AN EXPOSITION OF ALL St. PAUL'S EPISTLES, TOGETHER With an Explanation of those
other Epistles of the Apostles, St. James, Peter, John and Jude: Wherein the
sense of every Chapter and Verse is Analytically unfolded, and the Text
enlightened.

By DAVID DICKSON, Professor of Divinity in the University of Glascoe.

Published for the Benefit of such as desire clearly to understand, and rightly
to improve the Scriptures.

JOHN 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you; As the Branch cannot bring forth fruit
of it self, except it abide in the Vine, No more can ye, except you abide in
me.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
Marygold in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS MARQUESS, Earl of Kintar, Lord Cambel, Lord of Lorn,
etc. AND To the most Noble Lord, the Lord Archibald Cambell* Lord of Lorn, his
Eldest Son and Heir, etc.
David Dickson wishes all happiness.
THe name of Wisdom and Happiness (most Illustrious Marquess) has always and
every where been very eminent, and all men have justly commended him that has
been studious of both; But few they are who well understand the things
themselves: For they that place their Happiness in any thing besides the
enjoyment of God, in the matter of true Wisdom, are much mistaken: That indeed
is the true Wisdom, by which we are directly and infallibly led to solid and
eternal Happiness. It is a most sad spectacle, and to wise observers not
unprofitable, to behold the misery of mankind, joined with madness. Man is
banished from Heaven, and as a Vagabond wanders upon Earth, tossed up and down
with the stings of misery, and a certain blind desire of Happiness, inquires
after his Remedy. But the Felicity he should seek after above, he looks for
among terrene trash, and so misseth of it every where. For the chiefest Good
he embraces the meanest things, and the deceitful shadows of Vanity: By the
frequent frustration of his conceived hopes, he is minded of his error, and
urged with the perpetual agitation of a restless spirit, to seek after the
heavenly Country, and his Fathers house. But he goes astray from the womb, and
his error is endless, increasing and multiplying the miseries that he flies
from.

The contemplation of Divine Goodness, conflicting with man's obstinacy and
stubbornness, heightens the sadness of this spectacle; The fountain of
happiness descends from Heaven (clothed with Majesty and Light, as with a
garment) manifesting to those that are in the dark, his invisibility, to wit,
his eternal power and Godhead, shining forth in the works of Creation, that
he might invite rebels into favor with him. But they either look not toward
God, or looking to him, they acknowledge him not, or knowing him in some
measure, they glorify him not as God, but become vain in their imaginations,
and bowed downward, they cry out, Who will show us any good? None seriously
pray, Lift up the light of thy Countenance upon us.

God comes nearer in the works of his providence, and leaves himself not
without witness, but communicates his good things to men unworthy; gives Rain
from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling the hearts of his most ungrateful
enemies, with food and gladness, that they might feel after the Lord, and find
him, whom they had lost; so by the riches of his goodness and forbearance, they
might be reduced to repentance; But they receive these benefits, and sacrifice
them to gluttony and intemperance. And even with these things which Divine
bounty vouchsafed (arming themselves with the weapons of iniquity) they rebel
against God.

But here the Man-kindness of God does not end, but he comes close to us,
reaches forth his hand, knocks at every man's breast, produces the Law written
legibly upon every man's heart, shakes their consciences, stirs up their
thoughts to summon those fugitive enemies to the Tribunal of Justice, to accuse
the guilty, and convince them of their odious ingratitude, takes away all
excuse from those that are convicted, and all this, that men might repent, and
sue out for pardon. But they convinced of their iniquity, contumaciously lift
up themselves against God, fall out with conscience, and lay violent hands upon
it, to be silent; they invade that truth of God, written upon their hearts,
which once suppressed they imprison, and withold in unrighteousness. Its no
wonder if God suffer such desperately stubborn, and self-condemned creatures,
to walk in their own ways, and leaves them to Satan, giving them up to their
own corrupt affections. Alas! Alas! millions are lost, and will be so.

By how much the more this spectacle is lamentable, by so much the goodness of
God is more lovely, which will not endure that Divine Grace should suffer a
repulse, by those which the good pleasure of God will have to be his own, to
come to themselves, and be saved. You will easily affirm that to be a joyful
sight, which for ever will bless the beholders, and make them happy. The
Eternal Wisdom, the Beloved of the Father, the Delight of Angels, the Light of
the World, the Life of Men, the Son of Righteousness, under whose wings is
healing, and salvation, Our Lord Jesus Christ came down from the bosom of his
Father: Who having discharged the price of our Redemption, conquered our
enemies, gets up into his triumphant Chariot; passes through all places where
his redeemed ones abide; for their sakes he sets up the banner of his love;
he sends forth the voice of saving wisdom in the Gospel of Peace: By the
Ministry whereof, he opens the fountain of man's misery wider, reproves of
sin, creates in them a sorrow after God, holds forth wrath to come, and
terrifies; demonstrates to them their folly, unworthiness and impotency to
deliver themselves from those evils, and humbles them to an abnegation of their
own wisdom and strength. He offers himself a Mediator, for the restoring of
amity betwixt God and man, provokes in us a thirst after Life and
Righteousness, holds forth to us freedom from the Law of works, as also the
ratification of the New and Free Covenant of Grace, to which he causes them
to consent; persuades them to embrace Christ, that great gift of God, and
wholly resign themselves up to him: He exhibits also to them Remission of
sins, and causes them to lay hold upon it to Justification: He wills those
that are justified, to mortify the old man, and enkindles in them no less
desire after holiness, than after Heaven and Happiness it self: He requires
the fruits of Faith, in obedience to the Divine Law, and causes them to suck
vital juice from the vine, which they send forth in fruits worthy of the
Gospel. He commands that every one take up his own Cross, which lies in his
way to Heaven, causing them to observe his commands, and after the Lord of
Glory, bearing reproach for him, through prosperity and adversity to pass on
unto eternal life.

This is that saving Wisdom which deceives no man, but justifies and blesses
all her Children, and in like manner is justified, asserted and defended by all
her Children. This is that Wisdom from above, which every where is diffused
through the Holy Scriptures, in the thrice seven Apostolic Epistles, more than
twenty times drawn into a Compendium, and is fitted to the present use of the
Children of Light.

I have sent abroad an Explication of these Epistles, Noble Hero, that I with
my fellow-Ministers (who have dedicated their labors to your honor) might
perform some portion of that gratitude, which long since the Reformed Church of
Scotland is indebted to your most Illustrious family; And yet it is more
obliged to your self, who have not only revived the glory of your famous
Progenitors by your studious inde^vours in the reforming Religion, but also the
seven ^ast years (even with the manifold hazzards of your life and fortunes)
you have much advanced it, having undergone t^ose difficulties, which would
have altogether exhausted the strength and courage of meaner persons.

The University of Glasco is indebted to you this honor, to which you have
committed the education of your noble Sons, enlarging it in the number of its
professors of Divinity; most chiefly with the Delegates of the National Synod,
by your Presence, Counsel, and Authority, once and again you have been helpful
to them.

And here because it concerns my self, it is fitting I should own it, which you
may record, as a debt that may be required of me, by whose Authority, amongst
the chief Delegates of the Synod, I was advanced to the Chair of Divinity
Professor, the task enjoined, was to open the scope of difficult places of
Scripture to younger students. Wherefore after an Autumn or two equal it is
that you should receive some fruit for that your seeds-time in the University;
both from it, and namely from my self.

But this our smaller Offering bears no proportion with your Merits, whose
admirable Pr^wess* both in peace and war, constancy and fidelity in all
conditions (which by no temptations on the right hand or on the left to this
very day, could be taken off from promoting the Civil and Ecclesiastic
Republic) has in all Delegations, as well Ecclesiastic as Politic, rendered
the name of the Marquess of Argile, both to the States of the Kingdom, as also
to the Synods of the Nation, most acceptable and renowned, Neither could the
envy, or obloquy of open enemies, or of friends less faithful to the Church and
Commonwealth (who with their adhaerents, unskilful Judges of matters, are wont
to inveigh against none but those that deserve best of the Commonwealth) either
take away, or cast a cloud before equal Arbitrators, upon that honor which
virtue merited, the Council of the Kingdom, and the National Synods have
conferred.

I have also mentioned your name, Illustrious Hero, born of most Noble
Parentage, promising the fairest hopes, because it is equal, that you should
participate of your Fathers honor, as you are heir to his inheritance. Your
Name prefixed to this Apostolical Doctrine, may it be an Argument and an
incitation to you more firmly to embrace the Wisdom and the Virtue of Christ.
Imitating your Father, follow that way, wherein this doctrine is compendiously
contained, to the prosecution of solid felicity, that One thing necessary*
Finally, that this conjunction of your names may make you zealous after your
Fathers, and Grandfathers virtue, according to that hope, which the ripeness
of your ingenuity has begotten in us all, who observe that virtuous
disposition in you, ascending to great things (which we earnestly desire) that
the ancient renown of your family may be continued and greatned in your self.

Your Honors Servant in Christ Jesus, DAVID DICKSON.

To the Reader.
ALL Sciences have their introductions and rudimentary Preparatives, by which
the learner may be fitted and instructed to a farther and more researched
knowledge of things; All Noble families have their Porters to open unto their
Visitors, and courteously to conduct them from the Gate to the Parlour: I doubt
not (Candid Reader) but to find thee of my judgment, that the explication of
the Scriptures should have its Introduction too, and the Learned, and therefore
Noble Family of Commentators, their Ostiaries and Ianitors. Now that I might
become a Servant in this Family, and show my officiousness to give entrance
unto the Suitors of the holy Ministry, whereby they may have access unto the
richer Providores in Gods Family, I have taken up my standing at the threshold
of the house of God.

It Is well known in the Schools, in how little time, how many and great volumes
are to be read, how many facilitating and perasceuastical exercises young
Clients to Divinity must run through; and in apportionating either of days or
hours, to the several sorts of studies, how little time is spent in reading the
Holy Scriptures, to get a right understanding of which, ought to be the chief
labor of all men, especially of those that would hear the Lord himself
speaking, that they may believe, and that what they believe as the Oracles of
God they may publicly preach; He that shall conduce what he can to the
furtherance of such Noble Bereans, Scripture-Disciples, I Will be his warrant,
he shall not lose his labor.

For their sakes that are students in Theology, by the authority of the
National Synods Delegates, I made in my public Lectures an Analytical
Exposition of all the Apostolic Epistles, and those Lectures, though somewhat
rude, I committed to the Press, that I might spare many's labor of
transcribing them, and I purposed heartily to give you an account of my intent
therein, to the end that I might render thee more equitable to me in thy
censure of me.

For younger Students, for whom the reading of the Scriptures is necessary, but
the perusing of larger Commentaries is impossible, according to my duty, I was
to set forth an Explication of the main scope of the Text, and of the obscurer
words, and harder sentences, and of their coherence one with another, and also
with the principal scope; now here was need of an Analysis, Glosses, and some
Exposition, or Paraphrase which might be instead of an Exposition. Brevity was
so necessary for the intended Introduction, that it would have been better
never to have undertaken it, than not to have made it short; for if there had
been no hope of brevity, it had never been at all. Now to the brevity of the
Explication, perspicuity was also necessary, lest a trussing together of many
things in few words should entangle the Reader.

That I might therefore obtain my designed end, I have packed the Analysis, and
Commentaries, and Exposition or Paraphrase altogether, every one of which could
not singly be disposed of, without great tediousness: But whether or no, or in
what measure I have effected what I aimed at, be thou thy self Judge, when
having compared the Explication with the Text, thou shall see how each thing
has reference to other. Only know thus much, that I could with a great deal
less labor have made my Explication longer, than so short as it is. I have not
followed the Logical Analysis any further* than was necessary to demonstrate
the Scope of the Text; for to mince every member of the sentence by peecemeal,
would be the work of a prolix Commentary: those that are called Logical terms
of Art, I have used very sparingly, otherwise, I saw I should raise a quarrel
against my self, and a trouble to thee, who might more easily understand the
matter it self, than thou could examine, whether those terms were by me
rightly assigned, and would sooner consent with me in the main matter, than
subscribe to my use of those Logical notions: For every one has his several
way of Analyzing, so that you shall hardly find two Writers that do agree in
all their Logic terms, in the Resolution of but one Chapter, even when they
unanimously accord in sense. For Logic terms according to a various respect
had to the subject and attribute of the proposition to be proved, are, and
ought to be changed, the sense of the place remaining still entire and safe.
The Precepts and Exhortations which are emphatically proposed in that which
they call ( Modus Imperativus) or any other Rhetorical Modus, according to the
Rules in Logic, I have turned in Modum Indicativum, that the position to be
confirmed may be the more clearly illustrated. The emphasis and forcibleness
of the Spirit, I have left to be unfolded in larger Commentaries and Sermons.
For your memories sake, I have made the parts of every Chapter, and the chief
Positions in every part (as far as the truth of the matter would suffer) very
few. Arguments for the confirmation of that Proposition that expresses the
scope, I have made more or fewer, all after as perspicuity required; one while
contracting the force of many Arguments into one, other while unfolding them
severally.

Arguments that make to confirm the chief scope, and the next foregoing matter,
I have referred to both. But I have disposed all things by way of Enthymem for
brevity and perspicuities sake. If the scope or conclusion seems to be
repeated oftener than was needful, I hope you will pardon me this labor, when
you shall see the conclusion or purpose suppressed to be more easily gathered
by me, than you can fetch it from what went before. Although at first blush
some Arguments seem to be the same, you shall see some new force the Apostle
adds, does make a difference. Nor let it not trouble you, that the Arguments
that I refer to the confirmation of any Proposition, are used by learned men to
prove other conclusions: For the same medium may fitly serve for the proving of
several Propositions. Where the sense of the verses is obvious, and the
connection plain, there will be no need of this help of mine, which is to take
place chiefly in the obscurer passages; but lest there should be any gap, I
have made the work all along similar and homogeneous. He that likes not this
concise way of writing, I beg of him that he would not deter others from the
reading of it. If this Introduction shall but open a door to the Students of
Divinity unto larger Commentaries, I have my desire. A Key, the less it is, the
higher it is wont to be valued. In so great variety of Writers, he consults
best for the Commonwealth, that handles only necessary things well, or at
least, briefly, that the Reader may lose as little labor and cost as may be.

If this labor of mine be welcome to thee, your admonition shall not be
unwelcome to me, though it pitch upon something to be amended, or if in your
prudence you think fit to give me any advice. I will do my endeavor (God
willing) to satisfy thee as to an English Translation, which many of my
friends put me upon, if it shall be found worth the while. In the mean time I
humbly beseech the Father of Lights, that he would send more learned and able
servants of his into this Harvest, that what I cannot, they may do in this kind
of writing. For I hope, that very many that are now kept off by the only
prolixity of Commentaries, that they read little or nothing, and with very
small benefit, will now read the Scriptures more eagerly, having some short
helps for the opening of their scope and sense tendered them.

Farewell. Most desirous of your Edification and Salvation in Christ, DAVID
DICKSON.

The Translator to the READER.
THis Reverend Author having so well approved himself to the Church of God, by
his several labors upon the Holy Scriptures, was a great motive to us, to make
these elaborate Expositions upon the Epistles, of universal use, by putting
them into the same language, with his pious Commentaries on the Psalms of
David, St. Matthews Gospel, and other Tractates that have promoted sober minds
in the practical understanding of the word of God. And for this in thy hands,
as many learned men (with great commendation) have taken much pains in the
explication of these sacred Letters of St. Paul; so this Learned Professor of
Divinity* has very much served the Church of God, by the addition of his
Analytical Exposition, wherein he is true to his Method, solid in his
Explication, and learned in both. Yet possible it is, that matters of the best
desert, may fall under the censures of some, amongst the rest, perhaps the
translating of this book into the English tongue; I hope the suspicion of an
offense will not appear so great, when we shall have showed the reasons that
carried us thereunto, which among the rest were such as these*

Whilst this Commentary remained in the same language wherein the Author sent
it into the world, it was more confined in its use, and could be helpful only
to some, and those men of learning; By this means it becomes instrumental to
all, both learned and unlearned. And surely it is very meet that the learned
should condescend to the good of others, when they cannot ascend to their own.

We conceived that this eminent part of the Holy Scriptures, being plainly
opened (seeing that so many have, and do wrest the Scriptures to their own
destruction) might prove very useful to all Families, where the word of God is
conscionably read, and diligently studied, for their direction in the true
intent and meaning of the Holy Ghost; for want whereof, many have abused their
own understandings, and the apprehensions of others about the mind of God in
his revealed word; whereas this Commentary, being near at hand, will readily
lead them, not only to the sense of every single verse in any Chapter
throughout this work, but to the scope and aim of the Apostle, in the whole
design he has in hand: For by abstracting a particular sentence (or verse)
from the body of the Epistle, it may seem to look another way, than the
c^ntexture of the discourse does import.

Another motive of this translation, was that which sometime moved King Alured
(or Alfred) to procure the turning of Gregory's Pastorals into English, because
some of his Churchmen did not understand the Latin tongue. Thus it pleases God
to have it at this day; Many Preachers in England, who take upon them to teach
others, understand nothing but their Mother Tongue themselves, nor ever came
they where Learning grew. But seeing they will undertake to minister to the
people, and the wind blows for their turn; That the Church of Christ, purchased
with his most precious blood, might not be left qu^^e destitute, and totally
subver^ed by comments of their own, we thought it meet to commend this useful
Author to their understandings, whereby they might have some assistance
proportionable to their capacities.

These were the main inducements we eyed in attempting this work, and we hope
its general serviceableness* will answer to whatever might be objected against
the undertaking. Sometimes through the mistakes of printing the Latin book, the
sense was here and there disturbed, whereupon we were forced to take the more
care in finding out the Authors mind, that we might accordingly commend it to
^hy benefit.

Another thing I should signify to the Reader: Some years since this Author
set forth his Explanation of the Epistle to the Hebrews, a Book so useful and
solid, that it became deservedly acceptable to most men: This we have inserted
in its proper place, in this Volume and Edition: So that besides the Analy^^cal
Exposition of these Epistles (which was the sole intendment of the Author in
this present work) yo^ have his practical observations formerly set forth, upon
the Epistle to the Hebrews.

(...) remains, but that thou apply thy self to the perusal of the whole, and
before thou unde^^^kest ^o be a Judge become a Reader; and while thy
meditations are employed in these sacred Oracles of God, I shall pray that the
Spirit of truth and goodness may come down and rest upon thee: For (...) he
b^eathes from these mountains of spices, and we delude our selves with the
visions of our own heart^* while we think to find the Holy Spirit, God
blessed for ever, in any other Channels, but these wherein he is determined to
conveigh his holy and heavenly motions.

Farewell. Thine in the work of the Lord, WILLIAM RETCHFORD.

THE EPISTLE of PAVL to the ROMANS, Analytically Expounded.
THE SUM OF THE EPISTLE.
THe Apostle determined to visit the Romans, that he might by his presence
confirm them in the faith. In the mean time when he observes his coming
delayed, being moved by the Spirit of the Lord, he writes this famous Epistle
unto them.

The parts of the Epistle, besides the beginning and conclusion, are two. The
first shows the only and spiritual ground of sinners Justification by faith
in Christ, to Chap. 12.

The other part treats concerning the holy course of life, which justified
persons should live; to the end of the Chapter.

That which appertains to the first part, presently after the beginning of the
Epistle, the Apostle undertakes to prove, THAT NO MAN CAN BE JUSTIFIED BY
INHERENT RIGHTEOUSNESS, BUT BY THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF CHRIST ONLY, APPREHENDED
BY FAITH ALONE, AND FREELY OF HIS GRACE IMPUTED, BY GOD, TO US THAT BELIEVE.

This Position he proves by ten Arguments; whereof the two first are in the
first Chapter. The third in the second Chapter; the seven other in the third
Chapter.

To the further fixing of these Arguments, he sub-joyns a sevenfold proof of
this doctrine

The FIRST is, That Abraham was justified by Faith alone. Chap. 4.

The SECOND is, That this only reason of our justification, affords us comfort
against the just anger of God, and original sin, the poison which Adam derived
upon us. Chap. 5.

The THIRD is, That this ground of our justification very much conduces to
promote sanctification in them that are justified. Chap. 6.

The FOURTH is, That this ground of our justification only yields comfort to
the afflicted consciences of them that are justified upon their imperfect
obedience, and the relics of sin dwelling in them. Chap. 7.

The FIFTH is, That this ground of our justification fenceth those that are
justified, and sanctified, not only against condemnation, or all the evils to
be feared after this life; but also confirms and comforts against all the
troubles and afflictions, to which the Children of God are obnoxious in this
life. Chap. 8.

The SIXTH proof is, That by experience it is found, that the Jews seeking
righteousness from their works, fall short of it; and that the Gentiles,
destitute of all show of inherent righteousness, by faith in Jesus Christ, have
obtained true and saving righteousness. Chap. 9. Where, from occasion of the
Jews cutting off, election and reprobation is handled.

The which rejection of the Jews, being apparent and manifest to all the
Churches, (because of their foolish incredulity and obstinacy) he proves to
be just. Chap. 10.

Yet all the Jews not to be despised, because the obstinacy of that Nation is
to last but for a time, which he shows. Chap. 11.

In the other part of the Epistle, wherein he treats of sanctification in the
lives of all those that are justified, ( 1) After a serious obtestation, that
all who are justified should consecrate themselves unto God, and all the
Ministers of the Gospel, maintaining peace amongst themselves, every one
according to his ability should promote the sanctification and salvation of the
faithful; He gives general Precepts about Sanctity. Chap. 12. (2) He descends
to more special duties toward the Magistrate, and their neighbors of all
degrees, according to the Law of Charity. Chap. 13. (3) He handles the mutual
duties of the faithful, in a prudent use of their Christian liberty. Chap. 14.
and in the former part of Chap. 15.

Lastly, Assuring the Romans of his love, and authority, in the remaining part
of Chapter 15. with salutations of the Saints, he concludes his Epistle. Chap.
16.

CHAP. I.
THere are two parts of this Chapter. The first contains the beginning of the
Epistle, to verse 17. The other is an entrance, to prove the principal
Proposition of the Epistle, viz. THAT WE ARE JUSTIFIED BY FAITH IN JESUS
CHRIST, AND NOT BY WORKS.

The beginning contains the inscription of the Epistle to verse 8. And the
proemial discourse to verse 17. and all is ordered to the preparing of the
faithful Romans, that with all submission of mind, they would receive the
subsequent doctrine; which design may be comprehended to the same sense, in
this or the like maxim. You O Romans ought with all subjection of mind to
receive this following doctrine: To this end he insinuates eighteen Arguments,
whereof some are contained in the inscription, and the rest in the proemial
discourse of the Epistle.

Verse. 1. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated
to the Gospel of God. In the inscription of the Epistle, you have the
description of the Penman to verse 7. and of those to whom he writes, verse 7.

A Servant] Argument 1. I Paul the writer of this Epistle unto you, am a
Servant of Jesus Christ, i. e, The matters of Christ Jesus my Lord, are in hand
(not mine own) and to him I am to be countable for my service; Therefore you
Romans ought with all readiness of mind to entertain the things which I write
in this Epistle.

By Calling] Argu. 2. By Calling I am an Apostle, i. e. A Servant
extraordinary, who (as an Ambassador) am sent from Christ with instructions to
preach the Gospel, having received power to found and govern Churches, which
office I have not invaded, but immediately called, I have received it;
Therefore you ought with all submission to receive those things which I have
writ unto you.

Separated] Argum. 3. I am set apart to the Gospel of God, i. e. I am designed
by the Counsel of God, that I should give up my self to this Office alone,
being separated from the womb, Gal. 1.15. appointed by the special authority of
Christ, separated by the Holy Ghost (Act. 13.2.) Sent to preach to you Gentiles
the glad tidings of man's redemption by Christ: Therefore with all reverence and
willingness ought you to receive the things I have written unto you.

Verse. 2. (Which he had promised before by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures.)
Before] Argum. 4. The Gospel which I preach, is not new, or feigned, but that
most ancient Word of God, which in times past, God promised by his Prophets
should be revealed, as it is set forth to be read in the Holy Writings of the
Old Testament; Therefore ought ye to embrace the following doctrine with all
readiness of mind.

Verse. 3. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the Seed
of David according to the flesh.

4. And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of
holiness; by the resurrection from the dead.

Argum. 5. The matter of the Gospel which I preach, is not any common or
ordinary thing, but Jesus Christ our Lord, the Son of God, God-man, in the
unity of person, truly man, conceived by the Holy Ghost, of the substance of
the Virgin Mary, of the seed of David according to the flesh, or his humane
nature: Also very God, as is apparent by many signs, so especially by his
resurrection from the dead, whereby he is expressly manifested to be the most
powerful Son of God, according to his divine nature, which is called the Spirit
most holy, 1 Timothy 3.16. and 1 Pet. 3.18. Therefore ought you with reverence and
willingness to receive the subsequent doctrine.

Verse. 5. By whom we have received grace and Apostleship for obedience to the
faith, among all Nations, for his Name: Argum. 6. To this very end, the
glorious office of the Apostleship was freely bestowed upon the other Apostles,
and my self by Christ; that according to that authority which Christ has, and
has granted to us, we might obtain amongst all Nations that saving obedience
which is due to the doctrine of faith; Therefore you ought with all subjection
of mind to entertain this doctrine of the Gospel.

Verse. 6. Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ. Argum. 7. Amongst
the Gentiles, to whom I am sent, you believing Romans are the chief, because
you are effectually called by Christ, and to him are you subjected in obedience
of the faith; Therefore ought you to receive this doctrine of the Gospel with
all submission of mind.

Verse. 7. To all that be in Rome beloved of God, called to be Saints; Grace
to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. In the
inscription of the Epistle, there remains the description and salutation of
those to whom he writes, wherein the Eighth Argument is contained, to this
purpose.

You are the Beloved of God, effectually called, and in part sanctified, and
heirs of grace and peace; so that I may justly in the Name of God, apply to you
the blessing of the Gospel, and wish you Grace (i. e. All good things which by
way of Sanctification flow from the special favor of God.) Peace, (i. e. all
those things which conduce to your happiness, either in this present life, or
that which is to come) from God, through Christ the Mediator, to be
communicated to you; Therefore ought you with all willingness of mind to
hearken to my doctrine.

Verse. 8. First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your
faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. In the other verses of the
beginning we have his procmial speech, whereof this is the scope,

Argum. 9. Throughout the world, the report of your faith is famous, which you
yield to the Gospel, whereat I rejoice, and give thanks to God by Christ our
Mediator, for you all; Therefore you ought to attend to my Gospel with all
readiness of mind.

Verse. 9. For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of
his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers.
Argum. 10. The care which I have of your salvation, and the desire I have of
your good, will not let me be unmindful of you in my prayers, which because
it cannot otherwise appear to you, I call God to witness, who best knows, with
what sincerity of heart I serve him in the Ministry of the Gospel of his Son;
Therefore ought you to obey me in what I write to you.

Verse. 10. Making request (if by any means now at length I might have a
prosperous journey by the will of God) to come unto you. Argum. 11. That I may
be profitable unto you, I do not only not decline the labor of coming unto
you, but I earnestly desire of God, that he would at length grant me a
prosperous journey unto you, when it shall seem good to him; Therefore ought
you willingly to hearken.

Verse. 11. For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual
gift, to the end you may be established. Argum. 12. I am very desirous to see
you, not that I might partake of your outward enjoyments, but that I might
communicate to you a fuller knowledge of the Mystery of the Gospel, as some
spiritual gift, whereby you may be established in the faith against what ever
tentations; Therefore you ought willingly to entertain this doctrine.

Verse. 12. That is, that I may be comforted together with you, by the mutual
faith both of you and me. He unfolds this Argument (lest it might seem
arrogantly spoken) modestly intimating that he was as ready to receive comfort
and edification from their faith, as he was to administer the same to them,
from his.

Verse. 13. Now I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, that oftentimes I
purposed to come unto you, (but was let hitherto) that I might have some fruit
among you also, even as among other Gentiles. Argum. 13. Although I have been
hitherto hindered from coming to you, yet after many impediments, I resumed my
purpose of coming unto you again, that, by the preaching of the Gospel, I
might not only confirm you in the faith and obedience of the Gospel, but might
be a means of converting some amongst you to the faith, even as among the
other Gentiles I have gained some to God; Therefore ought you to hearken to my
doctrine.

Verse. 14. I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to the
wise, and to the unwise. Argum. 14. By the office of my Apostleship, and the
special command of Christ, I am a debtor to all sorts of men to preach the
Gospel; Therefore you ought to hearken to my doctrine.

Verse. 15. So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you
that are at Rome also. Argum. 15. I have much respect to you Romans, and
according to the liberty granted of God, as much as in me lies, I am ready to
preach the Gospel no less to you, than to others, for your salvation; Therefore
you ought to obey my doctrine.

Verse. 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of
God unto salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to
the Greek. I am not ashamed] Argum. 16. Although the Gospel which I preach is
commonly dis-esteemed, and goes along with the Cross, yet because it is not
mine, but the Gospel of Christ (holding forth that grace which by him is
communicated unto us) honorable and glorious, whereof I am no wise ashamed;
Therefore you ought to hearken to my doctrine.

Power] Argum. 17. Confirming what was said before; The Gospel which I preach
is a powerful and effectual instrument of salvation to every one that believes,
without exception of Nation, whether Jews or Gentiles, the Jews prerogative
being regarded, to whom the Gospel ought first to be preached, because of the
Covenant long since made betwixt God and the Jews; Therefore you ought, etc.

Verse. 17. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith; as it is written, The just shall live by faith. Argum. 18. Confirming
the former; In the Gospel which I preach is revealed and discovered the
righteousness of God from faith to faith, which before was hid under Ceremonies
and shadows; that is to say, That means of justifying sinners, which God
himself has found out, in which only we can stand before God, and in which
alone he is well pleased: To wit, the righteousness of Christ our Lord, which
is made ours from faith to faith, i. e. from faith (increasing by degrees) from
less to a greater measure; or from faith merely, only, and not of works; or
our inherent righteousness; Therefore ought you to receive the things which I
write; with all willingness and submission of mind.

The second part.
He passes to the second part of the Chapter, wherein he lays down a
Proposition to be confirmed in the following part of the Epistle, which is
this, That Righteousness which is revealed in the Gospel, is the Righteousness
of Christ, imputed to us by the grace of God, apprehended by faith alone, and
not inherent righteousness in men, which is works. Or which is to the same
sense, we are justified by faith in Christ, and not by works.

The Arguments brought to confirm this Position are ten, whereof two are
contained in this Chapter, one in the second, the rest in the third Chapter. To
all which, this dis-junction is to be premised. Either we are justified by
Faith, or Righteousness freely imputed, or by works, or inherent Righteousness.

The Just] Argum. 1. By the Righteousness of faith only we obtain life;
Therefore by the righteousness of faith alone we are justified; for by an
indissoluble connection Righteousness and Salvation are joined together, and
there is the same reason or ground of both. This Argument he confirms by a
Testimony, Hab. 2.4. Who rejects those as Hypocrites, from life, that trusted
in themselves, or their own works, and the righteous by faith, he pronounces
heirs of life only.

Verse. 18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.
Argum. 2. We are so far from being justified by works, that the wrath of God
openly pursues the unjust and wicked works of all men, of the Gentiles and the
Jews, to wit, of those that are out of Christ; Therefore we are justified
only by the righteousness of faith, or the Righteousness of Christ apprehended
by faith, and through grace imputed unto us.

The Truth] He confirms this Argument by several parts; and first he shows
the unrighteousness of men, in the example of the Gentiles, to verse 24. and
the wrath of God poured out upon the wicked; and their unrighteousness he
further shows to the end of the Chapter. He proves the impiety and
unrighteousness of the Gentiles, inasmuch as the wisest of men (to wit, the
Rulers and Philosophers among the Gentiles) withheld the truth in
unrighteousness, i. e. That true knowledge which they obtained from God
(through unrighteousness, or the pravity of their own will) they suppressed,
and detained in themselves as a captive, whilst they neither communicated it
unto others, nor showed it forth in works of piety; Therefore they are all
impious and unrighteous. This Argument is much to the purpose; for if this be
true concerning the prime part of mankind out of Christ; 1 Concerning the
wisest Lawmakers and Philosophers amongst the Heathens, much more is it true,
touching the rest; for if the flower and principal part be corrupted, what
shall we think of the dreggs and lower sort?

Verse. 19. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God
has showed it unto them.

20. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead, so that they are without excuse.

This Argument he explains two ways; First, By showing, that the Gentiles had
certain remnants of the light of Nature, concerning the worshipping of God;
because that which may be known of God by natural light, was manifest to them,
to wit, The Eternity* Power* and Divinity of God, with the rest of his
Attributes, which are apprehended by the light of Nature, even from the
Creation of the World, were manifested (by the things that were made) clearly
as in a glass, that they could not plead ignorance.

Verse. 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened.

22. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools:

23. And changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like
to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things.

Secondly, He explains the former Argument, by showing that the Gentiles
detained and imprisoned the known truth, partly, in that they gave not God the
glory of his Attributes, and divine works, as also that they were not thankful
for his benefits, which the light of Nature would have taught them. Partly,
because they became vain in their imaginations, and deceived themselves, being
blind where they seemed most of all to be wise, leaving those true Principles
concerning God, through their own false reasonings, they drew false conclusions
about God, and the worshipping of him. Lastly, They apparently manifested their
ingratitude and folly by their works; they framed the images of men and beasts,
whereby they would represent God, or the properties of God, to the eye; thus,
as much as in them lay, they changed the glory of God, dishonored by so vile a
comparison, into those abominable images.

Verse. 24. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of
their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves:

25. Who changed the Truth of God into a Lie, and worshipped, and served the
Creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.

The impiety and unrighteousness of men against God, being manifested in the
Example of the Gentiles, he shows the wrath of God to be poured out upon the
wicked; and withal the greatness of their iniquity, In that God gave them up
judicially to their own affections, and most justly left them to themselves,
for a punishment of their abominable Idolatry: That they which robbed God of
his glory, might suffer in, and by themselves, the foulest ignominy: And that
they which changed the glorious Attributes of God into lying images (which are
nothing less than what they are called) should change themselves into beasts by
their unbridled lusts. They are said to worship and serve things created,
passing by the Creator: For although Idolaters seem, in the false
representation of God by an Image, to intend him honor and worship, yet God
altogether rejects that worship, and leaves it wholly to the Image or Creature,
with whom he will not by any means share his worship.

God is called in this place, Blessed for ever, that we may know that the
injurious carriage of Idolaters can detract nothing from the felicity of God;
But that his glory and blessedness will abide for ever, to whom we all of us
ought with the Apostle to ascribe it, saying, AMEN.

Verse. 26. For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections; for even their
women did change their natural use into that which is against nature:

27. And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in
their lust one toward another, men with men working that which is unseemly, and
receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet.

In the Example of the Gentiles is propounded a further demonstration of man's
unrighteousness, and Gods wrath against the wicked: To wit, that God gave them
up judicially to the hands of their own lusts, and defiled spirits (who served
their own corrupt affections in matter of Religion) that (against Nature) the
men and women in their abominable Sodomitical filthiness (below beasts, in
their unnatural lusts) by way of requital should debase themselves, who by
their Idolatry had abased the glory of God, in resembling him to Creatures and
fictions of their own.

Verse. 28. And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God
gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient.

29. Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity,
whisperers,

30. Back-biters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventers of evil
things, disobedient to Parents,

31. Without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural affections,
implacable, unmerciful;

He proceeds further to manifest the unrighteousness of man, and the wrath of
God; to wit, That God most justly gave them up to a reprobate mind, who refused
to retain in their minds the knowledge of him, which by the light of nature was
apparent in all the works of Creation, that being deprived of the use of common
judgment, as if they had turned beasts, they ran mad into all wickedness
against the Law of Nations and Nature, without the least show of Reason.

Filled] That we might not imagine them guilty of one fault only, the Apostle
reckons up a Catalogue of about three and twenty, with which these were filled,
that were left to themselves.

With all unrighteousness] That is, with all unrighteousness against their
neighbor.

Fornication] Under this he comprehends all unlawful lying of the Man with the
Woman.

Maliciousness] That is, a desire to hurt, joined with fraud and endeavor.

Wickedness] That is, a frowardness of mind, openly discovering it self.

Malignity] That is, with roughness and harshness of manners.

Whisperers] Such as privily back-bite their neighbors, on purpose to dissolve
the bonds of friendship.

Back-biters] Such as injure the reputation and fame of others.

Haters of God] Such are they, who (out of an evil conscience) will not endure
to hear any thing of God.

Spightful] Such are those that are cruel, oppressing others by force.

Boasters] Such as make a show of great matters.

Inventers of evil things] Such as devise new kinds of sins.

Without understanding] Such are they which are hurried like brute beasts,
without any show of reason, which way soever their lust draws them.

Verse. 32. Who knowing the judgment of God (that they which commit such things
are worthy of* death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do
them. The last demonstration of man's unrighteousness, and the wrath of God in
his justice leaving them to themselves, appears with a threefold aggravation.
(1) They practiced the foresaid wickednesses against the dictate of conscience;
for they knew that those wickednesses were displeasing unto God. (2) They
s^^ned against the knowledge of the judgment of God, and the due desert of
sin; They knew them worthy of death that committed such things. (3) They
themselves only did not commit such things, but (not only by their silence,
but consent, flattery and authority) became Patrons to them that did,
confirming and hardening them in their sins. This is the condition of the
wisest men out of Christ, who are so far from the righteousness of works,
that they do nothing but abuse the known principles of Righteousness, provoke
the wrath of God against themselves, and more and more pollute themselves with
all manner of filthiness, to their final perdition.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter we have the third Argument set down to prove the Position,
viz. CONCERNING THE RIGHTEOUSNESS, NOT BY WORKS, BVY BY FAITH. Which is
propounded in the first and second verses; in the remaining part of the Chapter
it is confirmed, and the objections removed.

Verse. 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judge, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou
that judge, do the same things.

2. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth, against
them which commit such things.

The third Argument against Justification by works, from the self-condemnation
of all men, drawn from the last verse of the former Chapter. Every man
(condemning others, and doing the same things which he condemns) in his own
judgment is condemned without excuse. Therefore every man is so far from
being justified by works, that on the contrary he is condemned.

In the second verse a reason of this is subjoyned, because the judgment of
God is just, and according to the merit of the deed, condemns every sinner,
both him that judges, and him that is judged. Therefore he which according to
the judgment of God condemns another to death for sin, condemns himself doing
the like things.

Verse. 3. And think thou this, O man, that judge them which do such
things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? This
Argument in the following part of the Chapter is confirmed, removing the four
pretended Objections, whereby men may evade the force of the Argument.

Object. 1. He securely contemns the judgment of God, who (because God has
hitherto spared him) promises himself impunity (or freedom from punishment)
when he judges others: I am not afraid (says he) of the judgment of God.
The Apostle refutes this Objection, and proves it null by six Reasons.

Reas. 1. That such an imagination is vain and foolish; for Think thou, etc.
which is the same, as if he had said, In vain do thou think to escape the
judgment of God.

Verse. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? Despisest] Reas. 2. Such an imagination puts contempt and abuse
upon the riches of the bounty, forbearance, and gentleness of God, when any one
(because God has spared hitherto) goes on in sin, and conceives hopes to go
unpunished.

Bounty] Reas. 3. That the bounty of God ought to invite, and move to
repentance, not to go on in sin, out of hopes to go unpunished.

Verse. 5. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment
of God: Hardness] Reas. 4. That such a thought is the hardening of our hearts
in sin, and a sealing of them up that we cannot repent.

Treasure] Reas. 5. That he who securely contemns the judgment of God, heaps
up unto himself a kind of treasure of punishments, from divine justice, to the
time of that last and terrible judgment, wherein that whole treasure of
punishments, in the most righteous anger of God shall be openly poured out
upon him.

Verse. 6. Who will render to every man according to his deeds:

7. To them, who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life:

8. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath;

9. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile:

10. But glory, honor, and peace, to every man that works good, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile.

Reas. 6. God will give to every man in the day of Judgment according to his
works, good or evil; his rewards of grace, or punishments of his justice; To
wit, eternal life to them that persevere in obedience to the truth, hoping for
a reward, verse. 6, 7. And besides the signs of wrath in this life, eternal
death also after this life (as it is just for an angry God to inflict) upon the
adversaries of the truth, and the servants of unrighteousness, verse 8. He
confirms this reason, in that God will have no respect to any Nation or outward
Privileges in the inflicting of his punishments; But the Jews which had the
chiefest favors of God, should be first in their punishments; and that he
would inflict upon the soul and body of the Heathens, or Gentiles, their
deserved torments, verse 9. And to the same manner, in his rewards, without
difference of Nations, he will glorify ( i. e. with all gifts that may
externally accomplish a man, such as Glory, and Honor; and inwardly, which is
signified by Peace) and will heap upon the pious and honest Jew, according to
all the privileges which he has vouchsafed to that Nation; and will crown
the pious and honest Gentile in his place, with eternal life, verse 10. from
whence it follows, that he is deceived, who indulges hopes of impunity,
because God has hitherto spared him.

Verse. 11. For there is no respect of persons with God. He confirms the former
reason from the equity of God, in that he is no respecter of persons; and he
meets with the second Objection, propounded verse 2. against the severe
judgment of God against sinners. Some might object. In the executing of
Judgment, respect is to be had, as well of the Heathen, who lives out of the
Church, without the knowledge of the Law, or the doctrine of God; as also of
the Jew, which is a Disciple of God, and an hearer of the Law; God forbid that
either of them should perish, for both seems unjust, although they are sinners.
He refutes this Objection, and proves it just that every sinner should perish,
by five Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because there is no respect of persons with God, that he should
exempt from condemnation those that persevere in sin, whether Jews or Gentiles,
for any reason which appertains to the person, not the cause. And here it is to
be observed, that God looks with an equal eye upon the Jew and Gentile out of
Christ, not in the degrees of punishment, but in the guilt of eternal death,
which all sinners are worthy of, although not in the like degree.

Verse. 12. For as many as have sinned without Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law, those having not the Law, shall be judged by the Law.
Reas. 2. This confirms and unfolds the other, because they that have sinned
without the Law ( scil. written) Against the Law, written upon their hearts by
nature, even by the same Law within them, shall perish without the written Law
by the sentence of Justice. And whoever have sinned in the Law, or in the
knowledge of the Law written, shall be condemned even by the sentence of the
written Law.

Verse. 13. (For not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers
of the Law shall be justified.) Reas. 3. Especially intended against the Jews,
who according to the rule of Righteousness, cannot be accounted for Righteous
before God, even they that are hearers of the Law, unless they perform perfect
obedidience to the Law, which because neither Jew nor Gentile can do, by
consequence neither can they be exempted from deserved condemnation; but on
the contrary, especially the Jews, which are hearers of the Law, and do not
keep it, are most worthy of judgment.

Verse. 14. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves:

15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else
excusing one another.

Reas. 4. Especially intended against the Gentiles, which though they have not
the written Law, yet they have a Law within them, and by nature do some
external works of the Law, although they have not the written Law, yet that Law
within them is a Law, and that really and indeed written upon their hearts, as
their consciences witness, accusing them when they do ill, and excusing them
when they do well; Therefore they have nothing to pretend why they should not
undergo deserved condemnation, when they sin, much less the Jews.

Verse. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel. Reas. 5. Because in the day of judgment God will bring
forth the secrets of the heart, and according to this my doctrine in the
Gospel, will pronounce the condemnation of sinners to be just, whether Jews or
Gentiles; Therefore they cannot be excused who sin, but perish by their own
just desert.

Verse. 17. Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy
boast of God,

18. And know his will, and approvest the things that are more excellent,
being instructed out of the Law,

19. And art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light of
them which are in darkn^ss:

20. An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which has the form of
knowledge, and of the truth in the Law.

The third Objection. But something must be allowed to the privileges of the
Jews, that they come not into the like condemnation with the Gentiles; And here
he seems to conflict with some principal teacher of the Law, and Patron of
Righteousness by works, and brings forth seven props of his vain confidence, by
way of concession granting all. (1) The first that he grants is, the external
honor of a worshiper of God: Thou art called a Jew, which was a name not of
Nation only, but of a confessor of the true Religion. (2) A submission of mind
to the doctrine of the Law: Thou restest in the Law, and thou applaudest thy
self in this, as an eminent benefit. (3) Thou make thy boast in God, viz.
that thou art of that people, chosen above all other Nations, and in Covenant
with God, verse. 17. (4) The knowledge of Gods will, taken out of the Law. (5)
The discerning of good and evil, and of things that differ, and controversies,
by the benefit of the same Law, verse 18. (6) The confidence of such abundant
knowledge, and certainty, that they could teach others. (7) That they had a
systeme and collection of that knowledge, which was here and there contained in
the Law, and that all the rest besides this our Rabbi, are infants and foolish,
verse 19, 20.

Verse. 21. Thou therefore that teach another, teach thou not thy self?
Thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal?

22. Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, do thou commit sacrilege?

23. Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law
dishonourest thou God?

The Apostle answers the Objection, and all these being granted, he shows them
insufficient to righteousness, by two Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because thou do not teach thy self, i. e. thou do not show forth
thy doctrine by thy deeds, but either pollutest thy self with those vices, or
the like, which thou forbiddest in others. Therefore those things suffice not
to free thee from condemnation.

Verse. 24. For the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you,
as it is written. Reas. 2. Confirming the former, Because through your fault
the Gentiles speak evil of God, as if he had or could bear profane
worshipers: Therefore the forecited privileges make nothing to Righteousness.

This reason he confirms by the testimony of Ezekiel 36.22. who complains of
the Hypocrites of his time, boasting in the same privileges.

Verse. 25. For Circumcision verily profits ^f thou keep the Law; but if thou
be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision. The fourth
Objection. But because of the Covenant of God, the sign whereof is
Circumcision, I shall not perish, who am circumcised, says the Jew, confiding
in the outward Ceremony.

The Apostle answers and proves, that Circumcision does not exempt us from
condemnation, or death, by four Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because Circumcision if it be joined with perfect obedience to all
the rest of the commandments, if it could be, it would profit as a part of
that obedience to justification by works, for which the Jew did contend; but if
the transgression of the Law be found in him that is circumcised, as touching
justification by works, circumcision and uncircumcision will be the same;
Therefore circumcision exempts not from condemnation.

Verse. 26. Therefore, if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the Law;
shall not this uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? Reas. 2. Because the
Gentiles uncircumcision joined with perfect obedience to the Law, if it could
be, shall be of the same account with the Jews circumcision; If so be God
require to justification by works nothing but a perfect observation of the
Moral Law; Therefore circumcision frees not from condemnation.

Verse. 27. And shall not uncircumcision, which is by nature, if it fulfill the
Law, judge thee, who ^y the letter and circumcision do transgress the Law?
Reas. 3. Because the Gentile being by nature uncircumcised, if it was possible
that he could keep the Moral Law, compared with thee who are outwardly
circumcised, and yet transgressest the Law, by thy own judgment, he shall
argue thee worthy of condemnation; Therefore circumcision does not free from
condemnation.

Verse. 28. But he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision, which is outward in the flesh.

29. But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the
heart, in the spirit, and no^ in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of
God.

Reas. 4. Because neither the outward profession of the true Religion (long ago
erected among the Jews by God himself) is to be accounted for a true
profession of the true Religion, nor outward Circumcision of the flesh is to
be reckoned for true Circumcision, ver. 28. But he is a true Professor of the
true Religion, who is such an one in the Spirit; and that is true Circumcision
which is of the heart, spiritual in the inward soul, and not that which is
outwardly in the body, or the letter, which is commonly called Circumcision. He
that is a Jew indeed, and that which is true and spiritual Circumcision, has
commendation and praise, not only among men, (who only see things that are open
and manifest) but with God, who looks into the heart: Therefore outward
Circumcision perfects not our righteousness, nor frees any man from
condemnation, ver. 29.

CHAP. III.
THere are two parts of this Chapter; in the FIRST he answers five objections
against the foresaid Doctrine, to ver. 9. In the SECOND part, he proceeds to
prove the POSITION, touching JUSTIFICATION NOT BY WORKS, BUT BY FAITH.

Ver. 1. What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of
Circumcision?

2. Much every way; chiefly, because unto them were committed the Oracles of
God.

The first objection is, from this Doctrine some might say, then the Jew has
no prerogative above the Gentile, nor is there any profit of Circumcision, ver.
1. He answers, ver. 2. that this is the principal and chief privilege of the
Jews; that the Covenant was made with the Jews, and this Nation had the
custody of the holy Scriptures, i. e. the Tables of the Covenant committed to
them of God, and the Jews were made Depositaries, (Treasurers) which was a
singular benefit, and a famous honor.

Verse. 3. For what if some did not believe; shall their unbelief make the Faith
of God without effect? The second Object. But they are fallen from that honor,
because they have not believed the Oracles of God, and so the Faith of God
given in that Covenant is made void; to which he answers four ways.

First; It follows not that the faithful Promises of God made to this Nation
were void, because some of them believed not.

Verse. 4. God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a liar; as it is
written, That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome
when thou art judged. Secondly; He answers, by detesting the Objection, because
it is absurd to imagine, that God should fail our Faith.

Thirdly; He answers, by laying down a most true assertion to the contrary,
that God is to be avouched always true, and that every man by nature is a
liar.

Fourthly; That the sins of men, and their lies, are no hindrance to God in the
performing of his Promise, but rather serve to illustrate his Truth, Mercy and
Justice; because by how much the greater and more the sins of men are, so much
the more is the Justice of God eminent when he punishes, and his mercy and
truth when he spares; which he confirms out of Psalm. 51.4. Where David in the
Confession of his sins, commends the truth of God, and pronounces God always
to overcome when he judges, as often as any one Undertakes to judge of what
he does, or says.

Verse. 5. But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what
shall we say? Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? (I speak as a man.) The
third Object. From the words of the Psalm perverted to blasphemy; If our sins
illustrate the righteousness of God, then God seems to be unrighteous, who
avenges those sins whereby he is glorified. This is objected by the Apostle in
the person of a man, ignorant of God.

Verse. 6. God forbid; for then how shall God judge the world? He answers* (1)
By rejecting the Objection as blasphemous; God forbid, says he.

(2) He answers, by giving a reason why he rejects the Objection; Because it
is impossible that he which shall judge the world should be unjust.

Verse. 7. For if the truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his
glory; why also yet am I judged as a sinner?

8. And not rather as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that
we say, Let us do evil, that good may come; whose damnation is just.

The fourth Objection, urging the former: If by my sin, to wit, my lie, the
truth of God is more glorified, I am not only not to be condemned for sin, but
I may follow after it, that the glory of God may be more advanced. In answer,
he says (1) They were malicious slanderers that thus charged the Apostles
Doctrine; Let us do evil, that good may come of it. He answers. (2) That these
calumniators, and those that teach and follow this Doctrine, doing evil, that
good may come, were justly to be condemned of God.

Verse. 9. What then? Are we better than they? No, in no wise; for we have
before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin. The fifth
Object. But by this Doctrine we Jews have no pre-eminence of the Gentiles, to
wit, in the matter of Justification by Works, which is the principal question.

He answers, that in this respect the Jew is no better than the Gentile, and
he renders a reason of it, because hitherto we have proved that both Jews
and Greeks are under sin.

The second Part.
In the second part of the Chapter he returns to prosecute the Dispute
concerning Justification, not by works but by faith.

Verse. 10. As it is written, there is none righteous, no not one.

11. There is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God.

12. They are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable,
there is none that does good, no not one.

Argument 4. Concerning Justification not by works, but by faith: The Scripture
witnesses, that all men are under sin, and liable to condemnation, to ver. 20.
therefore no man is justified by the works of the Law, ver. 20.

The testimonies of Scripture are six: (1) Out of Psa. 14.1, 2, 3. and Psalm
53.1, 2, 3. where the Prophet speaking of the unregenerate in his time, and of
all in their natural estate out of Christ, pronounces; first, that no man is
righteous, ver. 10. Secondly, that all are blind, and ignorant of the things
which make for their Salvation. Thirdly, that there were none which were
affected with a desire of knowing, or worshipping, or having any communion with
God, ver. 11. Fourthly, that all were guilty of Original Apostasy from God,
and his known Will. Fifthly, that all were unprofitable, polluted, abominable,
by reason of the filthiness of their wickednesses. Sixthly, that there were
none, viz. of those that were unregenerated, that did any good, and by
consequence that there was none but did evil, and only evil; for when he does
the work commanded, not to God commanding, being unregenerate, he serves
himself, and sacrifices to his own idols.

Verse. 13. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used
deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips. The second testimony is from
Psalm 5.9. wherein David, under the type of his enemies, condemns all
unregenerate men, or men not reconciled to God, of impurity of heart, from
whence proceeds nothing but that which is abominable and loathsome unto God;
that the throat of every one is as a Sepulcher newly opened, sending forth a
pestilential smell of wicked thoughts, out of whose mouth comes forth nothing
but pestilent, injurious and deceitful speeches.

Poyson] The third testimony is from Psalm 140.3. In which the same is
confirmed of David's enemies, which were types of persons unreconciled unto God,
in that they are always ready to send out from their mouths, as from a quiver,
poysonful speeches, no less hurtful than the poison of Aspes.

Verse. 14. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. The fourth testimony
is from Psalm 10.7. to the foresaid sense, wherein the Psalmist complains of
the natural man, that his mouth is full of cursing, and reproachful words,
whereby the glory of God, and the fame of our Neighbor is wronged.

Verse. 15. Their feet are swift to shed blood.

16. Destruction and misery are in their ways:

17. And the way of peace have they not known.

The fifth testimony is from Psalm 59.7, 8. In which unregenerate men are
pronounced guilty of cruelty, violence, oppression and manslaughter, who
create nothing but misery and destruction to themselves and others, in the
whole course of their lives, who are very far from procuring peace, or any
thing that is good, either to themselves or others.

Verse. 18. There is no fear of God before their eyes. The sixth testimony is
from Psalm 36.2. Wherein unregenerate men by their deeds, are condemned of
profaneness and contempt of God; for seeing they are void of the fear of God,
there is nothing to restrain them from falling headlong into all kind of
wickedness.

Verse. 19. Now we know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them
that are under the Law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God. He prevents an Objection, lest any man should elude
the force of the testimonies before recited, as if they belonged but to some
few, and those certain impious men, who lived in the times of David or Isaias.
Here he shows that the common disposition of mankind is taxed, which live
under the Law, or the Covenant of Works, and not under grace; and hereupon
these forecited sentences of the Law, are directed against all men, under the
state of corrupt nature, chiefly the Jews; whereupon a threefold conclusion is
inferred. First, from hence every mouth is stopped, lest any man should glory
in himself, or excuse himself in the judgment of God. Another conclusion,
Hence the whole world is made liable to condemnation, and obnoxious to
punishment.

Verse. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. The third
conclusion and principal, drawn from the forecited testimonies; therefore by
the works of the Law no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God, for it
matters not, that some may be justified by their works before men.

For by the Law] Argument 5. Serving to prove the same assertion: All men are
convinced of sin, and condemned by the Law; for by the Law is the knowledge of
sin, not a procurer of righteousness to any one: Therefore no man is justified
by the works of the Law.

Verse. 21. But know, the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested,
being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets.

22. Even the righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto
all, and upon all them that believe, for there is no difference.

Argum. 6. Tending to the asserting of the affirmative part of the position.
Now in the Gospel, the righteousness of God is manifested without the works of
the Law, approved by the testimony of Scripture, to wit, that the righteousness
of God, which is imputed and given to all believers, apprehending by Faith the
righteousness of Christ Jesus, without distinction of Nations or persons;
therefore by this Righteousness alone, which is through Faith in Jesus Christ,
are we justified. The Argument is good, for if we cannot be justified by the
works of the Law, and yet there is another way to justify us found out, to wit,
that which God commends to us in the Law, and in the Prophets: As for example,
when he has said in the Law, In the Seed of Abraham all Nations shall be
blessed: And in the Prophets, The Just shall live by Faith. It Is fitting we
should believe our selves to be justified only upon this latter ground, to
wit, by Faith.

Furthermore, seeing we can conceive only a twofold Righteousness; one is of
the Law, or of works inherent, or a man's own righteousness; another, which is
Evangelical, called the Righteousness of Faith, or the Righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us, to wit, that Righteousness which he imputes to all that
believe: After the exclusion of the former Righteousness, that being now
impossible, the other is of necessity to be admitted, which is commended to us
in the Old Testament, now revealed in the New, and only is possible and
acceptable to God, deserving alone the name of Righteousness.

Verse. 23. For all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God.

24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in
Jesus Christ.

Argum. 7. Wherein is showed the common disease of all men, as also the
necessity of the common remedy; all men without exception have sinned, and by
Law are shut out from the glory of God, or Eternal Life; therefore all are no
otherwise justified but freely, or by Divine Grace through the Redemption of
Jesus Christ; that is to say, they cannot otherwise be justified, than by
Faith in Christ the Redeemer, who by his Blood has purchased for us
Righteousness and Salvation, and has freely of his Grace made it ours.

Verse. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God.

26. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be
just, and the Iustifier of him which believes in Jesus.

Argum. 8. God has set forth Christ that he might be a Reconcilement, and
Propitiatory Sacrifice, whereby the wrath of God is appeased toward all that
lay hold on him by Faith; therefore it is not possible that a man should be
justified, but by Faith in Christ, offering up this atonement in his Blood,
unless God should alter the means of appeasing himself.

To show forth.] Argum. 9. God in this present time of the Gospel has set
forth Christ as the means of appeasing his anger, to those that embrace it by
Faith, that by this way of justifying, his Righteousness might be manifest in
the time past, in his forbearance and forgiveness of sins past, which from the
beginning of the world he has forborne and forgiven, to wit, that God did not
pardon the sins of his own, but upon the account of the Propitiatory Sacrifice
of Christ, which was to come, and that without any violation of his Justice:
Therefore this ground of our Justification is no less to be asserted, than the
glory of Gods Justice is to be manifested. The matter is clear: For if
Justification by Faith in the Blood of Christ, shows that God never pardoned
sins, but upon satisfaction made to his Justice by the Blood of Christ,
certainly he would have the righteousness of God concealed, that would
determine any other ground of our Justification than by Faith.

That he might be just] This confirms the Argument, that God has set forth
Christ, that he might be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood; not only
that he might declare himself just in sending the promised Messiah, for whose
sake freely and also justly he would pardon sin, but that he might show
himself the Author and Doner of true Righteousness to us, (that were without
any righteousness of our own) by believing in Jesus Christ: Therefore this
ground of our Justification by Faith, is no less to be maintained, than the
glory of Gods Justice, Faithfulness and Goodness, to be declared in justifying
Believers.

Verse. 27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By what Law? of Works? nay,
but by the Law of Faith.

28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith without the deeds
of the Law.

Argum. 10. Because by the Law of Faith, or the Covenant of Grace, which
requires Faith to our Justification by the Righteousness of another, man's
boasting in himself is excluded, and not by the Law of Works, or the Covenant
of Works, which exacts perfect obedience, and affords matter of boasting to men
in their Inherent Righteousness; Therefore (says he) we conclude* that a man
is Justified by Faith without the Works of the Law. The Argument is good: For
if men were Justified by their Works, and Inherent Righteousness, they might
boast of the meritorious cause of their Justification to be in themselves; but
they that are Justified by Faith, are compelled to renounce their own Inherent
Righteousness, and to place their only Confidence in the imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, and solely in the grace of God.

Verse. 29. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles?
Yes, of the Gentiles also.

30. Seeing it is one God which shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and
uncircumcision through Faith.

He concludes this Disputation with the resolution of two questions, which
give much light to the present Doctrine. The first question is, Whether this
way of our Justification by Faith be common both to Jews and Gentiles? To
which he answers, That it is common to both, whereof he adds a reason, because
there is one God of those that are Justified; therefore there must be but one
way of justifying all, to wit, by Faith, or of Faith. For if he should
Justify the Jews upon one ground, and the Gentiles upon another, God would
seem to differ from Himself in communicating Righteousness and Salvation to
sinners, both to Jews and Gentiles, which is absurd.

Verse. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; yea, we
establish the Law. Another question is, Whether the Doctrine of Faith, or
Justification by Faith, makes the Law of none effect, or to be given in vain,
while it is denied that men are Justified by the Law? He answers, that the Law
is no ways rendered void, but is rather established by the Doctrine of Faith;
for Faith, or the Doctrine of Faith, establishes the Law three ways. First, in
respect to the threatenings, showing that Christ was dead by the Sentence of the
Law, that he might satisfy the Law, and that we were liable to death, unless
freed from it by Christ. Secondly, in respect to the Precepts, because he
demonstrates that perfect obedience was yielded to the Law, in the
Righteousness of Christ. Thirdly, Faith establishes the Law in respect to
Believers, because being justified by Faith, by virtue of Christ, they are
initiated into new obedience, who before they were justified by Faith, could do
nothing but sin.

CHAP. IV.
UNto the twelfth Chapter the Apostle illustrates, commends, and further by
many Arguments establishes this Divine ground of our Justification by Faith,
not by Works. We, for the more easy method, shall make the Confirmation of
this Doctrine sevenfold.

The first Confirmation of Justification by Faith, which is contained in this
Chapter, is chiefly from the example of Abraham, the ground of whose
Justification is common, both to Jews and Gentiles, whose Faith is set before
us all of God for a pattern.

There are three parts of the Chapter. In the first, the example of Abraham's
Justification is set down, to ver. 9. In the second, he proves this ground of
Justification to be common both to Jews and Gentiles, to ver. 18. In the
third, the Faith of Abraham is commended to the use of Believers, to the end of
the Chapter.

Verse. 1. What shall we say then, that Abraham our Father, as pertaining to
the flesh, has found? So much as pertains to the example of Abraham, under the
form of an interrogation, he denies that Abraham was justified according to
the flesh, or by the Law of Works, or Inherent Righteousness, which is called
flesh, Galat. 3.3. in respect to the Spiritual Righteousness of Christ: From
whence it follows that no man is justified by Works.

Verse. 2. For if Abraham were justified by Works, he has whereof to glory,
but not before God. This Thesis concerning Abraham, is asserted by five Reasons.

Reason 1. If Abraham was justified by Works, he has whereof he may glory,
but not before God; therefore he is not justified by Works before God. The
reason is sufficient; because boasting in our selves is not taken away by the
Law of Works, but by the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. For in the question before
men, Whether Abraham is just, Abraham can produce his Works, and boast, saying,
I will show thee my Works; and so he shall be justified before men by his
Works: But the question is, Whether he be righteous before God, whereupon he
must renounce his own works, and fly to the Promise of Blessedness in Christ,
to come of Abraham's Seed, that he might be justified in Christ by Faith alone.

Verse. 3. For what says the Scripture? Abraham has believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness. Reason 2. The Scripture testifies, Genesis 15.6.
that Abraham was justified by Faith, or that Righteousness was imputed to him
by Faith; therefore he was justified by Faith, not by Works.

Verse. 4. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of Grace, but of
debt. Reason 3. The reward cannot be of Grace, but of debt, to him that seeks
after righteousness by his works; we may assume thus, But to Abraham it was
imputed of Grace. Therefore Abraham did not mercenarily seek after
righteousness by the works of the Law.

Verse. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his Faith is counted for righteousness. Reason 4. To this purpose
Faith is imputed for righteousness to him that is not mercenary, but renouncing
his own righteousness, believes in God, who freely justifies the ungodly that
flees to Christ Jesus; But such was the Faith of Abraham. Therefore Abraham was
not justified by works before God, but Faith was imputed to him for
righteousness; or the Blessing promised in Christ to come, received through
Faith by Abraham, was imputed to him for righteousness.

Verse. 6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom
God imputed righteousness without works,

7. Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered.

8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.

Reason 5. David testifies, Psalm 32.12. that Blessedness is given to him, to
whom Righteousness is imputed without works, and whose righteousness consists
not in good works, but in the forgiveness of sins: therefore such was of
necessity the Justification of Abraham: consisting not in the perfection of his
works* but in the remission of his sins. Understand the same of the
Justification of all, which the Apostle even now has showed.

Verse. 9. Comes this Blessedness then on the Circumcision only, or upon the
uncircumcision also? for we say, that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for
righteousness. The second Part.
The second part of the Chapter, wherein he proves this to be the ground of
Abraham's Justification, and obtaining Eternal Life, (to wit, by Faith) is
common to the uncircumcision, or the Gentiles, and to Circumcision; or the
Jews. The question is propounded in this verse, the answer whereof follows,
till he has proved it common both to Jews and Gentiles.

Verse. 10. How was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in
uncircumcision? not in circumcision* but in uncircumcision. He proves this
ground of Justification* and obtaining of happiness, to be common to the
uncircumcised, or the Gentiles, no less than to the Jews that were circumcised:
By seven Arguments.

Argum. 1. From the state of incircumcision, where^n Abraham was, when he was
pronounced righteous; as it appears in the History, Genesis 15.6. Righteousness
was imputed to Abraham by Faith, while he was yet uncircumcised: Therefore
this way of Justification is common, even to Believers while uncircumcised.

Verse. 11. And he received the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the
Righteousness of the Faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised, that he
might be the Father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised,
that Righteousness might be imputed to them also.

12. And the Father of Circumcision to them who are not of Circumcision only,
of our Father Abraham, which he had, being yet uncircumcised.

Argum. 2. Abraham received from God the Sign of Circumcision, as a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace, or the Righteousness of Faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised, to that end, that he might be the Father as well of the
Faithful that were uncircumcised, as of those that were circumcised, which were
the children of the flesh, and also of the Faith of Abraham. Therefore the
righteousness of Faith is common to Believers, both circumcised and
uncircumcised, or those that follow the steps of the Faith of Abraham, not yet
circumcised. Abraham is called the Father of the Faithful, because he was the
first eminent example of Faith, the Righteousness which is imputed by Faith,
and by his example, a Leader to all, that they may believe.

Verse. 13. For the promise that he should be the heir of the world, was not
to Abraham, or to his Seed through the Law, but through righteousness of Faith.
He proves that Abraham was not the Father of any but Believers, both
circumcised, and uncircumcised; and with this he adds a third Argument: The
Promise was made to Abraham, and to his Seed, that he should be afterward
heir of the Land of Canaan, in a type, and of the World and Heaven, in truth,
being restored to that right which Adam lost; and he came not to this by the
Law, or upon the condition of works, but by the absolute Promise, being
j^stified ^y Faith, or having the Righteousness of Faith; therefore his
children are not they which are by the Law, looking for righteousness by Works,
but only they which are of Faith, looking for righteousness by Faith; i. e. All
and only they that believe, circumcised and uncircumcised, who have an equal
community in the righteousness of Faith, and the promise of the inheritance.
The Argument is valid; for if Father Abraham is not heir of the world, and has
any righteousness but by Faith, certainly none are his sons but the faithful,
who have their righteousness by Faith, and from Righteousness the Inheritance.

Verse. 14. For if they which are of the Law be heirs, Faith is made void, and
the promise made of none effect. Argum. 4. This confirms the former Argument:
If those which are of the Law, or seek Righteousness by Works, are the children
of Abraham, and heirs of Life, and partakers of Righteousness, then Faith is
vain, and the Promise is void: But this is absurd; therefore they which are of
the Law, are not heirs, but only Believers are the children of Abraham, and
heirs of Righteousness and Life. The Argument is strong, for if Righteousness
and the Inheritance are given through Faith and the Promise, then they are
freely given: But if by the works of the Law, then of debt, and merit, and not
of grace, for merit or debt leaves no place for free grace, and by consequence,
makes faith and the promise void.

Verse. 15. Because the Law works wrath; for where no Law is, there is no
transgression. Argum. 5. Confirming the former, the Law works wrath to them
that seek for Righteousness by their Works, i. e. it pronounces condemnation
and death upon the guilty for their transgressions, which should be none, if
there was no Law. Therefore they that are of the Law, are not heirs of
Righteousness and Life, but all and only they which are of Faith, both
circumcised and uncircumcised.

Verse. 16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace, to the end the
Promise might be to all the Seed, not to that only which is of the Law, but to
that also which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all. Argum.
6. God has determined that the Inheritance should be of Faith, to this end,
that it might appear to be of Grace, or through Grace; therefore all and only
Believers, circumcised, and uncircumcised, are heirs. The Argument is good,
because Faith and Grace concur, mutually standing and falling together: Faith
is wholly maintained by Grace, which Grace is only promised and given to them
that believe. It being granted, that the Inheritance is through Grace, it
follows, to be through Faith also; and it being granted that it is through
Faith, it follows, that it is by Grace also, and that Believers are heirs only
through Grace.

That it might be firm] Argum. 7. The Inheritance is of Faith, and by Grace,
that the Promise might be firm to all the Seed, not only to that which is of
the Seed of Abraham by the Law of Nature, and with all Believers, i. e. to the
believing circumcised Jews; but also to that seed which is not after the flesh,
but only of the Faith of Abraham, that is, to the believing uncircumcised
Gentiles. Therefore unless we would make the Promise of Righteousness, and the
Inheritance (hanging it upon the condition of performing the Law) infirm and
uncertain, the whole Seed of Abraham (or all and only they that believe, both
circumcised and uncircumcised) are heirs by Faith with Father Abraham, who
according to Faith, is the Father of all us that believe, both Jews and
Gentiles. The matter is clear, because the Law, or the condition of Works,
would render the Promise of the Inheritance infirm, and altogether uncertain,
seeing that whatever depends upon our works can no wise be firm, both because
we are mutable, as also the condition of works, by reason of our infirmity, is
impossible; but that which is of Grace, that which is by Faith, that which is
in Christ, is necessarily firm, because it leans upon the unchangeable good
pleasure of God, and the Merit of Christ.

Verse. 17. (As it is written, I have made thee a Father of many Nations) before
him whom he believed, even God who quickens the dead, and callet^ those
things which be not, as though they were. The third Part.
The third part of the Chapter follows, in which the Faith of Abraham is
commended to the use and benefit of all Believers, that they may learn by his
example to believe more and more. The grounds upon which the Faith of Abraham
is commended, are six.

Reason 1. Because Abraham (through his Faith) by the special Sentence of God,
is declared the Father of many Nations, and so the Father of us that believe,
according to the Faith: For as Abraham begat Isaac by virtue of the Divine
Promise, and not by the power of Nature; even so by virtue of the Divine
Promise, promising that he should be the Father of many Nations, Abraham took
all Believers into the number of his Children, to be reckoned amongst his
Seed. And thus in the virtue of the Promise, he begot, or conceived the
Faithful, as Children of the Promise; which he shows more clearly, by calling
Abraham the Father of the Faithful, not only before God, or in the sight of
God, that is, after a spiritual manner, and in the account of God, but also to
the likeness of God, by a kind of similitude answering to God, whom he
believed; for in the Act of Faith, Abraham standing in the light of the
countenance of God Almighty who spoke unto him, believed the Promise. Those
sons which God promised, he looked upon as present by Faith: And thus after a
sort he became the Father of them, after the similitude of God.

Quickning] Reason 2. Because Abraham by Faith fixed his eyes upon the truth
and Omnipotency of God effectually bringing life out of death, and a being out
of nothing; and effectually calling things that were not yet, as if they were
or had a being; to which Omnipotent Truth when Abraham believed, his Faith put
on a kind of similitude to the Truth of God Almighty.

Verse. 18. Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the Father
of many Nations, according to that which was spoken, So shall thy Seed be.
Reason 3. Because Abraham believed in Spiritual hope, i. e. he had in his
heart a firm and invincible confidence, with a lively and strong hope of the
promised issue: Against hope, viz. of the flesh, and natural reason, which did
object nothing but impossibility, and as it were affirmed that they could not
be his Seed, as God had spoken.

Verse. 19. And being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own body now
dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of
Sarah's womb. Reas. 4. Because he was not weak in faith; he did not consider,
or did not stand upon those impediments that lay before his Faith, from himself
and his wife, as now dead, in respect to natural generation, but rather
magnified the power and faithfulness of God which had promised.

Verse. 20. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strong in Faith, giving glory to God. Reas. 5. Because he disputed not against
the Promise, not was stopped by those objections, which unbelief suggested, but
valiantly defended the Promise of God, and set himself against temptations,
ascribing to God the glory of his truth and Omnipotency.

Verse. 21. And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was also
able to perform. Reas. 6. Because he gave to God speaking, the glory of his
truth, out of a most full persuasion of Gods power for the performance of his
Promise. For the Promise once made, there is no doubt to be made of his will
to perform what he promises: But the question which remains, is touching the
Power of him that promises. Which question being laid aside, Abraham rests in
the promise of him whom he knew to be Almighty.

Verse. 22. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. Reas. 7.
Wherein the Faith of Abraham is commended, in that his Faith (by this act
showing it self to be true, such a Faith which uniteth, humbled and emptied
man (in the sight of God) to God that promises) was imputed to him for
righteousness. Because he embraced for his righteousness, the blessing
promised in that Seed which was to come, i. e. Christ.

Verse. 23. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to
him;

24. But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.

Now the Apostle shows forth the example of Abraham's Faith, fitted to the
common use of Believers, giving a pledge as it were by this example, promising
that our Faith in Christ Jesus, in like manner, should be imputed unto us for
righteousness. And that he might invite us to believe, he first compares the
Gospel (ministered unto us in the Name of God, touching the Death and
Resurrection of Christ for us) to the promise made unto Abraham: And further,
he requires of us Faith in God, who offers us this grace by the preaching of
the Gospel, that we might believe with Abraham. And lastly, he affirms our
Faith in God, who has willingly satisfied himself in the death of Christ, whom
he has raised also from the dead (that he might impute, and apply to us, the
righteousness obtained by the death of Christ) no less certainly to be imputed
unto us for righteousness, than it is certain that Abraham's Faith was imputed
to him for righteousness; and so sure it is that this was not written for his
sake alone, but for us, to whom in like manner this Faith was to be imputed
for righteousness.

Verse. 25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
Justification. He lays the foundation of this certainty in a twofold judicial
act of God toward Christ. The first act is, the delivering up of Christ our
Surety to death for our offenses. The other is, the raising of him for our
Justification. In the first whereof, God testifies that the sins of the
Redeemed were translated upon Christ by Covenant. And in the other, that he is
abundantly satisfied for their sins, and that the Redeemed in the person of
their Surety are justified: From whence it follows, that to those who are
Redeemed, (seeing they by Faith agree in this Covenant revealed in the Gospel)
Faith is imputed to righteousness, or the Righteousness obtained by Christ is
applied to them, that as in the person of their Surety they are justified, so
also they may be justified in themselves.

CHAP. V.
THe first Confirmation of this Divine ground of the Justification of sinners
by Faith in Christ, you have had; the second assertion follows, from a solid
consolation, which this way of our Justification affords against wrath and sin.

The parts of the Chapter are two. In the first is propounded a consolation in
repeating the several fruits of our Righteousness by Faith in Christ, to verse
the sixth. In the other, is set forth the solidity of this comfort, to the end
of the Chapter.

Verse. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ. The first part of the Chap. in which he recites nine
benefits or fruits, which depend upon each other, to show the consolation,
which Justification by Faith in Christ afford^ to us.

The first fruit is peace, or reconciliation with God, now appeased by our
Mediator, or through Christ who has made peace for us.

Verse. 2. By whom also we have access by Faith into his Grace wherein we
stand: The second fruit, is a daily leading by the hand, as it were, through
Christ by Faith, into the favor and grace of God, that we might use and enjoy
it more and more, and be even wholly taken into it.

Stand] The third fruit, is the confirmation of us in this state of grace, that
we may not fall from it, but constantly stand.

And rejoyce] The fourth fruit, is a rejoicing in the most assured hope of
enjoying of celestial glory hereafter with God.

Verse. 3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation works patience:

4. And patience, experience: and experience, hope.

The fifth fruit, is a glorying in all tribulations, and that in the midst of
afflictions, to which we are liable in this life, after we are justified.

Knowing] The sixth fruit, is the giving occasion of rejoicing in tribulations,
upon a certain knowledge or persuasion of persevering in holiness by the Cross.
Because thereby God teaches us patience, and by patience in us, affords us new
instructions of his grace toward us, giving us experience, and by experience
increases and confirms our faith, and hope of present and full freedom
hereafter from tribulations.

Verse. 5. And hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. The seventh fruit, is
a certainty of the possession of the good hoped for, or freedom from being
ashamed, which the frustration of conceived hope causes: for hope arising from
Justifying Faith, after this manner stirred up and increased, deceives not,
nor makes him that hopes ashamed.

Shed abroad] The eighth fruit confirming the former, is a sense of Divine Love
toward us, shed abroad in our hearts, and filling them; which as a certain
earnest, stablisheth us in the hope of future good things.

The Spirit] The ninth fruit, is the Holy Ghost more plentifully given to us
who believe in Christ, which Spirit works in us this sense of Divine Love
toward us, and witnesses together with our Spirits, that we are the sons of
God, and works in us all his other works belonging to Regeneration, Consolation
and Salvation. All that are justified by Faith have right to all these
privileges: If there be any that are Babes in Christ, or under any tentation,
and know not that they are justified, and are not acquainted with the
Consolations of the Spirit, and sorrow under their sins, no wonder that they
receive no comfort from these fruits.

Verse. 6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for
the ungodly:

7. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die; yet peradventure for a good
man some would even dare to die.

8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us.

9 Much more then being now justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him.

The second Part.
The second part of the Chapter, wherein he shows the solidity of Consolation
against wrath and sin, by a twofold comparison; whereof the first is of Christ
with Christ; to ver. 12. The other is of Christ (which is the second Adam) with
Adam our first parent; to the end.

There are three members of the comparison of Christ with Christ, wherein is
proved, that they which are justified shall be saved from wrath, by three
Arguments.

The first member of the comparison, is of the efficacy of Christ's love toward
us before Justification, with the efficacy of his love toward us after our
Justification. To this sense, when we lay in misery and sin, destitute of all
strength to deliver our selves, Christ in the fullness of time died for us
sinners, ver. 6. Such great love amongst men is scarcely found toward a
righteous man, unless perchance for a good man, and some way profitable to us,
some would dare to die, ver. 7. Whereupon the love of Christ is commended to us
from this, that when we were yet sinners, not yet justified, Christ died for
us, that we might be delivered from wrath, ver. 8. Therefore much more
effectual shall the love of Christ be toward us, now justified by his blood,
that we might be delivered by him from wrath, ver. 9. The Argument is
sufficient, because the love of Christ toward us now justified, cannot be
less than it was toward us when we lay in our sins. This is the first
Argument.

Verse. 10. For if when we were enemies* we were reconciled to God by the
Death of his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.
The second member of the comparison, is the efficacy of Christ's death before
Justification, and of his life after Justification, after this manner: If when
we were enemies, the Death of Christ was effectual for the reconciling of us
unto God, it shall be effectual to free us from wrath now being justified and
reconciled; because it is absurd to determine, that Christ being raised from
the dead, and living in heaven, should not preserve us from wrath, for whom
that we might be freed, he both died and arose from the dead. And this is
the second Argument.

Verse. 11. And not only so, but we also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement. The third member of the
comparison, is of the efficacy or virtue of Christ to procure and effect, that
God might be ours, (as a thing properly our own) which is greater, with the
virtue and efficacy of Christ to preserve us from wrath, which is less: To this
sense, we have not this advantage only by Christ, that we should be
preserved from wrath, but that which is chi^fest of all, we make our boast (or
rejoice) in God as our peculiar possession, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has not only obtained reconciliation for us, but has applied it to us now
justified by Faith, and has made God reconciled peculiarly ours; therefore we
are sure to be preserved from wrath. And this is the third Argument. In all
which is showed the solid consolation of those which are justified by Faith.

Verse. 12. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Another
comparison is of Christ and Adam, tending to show, that the righteousness of
Christ is no less effectual to save those that are justified by Faith, than the
sin of Adam was of force to destroy those that are not justified. There are six
parts of the Comparison.

The first, As by one man, viz. Adam, sin entered into the world, and death by
sin; and so death passed upon all men that are the sons of Adam by nature, in
as much as in him, as in a common parent, all have sinned; so by one man Christ
Jesus, the second Adam, Righteousness entered into the world, and Life by
Righteousness, and so life was communicated to all men which are the sons of
Christ by grace, (such as all are which are justified by Faith) in as much as
in him, as in a common parent, surety, and advocate, all are justified. This
Antithesis remains to be collected from what follows, and especially from the
end of ver. 14. where Christ is made the Antitype of Adam, because he is the
Gate and Fountain of Righteousness and Life, as Adam was the Gate and Fountain
of sin and death.

Verse. 13. For until the Law sin was in the world, but sin is not imputed when
there is no Law.

14. Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure of
him that was to come.

He proves that sin entered into the world, by one man Adam, and was propagated
to his posterity: For from Adam, to the Law written by Moses, sin was in the
world, and imputed; and that could not be, unless there had been some Law, at
least unwritten, and innate; for had there been no Law, neither written nor
innate, sin could not be imputed, ver. 13. but it was imputed, because the
punishment was inflicted: If so be the wages of sin is death, it reigned from
Adam to Moses, not only over those that were of riper years, but also over
infants, which sinned originally in him, (seeing all men were in Adam one man)
though not actually, or after the similitude of Adams actual transgression,
ver. 14. The sum of all is, there was death, the wages of sin, therefore there
was sin, therefore a Law, and sin from one passed unto all. He calls Adam a
type of him that was to come, viz. of the second Adam, Christ, that we might
understand how Christ ought to answer in his saving effects, to those
destructive effects of Adam, and that by the purpose of God, who would
represent Christ the Savior of men, in the lost original of mankind, that
Christ might be no less acknowledged the Fountain, Head, and Root of
Righteousness and Life, to be derived to those that are his, as Adam was the
Fountain, Head and Root of propagating sin and death to his.

Verse. 15. But not as the offense, so also is the free gift; for if through the
offense ^f one, many be dead, much more the grace of God, and ^he gift by
grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. The second
member of the Comparison wherein they disagree, which is first briefly
propounded, afterward more largely explained. The offense is not like the gift
of God, for that good which proceeds from God, is of Divine efficacy and
virtue, therefore infinitely surpasses the evil which is from man: Wherefore if
the offense of one man, i. e. Adam, could bring forth death to many that were
naturally propagated from him; much more the infinite grace of God, and the
free gift of one m^n Jesus Christ, who also is God, shall abundantly convey
life to them which are spiritually born of Christ. The sum of all is, He would
have us know, that the grace of Christ is more potent to save, than the sin of
Adam to destroy; and the gifts which are bestowed through the grace of God, are
more excellent than those which Adam lost.

Verse. 16. And not as it was by one that sinned, so was the gift; for the
judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses
unto Justification. The third branch of the Comparison, showing the
dissimilitude between the evil that entered only by Adam sinning, and the gift,
which is by Jesus Christ; because the just judgment of God from one sin of
Adam, proceeded to the just condemnation of himself, and of all, that by the
Law of Nature were comprehended in his loins: But grace, or the free gift of
God, not only frees us from that one Original sin, but from a multitude of
actual sins committed by every one, to a full justification from all sin. The
sum of all is, condemnation is from one offense, but the gift of grace is an
acquittal from all offenses.

Verse. 17. For if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they
which receive abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness, shall reign in
life by one, Jesus Christ. The fourth branch of the Comparison, with a
confirmation of the former, after this manner: If by one only sin of Adam,
death entering, as a King, subdued mankind to it; much more being justified by
Faith, receiving that abundant grace of God, and the gift of Righteousness,
shall reign in life, by one, Jesus Christ; By how much the more excellent
therefore the Kingdom of Life is (which makes its Subjects Kings, and
companions with Christ in Life Eternal) than the Kingdom of death (which
destroys all its subjects) by so much the gift of Christ (in respect to its
efficacy) excells the offense of Adam.

Verse. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so ly the righteousn^ss of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto ^ustification of Life. The fifth branch of the Comparison: As by the
fall of Adam only, the guilt came upon all, (that sprang of Adam by a natural
propagation) to their condemnation; so by the obedience of Christ only (wherein
he was obedient to his Father unto the death) the satisfaction came, to
justification of all men, which spring of Christ by a spiritual regeneration.

Verse. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. The sixth branch of the
Comparison, illustrating and ^onfirming the former, after this manner: As by
the disobedience of Adam only, it comes to pass, that many are accounted and
dealt with in the judgment of God as sinners, because they are derived from
him according to the flesh; so by the obedience of Christ only, many shall be
made righteous, that is, shall be accounted as righteous; to wit, all they
that are in Christ by Faith, born of him after the Spirit: For equal it is,
that the poison of sin should not pierce deeper, or the sin of Adam spread
further upon his Offspring, than the virtue of Christ's obedience upon his: And
it is mere, that as one sin of Adam was imputed to his children, to
condemnation and death; so the entire obedience of Christ only should be
imputed to his sons to Justification, and the obtaining of Eternal Life.

Verse. 20. Moreover, the Law entered, that the offense might abound; but where
sin abounded, grace did much more abound.

21. That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

He illustrates and concludes this whole comparison, by showing the abundance
of sin in those that are justified, renders the grace of Christ more
illustrious; and this he does by answering an objection concerning the end and
use of the published Law.

It may be questioned, if death reigned by the Law of Nature, not written
before Moses, what need was there of any written Law; and seeing righteousness
comes not by the Law, as is said before, to what end was the Law?

He answers, by showing a threefold end of giving the Law.

First: The Law entered, that the offense might abound; i. e. The Law forbidding
sin, and enjoining righteousness, in that space of time betwixt Adam and
Christ, came in, that sin, (which was daily committed, and yet because of
ignorance not acknowledged) might be known to be sin, and that the natural
wickedness of men might appear, which occasions, that by how much the more the
Law requires righteousness, by so much the more concupiscence is stirred up
against the Law; and that by this, the sin which lies hid in men might be
manifested, and known to abound.

But where] The second end, that from the abundance of sin in those that were
to be justified, the exceeding abundant grace of Christ toward those that are
justified might appear: seeing that where sin abounds in the conviction of men
that are to be justified, there the grace of Christ justifying is found to
super-abound.

Even as] The third end, that the power of sin, (as a King) by the Law, might
more clearly appear, showing forth its condemning power, the power of the
righteousness of Christ (as a Superior King) held forth in the Gospel, might
be more ^minent, prevailing, not only to the abolishing of the Kingdom of
sin, but also to the conferring of Eternal Life upon those that are justified:
Therefore by how much the more the force of sin (reigning over men not
justified) crowding them to the prison of Eternal death, might more clearly
appear; by so much the more, the virtue, power, and excellency of the grace of
Christ, overcoming and subduing sin, leading men powerfully unto Eternal Life,
might more manifestly be declared.

CHAP. VI.
THe third proof of the Doctrine of Justification freely by Faith in Christ, in
that it conduces very much to the promoting of Sanctity and Holiness.

There are two PARTS of the Chapter: In the first he shows, that by Faith in
Christ, or the Doctrine concerning the free ground of Justification, several
ways promotes endeavors after Sanctification; to verse 12. In the other part,
he exhorts those that are justified to follow after holiness; to the end.

Verse. 1. What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound?

2. God forbid: how shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?

By answering an objection, which seems to arise from this Doctrine, he sets
down a confirmation of the Proposition; That this Doctrine of Grace, or of Free
Justification, makes for the promoting of holiness. Some may say, Shall we
persevere in our sins, we that are justified by Faith, that the grace of God
may appear more abundant, as this Doctrine of Free Justification, by the
imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, seems to intimate? He answers, by
denying and rejecting: Far from us be such a thought. As if he had said, They
that are justified by Faith, ought not to indulge themselves in any sin, but to
endeavor after holiness: And this Proposition he confirms by ten Arguments.

Argum. 1. We are dead unto sin, in as much as when we gave up our names unto
Christ, that we might be justified and sanctified by him, we renounced sin,
that we might not have any more to do with it, than the dead have with the
living. Therefore we that are justified, ought not any longer to live in sin.

Verse. 3. Know you not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his death? Argum. 2. We (as you know) which are freely
justified by Faith in Christ, are also taken into the fellowship of his Death,
by Baptism; by which Sacrament we have bound our selves to die unto sin, and
Christ has bound himself unto us, to communicate the power of his Death, that
we might die unto sin. Therefore we ought not to undulge our selves in our
sins, but endeavor after holiness.

Verse. 4. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death; that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life. Argum. 3. Our communion with Christ in his
Death, is sealed to us in our Baptism, for the abolishing of the old Man of
Sin, i. e. Not only that we might be bound to mortify the old man, but also
that we might be made certain concerning the mortifying and subduing of sin,
by virtue of Christ's Death. Therefore we ought not to indulge our selves in
sin, but endeavor the mortifying of it.

Argum. 4. As our communion with Christ in his Death is sealed to us in our
Baptism, so also in his Resurrection; that as Christ was raised from the dead,
to a blessed and immortal life, by the glory of the Father, who powerfully
raised him; so should we endeavor by Faith, applying the virtue of Christ, to
arise from sin, and to walk in newness of life, to the glory of the Father
powerfully renewing us. Therefore ought we not to continue in sin, but follow
after holiness.

Verse. 5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death,
we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection. Argum. 5. Drawn from
our spiritual and nearest union with Christ by Faith, which union is the ground
of the communication of that virtue which flows from the Death and Resurrection
of Christ; for by Faith we are planted into Christ, as the Branch into the
Vine, and this ingrafting brings us into that conformity with the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, that we dying unto sin, Christ dying, and following
after newness of life, Christ rising again, may be clearly seen in a certain
likeness to himself. Hence he confirms his former Argument; when we are
planted together with Christ by Faith, we are so nearly united to him, that
there follows of necessity a conformity with him in his death, to the
mortification of sin, and in his resurrection, to newness of life. Therefore
unless we will acknowledge no union with him, and implanting into him, we
must renounce all sin, and endeavor after holiness.

Verse. 6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body
of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Argum. 6.
From that judicial union which we have with Christ crucified. The force of
which Argument, that it may be seen, four things are to be maintained. 1.
That Christ hanging upon the Cross as our Surety, sustained our persons before
Gods Tribunal. 2. That he under-went the punishment due to our corrupt nature,
or the old man, so called, because the evil of nature in those that are
regenerated waxes old, and hastens to destruction. 3. That he took upon him
to slay the old man in us. 4. In that he took upon him to represent our
persons, we are thereby obliged to labor after mortification of sin by his
Spirit, that after Justification we should no longer serve sin. From hence the
Argument, we know, or believe that our old man is crucified judicially with
Christ, to this end, that in us who are justified by Faith, might be weakened
the body of death, (so that filthiness of habitual corruption, compacted, as it
were, into one monstrous body, prepared with all its members to actual sinning)
that we should no more, after we are justified, serve sin. Therefore we
ought to endeavor the mortification of sin, unless we will cast away the
Faith of our judicial union with Christ, hanging upon the Cross.

Verse. 7. For he that is dead, is freed from sin. Argum. 7. From the fruit of
this union with Christ dying on the Cross; whosoever is dead to his old Lord
sin, is justified and freed from the yoke and dominion of sin, that he might
not serve it any longer, nor obey the commands of it: You may assume, But we
are justified by Faith in Christ dying for sin upon the Cross, we are dead to
^our old Master Sin, therefore we are justified and freed from the yoke and
dominion of sin, that we should not any longer obey its commands; for what
service can sin further exact from us, whom Christ in his death upon the Cross
has slain, as it were?

Verse. 8. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live
with him. Argum. 8. If we die with Christ, i. e. are united to him dying, in
his power endeavoring to mortify sin, we need not doubt but we shall live a
spiritual, new and heavenly life with him; therefore it behooves us to endeavor
the mortifying of sin.

Verse. 9. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death
has no more dominion over him. Argum. 9. Confirming the former; We believe
that Christ rose to an immortal life, neither is he for ever hereafter liable
unto death, but always living; he both will, and is able to perpetuate in us
a new life, that death may no more have dominion over us. Therefore as we do
not believe in vain, that by his power we shall live a new and eternal life,
so ought we to labor, that the new life, to which we have risen with Christ,
may be continued, not to suffer sin should any more prevail, or have dominion
over us.

Verse. 10. For in that he died, he died unto sin once; but in that he
lives, he lives unto God.

11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Argum. 10. As Christ died but once to wash away and abolish sin, and rising
from the dead, he lives for ever to the glory of God; so you that are
justified, by arguments of Faith gather, and reckon your selves in the death of
Christ to be once dead, nor to be obliged to dye for sin any more; that ye
were once dead by the dethroneing of sin, neither are ye bound to serve sin
any longer; that ye were once dead to the destroying of sin, nor can ye be
destitute of the strength of Christ to mortify sin, but in his resurrection
ye are bound to live unto God, or the glory of God, and that ye might so
live, ye have strength and help enough by Jesus Christ our Lord. Therefore the
Doctrine of free Justification by Faith, is so far from opening a door of
liberty to sin, that on the contrary, nothing is more effectual and conducible
to the promoting of Sanctity and Holiness.

Second Part.
Verse. 12. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that you should
obey it in the lusts thereof. The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein
the Apostle infers, out of what went before, an exhortation to all that are
justified by Faith, that they follow after Holiness. The Proposition to be
proved is the same with the former, viz. They that are justified, ought not to
continue in sin, but labor after Holiness. He produces thirteen Arguments,
whereof the three former are included in the following Exhortation.

The branches of this Exhortation are three, and the Arguments as many, couched
in the Exhortation, to the confirming of the Proposition.

The first branch of the Exhortation is, that they would not obey sin, by
indulging the sinful lusts of the body.

Argum. 1. The first Argument is this; To obey the sinful lusts of the body, is
to suffer in your mortal body the reign of sin, or of the Devil, from whence
ye are freed, which they that are justified should tremble at. Therefore being
now justified, you ought not to follow after sin, but holiness.

Verse. 13. Neither yield you your members as instruments of unrighteousness
unto sin, but yield your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the
dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God. The second
branch of the Exhortation is, that they would not fight for this Tyrant, viz.
sin, making use of the faculties of their souls or bodies as servants to
contend for it, wherein is the second Argument: To serve sin, is to yield the
faculties of the Soul, and members of the body, as weapons of iniquity to fight
for sin and the Devil against God, and our own Salvation, which all that are
justified ought to abhor. Therefore they that are justified, ought not to serve
sin.

Yeeld] The third member of the Exhortation, that they would yield themselves
Soldiers and Servants unto God, who has freed them from death, wherein is the
third Argument. God has called you back from death in sin, and Eternal
Perdition, unto Life, that you might be Servants unto righteousness, and might
contend for God against his enemies; therefore ought you to labor after
Holiness.

Verse. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye arae not under the
Law, but under Grace. Argum. 4. If you contend and fight against sin, the
Tyrant shall not recover his dominion over you, which he has lost, neither
shall sin reign over you, but you shall become Conquerours through Christ;
therefore ought you to labor after Holiness.

For you are not] Argum. 5. Confirming the former, you are not under the Law,
under the Covenant of works, wherein the Commandment exacted strict obedience,
but affords no strength to assist in our obedience; but you are under Grace, or
the Covenant of Grace, wherein the Grace of God, with the Command, confers life
to Believers, and strength to obey; therefore certain of the victory against
sin, ye ought to endeavor after Holiness.

Verse. 15. What? then shall we sin, because we are not under the Law, but
under grace? God forbid. He repeats and rejects the absurd objection of
Libertines, who take occasion from the grace of God to sin more freely, when
the contrary follows, viz. because we are under grace, therefore we ought not
to indulge to our selves a liberty of sinning.

Verse. 16. Know you not, that to whom you yield your selves servants to obey,
his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness? Argum. 6. Serving by the way to confute the
objection; seeing there is a necessity that you be servants to him whom you
obey, and that you receive a reward proportionable to your work, whether you
obey sin, or the Divine Commands, unless you will be accounted the servants of
sin, and will receive the reward of eternal death, it behooves you to beware
that you indulge not your selves in sin, and if you will be accounted the
Servants of God, that you may be pronounced Righteous, and Heirs of Life, of
necessity you must labor after Holiness.

Verse. 17. But God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin: but ye have
obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered to you. Argum.
7. By the grace of God, the time of your bondage is past, in which you were
servants to sin, before your regeneration, and now converted, you have begun to
yield sincere obedience to the Gospel, the impression whereof you have received
as from a print: Therefore to return to the service of sin, or to depart from
the sound Doctrine, is unworthy, but it behooves you to persevere in your
obedience to the Doctrine into which you were delivered.

Verse. 18. Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of
righteousness. Argum. 8. Being now freed from sin, by the Omnipotent Arm of
God, ye are servants of righteousness to holiness: Therefore by the Law of
servitude, being servants to righteousness, ye are bound to become servants
also unto holiness.

Verse. 19. I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your
flesh: for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to
iniquity, unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to
righteousness, unto holiness. After his excuse of his homely similitude, which
in many things holds no proportion with these spiritual things, yet
notwithstanding the Holy Ghost is pleased to use, because of the infirmity of
the Romans, for the sake of those that were carnal, which could not so easily
apprehend an higher, or more spiritual way of speaking: He repeats the
exhortation, and adds:

Argum. 9. You have sometimes yielded your members unto uncleanness, and have
been altogether servants to unrighteousness; therefore now it is fitting, that
with equal industry at least, you yield your members servants unto
righteousness, and to holiness, not to be less studious of doing well, than
heretofore you have been of sinning, and doing ill.

Verse. 20. For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from
righteousness. Argum. 10. Confirming the former: When you were servants of sin,
ye were free from righteousness, for you were not at all servants unto
righteousness: Therefore now it is equal, seeing you are the servants of
righteousness, that you should be free from sin, and not at all servants unto
it.

Verse. 21. What fruit had you then in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed? for the end of those things is death. Argum. 11. You have gained no
other fruit for your former sinful course of life, but shame, which is now upon
you, nor could you expect any other fruit for the future but eternal death,
which is the end of sin; Therefore it behooves you to beware that you serve sin
no longer.

Verse. 22. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye
have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. Arg. 12. After you
gained your liberty from the bondage of sin, you became servants unto God, and
have your fruit unto holiness, increasing and abounding daily therein, at
length you shall obtain eternal life; therefore ought you diligently to follow
after holiness.

Verse. 23. For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Arg. 13. Confirming those which went before,
after this manner; Whatsoever has hitherto been spoken in this Argument, is
sufficient and firm; for it is decreed by a Divine Sentence, to render a reward
to sinners according to their deserts, which is eternal death; and to bestow
life eternal, with Justification and Sanctification, which are chained to
eternal life, not of debt, but freely of his grace, and that no way but in our
Lord Jesus Christ: Therefore ought we not to continue in sin, lest we perish,
but with Faith in Christ we must join the practice of holiness, which holiness
with eternal life, God will freely give to those that believe in Christ, and
follow after holiness, as it is largely proved before.

CHAP. VII.
IN the former Chap. he exhorts those that are justified by Faith, to
Holiness; and because they who most follow after Holiness, are most sensible,
and lament the power of sin dwelling in them, not yet extinguished: Therefore
for the sake of these arises the fourth Confirmation of the Doctrine of Free
Justification by Faith in Christ, in that it yields consolation to the
afflicted consciences of the Saints, by reason of their imperfect obedience to
the Law, and the relics of sin that dwell in them.

There are three parts of the Chapter; in the first, that they who are
justified should take comfort against their imperf^ct obedience to the Law, he
handles the freedom of justified persons from the Covenant of Works, and their
interest in the Covenant of Grace, which is the first place of Consolation, to
ver. 7. The second contains an Apology for the Holiness of the Law, two
objections against the Law being answered, to verse 14. In the third, is
contained the second place of Consolation, wherein from the Doctrine of
Justification by Fait^ in Christ, the Apostle propounds the wrestling which he
had with the remnants of sin, and the victory which he gained, that by his
example and experience, troubled consciences might take comfort.

The first Part.
Verse. 1. Know ye not, Brethren, (for I speak to them that know the Law) how
that the Law has dominion over a man, as long as he lives.

2. For the Woman which has an Husband, is bound by the Law to her Husband, so
long as he lives: but if the Husband be dead, she is loosed from the Law of
her Husband.

3. So then, if while her Husband lives, she be married to another man, she
shall be called an adulteress: but if her Husband be dead, she is free from
that Law, so that she is no adulteress, though she be married to another man.

As to the first part, taking a comparison from Marriage, he shows that the
Justified which are delivered from the conjugal Covenant of the Law, and
Espoused by a new Covenant of Grace, to a new Husband Christ, should bring
forth the fruits of holiness, in new obedience to the Law, to the glory of our
new Husband, Christ.

In the three first verses he propounds the protasis of the comparison, after
this manner: As no Law has dominion over the dead (as ye know) but only over
them that are alive, ver. 1. and particularly the Law of Marriage is dissolved,
the one being dead, so that the Wife, (the Husband being dead) without adultery
may marry another, ver. 2, and 3. so you, etc. as it shall appear by and by.

Verse. 4. Wherefore my Brethren, ye also are become dead to the Law by the
Body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is
raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. The Apodosis
of the comparison, to this manner; So you that were espoused formerly to the
Law by a Covenant of Works, Christ being dead for you, that he might satisfy
the Law, Justice, and the Covenant of Works in our name, you are judicially
dead to the Law, in the body of Christ (for the Law, or Covenant of Works has
slain Christ, and you in him) and by consequence you are delivered from the
matrimonial Covenant of the Law; so that without the breach of Justice you may
enter into a new Covenant of Grace, with Christ, being raised from the dead. To
this end he shows, that the purpose of marriage being disannulled, betwixt the
Law of Works and us, not that we should live as we list, but being raised
from a state of death, by the Resurrection of Christ, that we should be
espoused to another Husband, viz. to him which is raised from the dead, i. e.
to Christ, who rose from the dead, and has raised us with himself to newness
of life, and has espoused us to himself, according to the Covenant of Grace,
that being married unto Christ, we might bring forth fruits of obedience to
the glory of God.

There are five Arguments of consolation to the Justified, who bewail the
imperfection of their own obedience.

Become dead] Argum. 1. You are freed from the Covenant of Works, which admits
no obedience besides what is perfect, and every way complete: Therefore all you
that are Justified have consolation, which bewail the imperfection of your new
obedience.

Of another] Argum 2. You are now married to another Husband, viz. to Christ,
who is raised from the dead, who when he could answer the imperfections of
your obedience, and (according to the Covenant of Grace) render your begun
obedience acceptable unto God, he took it upon himself: You have this
consolation that mourn over the imperfections of your new obedience.

Fruit] Argum. 3. Ye^ are married unto Christ, which is raised from the dead,
that you may not abide unfruitful, but may bring forth fruit to the glory of
God: Therefore take ye comfort, who bewail your imperfect obedience.

Verse. 5. For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins which were by the
Law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. Argum. 4.
Confirming the former, from the change of our condition, while we were
unregenerate (and by consequence under a Law-Covenant) evil affections by the
holy Law of God were stirred up, and put forth themselves powerfully in our
members, and all our faculties both of soul and body, to the production of the
deadly fruit of actual sin: Therefore it will follow, when we are now
regenerated, and under the Covenant of Grace, holy desires stirred up by the
New Covenant, powerfully show forth themselves in our members, to the bringing
forth the fruit of good works unto God, that we might not abide unfruitful.
Which is no small consolation; for if we by Faith would lay hold upon the
Covenant of Grace, and would stir up our souls by the promises thereof applied
unto us, there is no doubt but we should more plentifully bring forth good
works; That is it which Christ says, Joh. 15.5. I am the vine, ye are the
branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, he brings forth much fruit:
for without me you can do nothing.

Verse. 6. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we
were held, that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness
of the letter. Argum. 5. Opening and confirming the former, from the end of our
changed condition, Now, to wit, after Justification, through the Grace of
Christ we are freed from the Law-Covenant (that Covenant being dead in which
we were held, or we being dead in Christ, in whom we were contained
judicially) to that very end, that we should serve God, by the power of the
Holy Ghost, bestowing new strength upon us, by bringing forth new and spiritual
fruit, not superficial and hypocritical, which the letter of the old legal
Covenant (now abolished) at the most, brought forth: Therefore God will not
fail of his end, but will cause those that are justified, bewailing their
imperfect obedience, to bring forth much fruit in the newness of the letter,
for the fruits which are brought forth by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, are
truly new, and arise from the regenerating Spirit, furnishing us with new
strength forthwith to good works; But the fruits which are brought forth by
virtue of the Covenant of Works, either are open rebellion of corrupt Nature
against Gods Law, or counterfeit obedience only in the outward performance;
such as the fruits of the Pharisees are, who in the letter, that is, the
outward show, and formality obeyed, without any renovation of the heart.

The second Part.
Verse 7. What shall we say then? Is the Law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not
known sin, but by the Law: For I had not known lust, except the Law had said,
Thou shall not covet. The second part of the Chapter, containing an Apology for
the holiness of the Law, in answering two Objections, arising out of what was
said before. The first Objection; seeing that evil and sinful motions are
excited by the Law, as was said, the Law seems to be sin, or the cause of sin.

He answers by way of negation; far be it from us to entertain any such
thought; he gives three Reasons of his negation, illustrated by his own
experience, wherein he pleads for the Law.

The first Reason, Because the Law discovers sin, and manifests the evil that
is in it, which he confirms by his own experience, who had not known that lust
which lurked in his heart to be sin, had he not seen it forbidden by the Law:
Therefore the Law is holy.

Verse. 8. But sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence; for without the Law sin was dead. Reason 2. Because
the sin that dwells in us, or the habitual pravity of our nature, is the cause
of actual sins; but the Law is not the cause, but the occasion to sin, not
given, but taken. For sin that dwells in us (says he) or the evil of nature,
taking occasion from the Law forbidding lust, so much the more is inflamed and
excited; And endeavoring after what was forbidden, begat in me all manner of
concupiscence, and evil motions against the Law.

For without the Law] Which he confirms by a sign, Because the Law not being
known, sin lies hid, and is as dead, but when the Law comes, it is stirred up,
and appears; as filthiness is not seen in the absence of the Sun, but that
arising, it appears and stinks, not by the Suns fault, but by its own:
Therefore the Law is holy.

Verse. 9. For I was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came,
sin revived, and I died. By his own experience he further explains the matter,
showing, that formerly when he was a Pharisee and unregenerate, in his own
opinion he was alive, that is, very just, and in no wise guilty of eternal
death; but when his eyes were opened by the grace of God, the true sense of the
Law was unfolded, then he understood the force of sin, and that he was guilty
of eternal death.

Verse. 10. And the Commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto
death. From this experience he says that he learned two things; First, That
the end of the command, and the effect was good in it self, because the command
is good in it self, and by it self ordained to life, if men obeyed it: The
other, that the effect of the Law by accident was death, so far as it
threatened death to the sinner, and urges him from justice with the sentence of
death.

Verse. 11. For sin taking occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and by it
slew me.

12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and good.

The third Reason, in defense of the Law; The sin that dwells in us, is the
cause of death, only taking occasion from the Law, or the command, as he had
learned by experience: for sin (while he thought of what was forbidden in the
Law) invited and enticed him to forbidden things, and polluted him, and so by
the Command made him more and more obnoxious to death: Therefore the Law is
altogether holy; and particularly that which forbids Concupiscence, is holy,
just and good, because it is given by an holy God, according to equity, and for
our profit.

Verse. 13. Was that then which is good made death un^o me? God forbid. But
sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good, that
sin by the Commandment might become exceeding sinful. The second Objection;
Some might say, Therefore has that which is good been the cause of death? He
answers, by rejecting the reproach; for the occasion is to be distinguished
from the cause, and the use of a thing from the abuse of it. He therefore
acquits the Law, and casts all the blame upon the sin that dwells in us. Truly
( says he) it is not the Law, but sin that dwells in me, which is the cause
of death, and discovers it self to be sin, so far forth as it is stirred up
in me, and kindled by the good Law of God, it enkindles rebellious motions to
the Law of God, and so much the more upon this account does it cause death,
that so sin in me, by the Command might appear above measure sinful. Which is
spoken most seasonably, to stop the mouths of all, who otherwise would deny
inborn concupiscence (now natural to all) to be sin, was it not found to be
the cause of actual sins and death; and this defense he makes for the Law.

The third Part.
Verse. 14. For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under
sin. The third part of the Chapter, wherein is set down the second head of
comfort, to those who bewail the imperfection of their obedience to the Law,
from the Apostles example, wrestling with the same evil, and getting the
victory, by the favor and benefit of free justification, as appears from verse.
the last. This is the force of the Argument; I bewailing in my self the power
of sin, wrestle against it, taking comfort, from justification by faith in
Christ: Therefore you holy Champions take comfort in your wrestling and
conflict.

In the conflict of the Apostle appears a threefold difficulty, and a threefold
victory in the retreat; in all which are mixed some Arguments of comfort, drawn
from the Apostles experience: The first difficulty arises from a threefold
contention; The first is of the Law and himself; I (says he) with the rest of
believers, acknowledge the Law to be spiritual, which wholly favour^ the
holiness of the Spirit of God; and is wholly referred to a spiritual course of
life; But when I look upon my self, and compare the imperfection of my
obedience with the spiritualness of the Law; I am compelled (in respect to the
Old Man in me not yet mortified) to acknowledge my self carnal, and as a slave
sold to subjection under sin, out of whose bonds I cannot deliver my self, but
I am carried away whither I would not.

Verse. 15. For that which I do, I allow not: for what I would, that do I not;
but what I hate, that I do. He proves what he has said, and shows the second
contest betwixt his actions, and his judgment renewed. That which I do, I do
not approve, viz. when I examine my actions to the perfect Rule of the Law, I
am forced not to approve, but condemn many things in my actions.

The third disagreement he shows to be betwixt his actions, and his will
renewed; I do not that good which I would (says he) hindered by the body of
death in me; and that evil which I hate, that I do, failing of the Rule, where
I would not; for I would perform perfect obedience to the Law of God, but I
fall short, and in many things I offend.

Verse. 16. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law, that it
is good. The first difficulty you have seen, the victory follows, and three
Arguments of Consolation, whereby the Apostle comforts himself, and the rest of
his fellow-combatants.

Argum. 1. I my self, am in the number of those, who bewail their imperfect
holiness, and find the same conflict in my self as they do, from the
imperfection of my obedience: Therefore they have Consolation, that mourn over
the imperfection of their holiness, seeing they suffer nothing different from
other Saints, nay, not from the Apostles themselves.

I consent] Argum. 2. Of Consolation; Because from this con^^ict it appears,
that sanctification is begun in him that wrastles, and a consent to the Law of
God, that it is holy and good; for if I do what I wo^ld not, then I assent to
the Law of God, that it is good: and the same sign of their sanctification have
all those that bewail the imperfection of their obedience.

Verse. 7. Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.
Argum. 3. Of Comfort; Because to him that laments his imperfection, and
disallows it, that evil shall not be imput^d (which is also to be understood
of all the other holy Combatants) but to sin dwelling in him: Because God
esteems those that weep over the evil of their nature, from their better part,
viz. that which is renewed, which does, and shall prevail in the mortification
and abolition of sin that dwells in us; from which renewed part he is called
the Christian Champion; It is no more I (says he) but sin that dwells in me.

Verse. 18. For I know, that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good
thing; for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good,
I find not. The other difficulty or sharp contest, consisting in a threefold
conflict. First, Betwixt himself and the Old Man, or that part which was not
yet renewed, and himself, the New Man, or the renewed part; and here he
himself renewed, condemns himself unrenewed, as void of any good, and a fit
receptacle for all evil. I know (says he) that there does not dwell in me,
that is in my flesh (or corrupt and unrenewed nature, which I receive from my
carnal Generation) any spiritual good thing, whereby I may please God.

He proves what he said, and propounds the second conflict, betwixt his will
renewed, and the weakness of his flesh, or his perverse nature, hindering that
the holy motions, stirred up by the Spirit, were not brought into act and
performed.

Verse. 19. For the good that I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not,
that I do. The third conflict, betwixt the regenerated Will and the Flesh, or
the Old Man, not only hindering the execution of the Will renewed, but also
producing evil effects, contrary to the renewed Will. Some may wonder what he
means, when he speaks of the commission of evil; seeing we all know from the
Scriptures, how holily and unblameably our Apostle behaved himself in all
things, after his conversion. But it will be no wonder, when we consider,
that, by reason of the abundant measure of holiness, which was bestowed upon
him, he could not behold those rebellious motions of his nature, but he would
accuse himself of the omission of good, and the commission of evil; for he
took notice of those motions, either hindering him from performing all the parts
of his duty toward God and men, which he strictly desired to do; or polluting
some way or other all his actions in the sight of God: What wonder therefore,
if after this manner, he set out himself as a great sinner?

Verse. 20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwells in me. The Conquest follows, after this sharp conflict,
repeating the consolations of himself, and the rest of the Saints, That the sin
committed would not be imputed to him, bewailing this his imperfection; but to
the corruption of his nature, or his habitual corruption indwelling, designed
to destruction and abolition: And because he conflicted with sin, therefore is
he denominated from the better and renewed part, as above, verse. 17. and not
from the worser part.

Verse. 21. I find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with
me. The third sharp Conflict follows, consisting of a threefold contention:
The first is betwixt himself regenerated, endeavoring after holiness; and an
evil inclination cleaving unto him, and impelling him with a kind of necessity,
and as it were by a Law inciting and provoking to evil.

Verse. 22. For I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man.

23. But I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind,
and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin, which is in my members.

The second Contention is betwixt the inner spiritual man, renewed with his
affections, and the Law of God, on the one part; and the outward or Old Man not
renewed, furnished with his instruments and faculties, with his rebellious
motions, on the other side; Against the Law of God, and the Law or inclination
of his renewed mind, fighting, and sometimes prevailing, and making him captive
to the evil disposition of his nature. This is the fight, whereof he speaks,
Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh, and these are contrary, that you cannot do the things which you would.
Which wrestling only they understand, that feel it within them, and the force
of sin some way or other polluting their most holy actions, all their life long.

Verse. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? The third Contention is betwixt evil Concupiscence, and the holy
servant of God, lying prostrate under the oppression of the conquering
perverseness of his nature, or this body of death, groaning, lamenting, and
crying out to God for deliverance.

Verse. 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. After this feirce combat
follows the victory, and Comfort by faith in Christ justifying, together with
his thanksgiving to God his deliverer, who has provided comfort in his Son,
not for those that continue in sin, but which bewail their sins and
imperfections.

Verse. 25. -- So then, with the mind I my self serve the Law of God: but with
the flesh, the Law of sin. At length with a composed mind, after his being
affected with sorrow for sin dwelling in him, and with joy, because of his
hoped-for liberty by Christ, the Apostle at length propounds himself a
fellow-souldier with other Saints, in this holy war, against the remainder of
sin. After this manner; I therefore an Apostle (that for comfort to those who
bewail their sins, I may briefly recollect what I have spoken of my self) I
profess that I have not attained to that measure of Sanctity, after which I
aspire: But together with the rest of the Saints mourning and conflicting,
under the hope of freedom I go forward; and as if I was divided from my self,
the spirit and the flesh wrestling in me: with my mind, or my spiritual part,
delightfully I serve the Law of God; but with my flesh, or my unregenerate
part, I am as a Captive to the Law of sin, or the prevalency of corrupt nature.

CHAP. VIII.
THe fifth Confirmation of Justification by Faith is this, That this way of
Justifying, affords solid consolation, not only against all evil to be dreaded
after this life, but also against all troubles and afflictions to which the
children of God are liable in this life.

There are three parts of the Chapter. The first is to comfort those that are
Justified, against the fear of Condemnation, which might trouble those that
bewail the imperfection of their Sanctification, and the relics of sin. Which
consolation he appropriates to those that are justified, endeavoring after
holiness, secluding those that are unregenerate, and delight in sin, to ver. 9.
which he applies to the Romans, to ver. 12. and thus applied, he shows the
use of it, to ver. 17. The second part contains the Consolations of the
Justified in respect to the calamities of this life, to which the godly are
liable, to ver. 31. The third part contains the triumph of those that are
justified, over all their enemies, to the end.

Verse. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. From what has been
spoken, he infers consolation to those that are justified, against the fear of
condemnation; which the conscience of sin dwelling in us, may easily affright
us with. There is no condemnation (says he) to those which by true Faith are
ingrafted into Christ: And because many profess the Faith they have not, he
describes true Believers and justified persons from this property, that they do
not indulge themselves in sin, neither do they willingly follow the guidance of
the flesh and corrupt nature, but walk after the Commands of God, and the
motions of the Holy Ghost, inwardly persuading them, to direct the course of
their life according to the Rule of the Word of God.

Verse. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the Law of Sin and Death. That this consolation belongs to them that are
truly justified, and endeavor after holiness, he proves by three Arguments.

Argum. 1. The Law of Faith, of Life, and the Spirit in Christ, or the Covenant
of Grace, has freed every Believer, and me in particular, from the law of sin
and death, or the Covenant of Works. Therefore to them that are justified,
truly united unto Christ, there is no condemnation. For by the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, he understands the Law of Faith, or the
Covenant of Grace, because by Faith, or the Covenant of Grace, the Spirit is
received, and communion with the Life of Christ. And by the Law of Sin and
Death, he understands the Law of Works, as Romans 3.27. or the Covenant of
Works, by which Law or Covenant conviction of sin is made, and condemnation
unto death of them that are guilty.

Verse. 3. For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh; Argum. 2. Seeing the Law was found weak, to procure for us
Justification, by reason of the infirmity of the flesh, or humane nature, now
corrupted; not able to yield perfect obedience to the Law. God sending his Son
in the flesh, of the same nature with us, and in all things like unto us (sin
excepted) in the flesh of his Son crucified, condemned our sin, that
satisfaction being made for us, it might be abolished in us. Therefore sin in
us that are justified, who are in Christ, cannot be the cause of condemnation,
and thus there is no condemnation to us.

Verse. 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Argum. 3. To this very end sin is
condemned, in Christ that is condemned and dead for us, that we being once
dead and condemned in him, it might appear that the Law is satisfied; in us, I
say, who follow not the lusts of the flesh, but the guidance of the Holy Ghost:
Therefore now no condemnation remains us.

Verse. 5. For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh:
but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit. He gives four
reasons why he makes this consolation peculiar to them that follow after
holiness, secluding all that are unregenerate, and continue in sin. The first
reason, They that are carnal and unregenerate, savor and affect only those
things that are carnal and wicked; but those that are regenerate, savor and
affect spiritual things* Therefore its no wonder, that only they that follow
after holiness, are admitted to the consolation of an immunity from
condemnation; and they which are carnal are excluded.

Verse. 6. For to be carnally minded, is death: but to be spiritually minded,
is life and peace. Reason 2. The wisdom of carnal men, which is the Governor
of their counsels and actions, and is carried only to those things, which
please the flesh, whether in respect to God, or eternal life, and so it
inclines to death. But the wisdom of the spirit, or an habit directing the
actions of regenerate men, is carried to those things which belong to spiritual
life and peace: Therefore its no wonder, if only they that are regenerate, and
spiritual, are exempted from condemnation, but not they that are carnal.

Verse. 7. Because the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Reason 3. Confirming the former; the
wisdom of the flesh it self, the principal virtue of politic wits, is enmity
against God, for it only seeks and cares for its own, rejecting God; neither is
it subject to the Law of God, or can be subject: for it cannot but subject to
its own carnal ends, the Soul, Heaven, God, and all things; and pursue after
these so far as it thinks them conducible to carnal ends: Therefore its no
wonder that carnal men are not freed from condemnation.

Verse. 8. So then, they that are in the flesh, cannot please God. Reason 4.
Whoever are unregenerate, in the state of corrupt nature, or the flesh, cannot
please God, because they cannot but follow after those things which please
them: Therefore no wonder they are not freed from condemnation.

Verse. 9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the
Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he
is none of his. Applying the character of justified persons out of the
judgment of charity to the Romans, he also applies to the same Romans, to
whom he writes, the consolation which arises from freedom from condemnation:
he prudently in the mean time bespeaks them, that they would not indulge
hypocrisy in any; and he gives four Reasons of this application.

The first Reason; You are not subject to the dom^nion of the flesh, you are
not unregenerate, but in a spiritual condition, following the guidance of the
Spirit: Therefore there is no condemnation to you, or, which is the same, to
you belongs the foresaid consolation.

Reas. 2. Confirming the former, the Spirit of God dwelling in you, framing
your hearts and lives unto holiness; for unless I should thus judge of you, I
should think you did not belong unto Christ; for he that has not the
sanctifying Spirit of Christ, is not yet a living member of Christ: Therefore
there is no condemnation unto you.

Verse. 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin; but the
Spirit is Life, because of righteousness. Reas. 3. Seeing that Christ is in
you, though your body indeed, in respect to the remnants of sin, not to be
abolished, but by death, is destined to death, and shall certainly dye; Yet the
Spirit of Regeneration, which is given to you, is eternal life it self in you,
or begun in your souls, because of the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto
you: Therefore there is no condemnation unto you.

Verse. 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell
in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you. Reas. 4. The Spirit of Christ
dwelling in you, will never forsake his habitation, but will render you to
himself a glorious and immortal receptacle; To which end, God will no less
certainly and powerfully raise even your mortal bodies, to life immortal, as
he has raised the body of Christ from the dead: Therefore to you there is no
condemnation.

Verse. 12. Therefore, Brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live
after the flesh. The Consolation which he had applied to the Romans, from
their immunity from condemnation, be draws into use, exhorting them to the
study of holiness, by which they should strengthen their consolation: The
Arguments of his exhortation are six.

The first Argument; We are bound by all means to obey the Holy Ghost,
continually minding us of our duty, both inwardly, and by the Word: But we ^re
no debtors to the flesh, or to serve the lusts of our nature, because we are
nothing indebted to that, besides hatred, and all means of mortification:
Therefore ought we to follow after holiness.

Verse. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye, but if you through
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Argum. 2. If you
set up the lusts of the flesh, and corrupt Nature for a Rule, that you may
order your lives according to that, ye shall eternally dye: Therefore as you
would not perish, follow after holiness.

Argum. 3. If you obey the Holy Ghost, using only those means prescribed by
it, and make use of that power communicated by the Spirit to you that believe
in Christ, for the mortifying the corrupt affections and deeds of your bodies,
without doubt you shall obtain Eternal Life through the grace of God: Therefore
ought you to follow after holiness.

Verse. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.
Argum. 4. Confirming the former: All that follow the command, and guidance of
the Holy Spirit, testify themselves to be the Children of God, by virtue of
the regenerating Spirit: Therefore that you may prove your selves the Sons of
God, obeying the Spirit of God, follow after holiness.

Verse. 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but
ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Argum.
5. Further confirming that they are the Sons of God; Because after they fled to
Christ, and embraced the Covenant of Grace, being set free by Faith from the
servile fear of condemnation (which the Spirit strikes all those with, who seek
Life from the Covenant of Works) and are endued with the Spirit of Adoption:
from hence the Argument, After ye have embraced the Covenant of Grace, by
Faith in Christ, a servile fear of Condemnation, according to the tenor of the
Gospel, is no more given unto you; but the Spirit of Adoption, that you may
most familiarly call upon God the Father, with the people of God, every one in
his own tongue: Therefore you are both the Sons of God, and also it becomes you
to behave your selves as the Sons of God, in following after holiness.

Verse. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
Children of God. Argum. 6. The Spirit of God seals up in our hearts, and
witnesses together with our spirits, or consciences, that we are the Children
of God: We are therefore bound, as it becomes the Sons of God, to follow after
holiness.

The second Part.
Verse. 17. And if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joynt-heirs with
Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. The second part of the Chapter, comprehends the consolations of
justified persons by Faith, against the sharpness of afflictions in this life.

He premises a Conclusion, drawn from what was said before, wherein he proves
that they who are justified by Faith, are not only Heirs of God, and have
right to all his good things, but also coheirs with Christ, and brought by
Adoption into communion with the only begotten Son, and into the inheritance
with him, being the Sons of God. This is the right of those that are justified,
to the inheritance, which inheritance that they might be brought into the
possession of, he subjoyns the condition of suffering with Christ. And this
affords thirteen Arguments of consolation.

The first Argument of Comfort. Communion with Christ in the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the possession of the glorious inheritance, will follow our
communion with him in his sufferings: Therefore let us comfort our selves in
our afflictions.

Verse. 18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Argum. 2.
This is no hard condition; because, casting up the account, I find that
whatever we suffer in this life, for righteousness sake, is unworthy to be
compared with the glory that shall hereafter be revealed, and at length be
bestowed upon us, whether we respect the quality of the things, or the
duration of time: Therefore let us comfort our selves in our tribulations.

Verse. 19. For the earnest expectation of the Creature waits for the
manifestation of the Sons of God. Argum. 3. Figurately propounded; the whole
frame of the world, in its kind, suffering together with us, sustains it self
in the hope of the glory of God, to be revealed in the day of judgment, and
very earnestly, as it were with the head stretched out, expects that wished-for
time: Therefore we also, with this hope ought to support our selves.

Verse. 20. For the Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by
reason of him who has subjected the same in hope. He explicates this
Argument, showing first that created things are subject to vanity, i. e. a
corruptible condition, and to the abuse of the vainest men, who abuse the
Creature to all manner of sin, and prostitute it to their service, to the
fulfilling of their vainest lusts. Secondly, That the Creature is not subject
to this vanity willingly, or of its natural propensity, or its natural use, to
which it was created of God, but for the will and pleasure, or the judgment of
God, which has subjected the Creature to this curse, with sinful man (for
whose sake the fabric of the world was created;) whence,

Argum. 4. The Creatures are subject to vanity and misery, not for their own,
but our fault, and they patiently endure it: Therefore much more we, who are
subject to miseries by our own fault, ought patiently to suffer afflictions
under the hope of freedom.

Verse. 21. Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, unto the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Argum. 5.
There is hope of the Creatures, that they may be freed from that servitude
into a state proportionable to the future glorious condition of the Sons of
God: Therefore much more this freedom may be expected by the Sons of God.

Verse. 22. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth and travaileth in pain
together until now. Argum. 6. We know that the whole frame of the World, from
the time that sin came into it, to this day, does groan together, and travail
together, that being freed from the burden of man's sin, it might bring forth
into the eternal light of all the Sons of God, a perfect birth: Therefore
unless we would call this a vain instinct of nature, at the time appointed of
God, a full freedom of the Sons of God is to be expected.

Verse. 23. And not only they, but our selves also which have the first fruit
of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the
adoption, to wit, the redemption of the body. Argum. 7. Not only created
things, but we our selves, who have received peace and joy, the first fruits
of the Spirit, the pledges and beginnings of eternal life, do groan, expecting
a full manifestation of our adoption, in the resurrection of our bodies (by the
power of redemption wrought by Christ) to be freed from all evils: Therefore
unless we undervalue the first fruits of the harvest of eternal life, and the
desires of the Spirit, we ought to take consolation from the certainty of our
freedom.

Verse. 24. For we are saved by hope; but hope that is seen, is not hope: for
what a man sees, why does he yet hope for?

25. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for
it.

Argum. 8. From the nature of hope, which is said to save us, because it waits
for the fulfilling of the promises to salvation. Saving Hope is given to us,
which is a certain and patient expectation, not of visible and present things,
but of good things to come: Therefore unless we renounce saving hope in our
afflictions, we shall not want comfort, expecting the freedom that is
promised from all our troubles.

Verse. 26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. Argum. 9. We are
not alone in our afflictions, but we have the assistance of the holy Spirit
our Comforter, who supports us laboring under infirmities, and instructs us
how to pray, exciting in us groans, which cannot be uttered, being as an
advocate for us with the Father: Therefore ought we to take comfort in our
afflictions.

Verse. 27. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the
Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will
of God. Argum. 10. With the prevention of an objection. Some might say, we do
not discern the feeling of those confused and indistinct groanings: The answer
affords an Argument of Consolation: God which searches the hearts, well knows
the meaning of the Spirit stirring up those groanings in us, accepts of them as
agreeable to his will: Because he stirs up in the Saints desires according to
the Will of God, and after his own manner intercedes: Therefore being certain
that our prayers are heard, we ought to take comfort in our afflictions.

Verse. 28. And we know that all things work together for good to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. Argum. 11. As
all things, so afflictions work together for the good of them that are
justified believers: Therefore they may take comfort in the greatest
afflictions. He describes persons justified, or believers. First, That they
love God, as those who by faith have embraced the mercy and good will of God in
Christ, and cannot but love him from their hearts. Secondly, That they are
effectually called, being by the Spirit in the Word moved, that they should
obey the heavenly calling which invites sinners unto Christ. Thirdly, That they
are called according to his purpose, as the Elect of God, out of his mere good
will, before all time, without any respect to their merits, or worth, and upon
that ground they are called, that they might be led to eternal life, to which
they were predestined.

Verse. 29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn amongst
many Brethren. Argum. 12. Confirming the former, by an indissoluble chain; God
has joined in his decree of Election and predestination, a conformity (of
those that are justified, and effectually called) to Christ in his likeness
every way, viz. of his Cross, of his holiness and happiness, to this very end,
that the glory of Christ might more appear, whilst he the chieftain, as it
becomes the firstborn, is found amongst his Elect Brethren, as in an holy and
patient enduring of afflictions, so in wearing the Crown of Glory after the
afflictions are past: Therefore they that are justified, ought to take comfort
in their afflictions, while they behold how they make for their own good, and
the glory of Christ.

Verse. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom
he called, them he also justified* and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. Argum. 13. Effectual calling and justification, which in this life
are granted to believers; the gifts of God (as the rings of an indissoluble
chain) are so firmly joined with Election and Predestination before all time,
and with glorification after all time, so that he which is called effectually
and justified, may be certain of his Predestination to Eternal Life, and
certain of his future glorification with God, for ever. For whom he has
praedestinated, them he has called, etc. Therefore they that are justified,
have solid consolation, though afflicted in this life.

The third Part.
Verse. 31. What shall we then say to these things? if God be for us, who can
be against us? The third part of the Chapter, contains a sixfold triumph of
those that are justified by Faith in Christ, over the enemies of their
salvation.

To this boasting in God, he premiseth an interrogation, to show the undoubted
verity of the whole preceding doctrine, which no man could justly contradict*
what shall we therefore say to these things? In answer to this, the triumph of
all that are justified by Faith in Christ follows, amongst which the Apostle
reckons himself, and in their names, as some leader, he speaks in the singular
number. The first triumph is, over all enemies together in one, by reason of
the conjunction of those that are justified with God. If God be for us, who
shall be against us? i. e. Seeing God is for us, about to fulfill in us his
eternal purpose of sanctification, and glorification, who, or men or Devils,
may rise up against us, to hinder our salvation?

Verse. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all;
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? The second triumph,
is concerning the want of some good necessary to salvation, leaning upon such
great love of God toward us, that he gave his Son to death for us; After this
manner, God who spared not his own Son (than whom he has nothing dearer) but
gave him up to death for the salvation of all the Elect, cannot but give us his
Son, and with him all other gifts, necessary to salvation, and lastly salvation
and glory it self; what therefore can be wanting to us to salvation?

Verse. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that
justifies: The third triumph, is over every accuser, the Devil, the World, our
own conscience, leaning upon the absolving sentence of God justifying us; Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of those whom God has elected? That is, none
will do it, but in vain. It is God that justifies, i. e. from our sins, and
from any action brought against us, he absolves the Elect: Therefore in Christ
we triumph over all.

Verse. 34. Who is it that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that
it is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for you. The fourth triumph is, over every judge, or any one that
shall assume that office, and shall undertake to condemn those that are
justified. Seeing God has justified us, who shall dare to condemn us? Seeing
Christ is dead for us, yea as a Conqueror is risen from the dead, and ascended
into Heaven, and there in glory intercedes for us, no condemnation is to be
feared by us, unless we should say, that the death, resurrection, and
ascension of Christ, his sitting in glory, and intercession is in vain, which
is blasphemous: Therefore we triumph in Christ.

Verse. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? The
fifth triumph is, over outward afflictions, whereof he reckons up six kinds,
wherein he comprehends all adversities, with which Christians in any kind, by
the unthankful world, are used to be persecuted for Righteousness sake:
Denying concerning all, that any enemy, by these evils, can hinder the fullest
effect, and sweetest sense of divine love toward us, but that we should at
length partake of it.

Verse. 36. (As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long, we
are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.) Lest he should seem to triumph over
a feigned enemy, he proves out of Psalm. 44.22. That all the true servants of
God, which then lived, were liable to all those miseries, that they may apply
to themselves the words of the Psalm, saying, For thy sake, O God! are we
killed all the day long, and are handled as if we were sheep for the slaughter.

Verse. 37. Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerours, through him
that loved us. He follows his triumphing, declaring the excellency of the
victory, which Christians in his time had over these evils, by the power of
Christ: for they returned always from the battle more than Conquerours,
neither wounded, nor wearied, suffering no loss, but more healthy and strong,
more holy and increased in every grace, even then when they seemed to the world
to be most overcome, the glory of which triumph he wholly ascribes to the
love of Christ.

Verse. 38. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor Angels, nor things present, nor things to come,

39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The sixth and last act of triumph, is over unbeleef, and all doubtings, which
might arise from any Creature, or, any present or future cause. By Life and
Death he understands prosperity and adversity, by which we might be either
allured or affrighted. By Angels he understands good and evil spirits, if it
was possible they should concur to the separating of us from Christ. By
Principalities and Powers, he means the power of Kings, Emperors, Governors,
Tyrants in the whole world. By things present, and things to come, he
understands, all those occurrences which had already fallen out, or might
before death come upon us. By height and depth, he means the creatures placed
above or below us. By any other Creature, any created thing, universally in the
whole world, or any thing besides God that may seem terrible. Over all these,
in a full confidence of Faith, he triumphs, because of the powerful, and
efficacious, certain and immutable love of God, whereby he is pleased to
promote us to Eternal Life; from the embracing of whose love, and a saving
sense thereof, nothing shall ever separate those that are justified by Faith in
Christ. Whereof he gives this reason, because the efficacy of Gods free love
conveyed unto us, is founded in Christ's infinite merit, and omnipotent power,
whereby we are kept through Faith unto salvation.

CHAP. IX.
THe sixth and last Confirmation remains, of free Justification by faith in
Christ, and not of works, from EXPERIENCE; Partly of the rejected Israelites,
who seeking after Righteousness by Works, did not attain it, or were not
justified at all; Partly of the believing GENTILES, who being destitute of
works, are justified by faith in Christ, without the works of the Law, whence
it follows; that justification by Faith in Christ, without the works of the
Law, only is true and solid.

Because he saw this Argument liable to several cavils, he is careful every
way to fortify it, and opens it in the three next Chapters.

There are three parts of the Chapter. In the first, four Objections are
preve^^ed against the Doctrine of the Apostle, touching the rejection of the
Jews: In the answering whereof, he exactly handles the doctrine of
Predestination, to verse. 24. In the second, he proves out of the Scriptures,
the rejection of the Jews, and the calling of the Elect, of the Jews and
Gentiles, to verse. 30. In the third, to confirm the Doctrine of Justification
by Faith without works, he produces the EXPERIENCE of the Jews, who seeking
for Righteousness by works, are not justified; and the EXPERIENCE of the
believing Gentiles, who being destitute of the pretense of works, are justified
by Faith in Christ.

Verse. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost, In the first part of the Chapter, he prevents those
Objections, which might be moved about the rejection of the Jews: The first
Objection. Some might say, Paul, whatsoever thou shall produce about the
rejection of the Jews, seems to savor of that hatred wherewith thou hate
them. This Objection he prevents, and rowles away the suspicion, with seven
Reasons.

The first Reason, I clear my self by an oath, that I speak the truth
sincerely, without hatred or prejudice, as it becomes a man which is in Christ,
acted and inspired by the Holy Ghost, in what he speaks; which two witnesses
(of the truth I shall speak) I attest with my own conscience.

Verse. 2. That I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart. Reas.
2. Because my conscience bears me witness, and the Spirit of Christ, who
searches the hearts, how sorrowful I am, and how much I am troubled for the
rejection of my Nation.

Verse. 3. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the flesh. Reason 3. Because so great is my
love toward the Jews, that if it might be, I would redeem their ruin, with
the loss of my own salvation; and truly, I could wish to be as an accursed
thing, (separated from Christ) out of an eager desire of their salvation, and
the glory of God, if by any means the Jews might be saved, who are now
separated from Christ. With so great zeal was he carried out to the glory of
God, and the salvation of so many thousand souls, that he did not think his
own salvation to be compared with the salvation of so many Myriads.

Kinsmen] Reason 4. Because I am bound to love them as my Kinsmen, and Brethren
according to the flesh, which I do from my soul.

Verse. 4. Who are Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory,
and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises. Reason 5. Because I am bound to honor the people of the Jews,
because of the privileges wherewith God has dignified them: Seven he reckons
up; whereof the first is, That the Israelites are pa^takers of the honor, which
the Name of Israel (divinely imposed upon the Patriarch Jacob) brought with it.
Secondly, the Adoption into the people of God, before other Nations. Thirdly,
the presence of the glory of God in the Ark, and other representations.
Fourthly, that God had entered into Covenant with them. Fifthly, that the Law was
especially given to them. Sixthly, that the Worship of God was set up amongst
them. Seventhly, that to them in special the Promises were made.

Verse. 5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the flesh Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. Reason. 6. Because of their
Progenitors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, I think it fitting to magnify them.

Reason. 7. Because of this people, Christ was born, according to the flesh,
who in the unity of his person, is true man, and true God, blessed for
evermore, and eternally to be celebrated, to whom we all say, Amen. Which
Lord whoever honors, cannot maliciously detract from that people, whereof
according to the flesh, he came. Therefore there is no reason that any man
should suspect me in those things which I speak of the rejection of my Nation,
or shall say.

Verse. 6. Not as though the Word of God has taken none effect, for they are
not all Israel, which are of Israel. The second objection; Some might say, But
if the Jews be accursed from Christ, as thou teach, the Word of God is of
no effect, and the promise of Grace made to the Israelites is void, when God
said to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed.

He answers, Although the Nation of the Jews, for the most part is rejected,
yet it cannot be that the Word of God should fail, or the promise should be
void. The reasons of this answer are six.

The first reason, Not all that were born of Israel the Patriarch, according to
the flesh, are true and elect Israelites, or the elect people Israel, to whom
the promise of Communion with God is made: Therefore although many born of the
Patriarch Israel, are rejected, it follows not, that the Word of God, or the
Promise of God should fail, because it is fulfilled in the Elect.

Verse. 7. Neither because they are of the Seed of Abraham, are they all
children, but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called. Reason 2. Neither does it
follow, because the Jews are the Seed of Abraham according to the flesh,
therefore they are all children, or in a Scripture sense, that promised Seed:
For so the Ishmaelites should be reckoned the Seed of Abraham, contrary to the
Scripture which restrains the right of sons to Isaac and his family, saying, In
Isaac shall thy Seed be called: Therefore although the Jews for the most part
are rejected, it does not follow that the Promise should fail.

Verse. 8. That is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the
children of God, but the children of the Promise are counted for the Seed.
Reason 3. The children of the flesh are to be distinguished from the elect
children of God: For this God intended, when Ishmael was secluded, he called
Isaac the Seed of Abraham, to wit, the children of the flesh of Abraham, not
that they were all the elect children of God* but only the children of the
Promise (or those whom God out of his grace, did appoint to make children of
the Faith of Abraham with Isaac,) were the children of God, and the Seed to
whom the promise was made: Therefore although* the Jews are rejected, which are
now alive for the most (...), it does not follow that the promise is of no
effect.

Verse. 9. For (...) the word of promise, At this time will I (...) Sarah shall
have a son. Reason 4. Confirming the former, The word of promise, (which is
this, At the very same time will I come, and Sarah shall have a Son) The word
of promise, I say, (showing that Isaac, not by any privilege after the flesh,
but born by virtue of the Divine Promise) proves that the Blessing was given
not to the Seed after the flesh, but to the elect Seed, raised up by grace:
Therefore, although the Jews are rejected for the most part, it follows not
that the promise is null, because there remain Elect, which are heirs of the
Promise.

Verse. 10. And not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even
by our Father Isaac, Reason 5. After this manner; not only the former examples
show that all the children are not the true Seed, to whom the promise is made,
but also more clearly, the example of Rebecca, who conceived Twins of the same
Isaac our Father, viz. Esau and Jacob, whereof one only was truly a son, to
whom the Promise of the Blessing was made: Therefore it follows, that some Seed
of Abraham may be rejected, and yet the Promise not be void, but abide firm,
and be fulfilled in the Elect Seed.

Verse. 11. (For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good
or evil, that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls)

12. It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.

He unfolds this difference of the Seed, or of the choosing some, and rejecting
others, from their causes, to wit, that it depends not upon works good or bad
in the creature, but upon the mere good pleasure of God calling. For the
children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the
purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of works, [or man's
merits] but of him that calls, or solely upon the Will of God that calls; It
was answered to Rebecca, concerning her Twins, upon all accounts now equal,
that it should be, that the Blessing under the type of the Birthright, or
Dominion, should accrue to the younger, but the Curse; under the type of
Servitude, to the elder. Hence,

Reason. 6. The purpose wherein God has determined concerning every man,
according to the Decree of Election, abides firm, not depending upon any of
man's works, but upon the mere and most free pleasure of God, calling whom he
will, as from the answer given to Rebecca, it appears, touching the twins not
yet born: Therefore these, or those Jews being cast off, the Promise of God
might abide firm to the rest.

Verse. 13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. Reason
7. Confirming and explaining the former; God loves some (of those which are
every way alike) from eternity, and in time makes his love appear: and some he
hates* and in time shows that he hates them; as in the example of Jacob and
Esau it appears, Malac. 1.2. Therefore the Jews in part rejected, make not void
the promise of God.

Verse. 14. What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid. Hence arises a third Objection, If God choose and love some, every
ways alike and equal, and hates others passing them by, what shall we say? Is
there not injustice (or unrighteousness) with God, who does not deal equally
with those that are in the same condition? The Apostle answers with abhorrence,
God forbid.

Verse. 15. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
and I will have compassion, on whom I will have compassion. He gives an
account of his denial, first in Election, then in Reprobation: from which
grounds being granted, he draws conclusions: The reason why there is no
unrighteousness in Election, is this: Because it is the most supreme and free
pleasure of God to exercise his mercy: he has free power to do what he will
with his own, as it appears out of the Word of the Lord to Moses, Exodus 33.19.
Therefore there is no unrighteousness in God, seeing that in Election he does
with his mercy what he will.

Verse. 16. So then, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy. From hence he draws a conclusion, to this sense, If
the sole cause of showing forth divine mercy and goodness, be the most free
pleasure of God, then the cause thereof is not in man's will, or pleasure, nor
actions or good works, but alone in God: It is not of him that wills, says
he; Therefore it is not from man's free will. It is not of him that runs,
says he; Therefore it is not from humane endeavors and actions, that any one
is loved, chosen, or obtains mercy and the blessing; and by consequent it
solely depends upon God that shows mercy.

Verse. 17. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for this same purpose
have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my Name
might be declared thoroughout all the earth. In the second place he gives an
account of Reprobation, why there is no unrighteousness in that, from the mo^^
holy end of Reprobation: Because Reprobation tends to the illustrating the
glory of God, as it appears out of the Scriptures speaking of Pharaoh, whom God
raised up for this very end, that his Name might be glorified in him:
Therefore there is no unrighteousness with God reprobating whom he will.

Verse. 18. Therefore has he mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will, he hardens. Hence he draws a Conclusion common both to Election and
Reprobation: That the cause of Reprobation and Election is to be sought only
in the most free and holy Will of God, who most freely, and without
unrighteousness, has mercy on whom he will, and most freely without
unrighteousness, after most holy ways hardens whom he will.

Verse. 19. Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet find fault? for who
has resisted his will? The fourth Objection, arising out of what went before,
If God hardens whom he will, then he undeservedly reprehends those that are
hardened in their sins; and by consequence, undeservedly punishes, because no
man can resist his will.

Verse. 20. Nay but, O man! who art thou that thou reply against God? shall
the thing formed say to him that formed it; Why have thou made me thus? The
Apostle gives a fourfold answer to this Objection, Because in such disputations
carnal and corrupt reason pleases it self. The first Answer is to the person
of the Objector; Nay but, O man! who art thou that replyest against God? In
which words he shows two things; First, That this Objection is made by a
corrupt man, who by nature is a liar, and from his own free will a sinner,
whose conscience might stop his mouth, from speaking against God; Who art thou,
O man!

The second is, That he against whom the Objection is made, is God, whose
ways to us are past finding out, yet always holy, even then when the reasons
of his Counsel least of all appear to us, who are of a short understanding: Who
art thou that reply against God?

The second Answer is from the absolute authority of God over his Creatures, in
the words of Isaiah 45.9.110 unto him that striveth with his Maker, let the
potsheard strive with the potsheards of the earth, shall the Clay say to him
that ^ashioneth it, what make thou? By which answer the Apostle shows this
objection to be contrary both to Scripture, and sound reason (because it
intrencheth upon the absolute and unlimited right that God has over the
Creatures) and therefore the curse and woe is pronounced upon all that after
this manner dispute against God, Verse. 21. Has not the Potter power over the
Clay, of the same lump to make one Vessel to honor, and another unto dishonor?

The third Answer is propounded by way of comparison of the power of God over
men, with the power of men over other creatures, after this manner. As much
power as man has over any creature of God, so much has God over man, whom he
has created: But man has power of the same mass of Clay, to make one Vessel
to honor, another to dishonor, according as he please: Therefore God may, of
the mass of mankind, fashion some to honor, others to dishonor, as he
please; and by consequence, unrighteousness is not to be objected against God,
in the matter of Election and Reprobation.

Verse. 22. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much long-suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction:
The fourth Answer, not only freeing God from all unrighteousness in this his
free choice of some, and the reprobation of the rest, but also showing the
wisdom, and exact justice, in this whole business, that neither the Reprobate
can complain of unrighteousness, nor the Elect glory in their merits. The force
of the answer (by way of question) to touch the consciences of men the more
sharply, is urged thus. What if God willing to show his wrath, or his
vindicative justice, and would make known his power, in the execution of his
justice (which was most just) he has endured with much patience the vessels
of wrath, by their own wickedness, fitted to destruction, before he would give
up their deserved condemnation to execution? What is here I say, that common
reason can reply against God? what is here, which any man may not commend in
this Counsel of God? Thus the matter was in the casting off the Jews, whom God
rejected not from the grace of the Gospel, until they had refused the grace of
Christ, and abused much gentleness and lenity; which Righteousness, in the
execution of the decree, frees God from all unrighteousness, in making the
difference; seeing that he executes no otherwise than he has decreed.

Verse. 23. And that ^ee might make known the riches of his glory on the Vessels
of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory? A question yet depends,
therefore we must repeat, What if God, that he might render the riches of his
glorious grace more illustrious, toward the Vessels of mercy whom he has
prepared unto glory, will have his wrath and power manifested in the just
destruction of the vessels of wrath? what is there in this decree that any one
can blame, in the execution whereof there is so much Righteousness, and
wisdom, and goodness manifested?

The second Part.
Verse. 24. Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of
the Gentiles. The second part of the Chapter, wherein that he might satisfy
all, concerning the calling of the Gentiles, and the casting off the Jews, and
strengthen the Faith of the Romans, that they might not be offended with
doubtful thoughts of Reprobation.

First, he applies the Doctrine of Election to the Christian Jews and
Gentiles, whose election and future glorification God had made manifest by
their effectual calling to Faith in Christ.

Verse. 25. As he says also in Hosea, I will call them my people, which were
not my people: and her beloved, which was not beloved.

26. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them,
ye are not my people, there shall they be called the children of the living
God.

Secondly, he proves the calling of the Gentiles to be foretold by the
testimony of Hos. 2. ver. 23. after this manner; Those that were not my people,
I will effectually call, or make them my people, and they that were not endued
with the gifts of my grace and love, shall partake of the same, Chap. 1.10. to
this purpose; The Gospel was preached in Greece, Italy, and other places among
the Gentiles, (where they lived that were alienated from the Covenant of God)
that they might be effectually called the children of the living God, or the
Elect should be converted to the true Worship of God.

Verse. 27. Esaias also cries concerning Israel, Though the number of the
children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a remnant shall be saved.

28. For he will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness, because a
short work will the Lord make upon the earth.

29. And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed,
we had been as Sodomah, and been made like unto Gomorrah.

Thirdly, he proves the rejection of the Jews to be foretold, by the
testimony of Isai. 10.22. crying out on this manner; Although the people of
Israel, according to the flesh, after the promise of God, should be so
multiplied, that they might be compared with the sand which is on the Sea
shore, yet a remnant only, i. e. a very few* shall be saved; but a multitude
shall be rejected, and perish, ver. 27. For God after much abuse of his
lenity, will in short time end his controversy with that people, following the
exactness of Justice: because God determined quickly to execute and complete
his severity in casting off that people. And Chap. 1. ver. 9. the same Isaias
foretold, Except the Lord of Hosts had left to the people of Israel a very
small remnant, in which the promised blessings should be fulfilled, we should
have been wholly consumed and destroyed, as Sodom and Gomorrah.

The third Part.
Verse. 30. What shall we say then? that the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is
of Faith: The third part of the Chapter, wherein the Apostle opens this, as his
scope to what went before, that the experience of Believers among the Gentiles,
and of Justiciaries among the Jews, might confirm his former Doctrine of
Justification by Faith, and not of Works. The first part of the experience
touching the Gentiles, is this, The Gentiles (says he) which did not follow
after the righteousness of works, attained true righteousness, viz. that
righteousness which is by Faith: Therefore that is the only ground of
Justification, which is by Faith, and not of Works.

Verse. 31. But Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness. The other part of the experience, is of
the unbelieving Jews; The Israelites (says he) followed after the law of
righteousness, that they might be justified according to that, but attained
not that righteousness which is by works, because righteousness by the Law is
impossible* Therefore Justification is not by Works, or according to the Law,
but of Faith.

Verse. 32. Wherefore? because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by
the works of the Law; for they stumbled at that stumbling stone. That he might
further make use of this experience, he enquires after the cause, why the Jews
that followed after the Law, did not attain to righteousness: By way of answer,
he assigns a threefold cause: The first is, because they did not seek after
righteousness by Faith, which is the only ground of Justification.

Another cause, in as much as they sought after righteousness by works, which
way is impossible, not only because no man could perfectly observe the Law, but
also because good works, which the followers after legal righteousness, without
Faith perform, are not worthy the name of good works, they have only the show
of good works, and they that affect Justification thereby, fondly desire to be
justified, as it were by works, or a show of good works. The third cause,
because they knew not Christ, by reason of his humility, and the infirmity of
his flesh, in whom they should believe, that they might be justified, but
despised him, and to their own destruction set themselves against him,
stumbling at him, as at a stumbling stone.

Verse. 33. As it is written; Behold, I lay in Zion a stumbling stone, and rock
of offense; and whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed. Both parts of
this experience he confirms from the Prophets prediction, Isai. 8.14. and
28.16. after this manner: Behold I will lay (says God) Christ in the Church,
whose beginning is out of Zion, a tried stone, a rock of offense (as the
incredulous Jews have experienced) and whoever believes in him, in the
expectation of him, that is, in his righteousness and life eternal, he shall
not be frustrated, as the believing Jews have found by experience: And thus
the Apostle has firmly proved that we are justified by Faith.

CHAP. X.
HE further prosecutes the argument of the Jews temporal rejection; showing
this to be the cause, in that the Jews foolishly and stubbornly rejected the
righteousness of God in Christ.

There are two parts of the Chapter. In the first he shows the folly of the
Jews, to ver. 14. In the other, their stubbornness, to the end of the Chapter.

Verse. 1. Brethren, my hearts desire, and prayer to God for Israel is, that
they might be saved. The Apostle being about to show the just causes of the
Jews rejection, he prefaces, as before, from his good affection, lest any
thing should be thought to be spoken by him, out of hatred.

Verse. 2. For I hear them Record, that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge. He shows their preposterous zeal for God to be the
cause of his affection, which zeal was worthy of humane commiseration, though
it was not to be commended, because it did not arise out of knowledge, but
ignorance, therefore it was blind zeal, the zeal of fools.

Verse. 3. For they, being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God. He proves the folly of the Romans, by six Arguments.

The first Argument. Out of ignorance of the righteousness of God, imputed to
us by Faith in Christ, they affected the inherent righteousness of their own
works, and proudly rejected the righteousness of Christ offered to them:
Therefore they betrayed their folly.

Verse. 4. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes. The second Argum. Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness,
to him that believes, i. e. the whole Law is therefore given, that men
acknowledging their sins, manifested by the Law, might flee unto Christ, and
might obtain righteousness by Faith: Therefore the Jews did foolishly, who
making a show of the Law, did not acknowledge Christ, which is the end of the
Law.

Verse. 5. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the Law, that the
man which does those things shall live by them. Argum. 3. The righteousness of
the Law, or Works, as Moses testifies, confers life upon none, but those that
perform all things that are commanded in the Law, which is impossible:
Therefore the Jews foolishly affected such a kind of righteousness.

Verse. 6. But the righteousness which is of Faith, speaks on this wise; Say
not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven* that is, to bring Christ down
from above.

7. Or who shall descend into the deep? that is, to bring Christ up again from
the dead.

Argum. 4. The righteousness of Faith (as the same Moses witnesses) forbids
those that believe in God, from being troubled for those things, which are so
difficult, or impossible, as to ascend into heaven, or to descend into the
deep: Because seeing Christ has already overcome those difficulties,
descending from heaven, and rising from the dead, to be any further troubled,
how to attain righteousness, life eternal, and freedom from death, is no less
than to destroy the foundations of the Christian Religion, and to enquire how
it was possible to descend from heaven, or rise again from the dead: Therefore
the Jews betray their folly, who renounce this righteousness of Faith.

Verse. 8. But what says it? the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in
thy heart, that is, the word of Faith which we preach. Argum. 5. The
righteousness of Faith, as it gives security to those that believe, touching
the difficulties in the way of salvation, so also it holds forth an easy way
to righteousness and salvation: For the Word of God, or the Word of the Gospel,
the same which the Apostles preached, is near us, that receiving it into our
hearts, we may acquiesce in it, and confess the truth of it with the mouth; As
if he should say to us, Be not troubled, cast your care upon God, and believe
him that speaks in the Gospel, and show forth your Faith by your works:
Therefore the Jews rejecting this easy way of righteousness propounded, are
very foolish.

Verse. 9. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. Argum. 6. Opening and confirming the former; The sum of the Gospel is
propounded under this most sweet condition, viz. If thou applyest with sincere
affection to thy self the redemption procured by Christ, and manifested in his
Resurrection by the power of God, and studiest to glorify Christ with a
sincere confession, without doubt thou shall obtain salvation: Therefore the
Jews refusing this condition of Justification and Salvation, betray their folly.

Verse. 10. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto salvation. This he confirms with five reasons:

The first Reason is, From the connection of Faith in the heart, and confession
in the mouth, according to the order appointed by God, which is, that by Faith
from the heart in Christ Jesus, we might obtain righteousness or
Justification; and that, justified by Faith, we might proceed to the
possession of Salvation, glorifying Christ, by confession of the mouth, or
outward works: Therefore they ought to be joined, Faith in Christ from the
heart, and confession of Christ in the mouth: or inward Faith, and outward
works, ought to be joined together.

Verse. 11. For the Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him, shall not be
ashamed. Reason 2. Confirming the connection of true Faith and Salvation, from
the testimony of Isai. 28.16. which shows, that they shall not be frustrated
in their hope, or their expected salvation, whoever believe in Christ:
Therefore the connection of Faith and Salvation is firm.

Verse. 12. For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek, for the
same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him. Reason 3. Confirming
the generality of the connection, betwixt Faith and Salvation, there is no
distinction of Jew or Gentile, nor exception made with God of any that
believes: Therefore every one that has Faith, without exception, shall be
saved, as well Jew as Greek.

The same] Reason 4. Confirming the universality of the connection, between
Faith, and confession of the mouth, or sincere calling upon God and Salvation:
The Lord Jesus Christ is the same, and always like himself, and rich in his
grace to all that call upon him: Therefore all that believe, and call upon
Christ by Faith, or confessing him with their mouth, shall be saved.

Verse. 13. For whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.
Reason 5. Confirming the connection betwixt true confession of the mouth, or
calling upon Christ through Faith, and Salvation, from the testimony of Joel
2.32. who pronounces, All that call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.

The second Part.
Verse. 14. How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and
how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a Preacher?

15. And how shall they preach, except they be sent? As it is written, How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things!

The second part of the Chapter, wherein he shows the stubbornness of the
Jews, answering the objections which might have made for their excuse.

The first objection is from the conjunction of the means ordained to the
righteousness of Faith, after this sense.

Seeing it is impossible for those that believe not to call upon the Lord
Jesus, or for those that hear not the Word, to believe; or those that have not
the Word preached to them, that they should hear, or the Word to be preached
to whom the Messengers are not sent, (which connection is gathered from the
words of Isaiah, who joins together the Gospel and the Preachers; the sending
of Messengers, and the Hearers rejoicing; the feer, or the coming of the
Preachers with gladness in those that received them.) It follows, that the Jews
are to be excused, at least from a stubborn rejecting of Gospel righteousness,
because they heard not the Gospel.

Verse. 16. But they have not all obeyed the Gospel: For Esaias says, Lord, Who
has believed our report? The Apostle answers, That the Jews heard and did not
believe, which he proves from the Prophets complaint, bewailing, that few
believed the word of the Prophets: Therefore the Jews are not to be excused
from stubbornness.

Verse. 17. So then Faith comes by hearing, and ^earing by the Word of God.
From the same testimony he confirms the connection of Faith, hearing, and the
Word of God, that he might draw on the unbeleeving Jews, and provoke those
that believed to use the means.

Verse. 18. But I say, have they not heard? yes verily, their sound went into
all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. He repeats the
Objection, and answers that the allegation, to wit, that the Jews did not hear
the Gospel, was false; because the sound of the Gospel went throughout the
whole world, as the voice of the day and night, as it is said, Psalm. 19.5. to
which place the Apostle alludes.

Verse. 19. But I say, Did not Israel know? first Moses says, I will provoke
you to jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish Nation I will
anger you. Another Objection, But perhaps the Israelites did not know, or
understand the offer of the Gospel, but through ignorance refused the doctrine
they understood not: Therefore they may be excused in point of pertinacy.

He refels this Objection, by a threefold testimony of Scripture; The first is
out of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.21. who foretells, that because of the Covenant of Grace
rejected, or the conjugal Covenant violated, it should come to pass that the
Jews should be rejected from the Covenant, and that the Gentiles should be
taken in, in their stead: Therefore the Jews are guilty of stubborn refusing
grace.

Verse. 20. But Isaiah is very bold, and says, I was found of them that sought
me not, I was made manifest to them that asked not after me. The second
Testimony from Isaiah 65.1. who boldly, i. e. not fearing persecution from his
people, foretells, that, for the Jews frowardness, and stubborn rejecting of
grace, it should come to pass, that God casting off the Jews, would take the
Gentiles that sought him not, into communion with him by faith.

Verse. 21. But to Israel he says, All day long I have stretched forth my
hands, unto a disobedient and gainsaying people. The third Testimony, wherein
out of Isa. 65.2. he proves in express terms, that the Jews were condemned for
their rebellion: Because God all the day long, or all the time of his
forbearance, did offer himself to them as a Father, with his arms spread forth,
but they refused him: Therefore the Jews are guilty of rejecting his grace, and
for this cause are justly cast off by God.

CHAP. XI.
THe Apostle mitigates his speech of the Jews rejection in this whole Chapter:
And that the Gentiles might not wax proud against the Jews, as altogether
abjects and lost, he proves by eighteen Arguments that the Jews are not to be
despised.

Verse. 1. I say then, has God cast away his people? God forbid; for I also am
an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. Argum. 1. God
has not cast off all and every one of the Jews, He has not cast off his
Elect people: Therefore the Jews are not to be despised, as if they were all
cast-awayes. This Argument he backs with three Reasons.

Reas. 1. I Paul come of that Nation, and yet not a castaway: Therefore not
all and every one of the Jews are cast off.

Verse. 2. God has not cast away his people which he foreknew. Reas. 2. The
Elect people whom he fore-knew is not rejected because of the Election, and
the unchangeableness of his love: Therefore all are not cast-off.

Verse. 2. -- Wot ye not what the Scripture says of Elias? how be makes
intercession to God against Israel, saying,

3. Lord, they have killed thy Prophets; and dug down thine Altars, and I am
left alone, and they seek my life.

4. But what says the answer of God unto him? I have reserved unto my self
seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the Image of Baal.

5. Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the
election of Grace.

Reas. 3. As in the times of Elias, when the whole Nation seemed to him to be
lost and cast away, God reserved to himself seven thousand of his Elect: So in
this temporal rejection of the Jews, God has reserved some, according to the
Election of Grace: Therefore all are not cast off.

Verse. 6. And if by Grace, then is it no more of Works; otherwise Grace is no
more Grace. But if it be of Works, then is it no more Grace, otherwise Work is
no more Work. From hence the Apostle inferres two Conclusions; the first
answering the design of this Epistle, viz. That the Election, seeing it is of
Grace, not of any Works foreseen, because in the matter of Election, Grace and
Works (as causes) mutually destroy each other: For if Grace be the cause of
Election, Works are not; And on the contrary: But Grace is the cause, as has
been said: Therefore Works foreseen are not the cause.

Verse. 7. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for, but
the Election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. The second
Conclusion, showing what was said before, Chap. 9. verse. 31. of the Israelites,
who sought for Righteousness by the Law, and did not attain it, is to be
understood only of the Reprobate: For the Elect Israelites obtained
Righteousness, which they sought for by Grace, in the Messiah, but the rest,
that is the Reprobate, were hardened.

Verse. 8. According as it is written, God has given them the spirit of
slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear unto
this day. That the Reprobate were hardened, he proves by a twofold Testimony:
The first is of Isaiah 29.16. and 6.9. where God is said in his Righteous
judgment, to have smitten this perverse people with the punishment of
blindness and stupidity, or, for the contempt of his Word, to have given up to
a reprobate sense, that they might not discern the Grace of God offered in the
Gospel; which judgment lay upon the multitude, till the time of the preaching
of the Gospel.

Verse. 9. And David says, Let their Table be made a snare, and a trap, and a
stumbling block, and a recompense unto them.

10. Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see, and bow down their
back always.

Another Testimony is from David, Psalm. 69.23, 24. who (as a type of Christ)
prays against his enemies, that all the benefits of God, and the Gospel also
tendered to them, might be to them an occasion of ruin, that afterward they
might savor nothing but earthly things, who being so often warned of God,
would not relish heavenly things, and that in just revenge of their
unthankfulness.

Verse. 11. I say then, have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid.
But rather through their fall, salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to
provoke them to jealousy. He repeats the first Argument, to prove that the
Jews were not to be despised, and he adds a second: The Jews are not cast
off, that all, and every one of them should perish, that are of this Nation;
but that salvation through Christ refused by the Jews, might come to the
Gentiles, that the Gentiles being converted unto God, might provoke the Jews to
jealousy, and by consequence to Repentance: Therefore the Jews are not to be
despised.

The Jews are provoked to jealousy, when they see themselves shut out from
God, and scattered, that they might not be a Church: But the Gentiles in their
room to be taken of God into his bosom, wherein before the Church of the Jews
had been cherished.

Verse. 12. Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles: how much more their fullness?
Argum. 3. As the ruin of the Jews turned to the good of the Gentiles, so also,
and much more, the restitution of the Jews, shall prove an advantage to the
world, and the Gentiles: Therefore, so far should it be from us to despise the
Jews, as wholly cast away, that on the other side, their Conversion is to be
wished and hoped for.

Verse. 13. For I speak to you Gentiles, in as much as I am the Apostle of the
Gentiles, I magnify mine office:

14. If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and
might save some of them.

Argum. 4. I my self am an Apostle of the Gentiles, so much the more earnestly
do I bestow my Ministry in converting as many as I can, and magnify my
office, to this end, that I might provoke the Jews, my Kinsmen, not to suffer
you only to enjoy the privilege of the Sons of God, but that they would join
themselves unto you, and so might be saved: Therefore it is your duty not to
despise them, as altogether cast off, but to labor with me that they may be
saved.

Verse. 15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world:
what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? Argum. 5. If the
casting off the Jews, is through the goodness of God turned to an occasion of
reconciling the Gentiles, from the conversion of the Jews, is not such a change
for the better to be expected amongst the Gentiles, as if it was a kind of
Resurrection from the dead? Therefore the Jews are not to be despised, as
altogether cast off, but their conversion is to be desired and hoped for: For
when God shall again resume his ancient people, what wonder if he shall power
out upon all the Churches a greater plenty of his Spirit? What wonder if he
take away those destructive Heresies and Schisms, wherewith the Christian
Churches amongst the Gentiles, was almost oppressed even to death, and unite
them more firmly among themselves, and with the Church of the Jews? That this
hereafter shall be the happy condition of the Churches, about the time of the
Jews conversion, the Apostle would not have us despair, who propounds to us, as
it were, a Resurrection from the dead, to be hoped for by us, in the change of
the Churches condition.

Verse. 16. For if the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy; and if the
root be holy, so are the branches. Argum. 6. The Nation of the Jews, by virtue
of the Covenant with their Fathers, is consecrated unto God, and is honored
with the dignity of Federal Holiness, descending from their Fathers that were
in Covenant: As the lump and harvest is sanctified in the first fruits, and the
branches in the consecrating of the root: Therefore the Jews are not to be
contemned as wholly cast away.

Verse. 17. And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild
Olive Tree were graffed in amongst them, and with them partakest of the root
and fatness of the Olive Tree: Some unbelieving Jews, as branches, are broken
off from the Olive Tree, (from the Church of the holy Patriarchs) and thou a
Gentile, being as a wild Olive, far from the Covenant of God, art implanted in
their stead, and so made partaker of the privileges of that Church, and holy
Covenant, as of the fatness of the Olive Tree: Therefore thou ought not to
despise the Jews.

Verse. 18. Boast not against the branches: But if thou boast, thou bear not
the root, but the root thee. Argum. 8. If thou shall boast against the Jews, as
more worthy than they, thou behavest thy self no less foolishly, than the
branches born by the root, should boast against the root which bears them:
Therefore thou ought not to despise the Jews.

Verse. 19. Thou will say then, the branches were broken off, that I might be
graffed in.

20. Well; because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by
Faith: Be not high-minded, but f^ar.

Argum. 9. In answering the objection it is propounded; Its true the Jews are
rejected, that upon this occasion thou might succeed them in the Church, but
seeing they for their unbelief are rejected, and thou stand by Faith, thou
have no reason to insult over and despise the Jews, but rather to fear and to
take heed to thy self that thou sin not, and be punished: Therefore ought
thou not to contemn the Jews, as if altogether cast off.

Verse. 21. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also
spare not thee. Argum. 10. Confirming the former; If God spared not the proud
Jews, the natural branches of the holy Church, he will not spare the Romans,
or any insulting Gentiles, to wit, branches graffed in: Therefore thou being a
Gentile, ought not to despise the Jews.

Verse. 22. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which
fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness;
otherwise thou shall be cut off. Argum. 11. Unless thou continue in the Faith
and obedience unto Christ, considering the severity of God against the Jews,
and his goodness toward thee, thou also shall be broken off, and cast away:
Therefore unless thou will be rejected, keep thy self in the fear of God, and
despise not the Jews.

Verse. 23. And they also, if they bide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed
in: for God is able to graft them in again. Argum. 12. Even as thou, unless
thou continue in the Faith, shall be cut off: So the Jews, if they continue
not in unbelief, they shall again be graffed into the holy Church of the
Patriarchs; yea, verily, the restoring of the Jews, according to the omnipotent
goodness of God, is not to be despaired: Therefore the Jews are not to be
despised by thee.

Verse. 24. For if thou were cut out of the Olive Tree, which is wild by nature,
and were graffed contrary to nature in a good Olive Tree: how much more shall
these which be the natural branches, be graffed into their own Olive Tree?
Argum. 13. If God implant the Gentiles, (as branches out of the Covenant of
Grace) into the Church of the Patriarchs, much more will he restore the Jews,
which are natural branches of that Church.

Verse. 25. For I would not brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this
mystery, (lest ye should be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in part
is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.

26. -- And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written,

Argum. 14. I open a mystery unto you, and out of special Revelation declare,
that this hardening of the Jews, was not universal, nor of all, but in part, or
of some only, and that but for a certain time, viz. till the fullness of the
Gentiles was brought in: Therefore ought you not to lift up your selves, or
contemn the Jews. By the fullness of the Gentiles, he means, that great
multitude of the Gentiles, such as was not before the conversion of the Jews;
with the coming in of which multitude to the true Religion, Israel shall be
provoked to return unto the Lord Jesus Christ, or to true Faith in the Messiah,
from whom they had departed through unbelief; and so all Israel, i. e. the
multitude of the Jews, the body of that dispersed people, shall be converted.

Verse. 26. -- There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob.

27. For this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.

He confirms this Prophecy out of that of Isai. 29.26. and 27.3. Where he
fore-tells that the Messiah should come of the Jews Church, according to the
flesh, the true REDEEMER, to redeem his Nation from the guilt and bondage of
sin, pardoning their sins, and that he should take them into the Covenant of
Grace, to the full abolishing of sin, which when it should be, the Apostle
has now declared.

Verse. 28. As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but as
touching the election, they are beloved for the Fathers sakes. Argum. 15.
Although the rejected Jews (so much as concerns the Gospel, refused by those
reprobate Jews) are accounted of God, as enemies, for your advantage: yet in
respect to the election of this people, that they might above all other Nations
be esteemed the people of God; and in respect to the Elect in this Nation, the
Jews are loved, because of the Covenant betwixt God and their Fathers:
Therefore for the very same reason ought they not to be despised, but loved by
you.

Verse. 29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Argum. 16.
Preventing an objection; Although this Nation by just desert, may seem to fall
from all its privileges, yet because of the gifts of special grace bestowed,
(and in particular, their calling according to his purpose) whether upon any
Nation above others, or upon any man above others, are unchangeable, which God
will never wholly cut off, or re-call, but will in the conversion of this
people make it appear that they are firm: Therefore this Nation ought not to
be contemned by you, but to be had in honor rather.

Verse. 30. For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now
obtained mercy through their unbelief:

31. Even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy they
also might obtain mercy.

Argum. 17. It is every way to be believed, that God will manifest as much
grace to the Jews, by occasion of that mercy showed to you Gentiles, as he
has showed to you Gentiles heretofore disobedient, by occasion of the
stubbornness and unbelief of the Jews: Therefore the Jews are not to be
despised, as altogether cast off, but their conversion is rather to be
endeavored.

Verse. 32. For God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy on all. Argum. 18. After this manner, The most wise Providence of God
has so ordered the business of saving his own, that all being found in sin and
rebellion, might have no matter of boasting, and whoever should obtain
Salvation, might ascribe all to Divine bounty: Therefore the Jews are not to
be despised, as wholly cast off, but the work of Divine mercy toward this
people, in the time appointed, is to be expected.

Verse. 33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his waves past finding out? The
Apostle shows a twofold use of this argument, as also of the foregoing
Doctrine, especially concerning the election of some, and the reprobation of
others.

The first is, that we may admire and celebrate the depth of the riches of the
ineffable Wisdom of God: Another is, That we seek no further than is
revealed, touching the Counsels of God, but even in things revealed, we be
wise to sobriety, (because the Counsels of God exceed our capacity, and are
indeed unsearchable) glorifying God in all.

Verse. 34. For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his
Counselor? Three Reasons he adds of both those deductions.

Reason 1. No creature has pierced into the mind of God, none was ever of his
Counsel: Therefore the Counsels of God are past finding out, we ought not to
search after them, but admire and magnify the riches of his Wisdom.

Verse. 35. Or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him
again? Reason 2. God is in no man's debt, or can be, no man merits at his hand,
no man can come forth and say, that he has obliged God by any act of goodness
in himself: Therefore they cannot boast, any of the Elect, as if God was bound
to them by any Law, that he should appoint them unto life: neither can any of
the Reprobates complain, as though he paid not what he ought, seeing he is a
debtor to no man.

Verse. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things, to whom be
glory for ever. Amen. Reason 3. Confirming the former; All things are of God,
as the first Author; All things are upheld by him, as the Preserver; All things
tend to him, as the ultimate end: Therefore when it seems good to him to
promote his own glory, in the rejection of the Jews, or calling of the
Gentiles, in the Election of some, and Reprobation of others, all honor and
glory ought to be ascribed unto him by all men for ever. Amen.

CHAP. XII.
WE have had the first part of the Epistle, of the way to Justification, the
latter follows, concerning the right ordering the life of those that are
justified.

There are three parts of the Chapter. In the first he exhorts to Sanctity in
general, to ver. 3.

In the second, he instructs Ministers of the Church particularly, concerning
the right use of gifts, to ver. 9.

In the third, he gives common precepts concerning Christian virtues.

Verse. 1. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that you
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable service. By an allusion made to the typical manner of
sacrificing, under the Levitical Law, he most friendly exhorts them to show
forth the fruit of free Justification granted to them by Christ.

There are three branches of the Exhortation.

First, That we would present our bodies to God, that is, offer and consecrate
our selves wholly, not only our souls, but bodies also to God as a Sacrifice
of thankfulness. The reasons of the exhortation are five, which also contain
the properties of this sacrifice.

The first reason is contained in a vehement entreaty; because the mercies of
God before rehearsed, to wit, Election, of his Mercy; Redemption, of his Mercy;
Calling, of his Mercy; and Justification, of his Grace and Mercy, require of
you this gratitude and thankfulness.

Living] Reason 2. Because this is a living Sacrifice, wherein nothing is to
be slain but sin; and you your selves shall live consecrated unto God, and
shall be preserved unto eternal life.

Holy] Reason 3. This Sacrifice is truly holy, in the daily offering up
whereof, Holiness it self consists.

Acceptable] Reason 4. Because this Sacrifice will not be rejected of God, as
those many legal shadows offered up by hypocrites, but accepted of God.

Reasonable] Reason 5. Because the act whereby you offer up this Sacrifice to
God, is your reasonable, or spiritual service, pre-figured by that typical
worship, and so much above that, as spiritual things are above carnal, and the
bodies of Saints to be preferred before the carcasses of brute beasts.

Verse. 2. And be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable
and perfect Will of God. The second branch of the Exhortation, That we take
heed in life and conversation, that we do not make the pleasure and manners of
worldly men our Rule, to which we conform our selves: This exhortation
contains a Reason in it self; because men of the world only savor the
honors, pleasures, and profits of this present world.

Be ye transformed] The third branch of the Exhortation, That we endeavor
the transforming of our carnal mind into that which is spiritual, by the daily
renewing of our understanding and will. Two Reasons he gives of this
Exhortation.

Discern yee] Reason 1. Because the Law of God, or his Will revealed in the
Word, is the Rule to which we ought to conform. 1. Good, teaching and leading
us to those things which are good, and making us good. 2. It is acceptable to
God, who accepts no obedience, but what is prescribed in the Word. 3. It is
perfect, comprehending all things, which appertain to the worship of God, and
our salvation: Therefore endeavor after renewing your minds.

Discern yee] Reason 2. Because without a renewed mind, and spiritual, we
cannot discern the proper sense of the divine Will revealed in the Word, and
knowing it, we cannot approve, and approving it, we can have no experimental
knowledge, how good, acceptable to God, and perfect it is in it srlf: Therefore
ought we to endeavor after renovation of mind.

The second Part.
Verse. 3. For I say, through the Grace given unto me, to every man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to
think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of Grace.
The second part of the Chapter follows; wherein according to his Apostolical
authority (which he calls Grace, because granted to him out of ineffable
Grace) he charges every one that was among them, in any public office, or any
excellency of gift, that he would not think of himself above his fellows, or
above the value of his talent, or the measure of his knowledge, but that he
would carry himself soberly, and moderately in all things, toward all. The
Reasons of this Exhortation are five.

Reas. 1. God has distributed to every one not a fullness, but a measure of
Faith: Therefore it is fitting that every one should modestly contain himself
within that measure.

Verse. 4. For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not
the same office: Reas. 2. As in the natural body, diverse members are deputed to
diverse operations; So in the Ecclesiastical body of Believers, or the society
of the Officers of the Church, diverse functions are designed to diverse
employments: Therefore it is fitting, that each contain himself modestly in his
office.

Verse. 5. So we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one
of another. Reas. 3. Included in the same similitude, as in the natural body,
many members constitute one body, so in the Ecclesiastical body, all the
faithful, in particular all Church Officers, are one body in Christ: Therefore
all ought to concur modestly, every one for his part, to maintain the unity
of the body.

In particular] Reason 4. As in the natural body, so in the Ecclesiastical
body, each of the members, are not only of the whole body, but of one another;
or every member is intended to promote the benefit of another: Therefore all
ought to serve each other, mutually promoting the benefit of each other, and
not proudly and imprudently hinder one another.

Verse. 6. Having then gifts, differing according to the Grace that is given to
us, whether prophesy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith:
Reas. 5. Those diverse gifts which we have, are communcated through the Grace
and good pleasure of God, who has bestowed them: Therefore let us not grow
proud, but modestly demean our selves.

Whether Prophesie] He descends to particular ordinary public gifts, and to
each he prescribes their operations and bounds: He makes two kinds of
functions. The first is Prophecy; The second of a Deacon; Prophecy
comprehends the handling of the Word; He says, having Prophecy, let us
prophecy, according to the proportion of Faith, i. e. Let us only teach that
which God has propounded to be believed in the Scripture, and that which we
solidly know or believe to be the sense of Scripture.

Verse. 7. Or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering; or he that teaches, on
teaching: The second kind of Ecclesiastical functions, is that of Deacon, which
contains all the gifts subservient to the Ministry of the Word, as afterward
he declares. Concerning which he prescribes, that he which is employed in
that office, would contain himself in it, and would not aspire higher, unless
orderly called.

He that teacheth] He subdivides Prophecy into the office of Teachers and
Pastors: By Teachers he understands those, who teach by office, and labor in
informing of our minds in the knowledge of the Truth, and these he commands
that they diligently use their ability in teaching, and wholly give themselves
to it.

Verse. 8. Or he that exhorts, on Exhortation: he that gives, let him do it
with simplicity; he that rules, with diligence; he that shows mercy, with
cheerfulness. By Pastors he understands, those who exhort, and labor in
moving the affections, and have ability, not only for interpreting the sense
of the Scripture, but prudently to apply the Word for the present benefit of
hearers, with stirring up the affections. These he commands to attend to
Exhortation.

He that distributes] He reckons up three kinds as it were of Deacons,
subservient to the Ministry of the Word. The first is of those that
distribute, i. e. by way of Office they are set over the treasury of the
Church; the goods of the Church, and the collections of the Saints they
dispense to the public uses of the Church; he commands these, that they
distribute with simplicity, that is with good fidelity, without acception of
persons, and respect to private advantage.

He that Rules] The second kind, is of those which are otherwise called, 1
Cor. 12.28. Ruling Presbyters, and by office were set to over-see the manners
of the people, that scandals might be avoided, and removed from the Church;
These he commands, that they diligently and carefully attend to their duty.

He that shows mercy] The third kind of Deacons, is of those who by office
were to show pity, and were set to over-see the poor, the sick, those that
were banished, and others that were afflicted in the Church: These he
commands, that they attend to their duty with cheerfulness; lest with their
frowardness they more afflict those, whom a disease, or poverty, or banishment
has already afflicted. In all these Precepts he distinguishes betwixt
themselves diverse functions by diverse gifts, and diverse subjects, setting
several kinds of Officers over diverse employments; using the like way of
commanding in all of them.

The third Part.
Verse. 9. Let love be without dissimulation: abhor that which is evil,
cleave to that which is good. The third part of the Chapter, wherein he
changes the form of command, and delivers Precepts touching Christian virtues,
in number about sixteen.

Love] The first Precept, That the signs whereby we express our love, should
come from a sincere heart, without dissimulation.

Abhorring] Precept 2. That we so abhor evil or sin, that we suffer not our
selves to be drawn into fellowship with it. And that we so embrace goodness,
or virtue, that we suffer not our selves to be drawn away from it.

Verse. 10. Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in honor
preferring one another. Precept 3. That the love of Christians among
themselves, which is founded by the bond of Grace, should be as the love of
Brethren, which is founded by the bond of nature, viz. constant and earnest.

In honour] Precept 4. That in the testifying our opinion by outward signs,
concerning the virtue or worth of any one, we do not expect what is due to our
selves, but that we go before others, giving them the honor which belongs to
them.

Verse. 11. Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit, serving the Lord:
Precept 5. Concerning diligence in the duties, which by our Calling are due to
God, and our neighbor, That we be not slothful, dull, and cold, as if we
had no mind to the doing of the things, but that we undergo those offices with
fervency of spirit, and intenseness of zeal, taking the occasion of doing well
in the just opportunity; consecrating this ferventness of spirit to God, not to
our own private affections.

Verse. 12. Rejoicing in Hope; patient in Tribulation, continuing instant in
Prayer: Precept 6. Concerning remedies to be used in our afflictions. 1. That
we glory in the hope of deliverance. 2. If evils increase, that we behave our
selves patiently. 3. If help seem to be delayed, that we continue in prayers,
and give not way to evil.

Verse. 13. Distributing to the necessity of Saints, given to hospitality.
Precept 7. That we communicate of our goods to the necessities and want of the
Saints, especially of those that live amongst us: and that we (by our
hospitality freely tendered to them) succor strangers, and those that are
banished, which come unto us.

Verse. 14. Bless them which persecute you, bless, and curse not. Precept 8.
That we do not recompense slanders and reproaches (the ordinary persecution of
the world) with revilings again, but that we dissolve them by patience, and
blessing. And because this is very contrary to flesh, he twice commands it,
and the third time forbids the contrary.

Verse. 15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that do weep.
Precept 9. He commends to us a brotherly sympathy or fellow-feeling, as well
in the adversities, as prosperity of our neighbor, as it becomes the members
of the same body.

Verse. 16. Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate* Be not wise in your own conceits. Precept 10.
That we promote mutual concord, and bear ordinary infirmities in those that
differ from us, and that we do not proudly lift up our selves against, or
above others, but that we condescend to men of low degree, so far as the
truth shall give way, always bewaring that we be not puffed up with an
opinion of our own wisdom.

Verse. 17. Recompense to no man evil for evil, provide things honest in the
sight of all men. Precept 11. That we do not recompense injuries with
injuries, and because the flesh is ready to make exceptions, he says, Requite
no man evil for evil.

Providing] Precept 12. That following after honesty, and innocence of life,
we cut off all occasion, as well from our-selves of doing evil, as from our
adversaries of ^urting us, or reviling us.

Verse. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
men. Precept 13. That we follow peace with all men, Whereunto is added a
limitation, if it be possible, and as much as lies in us, that we use all
means of peace, and if any thing falls out to the contrary, let it be by
another fault, not by ours.

Verse. 19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto
wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord.
Precept 14. Forbidding in particular, more than before, requiring like for
like, because we are more prone to revenge. Therefore he friendly forbids
private revenge, and commands that we let our anger, and the anger of our
adversary to cool, exciting neither by words or deeds, adding a grave Argument,
because it belongs to God, either immediately by himself, or else by the
Magistrate, to revenge all injuries offered unto us. What is to be done in
case of unblameable defense, is to be inquired amongst common places.

Verse. 20. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him
drink; for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. Precept 15.
Of doing good to our enemies, when opportunity and their necessity requires it:
And this Reason is subjoyned, because by this we heap coals upon them, that
they may either be softened (as metal is melted in the fire) if there be any
ingenuity in them; or that their conviction and condemnation might be made so
much the more heavy, and that not by ours, but their own fault.

Verse. 21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Precept 16.
Tending to the same purpose, but more generally, That in contending with our
enemies, we judge rightly of the victory; which is, not that we requite, or
overcome evil with evil; for then we are rather overcome of evil, than
overcome; but this is the only victory, that by doing well we overcome evil,
and this is the victory which here he exhorts us to seek after.

CHAP. XIII.
He proceeds to exhort them, that they bring forth fruits worthy of their
profession, toward the Magistrate, and men of all conditions. There are two
parts of the Chapter. The first of Civil Subjection, to verse. 8. The other of
Love; as it respects the second Table of the Law.

Verse. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; for there is no
power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God. The Exhortation is
propounded in the first words: That every soul, or every man, be subject, or
subordinate to the higher Powers, i. e. To the Civil Magistrate: The Arguments
of the Exhortation are ten.

For there is no] Argument 1. Because the Magistrate of what kind or order
soever, is from Gods institution and ordination.

Verse. 2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. The
Ordinance] Argum. 2. Because he that is not subject, but resists and opposes
the Magistrate, sets himself against the Ordinance of God.

Damnation] Argum. 3. Because he that resists, brings upon himself revenge,
and punishment, as well from God, as the Magistrate.

Verse. 3. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? do that which is good, and thou shall
have praise of the same. Argum. 4. Because the office of the Magistrate is
ordained of God, that it may restrain the evil, and punish evil deeds, but not
what is good: Therefore we ought to be subject unto him.

Praise] Argum 5. Because the Magistrate confers rewards and praise upon those
that do well, and observe the Law.

Verse. 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good: but if thou do that
which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain: for he is
the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.
Argum. 6. Because the Magistrate is the Minister of God for our good; for by
the Magistrate God enjoins us things honest and profitable, and takes away
those that are evil, which is very advantageous to us.

For he bears not the sword] Argum. 7. Because he is armed with the sword to
punish them that are evil, by that authority which is divinely given him:
Therefore it behooves them that are guilty of evil, even in danger of life, to
fear, and to be subject.

Verse. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake. Argum. 8. Because it is necessary to be subject, not only
for avoiding the anger of the Prince, and civil punishments, but also for the
sake of a good conscience, in respect to the command of God, commanding
subjection.

Verse. 6. For, for this cause pay you tribute also, for they are Gods
Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Argum. 9. Because we
owe tribute to Magistrates, as to the Ministers of God, who are employed in the
defense of the public, and solely attend that: Therefore ought you to be
subject unto them.

Verse. 7. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute, to whom tribute is due;
custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom honor. Argum.
10. Brought in by way of conclusion: Because as it is just to give every one
his due, so also to the Magistrate tribute, fear, honor is to be paid: Even as
all, or some of these belong to the Supreme or inferior Magistrate, and their
Ministers.

The second Part.
Verse. 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loves
another, fulfilleth the Law. The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein
he handles holiness of life and love, as in respect to duties of the Second
Table. There are six Arguments of this exhortation.

Except this] Argum. 1. Because love is a perpetual debt: Therefore always to
be paid.

Fulfilled] Argum. 2. Because love to our neighbor is the fulfilling of the
Law: Therefore always to be endeavored.

Verse. 9. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery; Thou shall not kill; Thou
shall not steal; Thou shall not bear false witness; Thou shall not covet: And
if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying;
namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Thou shall not] He
strengthens this argument with two reasons: The first is taken from an
enumeration of the precepts of the Second Table, all which are referred to love.

Verse. 10. Love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore Love is the
fulfilling of the Law. Reason 2. Because love does no evil to our neighbor,
which we are forbidden by the Law: Therefore love is the fulfilling of the
Law, and we ought to follow after it.

Verse. 11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of
sleep; for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. Argum. 3.
Wherein he urges the fruits of Faith in the loving our selves and neighbors;
because this fruitfulness has been long enough neglected, when we were asleep
by nature, and now it is time, that we show our selves raised out of this sleep
of sin, and bring forth the fruits of Regeneration.

For now] Argum. 4. Because our salvation is nearer than when we were first
converted to the Faith. We must endeavor so much the more to bring forth the
fruits of Faith, and hope of Salvation.

Verse. 12. The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast
off the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armor of light. Argum. 5. The
night of ignorance and darkness is past, and for the greatest part gone, so
much as belongs to the state of corrupt nature, i. e. the end of this corrupt
world, and the abolishing of the corruption of our nature: Therefore let the
works of darkness and ignorance pass away.

Let us put on.] Argum. 6. The day, or state of illumination, and complete
regeneration in future glory approaches, and in our now begun regeneration
shines forth, as in the breaking of the day: Therefore let us put on armor,
that we may with-stand the Devil, Sin, and the World, always doing that which
is good.

Verse. 13. Let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in rioti^g and drunkenness,
not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying: Hence he draws a
fourfold hortatory conclusion.

Let us walk] The first exhortation is, that we walk orderly, as it becomes
children of the light, regenerate through the grace of the Gospel.

Riotousness] The second exhortation is, that we abstain from intemperance and
all filthiness, particularly from riotousness, and drunkenness, and adulteries,
and filthy lasciviousness, (wherewith profane men are wont to pollute
themselves in their chambers) and strife, and envy.

Verse. 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lust thereof. The third exhortation is, That we put on
Christ, which he says, rather, than let us put on temperance, and other
virtues, contrary to the forementioned vices; for unless in the first place
we closely embrace Christ, and his righteousness imputed to us by Faith, that
we fetch virtue from this Fountain to good works; our righteousness will not
exceed the righteousness of Philosophers and Pharisees. For even then when we
perform any thing holy, it is by virtue of the Spirit of Christ. Again, we
ought to put on Christ, that his righteousness may cover our nakedness, the
imperfection and pollution of our works.

For the flesh] The fourth exhortation, That being contented with the necessary
and lawful use of the creatures, to the health of the body, we take no care to
satisfy the immoderate lusts of the flesh, or indulge our selves in carnal
delights; for he that takes too much care for his body, takes too little for
his soul.

CHAP. XIV.
INstructions concerning the mutual duties, in the use of Christian liberty, of
the Faithful, follow: Some of the faithful, as the converted Gentiles, were
persuaded of their Christian liberty, or freedom from the yoke of Moses, and
did not observe legal Holy Days, or choice of meats. Others there were, as
some Jews, somewhat weaker in this Article, not sufficiently confirmed about
their liberty, who abstained from meats forbidden by Moses, out of a reverence
to the Divine Law: They observed Fasts, Holy Days, Sabbaths, Calends: Amongst
these, there arose a dissension, which hindered the work of the Gospel. To both
jointly the Apostle gives precepts, to ver. 13. To them that were strong in the
Faith, or in the persuasion of their liberty by themselves, in the remaining
part of the Chapter.

Verse. 1. Him that is weak in the Faith, receive you, but not to doubtful
disputations. The Apostle counsels that they mutually adjoyn themselves to
those, with whom they were persuaded concerning the abrogation of the
Ceremonial Law; as also with those that were weak in the Faith, or in this
persuasion, and that they would forbear contentious disputes, concerning which
he exhorts both, beginning with those that were strong in the Faith.

Verse. 2. For one believes he may eat all things; another who is weak, eats
herbs. He shows the occasion of the difference and dispute, in the instance of
meats, whilst some eat any flesh without any fear of the ceremonial
prohibition: Others not persuaded, abstain from those meats forbidden, content
with herbs, or any other sort of meat.

Verse. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not him
that eats not, judge him that eats, for God has received him. The Apostle
forbids discords, betwixt these, and condemning of each others in such a case;
using nine Arguments.

For God] Argument 1. Because God has taken both into the fellowship of the
grace of his Son; therefore it is unworthy that in such a case one should
despise or condemn another. For it was unequal that they which were weak,
should be contemned by them that were stronger, as superstitious, and Novices:
and in like manner, that they which were strong in the Faith, should be
condemned as profane by them that were weak.

Verse 4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master he
stands or falls; yea, he shall be holden up; for God is able to make him
stand. Argum. 2. It is unequal to judge another man's servant, without a Call
from God, because it concerns his Master, not another, whether he perish or
be saved: Therefore in this thing one ought not to condemn another.

He shall be holden up] Argum. 3. Because he that is a servant of Christ,
shall be established by him, who both can and will keep him: Therefore this
Judgment is contrary to the judgment of Christ, or, mutual condemning of each
other, is a sin.

Verse. 5. One man esteems one day above another: another esteems every day
alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. He propounds another
instance of the occasion of this contention, in observing the days prescribed
by Moses, which days some (to wit certain converted Jews) affirmed to be
observed before others: But others, (to wit, the Gentiles) out of conscience of
their liberty purchased by Christ, equally esteemed those days, with others,
not prescribed by the Ceremonial Law. Here the Apostle prohibits contention,
and condemning of each other, propounding a rule of due carriage of themselves
in such a case, to wit, that every one of them should labor after solid
grounds for the supporting their Faith, either for the doing or omitting those
things, which were controverted touching the Ceremonial Law; and thus he
adds a fourth Argument; That they would not condemn one another, because in
the foresaid case, some might do it with a well-grounded persuasion, and
another upon the like foundation might abstain: Therefore it was not fitting
that they should condemn one another. For the Apostles in the Council at
Jerusalem, freed the Gentiles from the Law of Moses, for the Ceremonial Law
was never imposed upon them: But the Apostles taking away from the Jews the
necessity of Ceremonies, for some time left them to a free use, till after a
season, the Gospel shining forth more clearly, they might plainly see that
their Synagogue was to be buried; wherefore the Gentiles might with a full
persuasion lay aside those ceremonies, and the Jews observe them; at least so
long as the favor of God suffered the Temple at Jerusalem to stand, whereunto
the chief ceremonies were tied.

Verse. 6. He that regards a day, regards it unto the Lord; and he that
regards not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it; he that eats,
eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks: and he that eats not, to the
Lord he eats not, and gives God thanks. Argum. 5. Because the Jew observing
a day prescribed by the Law of Moses, and abstaining from meat forbidden, in
like manner the Gentile, not observing the Law of Moses, both of them acted
(with Thanksgiving) to the glory of God: The Jew, because he had meat enough,
not forbidden: The Gentile, because he might eat any meat, gave thanks:
Therefore neither to be condemned by the other.

Verse. 7. For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself.

8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord: and whether we die, we die
unto the Lord: whether we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lords.

9. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be
Lord both of the dead and living.

He confirms the end propounded to him that did observe, and to him that did
not observe the ceremonies, and withal adds a sixth Argument. They that are
not in their own power, but another, nor live to themselves, nor die to
themselves, but only to Christ, they are bound to direct their actions, and
omissions, to the glory of Christ, as also not to condemn their
fellow servants: But we, or none of the Faithful lives or dies to himself, nor
is at his own dispose, ver. 7. But we live and die to Christ, to his honor, to
whom appertains the care over us in life and death, ver. 8. which he proves,
because Christ died and rose again to this end, that he might be Lord over
his Redeemed ones, living and dying: Therefore it follows, that the Faithful
ought not to condemn or contemn one another.

Verse. 10. But why do thou judge thy Brother? or why do thou set at
naught thy Brother? for we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ. Argum. 7. The Faithful are Brethren, whether Jews or Gentiles:
Therefore they ought not to judge or contemn one another.

We shall appear] Argum. 8. All are to be judged at the Tribunal of Christ:
Therefore all ought to take heed that they do not rashly condemn one another.

Verse. 11. For as it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall
bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. That he confirms by the
testimony of Isaias, foretelling, Chap. 45.23. that Christ shall be Judge of
all, and that all shall acknowledge subjection to him, as to God.

Verse. 12. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.

13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more.

Argum. 9. Drawn from the former, Every one is to give an account of himself to
Christ, ver. 12. Therefore every one ought to prepare himself for the Judgment
Seat of Christ, and not to judge his Brother.

The second Part.
Verse. 13. But judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an
occasion to fall in his Brothers way. The second part of the Chapter follows,
wherein after the conclusion of his general Exhortation, he begins a special,
properly belonging to them that are strong, that they abuse not their liberty,
with offense to the weak, verse. 13.

Verse. 14. I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self: but him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it
is unclean. He prevents an Objection: Some might say, I am persuaded by the
Grace of Christ, that no meat is impure or prohibited under the Gospel:
Therefore I may eat any meat indifferently: He answers by denying the
consequence, because pure meat, is made impure to him that eats, after two
sorts: First, if he that eats thinks it unlawful.

Verse. 15. But if thy Brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou
uncharitably; Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. Secondly,
Meat is impure, if any one (persuaded of his liberty) eat to the offense of his
Brother: In which case, he proves that he must not eat with scandal, or that
he must take heed, that he abuse not his liberty, and that by eleven
Arguments.

Argum. 1. It fights against charity, to act in things indifferent to the
offense of the weak: Therefore we must not abuse our liberty.

Destroy] Argum. 2. To lay a stumbling block before the weak, from the nature
of the deed, tends to the destruction of a Brother for whom Christ dyed, and
he that puts an offense in his Brothers way, in a judicial sense, destroies
his Brother: For as much as in him lies, he is the cause of bringing
destruction upon him: Therefore we must not abuse our liberty.

For whom] Argum. 3. He that eats with offense, thereby opposes the merit of
Christ's death, and the intent of it, for he died that the weak might be
saved: but he that eats with offense, does what is in him, to destroy him that
is weak: Therefore we must not abuse our liberty.

Verse. 16. Let not then your good be evil spoken of. Argum. 4. Eating with
offense causes the Christian Faith to be evil spoken of, and to be brought
into contempt, and that Christian liberty be evil reported of, by those that
are weak, and without: Therefore we must not abuse our liberty.

Verse. 17. For the Kingdom of God, is not meat, and drink, but righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Argum. 5. Because (as it is, 1 Cor. 8.8.)
meat and drink nothing promote the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, but
righteousness, peace, and joy, and the other fruits of the Spirit: Therefore
we are bound to abstain from meats, or things indifferent, when there is
danger, that by an unseasonable use of our liberty we should disturb the
Kingdom of Christ.

Verse* 18. For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God,
and approved of men. Argum. 6. They that use these, as meat, drink, and the
like indifferent things, wisely to the service of Christ (taking them by his
leave, and abstaining, that the work of Christ may be promoted) are acceptable
to God and men: Therefore we are to use our Christian liberty without offense.

Verse. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another. Argum. 7. By way of Consequence from
the former Argument, drawn by way of Exhortation. So must we use our liberty,
that, by peace and edification of others, the Kingdom of Christ may be
promoted: Therefore we must not use our Christian liberty, but so far as it
may be most serviceable to peace and edification.

Verse. 20. For meat, destroy not the work of God: all things indeed are pure;
but it is evil for that man who eats with offense. Argum. 8. The work of God
ought not to be destroyed, or the salvation of thy Brother brought into
danger, for a light matter (as the use of a certain kind of meat at a certain
time:) Therefore we must not eat with offense.

All things] He prevents an Objection: Some might say, all things are lawful,
i. e. those meats whereof we speak. He answers, It is true, considering the
things by themselves, but they are unlawful (in case of scandal) to him that
eats with offense, to them that are weak.

Verse. 21. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor any thing
whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. Argum. 9. It is
good to abstain from all meat and drink, when there is danger that our Brother,
in the matter of Religion, may be made worse, by our using meats and drinks:
Therefore in such a case we ought to abstain.

Verse. 22. Have thou Faith? have it to thy self before God. Happy is he that
condemns not himself in that thing which he allows. He here meets with an
Objection: I have Faith concerning my liberty, and it is necessary that I
profess it. He answers, by denying that profession is necessary, by way of
fact, in matter of scandal, because liberty consists no less with abstinence,
than the use of the thing; wherefore he commands that the Objector be content
in such a case, concerning the liberty of his Faith, by an inward professing of
it toward God.

Blessed] He confirms his assertion by an Aphorism, wherein the tenth Argument
is contained. He is blessed, who (in that he certainly knows to be lawful
for him, that he may use it, or refrain from it) so using his liberty, that by
abusing of it to the offense of others, he make not himself guilty of
condemnation: Therefore in such a case we must refrain.

Verse. 23. And he that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not
of Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. Argum. 11. There is danger,
lest a weak and doubtful person, should be drawn by the mere example of him
that eats, to eat with a doubting conscience, and sin, running headlong into
the guilt of condemnation: Therefore in such a case we must abstain.

By this Argument he deters the weak, from eating with a doubtful conscience
by the example of any man; and he deters the strong from unseasonable eating,
lest he be the cause of another man's sin and guilt.

Whatsoever] He proves him to sin that eats with a doubting conscience,
because he eats not of Faith, or out of persuasion, that the deed is lawful;
and whatever is not done of Faith, that it may be a lawful deed, he
pronounces it to be sin.

CHAP. XV.
THere are two parts of the Chapter: In the former part the Apostle proceeds in
his Exhortation to them that are weak in the Faith, touching Christian Liberty,
how they should carry themselves toward the weak, to verse. 13. In the other
part is contained the conclusion of the Epistle, to the end.

Verse. 1. We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak,
and not to please our selves. That which concerns the first, Because no
agreement in differences about the use of things indifferent can probably be
expected without sin, unless they that are strong carry themselves decently
toward them that are weak in the use of their liberty: Therefore he exhorts,
that they would so do, and bear the infirmities of the weak, patiently bearing
with them, and by prudent counsel, pardoning them as those that are weak in
that matter. The Arguments of his Exhortation are seven.

To bear] Argum. 1. It Is the duty of the stronger, both by the Law of Nature,
and by Divine Law, to bear the burdens of the weak: Therefore the strong in
Faith in these things indifferent ought to bear with the infirmities of the
weak.

Please] Argum. 2. The stronger which refuse to perform this duty toward the
weak, will be found guilty of self-love, only minding their own private
advantages: Therefore the weak are to be born with.

Verse. 2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification.
Argum. 3. Because every man is bound to please his neighbor, when it may be
done to his edification, and for his good. He adds to Edification, lest we
fall into sin for the sake of any one.

Verse. 3. For even Christ pleased not himself, but as it is written, The
reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell on me. Argum. 4. Whereby the
former is confirmed, from the example of Christ: Christ not respecting his own
profit, but our infirmity, and salvation, pleased not himself, but us: which
he proves, because our sins (which in their nature are injuries unto God)
Christ bore, that he might free us from deserved punishments, and he put his
shoulders to bear our burden: Therefore for the sake of them that are weak,
we ought to depart from our right, at least in things indifferent, that they
may be saved.

Verse. 4. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope. He proves that this example is to be imitated, from the general scope
of the Scriptures, which is our edification (in faith and obedience) by
promises, precepts and examples: that we in all our tribulation, patiently
obeying the Will of God, might have consolation and hope through the Scriptures.

Verse. 5. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded
one toward another, according to Christ Jesus. He concludes the Argument with
prayer, that God, who is the fountain of patience and comfort, would give unto
them the same affection one toward another, according to the example of
Christ, i. e. that they might think the same thing, according to the doctrine
of Christ, and might love one another, for if love abounded, there would be
agreement in things indifferent.

Verse. 6. That you may with one mind, and one mouth, glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The end of his prayer is, that all strife and
discord being removed, with one heart and mouth they might glorify God, even
the Father of Christ, who has given us the adoption of Sons, and joined us
amongst our selves, by the bond of Brethren, with Christ.

Verse. 7. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the
glory of God. Argum. 5. In like manner by the example of Christ, drawn from
what was abovesaid, by way of exhortation, Christ had compassion on us, took us
weak ones, and unworthy into fellowship with him, to the glory of God,
pardoning our sins: Therefore we ought to take into our fellowship of love and
peace, those that are weak, and (as they may seem) unworthy, passing by their
infirmities.

Verse. 8. Now I say that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for
the truth of God to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers. Argum. 6. Again
also from the example of Christ; Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision, or
to the Jews, preaching amongst them, and undergoing all the offices of a
Minister, by reason of the Covenant that was made with their Fathers: Therefore
it behooves all Christians, to be of the same mind with Christ, toward the
Jews (which are weak in the Faith) even because of the Covenant with their
Fathers.

Verse. 9. And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, as it is
written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing
unto thy Name. Argum. 7. Again from the example of Christ, who preached among
the Jews, not only that he might promote the completing of the Truth of God,
and the promises made to the Patriarchs, but also to this end, that the
Gentiles converted by and with the Jews, might glorify God together: Therefore
it is most unworthy that the Jews and Gentiles should contemn one another for
things indifferent.

Wherefore] As concerning the Gentiles, he proves out of the Scripture, that
Christ intended to call them into the fellowship of the Jews, by a fourfold
testimony: first, out of Psalm. 18.50. Wherein Christ under the type of David,
promises that he will preach the Name of God amongst the Gentiles.

Verse. 10. And again he says, Rejoice ye Gentiles, with his people. The
second proof is taken out of Deuteronomy. 32.43. wherein the Gentiles are commanded to
rejoice, with the Jews, as the people of God: Therefore the Gentiles are joined
with this people.

Verse. 11. And again, Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye
people. The third proof is taken out of Psalm. 117.1. The Gentiles are commanded
to praise God: Therefore they shall obtain mercy.

Verse. 12. And again, Isaiah says, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he
that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.
The fourth proof is taken out of Isaiah 11.10. Christ shall reign as King over
the Gentiles, and the Gentiles shall believe in him: Therefore they shall be
converted.

Verse. 13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
that you may abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. He concludes
this whole Exhortation, concerning abstaining from the unseasonable use of our
liberty, about meats, in case of scandal, with a most ardent prayer: That God
would recompense this their Christian abstinence from meats, with the abundance
of spiritual gifts, which would create to them more joy, from the comfort of
Faith, and the holy Spirit of Peace, than they could otherwise find in all the
delights of what meats soever.

Verse. 14. And I my self also am persuaded of you, my Brethren, that ye also
are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one
another.

15. Nevertheless, Brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you, in some
sort, as putting you in mind, of the grace that is given to me of God:

16. That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering
the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable,
being sanctified of the Holy Ghost.

The other part of the Chapter, contains the conclusion of the Epistle:
wherein he first shows the cause of his writing, and of his not coming yet
unto them, that although he was persuaded, that the Romans abounded in grace,
and knowledge, whereby they were able to exhort, and instruct one another in
all those things whereof he had spoken before; Yet notwithstanding he shows
that he has written the more freely and fully to them; First, Because the
advice which he gave them was profitable unto them: Furthermore, because of
his Apostolical authority given him by the Grace of God, it behoved him so to
attend to his Ministry among the Gentiles, that they being converted and
crucified according to the old man, by his Gospel, might be offered unto God,
as a Sacrifice sanctified by the Spirit of holiness, and accepted of God
through Jesus Christ.

Verse. 17. I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in those
things which pertain to God. That by what is said before his authority might
appear, he commends his Apostleship upon a sevenfold account.

First, from the spiritual effects produced by the power of Christ, which with
God is highly esteemed, however men undervalue it.

Verse. 18. For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ
has not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient, by word and deed.
Secondly, From the conversion of the Gentiles, whereof he durst not speak more
than was truth, neither could he say how much he has done, or what Christ
had effected by his Ministry, to the conversion of the Gentiles.

Verse. 19. Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God,
so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached
the Gospel of Christ. Thirdly, From the signs of his Apostleship, viz. the
power and miracles of the Holy Ghost, by which the Gentiles were convinced,
touching the certainty of the Doctrine of the Gospel.

So that] Fourthly, From the multitude of the Gentiles which he conquered by
his Ministry, amongst which were all those which lie betwixt Jerusalem and
Dalmatia, containing as it is thought the space of about a thousand four
hundred miles, besides the Provinces adjacent.

Verse. 20. Yea, so have I strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was
named, lest I should build upon another man's foundation. Fifthly, From his
founding the Churches of God in those places, the bringing in of whom, as
Christ was the only Author, so was it only by Paul's Ministry, and not by any
other of the Apostles.

Verse. 21. But as it is written, To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see:
and they that have not heard, shall understand. Sixthly, Because in his
Ministry was most evidently fulfilled what was foretold by the Prophet.

Verse. 22. For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to you.

23. But now having no more place in these parts, and having a great desire
this many years to come unto you;

24. Whenever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you, for I trust
to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if
first I be somewhat filled with your company.

Laying a foundation for his excuse in what he said before, that hitherto he
had not come to the Romans, ver. 22. and 23. he gives them hopes of his
coming, and tarrying a while with them, in his journey, which he intended for
Spain: After he should have been refreshed with their company, as with
Aromatic odours.

Verse. 25. But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the Saints.

26. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia, to make a certain
contribution for the poor Saints which are at Jerusalem.

He expresses the time of his coming, after he had been at Jerusalem, and had
brought the charitable benevolences of the Greek Churches for the relief of the
poor Saints in Judea.

Verse. 27. It has pleased them verily, and their debtours they are; for if the
Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is also
to minister to them in carnal things. He proves that this benevolence was to
be bestowed upon the Jews, because the Gospel came from the Jews to the
Gentiles.

Verse. 28. When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them this
fruit, I will come by you into Spain.

29. And I am sure that when I come unto you, I shall come in the fullness of
the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.

After he had delivered this collection to the Saints, and had sealed to them
this fruit without diminution, he promises that he would come unto them. In
the mean time he gives them hopes of spiritual blessings by his Ministry to
be conferred upon the Romans at his coming, which he speaks, that his coming
might be more acceptable, and more fervently desired and expected by them.

Verse. 30. Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and
for the love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me, in your prayers
to God for me. Lastly, he earnestly entreats their prayers to God, that they
would be importunate for him in three requests.

Verse. 31. That I may be delivered from them that do not believe in Judea, and
that my service which I have for Jerusalem, may be accepted of the Saints. The
first is, that he might be delivered from the snares of those that did not
believe in Judea, which vehemently thirsted after his blood.

My Ministery] The second Petition is, that the contribution which he was
carrying to Jerusalem, might be acceptable to the Jews his Brethren.

Verse. 32. That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may with
you be refreshed. The third Petition is, that he might come with joy to Rome,
and rejoice together with them.

Verse. 33. Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen. In the mean while, he
prays that God would keep them in peace, that the work of the Gospel might not
be hindered amongst them.

CHAP. XVI.
THe parts of this Chapter chiefly are two. In the first, after the
commendation of Phebe, who, as it seems, carried this Epistle to the Romans,
Some Saints he salutes honorably of tried fidelity, to ver. 17. In the second
part, after exhortations to them that they would beware of Schismatics, he
adjoyns to his own salutations, the salutations of certain Saints by name, who
were with him when he sent this Epistle, and concludes the Epistle with
earnest prayers.

Verse. 1. I commend unto you Phebe our Sister, which is a servant of the Church
which is at Cenchrea:

2. That ye receive her in the Lord, as becomes Saints, and that ye assist
her in whatsoever business she has need of you, for she has been a
succourer of many, and of my self also.

At Cenchrea there was a Haven near to Corinth, in which little Town a Church
collected, the charge which this Church could not bear, it seems Phebe
sustained, whose house was freely set open as a common receptacle for Christian
strangers, and therefore she is called the Servant of the Church: For it does
not seem that she was of the company of poor Widows, which the Church
maintained at their public charge, (1 Timothy 5.) but it is likely, that she
supplied the office of them, and sustained them at her own cost, because she
succored both the Apostle, and many others: And that she took so great a
journey from Greece to Rome, having the care of secular affairs at Rome, (which
deserved the cognizance and assistance of the whole Church, and to that end,
Apostolical intercession) are not the signs of a poor, but wealthy famous
woman, whom therefore he would have received by the Romans in the Lord, i. e.
with Christian affection, and for the Lords sake, and treated fairly by the
Saints, i. e. as became the outward condition of the Romans and Phebe, adorned
with holiness.

Verse. 3. Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my helpers in Christ Jesus:

4. (Who have for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not only I give
thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles.)

The salutations, with the names and commendations of the Saints, are so
clearly distinguished, that here is no need of any Analysis, some observations
shall suffice for our purpose.

How could Priscilla and Aquila be helpers to the Apostles? It appears, Act.
18. that although they were private persons, yet as much as could be privately
done by them, keeping themselves in their calling, they did vigorously labor
in propagating the Doctrine of Christ, according to their knowledge, and with
singular zeal; in which business, as the wife is named before the husband, so
she seems to precede him [in piety.]

Their necks] It appears that Priscilla and Aquila courageously stood up in the
defense of the Apostle in some dangerous persecution or tumult, and that they
rescued his life with hazard of their own lives; upon which account, all the
Church which regarded the welfare of the Apostle, ought to render thanks to
them.

Verse. 5. Likewise greet the Church that is in their house, salute my
well-beloved Epenetus, who is the first fruits of Achaia unto Christ. By
Church, he seems to understand only their family, (piously instructed, and
daily employed about holy things, amidst their manual labors) by reason of its
resemblance to a Church; because he says not the Church which met in their
house, but which is, or dwells in their house, unless we suppose them to have
given entertainment also to the whole Church, as Gaius, of whom ver. 23.

Epenetus is said to be the first fruits of Achaia, because he was converted to
the faith amongst the first, as 1 Cor. 16.15. the family of Stephen also, upon
that account is commended amongst those that are of chief note, and approved
Christians in the faith.

Verse. 6. Greet Mary, who bestowed much labor on us. The pains of Mary toward
the Faithful, and the Apostles, he would have the Church take notice of and
acknowledge, that he might encourage or exci^e the like pains in others.

Verse. 7. Salute Andronicus, and Junia, my Kinsmen, and my fellow prisoners,
who are of note amongst the Apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
Andronicus and Iunia of the Apostles Kindred, are said to be of note among the
Apostles, because they were known and approved of by the Apostles, and highly
accounted of among them, who also were converted to the Faith before the
Apostle Paul, and were partners of his sufferings for the Gospel, in prison and
bonds.

Verse. 8. Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord. Amplias is said to be worthy
of love in the Lord, for the faith and piety which was vouchsafed of the Lord.

Verse. 9. Salute Urbane our helper in Christ, and Starchys my beloved. Urbane
seems to be one of the Pastors of the Church at Rome, and an helper of the
Apostle in his labors in the Gospel.

Verse. 10. Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them which are of
Aristobulus household. Apelles he calls approved, because he gave certain
evidences of his faith and constancy.

Verse. 11. Salute Herodion my Kinsman. Great them that be of the household of
Narcissus, which are in the Lord. He does not salute Aristobulus and
Narcissus, because they continued unbeleevers, as we may safely conjecture,
but their Christian household servants, that they might be confirmed in the
Faith, and continue their obedience toward their Masters, though unbeleevers.

Verse. 12. Salute Traphena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. Salute the
beloved Persis, which labored much in the Lord. He salutes the approved
Matrons, which contributed their labors, zealously and successefully for the
promoting of the Gospel.

Verse. 13. Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his Mother and mine. He
salutes Rufus an eminent young man, whose Mother very much respected Paul, even
as much as she did Rufus her own Son.

Verse. 14. Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrabas, Hermes, and the
Brethren which are with them.

15. Salute Philologus and Julia, Nerius and his Sister, and Olympias, and all
the Saints which are with them.

Because he could not insist upon the rehearsal of all, setting down some
Saints by name, the rest he salutes in general.

Verse. 16. -- Salute one* another with an holy kiss. Because in those times,
amongst the signs of mutual love, a kiss was, (as now the shaking of right
hands amongst us) he commands that they salute one another holily, without
fraud and deceit.

Verse. 16. -- The Churches of Christ salute you. Salute] The second part of the
Chapter follows, wherein the Apostle salutes the Romans in the name of the
Churches amongst which he was conversant, who understood his purpose of
writing to the Romans.

Verse. 17. Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. He
interposes (as it were in a Parenthesis) his admonition to observe, restrain
and excommunicate those which should move any thing against the Apostolical
doctrine, or discipline (already received by them) to the renting of the
Church, and commands to avoid fellowship, viz. after they were excommunicated
by the Church.

Verse. 18. For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
people. He adds four Reasons of this his admonition; First, because such men
whoever they be, serve not God, but their own belly, minding worldly things,
i. e. their own lusts, and advantages, but not the welfare of the Church.

Reason second; Because unless they be observed by the wiser sort, the more
simple are easily deceived by their feigned words, by which means they make a
schism in the Church.

Verse. 19. For your obedience is come abroad unto all men, I am glad therefore
on your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, and
simple concerning evil. Reason the third; Because there was danger, le^t the
commendable readiness of the Romans to believe the Preachers, might be exposed
to some impostures, unless they were wary, viz. except they tempered that
simplicity with prudence, respecting simplicity only as to mischief, but in
other things, following after prudence, lest they be wronged by the subtilty
of others.

Verse. 20. And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. The fourth Reason; Because
although we must conflict with Satan, the author of contentions, yet the Go^
of Peace will give victory to us, when we have a while combated with those
that trouble us: which Argument the Apostle concludes with an Apostolical
benediction.

Verse. 21. Timotheus my work-fellow, and Lucius and Jason, and So^ipater my
kinsmen salute you. The Parenthesis being shut up, he subjoyns the salutations
of other Saints with him to the Romans, the first of wh^m is Timothy the
Evangelist, after him Lucius* who as it seems is that Cyrenean, Act. 13.1.
Jason, of whom, Act. 17.5. Sosipater, of whom, Act. 20.4.

Verse. 22. I Tertius, who wrote this Epistle, salute you in the Lord. Tertius
Paul's Secretary who wrote this Epistle, in honor of his Ministry, he
receives this mentioning of himself from the Holy Ghost, as it were in reward
of his faithfulness.

Verse. 23. Gaius mine Host, and of the whole Church, saluteth you. Erastus the
Chamberlain of the City saluteth you, and Quartus a Brother.

24. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

Gaius, of whom Act. 20.4. and 1 Cor. 1.14. commends himself to the Romans, and
in the mean while is commended by Paul to the Romans, that his house did not
only give entertainment to Paul, but also the whole Church in which they met
for the performance of religious duties.

Erastus, the Chamberlain of the City of Corinth, to whom is added Quartus a
Brother by name; he shuts up these salutations, repeating his Apostolical wish.

Verse. 25. Now to him that is of power to establish you, according to my
Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the
mystery, which was kept secret since the world began: In the three last verses
he concludes this excellent Epistle with a solenm thanksgiving, in which he
asserts the Faith, and the certainty of the Romans salvation, against all fear,
which dangers, persecutions, Impostors, Schismatics, or their own infirmities,
or any other temptations might cause in them, and that by reason of the power
and good pleasure of God, which God by the Gospel set down in this Epistle, as
it were holds forth his arms for their salvation; and also he commends his
Gospel upon a sixfold account; First, Because it is the preaching of Jesus
Christ, 2. Because it is the Revelation of the Grace of God which was kept
secret: for although Grace was made known to the Fathers, yet in comparison of
the present light, which has shined in the world by the doctrine of the
Apostles, it may be termed secret and hidden.

Verse. 26. But now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets,
according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all Nations
for the obedience of Faith.

27. To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

Because 3. This Gospel is agreeable to the Old Testament, and is confirmed out
of that. 4. Because it has Gods command, and appointment for its authority. 5.
Because it is not contained, as the Old Testament, in the narrow bounds of the
Jews, and one people, but shines forth for the use of all Nations. 6. Because
it tends to the obedience of Faith, that is, that the hearers being brought to
the Faith of Christ, may be made obedient subjects to the Grace of that
Kingdom: Withal he ascribes the glory of all these to God, as the only
wise, in himself, and of himself, who owes his wisdom to none; To him, through
Christ, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The First Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, Analytically expounded.
The Contents of the Epistle.
COrinth is a famous Mart-Town of Achaia, in the narrow straight of
Peloponnesus, situate between the Egean and Ionian Seas, in which City the
Apostle taught a year and half, where he founded a Church with great
difficulty. This Church Satan endeavored by many ways to rend, infect, and
corrupt, of which crafts of Satan the Apostle being assured, that he might
produce a seasonable remedy to so great evils, he writes this Epistle to the
Corinthians.

The heads of this Epistle are ten. The first is concerning the removing of
Schism, which arose amongst them, by the vain kind of preaching of their
Teachers, and to that end, he largely handles the right manner of preaching
the Gospel, Chap. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, Concerning the excommunication of the incestuous person, Chap. 5.

The third, about the avoiding of strifes, with which they vexed one another
even before Infidel Judges.

The fourth, of keeping chastity, or avoiding fornication, Chap. 6.

The fifth, of prudence to be used in cases of marriage and single life, and
secular employments, Chap. 7.

The sixth, of avoiding things dedicated to Idols, Chap. 8, 9, 10.

The seventh, of the order, and decency to be observed in the worship of God,
and chiefly in the Supper of the Lord, Chap. 11.

The eighth, of the right use of spiritual gifts, Chap. 12, 13, 14.

The ninth, of the certainty of the resurrection to come, which some amongst
them called in question, Chap. 15.

The tenth, of charitable contribution to be collected, for the relief of the
Saints in Judea* Chap. 16.

CHAP. I.
THere are three parts of the Chapter; The first is the preface of the whole
Epistle, to verse. the 10th.

The second, is the beginning of his disswasion from Schism, which was the
disease of the Corinthians, to that end be propounds five Arguments, to verse.
17.

The third is an illustration and confirmation of the fifth Argument, to the
end.

The whole Preface is laid down, to prepare the minds of the Corinthians, for
ready obedience to the doctrine and admonitions of the Apostle: And in this or
the like conclusion, the scope of the Preface may be represented: It is your
duty, O ye Corinthians, with a ready and submissive mind to obey my Doctrine
and Admonitions, or to believe and obey.

Eleven Arguments to this end are sub-joyned, whereof some show forth the
Apostles authority, others his favorable respect toward the Corinthians.

Verse. 1. Paul called to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will of
God, and Sosthenes our Brother, An Apostle] The first Argument: I Paul, who
write these things unto you, am an Apostle of Jesus Christ: Therefore ought you
to obey my Doctrine, and receive my Counsels.

By the will of God] Argum. 2. I perform my Embassage by the special command
and will of God, not by my own usurpation, so I write these things unto you:
Therefore ^nless you will be disobedient to the will of God, you ought to obey
my admonition and teaching.

Sosthenes] Argum. 3. I have taken in Sosthenes as a witness to my admonition,
(touching whom, Act. 18.17.) that by two witnesses this testimony might be
confirmed: Therefore ought you to obey my admonition and Doctrine, unless you
will have the witness of us two against you.

Verse. 2. Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in every place
call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours. Argum. 4. In
the description of those to whom he writes: you are the Church of God, called
out of the world, consecrated unto God, brought into communion with Christ,
called unto holiness: Therefore if you will be accounted worthy of your
privileges, you ought to hearken and obey me in my doctrine and admonitions,
which make for holiness.

With all that call upon] Argum. 5. My Apostleship, and the authority of this
doctrine, the use, and fruit of it, is not extended only unto you, but to the
Church of God universally, and all the Saints which adore Jesus Christ, the
true God, and our Lord: Therefore ought you to hearken and obey my doctrine and
admonitions.

Verse. 3. Grace be unto you, and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ. In this salutation is the sixth Argument. I acknowledge you, to
whom (with the rest of the Saints, living in any place, according to the
authority committed to me) I may apply the blessing of the Gospel, as also
grace and peace, i. e. all things that pertain to virtue and glory, to holiness
and happiness, that being made more certain by me of the favor of God, you
may expect the same things with a stronger faith, through the Mediator Jesus
Christ: Therefore ought you cheerfully to obey my doctrine and admonition.

Verse. 4. I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is
given you by Jesus Christ,

5. That in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance, and in all
knowledge.

In the other verses of the Preface, because he was about to reprove many
vices among the Corinthians, he commends what was good in them, confirming
their faith in God, lest being sharply reproved they should faint; withal he
shows what opinion he had of them, and what good will toward them, whereby
he might better reach the end which he aimed at.

Argum. 7. I do not envy you, but rather rejoice and render continual thanks to
God, for the rich grace of God toward you, especially in your reconciliation
to him by Jesus Christ, ver. 4. I rejoice much for the abundance of spiritual
gifts bestowed on you, pertaining to the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel,
ver. 5. Therefore ought you readily to obey me, advising you concerning the
right using of that grace, and those gifts.

Verse. 6. Even as the testimo^^ of Christ was confirmed in you. Argum. 8. Those
gifts are conferred upon you for the confirmation of our testimony, and your
faith, concerning this Gospel of Christ: Therefore ye ought (that you might
more abound in the gifts of the Spirit) to give credit, and yield obedience to
me, admonishing and teaching the things which are sound, from the same Author,
Christ.

Verse. 7. So that ye come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Argum. 9. You want no kind of Ecclesiastical and Spiritual
gifts, which are necessary for those that are travelers in the way, yet
notwithstanding you are not perfect, you must expect your fullness at the coming
of Christ: Therefore that you may with joy receive Christ at his coming to
Judgment, you ought to yield obedience to my admonitions and doctrine, which
may promote your perfection.

Verse. 8. Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless
in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Argum. 10. I am persuaded (I speak
concerning the Elect, such as in charity it is fitting I should think you to
be) that Christ will confirm you, and cause you to persevere in grace, and
will purge you from all spot, and at length will present you without blemish in
the presence of God: Therefore to this very end ought you to hearken to my
teaching and admonition.

Verse. 9. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Argum. 11. Confirming that he had said before:
Your effectual calling into communion with Christ, which is a lasting and
saving gift, as also the faithfulness of God, (who has promised perseverance
and confirmation in grace to that very end, to those that are effectually
called into the fellowship of his Son) are pledges of this my persuasion of
you: Therefore that you may answer my expectation, and your calling, you ought
to obey my counsel and doctrine.

The second Part.
Verse. 10. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye all speak one thing, and that there be no divisions amongst you, but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment. The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein he endeavors to
re-call them from Schism, exhorting, that if Christ was dear unto them, laying
aside their making of parties, they would follow after unity in Doctrine, and
the manner of reaching, and to this end, that they might be knit together in
the same affections, in the same mind, and the same judgment.

Verse. 11. For it has been declared unto me of you, my Brethren, by them
which are of the house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you. That he
might not exhort them in vain, he shows that he heard of their Schism, from
Authors of credit.

Verse. 12. Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Now he comes to the Schism; they
contend concerning their Teachers, preferring some before others, as if they
were more perfect, denominating themselves from them, with envy and contempt of
each other: Which Teachers he names not, but by concealing them, he pacifies
the minds of the Schismatics, that the Schism might more easily be laid
aside: And as it were for example sake he names himself, and Apollos, and
Cephas, although in the following part of the Epistle, it is plain, that their
own vain babbling Teachers were the Authors and furtherers of Schism, who also
brought Paul himself so far into contempt amongst the Corinthians, that he
could scarcely keep his own place amongst them, they were so far from having
their denomination from him.

Verse. 13. Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye baptized
in the name of Paul? He strives now to cure and take away this Schism, the
arguments of dehorting and reproving, are five.

The first argument is this; By this Schism, the mystical body of Christ is
rent, and its unity divided into so many parts, as there are Sects: Therefore
Schism is to be cured, and abolished.

Crucified] The second argument. None of your Teachers purchased the Church to
himself by death: Therefore this honor is due to none, that the Church should
have its name from him, and be rent in pieces for his sake.

In the Name] The third argument: You were baptized in the name of none of your
Teachers, that you should take your denomination from them: Therefore for the
sake of your Teachers, you are not to be divided into parties.

Verse. 14. I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius,

15. Lest any should say, that I had baptized in mine own name.

16. And I baptized also the household of Stephanas: besides, I know not whether
I baptized any other.

The fourth argument. Schismatic Teachers among you are to be blamed, who by
affecting the baptizing of many confusedly, endeavor to challenge to
themselves the Disciples taken away from others, as if they had been baptized
into their name; and that God by his Providence using my help but to the
baptizing of few, I give thanks unto him who has freed me from the suspicion
of this evil: Therefore you are not to be divided in parties for the sake of
your Teachers.

Verse. 17. -- For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, not
with wisdom of words, -- He adds another reason, why so few were baptized by
him, because he endeavored to exercise his chief parts in the discharging of
the trust committed to him, i. e* by preaching, to convert one after another,
committing the care of those that were converted, to be baptized by others,
lest he himself should be distracted, because Christ sent him not to baptize,
viz. chiefly, to hinder his preaching, but specially to preach the Gospel.

Not with wisdom of words] The fifth argument. Those Schismatics, your
Teachers, who endeavor to draw Disciples after them by their specious
eloquence, do not follow my example in the spiritual manner of teaching; for I
preach not with the wisdom of words, or the elegancy of speech, or acuteness
of wit, with set form of speech (as the Precepts of Oratorie enjoin) but in the
plainness and simplicity of speech, ordered for edification, I preached
according to the mind of our Lord: Therefore for the vain eloquence of such
Teachers, your Church is not to be rent in pieces.

Verse. 17. Lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect. Lest of
none effect] The third part of the Chapter, wherein he confirms his practice
in the manner of preaching, and also his duty, viz. that he might not preach
with the wisdom of words, but in the simplicity of the truth, to the capacity
of all his Auditors, and to their edification, not to please their ears; and
he proves that it was no wonder that Christ sent him to preach the Gospel, not
with wisdom of words; to this end he brings twelve arguments in this Chapter,
adding more in the following.

Lest of none effect] The first Argument is from the rule of contraries; if I
compose my speech in preaching rhetorically, to the rules of Eloquence, the
Cross of Christ had been made of none effect, or (as it is, Chap. 2.5.) the
Faith of my hearers, had rather stood in the wisdom of men, than in the power
of God, i. e. the plain Doctrine concerning Christ's humiliation to his Cross,
had wanted its glory of men's conversion, and Humane Eloquence had carried away
the Garland: Therefore it is no wonder that Christ sent me to preach not with
the wisdom of words.

Verse. 18. For the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish, foolishness:
but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God. By answering an objection,
he adds a second argument. Some might say, but the Doctrine of the Cross shall
be made contemptible, and exposed to scorn, as foolishness, if it shall not
be commended to us with the splendor of wisdom. He answers, its true in
respect of the reprobate, and those that abide in the way of perdition, but not
so in respect of the Elect, and converted, who highly esteem plain preaching,
finding it to be the effectual means of God to Salvation. Hence the Argument
rises why the Apostle used simplicity of speech, and not artificial flourishes
in preaching of the Gospel. God is wont powerfully to convert, and to promote
the salvation of the Elect, by this plain manner of preaching: Therefore its no
wonder that Christ sent me to preach not with wisdom of words.

Verse. 19. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will
bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Argum. 3. God will curse
those wise ones, who despising the simplicity of Divine Truth, dare in the
place of it, substitute their own wisdom in the preaching of the Gospel, which
he proves by the testimony of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 29.14. Where God
threatens that he will turn their wisdom into foolishness, who mind only
words in his Worship, and not the power of godliness, to inward sanctification:
Therefore its no wonder that Christ sent me to preach not with wisdom of
words.

Verse. 20. Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of
this World? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this World? Argum. 4. Is
taken from experience, because God in the calling of his Church, rejected the
works and the persons of the most wise amongst the Jews and Gentiles, by
suffering the greatest part of wise Politicians, and Scribes, or Interpreters
of the Law, the Disputers of this World, or Philosophers, to walk in their own
ways, for he suffered almost the whole multitude of the wise men of this
world, to wallow like fools in the mire and dirt with their worldly wisdom and
learning, without the bounds of his Church, or the Kingdom of Heaven. In this
Argument the Apostle alludes to the Prophecy of Isaiah 29.14. For if you ask,
Where are the Wise, etc? they are not to be found in the Church, for their
wisdom not directing them to the true knowledge of their misery, and their
only remedy in Christ, is foolishness. This is the force of the argument; in
the calling and building up of the Church, neither did God use the wise men of
this world, nor their eloquence: Therefore it is no wonder that Christ sent me
to preach not with wisdom of words.

Verse. 21. For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not
God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.
Argum. 5. Which is for confirmation of the former: Because afterward in the
wisdom of God, which shines forth in the works of Creation, and daily
providence, worldly men, neither by that natural knowledge remaining in them,
nor by the help of Philosophy, nor by any wisdom of their own, have known God
aright; but having neglected all means of knowledge, shutting their eyes, God
has revealed another way of Salvation, by the plain, and as it were foolish
way of preaching the Gospel (as it seems to unregenerate men) that he might
save the Elect through Faith: No wonder therefore that Christ sent me to
preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words.

Verse. 22. For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom.

23. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto
the Greeks foolishness:

He adds a sixth Argument, illustrating what he had said before, not only
from his own practice, but of the other Apostles, who, neither for the Jews
sake (seeking after miracles) nor of the Gentiles (seeking after wisdom)
studied to satisfy the curiosity of men, with a polished style; but following
the plain manner of preaching the Gospel, prescribed by God himself, they
preached redemption by the humiliation of Christ, nothing regarding that the
Jews would be offended at the meanness of the Cross, nor that the Gentiles
would account this kind of preaching foolishness. No wonder therefore that
Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words.

Verse. 24. But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the
power of God, and the wisdom of God. He excepts some of the Jews and
Gentiles, and annexeth the seventh Argument; from the judgment and experience
of the Elect, powerfully called out of Jews and Gentiles, who had experienced
and acknowledged Christ preached in plainness of speech, to be the evidence of
the power of God, above all miracles; and the manifestation of the wisdom of
God, above all (which the Gentiles seek after) worldly wisdom. No wonder
therefore that Christ sent me to preach the Gospel not with wisdom of words.

Verse. 25. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness
of God is stronger than men. Argum. 8. By which he confirms that this
judgment of the faithful is true; because the Institutions of God, (however
they may seem most foolish and weak to the world) are more prevalent than all
the wisdom and power of men, as we may see in the Sacraments. No wonder
therefore that Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words.

Verse. 26. For ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men after
the flesh; not many mighty, not many noble are called. Argum. 9. Whereby he
shows that God made choice of this plain manner of preaching, but not lofty and
specious, by his like good pleasure, in the selecting of persons by his
calling: He chose not many wise, mighty, noble, according to the flesh, or
outward condition and degree in the world, but men, for the most part, of no
wisdom, power, or greatness of birth, as to the world, yea not at all
accounted of: No wonder therefore if God choosing also the like manner of
preaching has sent me to preach the Gospel not with wisdom of words.

Verse. 27. But God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the
wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things
which are mighty;

28. And base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.

With this Argument he brings in the tenth, from the subalternate end of this
Counsel of God, viz. that he might show that he nothing esteemed those things
which were highly valued by men, that so whoever swelled with pride because of
these things, might be ashamed, confounded, and looked upon as vile, and of no
account; neither is it therefore to be wondered at, that God has chosen this
plain manner of preaching, and that I should stick to it, that the vain wisdom
of words might be shamed, seeing that all the pomp of words is found only to
tickle the fancies of men, and avails nothing to the conversion of the heart.

Verse. 29. That no flesh should glory in his presence. Argum. 11. From the
ultimate end of Gods good pleasure in choosing, things, and persons, and weak
means to salvation, which end is here negatively propounded, lest any should
glory in himself: No wonder therefore that God has sent me to preach not with
wisdom of words, lest I should glory in my self when any are converted by my
preaching.

Verse. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: In the mean time
he comforts the Corinthians against this their abasement and mean condition,
before the World, granting to them by way of recompense of nobleness of stock
in regeneration, riches in wisdom and righteousness, and finally freedom from
all sin and misery in Christ: and for the greater confirmation of their faith,
he discovers that Christ was appointed by God, and given to them for
righteousness and life, for Christ is made all these things by merit,
imputation, application, and effectual accomplishment to the use of all the
faithful.

Verse. 31. That according as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in
the Lord. He sets down affirmatively the ultimate end of Gods good pleasure in
choosing weak means and persons, and in debasing all men in themselves, that (as
it is, Ier. 9.23.) all the glory might be given to God; from whence arises the
twelfth Argument, God so orders all things, that no man should glory save in
the Lord: Therefore it is no wonder, that God sent me not to preach the Gospel
with wisdom of words, that in the success of the Gospel we might all glory in
God alone.

CHAP. II.
He goes forward to confirm the same doctrine which he delivered in the
foregoing Chapter, viz. That in the preaching of the Gospel he rejected
Rhetorical Elegance, but was pleased with plainness, and spiritual
demonstration, not that the Apostle defends the rashness or rawness of any in
preaching, as if we might speak whatsoever comes to the tongues end, without
Method, or sense, in a rude style, and contemptible kind of speaking; for the
right way of preaching has it is excellency, which neither approves of
dissembling, or sordidness, but condemns the affectation of eloquence (which
causes the hearer more to admire him that speaks, than that which is spoken:)
for the truth thought upon, and rightly understood (when the Preacher delivers
it out of Faith and Love) the simple willingly follow it, and a speech fitted
to the building up of all auditors, which relishes better with the wisest
hearers, than all the flourishes of Rhetoricians. This plain kind of preaching
he proves more excellent than artificial eloquence, by eight Arguments, the
former of which are taken from the experience of Paul himself, and the
Corinthians to whom he writes.

Verse. 1. And I, Brethren, when I came unto you, came not with excellency of
speech, or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. The first
Argument. I Paul, when I came to you Corinthians to preach the Gospel, by which
you were converted to the Faith, did advisedly abstain from the eminency of
eloquence: Therefore plainness of speech in preaching the Gospel is better than
artificial Rhethorick.

Verse. 2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. Argum. 2. I did not at all value it, to show amongst you, or
discover of my self the knowledge of any thing, save of the person, offices,
efficacy, and virtue of Jesus Christ, and specially of his Passions and
Humiliation: Therefore this way of preaching is most excellent.

Verse. 3. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling;
I, being mindful of humane infirmities, in the midst of dangers, composing my
self to humility without pride, preached amongst you, and carried my self
pensively and tremblingly in my duty: Therefore the preaching of the Gospel
plainly is the excellentest way.

Verse. 4. And my speech, and my preaching, was not with entising words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power. My speech and
preaching never glistered with the acuteness of wit, or humane Philosophy, nor
with fineness of words fitted for persuasion, but in the evidences of
Scripture, and sound truth, in which the Spirit showed himself powerfully, and
worked in your hearts: Therefore this kind of preaching is most excellent.

Verse. 5. That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of God. Giving a reason of his practice, why he refrained himself from
Humane Eloquence in his speeches, he adds the fifth argument: If I had made use
of artificial expressions to convert you to the Faith, Humane Eloquence had
been the cause of believing the Gospel amongst you Corinthians, and not the
naked truth, (which is said to be the power of God, because God works
powerfully by it in his people) and so the Faith of the Corinthians had been
grounded upon the deceitful foundation of Humane Eloquence; but when any one by
Eloquence is moved to believe, he may be moved also by greater Eloquence to
forsake the truth of Faith: Therefore it follows, that this plain way of
preaching is most excellent.

Verse. 6. Howbeit, we speak wisdom amongst them that are perfect; yet not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world, that come to naught.
Argum. 6. From the comparing the Gospel and Humane Wisdom together: That the
Gospel has its own proper wisdom, eloquence and luster (in this plain kind of
preaching) any one of years may be judge; neither can it more admit of the
dressing of Humane Wisdom, than the most beautiful face admits of painting. In
those that undertake to preach the Gospel, the help of Humane Wisdom is
requisite, not the splendor of it in preaching.

Wisdome] His comparison of Divine Wisdom in its plainness of speech, with
worldly wisdom, is eightfold.

The first Comparison; They that are perfect, or grown up in the School of
Christ, which have their senses exercised, to discern good and evil, this
Wisdom of the Gospel they apprehend, admire, and magnify; but that which is
Humane, they suspect, and only they that are Novices, and ignorant altogether
of Divine things, admire it.

Not of this world] Comparison 2. Humane Wisdom is only of this world, or
temporary; but the wisdom of the Gospel is of the world which is to come, or
Eternal.

Of the Princes] Comparison 3. Humane Wisdom is of men, who although they are
accounted by the world for Princes, yet they perish with their wisdom, and
come to naught.

Verse. 7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
wisdom which God ordained, before the world, unto our glory. The other part of
the Comparison; The Wisdom of the Gospel, is the wisdom of the Living and
Eternal God, because it was wisely contrived of God, and because in it the
wonderful Wisdom of God is revealed, touching the Salvation and Redemption of
men.

In a mystery] Comparison 4. Humane Philosophy is common and obvious to every
one that is endued with the gifts of Nature; but the Wisdom of the Gospel is a
Mystery, or hidden wisdom, because it is not understood by natural reason, as
Humane Philosophy, but by Supernatural Revelation.

Before the world] Comparison 5. In the antiquity of it, the Wisdom of the
Gospel is not of yesterday, but ordained of God before the world: But Humane
Philosophy is an invention lately found out, and not yet perfected or finished.

Glory] Comparison 6. The Wisdom of the Gospel appertains to Glory and
Salvation, especially of us who live under grace: But Humane Wisdom, compared
with this, appertains not to salvation, but vain speculation.

Verse. 8. Which none of the Princes of this world knew: for had they known it,
they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. Comparison 7. Humane Wisdom
may consist with the not knowing of Christ, but Divine Wisdom cannot. This
comparison is confirmed by experience, because the chief heads of the Jews, and
the Rulers of the Gentiles, (who in respect to their wisdom, seemed to get a
name in the world) understood nothing of the Wisdom of the Gospel, which he
proves by this instance, because had they known any thing of the Gospel, they
had either out of reverence to the Divine Power, or out of fear been wary of
Crucifying the Lord of Glory so ignominiously.

Verse. 9. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. Comparison 8. By which he confirms and illustrates the fourth and
sixth comparison: The object of Humane Wisdom, is apprehended by the external
senses, and the understanding, or the natural light of reason; but the object
of that Wisdom which is unfolded in the Gospel, containing those things which
Christ has procured for us, (to be enjoyed in this present, and in the world
to come) cannot be apprehended, either by the outward senses, or the
understanding, founded in sensible things, or by the discourse of reason,
without revelation, because the knowledge of it, (as Isaiah speaks, Chap.
64.14.) cannot come into the heart of man naturally. From all the parts of this
comparison arises

Argum. 6. The Wisdom of the Gospel, which the plain way of preaching it, best
opens, far excells all humane wisdom, which only the wisdom of words (used
for preaching) opens, and that with obscuring the wisdom of the Gospel:
Therefore the preaching of the Gospel in simplicity, is for the best. The sum
of all is, plainness of speech shows to the hearers the depth of the wisdom of
God; but wisdom of words, shows how learned the Preacher is in humane wisdom.

Verse. 10. But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit: for the Spirit
searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. He illustrates this
Doctrine, by answering two Objections.

Objection 1. From whence therefore do you know the Gospel? He answers, From
the revelation of the Spirit through Faith, we understand the subject of the
Gospel, which he confirms from the end and properties of the Holy Spirit,
which is given unto us; because the Holy Ghost, as it were by searching,
perfectly knows all things, even the hidden things of God, and reveals to us
these mysteries.

Verse. 11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of
God. This property of the Spirit, he proves by way of comparison; As the
Spirit of a man can best know the things which are in man, so the Spirit of God
only can know the deep things of God, and by consequence reveal them.

Verse. 12. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit
which is of God, that we may know the things that are freely given to us of
God. Objection 2. But if the Spirit only knows, what have you to do with the
Spirit? He answers, That the Spirit is given to us that believe, not that
common spirit of the world, not the gift of Eloquence, or worldly wisdom, but
the Spirit, or the gift of spiritual grace, to this end, that we may know
those spiritual gifts, viz. Christ with his benefits freely bestowed upon us,
through the grace of God.

Verse. 13. Which things also we speak not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual. Argum. 7. Confirmed by the practice of the Apostles: Spiritual
things ought to be manifested (if the Apostles practice be to be imitated)
not with the painted language of man's wisdom, but in a spiritual style, and in
words which the Holy Ghost teaches: Therefore this is the best manner of
preaching: This heavenly business cares not to be adorned, but is content to
be taught: He that speaks (says Peter) let him speak as the Oracles of God,
that is, let him use pious language, reverend, sanctified, speaking of divine
things, as becomes the Oracles of God.

Spiritual things] Confirming this argument, he subjoyns the eighth: Because
to spiritual things, and spiritual men, or men endued with the Spirit of God, a
spiritual style, and manner of speech ought to be fitted, using spiritual
arguments taken out of the Scripture, which will not be, if the preaching of
the Gospel be clothed with Rhetorical flourishes, and Philosophical
sentences, with painted speeches; for such kind of speech is as much unbecoming
the Gospel, as Herod's Purple Garment was unbecoming Christ: Therefore this
manner of preaching is the most excellent.

Verse. 14. But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. He illustrates this Doctrine, by occurring to an
Objection: Some man might say, This Doctrine of the Apostle cannot be admitted
by humane reason, for there is no man but accounts it folly, not to set out the
most excellent and spiritual things with the most elegant manner of speech: He
answers, by distinguishing men, or the same man, into Rational, and Spiritual;
because he is called rational, as he is considered in his mere naturals, or
so far as in any particular act, being destitute of the Spirit, he judges of
divine things by the wisdom of the flesh, as also of this spiritual manner of
preaching: And he is called the spiritual man, so far as renewed in his mind
and affections, he attends to the dictate of the Spirit. Concerning the
former, i. e. The rational man, (not regenerated) or any one not born again,
he grants what is objected, showing the reasons why he cannot apprehend nor
approve this Doctrine, nor any other spiritual matter. The reasons are three.
1. Because they are foolishness unto him, and ridiculous, even those things
which are the very wisdom of God. 2. Because so far as he is so, for want of
light, as also the enmity of his natural wisdom against God, he cannot
apprehend spiritual things. 3. Because spiritual things are discerned only
spiritually, i. e. by a spiritual light, and the Spirit within actually
manifesting the object, of which the rational man is destitute: For so great is
the blindness of our mind, the deceit, perverseness, and unaptness to spiritual
things, that unless we are regenerated, and illuminated actually in every
thing by the Spirit of Christ, we discern nothing in spiritual things.

Verse. 15. But he that is spiritual, judges all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man. The other part of the distinction lies thus; The spiritual
man, so far as he is spiritual, knows all the things of God, ( viz. concerning
whom we speak) and discerns the spiritual and saving manner of handling these
mysteries of God, and acknowledges them according to his measure: But he
himself, in his spiritual state and actions, can be discerned or accounted
spiritual, by no man which is not spiritual, or so far as he is not spiritual.

Verse. 16. For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him?
but we have the mind of Christ. He proves the answer given, by a sentence
borrowed from Isai. 40.13. Because no man knows the counsel of God, but they to
whom he has given his Spirit: And therefore no natural (or rational) man can
judge concerning the mysteries of Salvation, and the spiritual manner of
handling them, but only they that are spiritual, so far as they have the mind
of Christ revealed to them by his Spirit, such as were the Apostles, and the
rest of the Faithful, every one in his own measure.

CHAP. III.
TO the former Arguments in the Chapter foregoing, (proving plainness of speech
in preaching the Gospel) he adds one, ver. 1, and 2. and in the remaining part
of the Chapter passes to the reproving of their Schism.

Verse. 1. And I brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as
unto carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ.

2. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not able
to bear it, neither yet now are ye able.

He takes an argument from the necessity of the hearers, amongst whom are
found some less knowing, to whom the height of spiritual things is not only to
be tempered and seasoned with simplicity of speech, but to be brought down to
a familiar and plain manner of speaking; which he confirms by his own
experience, and the example of the Corinthians, amongst whom, as amongst those
that were carnal, and Babes in Christ, the Apostle is compelled to descend from
his manly kind of speech, and, as with children, to stammer, as it were, about
divine things: Wherefore he fed them with a more easy and familiar kind of
speech, as children are fed with milk.

For ye were not] He gives three reasons of this his doing: The first is,
because you could not then bear a more perfect manner of Preaching, as stronger
meat.

Nor yet] Reason 2. Because neither as yet, when he wrote these things, were
they able to bear it.

Verse. 3. For ye are yet carnal; for whereas there is among you envying, and
strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? Reason 3. Because
ye are carnal, comparatively, viz. in respect to spiritual perfection, after
which you ought to strive; which that he might prove, he passes to a reproof
of the Schism which sprung up amongst them: First in general, because among
them the works of the flesh were manifest, a preposterous ambition, and from
that arose contentions, and thence divisions, or Schisms, which was to walk in
the ways of unregenerate and carnal men.

Verse. 4. For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are
ye not carnal? Furthermore in particular he proves the Corinthians to be
carnal, and more specially taxes them of Schism, because they chose to
themselves certain Teachers, from one of whom one would call himself, and from
another, another. In the mean time he forbids them making any Schism about
their Teachers, laying down fourteen Arguments, all which prove, that they
ought not to nourish the Schism which was grown up amongst them, neither the
Teachers, nor the people.

Are ye not] Argum. 1. This contending about your Teachers, argues that you
are carnal: Therefore Schism is not to be nourished.

Verse. 5. Who then is Paul? and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye
believed, even as the Lord gave to every man. Argum. 2. The prime Apostles and
Evangelists, not your ordinary Teachers (whose names he mentions not) are
only the Ministers of your conversion and Faith: Therefore they are not so
highly to be magnified, that you should name your selves from them, and
because of them should be rent into factions: Therefore this Schism is not any
further to be maintained.

Verse. 6. I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase.

7. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters,
but God that gives the increase.

Argum. 3. The Ministry and labor of the Apostles and Evangelists, whether in
conversion, or edification of those that are converted, profits no more
(without the blessing of God) than planting or watering of the Gardener, if God
give not the increase: Therefore so much honor (that you should glory in them)
is not to be ascribed to men, but God.

Verse. 8. Now he that planteth, and he that waters are one, and every man
shall receive his own reward according to his own labor. Argum. 4. All
teachers in office, labor, and intention ought to be one: Therefore neither
by them, nor for them is the Church to be rent by Schisms.

Reward] Argum. 5. Every one shall receive his reward according to his work:
Therefore it lies upon the Teachers, that they rather attend to their work, and
their reward, than to the fomenting of factions.

Verse. 9. For we are laborers together with God: ye are Gods husbandry, ye
are Gods building. Argum. 6. All Teachers ought to work together with God, and
to minister together with him: Therefore Schisms ought not to be by, or for
them.

Husbandry] Argum. 7. They that are the people of God, as a field, or building,
ought to be closely united to one another in the service of God: Therefore
ought they not to be rent into parties one from another.

Verse. 10. According unto the Grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
Master Builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon: but
let every man take heed how he builds thereupon. Argum. 8. Is propounded
under the form of an admonition, whereby he more sharply wounds their
ambitious Teachers, the authors of Schism, which strove by their boasting of
Philosophy and Eloquence, every one to gain Disciples after them: This is the
Argument: It is dangerous, lest while each of these ordinary Teachers, serve
their own ambition, they build some kind of doctrine upon the Apostles
foundation, which agrees not with the foundation: Therefore Schism is not to
be fomented.

Verse. 11. For other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ. He gives a Reason, why he directs his admonition only to their
ordinary Teachers, about superstructures, because the sum of all saving
doctrine concerning Jesus Christ, as the sure and only foundation, is laid by
the Apostles, from which it is not lawful for ordinary or extraordinary
Teachers to depart.

Verse. 12. Now if any man build on this foundation, Gold, Silver, precious
Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble: Therefore he compares the doctrine of the Gospel
to a building, the Apostles to builders, laying the foundation of all saving
doctrine: Those Teachers that follow after, he compares to those that build
the walls upon the foundation laid by the Apostles; of whom some taught ^ound
doctrine agreeable to the foundation, for the truth of it, and the spiritual
manner of handling it; others stuffed their preaching with Philosophical
flowers, and the wisdom of words, building as it were, Wood, Stubble, Hay, not
solid matter, nor tending to salvation.

Verse. 13. Every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare
it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's
work, of what sort it is. That they might here know their danger, he
fore-tells the trial of every ones work in his preaching the Gospel (no less
exact, than that of Goldsmiths in trying their metals by fire) at leastwise in
the last day, wherein God will judge of all persons and works.

Verse. 14. If any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward. In which day at least, whosoever has built solid and
precious doctrine, agreeable to the foundation, shall receive a reward of his
faithfulness, according to the promises of God.

Verse. 15. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss: but he
himself shall be saved; yet so, as by fire. But if any one shall mingle
Philosophical speculations, the hay of humane wisdom, the stubble of wordy
eloquence, with his preaching; or shall add any other devices of his own, which
cannot endure the sentence of divine judgment, he shall suffer loss of all
his labors, but the Preacher shall be saved, but so as by fire, i. e. if so
be he is able to abide the fiery and exact trial of God, whereby he will
accurately separate the sincere from Hypocrites, as the fire purges the rust
from the metal: the sum of all is: The Preacher himself shall be saved, if
otherwise he be found sincere in the Faith of Christ.

Verse. 16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of
God dwells in you? Argum. 9. Appertains to preachers, as also hearers,
because when they know themselves to be the Temple of God, it is a wicked
thing to defile and do violence to the Church or Temple of God, even their own
conscience being witness: Therefore this Schism is not further to be fomented,
unless they will do injury to the Spirit of God dwelling in them.

Verse. 17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the
Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. Argum. 10. From the pernicious
effect: It is to be feared lest God destroy you with your vanities and
dissentions, while you defile his Temple: Therefore this Schism is not to be
fomented any further.

Verse. 18. Let no man deceive himself: if any man among you seems to be wise
in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. Argum. 11.
Propounded by way of prevention of an Objection, in maintaining this Schism you
seem wise to your selves, but your self-confidence deceives you: This is the
cause of Schism, and therefore you are to beware of it, and that you may beware
of the Schism, he prescribes the way how they should beware, which is this,
that he which seems to excel in humane wisdom, renounce this vain opinion of
his own wisdom, and yield up himself in obedience unto God, following the
plain manner of Preaching, which though it seem foolishness to men, yet it
alone is able to make us wise.

Verse. 19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: for it is
written, He takes the wise in their own craftiness.

20. And again, The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain.

He confirms the counsel that he had given, from the judgment of God,
concerning carnal wisdom, that God accounts it foolishness, especially when
carnal wisdom rejects the institutions of God, and despises the simplicity of
them, which he proves by the testimony of the Scriptures, the first is of Job
5.13. The sense whereof is, However vain men may seem wise to themselves and
the world, yet God so frustrates their devices, and turns them into snares,
that they may fall by their own Counsels, rather than by others; and thus he
convinces them of folly. Another Testimony is in Psalm. 94.11. Where God
declares the thoughts of the wise to be vain, which savor only humane
things, for those things which they imagine to make most for their happiness,
contribute least.

Verse. 21. Therefore let no man glory in men, for all things are yours.

22. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come, all are yours.

Argum. 12. Propounded by way of dehortation from the Schism, which he
reprehended: Because Schism, and making parties concerning their Teachers, is
unholy boasting in men: Therefore this Schism is not to be fomented: They
gloried in their Teachers, when they ascribed too much to them, depending upon
them, and made them (as it were) Masters of their Faith, when they ought only
to depend upon God, who speaks by his Ministers, when, and as much as he
please.

All things] Confirming this dehortation, he adds Argum. 13. Because all your
Teachers, the least and the greatest, even the Apostles themselves, and all
things in the world, things present, and things to come, life and death, and
whatsoever else can be reckoned up, are appointed of God, that they may be
serviceable to the salvation of the faithful: Therefore you ought not for the
vain glory of your Teachers, to rent your selves into parties, or boast in your
Teachers, as if you were the flock of learned men.

Verse. 23. And ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Argum. 14. The last
Argument is in the last verse, wherein calling their Teachers as also the
people, and the gifts and dignity of all, to the fountain, he reduces them
into order, that they might depend upon Christ, and God alone, and in him might
make their boast: for as the world is ours, and all things in the world, are
designed as it were to our good, so we are of Christ, redeemed by him, that
we might be his f^ock: For Christ personally considered, is of God, as the
most beloved Son of the Father, in the work of redemption, humbling himself to
the office of a Mediator, and that to the glory of God, essentially
considered. To whom be glory. Amen.

CHAP. IV.
AS amongst the Corinthians, their glorious Teachers were magnified by their
followers, so the Apostles were meanly thought of, and the other faithful
Ministers of Christ, as if they had not been to be compared with these
eloquent Ministers, either in gifts, or success: The Apostle teaches that this
judgment is to be rectified, and the Schism not to be fomented any further.

There are two parts of the Chapter: In the first, he corrects this corrupt
judgment of theirs, to verse. 14. In the second, he shuts up all he had to
say by way of reproof touching their Schism, to the end. He lays down nine
Arguments (why he corrects their rash judgment concerning the Apostle, and
his companions, and other faithful Ministers of Christ, and of their unequal
comparing of these with their Teachers.) Which prove that we must beware of
making unbecomming comparisons of the Ministers of the Gospel, neither ought
we rashly to judge of any ones gifts.

Verse. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God. Argum. 1. Which is propounded in a similitude
taken from Stewards: We, whom you despise, although we are not Masters of
your Faith, yet we are the Ministers of Christ, from whose hands you ought to
receive the treasure of salvation, and the bread of life: Therefore you ought
to beware of comparing the gifts of Teachers.

Verse. 2. Moreover, it is required in Stewards, that a man be found faithful.
Argum. 2. That which commends the Ministry of the Gospel, is not the
excellency of gifts, but a faithful dispensation of their gifts, and the
mystery of salvation, whereof God alone is the just Judge: Therefore we must
beware of this unequal comparing of the gifts of Teachers.

Verse. 3. But with me it is a very small thing, that I should be Judged of
you, or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self. Argum. 3. Because
neither ye, nor any men, nor I Paul am a competent Judge of my own dignity:
Therefore ye are to take heed of this unequal comparing of Teachers: For if
Paul could not determine in what esteem he himself ought to be had, the
Corinthians were rash, who determined concerning the dignity of Paul and the
rest of their Teachers.

Verse. 4. For I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified; but he
that judges me is the Lord. Argum. 4. Confirming the former: I an Apostle,
though I am not conscious of ill mannaging my office, yet I dare not acquit my
self, or determine of my own dignity to the injury of others, but I leave the
judgment wholly to God: Therefore this unjust comparing of Teachers from their
gifts, is to be taken heed of.

Verse. 5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God. Argum.
5. Propounded by way of dehortation; To judge, especially by way of comparison,
concerning the dignity [or worth] of men, is not seasonable, before the coming
of the Lord: Therefore we are to take heed of this unfitting comparing of men,
from their gifts.

Counsels] Argum. 6. Confirming also the former: The secret intentions of the
heart, and the hidden purposes of men in the Ministry, shall not be manifested
before the day of judgment; neither can judgment be made by any touching the
excellency of men, but by God himself only, who will distribute in that day to
every man, praise or dispraise according to their dignity: Therefore we are to
take heed of the comparing of men from their gifts.

Verse. 6. And these things, Brethren, have I in a figure transferred to my
self, and to Apollo, for your sakes, that ye might learn in us, not to think
of men, above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up for one
against another. Argum. 7. It is not fitting upon the account of the most
excellent gifts (such as are in me Paul the Apostle, and Apollos the
Evangelist) to e^^oll any Minister, above what is written in the first very of
this Chapter* i. e. to lift him up above the dignity of a Steward, and much
less out of prejudice, to discredit faithful Ministers, because of this or that
Teacher, whom we admire: Therefore this comparing of men from their gifts, is
to be taken heed of: That he might evidence the force of this Argument, he
opens how he used his prudence in this bus^ness viz. That concealing the names
of these (...) Teachers, he transfers the whole matter upon (...) and Apollos,
to this very end, that the Corinthians might learn in the person of these, who
excelled in extraordinary gifts and dignity, to think soberly of all Ministers,
and not to pride themselves in the name of any Teacher, against another, so as
to entitle themselves from any man.

Verse. 7. For who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou that
thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, Why do thou glory, as
if thou had not received it? Argum. 8. God differenceth one from another,
giving more or less gifts to this or that man, according to his pleasure, no
man makes himself to differ: Seeing then whatsoever gifts one man has, he
has received them of God, he ought not to boast in what he has received,
but to think modestly of himself and others: Therefore this unjust comparing of
men from their gifts, is to be taken heed of.

Verse. 8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without
us, and I would to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you.
Argum. 9. This unfitting comparing of men, has in it foolish self-pleasing,
therefore we must beware of it: By a most grave Irony the Apostle checketh
this their self-pleasing: Because the Corinthians did not less please their
selves in common gifts, and worldly prosperity, than if they had obtained a
perfection of gifts, a full felicity, and the enjoyment of a Kingdom, wanting
in the midst of their fullness, ^eing unmindful of the Cross of Christ, and
unacquainted with those afflictions wherein the Apostle was involved: He taxes
this vanity thus, that he wishes them the happiness which they dreamed they
had, that their happiness might comfort the Apostles, who lay in many
afflictions.

Verse. 9. For I think that God has set forth us the Apostles, last, as it were
appointed to death, for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to Angels,
and to men; He shows the afflictions of himself and Barnabas, (which are
called the last of the Apostles, because they were called after the Ascension
of Christ, and by a special command sent to the Gentiles) (as it is, Act. 13.2.
and 14.14.) showing that they were set forth of God in the sight of all, as
those that conflicted with all kind of troubles.

Verse. 10. We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ: we are
weak, but ye are strong: ye are honorable, but we are despised. Further,
he compares his afflictions with their prosperity, and their unequal opinion
concerning themselves and the Apostle, he shows in three particulars. 1. In
Wisdom, we are accounted fools, both by the world, and perhaps by you, that
we run into so many hazards for Christ: Ye seem to yourselves and others
wise, because you enjoy the Gospel, and prosperity withal. 2. In strength, we
appear weak, broken with distresses: you seem strong and powerful, living out
of the reach of any the darts of tribulation. 3. In honor, you shine forth in
glory and authority: we in the mean time, are ignominious, and despicable both
to you and others.

Verse. 11. Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are
naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dewlling place;

12. And labor, wo^king with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being
persecuted, we suffer it;

13. Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and
are the offscouring of all things unto this day.

He rehearses other sorts of his troubles, We are (says he) exposed to
want, and injuries, ver. 11. It is not by our fault that we are poor, for we
labor with our hands, we suffer injuries, but not by our own desert; for we
are so far from giving occasion either by word or deed, that on the other side,
we patiently requite good for evil, ver. 12, 13.

Verse. 14. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons to
warn you. In the other part of the Chapter, he concludes his reprehension of
their Schism: First by way of exhortation to obedience, and the following of
him, to ver. 18. Secondly, by threatening a severer discipline, unless upon his
admonition they repent. As for the first, he propounds four Arguments, by way
of persuasion to obedience.

Argum. 1. By way of preventing an objection; I have not writ these things to
shame you, but to admonish you: Therefore be obedient to me.

Children] Argum. 2. I account you, and love you as Sons: Therefore taking in
good part these my admonitions, be obedient to me.

Verse. 15. For though you have ten thousand Instructers in Christ, yet have ye
not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.

16. Wherefore I beseech you, be you followers of me.

Argum. 3. After a special manner (in comparison with your other Teachers) I am
a Father unto you, because you have been converted by my Ministry: Therefore
be obedient to me, and follow me, rather than your ambitious Teachers: for I
was the Minister of your Regeneration, not those ambitious teachers, which are
at the most but Instructers, not Fathers.

Verse. 17. For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved
son, and faithful in the Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways
which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every Church. Argum. 4. To this
end have I sent Timothy unto you, that I might the more easily procure your
following of me: Therefore be obedient unto me, and follow me in those
things wherein I shine forth to all the Churches, by reason of my Apostleship,
both in doctrine and holiness of life.

Verse. 18. Now some are puffed up, as though I would not come to you.

19. But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know, not the
speech of them which are puffed up, but the power.

As to the other part of the conclusion, because some amongst them were puffed
up, in hopes to escape censure, as if the Apostle would not come unto them,

He threatens 1. That he would come. 2. That he would try, whether in those
Teachers there be that Power of the Spirit, or merely the eloquence of words,
without the demonstration of the Spirit.

Verse. 20. For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in Power. He gives an
account why he esteemed nothing of their mere eloquence, or their boasting in
human wisdom, because the Kingdom of Christ, and the Salvation or edification
of men, is not promoted with words, or the wisdom of words, but by the Power
of God.

Verse. 21. What will ye? Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in
the spirit of meekness? Lastly, lest any of the Corinthians, whether Teachers
or their Followers should foment Schism, he propounds this choice to them,
Whether they would that he should come to their correction, with the authority
of Church Censures, which he resolved to do, if they further made Parties, and
fomented Schism; Or whether they would that he should come to their comfort,
in the spirit of love and meekness, which he intended, if they repented.

Thus he passes to the Excommunication of the Incestuous Person.

CHAP. V.
THE SECOND ARTICLE CONCERNING THE INCESTUOUS PERSON.
LEst they should think his Commination vain, (whereof he speaks toward the
end of the former Chapter) he commands that the Incestuous Person be
Excommunicated, propounding to that end, eleven Argum.

Verse. 1. It is reported commonly, that there is fornication among you, and
such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should
have his Fathers Wife. The first Argument; because the Incestuous Person is
defiled by an heinous wickedness, which the Gentiles will not so much as speak
of without detestation: Therefore he is to be Excommunicated.

Verse. 2. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that
has done this deed might be taken away from among you. The second Argument is
joined with the reproof of the Corinthians, because you ought long since to
have grieved for the great offense, and to have excommunicated the wicked
person, and not to excuse his fault by lessening of it, or making a jest at it,
or glorying in it, as if you were taken with the fact.

Verse. 3. For I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged
already, as though I was present, concerning him that has so done this deed,

4. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and
my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,

5. To deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Argum. 3. Because now besides that ordinary power which you have in the
Ecclesiastical Senate, viz. you are instructed and obliged also by an
extraordinary Power to excommunicate him; for truly you have my mind, or
spirit, judgment, opinion and authority concerning that wicked person (as much
in my absence as if I was present:) Therefore when you are gathered together,
being fortified by this Apostolical Epistle, (in which the spirit, or mind, or
opinion of me an Apostle is contained) and by the authority of Christ, (in
whose name the censures of the Church are to be made) that you deliver that
wicked one to Satan, or excommunicate him. He says, Deliver him to Satan,
because he that is rejected and cast out of the Church by Excommunication from
the Church-dignity of the Saints, as to the outward condition of a man, the
same also is declared to be (as to his outward condition) in the Kingdom,
bondage and power of Satan; for to be a Citizen even in the outward state of
the Church, (which is said to be the Kingdom of God) is a greater honor than
to reign without the Church: Therefore he that is Excommunicated, he loses
much of his repute, and honor, and dignity, and is reckoned amongst the
subjects of the devil.

Destruction of the flesh] Argum. 4. From the end of Excommunication, by way of
preventing an objection, because Excommunication is a means of Repentance and
Salvation; for truly by this censure the pride of the flesh may be mortified,
and the new creature be saved in the day of judgment: Therefore he is to be
excommunicated.

Verse. 6. Your glorying is not good: know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump? Argum. 5. Lest the whole Church should be infected
and polluted by the contagion of so great a wickedness, as by a little leaven
the whole lump is leavened: Therefore the Incestuous Person is to be
Excommunicated. This Argument is enforced by repeating his reproof of the
Corinthians.

Verse. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as
ye are unleavened: for even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Argum.
6. Propounded by the continuing of the Allegory; because the Christian Church
is to be purged from scandals, yea, and the hearts of Christians, from all the
corruption of their old nature, with no less diligence than heretofore the
houses of the Jews, under the Law, were purged from common leaven, before the
Passover was sacrificed: Therefore the Incestuous Person is to be
Excommunicated.

That ye may bee] Argum. 7. From the profitableness of it. Ye must endeavor,
that ye may be a new and holy society, an holy lump, or that ye may be
found new creatures, really and in deed, as ye are unleavened by your
obligation and profession, or as you are Saints: Therefore the Incestuous
Person is to be Excommunicated.

Passeover] Confirming this Argument, he adds the eighth, because the thing
signified in the Passover, to wit, the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, does not
less engage Christians to their duties, (represented by the celebration and
ceremonies of the Feast) that is, to be careful, that holiness may flourish in
us, and in the Church; than it did oblige the Jews heretofore, to observe the
ceremonies of the Feast, in which the Paschal Lamb, being a type, sacrificed
was set before them.

Verse. 8. Therefore let us keep the Feast, not with old leaven, neither with
the leaven of malice, and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincere
truth. From hence he infers, (as it were by a persuasive conclusion) the ninth
Argum. That malice and wickedness being put away, both from themselves, and
from the Church, and by consequence, that Incestuous Person being
excommunicated, they might worship and serve the Lord cheerfully, and holily,
in sincerity and truth: The force of this Argument is this, We cannot live
holily and righteously (as the signification of the Feast of the Paschal Lamb
typified, requires of us) unless the leaven of our former life, and wicked
practices, be purged away out of us, and the House of God, or the Church; and
unless we endeavor to keep sincerity and truth in us and the Church:
Therefore he is to be Excommunicated.

Verse. 9. I wrote unto you in an Epistle, not to company with fornicators.
Argum. 10. Because he before forbad them by his Epistle to have fellowship with
Fornicators, and by consequence they might understand, that Fornicators were to
be Excommunicated from the Church, and much more incestuous persons: Therefore
that Incestuous Person is now to be excommunicated.

Verse. 10. Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the
Covetous, or with Extortioners, or with Idolaters; for then must you needs go
out of the world. Lest they should excuse themselves, he shows them that that
Precept concerning vicious persons, was not to be understood by them* of those
that were in the world, or without the Church; because thus the Apostle had
commanded a thing impossible, because they must either necessarily live amongst
such wicked persons, or go out of the world; for they lived at Corinth, the
Citizens whereof (with whom the Faithful necessarily must have civil commerce)
remained for the most part Infidels.

Verse. 11. But now have I written unto you, not to keep company, if any man
that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a
Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one, no, not to eat.
Argum. 11. If you have not been heretofore sufficiently instructed in this
business, at least ye now have my mind, which you have heard out of this
Epistle, that you must not ea^ with a Professor, or Brother, that is a
Fornicatour; and by consequence that Brother is to be excommunicated, who
being convinced of his faults by the Church, remains still wicked without
repentance: Therefore now you ought much more to conclude that the incestuous
person is to be excommunicated.

Verse. 12. For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? do not
you judge them that are within?

13. But them that are without, God judges; therefore put away from among your
selves that wicked person.

Another reason of the Exposition is given, by urging the twelfth Argument, for
excommunicating the incestuous person, because from thence (that neither the
Apostle, nor the Church, had right to exercise Church Censures upon those who
were without the Church, but they were left to the judgment of God only) they
ought to conclude, that to judge of the members of the Church belonged to them:
Therefore that wicked incestuous person, was to be taken away from amongst
them by excommunication, which is the scope of the whole Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
THE THIRD AND FOURTH ARTICLE CONCERNING LAW SUITS, AND AVOIDING FORNICATION.
IN this Chapter the third and fourth Article of the Epistle is handled,
concerning the avoiding of going to Law before the judgment seat of Infidels,
to verse. 12 and of shunning Fornication, to the end.

Verse. 1. Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to Law before
the unjust, and not before the Saints? By eleven Arguments he proves that
Christians ought not to contend before Heathen Judges: Argum. 1. It is a
shameful thing, when there are holy Judges, to go to Law under Infidel Judges:
Therefore we must not contend before Infidel Judges.

Verse. 2. Do you not know that the Saints shall judge the world? and if the
world shall be judged by you, are you unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
Argum. 2. The Saints which shall judge the World, are much more worthy of
judging matters pertaining to this world: Therefore we must not contend under
Infidels.

Verse. 3. Know ye not that we shall judge Angels? how much more things that
pertain to this life? Argum. 3. The Saints shall judge Angels, viz. Evil
Angels, in the day of judgment; therefore they are much more fit to judge of
temporal things: Therefore we must not contend under Heathen Judges: The
Saints are said to judge Angels and the world, Because they being now acquitted
in judgment, as assessors in judgment with Christ, shall consent to the
sentence of the Judge against the enemies of God and the Church.

Verse. 4. If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set
them to judge who are least esteemed in the Church. Argum. 4. Those that are of
least esteem in the Church, are rather to be appointed Judges, than that we
should betake ourselves to Infidels: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 5. I speak to your shame, is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst
you? no not one that shall be able to judge between his Brethren? He corrects
himself in this Argument, by showing that he would have appointed Judges, not
simply those that are least esteemed in the Church, but this he would have
done by a comparative concession, from what they practiced, that he might with
shame restrain them.

Is it so] Argum. 5. You have amongst you those that are wise men, and yet you
betake your selves to profane judicatories, as if there were not wise men
amongst you, which might decide controversies: Therefore it behooves you not
thus to behave your selves.

Verse. 6. But Brother goes to Law with Brother, and that before the
unbeleevers. Argum. 6. Seeing that you are Brethren, ye ought not to contend
one with another in going to Law: Therefore much less under Heathens.

Verse. 7. Now therefore, there is utterly a fault among you, because you go to
Law one with another; why do yo not rather take wrong? why do you not rather
suffer your selves to be defrauded? Argum. 7. Strivings and contentions,
discover your weakness, infirmities, and sin: Therefore you must not contend,
especially before Infidels.

Wherefore] Argum. 8. I^ would be better to suffer injury and wrong, than with
scandal to contend: Therefore we ought not to contend, especialy under
Infidels.

Verse. 8. Nay, you do wrong, and defraud, and that your Brethren. Argum. 9.
Those that are active in contending amongst you, join it with injury, and
defrauding of your Brethren, inasmuch as the actors are full of revenge, pride,
and covetousness: Therefore your contending is unjust, and especially under
Infidels.

Verse. 9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? be not deceived: neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,

10. Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners,
shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

Argum. 10. These unjust contendings, as well as other kinds of wickedness, and
abominable impurity, which are here reckoned up, keep men out of the Kingdom
of Heaven: Therefore you ought not to contend, etc.

Verse. 11. And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. Argum. 11. And last: Seeing you Corinthians have been
defiled with all, or most, or at least with some of these foresaid vices, and
now, so far as in charity we may judge of you, ye have obtained remission of
sins, and are sanctified through the Spirit, and clothed with the
Righteousness of Christ; you ought to beware (receiving power from the Grace of
Christ) le^t you fall again into the same filthiness, either by stirring up
contentions with others, or defiling your selves any other way.

Verse. 12. All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient;
all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of
any. The other part of the Chapter containing the fourth Article of the Epistle
follows, concerning the avoiding simple Fornication (as it is called) which
the Corinthians accounted a thing indifferent, as other Gentiles did: He
proceeds to reproof, by preventing their Apology which they were ready to make:
The Corinthians might say, All indifferent things are lawful for us, but as
meat, so also Fornication is indifferent: Therefore it is lawful for us. First,
He answers in general, by limiting of the Major, viz, that all indifferent
things are lawful, so far as they are convenien^, and lawful, so that we be
not brought into bondage to our affections, by the intemperate use of our
liberty, for in those and the like cases* he sins in the use of indifferent
things.

Verse. 13. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy
both it and them. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord: and
the Lord for the body. Further he answers in special to the minor, showing the
difference betwixt meats and fornication, granting that it is lawful to use any
kind of meat, because God has ordained to the good of nature, meats for the
belly, and the belly for meats, but yet with a temporary conjunction; for as
God will destroy meats, so he will destroy the belly, as to the use it now
has; so that for the sake of the belly, we ought not to endanger our eternal
Salvation, or the Salvation of others, eating with offense: As to that which
concerns fornication, he denies it lawful upon any necessity, as meat is
lawful, but simply to be a sin, and to be avoided; and that he proves by six
Arguments.

Argum. 1. Because the body is not made for fornication, or ordained to that
end, as the belly for meats, and meats for the belly, but that it should be a
member of Christ our Lord, who is ordained to be the head of the man, to
govern the whole body, that it may be kept holy: Therefore Fornication is no
way lawful.

Verse. 14. And God has both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by
his own power. Argum. 2. Our bodies shall be raised glorious in the
Resurrection, as the Body of Christ was raised: Therefore they ought not to be
defiled with fornication.

Verse. 15. Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I
then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? God
forbid. Argum. 3. The Faithful which are members of Christ, are not by
fornication to be made the members of an Harlot, which argument he sharpens
with an Interrogation: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 16. What, Know ye not, that he that is joined to an Harlot, is one
body? For two (says he) shall be one flesh. That he may confirm this
argument, he proves from the Analogy of Marriage, that fornication with an
harlot, makes the fornicators one flesh; and by consequence the fornicator is
made the member of an harlot: Therefore fornication is unlawful.

Verse. 17. But he that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit. Further he
proves that Believers are members of Christ, because joined by Faith, and are
one Mystical Body with Christ, one Spiritual Body, or one Spirit.

Verse. 18. Flee fornication: every sin that a man does, is without the body:
but he that commits fornication, sins against his own body. He turns
the Position into a Dehortation, and adds the fourth Argum* by way of
comparison with other sins; other sins abuse the object without, chiefly and
principally, but fornication abuses its own body, and more dishonors the body
than any other sin: Therefore it is unlawful.

Verse. 19. What, know ye not that your own body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and you are not your own?

20. For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and
in your spirit, which are Gods.

Argum. 5. Our bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in us, given
us of God: Therefore they are not to be polluted with fornication.

Neither are yee] Argum. 6. The Faithful are not their own, but purchased with
the Blood of Christ: Therefore they ought to take heed, that they defile not
themselves with fornication, but rather endeavor by an holy conversation, both
of body and soul, to glorify God their Redeemer, whose they are.

CHAP. VII.
THE FIFTH ARTICLE OF CASES TOUCHING MARRIAGE.
THe Apostle being enquired of by the Corinthians, concerning Marriage-Cases,
in this Chapter he answers five of their demands.

Verse. 1. Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me; it is good for a
man not to touch a woman.

2. Nevertheless to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let
every woman have her own husband.

The first enquiry is of men unmarried, who lived a single life, whether it
were best for them to marry: The reasons of this demand were two, the fear of
troubles, and the fear of defilement in Marriage. That which belongs to the
first reason, we are to remember that the Corinthians had been a long time in
danger of persecution; although now they lived prosperously; and the most part
feared nothing. The Apostle answers those that are in such a case, if no
necessity lies upon them to marry, it is good and profitable not to marry, but
where there is danger of sinning by incontinence, we are rather to eschew
fornication and sin, than the danger of troubles in Marriage.

Verse. 3. Let the husband render to the wife due benevolence: and likewise also
the wife unto the husband. That which concerns the scruple* le^t any one should
think his conscience by Matrimonial Society defiled, he declares not only the
conjugal bed to be undefiled, but also the right of the Marriage Bed ought to
be granted to him that seeks a wife, whereto he subjoyns four reasons.

Due] Reason 1. Because that benevolence is due by the Law of Marriage.

Verse. 4. The wife has not power of her own body, but the husband: and
likewise also the husband has no power of his own body, but the wife. Reason
2. Because by conjugal agreement, the husband has power over the wives body,
and the wife over the husbands, chiefly to avoid fornication.

Verse. 5. Defraud you not one another, except it be with consent for a time,
that you may give your selves to fasting and prayer, and come together again,
that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency. Reason 3. Because otherwise
there would fall out an unjust defrauding of each others part, if commerce
should be denied without reason.

That you may give your selves] He limits what he had said with a special
exception* unless it be agreed by consent on both parts, that for a time they
might give themselves to fasting and prayer.

Le^t Satan tempt] Reason 4. Because after the set time, if benevolence desired
be denied, it is dangerous lest Satan tempts the party defrauded, for his
incontinency, to commit adultery.

Verse. 6. But I speak this by permission, and not of commandment.

7. For I would that all men were even as I my self: but every man has his
proper gift of God, one after this manner, another after that.

He explains this his opinion touching contracting Marriage, and using
conjugal society, that it is not an universal precept, as if here commanded
Marriage to all, but that the granting or permission is universal, only in case
of incontinency; for plainly, if by the will of God it might be, the Apostle
could with the Corinthians (who moved the question) both continence, and the
advantages of single life, which God had bestowed upon him; but because the
gift of Continence is not given to every one, he says, that he spoke this by
permission, which he has granted.

Verse. 8. I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them, if
they abide even as I.

9. But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to marry than
to burn.

From hence he gathers up the sum of what he had said, that he might plainly
answer those who lived unmarried, or Widows, it was convenient that they should
abide in that state, if they could contain, if not, that they marry.

For it is better] He gives a reason, because it behoved them rather to beware
of burning lusts, which defile the conscience with sin, than of the troubles of
Marriage, even those troubles which accompany a married state in times of
persecution.

Verse. 10. And unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, let not the
wife depart from her husband. The second thing they enquire of, is concerning
Divorce, the parts whereof are two: The first is, concerning both being
Believers, whether it is lawful for married Christians to make a Divorce,
unless the case be for adultery? He answers, that it is not lawful; which
answer that he may confirm, he denies that he commanded any thing new, or
from special revelation, but that he repeats an old command by the authority
of the Lord, who in the Institution of Marriage, established, that the married
should be one flesh, whereupon that separation and divorce is unlawful.

Verse. 11. But if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to
her husband, and let not the husband put away his wife. But if the wife,
(pretending necessary causes of departing, as danger of life, or such like)
shall depart, he commands that either she be reconciled to her husband, or
abstain from new Marriage, and by consequence much more from fornication; and
that he commands both for the punishment of frowardness and impatience, and
the trial of sincerity, lest this liberty should be drawn into licentiousness:
In the mean time he commands the husband that he put not away his wife, or
give her cause to depart.

Verse. 12. But to the rest speak I, not the Lord, If any brother has a wife
that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her
away.

13. And the woman which has an husband that believes not, and if he be
pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.

The other part of their enquiry follows, wherein the question is concerning
those that are married, where the one is an Infidel, whether Divorce is lawful?
He says that he will answer to this part, from the authority of special
revelation, because God had not determined it in the Law, what Christians
should do in that case; this is it which he says, The Lord has not
determined it in the old Law, but I, viz. by special revelation from the Lord,
will determine it. In the first part of his answer, he forbids that the
unbelieving party should be put away, if she desire not to leave him.

Verse. 14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children unclean,
but now are they holy. He lays down five Reasons. First, Because an
unbelieving person is sanctified, though not in it self, yet to the use of the
Believer; although not simply, yet so far, that Marriage is sanctified to the
believing party, and to the children brought forth: Therefore let not the
unbelieving wife be put away, if she desire to tarry.

Else] Reason 2. Confirming the former, from the consequent absurdity, because
otherwise the children of Christians, in such a case, would not be born under
the Covenant, they would not be born Christians, and dedicated to Christ in
holiness; the contrary to which is true: Therefore let not the unbelieving wife
be put away, if she desire to tarry.

Verse. 15. But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart: A brother or a Sister
is not under bondage in such cases: but God has called us to peace. Before he
adds the reasons that are behind, he propounds another part of the answer: If
the unbelieving party will not co-habit, but depart, in this case, he declares
the Marriage to be void, and the party believing to be free.

To peace] Reason 3. Proving that the unbelieving party is not to be put away,
being willing to stay, because Believers are called to maintain peace with all:
Therefore if the unbelieving party admits of equal terms of peace, she is not
to be put away.

Verse. 16. For what know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband?
Or how know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? Reason 4. Because
by dwelling together the unbeliever may be gained.

Verse. 17. But as God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called
every one, so let him walk, and so I ordain in all Churches. Reason 5. Because
every one, in what condition soever, ought to abide in that honest and lawful
calling, in which God by his Providence has set them, as the Apostle taught in
all Churches: Therefore we must also abide in Marriage with an unbeliever,
being willing to stay: For whereas Marriage has been contracted in Heathenism,
God would not that the calling of one to the Grace of Christ Jesus, should
defraud the party not yet converted: The Apostle prescribes the same Law to
believing servants, that they shake not off the yoke of an unbelieving Master,
who desired not to put away the servant converted to the Faith.

Verse. 18. Is any man called being circumcised? let him not become
uncircumcised: Is any called in uncircumcisian? let him not be circumcised.

19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of
the Commandments of God.

He confirms the Reason foregoing by an Induction. First, of Circumcision and
Uncircumcision, neither whereof was to be stood upon by a Christian, but this
only, that in both states, they observed the Moral Commandments of God.

Verse. 20. Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called.
From hence, because in one example of the Induction, the fullness of it might
easily be apprehended, he infers a general position of abiding in that state
wherein God had called him.

Verse. 21. Art thou called being a servant? care not for it: but if thou may
be made free, use it rather. Further, he adds another member of the
Induction, concerning bondage, in which he advises them to abide, unless God
had opened a door to their liberty.

Verse. 22. For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lords
Freeman: Likewise also he that is called, being free, is Christ's servant. He
gives a reason, Because bodily servitude is no diminution to the spiritual
liberty of Christians, from the guilt of sin and wrath, neither does bodily
liberty exempt and free us from the service of Christ.

Verse. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men. By the
way he admonishes them, that (whether bond or free, as to the body) that they
take heed they do not things unlawful in themselves, by the command or will of
men, because that would be, to serve men against Christ, who had bought them
with a price, that in all things they should do the Will of their Redeemer, not
of men.

Verse. 24. Brethren, let every man wherein be is called, therein abide with
God. That no man might rashly depart from his Calling, he further inculcates a
general Precept of abiding with God in the present condition of life, in
obedience unto God, until it should seem good to him to change their condition.

Verse. 25. Now concerning Virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord; yet I
give my judgment as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful.
The third inquiry which the Corinthians made to Paul, concerning Virgins, Male
and Female, whether they might marry or not? To which being about to give
answer, he premiseth, that he had no special command, whereby the state of
Virginity was either enjoined, or prohibited, but that he would faithfully
give his advice, and his opinion of the convenience, as it became him, to whom
God had vouchsafed mercy to be faithful.

Verse. 26. I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress, I
say, that it is good for a man so to be.

27. Art thou bound unto a Wife? seek not to be loosed; art thou loosed from a
Wife? seek not a wife.

There are three parts of the answer: First, In the present necessity, or the
danger of persecution, as he forbids those that are married, to put away their
Wives, so he says it is more convenient, that they that are single should
continue unmarried, viz. if they have the gift (as he said before) of
continency.

Verse. 28. But and if thou marry, thou have not sinned, and if a Virgin marry,
she has not sinned: nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh. The
other part of the answer follows, wherein he teaches, that to marry is not
sinful, but incident to several troubles, concerning which he will not any
further treat, lest he should seem to dissuade them from marriage, more than
was safe.

Verse. 29. But this I say, Brethren, the time is short, it remains, that both
they that have Wives, be as though they had none:

30. And they that weep, as though they wept not, and they that rejoice, as
though they rejoiced not, and they that buy, as though they possessed not:

The third part of the answer follows, wherein he commands, that whether they
married or not, they should take heed to themselves that they be not much
moved with the advantages, or disadvantages, the pleasures or troubles of this
short life, but moderately bearing prosperity and adversity, they should
provide for the life which is to come, always prepared to suffer sorrowful
things, and to leave a joyful condition, according to the Will of God, for this
is as much as if they had not Wives, as if they wept not, etc. whilst they
using a marriage-state, are not hindered in their race to the Kingdom of
Heaven, but they go forward with all expedition, through sorrow and joy,
through the conveniences and inconveniences of this life, all occasions, all
changes.

Verse. 31. And they that use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of
this world passes away. The reason of this is laid down, Because the good and
evil things of this life, as a shadow, pass away: Therefore ought we to use
the things of this life, as it were in our passage, that they hinder us not in
our race.

Verse. 32. But I would have you without carefulness; he that is unmarried
cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord:

33. But he that is married, cares for the things that are of the world, how
he may please his Wife.

He lays down two Reasons of his counsel about the keeping themselves
unmarried, First, That they might be freed from trouble, which the fear of
persecution, and of the present condition, might cast those that are married
into. Reason 2. Because he that is unmarried, more conveniently is at leisure
for divine employments, or to attend upon the exercises of Religion, and more
immediately to please God: But he that is married is forced by his Calling* to
lay out much of his time about earthly businesses, and houshold-cares, and so
in lawful things to please his Wife, which care, although it may be obedience,
where it is performed in the fear of God, yet it is not so immediate obedience,
and so near to God, as that which is placed in the exercises of Religion.

Verse. 34. There is difference also between a Wife, and a Virgin, the unmarried
Woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy, both in body,
and in spirit: but she that is married, cares for the things of the world,
how she may please her Husband. He shows the same difference to be betwixt
the condition of Virgins, and Women that are married: That a Virgin may with
fewer avocations, and less difficulty, more holily (both in body and soul)
attend to holy employments, because she has no family to take care of; This
is called Holiness, not as it is opposite to sin, but as opposed to Civil or
Common: So* the Ministry of the Gospel may be called more holy, than any
civil Calling: But a Wife is usually encumbered with houshold-cares, and an
endeavor to please her Husband, nor can she so freely have leisure for holy
exercises.

Verse. 35. And this I speak for your own profit, not that I may cast a snare
upon you, but for that which is comely, and that you may attend upon the Lord
without distraction. The Apostle expounds all this his advice, that it tends
only to this, that they may more conveniently and fitly be composed, to
attend upon God without distraction in the exercises of Religion, if they have
the gift of continency, not that he might cast upon them a snare of necessity
to abstain from marriage, if they had not the gift of continency.

Verse. 36. But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his
Virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let him do
what he will, he sins not; let them marry. The Fourth matter that is
inquired of, is, Concerning the duty of Parents, in whose power are Daughters
marriagable, whether advisedly they may give their Virgin Daughters to marriage
or not? The Answer has two parts; The first upon a threefold supposition. 1.
If any one is suspected to detain his Daughter from Marriage longer than is
expedient. 2. If his Daughter have passed the flower of her age, i. e. has
attained to the twentieth year of her age, and begins to be more than of ripe
years. 3. If he see the mind of the Virgin inclinable to Marriage, let him
follow the will of the Virgin, and his own. Let the Daughter, and the Son in
Law, whom the Father shall choose, be joined in Marriage, the Parent sins not
in it.

Verse. 37. Nevertheless, he that stands steadfast in his heart, having no
necessity, but has power over his own will, and has so decreed in his heart,
that he will keep his Virgin, does well. The other part of the Answer, also
upon a threefold supposition, 1. If the Parent be persuaded that he wrongs
not his Daughter, if he withold her from Marriage. 2. If his Daughter have
the gift of continence* and out of no necessity the Father is moved to seek an
Husband for her, so that the Parent may determine of his Daughter as he
please. 3. If he purpose to keep his Virgin unmarried, he has done well,
says he, for the advantage of his Daughter.

Verse. 38. So then, he that gives her in Marriage, does well; but he that
gives her not in Marriage, does better. Whereupon he concludes in the first
case, that the Parent does well, or for the benefit of his Daughter* And in the
other case, that the Parent does better, or, that he more consults the benefit
of his Daughter: in the mean time he asserts that there is sin in neither.

Verse. 39. The Wife is bound by the Law, as long as her Husband lives: but if
her Husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will,
only in the Lord. The fifth thing that is inquired of, is this, Whether second
Marriages of Widows are lawful or not? The Answer has two parts. 1. He says
it is lawful with a limitation, if so be they marry with pious affections, and
with a person that is a believer, and to one whom she may by the Law of God:
for this it is to marry in the Lord, so to marry, that the blessing of God may
be expected.

Verse. 40. But she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment; and I
think also that I have the Spirit of God. Secondly, He answers, although it
be lawful, yet it is not expedient for the most part, especially when in
danger of persecution, or in present necessity: Because she shall be more
happy, if she abide in her Widowhood, i. e. she shall live in more
tranquillity, and void of troubles, which second Marriages might create to her.
Modestly insinuating this his advice concerning the convenience of it, to be
divine, he strongly asserts that it most certainly conduces to convenience;
for more is said, than if he had spoken this without extenuation.

CHAP. VIII.
THE Sixth ARTICLE CONCERNING THE AVOIDING OF THINGS offered to Idols.
THe sixth Article of the Epistle follows, concerning the avoiding of things
offered to Idols, Chap. 8, 9, 10,

Verse. 1. Now as touching things offered unto Idols, we know that we all have
knowledge: knowledge puffs up; but charity edifieth. The disputation which is
contained in this Chapter consists in the answering of three Objections, from
whence it appears, that it is not simply lawful to feed upon things offered to
Idols.

The first Objection; we are sufficiently instructed by knowledge, concerning
the lawful use of things offered to Idols: Therefore we may lawfully eat of
them. He answers by way of concession, and correction, to this sense, although
any one knows his liberty in using things offered to Idols, yet a bare
knowledge is not sufficient, unless it be joined with charity in use and
practice; because knowledge without charity puffs up, and makes them proud
despisers of the Brethren that know but little; but joined with charity if
edifies, i. e. accommodates it self for the good of others.

Verse 2. And if any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing
yet as he ought to know.

3. But if any man know God, the same is known of him.

He explains what he had spoken, by distinguishing betwixt him that knows
with pride, and him that knows with charity to God and his neighbor. The one,
who has knowledge joined with pride, knows nothing solidly, because he is
puffed up with a vain opinion of his own knowledge, but the other who has
knowledge joined with love, as he is taught by God, so he is approved of by
God that he is truly knowing.

Verse. 4. As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered
in sacrifice unto Idols, we know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and
that there is none other God, but one. The second Objection; we know that an
Idol has no divinity in it, either externally or internally, which is
conceived to be in him by those that offer things to the Idol, or is feigned
to be represented in him. We know also that there is no God but one:
Therefore seeing the Creatures of God may not be polluted by us from the
fictions of men, it is not lawful to feed upon things offered to Idols.

Verse. 5. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in
Earth (as there be gods many, and Lords many:)

6. But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we
in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

He answers first by concession and confirmation of the antecedent laid down
by the opposers. For although they may be in the words and opinion of men, and
may be called caelestial and terrestial Gods, and many Lords, yet there is but
one God, and Lord, viz. the Father (by which name we are brought to the other
persons, to wit, the Son and the holy Spirit, who are one God, the beginning of
all Creatures from whom; and the end of all to whom, chiefly in respect of us,
who are believers, and dedicated to his glory) and one Mediator Jesus Christ,
the same God with the Father, by whom, as by the Word of the Father, all things
were created; and we believers redeemed by him, who therefore is said to be
Lord, both in respect of creation and redemption.

Verse. 7. Howbeit, there is not in every man that knowledge: for some with
conscience of the Idol unto this hour, eat it as a thing offered to an Idol,
and their conscience being weak, is defiled. Secondly, He answers by way of
limitation, denying that this measure of knowledge is in all that are
converted; because some have not yet manifestly laid down their old opinion
concerning Idols, but are touched with a certain reverence of the Idol, whilst
they eat things offered to Idols, and so their weak consciences are defiled,
doubting whether they do well: Therefore it is not simply lawful to feed upon
things offered to Idols.

Verse. 8. But meat commends us not to God: for neither if we eat, are we
the better, neither if we eat not, are we the worse. Objection 3. But the
eating of meats is in indifferent things placed without Religion, in which,
liberty is granted to us: For our eating, and our not eating are both alike
pleasing to God, so far as it is for our health, whether we eat this or that
meat: Therefore we are not here to be barred of our liberty.

Verse. 9. But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a
stumbling block to them that are weak. He answers, that this is true indeed,
unless in case of scandal, yet that he sins, who uses his liberty to the
offense of his weak Brother.

Verse. 10. For if any man see thee, which have knowledge, sit at meat at the
Idols Temple, shall not the conscience of him that is weak, be emboldened to
eat those things which are offered to Idols? This he proves by four Reasons.
First, Because in the praesupposed case, the weak one is encouraged and ill
instructed by the example of him that eats in the Idols Temple with knowledge,
without charity, to the polluting of himself by eating things offered to Idols:
Therefore it is not simply lawful to eat things offered to Idols.

Verse. 11. And through thy knowledge shall the weak Brother perish for whom
Christ died? Because by so doing he is destroyed, for whom Christ died, to
wit, as much as can be by the intention and procurement of the practice of
them that eat: Therefore it is not simply lawful to eat things offered to Idols.

Verse. 12. But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak
conscience, ye sin against Christ. Reason 3. Because in so doing we sin not
only against the Brethren, whose conscience is wounded, but also against
Christ, because it tends to the frustrating of the end of Christ death, viz. so
far as he whom Christ has redeemed, that he might be saved, he that eats
with offense, endeavors what in him lies, that he should perish: Therefore,
etc.

Verse. 13. Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh
while the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend. Reason 4. Because
it is better to be deprived for ever of our liberty of eating flesh, than to
eat with offense, which the Apostle shows in the instance of his own vow:
Therefore, etc.

CHAP. IX.
HE proceeds to treat concerning things offered to Idols; he propounded his
own example, in the former Chapter: In this Chapter he exhorts them further by
his own example, that they would moderate the use of their liberty, chiefly in
those things which appertained to gluttony: And by name, in the eating of
things offered to Idols: The sum of the Argument is this, I being an Apostle,
and no less free than any other, do not only abstain from things lawful and
profitable, but also I conform my self to the infirmities of all, yea, I keep
under my self by continence for the good of the Gospel; therefore in like
manner do ye also: The Antecedent is carried on to ver. 23. The Consequence is
an Exhortation, to the end.

Verse. 1. Am I not an Apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our
Lord? Are not ye my work in the Lord?

2. If I be no^ an Apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you: for the
seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord.

3. Mine answer to them that do examine me, is this:

The Antecedent he prosecutes by parts; and proves by three reasons, that the
first, not the last place was due to him in Christian liberty. 1. Because he
was an Apostle. 2. Because he was honored with the ^ight of his Lord, and
immediately called. 3. Because he had the testimony of his Apostleship in the
conversion of the Corinthians, ver. 1. Which fruit, as a seal, confirmed his
Apostleship, at least among the Corinthians, ver. 2. and afforded a defense to
the Apostle against them, (who called his Apostleship into question) at least
amongst the Corinthians.

Verse. 4. Have we not power to eat and to drink?

5. Have we not power to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well as other
Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?

6. Or I only and Barnabas, Have not we power to forbear working?

Afterward he applies this his liberty, first, to things that are to be
eaten and drunk, which he (if any one) might lawfully make use of, ver. 4.
Secondly, to Marriage, and we ought to use that benefit, which he proves from
the example of other Apostles, ver. 5. Thirdly, to forbear working with his
hands, and by consequence, to require maintenance from the Churches, (which he
proves that he might lawfully do, by seven Arguments.)

The first Argum. From the example of other Apostles, and Ministers; it is
lawful for other Apostles: Therefore it is lawful both for me and Barnabas.

Verse. 7. Who goes a warfare at his own charges? Who planteth a Vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the
milk of the flock? Argum. 2. From the Law of Nations, propounded in a threefold
example, of Soldiers, of Vine-dressers, and Shepherds: Soldiers,
Vine-dressers, and Shepherds, are nourished by the fruit of their labors,
every one in his calling: Therefore also we Ministers ought to be maintained
by the fruit of our labors in the Gospel.

Verse. 8. Say I these things as a man? or says not the Law the same also?

9. For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the corn; does God take care for Oxen?

10. Or says he it for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written,
That he that ploweth, should plow in hope: and that he that thresheth in
hope, should be partaker of his hope.

Argum. 3. From the testimony of the Law, of giving food to the Ox that treads
out the corn, which shows that it was spoken for the sake of those that labor
for the use of others, especially in the Ministry. The Ox is fed with the
corn which he did beat out with his feet; therefore all laborers, plowers,
threshers, and by consequence the Laborers in the Gospel ought to be
maintained with the fruit of their own labors. For if he that plows and
threshes in the hope of reward, is partaker of his hoped-for reward, Why should
nor they also that labor in the Gospel be partakers of the fruit of their own
labors?

Verse. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if
we shall reap carnal things? Argum. 4. From the rule of Justice; If we have
administered spiritual things to you, will not you let us instead thereof reap
your carnal things?

Verse. 12. If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather?
Nevertheless, we have not used this power: but suffer all things, lest we
should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Argum. 5. From the like example of the
Teachers, who preached at Corinth, whose example he alleges in point of
lawfulness, but denies that he would follow them in the doing of any such
thing, that he might promote the Gospel. Your Teachers are maintained at your
charges: Therefore it is fitting that we also should be maintained, although
we are resolved not to use our right.

Verse. 13. Do not you know that they which minister about holy things, live of
the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers of
the Altar? Argum. 6. From the example of the Levites, to whom maintenance, and
part of the Sacrifices was given for their Ministry: The Levites lived of the
Altar: Therefore we that are the Ministers of the Gospel ought to live of the
Gospel.

Verse. 14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel. Argum. 7. Christ has given a Command for
maintaining the Ministers of the Gospel: Therefore they ought to live of the
Gospel.

Verse. 15. But I have used none of these things; neither have I written these
things, that it should be so done unto me: for it were better for me to die,
than that any man should make my glorying void. Hitherto he has asserted his
own right; Now he shows his moderation in the use of his foresaid liberty;
First, in the business about maintenance, he shows his resolution for the
future to forbear; from which his resolution he will not be removed with
hindrance to the Gospel, choosing rather to die by famine; the reason whereof
he gives, from the end, that he might glory against those that spoke evil of
him, who perhaps might say that the Apostle Preached for hire.

Verse. 16. For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for
necessity is laid upon me, yea, ^o is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.
He explains himself, that this boasting was not merely in the Preaching of the
Gospel, because he was obliged to that by the necessity of his office, and the
Command, as also the fear of Gods displeasure.

Verse. 17. For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if against my
will, a dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me. My Preaching (says
he) if it be voluntary, it shall have a reward, but if against my will, yet I
must discharge it, because of the dispensation committed unto me, by the
Command of God, and that would be without the glory of my voluntary Preaching,
If I should unwillingly preach the Gospel, as they do, who exercise their
Ministry, not out of any love to God, and desire of converting Souls, but for
filthy lucres sake, or out of vainglory.

Verse. 18. What is my reward then? Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I may
make the Gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the
Gospel. Now he says, that he has matter whereof to boast against his
Reproachers, as a reward of his not receiving any stipend from them, in as much
as he Preached the Gospel to the Corinthians without charge unto them:
whereunto he sub-joyns another reason, That if he had exacted a maintenance
there where his Reproachers endeavored to bring an evil report upon him, then
he had abused his liberty.

Verse. 19. For though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant
unto all, that I might gain the more. He extends the moderating of his liberty
to all sorts of things indifferent, wherein he served not himself, but others,
that he might gain them.

Verse. 20. And unto the Jews, I became a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to
them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that are
under the Law. That he explains particularly in three things: First, that he
did conform himself to the Jew, bound (as they thought) under the Ceremonial
Law, observing the Mosaical Ceremonies for time and place, as the matter
required, as if he had been under the yoke of Ceremonies; and that he did by
the opinion of the Council at Jerusalem, which left to the Jews (born under
that yoke) whereof the Apostle was, a free use of Ceremonies for a time, but in
no wise to the Gentiles, Act. 21. 21, 25.

Verse. 21. To them that are without Law, as without Law, (being not without Law
to God, but under the Law to Christ) that I might gain them that are without
Law. The second is, That conforming himself to the Gentiles which were without
Law, he laid aside the use of Ceremonies, as one that was without Law; but in
the mean time, he intimates that he did not understand the Moral, or the law
of love, which is the perpetual Law of God and Christ, from which he could not
be freed; but the Ceremonial Law, from which indeed he was freed, that he
might freely, for the advantage of the Gospel, use Ceremonies, or might abstain
from using them.

Verse. 22. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made
all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. The third, That he
conformed himself to those that doubted of their liberty, abstaining from
things lawful, as they did; finally, he accommodates himself in all things
indifferent to all men, for three causes.

First, That he might gain as many as possible, or at leastwise some.

Verse. 23. And this I do for the Gospels sake, that I might be partaker
thereof with you. The second cause, That the Doctrine of the Gospel might be
better esteemed of amongst all, by his moderate carriage.

The third cause, That serving the advantages of the Gospel, he might be
saved, being made partaker of the Gospel with other Believers.

Verse. 24. Know you not that they which run in a race, run all, but one
receives the prize? So run, that you may obtain. Hitherto he has insisted
upon his own example, as the Antecedent of the Argument, the force of this
example follows, or the hortatory conclusion, viz. That the Corinthians would
labor after temperance, and not so mind their meat, as to eat with offense
that which was offered unto Idols; To this end he shows them, that they must
run in their Christian Race, in which all (not one only, as it was usual in
their sports) that run according to the Laws of God, were to be crowned.

Verse. 25. And every man that striveth for the Mastery, is temperate in all
things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible.
And how that comes to pass he shows, viz. If after the example of those that
contended in those Noble Games, (whether running or combating) usually
celebrated near unto Corinth, they should not indulge themselves in gluttony
and pleasures, but temperate in all things, bearing all things, whereby the
conquering Crown might be won. In their Isthmian or Corinthian Games, the
Runners and Wrestlers inured themselves to a most temperate diet, by way of
Preparation for the Race, as now horses are fitted for running: The Conquerours
in these Games were crowned with Laurel, or Ivy, or were honored with some
such like reward: After the same manner, the Apostle would have Christians most
moderate in their using the things of this world, and abstinent from whatsoever
may stop their course, or hinder them in their warfare, and that they might
obtain an incorruptible, that is, an Eternal Crown, (laid up in heaven for all
those who strive lawfully, and finish their course.) He adds three Hortatory
Arguments.

Argum. 1. Because you Christian Wrestlers may expect a more noble Crown than
that corruptible one, of those that sport in those Gymnastick Games.

Verse. 26. I therefore run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that
beats the air:

27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any
means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway.

Argum. 2. From his own example running, and acting the part of a Champion, and
smiting his adversary certainly and seriously. I earnestly keep down the body
of sin, and the old man, and the lusts of the flesh, that they may be slain;
and I compel my body properly so called, (by virtue of Spiritual Discipline) to
be subject to my Spirit: Therefore do you the same thing: For so the Apostle
nurtured his body, that in labors, and watchfulness, and fastings, it might
hold out in its duty, that it might not wax wanton against the Spirit: and the
body of sin (as much as lay in him) be destroyed.

Lest by any means] Argum. 3. From the end of it, I keep under the body of sin,
or the old man* lest if I should live otherwise than I advise others to live, I
should be a castaway, or as an hypocrite, should be blotred out of the
number of the Saints: Therefore do you the same thing that I do, and to the
same end.

The Apostle here does not oppose Reprobate to one that is Elect, but to one
that is Approved; for as the Scripture calls Reprobate silver, that which is
not true and genuine, and that Approved, which is sincere; so the Apostle calls
him Reprobate, who answers not (...) profession, and is not sincere, and as he
ought to be: If we should imagine that here he takes Reprobate in an
absolute sense, we are to take notice of nothing but the necessary connection
betwixt a profane life, (if it be supposed to continue to the end) and
Reprobation: For whoever dies in his sins, shows himself to be a reprobate.
For it is absurd, and no ways agreeable to the writings of this our Apostle to
affirm, that he made any doubt of his Election, or thought the decree of his
Election changeable. For on the other side, Because he was persuaded of his
Election and Regeneration, the demonstration whereof he gave in the holiness
of his life, taking all heed, lest by an evil life, he should show forth in
himself the signs of Hypocrisy, not in any wise of Reprobation.

CHAP. X.
HItherto he has spoken of things offered to Idols, by way of Concession, as
if they were indifferent. In this Chapter, he sets down a twofold use of
things offered to Idols: The one public in the Idols Temple, simply unlawful,
to verse. 23. The other private in their houses, which (without the case of
scandal) was lawful, but in case of scandal unlawful, from which he dehorts,
to the end. That which pertains to the public eating of things offered to
Idols in the Idols Temple, he disswades from, by five Arguments.

Verse. 1. Moreover, Brethren, I would not that you should be ignorant, how
that all your Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed thorough the Sea:

2. And were all baptized to Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea:

Argum. 1. There is danger, lest you fall into those sins and punishments, into
which the Israelites fell, if you proceed to participate of, and be present at
Idolatrous Banquets, and covet after things offered in Sacrifice to Idols:
Therefore you ought not to eat things sacrificed to Idols, in the Idols Temple.

That the likeness of the Israelites example may appear, he shows that they
had the like privileges with us (because the Iseaelites were our Fathers) not
of the Israelites only, but also of the Christians amongst the Gentiles, viz.
in the profession of the true Religion, and propagation of them to us their
posterity; for as they are wont to be called Fathers, who lived in ancient
times, with some certain relation of propagating Religion to us; So he calls
the Israelites our Fathers; because they went before us in the partaking of the
same Religion, the same Covenant, and like Sacraments: For the walking under
the cloud, and the Sea which was over their heads, as if they had with us been
bapized into the doctrine and outward profession of Moses, of obtaining
salvation by the Messiah.

Verse. 3. And did all eat the same spiritual meat:

4. And did all drink the same spiritual drink: (for they drank of that
spiritual Rock that followed them; and that Rock was Christ.)

5. But with many of them God was not well pleased; for they were overthrown in
the wilderness.

They did also as it were partake of the same Supper of the Lord with us,
eating Manna, and drinking out of the Rock, or waters gushing out of the Rock,
which followed the Camp of the Israelites (which are called spiritual meat and
drink, because they had a spiritual meaning, figuring the same Grace of Christ,
which the Supper of the Lord does) yet notwithstanding many of those Israelites
(because they displeased God) perished in the wilderness.

Verse. 6. Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust
after evil things, as they also lusted. Furthermore, he reckons up the sins
for which God inflicted punishments, and death it self upon them, for an
example to posterity; from which sins the Apostle dehorts the Corinthians, lest
they also perish; and first, he exhorts them in general, lest they covet evil
things as they did, i. e. lest they indulge their fleshly lusts, as those
ancient Israelites did, who by their lusts were hurried beyond the bounds
appointed by God.

Verse. 7. Neither be you Idolaters, as were some of them, as it is written,
The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

8. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in
one day three and twenty thousand.

9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were
destroyed of Serpents.

10. Neither murmr ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of
the destroyer.

More especially he admonishes them, that they be not Idolaters, or
Fornicators, or Tempters of Christ (trying how true and just Christ is, and
that by unlawful ways) or murmurers against the providence of God, as the
Scripture witnesses of the Israelites. The meaning of this dehortation is this:
That you be not amongst any Idolatrous Banquets made in the honor of any
Idol, lest ye suffer that which the Israelites did, sacrificing to the honor
of the Golden Calf, whose indulging their gluttony and sport, was in stead of
Religion, verse. 7. Be not taken with the desire of pleasing Idolaters, that
for their sakes you be mixed with them in Idolatrous Banquets, lest God also
deliver you to your hearts lusts, that together with the pollution of your
souls, you defile also your bodies by Fornications, Adulteries, and so perish
with those Israelites, verse. 8. Tempt not Christ, by abusing of his knowledge,
and pretending Christian liberty for your lusts, which is nothing else, than to
provoke Christ to anger. As the Israelites in the wilderness provoked the Angel
of the Covenant, or Christ, who went before them in the wilderness, and
perished by Serpents, verse. 9. Lastly, Murmr not, because it is not lawful to
you by Christian Religion, to be present at the Idolatrous feasts of your
friends in the Idols Temple, lest you perish with the murmuring Israelites.

Verse. 11. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

12. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

Further he shows that the use of these examples belong unto all men living,
and those that shall live hereafter; he declares the danger of falling into
the same sins, and the same punishments, if they shall mix themselves with
Idolatrous Feasts; rebuking in the mean time their vain confidence, who feared
not the danger, but fed securely upon things offered to Idols in the Idols
Temple.

Verse. 13. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man:
but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able: but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it. He prevents an Objection, from the fear of evil things, which
did hang over them, from the Idolaters, their fellow Citizens, if they should
so much abhor their society, that they would not be at their public
Religious Feasts. He answers, that that temptation was no other than what was
ordinary to men, for which they might hope for an end, for the faithfulness of
God who will not permit, that they should be tempted above measure, who
endeavor to keep themselves from impurity, chiefly in the case of confessing
of him, but lest they should fall with the temptation, he is wont to discover
a way of freedom from danger, or at least from sin; out of these things
precedent from the first verse, it follows: Therefore we ought not to feed in
the Idols Temple, upon things offered to Idols;

Verse. 14. Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry. Argum. 2. Of
dissuading from things offered to Idols in the Idols Temple. Idolatry is joined
with the public eating of things offered to Idols, from which Idolatry ye
ought to fly: Therefore we ought not to eat things offered to Idols in the
Idols Temple.

Verse. 15. I speak as to wise men: judge ye what I say. Being about to confirm
this Argument, he calls his Hearers or Readers wise, and commands that they
weigh both the argument now spoken, and the confirmation of it, which he
sub-joyns, adding five reasons, by which he proves, that this public eating
of things offered to Idols in the Idols Temple, does render them guilty of
Idolatry.

Verse. 16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
Blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body
of Christ? The first reason, from the like example of Christians, whose fashion
is this: The partaking of the Elements in the Supper of the Lord, is the
profession of our Communion with Christ, and other Christians in the true
Religion: Therefore the partaking of things offered to Idols, in the Feast of
the Devil together with Idolaters, is the profession of Communion with the
Devil and Idolaters, in Idolatry, or their false Religion.

But he urges this reason and the rest, by often questioning; The Cup of
Blessing* he says, Is it not a sign, a powerful token, and real profession of
that saving Communion which we have in the Blood of Christ shed for us? Also
that holy bread which we break in our Assembly, is not it a sign, and real
profession of that Communion, which all of us have in the Body of Christ
crucified for us? Therefore it follows from the like, that the partaking of the
Sacrifice in an Idolatrous and devilish Feast, is no less a sign and real
profession (in it self, and out of the intention of the deed) of Communion with
Idolaters, and the Idol, to whom the Sacrifice was offered.

Verse. 17. For we being many, are one bread, and one body: for we are all
partakers of that one bread. He unfolds this reason to this sense. As we
Christians, although many, yet by virtue of our Society in the same worship,
Sacramentally sealed, grow together, as it were into one bread, i. e. into one
Mystical Body, in this that we communicate of one and the same Sacramental
Bread: So those that communicate with Idolaters, in the participation of
Idolatrous Sacrifices, by virtue of their society in the same worship, sealed
by their Idolatrous feasting in the Idols Temple, grow up into one Mystical
body with them, in this, that together with them, they communicate of one and
the same Sacramental Sacrifice.

Verse. 18. Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the
Sacrifices, partakers of the Altar? Reason 2. From the like example of the
Israelites, the Israelites eating of the Sacrifices, by thus doing testified
themselves to be partakers of the Altar and Jewish Religion: Therefore they
who eat of the Idol-Sacrifices in the Idolatrous Feast, witness that they
communicate with Idolaters in their Idolatry.

Verse. 19. What say I then? That the Idol is any thing? or that which is
offered in Sacrifice to Idols is any thing?

20. But I say, That the things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to
devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should have fellowship with
devils.

Reason 3. Propounded by way of answer to an objection: Although an Idol has
nothing of Divinity (as was said before) nor things offered to Idols is any
thing of the Worship of God, which possibly the Idolater supposes and intends;
yet in the nature of the work, an Idolatrous Sacrifice is the worshipping of
Devils, 2 Chronicles. 11.15. Therefore partaking of that which is offered unto
Idols, is the most gross Idolatry, from which you ought to abstain.

Verse. 21. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils: ye
cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils. Argum. 3.
By way of dehortation from things offered to Idols in the Idol Temple; The
partaking of the Sacramental Feast of Idols, or Devils, cannot consist with a
lawful and saving partaking of the Supper of the Lord; because this was to do
homage to two Lords, God and the Devil, and to profess public service to both:
Therefore we must not eat of things sacrificed to Idols in the Idol Temple.

Verse. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?
Argum. 4. By way of dehortation from things offered to Idols: God is provoked
to jealousy, if any one profess himself a Christian, and yet publicly
partakes of things sacrificed to Devils: Therefore must we not eat of things
sacrificed to Idols.

Stronger] Argum. 5. Because to persist in this so manifest a sin, is to
proclaim war with God, and to try whether any be stronger than he: And
therefore unless any be so mad, as to think himself stronger than God, we must
abstain from things offered to Idols in the Idol-Temple.

THE SECOND PART.
Verse. 23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all
things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. The other part of the
Chapter follows, wherein he propounds a general Doctrine, (that he may come
to the private use of things offered unto Idols) which is this. All things (to
wit, indifferent) are lawful, unless when it is not expedient to use them, or
they edify not.

Verse. 24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. That they
are not lawful, when not expedient, and edify not, or are hurtful to
edification, he gives a reason hereof, by way of Precepts, because in the use
of our liberty we must regard rather the Salvation of another, than our own
temporal profit.

Verse. 25. Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat, asking no question for
conscience sake. Premising the general Doctrine, he answers concerning things
offered unto Idols, when they are out of religious use (as for example, when
they are sold in the Shambles) any one may eat them without any scruple of
conscience. For it was a custom to set to sale in the Shambles flesh that was
sacrificed, the gain whereof was returned to the Priests.

Verse. 26. For the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. The reason is,
Because in that common condition they are the creatures of God, sanctified to
the use of the faithful, and they were allowed a free use of them, by the Lord
of Heaven and Earth, etc.

Verse. 27. If any of them that believe not, bid you to a Feast, and ye be
disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for
conscience sake. In like manner, if any Believer be invited to a Feast in the
private house of an Unbeliever, he says, the Christian may eat without
scruple, of any meat that is set before him.

Verse. 28. But if any man say unto you, This is offered in Sacrifice unto
Idols, eat not for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake. The earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. He excepts in case of scandal, when
either an Unbeliever, or a weak Brother, shall intimate that that mea^ was
sacrificed to Idols, in which case he wills them to forbear, and sub-joyns
seven Reasons.

Reason 1. Lest if thou eat after warning given, thy weak brother who warned
thee be offended, or lest the unbeliever be hardened in his Idolatry, if
happily he gave thee warning.

Is the Lords.] Reason 2. Other meats besides that, wherein there is danger of
offense, God has sanctified; and because the Lord of the earth has not
granted power of using his creatures indifferently with the offense of any one:
Therefore in this case we must not eat.

Verse. 29. Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the others: for why is my
liberty judged of another man's conscience? Reason 3. If any one eats with
offense, Christian Liberty in eating will be condemned of another man's
conscience, as profane licentiousness: Therefore in this case we may not eat.

Verse. 30. For if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that
for which I give thanks? Reason 4. He should sin against the Grace of God, if
he should abuse the gift of God, (for every kind of meat is the gift of God,
as in the giving of Thanks before or after meat we acknowledge) so as to give
occasion of speaking evil of him, as if he had no regard of another man's Soul:
Therefore we must not eat in this case.

Verse. 31. Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
for the glory of God. Reason 5. Propounded by way of Precept: In all our
actions (and therefore in eating and drinking) we must endeavor that God may
be glorified, which is not done when we eat with offense: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 32. Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to
the Church of God. Reason 6. We must give offense to none, whether they
profess the true Religion or not: Therefore in case of scandal we ought not to
eat.

Verse. 33. Even as I please all men in all things; not seeking mine own profit,
but the profit of many, that they may be saved. Reason 7. All are bound to
imitate the Apostles example in all indifferent things, who served not his own
temporal profit, but the Eternal Salvation of others: Therefore as he, in such
a case, would not eat, so are all bound not to eat this or that meat, in case
of scandal.

CHAP. XI.
THE SEVENTH ARTICLE CONCERNING ORDER AND DECENCY.
THe seventh Article of the Epistle concerning the observation of Order and
Decency, in the public meetings of the Church.

There are two parts of the Chapter. 1. About the comely habit of men and women
in religious performances, to verse. 17. The other part, concerning the right
Administration of the Sacrament, to the end.

Verse. 21. Be ye followers of me* even as I also am of Christ.

2. Now I praise you, Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep
the Ordinances as I delivered them unto you.

As concerning the first part, he premises a command to imitate him, so far as
he followed Christ: He also commends the Corinthians, that for some time they
observed the Doctrine and Precepts delivered to them, partly by letter, partly
by his lively voice^ concerning Religion, and things which appertain thereunto,
so far at least, that they deserved some commendation.

Verse. 3. But I would have you know, That the head of every man is Christ: and
the head of the woman is the man, and the Head of Christ is God. Furthermore
he sub-joyns to the following* admonition a maxim concerning order divinely
stablished in the mystical body of the Church, viz. that Christ is nearest
subordinate to God, as he is God-man, the Mediator and the Head of the Church,
and that the man next succeeds in dignity unto Christ, and the woman to the
man, which so far as it appertains to the honor of the sex, she is made
subordinate to the man as Head; whereupon they may understand that order in
Church Assemblies is to be observed.

Verse. 4. Every man praying, or prophesying, having his head covered,
dishonors his head. It is apparent that the Corinthians did not sufficiently
observe this order, because their women in the public Assemblies (after the
manner of Heathens) laid aside their veils, and the men covered their heads and
faces; (they are said to pray and Prophecy, who met publicly, and consented
to promote this public Worship of God.) This uncomeliness he reproves both in
the men and women, by nine Arguments.

Dishonours] Argum. 1. The covering of the man is not agreeable to the dignity
of his sex, and against the honor of Christ, whom he ought to represent:
Therefore it is uncomely.

Verse. 5. But every woman that prays, or Prophesies with her head uncovered,
dishonors her head: for that is even all one as if she was shaven.

6. For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it be a
shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered.

Argum. 2. It is dishonorable to the Female Sex to lay aside her veil, and
against the dignity, as well of her natural head* as of her metaphorical head,
to wit, the man to whom she ows subjection for the honor of the Masculine
Sex; the reason whereof he gives, because it was not less unseemly for the
woman to be without her veil, than to be shorn: Here therefore the woman is
reproved for undecency, which she ought to amend.

Verse. 7. For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the
Image and Glory of God; but the woman is the glory of man. Argum. 3. The man
(seeing he is the Glory of God, and the representation of his glorious
Excellency in respect of the woman over whom he is appointed head) ought to
show forth the Glory of God in his manly deportment: Therefore he must beware
of this unseemliness in the use of a veil.

The woman.] Argum. 4. The woman is the glory of the man; or the image of his
dignity, in whom (as in a Glass) the excellency of the man (for whose sake she
was created) is seen, to whom she ought to profess subjection by the covering
of herself: Therefore seeing the woman behaves herself otherwise amongst you,
she is blamed for uncomeliness. This does not any whit hinder but the woman is
created, in respect of her Soul and spiritual state, to the glory and Image of
God, as well as the man.

Verse. 8. For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man. Argum. 5.
The man is the material principle of the woman, because she was made out of
the ribs of man: Therefore it becomes the man and the woman to testify the
privilege of their original, in the observation of the aforesaid decency:
Therefore you are guilty of undecency which do otherwise.

Verse. 9. Neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man.
Argum. 6. Seeing the man has the respect of the end, and the woman is destined
for the end; it is fitting that this difference of their excellency should be
expressed by the observance of decency: Therefore when it is not observed, you
are deservedly to be reproved.

Verse. 10. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head* because of
the Angels. Argum. 7. Even because of the Angels, who behold and are witnesses
of comely and uncomely deportment^ in the Church* although you would not regard
that me^ look upon you, yet it (...) Women to te^^ifie the subjection of their
Sex, (...) power of the M^n, by putting a veil over their (...) a sign of it?
Therefore you are guilty of indecency (...) your behavior (...) otherwise.

Verse. 11. (...) neither is the (...) without the Woman: (...) Woman without
(...) Man in the Lord.

12. For as the Woman (...) of the Man, even (...) is the Man also by the
Woman; but all things of God.

That this comparing of the Man and the Woman, may not be drawn out further to
the despising of the Woman, in a threefold respect he equals the Woman to the
Man. First, In respect to Christ our Lord, or in respect to our state of Grace
in Christ: The Man and the Woman are equal, bought with the same price, and
alike ordained to the service of Christ. Secondly, In respect to the same
Original; for as in the Creation the Woman is of the Man, so by ordinary
propagation the Man is by the Woman. Thirdly, In respect to the first and
principal efficient cause, i. e. God; (who has made the Man and the Woman, and
all things else) the Man and the Woman are equal.

Verse. 13. Judge in your selves, is it comely that a woman pray unto God
uncovered?

14. Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair, it
is a shame unto him?

15. But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her; for her hair is given
her for a covering.

Argum. 8. Common sense, and nature it self, or natural inclination (so he
calls settled custom, and agreeable to nature, in respect to what is comely)
dictates that it is unseemly for a woman to pray uncovered, or that a man
should wear long hair, and the contrary is decent: Therefore you observe no
decorum when you behave your selves otherwise. Hair is said to be given to the
woman for a covering, because it is given to that end, that she may know her
head ought to be covered.

Verse. 16. But if any man seem to be con^entious, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God. Argum. 9. If any perhaps should not be moved by
these Arguments, but should contend, the Apostle opposes to their contentious
Apologies, the received and established custom of the Jews, and the rest of
the Churches: Other Churches have no such custom, that women should be
present at public assemblies, with their heads uncovered, and the man with his
head covered: Therefore your custom not agreeing with decency, either
according to natural use, or of the Churches, is altogether unseemly.

The second Part.
Verse. 17. Now in this that I declare unto you, I praise you not, that you come
together, not for the better, but for the worse. The second part of the Chapter
follows: concerning the right administration of the Lords Supper, in which he
does not commend, but discommend the Corinthians; First, In general, that their
coming together was not for the better, but for the worse.

Verse. 18. For first of all, when you come together in the Church, I hear, that
there be divisions among you, and I partly believe it. Secondly, More
specially, that they came together to ^oment Schisms, as he heard, and did in
part believe.

Verse. 19. For there must be also Heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest unto you. He gives a Reason, why he believed
Schisms to be amongst them, viz. Because by the malice of the Devil and men,
out of the just judgment of God, not only Schisms in their affections arose,
but also Heresies or Sects, which must be, and to that end are they permitted
of God, that approved and sincere Christians, (maintaining that which is right
in the contending for parties) may be manifestly known; and to the greater
glory of God, and the conservation of true Religion, in purity, they might
appear sincere to the whole world.

Verse. 20. When ye come together therefore in one place, this is not to eat
the Lords Supper. Thirdly, He most specially dispraises their profaning the
Holy Supper, as if it had not been the Lords Supper: for when they met together
in one place, they behaved themselves in the assembly of the Saints so
irreligiously, as if they had not celebrated a Religious Supper.

Verse. 21. For in eating every one takes before other his own Supper: and one
is hungry, and another is drunken. This he demonstrates in four notable faults
amongst them, in the celebration of the Lords Supper; The first is, That every
one of them with his faction (excluding the other members of the Church) did
take the holy Supper Schismatically. Secondly, They mixed with the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, their own Supper, or their common Feasts, which were called
Love Feasts. Thirdly, The poorer sort were excluded, whilst the rich feasted.
Fourthly, In their feastings they drank to drunkenness.

Verse. 22. What, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the
Church of God, and shame them that have not? what shall I say to you? shall I
praise you in this? I praise you not. Therefore he reproves that fashion among
them, of celebrating their Love Feasts publicly in the Church, as unbecomming
the public Assembly, thinking fitter to send them back to their private
houses; adding a reproof, that they had a low esteem of that grave Assembly of
the Saints, and exposed those to contempt that were given to riotousness, when
they ought to have attended only to Religion; As also, Because in those their
feastings, the poorer sort (which could not be at that cost) were shamed.

Verse. 23. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread,

24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is
my body which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.

That he may correct these errors; First he sets down the institution of the
Sacrament, to verse. 27. and then he exhorts them to, and teaches them the
lawful use of this Sacrament, to the end. As for the institution of the Supper,
he shows that the Lord Jesus being about to suffer, by way of Testament, set
his seal to the Covenant of Grace, which by his mediation he entered into
between God and the Church: Whereby the glorious memory of his death might be
celebrated in the world, till his second coming, and might be delivered to
the faithful, and being delivered, it might judicially confirm a right to his
person, and the benefits of his sufferings, and a living virtue flowing from
his death, resurrection, and exaltation, to the sanctification and salvation of
Believers, and that by the symbols of this holy Banquet, and holy Communion
with God, and amongst themselves. To which end Christ sitting at Table with his
Disciples, after the eating of the Paschal Lamb; First, Took Bread, and
sanctified it by giving of thanks, brake, and gave it to his Disciples,
commanding them to take and eat; further, he declared the Bread received and
eaten, to be his body represented after a Sacramental manner, that i^ being
given for our Redemption, and after a judicial manner, applied to us; and
last^y, he commanded that his Disciples, or all the faithful should imitate
this his action in the Church, in remembrance of him, who had paid the price of
Redemption by the sufferings of his body.

Verse. 25. After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped,
saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood: this do you, as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me. That which concerns the other part of the
Supper follows: In the same Supper, ( viz. after the Paschal Supper) when the
Bread was distributed, Christ took the Cup with Wine, sanctified by the giving
of thanks, gave it to the Disciples to drink; further concerning the Cup he
declared, That it being taken and drunk, was that new Covenant of Grace,
between God and the Church, established Sacramentally by his blood, i. e. As it
is ratified on Gods part that gives, so it is confirmed on the believers part
that receives, and judicially applied and sealed: Lastly, He commanded that
his Disciples should frequently imitate him in this action, in remembrance of
him, who had paid the price of Redemption for the Church by the shedding of his
blood.

Verse. 26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cap, ye do show
the Lords death till he come. And that we might acknowledge, that of two
Elements, Bread and Wine, one Supper (frequently to be celebrated in the
Church) ought to be made; the Apostle would have perpetuated in the Church, a
public commemoration of our Lords death, by the often reiteration of this
Sacrament, and that because Christ would not be present in his body with the
Church, before the last judgment, by this Sacrament he would that the
memorial of the Churches redemption, by his death, might be preserved and
celebrated, until he come out of Heaven in the last day.

Verse. 27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. After the
Apostle had repeated the institution of this Sacrament, he exhorts and
instructs the Corinthians in the right use of it, and that in six ways: First,
Showing the danger of guilt which they are liable to who profane this
Sacrament; For whosoever without preparation and reverence, otherwise than
becomes such an Ordinance, approaches so great mysteries, abuses the Sacrament,
despises Christ, and comes near to the wickedness of those that crucified
Christ.

Verse. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup. Secondly, Showing the easiness of preparation, that every
one may worthily receive this Sacrament; Only (says he) set every man
examine himself, that being sensible of the greatness of his sin and misery,
he may see how much need he has of a remedy by Christ, and let him consider
with what Faith and purposes of holiness he is bound to approach communion
with Christ, who is a thousand times lost without him; and when he has
examined himself, so let him eat and drink in that holy Banquet, i. e. so let
him apply the thing signified, with his participation of the sign, that he
consider what need he has of it.

Verse. 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. Thirdly* Having showed the
punishment of eating unworthily: That he brings judgment, or temporal and
eternal punishment, unless he repent, upon himself by unworthy eating and
drinking, who participates of the outward Sacrament without examination of
himself, because he discerns not this Feast, or the thing signified, from his
own common Supper, but comes to the Lords Table no otherwise than to some
common one.

Verse. 30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.
Fourthly, Showing before their eyes the examples of Gods temporal anger, in
diseases and death it self inflicted already upon many of the Corinthians, for
their profanation of the Sacrament.

Verse. 31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. He
clears from severity this infliction of temporal judgment. First, From the
equity of it, That God justly punishes those that judge not themselves, or
repent not, but lie securely in their sin, which he would not do if they
repenting would judge themselves.

Verse. 32. For when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world. Further, That the inflicting of these
punishments, is a fatherly chastisement, whereby the faithful may be brought
to repentance, and not perish with the world.

Verse. 33. Wherefore, my Brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. Fifthly, The Apostle directs the Corinthians to a right use of the
Supper, giving a Precept to avoid Schism, that they would tarry one for
another, and would partake of the holy Supper together; and every man take not
his supper asunder, because the Supper of the Lord is a common action of the
Church, in the public Assembly, to be celebrated after the manner of a Feast.

Verse. 34. And if any man hunger, let him eat at home, that ye come not
together unto condemnation. And the rest will I set in order when I come.
Sixthly, By forbidding their manner of feasting in public, by their feasts of
charity before the holy Communion, and commanding, that if need were, they
would eat at home to satisfy their hunger, repeating the danger of profaning
the Supper, and of the following judgment. At last, because it was impossible,
that all things which appertain to a particular Church, should be ordered,
unless he was present; He promises to take care of the rest, touching the
observing of order, especially in that Church, when he should come himself.

CHAP. XII.
THE EIGHTH ARTICLE CONCERNING THE USE OF SPIRITUAL GIFTS.
THe eighth Article of the Epistle concerning spiritual Gifts, and the right
use of them, in the three next following Chapters.

Some were proud of spiritual Gifts, and despised others in comparison with
themselves; Some envyed others because they had a larger measure of spiritual
Gifts, most abused their gifts to discord, not to spiritual Edification: The
scope of the Apostle, is, to correct these abuses, and to dehort them from
them, and to set before them the right use, and that with sixteen Arguments:
whereof some of them conclude one, others of them another part of their end,
but all urge a prudent use of gifts.

Verse. 1. Now concerning spiritual Gifts, Brethren, I would not have you
ignorant. The Apostle comprehends all abuse, only under ignorance, or
imprudence, and the right use of spiritual Gifts, under prudence: The Position
which the Apostle propounds to be proved, is this: ye ought not to behave
your self ignorantly, or imprudently in the business of spiritual Gifts, but
prudently.

Verse. 2. Ye know that ye were Gentiles, carried away unto these dumb Idols,
even as ye were led. Argum. 1. From the comparison of their former and present
state, to this sense: Not long since ye being destitute of all the Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, ye were carried about after the pleasure of the Devil, that
impure spirit, even as other Gentiles, into the grossest worship of dumb Idols,
or into Idolatry: Therefore now being converted, and adorned with spiritual
Gifts, you ought to behave your selves prudently, taking heed, that you be not
hurried about by that evil spirit, to no less hurtful enormities, in the abuse
of spiritual Gifts.

Verse. 3. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the
Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed: and that no man can say, that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. Argum. 2. Those that blaspheme Christ, as they
are certainly destitute of his Spirit, so certainly are all you, (who with a
sincere Faith profess Jesus Christ your Lord) endued with his Spirit, or with
the saving and special gift of the Holy Spirit, without which you cannot
profess him with a sincere Faith: Therefore concerning other spiritual gifts,
which do not necessarily accompany Salvation, ye ought not to envy each other.

Verse. 4. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit; Argum. 3.
Although there are diversities of gifts, yet all flow from the same Fountain,
and one Holy Spirit: Therefore in the use of these gifts you ought to carry
your selves prudently, and friendly to agree together.

Verse. 5. And th^re are differences of Administrations, but the same Lord.
Argum. 4 Administrations and Ecclesiastical offices are many, but the same
Lord, whom you all ought to serve: Therefore ought you to demean your selves
prudently, and promote the work of God only.

Verse. 6. And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God that
works all in all. Argum. 5. There are diverse operations, various works
produced by diverse men as instruments, but the same God is he that works those
works in those diverse instruments: Therefore there ought to be no debate
concerning these. He ascribes gifts to the Holy Spirit, who distributes gifts
both ordinary and extraordinary, according to the necessity of the Church, ver.
4. He ascribes Functions and Offices to Christ, who being Lord in his house,
appoints what services he pleases, he calls to offices whom he will, and
makes use of those that are called, in their functions, as he will, ver. 5.
But operations, or the exercises of gifts of what kind soever, he ascribes in
this verse to God the Father, who as he is the first beginning of all, so he
works very effectuously in all; nor therefore does the Apostle distinguish
these, as if gifts, offices, and operations, may be so of one person, as not
of all the persons, but that we may have need, that by this distinction of
gifts, offices, and operations, (which concur to the producing of the same
work) we might more easily be led by the hand, to apprehend the distinction
of persons, and unity of essence; and that we might observe the equality of
the persons of the Holy Trinity, and their unity in gifts, offices, and
exercises of gifts, and observing, might all of us unanimously endeavor for
the good of the Church, and the glory of God.

Verse. 7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
with all. Argum. 6. Spiritual gifts, or manifestations of the Spirit, to wit,
in which the Spirit is manifested, are given for one end, viz. for the good and
edification of the whole Church: Therefore there ought not to be difference
concerning these.

Verse. 8. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom, to another the
word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit. This he shows by reckoning up the nine
kinds of gifts, which all tend to the good of the Church. The first gift, To
one is given the Word of Wisdom, whereby he can seasonably apply sound
doctrine to his Hearers, which is the gift of a Pastor. The second; To another
the word of Knowledge, which is the gift of a Teacher, whereby he can give the
general doctrine and sense of the Scripture, although he has not the gift
fitly to apply it.

Verse. 9. To another Faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing
by the same Spirit.

10. To another the working of Miracles, to another Prophecy, to another
discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of Tongues, to another the
interpretation of Tongues.

The third gift, is Faith, which is called the Faith of many and famous
miracles, and in the following Chapter it is called all Faith. 4: Is the gift
of healing Diseases, which was one kind of miracles, as the rest following. 5.
The gift of working miracles, and powerfully casting out devils, and the
enemies of the Church, of which we have an example, Act. 13.11. 6. The gift of
foretelling things to come, and revealing secrets. 7. The gift of discerning
impostures from the gifts of the Spirit. 8. The gift of speaking with diverse
kinds of Tongues. 9. The gift of Interpretation of Tongues, without the gift of
speaking with those Tongues; for it will appear that some spoke with Tongues
who could not interpret, and contrarily; for so it seemed good to God to
distribute his gifts.

Verse. 11. But all these works that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to
every man severally, as he will. Argum. 7. To the wise using of gifts. This
diversity of gifts, and distribution of them, is according to the good will of
God: Therefore we must rest in his will, and use them without discord.

Verse. 12. For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members
of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ. Argum. 8. Christ
Mystical, or Christ is one Body with the Church, consisting of many members,
and they instructed with variety of gifts: Therefore as in the humane, so in
the Mystical Body there ought to be concord in the use of gifts.

Verse. 13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free: and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit. Argum. 9. All the faithful are joined together in the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, or the union of all the Faithful
into one Church, and partaking of one life, in one body, and one Spirit, is
signified in the Sacraments: Therefore you ought not to disagree amongst your
selves about the diversity of gifts.

Verse. 14. For the body is not one member, but many.

15. If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; Is
it therefore not of the body?

16. And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body;
Is it therefore not of the body?

Argum. 10. Seeing the condition of the body requires necessarily plurality of
members, and by consequence diversity, it will follow, that the meanest offices
in the least gifts, are as well of the body, as the most excellent offices and
gifts. And if they should exclude themselves, they would not do less foolishly,
than if the foot should deny that it was the hand, or the ear deny that it was
the eye; and for this cause should conclude that it is not of the body:
Therefore there ought to be no dissension amongst you, because of the
diversity of gifts.

Verse. 17. If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole
were hearing, where were the smelling?

18. But now has God set the members every one of them in the body, as it has
pleased him.

19. And if they were all one member, where were the body?

20. But now are they many members, yet but one body.

Argum. 11. Even as if the body was one member, three inconveniences would
follow. (1.) The rest of the members should be excluded, and the more noble
senses, ver. 17. (2.) The change should be made contrary to the wise
dispensation of God, who has otherwise appointed diversity of members, ver.
18. (3.) The change should be contrary to the nature of an organical body; for
the very organical body should be destroyed, ver. 19. Because God has made
one organical body of many members, ver. 20. So in Ecclesiastical Functions, if
there was but one Function, three inconveniences would ensue. 1. The other
offices would be extinct. 2. The dispensation of God would be destroyed. 3.
The Organical Church it self would be overthrown, which now consists of many
offices, united together into one body: Therefore concord and agreement is to
be regarded.

Verse. 21. And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee: nor
again, the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

22. Nay, much more, those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble,
are necessary.

Argum. 12. As in a natural body, the superior and more excellent members
cannot be without the inferior, which are most necessary; therefore they are
friendly each to other; so it is in Ecclesiastical functions: therefore ought
they to be assisting one to another.

Verse. 23. And those members of the body, which we think to be less
honorable, upon those we bestow more abundant honor, and our uncomely parts
have more abundant comeliness.

24. For our comely parts have no need; but God has tempered the body together,
having given more abundant honor to that part which lacked.

Argum. 13. As in the body natural, that there may be an agreement, those
members which are more infirm are most honored, and necessary, by the
appointment of God: so ought it to be in Ecclesiastical functions: Therefore
in the choosing of Deacons rather than Pastors, care must be had, that other
things being alike, men of the fairest fortunes, may be elected for the
adorning of this inferior office.

Verse. 25. That there should be no Schism in the body, but that the members
should have the same care one of another. Argum. 14. As the Natural body would
come to ruin by Schism, if the members should strive among themselves, and
should not regard each other: So in Ecclesiastical functions: Therefore concord
is to be highly regarded.

Verse. 26. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or
one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it.

27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

Argum. 15. As amongst the superior and inferior members of the body, there
is a sympathy in joy and grief, so it ought to be amongst the Governors and
Ministers of the Church: Therefore the greatest accord: He gives the Reason of
it, Because ye (says he) are the body of Christ, and members in particular,
i. e. such as ought as members to agree with the whole body, the Church, and
amongst your selves: And here is the common Apodosis of the whole similitude,
taken from the body, from verse. 12. to this 27. verse.

Verse. 28. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps,
governments, diversities of tongues. Now in order he reckons up the Ministers
of the Church, as much as might be sufficient to restrain the ambition and
envy that was among the Corinthians; The Authority of Paul by name, and of the
other Apostles was prejudiced, by the subtle and Eloquent Doctors amongst the
Corinthians (as is manifest in the second Epistle.) Therefore he asserts the
dignity of the Apostles in the first place, as those that were appointed of God
to lay the foundation of all the Churches. Concerning the Evangelists and
Prophets extraordinary, either there was no question amongst them, or the
dignity of the Ministers of the Gospel extraordinary, being asserted in the
vindication of the Apostolical office, concerning the authority and dignity of
the Evangelists and Prophets extraordinary (whose Ministry was common to all
the Churches, and subservient to the Apostles) it was manifest and apparent
enough.

Secondly, He determines concerning Prophets (by which name (as shall appear,
chap. 14.) he understands Pastors) who applied in their Sermons the doctrine
to usefulness, whose gift was the word of wisdom, as verse 8.

In the third place he names Teachers, who although they were not eloquent and
prudent for the application of the doctrine to all the uses of the Church, yet
they had a word of knowledge, that they were able to apply the general Doctrine
to the capacity of the Church: These are the functions which were employed in
the Word and Doctrine, and therefore the more eminent.

In the fourth place, he sets down those, who in the Primitive Church, for the
confirmation of the faithful, were endued with a power of working miracles,
signs and wonders of all kinds, in great measure.

Fifthly, He sets down those who had power miraculously to heal diseases, in
whom the gift was more straightned and restrained to this one kind.

After this sixthly, he names ordinary offices and gifts, viz. helps, or the
office of Deacons, whose work it was to see to the maintenance of Ministers,
and the necessities of the Saints, and the dispensation of the public revenues
of the Church: which office, though it may seem the meanest, it appears to be
in no small account, and imposed not upon men of inferior rank, but upon
those that were of tried fidelity, and the more able, or men of fairest estate,
as verse. 22, 23, 24. And that for the necessary use of it; for without the help
of this office, the work of the Ministry would be much hindered, for had
there not been helps or Deacons, who undertook the care of collecting the
stipends, that the Ministers might more freely attend the work of the Lord: It
is necessary that the Ministers with the Levites, Nehem. 13. to whom a designed
portion was not given, should betake themselves to their fields, and their
work, or secular businesses, and also to Law-sutes, being debarred of their due
allowance, they might lose their zeal of laboring in the Lords Vineyard, or
the fruit of their labors.

After these (unless perhaps there was no difference touching these inferior
offices) the Apostle is not solicitous any further about the order; He names
Governors, or Ruling Presbyters, who take notice of the peoples manners, and
as presidents with the Pastors and Teachers, with the Ecclesiastical Assembly
attend to the removing of scandals.

In the last place he sets down the gift of tongues, to wit, solitary, with
which any one either spoke that which he could not interpret, in a language
known to the people, or could interpret it, but could not speak in an unknown
tongue; which gift, because above others it caused admiration, it seemed to be
affected among the other Corinthians, and to be matter of boasting to the rest.

Verse. 29. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? are all
workers of miracles?

30. Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?

By all which forecited, he sharply corrects and reproves the ambition and
envy of inferiors, as if they would all have the most eminent gifts, and the
more excellent functions, which was most unreasonable, as the interrogations
repeated to the peircing of their consciences show.

Verse. 31. But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet show I unto you a more
excellent way. Argum. 16. Of Exhortation, that there be no evil emulation
about their gifts, their ambition might be better laid out, by coveting the
most excellent gifts, to wit, saving, or such as accompany salvation, which
kind of gifts first of all is Christian Charity, by which saving Faith is
effectual (whereof he promises to speak:) Therefore evil emulation concerning
gifts and Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Offices, is to be taken heed of.

CHAP. XIII.
HE shows that, that more excellent way of which he spoke in the last verse.
of the Chapter going before, was the way of Charity, and proves by four
Arguments, that the gift of Charity is the most worthy gift, which they should
affect above all.

Verse. 1. Though I speak with the tongues of Men and of Angels, and have not
Charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling symbal. The first
Argument, the gifts which you desire are nothing without Charity, and he
reckons up five sorts of gifts, before which he prefers Charity. The gift of
Tongues in the highest degree (which is, if any one could speak with all
Tongues, or like unto Angels) would do nothing more to salvation without
Charity, than an unprofitable sound.

Verse. 2. And though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and all Knowledge; and though I have all Faith, so that I could
remove Mountains, and have no Charity, it profits me nothing. The second
gift, is the gift of Prophecy in the highest degree (being joined with
knowledge and wisdom) which will not at all conduce to the salvation of the
Prophet without Charity. The third gift is of a Faith miraculous in the highest
degree (to the doing of those things which are most impossible) which if it
should be given, yet it would be nothing without Charity.

Verse. 3. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the Poor, and though I give
my body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits me nothing. The
fourth gift is the greatest liberality toward the poor, that can be imagined.
The fifth gift is the greatest courage of Martyrdom, as any one can imagine,
all which without Charity, will not at all profit to salvation: Therefore
Charity is the most worthy gift which you can desire.

Verse. 4. Charity suffers long, and is kind: Charity envyeth not: Charity
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up. The second Argument, from the famous
properties or effects of Charity, which he reckons to be fifteen. 1. Charity
suffers long. 2. And is kind. 3. Envyeth not. 4. Charity vaunteth not it
self. 5. Is not puffed up.

Verse. 5. Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks not evil. 6. Does not disgrace it self or its neighbor by
behaving it self unseemly. 7. Seeks not her own, but the good of others. 8. Is
not provoked to render evil for evil. 9. Thinks no evil unjustly.

Verse. 6. Rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth.

7. Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things.

10. Rejoices not in iniquity. 11. Rejoices at the good successes of others.
12. courageously bears labors and difficulties in discharging its duty. 13.
Believes the best of all, so far as truth suffers. 14. Hopes the best of the
amendment of all, so far as prudence suffers her. 15. Endures all the
infirmities of others: Therefore is the most worthy gift which you can affect.

Verse. 8. Charity never fails, but whether there be Prophecies, they shall
fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there shall be
knowledge, it shall vanish away. Argum. 3. Charity never fails; therefore the
most excellent and worthy to be desired. This propriety he illustrates, by
comparing it with other gifts. First, With Prophecy and Tongues, which because
we shall not have use of them in the life to come, as means, they shall cease,
being no further necessary. Secondly, He compares Charity with knowledge it
self, and prefers it before knowledge, because knowledge shall vanish away,
viz. that mediate knowledge, or manner of knowing, which is now obtained by
books, by hearing and meditation, etc. Therefore Charity is the most excellent
gift which you can desire.

Verse. 9. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part. Which he proves,
because knowledge is now in part, and imperfect, not only in respect of the
measure, for so also is Charity imperfect, but chiefly in respect of the manner
of knowing, viz. by means, which kind of knowledge, because it is mediate, it
is imperfect.

Verse. 10. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part
shall be done away. This manner of knowing, viz. mediately, shall be quite
abolished when the perfect way of knowledge shall come, viz. the immediate. But
Charity, although it be imperfect, as to the measure, yet as to the manner of
loving, it is perfect; for it is immediately carried to God; and therefore this
manner of loving shall never be abolished, but rather increased.

Verse. 11. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I
thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things: He
shows that the present way of kno^ing is to be abolished, by the similitude of
the abolishing of childish sports, when any comes to be a man.

Verse. 12. For now we see thorough a glass darkly, but then face to face: now
I know in part, but then shall I know, even as also I am known. He shows the
same by another similitude, ^^^paring the present manner of knowing, to
knowledge by a glass darkly, which kind of knowledge is mediate, but the
knowledge to come is immediate, whereby any one kno^^ intuitively, because in
the life to come our mind shall immediately be enlightened by God, and we
shall see and know God immediately.

Verse. 13. And now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these three, but the greatest
of these is Charity. Argum. 4. Charity is more excellent than Faith or Hope
(which are saving Graces, and gifts not to be repented of.) Therefore the most
worthy. Because Charity shall never fail, but shall also continue in the life
to come, when Faith and Hope shall cease. In the mean time, let us remember
that Faith in some respects is more excellent than Charity, because Faith is
the cause of Love, Gal. 5.6. We are justified by Faith, and have peace with
God, Romans 5.1. And Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, which works Charity in
us, Ephesians. 3.17. But the Apostle regarding the concord and edification of the
Church, by right extolls Charity, as much as belongs to his purpose; he knew
also that no man could endeavor after the increase of Christian Charity, but
he must also labor after the increase of Faith, which is the cause of Love.

CHAP. XIV.
HE PROCEEDS TO TREAT OF SPIRITUAL GIFTS, AND THEIR RIGHT USE.
THere are two parts of the Chapter. In the first he prefers the gift of
Prophecy before the gift of Tongues, to verse. 26. In the other he gives
commands concerning that order that was to be observed in their Assemblies, to
the end.

Verse. 1. Follow after Charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye
may prophecy. He proved in the foregoing Chapter, that Charity was the most
excellent gift: In the beginning of this Chapter he infers an Exhortation by
way of conclusion, that they would affect it, and have all both gifts and
spiritual offices in honor; but because some were proud of the gift of
tongues, and most despised Pastoral gifts in comparison of this gift, and too
much admired the gift of tongues: Therefore he compares these gifts together,
and proves that the gift of Prophecy or Exhortation is more excellent than the
gift of tongues, separated from the gift of interpretation. He gives thirteen
Reasons.

Verse. 2. For he that speaks in an unknown tongue, speaks not unto men,
but unto God, for no man understands him: Howbeit in the Spirit he speaks
mysteries.

3. But he that prophesies, speaks unto men, to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort.

The first Reason; He that speaks in an unknown tongue, although by the gift
of the Spirit, he speaks the Mysteries of God, yet he speaks without profit,
because he is understood by God alone, and not by men: But a Prophet or Pastor
speaking in a known tongue, teaches, exhorts, comforts his hearers, and so
speaks profitably: Therefore Prophecy is more excellent than the gift of
tongues.

Verse. 4. He that speaks in an unknown tongue, edifieth himself: but he
that prophesies, edifieth the Church. Reason 2. He that speaks in an unknown
tongue, edifies none (...) himself; but a Prophet, the whole Church or
Assembly: Therefore Prophecy is more excellent.

Verse. 5. I would that ye all spoke with tongues, but rather that ye
prophesied: for greater is be that prophesies, than he that speaks with
tongues, except he interpret, that the Church may receive edifying. That he
might rightly be understood, he shows that he does not abolish tongues,
though he prefers a Prophet before him that speaks in an unknown tongue.

Verse. 6. Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I
profit you, except I shall speak to you, either by revelation, or by knowledge,
or by prophesying, or by doctrine? Reason 3. From his own example; his
Apostolical Ministry would not be profitable to them, unless he should speak
to them in a known tongue by extraordinary Prophecy, by Revelation, or
ordinary knowledge; either by Prophesying, or exhorting, as a Pastor, or
instructing, as a Teacher: Therefore the gift of tongues is inferior to the
gift of Prophecy.

Verse. 7. And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe, or harp,
except they give a distinction in their sounds, how shall it be known what is
piped or harped?

8. For if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself unto
the battle?

9. So likewise you, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be
understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the
air.

Reason 4. As a Trumpet, or any other instrument touched or blown, sounding
confusedly, utters an unprofitable and an ungrateful sound, so also a tongue,
not understood, gives no other than an uncertain and useless sound: But the
Prophets in their Prophesying speak in a known tongue: Therefore the gift of
tongues is inferior to the gift of Prophecy.

Verse. 10. There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and
none of them are without signification. Reason 5. The voices of Brutes are
many; whereof none is so inarticulate, but represents a certain species of the
living creature to those that hear: It is therefore an unworthy thing, so to
debase the gift of the Spirit, that it should profit no more, but should be
less valued than the blearing of a brute beast: In Prophecy it is not so:
Therefore the gift of Tongues is inferior to that of Prophecy.

Verse. 11. Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto
him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto
me. Reason 6. Because to speak things not understood, makes the Teachers and
the Hearers Barbarians each to other: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 12. Even so ye, for as much as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek
that ye may excel to the edifying of the church.

13. Wherefore let him that speaks in an unknown tongue, pray that he may
interpret.

He infers an exhortation to what was fore-spoken, that they might be zealous
of the gift of Prophecy, for the good of the Church, and to that end, that he
which has the gift of an unknown tongue might pray, that he might have also
the gift of interpreting that tongue.

Verse. 14. For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my
understanding is unfruitful. Reason 7. If any one speak unto God, praying
publicly in an unknown tongue, he does ill, because though he that prays
understands, yet the understanding of him that prays shall be unfruitful to
those that hear and do not understand, and he does ill much more who speaks
publicly to men in a tongue not understood: Therefore the gift of Tongues is
inferior to that of Prophecy.

Verse. 15. What is it then? I will pray with the Spirit, and will pray with
understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also. Hence he draws forth his exhortation, because amongst
those who had the gift of strange tongues, some had the faculty miraculously to
reason in divine mysteries, some had the faculty of praying, others did sing in
those strange tongues, and others gave thanks; these gifts were diverse, and for
diverse uses; he commands them so to use them all, that they may be understood
by the hearers; for if any one pray by the Spirit, or from the gift of the
Spirit, what profit shall it be to the Church, unless he pray also with
understanding, i. e. so that the hearers may understand him?

Verse. 16. Else, when thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he that
occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing
he understands not what thou say? This he confirms and adds the eighth
Reason, from the unprofitableness of it, because when any one shall bless by
the gift of the Spirit, those that occupy the room of private men in the
Church, i. e. the rest of the hearers in the Assembly, cannot join their
prayers with him, or say Amen, unless he speaks in a known tongue. The matter
is otherwise in Prophesying, where all things are uttered in a known tongue:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 17. For thou verily give thanks well; but the other is not edified.
He gives a reason, because the hearers in the Church neither understand, nor
are edified, although that which is spoken is most excellent.

Verse. 18. I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than you all;

19. Yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding,
that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue.

Reason 9. From his own example, who was most enabled in the gift of Tongues,
and yet he had rather speak a few words which might be understood by the
hearers, than many in a tongue unknown to the people: Therefore the gift of
Prophecy excels that of Tongues.

Verse. 20. Brethren, be not children in understanding; howbeit, in malice be
ye children, but in understanding be men. Reas. 10. Backed with a Precept,
because this abuse of the gift of strange Tongues, being no way profitable to
the hearers, is a childish and foolish ostentation; whereas it became them to
be children indeed in respect to innocence, but not in respect to knowledge.

Verse. 21. In the Law it is written, With men of other Tongues, and other Lips,
will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear me,
says the Lord.

22. Wherefore Tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them
that believe not; but prophesying serves not for them that believe not, but
for them which believe.

Reason 11. Out of Isa. 28.11. and Ier. 5.15. because to speak with Tongues not
understood in the Church, is set down of God as a threatening for a punishment
of unbelief; But Prophecy serves for the edification of Believers: Therefore
let unknown Tongues be rejected out of the Church, and let Prophecy be
preferred.

Verse. 23. If therefore the whole Church be come together into one place, and
all speak with Tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or
unbeleevers, will they not say that ye are mad? Reason 12. Taken from the
avoiding of Scandal: Unbeleevers, or Professors of a private condition, will
be estranged from the Faith, and they will say that both the Preacher and the
People are mad, if the time appointed for public worship be spent in the
hearing of an unknown Tongue: Therefore the gift of Tongues is inferior to the
gift of Prophesying.

Verse. 24. But if all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or
one unlearned; he is convinced of all, he is judged of all.

25. And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down
on his face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.

Reason 13. From the special fruit which would ensue, If laying aside the use
of strange Tongues, all the Prophets (for he denies that all the faithful in
the Church were Prophets, Chap. 12.29.) should prophecy, i. e. should propose
the Oracles of the Prophets, and their Doctrine, to the edification of the
Church: For in this case, if any unbeleever should come in, or a private
Christian one of their hearers, should hear them prophesying, he is convinced
of sin, and condemned according to the sentence of the Law, by all that
prophecy, and the secret sins of his heart are manifest unto him, which when
the hearer sees, and observes the Grace of God laid open by the Prophets in the
Gospel, he falls upon his face, adores God, and seriously gives testimony of
Gods presence with the Prophets in the Church: Therefore Prophecy is more
excellent than the gift of Tongues.

The second Part.
Verse. 26. How is it then, Brethren? when ye come together* every one of you
has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an
Interpretation; let all things be done unto edifying. The other part of the
Chapter, in which he gives seven Precepts concerning good order.

The first is, that if the Spirit shall suggest to any one of the Prophets any
godly Psalm to the praise of God, or any Doctrine, or expression of a strange
Tongue for the use of the Church, or revelation of a thing to come, or of a
mystery not observed before, or the interpretation of a strange Tongue, or of
the Scripture; He commands that the exercise of all these be fitted to the
edification of the Church, that all may go out of the Assembly better than they
came.

Verse. 27. If any man speak in an unknown Tongue, let it be by two, or at the
most by three, and that by course, and let one interpret.

Verse. 28. But if there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church,
and let him speak to himself, and to God.

The second Precept. That of those who were enabled with the gift of Tongues,
should not speak in one Assembly more than two or three, and that in order, one
after another, and unless there were some Interpreter present, who could
expound their sayings, otherwise they were to be silent in the Church.

Verse. 29. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. The
third Precept. That the ordinary Prophets, i. e. the Pastors should speak in
one Assembly, two or three, of whose doctrine the other Prophets should Judge,
examining it by the rule of the Word.

Verse. 30. If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first
hold his peace. The fourth Precept. If (as in those times it might usually come
to pass) any other Prophet being inspired by the Spirit, desired to be heard
out of order, he commands that he be silent, that time be granted to the
other to speak.

Verse. 31. For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all
may be comforted. He subjoyns five Reasons of the Precept. 1. Because in such
a case many, yea all the Prophets may be heard (he does not here understand
believers promiscuously, but the Prophets, and those that were truly
extraordinarily inspired by the Spirit) in which case all are to be heard, but
order is to be observed.

That all] The second Reason. Because so the knowledge and consolation of the
Church, and also of their Prophets might be promoted, if many by ^urns were
heard.

Verse. 32. And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Reason
3. Because the Spirits of the Prophets are to be examined and judged of by the
other Prophets, who might afterward give their opinions concerning those
things which were heard, whether any one has seasonably interrupted another,
and whether it were agreeable to the Word of God, which was delivered by him;
and therefore there was no danger, if he that spoke before, should give place
to him that modestly interrupted him, and so more might speak in their order.
When he refers to the Prophets, the judging of the Spirit, or the Doctrine
which the Prophet utters by the Spirit, he does not exclude Spiritual men, i.
e. the other Governors of the Church, who were skilful in spiritual knowledge
and judgment, such as all ought to be in an Ecclesiastical Senate: For he
commands these, verse. 37. together with the Prophets, or Ministers of the Word,
that according to their Ecclesiastical authority, they acknowledge and defend
their doctrine in the Church, that according thereunto they would judge and
determine concerning those that were disorderly.

Verse. 33. For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all
Churches of the Saints. Reason 4. Because otherwise a tumult would arise,
(which is hateful to God) while many should speak: Therefore in the case
abovesaid let one speak after another in order. As in] Reason 5. Because this
is the custom in all the Churches of the Saints; and therefore it ought to be
thus amongst them, that one speak in order after another.

Verse. 34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches: for it is not permitted
unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience: as also
says the Law. Precept 5. Whereby he forbids that Women should speak in the
Church, i. e. teach publicly, or propound questions, because subjection is
appointed in the Word of God, for the Sex of Women, Genesis 3.16. requires.

Verse. 35. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at
home: for it is a shame for Women to speak in the Church. That he might
prevent an Objection, he commands them to learn at home privately of their
Husbands, or elsewhere, that which they would demand publicly, adding another
reason of the Precept, because it is unseemly that a Woman should speak in the
Church.

Verse. 36. What? came the Word of God out from you? or came it unto you only?
Because he knew that they who knew little, would take it ill, that they should
be kept within the compass of these Precepts, he stays them, being ready to
answer four ways. 1 By showing, that they who do not submit to these Precepts,
so behave themselves, as if they would equal themselves with the Apostles, by
whom the Will of Christ came into the world. 2 Because they so carry
themselves, as if they only were Christians, to whom the Apostles were sent,
and to whom only belonged judgment concerning order and decency.

Verse. 37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him
acknowledge, that the things that I write unto you, are the Commandments of
the Lord. Thirdly, By affirming that these Precepts are the Lords, and by
commanding, that not only they who are true Prophets in the Church, or truly
spiritual, i. e. who are such, both by office and desert, acknowledge that they
are divine; but also that they, who for an office, and certain gifts of the
Spirit, seem to themselves to be Prophets, or spiritual, or skilful in
discerning spiritual things, or who are esteemed to be such in the Church, by
reason of their office in regarding spiritual things, acknowledge according to
the reason, viz. of their office, that these Precepts are divine, and by
consequence, that the Churches censure be passed upon the contemners of these
Precepts, as upon those who are disobedient to God. But that under the name of
spirituals the Governors of Ecclesiastical Discipline was noted, it is plain,
Gal. 6.1. and 1 Cor. 12.1. where he comprehends all Ecclesiastical Offices and
gifts under the name of spiritual.

Verse. 38. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Fourthly, By
rejecting the judgment of affected ignorance, and after a Precept now given to
the Governors of the Church, that they would acknowledge these Precepts to be
divine, by referring the ignorant and contemners of these Precepts to the
Moderators of Discipline, that according to the judgment of the Apostle, and
of their Church (judging according to the Rule of the Apostle) they might be
ignorant of their own danger, who contemn these Precepts.

Verse. 39. Wherefore Brethren, covet to prophecy, and forbid not to speak with
Tongues. Precept 6. Showing the use of the former Doctrine, that they should
embrace by all means, and desire the gift of Prophecy, but not contemn or
neglect the gift of Tongues.

Verse. 40. Let all things be done decently, and in order. Precept 7. That
decency should be observed by persons coming to the public Assembly of the
Church, and in things necessary for public worship, that all things be
performed with gravity and modesty, without superstition and undecency, and
that the parts of divine worship be so ordered and disposed in their times, as
they most serve for the glory of God, and the edification of the Church.

CHAP. XV.
THE NINTH ARTICLE, OF THE RESURRECTION.
THe ninth Article of the Epistle is to confirm the doctrine of the
Resurrection, which some amongst them called in question.

There are three parts of the Chapter. In the first he confirms the
Corinthians in the Faith of the Gospel, and by name of the Article of the
Resurrection of Christ, to verse. 12. In the second, he confirms the doctrine
of the Resurrection of our bodies, to verse. 35. In the third he confutes the
objections against this Faith, that the faithful being confirmed may be more
constant, to the end.

Verse. 1. Moreover, Brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached
unto you, which also you have received, and wherein you stand. That which
belongs to the first. Because by denying of the Resurrection he knew the whole
Gospel was overthrown; First, He confirms the Corinthians in the Faith of the
Gospel in general, silently admonishing them, that they would not fall from it,
using five Arguments. The first Argument. I constantly preached the Gospel to
you: Therefore keep firmly my doctrine.

Ye received] Argum. 2. You have now received the Truth by Faith: Therefore
keep it.

Wherein you stand] Argum. 3. You have kept this doctrine hitherto, and even
now also you profess it: Therefore keep it.

Verse. 2. By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory, what I preached
unto you, unless ye have believed in vain. Argum. 4. By this Gospel you are to
obtain salvation, unless your Faith be Hypocritical: Therefore keep it.

Verse. 3. For I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received,
how that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures:

4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to
the Scriptures.

Argum. 5. Confirming also that which went before; because that which is
preached and believed by you concerning the death and resurrection of Christ,
etc. was revealed from Heaven: Therefore keep it.

Christ] Afterward especially confirming their Faith. First, Concerning the
death of Christ for our sins, because according to the Scriptures it is
preached and believed. 2 Concerning the burying of Christ, because also it is
believed according to the Scriptures; and lastly, concerning the resurrection
of Christ he confirms their Faith by an eightfold Testimony. The first
Testimony is of the Scriptures.

Verse. 5. And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve.

6. After that he was seen of above five hundred Brethren at once: of whom the
greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.

7. After that he was seen of James, then of all the Apostles.

2. Testimony is of Peter the Apostle, who saw Christ alive again.

3. Testimony is of the twelve Apostles gathered together.

4. Testimony is of the five hundred Brethren, many of whom then saw him.

5. Testimony is of James.

6. Testimony is of all the Apostles, who at the second time being together saw
Christ alive again.

Verse. 8. And last of all, he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due
time.

9. For I am the least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God.

10. But by the grace of God I am what I am; and his grace which was bestowed
on me, was not in vain: but I labored more abundantly than they all: yet not
I, but the grace of God which was within me.

7. Is the testimony of Paul himself, which although it may seem to be little
valued by some, (because that after Christ's death, and ascending into heaven)
he as an abortive offspring was suddenly sent forth into the light of the
Gospel, and also, because for his past life in the state of nature, he might
deservedly be accounted the least of the Apostles; yet in respect of the grace
bestowed upon him, he shows that his testimony might be compared with the
testimony of the rest, because the grace of God was by so much the clearer
manifested toward him, than toward the other Apostles, by how much the more
his Conversion was more wonderful than the Conversion of the other Apostles,
and by how much the grace of God was more approved by working in him, and by
him, and his great labors in the Gospel, and was more famous than that which
was expected in the other Apostles, in regard of the effects; The whole praise
of this excellency he gives wholly to the grace of God, but no part of the
glory to himself.

Verse. 11. Therefore, whether it were I, or they, so we preach, and so we
believed. 8. Testimony is the consent of Paul and the other Apostles in the
preaching of the Resurrection of Christ, to all which testimonies the
Corinthians set to their Faith for a Seal.

The second Part.
Verse. 12. Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some
among you, that there is no Resurrection of the dead? The second part of the
Chapter, in which he proves the Doctrine of the Resurrection delivered to them
was true, and the Doctrines of those that deny the Resurrection was false. The
Proposition is propounded in this verse, he brings fifteen arguments to the
proof, seven of them are drawn from a sevenfold absurdity that would follow.

Verse. 13. But if there be no Resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not
risen. The first argument, and first absurdity. It follows from their own
Doctrines, that Christ is not risen: Therefore it is false; for between Christ
the Head, and Believers who are the members, there is such a union, that the
Resurrection of these being denied, his Resurrection also is denied, and e
contra.

Verse. 14. And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain; and your
faith is also vain: 2. Absurdity, and Argum. 2. By consequence it follows from
their tenants, that the preaching of the Apostles is vain: Therefore it is
false.

Vain] Absurdity* 3. and Argum. 3. It will follow, (he says) that your faith
is vain: Therefore their Doctrine is false, for unless Christ had risen,
neither righteousness, nor eternal life, nor any other effects of Christ's
Resurrection had been expected.

Verse. 15. Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God, because we have
testified of God, that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be
that the dead rise not. Absurd. 4. and Argum. 4. It would follow that we spoke
a false testimony, not only of Christ, but also of God the Raiser of Christ,
who is not the Raiser of Christ, if there be no Resurrection: Therefore their
Doctrine is false.

Verse. 16. For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised. The reason is,
because if the Doctrine of our Resurrection be false, the Doctrine also of
Christ's Resurrection is false, neither can consist.

Verse. 17. And if Christ be not raised, your Faith is vain, ye are yet in
your sins. Absurd. 5. and Argum. 5. It would follow also from their Doctrine,
that beside the vanity of your faith, that you are yet in your sins without
redemption: Therefore it is false; for he having redeemed us, unless he had
risen again, our redemption had been none, nor our sins taken away.

Verse. 18. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished.
Absurd. 6. and Argum. 6. It will follow from their Doctrines, who deny the
Resurrection, that the Saints who are dead, are perished: Therefore it is false.

Verse. 19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable. Absurdity 7. Argum. 7. It would follow from their opinion that
Christians were of all men most miserable, because the hope of happiness, by
this error, is not only cut off in the life to come, but also in this present
life; because they willingly for the cause of Religion subject themselves most
foolishly to many inconveniences, and deprive themselves of many advantages, if
there was not a future Resurrection: Therefore the opinion of those that deny
the Resurrection is false and absurd.

Verse. 20. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits
of them that slept. Argum. 8. As the first fruits are pledges and an earnest of
a future harvest, so the Resurrection of Christ is a pledge of the Resurrection
of all the Saints.

Verse. 21. For since by man came death, by man came also the Resurrection of
the Dead. Argum. 9. Because it is no less agreeable to the goodness and wisdom
of God, to restore all the Sons of Grace from the dead by the Man Christ, than
it is agreeable to his Justice and Wisdom, to send forth death by the man Adam
upon all the sons of Nature: and on the other side, as death came by Adam, so
shall the Resurrection from the Dead by Christ: Therefore our Doctrine of the
Resurrection is true.

Verse. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.
Argum. 10. Because as in Adam all his Posterity are dead, first judicially, and
afterward actually; so in Christ, all his Sons or Children, i. e. the
Faithful, are judicially risen, and shall actually rise: For there is the like
reason in both, of the Sentence of the Judge, and the Execution of the Sentence.

Verse. 23. But every man in his own order, Christ the First Fruits, afterward
they that are Christ's, at his coming. Argum. 11. In this he answers to a
question; Why Christ being raised, those that are dead in Christ, are not yet
risen: He answers, and propounds the eleventh Argum. That the order which God
has appointed ought to be observed, viz. that Christ as the First Fruits
should rise first, and afterward the whole harvest of Christians by Christ, at
his second coming: Christ (as the First Fruits) is risen first: Therefore his
members, viz. all the Faithful (as the rest of the harvest) shall rise.

Verse. 24. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom
to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and authority,
and power. He further declares this Argument, showing that by the purpose of
God, two things are conjoined in time, with the end of the world, viz. The
delivering up the Kingdom by the Son into the hands of the Father, and the
putting down of all rule, authority, and contrary power; whereof this is the
meaning: After Christ shall have subdued and abolished all adverse power, as
the Devil, the World, and the rest, of what kind soever, he will vanquish
those powers so far forth, that they shall not any longer be injurious to his
members, all of them being thrust down to hell; at last Christ shall present
his Church (which is called the Kingdom of Christ, given him of his Father)
every way perfect, and deliver it up, as it were, into the hands of his Father.

Thirdly, Having now perfected his Mediatory Office, and laid aside that manner
of ruling, by those means which he now uses for the gathering and governing
of his Church. Fourthly, Having finished all things which were committed to him
by his Father to finish, he shall resign up the Kingdom also committed to
him, over all things which are in the world, to the perfecting the work of our
Redemption, he shall (I say) deliver up the Kingdom to God, according to his
Humanity, and to his Father, according to his Divinity; not that he shall
cease to reign immediately, but mediately, and as before: not that he shall
leave off to reign with the Father, but shall cease to reign as deputed by the
Father, to conflict with his enemies, or to administer any longer in a
laborious and painful work of gathering his Church, otherwise there is no end
of his Kingdom, he shall indeed reign much more gloriously than now he does,
when his adversaries are conquered, without the Ministry of Angels or men, he
shall govern, together with the Father, and fill all his with light, love,
life, with his virtues immediately.

Verse. 25. For he must reign, till he has put all enemies under his feet.

26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.

Argum. 12. This confirms the former sense that was given, Christ must reign
until he subdue all his enemies, and death the last enemy: Therefore he shall
destroy death, and by consequence there shall be a Resurrection.

Verse. 27. For he has put all things under his feet, but when he says all
things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which did put all
things under him. That no man might quarrel at the word All, he excepts God
from the number of All those things that should be subdued unto Christ,
because it is God who subdues all other things to Christ, except himself.

Verse. 28. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son
also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may
be all in all. This he further illustrates, because the Mediatory Kingdom of
Christ being delivered up, as was now said, the Son himself is to be subjected
unto God, who has subdued all things to him, that God may be all in all, i.
e. Christ as man having laid aside his Mediatory Embassage, will most fully
manifest, that all things which were done by him as man, were done in the
power, authority, and Name of God; and that he, as man, is less than the
Father, being for ever united to his Body, the Church, is subject to the
Father; that the mediation, and means, and instruments, and helps which are now
used being laid aside, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, may supply all the
necessities of the Saints immediately; and may by his power be all means in
all his Saints, and may altogether extinguish the necessity of all means,
instruments, and helps by his immediate presence with them most fully for ever;
and he will more than supply the room of all those; and he himself by his
power and efficacy, will be more than all these, and what ever may be needful
for the most happy felicity of all his Saints.

Verse. 29. Else what shall they do, which are baptized for the dead, if the
dead rise not at all? Why are they baptized then for the dead? Argum. 13. That
there is a future Resurrection, he proves after this manner; Unless there be
a Resurrection of the Dead, what benefit will accrue to those that are tossed
with the waves of Persecution, for some that are dead, i. e. for Christ and the
Saints that are dead, whose Resurrection while they defend, they profess and
assert the Resurrection of Christ past, and of the Saints hereafter? (for so
the word To be baptized is taken, Mar. 10.38. and the Preposition (...)
signifies for, Act. 9.16.) And it is absurd that they who suffer Martyrdom for
defending the Resurrection of the Dead, should be disappointed of their hope:
Therefore there shall be a Resurrection.

Verse. 30. And why stand we in jeopardy every hour? Argum. 14. He confirms in
this the sense of his former Argument: If it seem not absurd that other Martyrs
should lose their labor, all Christians will at least think it absurd that we
Apostles should lose our labor, who Preaching and hoping for the Resurrection
of the Dead, are in continual dangers: Therefore there shall be a Resurrection.

Verse. 31. I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I
die daily. This Argument he confirms by the testimony of his own experience,
seriously affirming how certainly he gloried with the Corinthians in Christ,
so certainly did he daily undergo one death after another for the Gospel,
being every day cast into new dangers of his life.

Verse. 32. If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus,
what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we die.

33. Be not deceived, evil communications corrupt good manners.

In particular he gives instance of a notable danger, in fighting with beasts
at Ephesus, in a plain sense, and as men ordinarily understand this phrase; for
to condemn to the beasts was an usual kind of death, which Christians were
allotted to, as Histories make mention: What need the Apostle undergo this
danger? To what purpose had this been, unless a Resurrection had been to be
hoped and defended?

Let us eat] Argum. 15. If the dead arise not, the gluttonous Religion of
Epicures was best, Let us eat, and drink, for to morrow we shall die, as some
amongst them, like hogs, began to grunt: But this is absurd: Therefore the dead
shall rise: Instead of the Assumption he forbids that they attend not to these
rotten kind of speeches, which might infect them either with false doctrine, or
vicious manners.

Verse. 34. Awake to righteousness, and sin not: for some have not the knowledge
of God, I speak this to your shame. Further intimating that the Authors and
Fomenters of this Error amongst them, were sleeping in their ignorance of God,
in both bodily and spiritual intemperance of this world, drunk with pleasures,
he therefore exhorts them that they would awake to righteousness, i. e. That
they which minded their own matters, pleasing themselves, in their own wit,
would shake off slothfulness, and employ their wit about good and holy matters
rather; upbraiding all of them as a shameful thing to suffer those Atheists,
the Authors of this error.

Verse. 35. But some men will say, how are the dead raised up? and with what
body do they come? The third part of the Chapter follows, wherein he answers
three Objections of the Adversaries. The first is this, It seems impossible
that the dead should arise: for how should it be? Object. 2. No man can
describe with what bodies they shall arise. Object. 3. Verse. 51. What shall
become of those that are alive at the coming of the Lord, they therefore,
because they die not, cannot rise again?

Verse. 36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die. He
answers to the first Objection, It is not impossible that the dead should
arise, because the seed dies yearly, and rises again as it were.

Verse. 37. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall
be, but bare grain, it may chance of Wheat, or of some other grain.

38. But God gives it a body as it has pleased him, and to every seed its own
body.

He answers the second Objection, That our bodies, the same in substance, but
diverse in quality, shall rise again: This he confirms four ways; First, By
the example of Grains of Corn, as a bare Grain, dry and hard, etc. It is raised
in substance and kind the same, but diverse in quality, so our bodies, the same
in substance, but of most different qualities, shall arise.

Verse. 39. All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one kind of flesh of
men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds.
Secondly, From the like example of flesh: As God can, and daily does produce,
not only diverse seeds, but also diverse kinds of flesh, for all flesh is not of
the same kind, so he can raise the same flesh of the self same man, changing
his qualities.

40. Verse. There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: But the
glory of the terrestrial is one, and the glory of the celestial is another.

41. There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of
the Stars: for one Star differs from another Star in glory.

42. So also is the resurrection of the dead, it is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption:

43. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it
is raised in power:

44. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a
natural body, and there is a spiritual body.

Thirdly, From the like difference betwixt Stars and terrestrial bodies: As God
has beautified celestial bodies with a celestial, and terrestrial bodies with
a terrestrial glory, and has distinguished celestial bodies amongst themselves
with a different glory, as is to be seen in the Sun, Moon, and Stars; So also
the body in the resurrection, when it is raised it shall differ from it self
falling into the grave, as that which is incorruptible from that which is
corruptible, as that which is comely from that which is filthy, powerful from
that which is weak, spiritual from that which is natural: That is called a
natural body, which is quickened by the soul after the manner of living
Creatures, by means of meats, elements, etc. And that is a spiritual body,
which retaining the soul, is supported by the Spirit of God without means, as
the Angels.

Verse. 45. And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul, the
last Adam was made a quickening Spirit. He explains this last difference
betwixt a natural and a spiritual body, and proves it (because the phrase might
seem somewhat harsh) by leading us to the first Adam, as to the Original of our
first State in a natural body, and to CHRIST, the second Adam, as to the
Original of our second State in a spiritual body, and compares these two in a
threefold manner. The first comparison is, in the opposite state of a natural
and a spiritual body: The first Adam was made a living soul, not (giving life)
which had a life indeed, but supported, as other creatures are, with meat and
drink, etc. And not such as could continue life to the body without
nourishment; But Christ, the last Adam, is made a quickening Spirit, who could
communicate virtue to those that were his, by his Spirit, that without
nourishments of the body, the most blessed union of body and soul may be
preserved.

Verse. 46. Howbeit, that was not first, which is spiritual: but that which is
natural, and afterward that which is spiritual. The second comparison in
respect to Order; The first Adam had the precedence in the natural state of the
body: The second Adam was latter in the spiritual state of the body; for the
imperfect state ought to precede, so God is wont to proceed to the highest
perfection: He says not simply that Adam was before Christ, but that the
Natural state of the first Adam, is first in time in Adam, in Christ, and in
us: And our Spiritual state which is from Christ, is latter.

Verse. 47. The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord
from Heaven. The third comparison in the order and dignity of the person: The
first-Man, mere man, is of the earth, earthy, whose body rose out of the earth,
and is resolved again into earth, upon the substraction of food, whereupon he
could communicate unto us, nothing but a terrene life: But the second Adam, is
both man and God from Heaven, who although he has a body from the earth, yet
because he is God from Heaven, and therefore is called heavenly, as he could
support his body, that it should not see corruption, though in its own nature
terrene, and resoluble into dust, and as it being raised out of the grave, he
could make it every way glorious, immortal, and heavenly, not needing earthly
supports: So in like manner can he make our bodies such.

Verse. 48. As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy; and as is the
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. From these he proves the
future mutation of the qualities of the body, from earthly to heavenly, from
natural to spiritual, by four Arguments.

Argum. 1. Such as was the earthly Adam, the head of our stock, after the
fleshly propagation, such it became us to be born, viz. mortal: Therefore as
the heavenly Adam (our head in respect to regeneration and glorification) is
after his resurrection, viz. Spiritual, glorious, incorruptible, immortal, such
shall we be that are born again of him after our resurrection.

Verse. 49. And as we have born the image of the earthy, we shall also bear
the image of the heavenly. Argum. 2. From its future certainty; As sure as we
bear the image of the first Adam, in the qualities of our substance, being made
conform to him in soul and body; so sure shall we bear the image of the second
Adam, in the glorious qualities of our substance.

Verse. 50. Now this I say, Brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God: Neither does corruption inherit incorruption. Argum. 3. The
promises of glorifying our bodies, or of bringing us into the glorious Kingdom
of God, ought to be fulfilled: But flesh and blood, i. e. our bodies, as now
they are corruptible, cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, unless they be
fitted for that glorious state: Therefore our bodies shall be made meet, by
the mutation of their qualities, to enter into the Kingdom of Glory.

Corruption] By way of confirmation to this reason he adds, Argum. 4.
Corruption cannot inherit incorruption: Therefore necessary it is that our
bodies be changed in their qualities from corruptibility to incorruptibility.

Verse. 51. Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed, Objection 3. What shall become of those that are alive at the
coming of our Lord? How shall they arise, which shall not dye, but be found
alive by the Judge at his coming? He answers by opening the mystery, viz.
that all shall not die, nor rise again, but they shall be taken that remain
alive at the coming of our Lord, and changed into an eternal state of
immortality, either in glory, or torments, which change shall be in stead of
death and a resurrection.

Verse. 52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trumpet (for
the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we
shall be changed.) He shows the manner of this change, that it shall be in
the twinkling of an eye, i. e. in a moment, all that are alive and dead shall
be summoned by a fearful alarm to the judgment of God.

Verse. 53. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must
put on immortality. He gives two Reasons of this change. First, Mortality must
be swallowed up of immortality, and this mortal body must put on immortality:
Therefore they shall be changed that are found alive at the coming of our
Lord.

Verse. 54. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this
mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up of victory.

55. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

Reason 2. The Prophecy of Hosea ought to be fulfilled, chap. 13. v. 14. who
foretold our full victory over death and the grave: Therefore they that are
alive shall be changed at the coming of the Lord, which shall be in stead of
death.

Verse. 56. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. That
this victory may appear the greater, he intimates the victory we shall have
over sin and the Law, without which the grave cannot prevail any thing over us;
for unless satisfaction be given to the Law, sin, wrath, and death, remain in
full power: But after satisfaction is made to the Law for us, sin and wrath are
taken away, wherewith death is armed, as with a sting; which being disarmed is
abolished and triumphed over.

Verse. 57. But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ. He shows a twofold use of this victory: The first is, that
thanks may be given to God, who has given us through Christ victory over
death, sin, and the Law, yea verily he has imputed the victory of Christ to
us, and has made it ours; for he has died for us, and by his resurrection
has obtained for us victory over death, that he might make us conquerours.

Verse. 58. Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know, that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord. Another use of this doctrine is this, That under hope
of the free gift, at the day of resurrection, we would persevere constantly in
the Faith of the Gospel, and diligently endeavor the bringing forth of the
fruits of Faith, because in the resurrection the Lord will give us, whatever
we have lost with men, viz. the reward of good works.

CHAP. XVI.
THere are three parts of this last Chapter. In the first is contained the last
Article of the Epistle, concerning a Collection for the poor Jews, to verse. 5.
In the second is contained the conclusion, showing, for the most part familiar
matters, to verse. 19. In the third he mentions salutations of the Saints, to
the end.

Verse. 1. Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given order
to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. As touching the Collection: The
famine which was prophesied by Agabus, Act. 11.28. as also the persecution, did
much distress the Churches in Judea, wherefore the Apostles living at
Jerusalem, exhort Paul and Barnabas, that they would take care to make a
collection amongst the Gentiles, to succor the need of the poor Jews, Gal.
2.20. he speaks of this contribution, commanding that on the Lords Day
(whereupon all Christians ceased from their labors, and met publicly to the
Worship of God) that every one according to his ability, without vainglory,
should cast something into the Treasury.

There are six reasons of his Exhortation: The first is from the example of
other Churches, by name of those which were in Galatia, who were bound to the
same duty, under the same Precepts.

Verse. 2. Upon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in
store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come.
Reason 2. Because nothing is required of them unfitting or burdensome, but that
once every week, in convenient time and place, every one would contribute
according to that measure wherewith God had blessed him: And the manner is
plain, whereby the collection might be made publicly every Lords Day, and yet
every one should lay it by himself, i. e. no man knowing the sum: We may
imagine that they imitated the example of the Ancient Church, a bored Chest
being placed in the entrance to the house where they met for the Worship of God.

Lest when I come] Reason 3. Because he was about to come unto them, to
enquire of their obedience. Here we have the fourth Reason, lest upon their
putting off, or neglecting the matter, they might be found unprepared when the
Apostles should come, and might make their collection not so seasonable, with
greater difficulty and prejudice.

Verse. 3. And when I come, whomsoever you shall approve by your letters, them
will I send to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem. Reason 5. He prevents an
objection, lest there should be any suspicion of laying out their collection:
Behold, I will commit your charitable contribution to be carried to Jerusalem,
unto men approved, chosen by your selves, whom I will send together with you,
with letters.

Verse. 4. And if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with me. Reason 6.
Because this business so well likes me, that I am ready, not only to commend
your messengers to the Churches which are in Judea, by our Epistle, but if it
shall seem meet, I also have determined to go along with those whom you commit
the charge of this business to.

The Second Part.
Verse. 5. Now I will come unto you, when I shall pass thorough Macedonia: for I
do pass thorough Macedonia.

6. And it may be that I will abide, yea, and winter with you, that ye may
bring me on my journey whithersoever I go.

7. For I will not see you now by the way, but I trust to tarry a while with
you, if the Lord permit.

The second part of the Chapter is the Epilogue of the Epistle, containing for
the most part matters familiar, which also appertained to the edification of
the Corinthians: The Articles of this conclusion are six: The first concerns
his coming, whereof he gives them hopes, ver. 5. and of his stay among them,
for the confirmation of mutual friendship, and their consolation, if it was the
Will of God, ver. 6, 7.

Verse. 8. But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost.

9. For a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many
adversaries.

Why he deferred his coming, (determining to stay longer at Ephesus) till the
time of the Jews Feast, (which to that day, they that Judaized observed) he
gives two Reasons. 1. Because God had opened a great door, or offered an
abundant occasion for the gaining of many, or converting them to the Gospel,
and apparently gave a blessing to his labors, which he calls an effectual
door. Another Reason, because the tumult of adversaries was so great, his
Presence was most requisite, and Satan in his absence did much harm.

Verse. 10. Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear:
for he works the work of the Lord, as I also do.

11. Let no man therefore despise him, but conduct him forth in peace, that he
may come unto me, for I look for him with the Brethren.

Article 2. Wherein he carefully commends Timothy unto them, if he should
come to them, as his most dear Son (who is called the Apostles Son, because in
Preaching the Gospel he followed his steps, serving God holily, as he did)
that they would defend him from injuries, treat him honorably, bring him on
his journey when he returned, guard him from dangers by the way, that he
might come safe to him.

Verse. 12. As touching our brother Apollos, I greatly desired him to come unto
you with the Brethren, but his will was not at all to come at this time: but
he will come when he shall have convenient time. Article 3. Wherein (that the
Corinthians might not take it ill, that the Apostle while he came, did not
send Apollos the Evangelist, a man familiar with them, who watered the Apostles
planting amongst them) he clears himself, that he had not a will then to
come, but gives them hopes of his coming, when he shall have a fit opportunity.

Verse. 13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men: be strong.

14. Let all your things be done with charity.

Article 4. Wherein he exhorts them to five military duties of
Christian-souldiers. 1. That although neither he nor Apollos should come unto
them, yet in the mean time they should keep continual watch, lest Satan should
come upon them while they were secure, and drunk with worldly cares. 2. That
they should be constant in the Faith, firmly holding the truth of the Gospel,
being united unto Christ by Faith. 3. That they would show themselves men, in
every combat against the adversaries of Faith and their salvation. 4. That
they would be strong in the Power of God, and not faint under the evils they
any time met with. 5. That they would constitute Charity the Arbitrator of all
things, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, serving the common good in every thing.

Verse. 15. I beseech you, Brethren, (you know the house of Stephanas, that it
is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves, to the
Ministry of the Saints,)

16. That ye submit your selves to such, and to every one that helps with
us, and labors.

Article 5. Wherein he commends to them Stephanas, with his family, who in the
office of Deacon assisted him, that they would have honorable respects to him,
and his family: First, Because with the first they gave their names to Christ.
2. Because he willingly addicted himself in the office of a Deacon to the
Church of Corinth, and that according to the order which was required in the
constituting of Deacons: Therefore the Apostle wills them as subject to these,
that they give them due honor, or that which is convenient to their Ministry:
He understands not politic subjection only, in respect to their office, but
also moral, whereby we show our selves reverend and obedient to them, who
excel in virtue: In the mean time we exclude not that subjection which is due
to Deacons for their office sake, who administer with the rest of the
Presbytery about Ecclesiastical matters, wherein Stephanas with his family was
employed.

Verse. 17. I am glad of the coming of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus,
for that which was lacking on your part, they have supplied.

18. For they have refreshed my spirit and yours: therefore acknowledge ye
them that are such.

Article 6. Wherein he commends their sending of three Brethren from Corinth,
unto him, because they supplied the stead of the Corinthians in visiting of
him; They are said to have refreshed the Spirit of the Apostle, and the
Corinthians, because as they had gratified the Corinthians who sent them, so
likewise the Apostle to whom they were sent; wherefore he would have them
esteemed so much the more, both these, and they that were like unto them.

The third Part.
Verse. 19. The Churches of Asia salute you; Aquila and Priscilla salute you
much in the Lord, with the Church that is in their house.

20. All the Brethren geeet you; greet you one another with an holy kiss.

The third part of the Chapter follows, wherein after he has saluted the
Corinthians. 1. In the name of the Ephesians, and the rest of the Churches of
Asia. 2. In the name of Priscilla and Aquila and their families, verse. 19. 3.
In the name of the Brethren his companions, who lived in his society; He wills
them (as the Eastern manner was) to salute one another with a kiss (as we,
with joining right hands) without deceit or dissimulation, and that they
perform those things, and all other expressions of love holily.

Verse. 21. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand. Further he signs
this Epistle (being written by the hand of another) with a salutation, and his
own hand, that it may be known to be his own; Because in those times Epistles
were feigned in the name of the Apostles, 2 These. 2.1. Therefore it was needful
that by some manifest token they should be known to the Church.

Verse. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha. In the close of the Epistle he lays down an Apostolical
malediction against the haters and enemies of Christ, both secret and open,
using the words of extremest execration: For by this solemn form, Maranatha,
i. e. THE LORD COMES, the Church testified that they had performed all the
parts of their office toward such a man: And for the future by a common
consent let him alone, and referred him to the last judgment of God, or to the
coming of the Lord, as one that was desperate amongst men: In the mean while
the Apostle does not excommunicate hypocrites from the external society of the
Church, but threatens utter destruction unless they repent.

Verse. 23. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

24. My love be with you all in Christ Jesus.

Finally after his Apostolical benediction, by his Authority applied to the
Church of Corinth, he signifies his special love toward them, that they may
be convinced in themselves, that whatever he had set down in this Epistle,
whether by way of reprehension, or exhortation, it came all from his love
toward them.

The Second Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, Analytically expounded.
The Contents of the Epistle.
THe first Epistle did not want its effect amongst many of the Corinthians, yet
there were some, especially vain-talking Teachers, who persevered in their
contumacy, and not only they themselves set at naught the Apostles Authority,
but also dared publicly to compare themselves with him, and to prefer
themselves before him, and to diminish the Authority of the Apostle amongst the
people, with no small detriment and prejudice to the Gospel. That he might
restrain these, and find all things at his coming better ordered in the
Church of Corinth, he writ this second Epistle which is wholly Apologetical.

Besides an Exordium and Conclusion, there are three parts of the Epistle: In
the first, having removed the scandal of the Cross which was laid upon him, and
the suspicion of his alienated mind from the Corinthians, Chap. 1. and 2. He
defends his Ministry, Chap. 2. and 3. And proves his constancy and fidelity
therein, Chap. 4. and 5. Exhorting them to bring forth the fruits of his
Ministry, Chap. 6. And that they would persuade themselves of his good will
toward them, Chap. 7.

In the second part of the Epistle, he exhorts them to make a collection for
the poor Brethren, the afflicted Jews, Chap. 8 and 9.

In the third part he vindicates his Authority from contempt, and the
aspersions of false Teachers, (who labored to render the Apostle vile amongst
the Corinthians) Chap. 10. and holily boasts himself against them, Chap. 11.
and 12. endeavoring to render his Authority formidable, and also amicable to
the Corinthians, Chap. 13.

CHAP. I.
THere are two parts of the Chapter, besides the inscription of the Epistle; in
the former he removes the scandal of the Cross and afflictions, wherewith he
was not long since oppressed, to verse. 12. In the second part, he removes the
suspicion of an alienated mind from the Corinthians, to the end.

The Inscription of the Epistle which is instead of an Exordium, verse. 1. and
2. serves to prepare the minds of the Corinthians, for receiving the things
which he wrote, intimating five Reasons to that end.

Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the Will of God, and Timothy our
Brother, unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, with all the Saints which
are in all Achaia; The first Reason: Because Paul the Author of the Epistle*
was an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and of chiefest Authority in the Church. Reason
2. Because he did not assume to himself this honor (as certain false Brethren
feigned themselves servants of Christ, when they were not sent of God) but
obtained it by the special Will of God. Reason 3. Because he had brought in
Timothy with himself to witness against them, if they should not admit of this
Truth of God, written by him. Reason 4. Because what he was about to write,
appertained not only to the Church of Corinth, but to all the Saints and
Churches in all Achaia, to wit, to know this asserted truth which he was about
to write.

Verse. 2. Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ. Reason 5. Comprehended in the salutation or Apostolical
benediction: Because Paul, the Author of this Epistle, would not that the
dignity of the Church of Corinth should any ways be eclipsed (although he
knew there were most corrupt persons among them, not only which lay hid, but
openly showed themselves enemies to the Apostle) but constantly accounted the
Church at Corinth a true Church, to which, by his Authority he applied the
benediction of the Gospel, and doubted not to wish them all good things:
Therefore they were obliged to receive the things which he wrote, with that
submission and readiness of mind that was fitting.

The first Part.
Verse. 3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of mercies, and the God of all comforts, In the first part of the Chapter the
Apostle proves that the Corinthians ought not to despise him, by reason of the
Cross or afflictions, and that by twelve Arguments.

Argum. 1. In the midst of afflictions I find God the Father most merciful, and
abundant in all consolation, so that I have cause rather to bless God, than to
complain of my calamities, sent of God: Therefore ought you not to contemn me,
or to be offended because of my afflictions.

Verse. 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God. Argum. 2. By the experience which I have in afflictions,
I am made more fit to minister comfort (...) others that are afflicted:
Therefore ought you not to be offended in me, etc.

Verse. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ. Argum. 3. Afflictions are a part of Martyrdom, and for
the Gospel, or for Christ, are inflicted upon me with honor, that they may
be called the afflictions of Christ by way of participation; For what things
are inflicted upon the Martyrs, Christ takes upon himself, as Act. 9. Saul,
Saul, why do thou persecute me? Therefore, etc.

In us] Argum. 4. Christ gave testimony (from his superabundant and seasonable
consolations toward me, in the midst of my afflictions) that the miseries
which I suffer are inflicted upon me for the defense of the Gospel: Therefore,
etc.

Verse. 6. And whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and
salvation, which is effectual in enduring the same sufferings which we also
suffer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation:
Argum. 5. Those afflictions, as also these comforts, tended to the benefit of
the Corinthians, who might be strengthened in the Faith, and built up diverse
ways to salvation, and take comfort from the Apostles experience: Therefore
ought they not to be offended in the Apostles sufferings.

Which effectually produceth] Argum. 6. Because the salvation of the
Corinthians was effectually to be promoted, by his suffering such kind of
afflictions, by which (as by the way to salvation freely given) they were
earnestly to strive: Therefore, etc.

And the hope] Argum. 7. I have certain hope of you, that you will not despise
us, nor take ill the afflictions which ye shall suffer: Therefore ye are
bound not to frustrate our hope concerning you.

Verse. 7. And our hope of you is steadfast, knowing that as you are partakers of
the sufferings, so shall you be also of the consolation. Argum. 8. I know that
you are made both partakers of our sufferings by your sympathy, and shall
partake of our consolations: Therefore you are bound not to despise us because
of the afflictions which we suffer.

Verse. 8. For we would not, Brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which
came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength,
insomuch that we despaired even of life.

9. But we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust
in our selves, but in God which raises the dead:

10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; in whom we
trust that he will yet deliver us.

Argum. 9. From his special example, and late sufferings in Asia: So far am I
from being ashamed of my afflictions, that I am desirous all should understand
how great they are, and also my infirmity, that God may be glorified the more:
Therefore ought you not to despise me for my afflictions. He shows the
greatness of his afflictions, and his own infirmities in this, that in the
tumult at Ephesus (whereof he speaks, Act. 19.23.) or some such like danger,
he kn^w not which way to turn himself to escape the danger of his life,
expecting in himself nothing but certain death.

That we should not trust] Argum. 10. I have learned by this experience and
the like, not to confide in my self, but in God alone, who can deliver from
imminent death, those that are ready to dye, and raise up them which are dead,
to which end God was pleased to bring me into danger: Therefore ye ought not
to despise my affliction.

We hope] Argum. 11. By this late experience and such like, God has stirred
up in me a firm hope, of my deliverance for the future, though I fall into new
calamities: Therefore ought you not to despise my affliction.

Verse. 11. You also helping together by prayer for us, that for the gift
bestowed upon us by the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many on
your behalf. Argum. 12. Because the knowledge of his sufferings, and his
deliverance should stir up the Corinthians, among others, to pray for him, and
so to obtain his deliverance for the future, and by consequence also to
thanksgiving by many unto God: which Argument being considered, the Corinthians
could not despise Paul for the afflictions which he suffered, at least they
ought not to be offended in him.

The second Part.
Verse. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards. The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein he removes their
suspicion of his estranged mind from them, (which the false Apostles, his
adversaries, seem to f^ment with frivolous Arguments) and proves that they
ought not to surmise any change of his carriage toward them, or that his mind
was alienated from them, by six Arguments, after which he answers two or three
Objections, which were brought to the contrary by his adversaries.

Argum. 1. Wherein he gives an account why his safety ought to be commended
to them all, and also proves that he continued the same as the Corinthians had
found him, in so many months trial that he had stayed amongst them: In
simplicity, and godly sincerity, I have always behaved my self so, as to
approve my self to God, my own and other men's consciences: Therefore there is
no reason that you should suspect any change, either of my carriage or
affection toward you.

Not with] Argum. 2. Hereby he confirms the former: The fountain of my
conversation was the Grace of God, which is like it self, and always constant,
not that subtle wisdom, whereby carnal men, for their profits sake counterfeit
respect to others, which indeed they have not: Therefore let no suspicion be
amongst you about the change of my carriage and affection toward you.

Verse. 13. For we write none other things unto you, than what you read, or
acknowledge, and I trust you shall acknowledge even to the end. He confirms
what he had said before, adding a third Argument: Because his deeds and his
writings were answerable to each other (wherein he seems to tax his
adversaries, who carried themselves otherwise, as in the former Argument) which
he proves by the testimony of the Corinthians themselves, who although they
were somewhat disturbed by the whisperings of adversaries, yet they
acknowledged his sincerity and constancy, and he hoped they would afterward
do the like: Therefore etc.

Verse. 14. As also you have acknowledged us in part; that we are your
rejoicing, even as ye also are ours, in the day of our Lord Jesus. Argum. 4.
Because in some measure (although not with that confidence as became them
against the false Apostles) the Corinthians boasted of their conversion by the
Apostle, and the Apostle boasted of them, as the fruit of his Apostleship, and
further, he hoped to glory in the day of judgment: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 15. And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before; that you
might have a second benefit:

16. And to pass by you into Macedonia, and to come again out of Macedonia,
unto you, and of you to be brought on-ward my way to Judea.

Argum. 5. Because he had a purpose to go to the Corinthians in confidence of
mutual good will, that he might complete the first benefit of their
conversion, by confirming their Faith, as a second benefit; and that he might
receive expressions of their good will toward him, in the duties which he
reckons up, to the increase of their mutual love: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 17. When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness? or the things
that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should
be yea, yea, and nay, nay? Argum. 6. By answering the Objection proposed, I
have deferred my coming unto you longer than I would, not out of the levity of
a mind changed, but, as afterward it shall appear, out of love to you, that I
might spare you, who ought to be chastised with the censures of the Church,
had I come to you before: Therefore ought you not to suspect the alienation of
my mind from you: The Objection is propounded in the same terms, in which his
adversaries did reproach him, as vain and light, speaking like carnal and
unregenerate men, and promising what he intended not to perform, as those that
slightly promise, and easily change their mind, neither whose words (and by
consequence) nor doctrine carried any certainty, to whom therefore no credit
was to be given.

Verse. 18. But as God is true, our word toward you, was not yea, and nay. He
answers the Objection, and because he is more careful that nothing should be
imputed to his Doctrine, as also to his Credit; he answers first for his
Doctrine, and confirms the truth thereof by five Reasons. Reason 1. Because his
Doctrine was the Word of God, it must of necessity be true: because God is
faithful and true, whose dictates and precepts only he taught among them, not
sometimes affirming, sometimes denying, as those that are not constant to
themselves, use to do: Therefore they were to make no doubt of the truth of his
doctrine.

Verse. 19. For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us,
even by me, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was
yea. Reason 2. My Doctrine, and the Doctrine of my companions contained nothing
but Jesus Christ only, who is the unchangeable Son of God, and the eternal
verity always constant to himself: Therefore you are not to make any doubt of
my Doctrine.

Verse. 20. For all the Promises of God in him are yea, and in him, Amen, unto
the glory of God by us. Reason 3. Confirming the former. All the Promises of
God in and through Christ are firm, unchangeable, and complete; partly inasmuch
as he is the Son of God, by whom all things are made; partly inasmuch as he
is Mediator, God-man, who completed for us our Redemption, and procured it by
his merit, that the good things promised might be performed to us, and really
he applies them to us: Therefore our preaching which contains nothing else, is
necessarily certain, and no doubt to be made of it.

To the glory of God] Reason 4. As the Promises of God are yea and Amen in
Christ, i. e. that is, really and indeed ratified and complete, and so they are
acknowledged and preached by us, it makes to the glory of God, who will not
have his Promises fulfilled but in Christ: Therefore our preaching is so sure
and firm, as the purpose of God is in glorifying himself in his Son, neither
must you doubt any thing in the matter.

Verse. 21. Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed
us, is God,

22. Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.

Reason 5. God is the Author of this our Faith in Christ, confirming both the
preaching of us Apostles, and the Faith of you Corinthians (as many of you as
are sincere) partly by communicating the several gifts of the Spirit, as it
were an unction from Christ, partly by setting to his seal to our Faith, making
us certain of the Truth of the Gospel, and stirs up ineffable and glorious joy
in us; which is, as it were the earnest of our future happiness: Therefore our
preaching is sure, nor ought you to make any doubt of it.

All these Arguments being weighed, upon no ground could the Corinthians
suspect, that in the preaching of the Apostles, so many ways divinely
confirmed, there could be any uncertainty or falsehood; and so he prevents an
Objection, as it tended to destroy the Truth of the Gospel.

Verse. 23. Moreover I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I
came not as yet unto Corinth. Here he answers the Objection, so far as
concerned his credit and carriage, by showing the reason of his not coming
unto them, viz. That time of repentance being granted to the Corinthians, he
might spare them, i. e. restrain himself from a severe course with them, which
at present he was forced to use; and he confirms his Word with an oath,
because so the gravity of the matter required: Therefore not out of any levity
did he defer his coming unto them.

Verse. 24. Not for that we have dominion over your Faith, but are helpers of
your joy: for by Faith ye stand. Hence arises another Objection: Therefore
thou make thy self Lord of our Faith, as if thou could punish when thou
would. He answers by denying any Mastery, affirming the power of his
Ministry, and that to be employed to the benefit of the Church, that timely
Censures, according to the Will of Christ, being used, those that repented
might at length rejoice: He gives an account why he denied any dominion over
their Faith, because Faith is the bond of conjunction with Christ, by which
Faith we stand fast in the Grace of God, in right and title unto Christ, in
the possession of things present, and in hopes of future good things: Therefore
Faith admits no Lord, besides God; it admits of men only as Ministers, and
helpers.

CHAP. II.
THere are two parts of this Chapter; In the first he proceeds in his Apology
for his constant good will toward the Corinthians, to verse. 14. In the other
he begins his Apology for his Ministry, to the end.

In the first, to the former Arguments (whereby he proves that his mind was
not alienated from the Corinthians) he adds eight signs of his good will
toward them.

Verse. 1. But I determined this with my self, that I would not come again to
you in heaviness. Sign 1. That the cause why he changed his purpose concerning
his coming to them, was, lest he should bring sadness to the Corinthians, at
his coming, being compelled more severely to correct their manners, which he
did desire might be amended before his coming.

Verse. 2. For if I make you sorry, who is he then that makes me glad, but
the same which is made sorry by me? Sign 2. That his sympathy was so much with
the Corinthians, that he could not, unless they were glad, rejoice, neither
moderate himself from sorrow, so long as any one amongst them, by reason of him
remained sad.

Verse. 3. And I wrote this same unto you, lest when I came I should have sorrow
from them of whom I ought to rejoice, having confidence in you all, that my joy
is the joy of you all. Sign 3. That the writing, not only of the former
Epistle, but also of this second, was undertaken for this end, lest if he had
come to those, and had found them impenitent, besides his sorrow for their sin,
he might have been forced to a new sorrow, which necessary severity would
create both to them and himself.

Having confidence] Sign 4. That he was persuaded, that his joy was matter of
joy to the Corinthians themselves, and their joys were both to him and them
common.

Verse. 4. For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with
many tears, not that you should be grieved, but that ye might know the love
that I have more abundantly unto you. Sign. 5. That the former Epistle, which
necessarily was more sharp, was not writ by him without tears, and truly for
that end, that he might testify his ready mind toward them, not that he
might make them sorry.

Verse. 5. But if any have caused grief, he has not grieved me but in part:
that I may not over-charge you all. Sign 6. His friendly mind toward the
Corinthians, That the Apostle did esteem as nothing, that heaviness which the
incestuous person had created to him, in comparison with that sadness which he
had caused to all the Corinthians: He adds ( in part) because his grief was
now turned into joy through the incestuous persons repentance: Therefore by way
of mitigation he says, that he added ( in part) for the incestuous persons
sake now a penitent, lest he should cast a burden on him already burdened in
himself, if he should too much aggravate his sin.

Verse. 6. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of
many. Sign 7. That now he was ready to receive the penitent incestuous person
into favor, and so to give a proof of his lenity and meekness, that it might
appear that the former severity came not, but from love and his desire of
advantage to the Church of Corinth. To which end he declares that the
chastisement of this Incestuous person, inflicted by the Authority of many ( i.
e. the Governors of the Church, the Church it self consenting) after his
repentance appeared, was sufficient.

Verse. 7. So that contrariwise, ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort
him, lest perhaps such an one should be swallowed up with over much sorrow.
That he might show his meekness toward the penitent Incestuous person, he
advises that he may by the Corinthian Church be again received into favor,
for these six Reasons annexed.

Reason 1. Because they are bound to forgive the penitent, and to comfort him,
no less than they were bound to excommunicate him, being impenitent.

Lest perhaps] Reason 2. Because otherwise it was dangerous, lest he should
be swallowed up with over much sorrow, except they should now receive the
penitent into favor again.

Verse. 8. Wherefore I beseech you, that you would confirm your love toward
him. Reason 3. Because (especially they were so desired by the Apostle) they
are bound to testify their love toward him, to wit, by showing themselves to
have excommunicated that man, not that they might destroy him, but that by
repentance, they might save him.

Verse. 9. For to this end also did I write, that I might know the proof of you,
whether you be obedient in all things. Reason 4. Because by this means they
were about to show themselves obedient to the command of the Apostle in all
things, as before in excommunicating, so now also, by absolving him from the
bond of excommunication, wherein the Apostle did prove their obedience.

Verse. 10. To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also* for if I forgave any
thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it in the person of
Christ.

11. Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his
devices.

Reason 5. Because the Apostle, for the sake of the Corinthians, had granted
him pardon, and was about to forgive him: Therefore it was meet that they for
the Apostles sake should forgive this man also.

Get an advantage] Reason 6. Lest through the craftiness of Satan, the Church
should suffer harm: except now they should forgive him repenting; for by ever
much severity sinners may be brought into desperation, or a depar^ing from the
Church, because of Satan, whose arts and deceits to do harm are not unknown to
the Church.

Verse. 12. Furthermore, when I came to Troas to preach Christ's Gospel, and a
door was opened unto me of the Lord,

13. I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my Brother, but
taking my leave of them, I went from thence into Macedonia.

Sign 8. His constant good will toward the Corinthians; That he could not any
where rest, also that great hope of promoting the Gospel being offered, as in
Troas, until he had known of Titus, whom he had sent to Corinth, concerning
their affairs, for the cause of meeting him he went into Macedonia, that by
him he might be made more certain concerning the affairs of the Corinthians,
and that he might learn, whether as yet it was a convenient time to come to
the Corinthian^. All which signs of his ready mind toward the Corinthians,
being considered, the Apostle persuades himself that the suspicion that his
mind was alienated from them, was removed.

The second Part.
Verse. 14. Now thanks be unto God, which always causes us to triumph in
Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place.
The second part of the Chapter follows, in which he defends his Ministry,
and proves it to be commendable, by five Arguments, intimating by the way,
that he, whilst he was absent from them, was not idle, but was busied in the
work of the Lord with success.

Argum. 1. Because Christ in his Ministry, and he himself in Christ did
triumph concerning his enemies, by snatching many out of the power of Satan,
and by bringing them to the Faith of the Gospel.

The savour] Argum. 2. Because by his Ministry, (whatsoever the success were)
the sweetness of the Gospel and its efficacy was manifested in every place,
whilst the knowledge of Christ did breathe a quickening life, by which sinners
are quickened and converted unto God.

Verse. 15. For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish.

16. To the one we are the savor of death unto death, and to the other a
savor of life unto life: and who is sufficient for these things?

By preventing an Objection, that the Apostles and their preaching would give
an ill savor to many; He answers and adds, Argum. 3. That notwithstanding
the Apostles themselves with their Ministry, were acceptable unto God, and
through Christ brought an acceptable savor to God, no less in the conviction
and perdition of the Reprobates (to which the Gospel by accident was a savor
of death) than in the faith and salvation of those that believe and are saved,
to whom the Gospel, both in its own nature, and proper effect, was a quickening
savor to life and salvation.

Who is sufficient] Argum. 4. Because seeing that few were fit and sufficient
Ministers (as the interrogation shows) whose Ministry God might prosper and
accept, that he was in the number of those that are made fit for these things
which are spoken of: secretly checking the false Apostles, which were not fit
Ministers for the conversion of sinners, although they did prefer themselves
before the Apostles.

Verse. 17. For we are not as many which corrupt the Word of God; but as of
sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God speak we in Christ. He confirms
the next Argument, more openly noting his enemies, and those that envy him, and
also adds Argum. 5. From the unlikeness betwixt himself, and many Preachers; if
they did not mix false doctrine; yet they did mingle their own passions with
true Doctrine, serving their ambition and covetousness, and bending the
Doctrine to the favor of men: But the Apostle 1 In Sincerity, i. e. neither
mixing false doctrine, nor corrupt affections. 2 Of God, i. e. with confidence
and authority, knowing from whence it came. 3 In the sight of God, i. e.
calling God to witness, and looking at his glory. 4 In Christ, i. e. he did
speak in the virtue of Christ, and acknowledgement of his strength: From which
it follows, that his Ministry was commendable, and not to be contemned in any
wise.

CHAP. III.
HE proceeds to defend his Ministry against slanderers. There are two parts
of this Chapter: In the first he proves his Ministry to be commendable, by
five Arguments, to verse. 6. In the second he illustrateth and confirms the
last Argument by comparing the Legal Ministry, or the Covenant of Works, with
the Gospel, or the Covenant of Grace.

Verse. 1. Do we begin again to commend our selves? or need we, as some
others, Epistles of commendation to you, or Letters of commendation from you?
Argum. 1. Of the commendation of his Ministry, containing also his clearing
himself from the desire of vainglory.

The efficacy of my Ministry is so apparent to all the Churches, that I need
not any commendatory Letters from any particular person, or from you, or from
others, neither do I say these things, because I care for vainglory, but that
I may defend my Ministry against my enemies for your good: Therefore my
Ministry is commendable.

Verse. 2. Ye are our Epistle, written in our hearts, known and read of all
men. Argum. 2. Because your conversion, O Corinthians, to the profession of the
Faith by my Ministry, suffices in my conscience and yours, for a commendatory
Epistle, which is understood and acknowledged amongst all.

Verse. 3. Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ
ministered by us, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God,
not in Tables of stone, but in fleshy Tables of the heart. Argum. 3. by
confirmation of the former: Because my Ministry was effectual, not only in
bringing you to the profession of the Faith; but also to your saving
regeneration, by the special operation of Christ's Spirit, this is that which
he says that they were the Epistle, which Christ himself by his Ministry
has written, by writing his will in their hearts by the Holy Ghost, after a
more excellent manner, than any thing was wont to be writ with Ink upon Paper
or Tables of Stone.

Verse. 4. And such trust have we through Christ to Godward:

5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves: but our sufficiency is of God:

Argum. 4. Because he himself (as it becomes a faithful servant) does not
ascribe the whole confidence of glorying, to himself, but to his Lord, Jesus
Christ, in the sight of God.

Which Argument he illustrates, partly by confessing his natural impotency to
think that which is good, or to the least beginnings of a good work, much less
to the converting the Corinthians, partly by acknowledging the Grace of God, as
the fountain of his sufficiency, in that he is fitted to communicate so much
Grace to others.

Verse. 6. Who also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives l^fe.
Argum. 5. Because his Ministry is the Ministry of the New Covenant, not of
the Law and Covenant of Works. He confirms this Argument with a sevenfold
Comparison of the Ministry of both Covenants.

The second Part.
Not of the Letter] Compar. 1. The Ministry of the Law, or the Covenant of
Works is only the Letter written or spoken, without efficacy, without all
spiritual virtue to perform that which it commands: But the Ministry of the
Gospel, or the Covenant of Grace through Christ, is the Ministering of the
Spirit, because according to, and by that, the Holy Ghost is administered,
whereby the hearer is quickened and strengthened to embrace that which is
propounded.

Killeth] Compar. 2. Confirming the former. The Ministry of the Law of Works,
or the written Letter only convinces of sin, and kills the sinner, by
pronouncing to him the sentence of death. But the Ministry of the Gospel, or
grace in the New Covenant shows liberty from sin, absolves the sinner, and so
brings him life.

Verse. 7. But if the ministration of death written and engraven on stones was
glorious, so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face
of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away:

8. How shall not the ministration of the Spirit rather be glorious?

In Stones] Compar. 3. The Law of Works which only administers death (for
according to this Covenant no man does obtain righteousness or life) was
engraven in stones, to signify that the heart by it cannot be mollified nor
renewed, but remains dead: But the Gospel of Grace is writ in the fleshy
Tables of the heart, i. e. in hearts, by the power of the holy Ghost, quickened
and mollified, it is so imprinted, that the virtue of divine Grace, may be
discerned in all the expressions of the heart.

Glorious] Compar. 4. The Ministry of the Covenant of Works, which is the
Ministry of death to all that have sinned, was truly glorious, as it appeared
in Moses (for justice is glorious in punishing of sin) But the Ministry of the
New Covenant, which is the Ministry of the Spirit quickening, is more
glorious; for as in Moses pronouncing the curse of the Law against sinners, his
bodily glory did shine: but O how much spiritual glory does shine in the face
of Christ, setting sinners at liberty by his Grace!

Verse. 9. For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. Compar. 4. The Ministry of the
Law, or the Old Covenant of Works is a Ministry of condemnation for sin,
therefore indeed glorious: But the Ministry of the Gospel, or the New Covenant,
is the Ministry of the Righteousness of Christ, and absolution from sin; and
therefore so much the more glorious, by how much absolution and justification
do excel condemnation and sin. Because by the Covenant of Works we are all
accused of sin, we are all condemned, and made obnoxious to death: Therefore
its Ministry is called the Ministry of sin, condemnation and death.

Verse. 10. For even that which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect,
by reason of the glery that excels. Compar. 5. The Ministry of the Law,
although it was glorious, was exceedingly excelled by the glory of the
Ministry of the Gospel, or of Grace, that it not deserves to be called
glorious, but let it vanish rather in comparison, as the glory of the Stars,
when the Sun appears, is obscured: But the Ministry of the Gospel, is simply,
and by way of excellency, glorious.

Verse. 11. For if that which was done away was glorious, much more that which
remains is glorious. Compar. 6. The Ministry of the Covenant of Works, in
respect to the annexed ceremonies, has only the glory of temporal
dispensation, because so long it was to endure, whilst men in the infancy of
the Church, convicted of sins, and of their own impotency to deliver
themselves, were taught to fly unto Christ, and as it were by the hand of a
Schoolmaster might be led to him: which manner of instructing, the Church
being now at its full growth, and continuing under the brightne^s of the
revealed Gospel, is abolished as unprofitable: But the Ministry of the New
Covenant has permanent glory, until the glorious coming of Christ.

Verse. 12. Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of
speech:

13. And not as Moses, which put a veil over his face, that the children of
Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished.

Compar. 7. The Ministry of the New Covenant is plain and perspicuous, so that
the Ministers thereof can plainly and confidently preach the way of Salvation,
having Christ now revealed, who in times past being to come was hoped for: But
the Ministry of the Law, as it did appear in the type of the Mosaical
ministration was obscure, and wrapped up in types.

Put] He follows this comparison to the end of the Chapter, illustrating the
latter part thereof to the last verse, in this sense. Moses the Minister of the
Law turned from the Tabernacle, from the Altar, from the Ark, and the
Propitiatory, speaking with his face veiled, signified to the people, and
typically related the nature of the legal Covenant of Works, and of its
Ministry divided from Christ, and did also figure out the blindness of the
people under the legal Covenant, because they did not perceive Christ to be
the end of the Law, and temporal ceremonies now abolished.

Verse. 14. But their minds were blinded: for until this day remains the same
veil untaken away in the reading of the Old Testament: which veil is done away
in Christ.

15. But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart.

The Apostle observes that now blindness also may be perceived in the Jews,
who while they read the Old Testament, they see nothing besides the veil of
ceremonies, because the veil of ignorance and infidelity remains upon their
minds, which veil, represented by the type of the external veil covering Moses
his face, by Christ is taken away from all the Faithful, for righteousness,
life, virtue; and lastly, all grace and glory is published and communicated to
the Faithful in Christ: But hitherto this veil does remain upon the hearts of
the unbelieving Jews.

Verse. 16. Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be
taken away. He has hope of the Jews Conversion, when by the Grace of God the
heart of the Israelites, or the Doctrine of Moses now veiled, should be turned
by them to God, i. e. should be brought according to this typical
signification to Christ, who is the end of the Law: Then the veil of ignorance,
and of the darkness of ceremonies, should be taken from them, as the veil was
taken from the face of Moses, when he entered in unto God sitting betwixt the
Cherubins; chiefly that they might see God their Lord, and their Savior
Christ, and might acknowledge him to be the true end of the whole Law*

Verse. 17. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty. The reason of this is given: Because 1. Christ is the Spirit,
or the Soul of all ceremonies, that a spiritual thing is signified by them. 2.
Christ is also the Spirit, or the Soul of the Moral Law, because he fulfilled
the Law, in whom alone the perfect righteousness of the Law is to be found. 3.
Christ is the Spirit, because he quickens those that believe to new obedience
and life everlasting, and he delivers those from sin and misery: for when it
is said, Where the Spirit of Christ the Lord is, or where Christ is, there is
liberty; the liberty is to be understood, not from the obedience of the
Commandments, but from the ceremonial yoke, from the bondage of sin, and yoke
of the Legal Covenant, and all evils which do follow from its violation:
Liberty, I say, was given to the Faithful by the Spirit of the Gospel, at
leastwise that which belongs to them of right, although not always according
to sense, nor ever before the end of life, as to a full possession: For
although the Spirit with a loud voice proclaims, that there is a gate opened
unto us, that we may go out of prison, yet we by reason of the weakness of
Faith, do go slowly forth. And this is the Explication of the first part of the
Comparison concerning the Ministry of the Law.

Verse. 18. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. Here follows another branch of the Comparison, concerning
the Ministry of the Gospel in those that believe, which is propounded in this
sense: But we that by the Ministry of the Gospel believe in Christ, the veil
of ceremonies and ignorance, the veil of infidelity and hardness of heart also
being removed, are freely admitted to the clear beholding of Christ, and the
glory of the grace of God shining in the Gospel, as in a glass, and beholding
Christ by Faith we are sanctified, and more and more made happy in conformity
with Christ, increased daily by degrees, from one measure of glory and sanctity
to another, and that by the powerful working of the Holy Ghost. Sanctification
is called glory, because Sanctification is the beginning of Glorification, for
by that the Image of God is repaired in us, which is our glory.

CHAP. IV.
HE goes on to defend his Ministry. There are two parts of this Chapter, in
the first he proves his faithfulness, or sincerity in the Ministry, by seven
Arguments, to the sixth verse. In the second he confirms the seventh Argument,
by answering the objections concerning the scandal of the Cross lying upon him,
to the end.

Verse. 1. Therefore se^ing we have this Ministry, as we have received mercy,
we faint not. Argum. 1. The inward testimony of so glorious a Ministry
committed unto me by the mercy of God, is effectual to sustain me, lest I be
overcome in the doing of my duty, with the hurthen of evils, and that by the
measure of grace given to me, I go forward valiantly* From hence therefore it
appears, that I am sincere and faithful: For modesty sake he joyneth others,
but he himself in the conflict was especially aimed at by his Adversaries.

Verse. 2. But having renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
Argum. 2. I have renounced ambition, covetousness, and the other shameful
lusts, which some secretly indulging, do cover this their disgrace in corners,
under other, or the like veils and pretenses: Therefore I am faithful.

Not with] Argum. 3. I have not walked in craftiness, deceitfully handling the
Word of God, or bending and fitting that to the dispositions of men, as the
false Apostles do: Therefore I am faithful.

By manifestation] Argum. 4. I have carried my self so mildly in the clea^
preaching of the Word of God, that the consciences of all men are compelled to
acknowledge my integrity, of which thing also I have God to my witness:
Therefore I am faithful.

Verse. 3. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

4. In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them that believe
not, le^t the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine unto them.

Object. But how comes it to pass that thy Doctrine is not understood by so
many wise and potent men, if it be so clearly taught? He answers, that the
ignorance of the Gospel so plainly unfolded to them, was no argument of the
obscurity of the Doctrine, but of the incredulity of the hearer, and his future
perdition from the blindness of unbelievers, blinded by the Devil, whom the
world serves. For the Devil further blinds the blind Infidels, lest they
should see God offering himself in Christ, lest they should behold Christ to
their Salvation, shining in the Gospel, who has brought forth the invisible
God as to our view by his Doctrine and Power manifested in the flesh, that we
may behold God in Christ, the true Image of God the Father.

Verse. 5. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our
selves, your servants for Jesus sake. Argum. 5. Of the Apostles fidelity, I
(says he) seek the glory of Christ alone, and acknowledge Christ only, Lord
in the Church. Truly I declare my self, and other Teachers, not only Ministers
of Christ, but also of his people, that Christ alone may be exalted: Therefore
I show my self faithful.

Verse. 6. For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined
into our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ. Argum. 6. Confirming the former, wherein he compares his
Conversion from Pharisaism, to the creation of light out of darkness; God, who
by his Omnipotent Word has produced light out of darkness, by no less efficacy
has he brought me lost sinner out of the darkness of Pharisaism, and sin,
and has so powerfully enlarged my heart, illuminated by the light of Christ
his glorious Son, that I cannot but communicate to others this glorious
knowledge of the grace of God given to me, manifestly shining in Christ:
Therefore it behooves me to be faithful.

Verse. 7. But we have these treasures in earthen vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us. Argum. 7. God, by showing my
infirmity in all exercises, and also by maintaining his strength in me under
frequent afflictions, and by keeping me constant hitherto, has rendered my
faithfulness commendable with all men: Therefore I can affirm my self faithful.

The Second Part.
He so handles this argument, that in the mean while he solves two
objections, that he might take away the scandal of the Cross.

Earthen] Object. 1. In the mean while, thy condition of life is miserable and
contemptible, as a certain earthen vessel. He answers four manner of ways.

1. That it is true, that he is an earthen vessel, frail and contemptible, but
not withstanding he contains the Treasure of Grace, and the knowledge of the
Gospel.

May be of God] Furthermore he answers, that that happened by the Wisdom of
God, lest the glory of the Conversion and Salvation of so many men should be
ascribed to the virtue of the Apostle, that it should be wholly ascribed unto
God, for by so much the more the Power of God is conspicuous in great works, by
how much the weakness of the Instrument more evidently appears.

Verse. 8. We are troubled ^n every side, yet not distressed: we are
perplexed, but not in despair:

9. Persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but not destroyed.

He answers: 3. That all his afflictions are moderated, and he himself is
upheld by God in all things, that he is not destitute of the help of God, does
not sink under his burden, that he does not forsake God, nor despair, is not
forsaken of God, not left, or lost: Therefore it matters nothing how weak he is
in himself. We are afflicted (he says) yet not distressed; i. e. on every
side we are troubled with adversity, but we are not brought into such
streights, as to be overwhelmed, but we are preserved by the help of God in
the midst of afflictions. We are perplexed, but not in despair; i. e. we
doubt sometimes what may be done in the dangers of this life, but we are not
so destitute, that we are void of all counsel. We are persecuted, but not
forsaken; i. e. God permits us to be vexed and evil entreated by the enemies
of the Gospel, but he neither permits us to be slain, before the time by him
determined, neither does he withdraw his consolations from us. We are cast
down, but not destroyed; that is, we sometimes seem presently ready to perish,
but God helping us, we are kept from perishing.

Verse. 10. Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that
the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. He answers: 4.
That his afflictions make for the glory of Christ, because the Image of Christ
suffering and dying may be seen in them, and that the virtue and strength of
Christ living, may appear in supporting him under so many afflictions:
Therefore it matters not how weak he may be in himself.

Verse. 11. For we which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake,
that the Life also of Jesus might be manifest in our mortal flesh. He
confirms this from hence, that the Apostles who lived in the midst of troubles
by the strength of Christ's Spirit, for the cause of Christ, daily undergo
danger, that the quickening Virtue of Christ may more and more appear in
sustaining their fleshly infirmities, obnoxious to that miserable condition.

Verse. 12. So then death works in us, but life in you. Object. 2. But not
necessarily, because thou art the Servant of Christ, therefore thou should
be also miserable and contemned: For we Corinthians are Christians, and yet
we live more prosperously. He answers four manner of ways.

1. By granting it to be so; yet by the Wisdom of God it comes to pass, that
in some stronger Christians, as the Apostles, the Image of Christ dying, might
rather appear at least to the world. But in others, as the weaker Corinthians,
the efficacy of Christ's Life supporting them under extreme afflictions, might
be more apparent to the world.

Verse. 13. We having the same spirit of Faith, according as it is written, I
believed, and therefore have I spoken: we also believe, and therefore speak.

14. Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by
Jesus, and present us with you.

He answers 2. Although the Apostles may be afflicted more than the
Corinthians, yet there is the same Spirit of Faith both in them and in the
Corinthians, by which Faith, believing with David, Psalm. 116. ver. 10. The
Apostle dare promise to himself, together with the Corinthians, a glorious
Resurrection, although now he is more pressed under the Cross than they.

Verse. 15. For all things are for your sake, that the abundant grace might,
through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God. He answers 3.
That he was afflicted for their consolation and confirmation, as also that
from his afflictions and deliverances; occasion of praying and suffering
together with the Apostles, might not only be given to the Corinthians; But
also occasion of thanksgiving with them, for their eminent deliverances from
trouble, which God forthwith granted to him with the rest of the Apostles, and
was about to grant.

Verse. 16. For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish,
yet the inward man is renewed day by day. He answers 4. That he was not tired
nor wearied by his afflictions, whereof he subjoyns three Reasons.

Reason 1. Because as much as was diminished of those goods, that made for the
maintaining the State of this present life, so much was added to his holiness
for the increasing of his spiritual life.

Verse. 17. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Reason 2. Because it did
procure an unspeakable weight of glory (to the promoting of which, afflictions
help, as instruments and means both of mortification and glorification) so that
no afflictions are to be accounted of, yea truly the lightness of afflictions,
which is but for a moment, clearly vanishes and becomes as nothing in
comparison with future glory.

Verse. 18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal. Reason 3. Why he does not wax faint, is,
Because (says he) by Faith I look at things eternal and invisible, by reason
of which, I despise all temporal and visible, i. e. both Riches, Honors, and
Profits, etc. I do not look at, because those are only durable for a time, but
I have my mind intent upon those good and eternal things which God has
promised: Therefore I do not weigh the loss of temporal things; by all which
the Apostle confirms the Corinthians, lest they should be offended at his
afflictions.

CHAP. V.
HE goes on to show more fully his faithfulness in the Ministry, by
mentioning seven impellent causes, whereby he was moved to faithfulness in the
discharge of his duty.

Verse. 1. For we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens. The first impellent cause to faithfulness in the Ministry is his
certain confidence of a blessed immortality, which after death remains for him,
and all the rest of the faithful Ministers of Christ, of which felicity also
the body shall be partaker in the Resurrection. I am persuaded (says he)
that after the dissolution of this my frail body, I shall continually enjoy
felicity of soul, and the glorious immortality of a raised body, why should not
I therefore be faithful, so long as I dwell in this mortal body.

Verse. 2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with
our house which is from Heaven. The solidity of this his confidence or
persuasion is confirmed by seven Signs, all which did stir up his mind to
faithfulness.

Sign 1. Is a desire of departing out of this life, that he might obtain
immortality, or be endued, instead of a corruptible body, with immortal glory.
An Argument certainly of a mind conscious of its sincerity, and certified of
future happiness.

Verse. 3. If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked. He
limits this sign and privilege of being endued with future glory, That it may
belong to those only, who departing out of this life to an immortal and
immutable state, are not found naked, i. e. not destitute of that true
covering, whereby our filthy nakedness is covered, which covering is Christ, or
Christ's Righteousness, which can alone cover our sins, wherein our nakedness
consists: This therefore is the second Sign of his solid desire of going out of
this life, and of a mind very conscious of the faithful administration of his
office, that he knew himself to be in the number of those, to whom alone the
certainty of being clothed upon with glory belonged, to wit, of those, who are
clothed already with that covering, whereby the foul nakedness of sinners is
covered, i. e. the Righteousness ^f Christ, with which, except a man be
clothed in this life, he shall be found naked in the other, and shall remain
naked for ever.

Verse. 4. For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened, not for
that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life. Sign 3. That the desire of his departing this life
arising from this confidence, was holy, i. e. it was derived not so much from
the weariness of natural life, but from the hope of a better: This is that
which he says, although he groan and be sorrowful in his body, yet he
would not be uncloathed of this body, but that this body might be clothed
upon with immortality, and that mortality might be swallowed up of immortality.

Verse. 5. Now he that has wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also
has given unto us the earnest of this Spirit. Sign 4. That this desire is not
natural, but the supernatural work of God, stirred up, and formed in the hearts
of his own by the special work of God: It is God that has wrought, formed and
created us for this thing. His confidence therefore is solid.

Who also] Sign 5. That this confidence of a better life is sealed by the
earnest of the Spirit, having as it were a taste and experience of that life in
the peace and joy of the Spirit, i. e. in the first fruits of that happiness
which is to come.

Verse. 6. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. Sign 6. That this confidence is
firmly grounded in the certain persuasion of his nigher access to the Lord,
which should be vouchsafed to him after death, when doubtless, even as in one
house, he should dwell with God, who now in the body is as absent from the
Lord.

Verse. 7. (For we walk by Faith, not by sight.)

8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body,
and to be present with the Lord.

Sign 7. Confirming the former, that he knows himself to walk by Faith in
this life, and not by sight of the beatifical vision, which abides for us in
the life to come, who in our sense are absent from the Lord, while we are
present i^ the body: Therefore more vehemently and confidently he did both
desire and choose to go to the Lord, rather than to remain in the body.

Verse. 9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him. That this confidence confirmed by so many signs of sincerity
was the impellent cause to his faithfulness in his Ministry, he now expressly
declares: Because whatsoever change toward life or death did happen to him,
out of this confidence he did endeavor to please God, with no less diligence
than those which contend for honor, that both in this life or pilgrimage, and
in his death or approaching to God, he might be made acceptable to him.

Verse. 10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or evil. His second impellent cause to faithfulness
in his Ministry, is the consideration of punishments and rewards which abide
every one according to their works at the last judgment, in which God will
inflict punishments upon the wicked, but to the godly (whose good works after
their sins are pardoned only remain) he shall render rewards.

Verse. 11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, but we
are made manifest unto God, and I trust also, we are manifest in your
consciences. He shows by calling God and the consciences of the Corinthians to
be his witnesses, that this Argument has urged him to faithfulness in the
Ministry: For the apprehension of that future terrible judgment has affected
this, that he exhorted all to reconciliation with God by Faith.

Verse. 12. For we commend not our selves again unto you, but give you occasion
to glory on our behalf, that you may have somewhat to answer them, which glory
in appearance, and not in heart. He solves two Objections, which his
adversaries may object against him so earnestly glorying of his faithfulness.

Object. 1. Thou O Paul gloriest (some one may say) whilst thou commendest thy
self. He answers, that he did not say these things for that end, but that the
Corinthians may have that for his defense, whereby to repress their vain and
boasting Teachers, who did diminish the authority of the Apostle amongst them,
and did glory in the presence of men, otherwise than their conscience and the
truth of the matter did permit; For they being destitute of piety, or matter of
glorying in heart, they gloried in their adulterated eloquence.

Verse. 13. For whether we be besides our selves, it is to God, or whether we
be sober, it is for your cause. Object. 2. But O Paul, thou art besides thy
self, who do so openly confute such Teachers. He answers, that he did not
dispute, but give a reason of the fact, as it did become a wise man, to wit,
that he uttered those things for the glory of God and their salvation: For
(says he) if I praise my Ministry, which seems to be the part of one
besides himself; I do it for the Glory of God, lest my Gospel should be
undervalued: If I speak humbly of my self, as sober men use to do, I do it for
your good.

Verse. 14. For the Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge: that
if one d^ed for all, then were all dead: The third impellent cause to
faithfulness containing a reason of the former saying, is his love, wherewith
he loved Christ, which did cast upon him, as it were bonds, and constrained
him, that he being unmindful of himself, did both speak and do those things
only, which might promote the Glory of Christ, and the good of the Church.

Verse. 15. And that he died for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live to themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose
again. He gives a reason of his love, and adds the fourth impellent cause, to
wit, the love of Christ to us: Christ (says he) when we were all dead in
respect of our desert, and the justice of God, alone died in the room of all of
us, that believe in him: That we being delivered from deserved perdition,
should not serve our selves, but Christ our Redeemer: why therefore should not
I be faithful in the business of Christ?

Verse. 16. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh; yea, though we
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. He
prevents an Objection, to this end, that he might give account why he checked
those glorious Corinthian Doctors; not regarding his esteem with the ignorant;
So that he might promote the Glory of Christ, and the Churches safety. Some
one might say, but it behoved him to regard the dignity of so many worthy
Teachers amongst the Corinthians, who shined with Eloquence, Learning, Riches,
Honors and Nobility of Parentage: For some of these were of the Jews, and
perhaps did boast, that they were of the Tribe of Judah, and did arrive to
Christ's kindred, as it is credible from what follows* He answers three ways,
drawing every one of his answers as conclusions from verse. 12.

Answ. 1. That he does not look at Riches, Honors, Parentage, Eloquence, and
the rest, neither did he esteem any man from outward things, by which the
esteem of men is increased or diminished with worldlings, and those that are
carnal.

Tea] Answ. 2. That he did not judge any more of Christ himself, according to
his external condition, or detract from his estimation, by reason of his
poverty and ignominy in the world, as in times past he esteemed being in a
mistake: And therefore he did not esteem any one more valuable, because of his
Riches, Honors, and Parentage, etc.

Verse. 17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old
things are passed away, behold, all things are become new: Answ. 3. Showing the
duty of the faithful ingrafted into Christ to be this, that as new Creatures
they should labor for the newness of a right judgment, and an holy life. And
that these worldly things should not be so highly esteemed, he proves from
Isa. 65.17. where God promises an abolition of old things, and that he will
make a new Heaven and a new Earth; i. e. all things new under the Kingdom of
Christ: Whence it follows, that those things only are to be had in estimation
amongst Christians, which reach to a new Creature, or Regeneration; For all
things are made new to those that are renewed, when they are reconciled to God,
they have all Creatures as it were reconciled to them, and now they use them
after a new manner, for the Glory of God, and their own salvation, setting a
price upon every thing, according as it makes, or not makes, for the promoting
of the Kingdom of God in themselves and others.

Verse. 18. And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by
Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the Ministry of reconciliation. The fifth
impellent cause to faithfulness in his Ministry, is the grace and goodness of
God toward him, which cause (returning to his purpose, and looking up to God)
he asserts the Author of the New Creature (whereof he had even now spoken)
and of all graces: Because the Grace of God toward him had brought to him a
double privilege, to wit, reconciliation by Christ, and a Ministerial office
for the reconciliation of others; from hence he acknowledges a twofold
Obligation for his faithfulness in the Ministry: Why therefore should not he
approve himself faithful?

Verse. 19. To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of
reconciliation. The sixth impellent cause, is the excellency of preaching, of
which he propounds a short collection, wherein, 1 The Father, who by reason of
sin was removed far from us, declares himself to come near unto us in Christ,
who is the true IMMANUEL God with us. 2 The Father reconciled, as for his part,
declares himself to do that in Christ, for the Elect world, that they beholding
their enmities betwixt themselves, and God, as for their part, may come again
into favor, and be reconciled with God through Christ. 3 The means is shown
by which men may be reconciled to God, viz. by remission, or a not imputing of
sins, which God most graciously does offer. 4 The instrument of applying the
Grace of reconciliation obtained by Christ is shown, viz. the word of
reconciliation committed to the Apostles, and to the other Ministers. In which
so excellent and so necessary a Ministry, he could not be but faithful when
he set those things before him.

Verse. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. The
seventh impellent cause to faithfulness is, the excellency of the person which
he represents, which cause he propounds, and together with the whole
precedent Doctrine he makes use of, by which very thing showing the endeavor
of his faithfulness. To this end he importunes all, and diligently urges all
with his authority as an Ambassador, and also submissively and lovingly, as
bearing the Image of God, that every one would more heartily accept the
reconciliation offered of God, that the remainders of enmity being taken away,
which unbelief cherishes within, all may become the same Spirit with God.

Verse. 21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. Lastly, That he may persuade
to the obedience of Faith, and to the receiving of a fuller measure of
reconciliatio^, he shows that an open and expedient way to reconciliation,
is because Christ the innocent Mediator, and pure from sin, by his consent and
agreement with the Father in a judicial manner, is accounted guilty of our sin,
yea truly he was made an Expiatory Sacrifice for our sin, expressly for that
end, that we believing in Christ may be made partakers of Christ's
righteousness judicially by imputation, and so may be made perfectly
righteous, and as it were by that righteousness which chiefly pleases God
through this excellent and divine way of reconcilement, which the wisdom of
God has invented, and grace has made ours.

But he adds this (in him) that we might necessarily understand that we are
engraffed into Christ by Faith, by which this righteousness may be ours,
because from our conjunction with Christ by Faith, follows our judicial union
with Christ, from this union imputation is made of the obedience and
righteousness of Christ to us, and at length the application of all his gifts,
even to perfect felicity, which being considered, what can be said more
efficaciously to stir all of us up, that our enmities being acknowledged, and
our necessities, we may embrace reconciliation offered in Christ.

The sum therefore of these three verses is, That the Apostle when he had
weighed the dispensation of man's Redemption, and the reason of bringing the
Elect to Reconciliation and Salvation, he could not but employ himself
strongly and faithfully in his Ministry: For when he knew by the Covenant,
(concerning the Redemption of the Elect) between God and his Son, (the second
person of the Trinity invested with the office of a Mediator and a Surety) God
being so abundantly satisfied, he now becomes gracious to the world of the
redeemed, or Elect, concurring with Christ the Mediator for the applying of
Reconciliation obtained for all the Redeemed; and he importunes them by
Christ, and by the Servants of Christ, the Ministers of the Gospel, no less
seriously than the Redeemer himself, and prays them* that now he himself
being reconciled, they would be reconciled. When I say the Apostle knew these
things, and that there was a charge committed to him, that he should promote
this reconciliation, what wonder then, if he earnestly strived, that men might
be turned to God? And when he knew that by Covenant Christ had took upon
himself all the sins of all the Redeemed, and was made a Propitiatory Sacrifice
for the expiating of their sins imputed to him, under this condition, that the
Redeemed (such all the faithful show themselves to be) clothed with the
Righteousness of God, or the Righteousness of Christ, should be accounted most
righteous in the mind of God, and at length should be fully renewed by the
Holy Spirit, what wonder then if he confidently and constantly prosecuted the
business of reconciliation, and showed himself faithful in executing his
Ministry?

CHAP. VI.
THat as yet further he may commend the exercise of his Ministry more fully
to the consciences of the Corinthians, putting before their eyes a Minister
faithful in work and example, he draws a threefold exhortation from the
premises, that they may bring forth the fruit of his Ministry. There are three
parts of the Chapter, of which the first is an exhortation seriously to receive
the grace offered by him, to verse. 11. The second is an exhortation to receive
him for the Apostle of Christ, to verse. 14. And the third is an exhortation to
shun the contagion of Idolatry, to the end.

Verse. 1. We then as workers together with him beseech you also, that ye
receive not the Grace of God in vain. The first Exhortation is, that they would
receive the Grace of Reconciliation more seriously, and with fruit, and suffer
not the Grace of God offered in the Gospel (by their fault) to want its full
fruit in them* that they may obtain Righteousness, Peace, Life, and all things
which Christ has obtained for them. The Proposition he urges is this. Ye
ought not to receive the Grace of God in vain, i. e. in outward profession
only, without its internal virtue; this he proves by three Arguments.

Argum. 1. We Ministers of God being co-workers, (that his work may be
promoted in you) granted from him to you by free gift promising our endeavor
for the promoting of your salvation, earnestly desired that of you; Therefore
ye ought not to receive the Grace of God in vain.

Verse. 2. (For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in a day of
salvation have I succored thee: Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now
is the day of salvation.) Argum. 2. In a Parenthesis. Because now the time is
acceptable in which, by the intercession of Christ, the Grace of God is
efficacious to the producing of fruit in all those that receive the Gospel with
serious affection of heart, and desire to bring forth fruit, which he proves
out of Isa. 49.8. where the Father speaks to the Mediator interceding for
them, and by his Spirit breathing in them: Therefore you must beware lest this
opportunity of Grace be in vain offered to you.

Verse. 3. Giving no offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed.
Argum. 3. Joined with the first verse. We Ministers which exhort you, and I by
name Paul, we are approved by all manner of ways, and we are found faithful
in the Ministry of the Gospel, not hindering you, but that you may profit by
our Ministry, that so ye may pretend nothing, but that ye may persevere in
the Grace of the Gospel: Therefore ye ought not to receive the Grace of the
Gospel in vain, but to contend for the receiving of, and expressing the virtue
of the Gospel: He confirms the Antecedent by an induction of the virtues which
prove Ministers faithful, with which he was first of all, by the Grace of God,
adorned: There are five parts of the induction; In the first part he removes
from himself those vices, whereby idle Teachers were wont to create offenses to
the Gospel, demolishing more by their manners in the edifice of God, than by
their Doctrine they edify, and yielding occasion to the wicked of speaking ill
of his Ministry, or of the office of Ministers.

Verse. 4. But in all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in
much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses,.

5. In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in
fastings,

In the second part he recites diverse kinds of virtues, with which his
Ministry is adorned, but namely he mentions his patience exercised in nine
kinds of evils, in all which without murmuring he patiently executed the
offices of his Ministry, for he strongly endured the troubles of his journies
with want and dangers, the snares of his persecutors, prison, and ^umults
stirred up against him, and in preaching, his labor, watchings, fastings,
neither did he wax faint in the work of the Lord.

Verse. 6. By pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the
Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, In the third part he adds other six virtues of
his patience, of which the first is his freedom from the pollutions of the
world, whilst he conversed amongst those of the world. 2 His discretion in
handling his auditors. 3 His forbearance in provocations. 4 His gentleness in
his commerce with more difficult things. 5. His spiritual disposition in all
things. 6. His sincere love toward all.

Verse. 7. By the word of truth, by the Power of God, by the Armor of
Righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left. In the fourth part he
reckons the virtues which did belong to the discharge of his duty. 1. He
preached nothing besides the truth of God. 2. He demonstrated the power of the
Spirit in his speech. 3. He contended against all his enemies with spiritual
weapons, i. e. with lawful means, on the right hand in prosperity; on the left
hand in adversity; and in every change and vicissitude of things, he did
remain constant, lest he should either by enticements, or by terrors, turn
out of the right way.

Verse. 8. By honor, and dishonor, by evil report, and good report, as
deceivers, and yet true:

9. As unknown, and yet well known: as dying, and behold we live: as
chastened, and not killed:

10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: as poor, yet making many rich, as
having nothing, yet possessing all things.

In the first part he boasts, that he has always continued in a right way,
whether ignominy or infamy, whether glory or fame followed: For when he was
counted as an Impostor, he declared himself one that spoke truth.

When he was accounted as ignoble and contemptible, he did manifest himself
by his deeds, that they who had eyes might acknowledge him to be the Servant
of the most High God: He seemed even as dead, and in the midst of death, he
triumphed notwithstanding, that he performed his duty, as being alive: yea
chastened with many stripes, even to death, he was kept by God, lest he
should die: by reason of those evils which pressed him, sometimes under a
pretense he was sad, but by the Spirit in God, he did always rejoice: He
was counted poor, but through the Gospel, by the manifold love of God, he did
enrich many, not only by showing the manner of contentation in the Gospel, but
also instructing men to virtue and piety, which is profitable for all things.
He wanted possessions and revenues, and yet contented with his lot, he did
rejoice as much as was fitting, in the use of all things.

The Second Part.
Verse. 11. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is
enlarged. The second part of the Chapter follows, in which the second
exhortation of Paul to the Corinthians, is, that they would love again that
Apostle, viz. of Christ, who had undergone so many labors in the Ministry for
their good. To this Exhortation he premises five Arguments.

Argum. 1. Plainly and ingenuously, that I may use liberty of speech with
friends, most freely with an heart enlarged, and with an open mouth publishing,
what good will inwardly I have toward you, why therefore do ye not require me
in like manner?

Verse. 12. Ye are not straightned in us, but ye are straightned in your own
bowels.

13. Now for a recompense in the same, (I speak as unto my children) be ye
also enlarged.

Argum. 2. There is nothing in me why you should no apprehend my love, but
through the straightness of your own hearts, who do not believe that thy good
will is so great toward you.

Ye are not straightned] Argu. 3. Ye are bound to love me again, who so
exceedingly love you: Therefore as out of equity requite me, by loving me,
and persuading your selves that you are beloved of me.

As unto dear children] Argum. 4. I am your Father, and you my Sons: Therefore
as my Sons, love me as your Father.

For a recompence] Argum. 5. Now I require a debt from you: Therefore be ye
enlarged, i. e. admit ye with an enlarged heart the persuasion of my
lovingness and my parental admonitions, proceeding out of lovingness, and
likewise love ye me again.

The Third Part.
Verse. 14. Be ye not unequally yoaked together with unbelievers: for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has
light with darkness?

15. And what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that
believes with an infidel?

The third exhortation, that they abstain from all unlawful society with
unbelievers, by whom they may be hindered, lest they should serve God, or be
alienated from the true Religion, or any ways polluted of this kind of
society, is matrimony, by which men easily, or women, may be wrapped in a
consent to wickedness by Idolaters, because of all kind of society this is
nearest. That which he seems to tax first of all, is the society or communion
of the faithful Corinthians, with their unbelieving companions in external
Idolatry, wherewith they polluted themselves, eating together with those,
Idolatrous Sacrifices in the Idols Temple* as it appears in the former Epistle,
Chap. 8. In which Idolatry, or in any other sin, he forbids to draw with them
in the same yoke of impiety. The arguments of the Exhortation are four:

For what] Argum. 1. Your condition and profession of Christians on the one
part, and the sins of Idolatry, which are openly professed on the other part,
They are no less opposed by one another, than righteousness and iniquity, Light
and Darkness, Christ and the Devil, Faith and Infidelity, the Temple of God and
Idols, amongst which there can be no communion: Therefore no communion with
you Christians ought to be with unbelievers in Idolatry, or in any other sins
which unbelievers openly profess, or in any other necessity (out of which may
arise an unsuperable danger) of communicating with their sins; He did not
forbid them to inhabit in the same City with them, neither to negotiate nor eat
meat, if they should be invited to dinner or supper.

Verse. 16. And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are
the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk
in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Argum. 2. Ye
are the holy Temple of God, which he proves by the testimony of Moses, Lev.
26.12. and Ezekiel. 37.27. Therefore it is not lawful for you to pollute your
selves by society with unbelievers, chiefly in that, in which are the Temple of
Idols professedly.

Verse. 17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you.

18. And will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons, and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty.

Argum. 3. God commands you to separate from Idolaters, and the pollutions of
the World, and not to touch them: Therefore you ought to beware of them.

I will receive] Argum. 4. From the Promises which God has made to those, who
keep themselves pure from the defilements of the world, nor participate with
other men's sins. God will be a Father to them, i. e. in a recompense of all
hurt, and full consolation against all evils, which they, looking to
themselves, may suffer from other men's sins; God will communicate himself to
them, and will manifest his paternal affection toward them really.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. HAving therefore these Promises (dearly Beloved) let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear
of God.

The first verse of this Chapter belongs to the precedent Chapter, wherein
from the former Promises he draws an Exhortation, that they do not only
beware of Idolatry, and its outward appearance, but also from all defilements
of spirit and body, i. e. from sins which either pollute the soul within, or
defile the soul, and the body also, and endeavors the perfecting of holiness,
going forward, and proceeding in the fear of God, using one Argument for all;
The Promises fore-spoken of made to you by God do justly require that from you:
Therefore apply your selves diligently to these duties.

Verse. 2. Receive us, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we
have defrauded no man. In the rest of the Chapter he endeavors to oblige the
hearts of the Corinthians to him, the signs of his love toward them being
produced, in the unfolding of which he insists to the end. The Proposition is
clearly propounded, which is to be confirmed. O Corinthians, ye ought to
receive us, i. e. to be persuaded of my love toward you, ye ought to love
me again, and to lay up my exhortations in your enlarged hearts: Three
Arguments are taken from the three Signs of the Apostles good will toward them.

No man] Argum. 1. That they should receive the Apostle, and the first Sign of
his little ill toward them. Because I do not ill deserve of any one, either by
bringing reproach, or corrupting by perverse Doctrine, or defrauding any one by
any means.

Verse. 3. I speak not this to condemn you: for I have said before, that you are
in our hearts to dye and live with you. Argum. 2. Sign 2. Because when I speak
of the things foregoing, it was only for the clearing of my self; I am so far
from condemning the Church of the believing Corinthians, that out of love I
have determined the contrary, to cleave to you in prosperity and adversity, in
life and death, that no change at any time may draw my affection from you.

Verse. 4. Great is my boldness of speech toward you, great is my glorying of
you, I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation.
Argum. 3. Sign 3. Because news being received concerning your repentance, my
heart so rejoices in the midst of afflictions, that I dare safely speak the
confidence of my mind toward you, concerning your perseverance, and glory of
you amongst others.

Verse. 5. For when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we
were troubled on every side; without were fightings, within were fears.

6. Nevertheless, God that comfort those that are cast down, comforted us by
the coming of Titus.

He being about to explain the experiment of his good will toward them,
propounds his afflictions, wherewith he was pressed in Macedonia, whilst he
expected news from them he was oppressed partly by persecution of the enemies,
partly by the intestine evils of the Church, partly by the anxiety of his mind,
and also with the troubles of his body; that there was no rest to his outward
man. Against all which troubles, by mercy of God, consolation was sufficiently
administered to him by the coming of Titus, who had now returned from the
Corinthians, and brought joyful news concerning their state.

Verse. 7. And not by his coming only, but by the consolation wherewith he
was comforted in you, when he told us your earnest desire, your moarning, your
fervent mind toward me, so that I rejoiced the more. The Apostle reckons
eight causes of his joyfulness, whereof many were signs of his good will
toward them. 1 Because Titus was returned safe. 2 Because Titus had received
consolation from you Corinthians. 3 Because I had heard by Titus concerning
your pious affection toward me, and desire of seeing me; concerning your
weeping for the wickedness committed amongst you, concerning your zeal against
the Incestuous person, and against my back-biters, from whence has abounded
joy to me much surpassing all that grief, which I have taken for that matter.

Verse. 8. For though I made you sorry with a Letter, I do not repent, though I
did repent; for I perceive that the same Epistle has made you sorry, though it
were but for a season. Before he propounds the fourth cause of his consolation
he solves an Objection, which solution did make much to the purpose. They
might say* Thou have made us sorrowful in the former Epistle.

The Answer is fourfold. Answ. 1. I was compelled, and not without grief have I
made you sad, but this grief through your repentance has ceased. For when the
Apostle writ the Epistle, being uncertain concerning the event, he was sad, i.
e. that he says, that he himself repented: but when he saw the event, he
was freed from grief, i. e. Now he says he did not repent. Answ. 2 That
sadness which was moved by my Epistle was short.

Verse. 9. Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to
repentance, for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might
receive damage by us in nothing.

10. For godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of,
but the sorrow of the world works death.

He answers 3. That sadness is turned into joy, both to you and me, because
it is found now good and profitable to repentance; which he proves: because it
brought forth repentance not to be repented of, otherwise than worldly sorrow
is wont, which only increases sin and misery, and brings death as well to
the soul as to the body.

Verse. 11. For behold, this self-same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly
sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea
what indignation, yea what fear, yea what vehement desire, yea what zeal, yea
what revenge: in all things ye have approved your selves to be clear in this
matter. He proves that their sadness was after God, or pious, because it
produced seven Effects in them, even so many signs of their repentance, whereof
the first was the shaking off security, with a carefulness to mend what was
amiss. 2 Is an Apology, that now by no means they approve either the fact of
the Incestuous person, or their own negligence. 3 Is an indignation against the
sin, both of the Incestuous person, and their own in suffering him. 4 Is a
fear, lest they should be compassed with divine justice, or a new sin. 5 Is a
desire of taking off the scandal, and satisfying all good men. 6. His zeal and
fervent desire in prosecuting all means for the removing of evil, and repairing
of the damage. 7. Is his revenge in chastising the incestuous person, and all
their dullness; in all which the Corinthians had declared their repentance, and
had showed themselves no ways delighted with wickedness, but that they were
clear.

Verse. 12. Wherefore though I wrote unto you, I did it not for his cause that
had done the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered wrong, but that our care
for you in the sight of God might appear unto you. The fourth answer to the
objection is: I have not written that Epistle either only or chiefly that in
chastising of the incestuous person, satisfaction might be given to the Father
with whose wife the son had committed adultery, or that the incestuous person
might be corrected, (which truly was not to be neglected) but especially for
this end, that my fatherly care toward you, O Corinthians, might appear to
all, sincere and approved in the sight of God.

Verse. 13. Therefore we were comforted in your comfort, yea, and exceedingly
the more joyed we for the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by
you all. The objection being solved, he adds the fourth cause of his
consolation; I understand, says he, that ye have taken in good part my
reproof, and now have received consolation.

Of titus]* The fifth cause of his consolation, because all ye have
endeavored to refresh the spirit of Titus.

Verse. 14. For if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I am not ashamed: but
as we speak all things to you in truth, even so our boasting which I made
before Titus, is found a truth. The sixth cause, That ye would prove in very
deed, that which I boasting of you, confidently foretold to Titus.

Verse. 15. And his inward affection is more abundantly toward you, whilst he
remembers the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received
him. The seventh cause, Because you have engaged to you by your respects and
goodness, the mind of Titus, which you may esteem as great gain. For they
reverenced Titus, as an Evangelist, and a servant of God, sent to them
extraordinarily, and so they had reconciled the mind of Titus to themselves.

Verse. 16. I rejoice therefore, that I have confidence in you in all things.
The eighth cause of consolation, That I being encouraged by this experience,
for the future, I may dare to promise the best things whatsoever, of you all,
both to my self and others.

CHAP. VIII.
THe second part of the Epistle, wherein the Corinthians being confirmed,
touching his love toward them, does exhort them to the giving of Alms, with a
cheerful mind to the use of the poor* Jews: For this end there are thirteen
arguments used in this Chapter, to which he adds more in the Chapter following.

Verse. 1. Moreover, brethren, we do you, to wit, of the grace of God bestowed
on the Churches of Macedonia. Argum. 1. From the example of the Macedonians,
the Churches of Macedonia have contributed: And therefore do ye the same
thing, whose liberality he commends, by nine reasons.

Grace] The first Reason, Because it was the gift of Gods grace, that they
contributed any thing for the use of the poor Jews.

Verse. 2. How that in a great trial of affliction, the abundance of their joy,
and their deep poverty, abounded unto the riches of liberality. Reason 2.
Because Alms was given by them in that time, when they were tried with heavy
afflictions.

Ioy] Reason 3. Because they contributed with joy.

Deep] Reason 4. Because in poverty they were liberal.

Verse. 3. For to their power, (I bear record) yea, and beyond their power, they
were willing of themselves. Reason 5. Because they were willing to give more
bountifully, than they were able.

Verse. 4. Praying us with much entreaty, that we would receive the gift, and
take upon us the fellowship of the Ministering to the Saints. Reason 6. Because
they offered freely, not provoked by others examples, but rather were Leaders
to others, lest they should be wanting in this duty of charity.

With entreaty] Reason 7. Because they were instant in prayers, that what they
gave might be received.

Fellowship] Reason 8. Because they did entreat the Apostle, that he together
with others, would take upon them the charge of gathering and dispensing that,
which they and others were about to give.

Verse. 5. And this they did, not as we hoped, but first gave their own selves
to the Lord, and unto us by the Will of God. Reason 9. Because beyond the
Apostles expectation, they consecrated themselves and all theirs to God, and
did commit themselves to the Apostle; that they might be ruled by him in all
things, according to the Will of God.

Verse. 6. Insomuch that we desired Titus, that as he had begun, so he would
also finish in you the same grace also. Argum. 2. To a liberal contribution;
Because at the entreaty of the Macedonians, I have desired Titus that he would
take care to accomplish your alms, which thing he has undertaken already:
Therefore take ye care, lest this our labor be in vain.

Verse. 7. Therefore (as ye abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance, and
knowledge, and in all diligence, ^ad in your love to us) see that ye abound in
this grace also. Argum. 3. Because seeing that you excel others in many
virtues, it becomes you to do your endeavor, lest in this ye fail, or seeing
that the gifts of the Spirit abound in you, the faith of miracles, the gifts of
knowledge and eloquence, endeavor concerning the Salvation of the Brethren,
and charity toward me, ye must have a care, lest this gift be found wanting
to you.

Verse. 8. I speak not by commandment, but by occasion of the forwardness of
others, and to prove the sincerity of your love. Argum. 4. Because now the
sincerity of your Christian love is to be proved in the distribution of this
alms, for which thing sake I exhort you diligently, at the desire of the
Macedonians, commanding nothing imperiously: Therefore show a proof of your
liberality.

Verse. 9. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might
be rich. Argum. 5. Christ has made himself poor; that you might be rich:
Therefore it is meet, that for his sake ye give alms, when it is required of
you.

Verse. 10. And herein I give my advice, for this is expedient for you, who have
begun before, not only to do, but also to be forward a year ago. Argum. 6.
Because I know it is profitable for you, both in respect of your praise, and in
respect of the blessing that will follow, that in this business in no wise ye
be wanting, but at length ye accomplish this collection already begun.

Verse. 11. Now therefore perform the doing of it, that as there was a readiness
to will, so there may be a performance also out of that which you have.

12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted, according to that a
man has, and not according to that he has not:

13. For I mean not that other men be eased, and you burdened.

Argum. 7. Because it is meet and comely that your ready will, which ye showed
the last year, might be actually completed, and it will be uncomely if it
otherwise fall out.

Which ye have] Argum. 8. Because nothing is required, but that which your
selves may see to be equal, for it is desired that you give according to your
abilities, out of equity, without your prejudice, a little from the poor sort,
if they give with a willing mind, shall be accepted of God, Although they have
not given much, which have it not: For if a willing mind be not present,
nothing is respected by God, how much soever is given: Therefore be not here
wanting.

Verse. 14. But by an equality: that now at this time, your abundance may be a
supply for their want, that their abundance also may be a supply for your
want, that there may be an equality: Argum. 9. Because you may expect, that if
there be need, some retribution may be made, and out of the plenty of the
Churches in Judea, your want may be supplied, that so, that which is equal may
be done.

Verse. 15. As it is written, He that had gathered much, had nothing over, and
he that had gathered little, had no lack. Argum. 10. Because it appears in the
example of Manna, that no man ought to suppress his abundance with others
wants, but so far equality is to be observed, that so much as is necessary may
be wanting to none. For as it was done in the gathering of Manna, every one
did measure to himself an Omer, the rest was given to those, who had gathered
little, Exodus 16.18, 19. so in gathering of riches, that which remains after
your own uses, ought to be given for the use of the poor.

Verse. 16. But thanks be to God, which put the same earnest care into the
heart of Titus for you.

17. For indeed, he accepted the exhortation, but being more forward, of his
own accord he went unto you.

Argum. 11. Because the faithful, the strong, and some Brethren of best fame,
were stirred up by God (compare verse. 18.22.) and sent by me to promote this
whole business, not only in gathering of Alms, but also in bringing them to
the hands of the poor Jews. The first of these Brethren was Titus, for whose
care and willingness of mind for the perfecting of this business, he praises
God.

Verse. 18. And we have sent with him the Brother, whose praise is in the
Gospel throughout all the Churches.

19. And not that only, but who was also chosen of the Churches, to travel
with us with this grace which is administered by us, to the glory of the same
Lord, and declaration of your ready mind.

His second Messenger is described, that he labored diligently for the
promoting of the Gospel, whether it was Barnabas, or any other, it matters not.
For whosoever he was, he is designed of the Churches (called together as it
seems in a Synodical way) as a person worthy of trust, to whom this business
might be committed.

Glory] Argum. 12. Because this alms is taken into my care, and administered by
me, and others, to the glory of God, and demonstration of the willingness of
your mind.

Verse. 20. Avoiding this, that no man should blame us in this abundance, which
is administered by us.

21. Providing for honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but in the
sight of men.

He gives the reason why he had joined to himself those companions, of such
approved fidelity in this administration of beneficence, collected for the use
of the Church of Jerusalem, viz. that he might take away the occasion of ill
report from his adversaries, who might otherwise calumniate him, as if he had
diminished somewhat of the sum of money collected: And that he might consult
his reputation with all men, as he had looked to his conscience before God,
that he might be kept in the holy purpose of his integrity, in this business.

Verse. 22. And we have sent with them our Brother, whom we have oftentimes
proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent, upon the great
confidence which I have in you. He commends his third messenger, whether he
were Luke, or any other, it matters not, but from hence the force of the
eleventh argument appears, whilst he says, that he has sent them out of his
confidence of the Corinthians liberality, such famous men that he does not
fear, that their expectation will be frustrated; from whence it follows, that
ye ought to contribute liberally.

Verse. 23. Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my Partner, and
fellow-helper concerning you; or our Brethren be enquired of, they are the
messengers of the Churches, and the glory of Christ. After he has set forth
each of these messengers with his own commendation, he commends them
altogether, and especially Titus, because they are the Apostles of the
Churches, i. e. assigned by the Churches for the gathering of his alms: And
secondly, because they are the Glory of Christ, so called, because his grace
did gloriously shine in them, and by them his glory was illustrated.

Verse. 24. Wherefore, show ye to them, and before the Churches, the proof of
your love, and of our boasting on your behalf. The Exhortation being repeated,
he adds Argum. 13. This liberality as it shall be a proof of our charity, so
also it shall be the confirmation of my glorying of you no wise vainly, in the
fight of those that were assigned, who in the name of the Churches being
present, will behold your liberality in this business: Therefore ye ought to
contribute liberally.

CHAP. IX.
HE goes forward to speak concerning the collection. There are two parts of
the Chapter. In the first he gives the reasons why he sent to them, three
Brethren assigned, where he interposeth some arguments to persuade them to
hasten the collection to verse 6. In the other he adds more arguments to move
them to give liberally, as it becomes Saints.

Verse. 1. For as touching the ministering to the Saints, it is superfluous for
me to write to you. That which belongs to the first part, lest they should
ill interpret his sending of those Messengers, as if he should cherish a
suspicion of their willingness in this business, he shows, that the cause of
sending his Brethren, was not, that they should be instructed, neither that
they should be made willing to make a collection, because for that it would
have been needless to have written, at leastwise to have sent his Brethren to
them.

Verse. 2. For I know the forwardness of your mind, for which I boast of you to
them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago, and your zeal has
provoked very many. He confirms his words with three Reasons.

I know] Reason 1. Because he had very well known their willingness of mind
before.

I boast] Reason 2. Because he boasted of their readiness.

Zeal] Reason 3. Because their endeavor in this business had provoked many to
the like alacrity and zeal.

Verse. 3. Yet have I sent the Brethren, lest our boasting of you should be in
vain in this behalf, that as I said, ye may be ready. He propounds five true
Reasons why he sent the Brethren.

Reason 1. That they would prepare for the more speedy conveying of their
beneficence, and that now the money gathered might be found by the Messengers,
as the Apostle had promised in their name.

Lest our rejoycing] Reason 2. Lest the boasting of the Apostle concerning them
should be found in vain.

Verse. 4. Lest happily if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you
unprepared, we, (that we say not, you) should be ashamed in this same
confident boasting. Reason 3. Following from the former, left both you and I
should be ashamed, if you should be found unprepared, when I together with
the Macedonians (who have heard me glorying in your behalf) should come unto
you.

Verse. 5. Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the Brethren, that they
would go before unto you, and make up before hand your bounty, whereof ye had
notice before, that the same might be ready, as a matter of bounty, not of
covetousness. Reason 4. I have sent unto you the Brethren, that you may be
assisted in your gathering the money by the Brethren, whereby all things may
be more ready.

Not as of covetousness] Reason 5. I have sent unto you the Brethren, who have
taken care lest any one in gathering should be urged to contribute more than
he was willing, and lest covetousness in those that collect, or parsimonie in
those that contribute, should appear, but that they which give, may give
liberally and freely, and so the whole collection being liberal, may appear at
my coming as a blessing.

The Second Part.
Verse. 6. But this I say, He which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: and
he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. The second part of the
Chapter follows, wherein he adds ten arguments, that they would give their
alms liberally, and as it becomes Saints.

Argum. 1. Because whosoever shall give, either nothing, or not according to
his ability, or not out of the purpose of his heart (which is to sow sparingly)
they shall reap also sparingly, i. e. shall get either nothing, or only a
temporal reward: Therefore give ye liberally.

Liberally] Argum. 2. Because they which will give liberally, and out of love
(which is to sow liberally) shall have a liberal harvest: Therefore give ye
liberally.

Verse. 7. Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give,
not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loves a cheerful giver. After he
has expounded what it is to give liberally, or to sow in blessings, (to wit,
to give out of purpose of heart, not out of sadness, or out of necessity: For
he which so gives, gives sparingly, whatsoever he gives, and would give
nothing if he might follow the purpose of his mind.)

He adds Argum. 3. God loves a cheerful giver* and consequently a sad and
unwilling giver, he neither loves, nor approves of, nor blesses: Therefore
give ye liberally and cheerfully.

Verse. 8. And God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye
always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work.
Argum. 4. Is tacitly propounded in the solution of an Objection. So far be it
from you, says he, that you fear want, if you contribute more plentifully,
that on the other side ye may rather expect that God will give you of his
Grace and Power enough of temporal things, that not only you may be contented
with your condition, but also that ye might abound in every good works for the
helping of others: Therefore give liberally.

Verse. 9. (As it is written, He has despersed a broad: he has given to the
poor, his Righteousness remains for ever. He confirms this Argument out of
Psalm. 112.9. where it is spoken, that the Righteous distributeth his goods, and
gives to the poor, and his Righteousness remains for ever; where Argument 5.
is insinuated, That it is the property of the righteous man to distribute his
goods, and to give to the poor, and that the ordinary blessing of God is upon
them, that he may have further to bestow: Therefore show your selves righteous
by giving liberally.

Verse. 10. Now he that ministers Seed to the Sower, both minister Bread for
your food, and multiply your Seed sown, and increase the fruit of your
righteousness.) Argum. 6. Included in a wish and a similitude, as God both
ministers Seed to the Husbandman after sowing, and Bread after Harvest; So he
shall both minister fruit out of your sowing, I wish that he might both
increase your abilities for doing good, and for the bringing forth fruits of
Righteousness and Mercy: Therefore do not you doubt to sow in the giving of
this Alms.

Verse. 11. Being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, which causes
through us thanksgiving to God. Arg. 7. Ye being enriched by the Grace of God,
and abounding in all liberality, may cause that through us, who observe your
charity, thanks may be given to God: Therefore upon this account give ye
liberality.

Verse. 12. For the administration of this service, not only supplieth the want
of the Saints, but is abundant also by thanksgiving unto God. He confirms this
Argument from this, that the office of this undertaken Ministry concerning the
gathering and contributing this Alms, will not only supply the necessities of
the Saints in Judea, but will also cause by many Saints, that thanks be given
unto God.

Verse. 13: Whilst by the experiment of this Ministration, they glorify God
for your professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal
distribution unto them, and unto all men. Argum. 8. This your liberality will
be a sign of your Faith, and subjection of your obedient mind unto Christ and
his Gospel, as also matter of glorifying God; and lastly a sign of your
liberality toward all that are poor, when occasion is given: Therefore give
ye liberally.

Verse. 14. And by their prayer for you, which long after you for the exceeding
Grace of God in you. Argum. 9. The Saints in Judea cherished by your liberality
will pray to God for you: Therefore ye ought to give liberally.

Long after you] Argum. 10. This your liberality will stir up in the holy Jews
love toward you, and will cherish a desire of seeing you, and will enkindle in
them no small esteem of you, by reason of that eminent Grace of God in you: Be
ye not wanting therefore in this.

Verse. 15. Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift. As now having his
desire, and beholding the manifold fruit of their liberality, which by the
Grace of God, it would produce upon their refreshing the Brethren in Judea, he
thanks God for his gift in the liberality of the Corinthians, which he could
not sufficiently in words declare as it deserved.

CHAP. X.
THe third part of the Epistle: In which the Apostle vindicates his authority
from the aspersions of the false Apostles, whereby they labored to lessen his
authority with the Corinthians. In this Chapter, because they blamed Paul, that
being present amongst the Corinthians, he carried himself humbly, but being
absent, he had boasted of the weightiness of his authority in his letters, he
removes this calumny, by defending the fact.

There are two parts of the Chapter. In the first, he proves by eight
arguments, that he is not to be contemned, to verse 12. In the second, he
modestly compares himself with those that were his Emulators, to the end.

Verse. 1. Now I Paul my self beseech you by the meekness, and gentleness of
Christ, who in presence am base among you, but being absent, am bold toward
you. Argum. 1. Is contained in his obtestation by the meekness and gentleness
of Christ, that they would not interpret his carriage otherwise than was mee^.
As if he had said, my humility was the self-same gentleness, and the very
imitation of the meekness of Christ, which I remember you of. That ye
acknowledging the imitation of our Lord in me, may judge rightly concerning
me: Therefore I am not to be despised by you.

Verse. 2. But I beseech you, that I may not be ^old when I am present, with
that confidence wherewith I think to be bold against some, which think of us,
as if we walked according to the flesh. Ye ought to beware, lest by your
fault I am compelled to exercise my power more boldly toward some of you, when
I come, as I have determined to exercise against those, who being led by fear
or hope, think of us, as if we would change our carriage like carnal and
irregenerate men: Therefore I am not to be despised.

Verse. 3. For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh.
Argum. 2. Although I do not live free from humane infirmity in this frail
flesh, yet in the execution of my office, and my Ministerial warfare, I have
not followed carnal lusts, being led by fear or affection, as they falsely lay
to my charge, when sometimes I carried my self humbly, sometimes according to
the dignity of my office and authority: Therefore I am not to be contemned.

Verse. 4. (For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strong holds.) Argum. 4. Confirming the former. I
have no need to use carnal weapons in the subtle changing of my carriage,
sometimes flattering, sometimes boasting, or using any other such like evil
arts, but my Spiritual Weapons (such as they are) were sufficient in the truth,
boldness in the exercising of Ecclesiastical Discipline, zeal, patience,
Christian fortitude, and other virtues, wherewith being armed, I do manage my
warfare: Therefore I am not to be contemned. He shows a threefold virtue of
these weapons. 1. Virtue is, That by divine power they are sufficient for the
throwing down of all the strong holds of humane wisdom, and the demolishing of
subtle pretenses, and all counsels, with which carnal men striving against the
Gospel for their errors and vices, use to defend themselves.

Verse. 5. Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. The second Virtue. He also reaches that these Weapons are
mighty, as to the throwing down the pride of man's mind, and the highness of
worldly knowledge, so also to the converting or subduing high wits to the
obedience and humble submission of themselves, as captives, to Christ by Faith.
Understand it concerning the Elect, and those that are ordained to Salvation.

Verse. 6. And having a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your
obedience is fulfilled. The third Virtue. Those Weapons of the Word of God, and
Ecclesiastical censures are sufficient, etc. to revenge those that rebel and
are disobedient, as doing ready execution, partly in this life, partly in that
which is to come; which weapons the Apostle was making ready against his
adversaries, after he had recalled the flock of the Corinthians, seduced from
him, into order and obedience: for he intended prudently to exercise the
Ecclesiastical censures.

Verse. 7. Do ye look on things after the outward appearance? If any man trust
to himself that he is Christ's, let him of himself think this again, that as
he is Christ's, even so are we Christ's. Argum. 5. Whereby he proves that he
ought not to be contemned, because judgment ought not to be made concerning
the Apostles dignity by the external appearance of humility: For the
interrogation has the force of a negative duty, and is as much as ye ought
not.

If any man] Argum. 6. My humility nothing detracteth from the dignity of my
Ministry, but I am to be equalled with any one of those Emulators, and am as
near to Christ, in as many respects, as any of them: Therefore I am not to be
despised.

Verse. 8. For though I should boast somewhat more of our authority (which the
Lord has given us for edification, and not for your destruction) I should not
be ashamed. Argum. 7. Because however, sometimes humbly, sometimes according
to my authority I shall carry my self, yet I can glory of my Apostolical
authority without vanity. In the mean while, lest the remembrance of his power
should be troublesome, he says, that this authority was given to him, that
he might be advantageous for their Salvation; but not that by any means he
should hinder their salvation.

Verse. 9. That I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters.

10. For his letters (say they) are weighty and powerful, but his bodily
presence is weak, and his speech contemptible.

11. Let such a one think this, that such as we are in word, by letters when
we are absent, such will we be also in deed, when we are present.

Argum. 8. Lest I should seem to affect by my Epistles that authority which I
have not, verse. 9. As my accusers are diligent to intimate by their reproaches,
ver. 10. I shall demonstrate, that my authority is the same indeed when I come
to them, which I used to show in my letters: Therefore do not ye contemn me.

The Second Part.
Verse. 12. For we dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our
selves with some that commend themselves: but they measuring themselves, and
comparing themselves amongst themselves, are not wise. The second part of the
Chapter follows, wherein he discovers the vanity of those that praise
themselves, who did so exalt themselves, as if the Apostle durst not equal
himself with them. The Apostle compares himself with these in a five-fold
dissimilitude.

First, We humbly and modestly carrying our selves, surely we are not like
them, who ambitiously and boastingly insult over us (as if we were not to be
compared with them) commending themselves above that which the thing it self
does admit them to be commended.

Are not] 2. They show their own foolishness, measuring themselves by their own
esteem, making themselves great in their own judgment, and of some like unto
themselves; we avoid this vanity.

Verse. 13. But we will not boast of things without our measure, but according
to the measure of the rule which God has distributed to us, a measure to reach
even unto you.

14. For we stretch not our selves beyond our measure, as though we reached
not unto you, for we are come as far as to you also, in preaching the Gospel
of Christ.

3. We do not boast beyond the measure and rule of our gifts and calling, as
if we were sent to preach to those whom we are not sent to, but we keep our
selves within the measure of our Apostolical calling, assigned to us by God,
which allows our preaching to you Corinthians, who by our means were converted
to the Faith: Our Emulators do not so contain themselves, but run to those to
whom they are not sent, and do boast above the measure of gifts, and divine
benediction upon their labors.

Verse. 15. Not boasting of things without our measure, that is, of other men's
labors, but having hope, when your faith is increased, that we shall be
enlarged by you according to our rule abundantly,

16. To preach the Gospel in the Regions beyond you, and not to boast in
another man's line of things made ready to our hand.

4. We do not boast in the labors of others, as if we had converted to the
Faith those which we have not converted, as our Emulators, who boast in you
Corinthians, which they have not converted; but we hope, that after you are
further stablished in the Faith, that ye may be confident, and also endeavor
to propagate our Gospel, and deal with your neighbors, that they may hear my
preaching: For verily I hope that the borders of our Ministry through you will
be more abundantly enlarged, and that according to the rule of my calling, to
whom the Apostleship to the Gentiles is committed. I hope, I say, it will come
to pass, that we may preach the Gospel also in those Regions which are beyond
us, that I shall not need to boast in another man's harvest, prepared by the
labors of other men, as the false Apostles now do boasting in you, whom I have
converted to Salvation, not they.

Verse. 17. But he that glories, let him glory in the Lord. 5. This he
propounds by way of precept. I an Apostle will boast only in the Lord, not in
evil things, not in feigned, or false, nor in the gifts of God as mine, not in
my self, as my Emulators do boast in themselves, but as the Lord will allow
me, in God alone.

Verse. 18. For not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends. He gives the reason of this, because no man is approved that
commends himself out of his own opinion, but he that is approved of God, and
receives testimony from him: The trial of this rule the Emulators of the
Apostle could not abide.

CHAP. XI.
HE proceeds in his holy boasting against the false Apostles. There are two
parts of the Chapter. In the first, he gives an account of his boasting,
reprehending the Corinthians, way being made for his future boasting. By the
way drawing off the Vizzard from the false Apostles, to verse 21. In the other,
he opens the large matter of his boasting against those his Emulators, to
the end.

Verse. 1. Would to God you could bear with me a little in my folly, and indeed
bear with me. That which belongs to the first, although he had not
determined to boast, unless hol^ly and purely in the Lord, yet because at the
first sight the praising of himself had the appearance of folly; therefore he
wishes and asks, that they would a little bear with him, as foolish,
speaking by way of concession (otherwise in very deed the Holy Ghost did speak
in the Apostle) that he might better discover to them in this the reasons of
his prudence: for because he saw them deceived by some vain and subtle men,
not without the subtilty of Satan, he was compelled for their good to this
boasting.

Verse. 2. For I am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for I have espoused
you to one Husband, that I may present you a chaste Virgin to Christ. He
produces ten reasons, whereby he demonstrates the necessity of his boasting.

Reason 1. Because I am driven with an holy zeal in the Cause of Christ to this
boasting: Therefore boasting is necessary. He clears this reason, because as a
Paranymph he did endeavor to marry the Corinthians, not to himself, but to
Christ, as a chaste Virgin, and to retain them in his society.

Verse. 3. But I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through
his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ. Reason 2. I fear, lest as Eve was seduced by the subtilty of the Devil,
so you being corrupted by the false Apostles, should be moved from that
Virgin-like simplicity of the Gospel of Christ^ for the Wisdom of God,
embracing humane wisdom, and admitting the leaven of legal ceremonies to the
corrupting the Doctrine of the Gospel of grace amongst you: Therefore this my
boasting is necessary.

Verse. 4. For if he that comes preaches another Jesus, whom we have not
preached; or if ye receive another spirit, which ye have not received; or
another Gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with him.
Reason 3. You might deservedly bear with another Thrasonical Preacher, if he
could impart unto you another Christ, which is impossible, or more excellent
gifts of the Spirit* or a better Gospel than you have accepted and received by
our Ministry. Truly, seeing that is impossible, ye ought deservedly to bear
with me an Apostle boasting, by whose preaching ye are made partakers both of
the gifts of Christ, and his Spirit.

Verse. 5. For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles.
Reason 4. Confirming the former; I suppose they will not deny me to be
inferior to Peter, James, and John (those Apostles who were chiefly esteemed)
because the Gospel being communicated with them, Gal. 2. they have contributed
nothing to me. Therefore my boasting against the false Apostles is necessary
and just.

Verse. 6. But though I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge, but we have
been thoroughly made manifest among you in all things. Reason 5. Because I will
not contend with those that commend themselves for their excellency of speech
or eloquence; but I will give place to none in the knowledge of the mysteries
of salvation, which thing he calls the Corinthians themselves to witness, who
have very well understood his knowledge.

Verse. 7. Have I committed an offense in abasing my self, that you might be
exalted, because I have preached to you the Gospel of God freely? Reason 6.
Wherein he meets with an Objection: Some would say, Whilst thou were present
at Corinth, thou did live by thy Handicraft labor. Ans. My humility is so
far from being blameworthy, that it is rather worthy of praise, because it
conduces to your profit, whose salvation I did so much esteem, that not
regarding my profit, I preached the Gospel to you of good will: Therefore even
for this cause it is lawful for me to boast.

Verse. 8. I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them* to do you service.

9. And when I was present with you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no man:
for that which was lacking to me, the brethren which come to Macedonia
supplied, and in all things I have kept my self from being burdensome to you,
and so will I keep my self.

He more clearly explains his practice by a pleasant metaphor, showing that
he did take wages, even as spoils, from the other poorer Churches, conquered
by the Gospel, to support himself, that he might better do service to the
Corinthians freely, ver. 8. by name from the Macedonian Philippians, lest he
should be chargeable to the Corinthians.

Verse. 10. As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this
boasting in the Regions of Achaia.

11. Wherefore? because I love you not? God knows.

12. But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them which
desire occasion, that wherein they glory, they may be found even as we.

Lest he should seem to repent of what he had done, he determined that he
will not afterward be chargeable to them, or will not receive wages, which he
confirms with an oath, v. 10. And lest they should take it ill, as if it was
for want of love, that he would not receive wages of them, he professes that
he had thus determined, out of special love to them, calling God to Witness
concerning the truth of his words, ver. 11. and that for this end, lest the
false Apostles should seem to exceed him in his boasting, from whom he would
have the occasion of reproaching him, so taken away, who otherwise would say
that Paul preached to the Corinthians for the increasing his substance.

Verse. 13. For such are false Apostles, deceitful workers; transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ.

14. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light.

15. Therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed as
the Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works.

Reason 7. Showing the necessity of his boasting, because the wickedness of his
Emulators did compel him to this boasting; for they did feign themselves the
Apostles of Christ, and Workers in the Vineyard of God, when in the mean while
they only cared for their own business, not Gods; they preached the Gospel for
profits sake, and their own honor, they feigned themselves Ministers of
Christ, when they did only personate Stage Players, ver. 13. neither is it to
be wondered at, seeing these deceivers were the Apostles of Satan, imitating
the Devil (who sometimes puts on the form of some celestial Angel, that under
the pretense of zeal and piety he might beguile men) whose manners his
Emulators did follow, pretending the glory of Christ, when in the mean while
they sacrificed all their labor to the belly, to their purse, to their honor,
nothing solicitous what became of the Apostles, what of the Churches, so that
they might obtain their desires: To whom therefore the Apostle threatens
eternal death, according to their deserts.

Verse. 16. I say again, let no man think me a fool: if otherwise, yet as a
fool receive me, that I may boast my self a little.

17. That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were
foolishlie in this confidence of boasting.

Reason 8. Because they should find that it was wisely done, that he was
necessitated to this boasting, which he desires them to take notice of; but if
as yet for the present they could not perceive the just necessity and prudence
of his boasting, at leastwise he desires, that they would bear with him
patiently a little, as foolishly boasting, until he could finish his Speech
and Apology, ver. 16. Yielding only, but not affirming that he foolishly
boasted, or that it was un-beseeming him to Godward: for otherwise the
Apostle, with the greatest Wisdom of the Spirit, did most justly boast to the
glory of God, and the benefit of the Church in this whole business.

Verse. 18. Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also. Reason
9. Because the false Apostles did falsely glory against him; therefore he
contends that it is an equal thing, that he himself should truly boast in his
own defense.

Verse. 19. For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye your selves are wise.
Reason 10. Wise men were wont to bear with those that seemed more foolish, as
you know by experience: Why should ye not therefore suffer me of necessity to
boast, although herein I may seem foolish to some amongst you?

Verse. 20. For ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour
you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the
face. Reason 11. Because ye suffer more harsh things (as it appears) than this
foolishness of my glorying. For (1) Ye suffer those importunate men, who bring
you into bondage. Such were the false Apostles, who exercised their power over
them, dividing the Church of Corinth into factions, and set up themselves
Captains and Lords of their Followers amongst the Corinthians, as of Soldiers
and Servants. (2) Ye suffer those which devour you; such were the false
Apostles, affecting stately banquets, and eating up the substance of the
Corinthians. (3) Ye suffer spoilers; such also were the false Apostles, who
would not indeed take wages, but in the mean while, they coveted gifts, and did
collogue and receive them from the Corinthians. (4) Ye suffer those that
contemn you; such were the false Apostles, who because of the Stock and Hebrew
Nation, which they were of, and some gifts of the Spirit given to them above
the Church of Corinth, gathered out of the illiterate and ignoble Gentiles, did
above measure exalt themselves. (5) Ye suffer those that smite you on the
face, or those that use you reproachfully: Why therefore should not ye suffer
this may just boasting.

Verse. 21. I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak: howbeit,
wherein soever any is bold, I speak foolishlie, I am bold also. He expounds
what it is to smite on the face, that it is not to be understood of external
violence, but in respect of reproach, which in some measure he found amongst
the Corinthians from those false teachers, when the false Apostles hit the
Corinthians in the teeth with the lowness of their minds, in that they
subjected themselves to Paul an handicrafts man: for what else was this, but to
smite the Corinthians in the face, and insult over the holy Apostle.

The Second Part.
Howbeit whereinsoever] The second part of the Chapter follows, in which the
way already being prepared for him to a just glorying, and the necessity of it
being demonstrated, he compares himself with those glorious Doctors, proving
himself not inferior to them in four Characters of his dignity, but to be
preferred before upon many accounts.

Sign 1. Of his dignity, propounded in general: that he was inferior to them
in nothing, whatsoever they looked upon in their glorying: In the mean while
he modestly grants a show of folly in this his glorying, which yet he wisely
prosecutes.

Verse. 22. Are they Hebrews? so am I: Are they Israelites? so am I: The second
sign of his dignity more specially laid down, that he is worthy to be
compared to them in the Nobility of his Lineage: For if he had sought glory
from a Holy Nation, he sprung from that family which had not mixed themselves
with the Gentiles; he was an Hebrew, from Hebrew parents: if he would glory
in the Nobility of his Race, he sprung from the more Noble Israelites, because
from the Tribe of Benjamin; Benjamin was the Son of Rachel, a woman freeborn:
but some Tribes had their original from bond-maids: If they strived for the
Antiquity of Religion, that they remained in the Covenant as true Abrahamites,
here also he* was equal to any one of them.

Verse. 23. Are they Ministers of Christ? I speak as a fool, I am more: in
labors more abundant; in stripes above measure; in prisons more frequent; in
deaths often: Sign 3. If they had striven for the dignity of office, herein
modestly, as one compelled, he prefers himself before them in respect of his
Apostleship, and office granted to him extraordinarily, I am greater, says
he, because I am an Apostle.

In labours] The fourth Sign of his dignity, is sincerity in the administration
of his office. Of this his sincerity he produces nine Testimonies. First, His
labors or his diligence. Secondly, His sufferings in general, which belonged
to his health and bodily liberty, and the dangers of his life.

Verse. 24. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thirdly,
He produces his special sufferings from the Jews, that he was whipped by them
five times according to the number of stripes inflicted upon malefactors by the
Law: for the Jews, although they are cruel, yet they would seem to contain
themselves within the Law, Deuteronomy. 25.3.

Verse. 25. Thrice was I beaten with Rods: once was I stoned: thrice I suffered
shipwreck: a night and a day I have been in the deep. Fourthly, His sufferings
from the Gentiles bear testimony, that by their Lictours or Sergeants he was
beaten thrice with clubs, and whips, and once stoned. Fifthly, That he thrice
suffered shipwreck, in one whereof, after he was twenty four hours tossed by
the waters in the deep Sea, he was freed by the powerful hand of God.

Verse. 26. In journying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in
perils by mine own Countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the
City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst
false Brethren. The Sixth Testimony of his sincerity comprehends the labors of
his journying, and eight kinds of dangers, which he found in sundry places,
and from diverse kinds of men.

Verse. 27. In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger und
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. The seventh has five sorts
of troubles, with which, while he fulfilled the work of the Ministry, he was
very often exercised, wherein being wearied, he was instead of rest forced to
take in hand new labors.

Verse. 28. Besides those things which are without, that which comes upon me
daily, the care of all the Churches. Eighthly, His unconquerable patience in
daily public businesses, a solicitous mind for all the Churches of Christ.

Verse. 29. Who is weak, and am I not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? The
ninth Testimony of his Sincerity, is, his sympathy with all that are afflicted,
and offended by any scandal.

Verse. 30. If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern my
infirmities. He retorts the Objection of his adversaries: But all these things
have made thee a contemptible and miserable man. He answers, that he
purposely determined to glory in these, as the things which did more commend
his sincerity, than the prosperous affairs of the false Apostle, adorned them.

Verse. 31. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for
ever more, knows, that I lie not.

32. In Damascus the Governor under Are^as the King, kept the City with a
Garrison, desirous to appreh^nd me.

33. And thorough a window in a basket was I let down by the wall, and escaped
his hands.

Lastly, Because these things which he had mentioned may seem incredible, viz.
that one should be able to bear so many afflictions, premising an oath,
touching the truth as well of those things that were said already, as of those
that were to be spoken, he mentions the special danger of his life, out of
which there was no apparent escape, unless God had kept him safe for the good
of the Church, and opened a way by his special providence for his escape,
concerning which, Act. 9.23.

CHAP. XII.
HE proceeds in his holy glorying: There are three parts of the Chapter. In
the first he explains the heavenly vision presented to him, together with the
events of the same. To verse. 11. In the second he proves that the Corinthians
ought to have freed him from this necessity of glorying, or defended him. To
verse. 19. In the third he produces the causes of his troubles.

Verse. 1. It is not expedient for me, doubtless, to glory, I will come to
visions and revelations of the Lord. The Preface being Premised (that he does
not glory for his own sake, because that was not expedient for him, (For this
is here somewhat emphatical* for me) but for the Corinthians, and the Churches
sake, whom it concerned, to preserve the authority of the Apostle entire) he
comes to extraordinary revelations, one of which he begins historically to
declare.

Verse. 2. I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the body,
I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell, God knows, such an
one caught up to the third heaven. I knew a man] He discovers the excellency
of this revelation, and his modesty, by nine Arguments.

Argum. 1. That he scarcely dare publish his name in this business, but lest
he may seem to arrogate much to himself, he is compelled to speak of himself
in a third person.

In Christ] Argum. 2. That although this revelation may seem to extol him above
the common condition of men, yet he does not affect any other excellence, than
to be in Christ, or in the number of Believers, who have renounced themselves,
that they may glory in Christ alone.

Fourteen] Argum. 3. That silently with himself he had suppressed the mention
of this glorious revelation whole fourteen years, never intending to recite it,
unless he was compelled by the importunity of his Emulators, who endeavored
to diminish his Apostolical authority, to the damage of the Gospel and the
Church.

Caught up] Argum. 4. That he was caught up to the upper heaven, above all the
Stars, to the place of the blessed Spirits, where God chiefly manifests his
glory.

Whether in the body] Argum. 5. That he is ignorant, whether he was caught up
by the local translation of his body into Heaven, or whether his soul
extraordinarily was separated for that time, and lifted up into Heaven,
concerning the other, notwithstanding, I am certain.

Verse. 3. And I knew such a man (whether in the body, or out of the body, I
cannot tell, God knows.)

4. He was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is
not lawful for a man to utter.

Into Paradise] Argum. 6. That he certainly knew the matter done, and that he
was caught up into Paradise, or into that blessed seat of the Glory of God,
(whereupon he repeats the second time, I kn^w a man) and there heard ineffable
words, which is not lawful for a man to utter, i. e. of whom something could
not be expressed, other things it was not lawful for him to utter, which
otherwise had he not been prohibited, might have been uttered, for those
things which were revealed, he is certain, did belong to his private
confirmation, and preparations for those conflicts he was about to undergo.

Verse. 5. Of such an one will I glory, yet of my self I will not glory, but in
my infirmities. Argum. 7. That indeed he was ready to boast (to the glory of
God) of such a man, i. e. of himself, as the servant of God, exalted after this
manner: But not concerning himself, considered in himself, for that he had
nothing in himself, in which he might glory, except his infirmities.

Verse. 6. For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool: For I
will say the truth. But now I forbear, lest any man should think of me above
that, which he sees me to be, or that he hears of me. Argum. 8. That
although he had sufficient matter of glorying offered upon this revelation,
that truly and solidly, without vanity, he might much more glory, but he
determined as yet sparingly to speak of this matter, lest he should stir up
too much esteem of himself.

Verse. 7. And lest I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of
the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. Argum. 9. That
the excellence of the Revelation was so great, as that he might beware of
pride, the Angel of Satan was sent for the Apostles humiliation.

A Thorn*] He describes the reason of his humbling so, that he intimates
three Reasons of it.

Reason 1. That the matter of his humiliation, was something of the relics of
sin in his flesh, or his corrupt nature as yet not quite abolished, viz. some
motion of concupiscence, tending to his further sinning, which motion he
compares to a Thorn left in lopped wood, because it was no less troublesome to
him, than a Thorn was wont to be fastened in the foot of a travellour.

The Messenger] Reason 2. Of his humiliation, that this motion carried along
with it a special temptation opening a way to the Devil, making way to sin.

To buffet] Reason 3. This Temptation sent from the Devil does so much the more
violently solicit him to sin, that he was compelled to implore divine
assistance, lest he should be overcome with the Temptation: which exercise,
as it is not to be wondered at by him that reads Chap. 7. Romans So it is to be
acknowledged the most efficacious means for the humbling of the Apostle, for
he that was wont to bear all troubles, and fights, both with his bodily and
spiritual enemies courageously, he is heard to howl and cry out in his combat
with the flesh, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, etc.

Verse. 8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from
me. The humiliation of the Apostle it self follows, of which he brings four
Signs. Sign 1. That he had very often prayed unto God, that he would deliver
him from the Tempter.

Verse. 9. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory
in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. Sign 2. That he
rested in the answer of God, in which he certified him, partly of the
sufficiency of his Grace, for the sustaining of his combating servant, lest he
should be overcome by the Tempter, and for the washing away of all pollution
which he had contracted in his combat: Partly concerning the end of his
purpose in the exercise of his servants, which is, that by how much any servant
of God is found more weak in any combat, by so much the strength of God
sustaining him, might more clearly and perfectly demonstrate it self.

Most gladly] Sign 3. That a more constant frame of humility would ensue upon
this combat of his, wherein he determined to acknowledge his infirmities, and
weaknesses in all things, to this very end, that he might experience the power
of Christ dwelling in him, and so much the more apparently manifested.

Verse. 10. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's sake: for when I am
weak, then I am strong. Sign 4. That he had now learnt, not only to bear all
afflictions courageously for the Gospel, which might make him more humble, but
out of them to take much pleasure. Because when he perceived himself most
weak, flying to Christ, he had experience of his more powerful presence for
the sustaining and comforting him, and likewise making him victorious.

The second Part.
Verse. 11. I am become a fool in glorying, ye have compelled me: for I ought
to have been commended of you: for in nothing am I behind the very chiefest
Apostles, though I be nothing. The second part of the Chapter contains his
glorying in the manifestation of his Apostleship powerfully and sincerely
administered amongst the Corinthians: He clears this glorying from that folly
which some might object, laying the fault upon the Corinthians, from whose
neglect the necessity of the Apostles glorying did arise: For they ought to
assert his dignity against the false Apostles. He says, I ought to be
commended by you, or it was your part to defend me: he brings nine Reasons of
this Proposition, and also of his glorying.

For in nothing] Reason 1. Because although the Apostle was nothing in himself,
yet by the Grace of God he was not inferior to the chief Apostles, the
Corinthians being his witnesses: Therefore he ought to be defended and
commended by them.

Verse. 12. Truly the Signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all
patience, in signs and wonders, and mighty deeds. Reason 2. Confirming the
former. Because amongst you the signs of my Apostleship appear, partly in my
patient enduring of labors, troubles and injuries, partly in the effects and
signs of my Apostleship, in miracles and powerful works: Therefore I ought to
be commended by you.

Verse. 13. For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other Churches, except
it be that I my self was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong. Reason
3. Because the Corinthian Church is endowed with such illustrious gifts of the
Holy Ghost, by my Ministry, as any other Church, founded either by other
Apostles, or by my self: Therefore my Ministry ought to be defended by you.

Except it be that] Reason 4. Because his zeal in propagating the Gospel
amongst them, was so great, that he preached the Gospel to the Corinthians
freely, wherein if there was any wrong, by a civil Irony he asks pardon,
intimating the benefit which was vouchsafed to them: Therefore he ought to be
defended by them.

Verse. 14. Behold the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be
burdensome to you, for I seek not yours, but you: for the Children ought not to
lay up for the Parents, but the Parents for the Children. Reason 5. Confirming
the former. Because the Apostle was still of the same mind toward them, not to
take any wages of them for the future, when he shall come to them, for now he
prepared himself for coming the third time, although his second intention to
come was hindered, As it is 1 Corinthians. 1.

Yours] Reason 6. Confirming the former. Because he sought the salvation of
the Corinthians, and not to convert their goods to his own proper use:
Therefore they ought to defend him.

For I seek not] Reason 7. Because although he be their spiritual Father, who
ought to be nourished by his folk or his children, yet he endeavored to
imitate natural Parents, who ordinarily lay up for their children. Otherwise if
the Parents be in want, it is not to be doubted, but children ought to do
their mutual duties to their Parents, and to honor them by nourishing them.

Verse. 15. And I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you, though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I be beloved. Reas. 8. Because he was ready to
spend his goods and life it self for their salvation, which vehement love he
amplifies from the ingratitude of the Corinthians, who in the mean while did
not make return of his love, but received the false Apostles, his Emulators,
and made more of them, than the Apostle himself, their Father.

Verse. 16. But be it so: I did not burden you: nevertheless being crafty, I
caught you with guile.

17. Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I sent unto you?

18. I desired Titus, and with him I sent a Brother: did Titus make a gain of
you? walked we not in the same Spirit? walked we not in the same steps?

Reason 9. In which he prevents an objection; some might say, although thou
thy self have not received of them wages, yet perhaps thou have drawn much from
them by those whom thou ^ast sent. He answers, that his companions and
Ambassadors, which he had sent to the Corinthians, have taken the same care,
lest they should burden the Corinthians. But by the way he checks his
adversaries, whilst he clears himself from those arts which those crafty
workmen did use, who when they would seem to receive nothing themselves, did
subborn others, who should receive for their use whatsoever they could squeeze
from the Corinthians: Therefore the Corinthians ought to defend Paul, and stop
the mouths of his accusers in his absence.

The Third Part.
Verse. 19. Again, think you that we excuse our selves unto you? we speak
before God in Christ: but we do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying.
The third part of the Chapter follows, wherein by preventing an objection, he
gives the reasons of his defense: Some might say, wherefore do thou write
these things? wherefore is that defense? whether art thou conscious of some
evil? or do thou desire to be extolled by us? He answers, by giving five
reasons, why he was so solicitous in that kind.

1. I have not writ these to this intent, that (as guilty of some evil, or that
I desired glory) I may clear my self amongst you, or excuse my self; but out of
my love to you, that I might promote your edification and Salvation, lest you
viz. thinking meanly of my Apostleship, should by the false Apostles be moved
from the simplicity of the Gospel, for the testimony of this my assertion, I
call God (who has known my mind) and Christ (whose business I do) to be my
witnesses.

Verse. 20. For I fear, lest when I come, I shall not find you such as I would,
and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not, lest there be
debates, envyings, wrath, strifes, back-bitings, whisperings, swellings,
tumults: Reason 2. I fear lest my Authority and Doctrine being diminished
amongst you, through the false Apostles, when I come I shall find you such as I
would not; i. e. infected with those evils which follow upon Schisms, such are
strifes, or contentions: emulations or envy concerning the gifts of God: wraths
or angers from mutual injuries: brawlings or mutual provocations: back-bitings
and whisperings, by which openly and privily men are wont to defame one
another: swellings, and as it were puffings up of the mind out of pride; and
lastly, tumultuous seditions.

And that I] Reason 3. I fear lest ye should find me more severe than you
would, unless ye timely mend by admonitions, and submit to my doctrine and
authority in the Lord.

Verse. 21. And lest when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and
that I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of
the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which they have committed.
Reason 4. I fear lest if my authority be despised amongst you, many amongst
you will impenitently continue in their defilement, fornications, and such like
sins which I have in the former Epistle reproved.

Will humble mee] Reason 5. I ^ear lest the Lord should afflict me when I come
to you, viz. lest your sins should create shame, sadness and mourning to me,
and offenses amongst you, who are my glory and joy, if you behave your selves
as it becomes children; but ye will cause shame and sadness to me if you do
otherwise.

That he might prevent these evils, and take away scandals arising amongst
them, it was necessary that the authority of the Apostle and Apostolical
Doctrine should be maintained amongst them, for this end, this the Apostles
Apology was necessary.

CHAP. XIII.
IN this last Chapter he proceeds to vindicate his Apostolical Authority from
contempt, and to make it awful and amiable amongst them: The Proposition to be
confirmed is this, My Authority ought to be reverenced by you. The Arguments
which confirm this Thesis are ten.

Verse. 1. This is the third time I am coming to you ^ in the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall every word be established. Argum. 1. I fore-warn you by
that authority committed unto me, of the purpose of my coming unto you, now
the third time, that you being twice or thrice forewarned concerning my
coming, it might be instead of two or three witnesses to certify you of my
firm purpose to exercise Ecclesiastical censure amongst you: Therefore my
authority is to be feared by you.

Verse. 2* I told you before, and foretell you, as if I was present the second
time, and being absent, now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and
to all other, that if I come again, I will not spare: Argum. 2. From the
commination of exercising severity, when he came, upon the impenitent, who had
first sinned, and not repented: Be persuaded that I will severely punish the
impenitent when I come: Therefore fear ye and repent.

Verse. 3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you-ward
is not weak, but is mighty in you. He gives the reasons of this his severe
commination: Because they tempted Christ, and the Apostle, doubting whether
Christ spoke in the Apostle, or the Apostle from the authority of Christ: And
also he adds Argum. 3. for the vindicating of his authority. Christ has
powerfully manifested himself amongst you by my Ministry; partly by grace
given to sinners, partly by the gifts of the Spirit conferred upon the
Presbyters, and others, partly by miracles done amongst you, partly by the
correcting of stubborn sinners. Fear therefore.

Verse. 4. For though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lived by the
Power of God: for we also are weak in him, but we shall live with him by the
Power of God toward you? Argum. 4. That as Christ was crucified in the
infirmity of the flesh, but is found alive by the Spirit and Power of his
Deity, so I am weak in appearance, and have carried my self humbly for Christ's
sake, that I might be conformable to Christ, but by the Power of God I have
been able, and shall be also powerful in my Ministry, when the matter
requires it: Therefore my authority is to be feared.

Verse. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith: prove your own
selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be reprobates? Argum. 5. All you, after your examination, shall know that
Christ dwells in you, through my Ministry, unless some of you are cast-awayes,
and unworthy of the name of Believers, or at least as yet unregenerate:
Therefore the authority of my Apostleship ought to be reverenced by you.

Verse. 6. But I trust that ye shall know, that we are not reprobates. Argum.
6. Whatsoever ye now are, I hope it will come to pass that at length ye being
overcome by the truth, and convicted by the signs of my Apostleship, may
acknowledge me to be the true servant of Christ, and not a false or a
reprobate Apostle: Therefore my authority ought to be reverenced by you.

Verse. 7. Now I pray to God that ye do no evil, not that we should appear
approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as
reprobates. Argum. 7. By which he does not only vindicate his authority from
contempt, but by the moderation of his mind makes it lovely: I earnestly
desire you to abstain from all evil, and do good, lest I should need to
exercise my authority amongst you: And to this end I pray God, that I may not
regard my reputation, whether approved or disapproved by the judgment of men,
I am indifferent, so that it may be well with you: Therefore my authority
ought to be reverenced by you.

Verse. 8. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. Argum.
8. Confirming the former, my authority does not prevail against Truth, or
Righteousness, that they may be destroyed, but for preserving the Truth, and
therefore if you do no evil, my authority amongst you will cease: Therefore
that ought to be beloved by you.

Verse. 9. For we are glad when we are weak, and ye are strong: and this also
we wish, even your perfection. Argum. 9. Confirming the seventh: I rejoice
when there is no occasion for the exercise of my authority (I as if I had none)
do not show my power, having nothing more in my desires, than your integrity,
that all things being duly composed, and the members of the Church, which are
now dis-joynted, being restored, I may never have need to extol myself to your
terror: Therefore my authority ought both to be reverenced and loved by you.

Verse. 10. Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being present I
should use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord has given me to
edification, and not to destruction. Argum. 10. Now I deal with you more
severely by Letters, that you may repent, lest being present, I be compelled
more severely to punish the impenitent, according to my power given me for
your good, but not for your hurt: Therefore my authority ought to be
reverenced by you.

Verse. 11. Finally, Brethren, farewell: be perfect, be of good comfort, be of
one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

12. Greet one another with an holy kiss.

13. All the Saints salute you.

14. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion
of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen.

He concludes the Epistle with a very fit Exhortation, which is sixfold.
Exhort. 1. That they may rejoice in obeying my admonitions with real joy. 2.
That they may be perfect, or sound, and schism being laid aside, may be
joined together amongst themselves. 3 That they may have comfort by obeying
him. 4 That in opinions they may agree amongst themselves. 5 That joined in
affections they follow peace. Which exhortations he confirms by promising the
divine presence in the fuller gifts of his Grace, which God, who delights in
peace and love, is wont to give to those that endeavor after peace and love.

Greet] 6. He exhorts, that they would show toward one another the signs of
mutual love without dissimulation, as it becomes Saints.

The Grace of our Lord] After his salutation in the name of the Saints, in the
end he applies himself to them by an Apostolical benediction, and wishes
furthermore, that there might not only be granted a right to all the
comfortable benefits of Christ, but also an acknowledgement, a sense and more
full fruition; first, of the Grace of Reconciliation made by Christ; further of
his divine Love, which by Christ descends upon us: and thirdly, all sorts of
gifts of the Holy Ghost, sealing, even as with his Seal, his desire and hope.

Amen.
The Epistle of Paul to the GALATIANS Analytically expounded.
The Contents of the Epistle.
GAlatia is a Region of Lesser Asia, in which the Apostle had laboriously
planted Churches, Act. 16. and 18. certain Pharisees being come hither from
Judea, who had embraced the Faith of Christ in profession, taught the
observation of the Mosaical Law, together with the Faith of the Gospel, as
necessary to be conjoined to our salvation, and had corrupted many, if not all
the Churches of that Region, by their error, in the mean while those Impostors
did pretend that they were sent by the Apostles, Peter, James, and John, and
di^ falsely affirm, that he (according to their Opinion) had taught all their
Doctrines. Wherefore they highly extolled those three Apostles, but did take
away the name and right of an Apostle from Paul, as if he was not chosen into
the society of the Apostles by Christ, neither acknowledged for an Apostle, by
the rest of the Apostles. Wherefore in this Epistle (the accusation of the
false Apostles being refuted) The Apostle deals with the Galatians, that they
may return to the soundness of Faith.

Of the Epistle (besides the Preface and the Conclusion) there are three chief
parts. In the first he deals with the Galatians, that they would renounce the
errors which they had drunk in; but by the way, that he might prevent those
that accuse him, he courageously asserts his Apostleship, lest he should give
place to those three chief Apostles, in his Apostolical authority. In the first
Chapter, and the first part of the second.

In the second part he purposely disputes of Justification by Faith, and of
the temporary use and abrogation of the Mosaical Law, in the latter part of the
second Chapter, also in the third and fourth.

Lastly, In the third part his Exhortation for perseverance in Christian
Liberty being premised, he counsels them to use it well, and shows which are
the true exercises of Christians, lest, either by a dissolute licentiousness,
or the superstitious observation of Ceremonies, they should neglect the chief
Christian duties. In the fifth and sixth Chapter.

CHAP. I.
THere are three parts of the Chapter: In the first is a Preface to verse. 6. In
the second he begins to deal with the Galatians, that they return into the way
from their error in observing the Levitical Law, and that imaginary
conjunction of Justification by Works, with Justification by Faith, as if this
had been possible; some Arguments to this end being propounded, to verse. 13. In
the third part the Apostle confirms the last Argument from signs concerning the
divinity of his Doctrine, to the end.

Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and
God the Father who raised him from the dead: The whole Preface is ordered for
the preparing the mind of the Galatians to obey his Doctrine concerning the
Grace of Christ. The scope may be perceived in this or the like Proposition to
the same sense: Ye ought to believe and obey me, admonishing you of the true
cause of Justification and Sanctification: Eight Arguments are intimated to
this end, whereof some are contained in the inscription, verse. 1, 2. Some in
the salutation, verse. 3. Some in the description of Christ, verse. 4. Some in
the doxology, verse. 5.

An Apostle] Argum. 1. I Paul which write these things unto you am an Apostle
of supreme authority in the ministry of the Church: Therefore you must believe
and obey me.

Neither of men] Argum. 2. My office is not of humane invention, or is not
founded in humane authority, but God is the Author of it, so that my Doctrine
cannot be contemned without injury done to God: Therefore except you would
reject God that sent me, ye must hearken to me.

Neither by man] Argum. 3. I am not mediately, or by the Ministry of men
called, but immediately by God, viz. Christ, by him now raised from the dead,
and by God the Father who gave testimony to the Doctrine of his Son, by raising
him from the dead: Therefore ye must believe and obey my Doctrine.

Verse. 2. And all the Brethren, which are with me, unto the Churches of
Galatia. Argum. 4. I have called all the Brethren, which are with me, to the
society of this admonition written to you, all the Brethren with me, which
together with my self salute you, will sometimes be witnesses against you,
unless you obey my Doctrine: Therefore ye ought to believe and obey me.

Churches] Argum. 5. Although ye be infected with a dangerous error, yet I
think you are to be accounted in the number of the Churches: Therefore
recompense me, and acknowledge me as an Apostle sent to the Churches, to be
obeyed and believed.

Verse. 3. Grace be to you and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ. Argum. 6. I according to the authority bestowed upon me by the
providence of God do not doubt to give you right to the blessing of the Gospel,
and to entreat Grace, i. e. a more plentious acknowledgment, sense, and fruit
of Gods free mercy, reconciliation, and forgiveness of sins, and the other
effects of the Grace of God conducing to sanctification: Together with peace or
a sound tranquillity of heart, and other good things which appertain to your
happiness, that all things may be derived to you from the God of Peace, and
from the Lord Christ the Mediator, the only Fountain of Grace and Peace:
Therefore I ought to be believed while I open to you the reason of this Grace
and Peace communicated to you.

Verse. 4. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil world, according to the Will of God, and our Father, He makes a
description of Christ from the work of Redemption; that he might show, that
our whole salvation by the Grace of God comes to us through his merit; from
whence

Argum. 7. Our salvation or redemption (from that lost condition of the wicked,
who are of this world without Christ) is obtained by the death of Christ alone,
and that by the decree and institution of God the Father, who has ordained
this only free cause of salvation: Therefore I ought to be believed and
obeyed admonishing you, that you would acknowledge this the alone cause of your
salvation.

Verse. 5. To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Argum. 8. God is worthy,
and Christ also, to whom, for such a gift and ineffable Grace, Glory should be
given by all for ever: Therefore I ought to be believed by you vindicating
this glory of the Grace of Christ amongst you, lest it should be obscured or
taken away by the merit of humane works.

The second Part.
Verse. 6 I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called you in the
Grace of Christ, unto another Gospel. The second part of the Chapter follows,
wherein he proves that the error, concerning that imaginary and impossible
conjunction of justification by works, and justification by Grace, or by Faith
in Christ, must be renounced, in which error now they were entangled by the
false Apostles, who taught the observation of the Mosaical Law to be also
necessary for the salvation and justification of those that believe in Christ,
The Arguments which he urges, that they may renounce this error are nine. Of
whom some are used by way of reprehension, others are openly brought in the
disputation following.

I marvel] Argum. 2. Your revolting, O Galatians, from the Grace of Christ, to
the merits of humane works, Is to be wondered, that so soon as ever the Faith
of Christ was admitted, and Grace for your conversion received, ye fell from
it: Therefore ye must renounce this error.

Removed] Argum. 2. By this your error ye have forsaken God, who has called
you into the Grace of Christ, and have betaken your selves to humane works:
Therefore you must renounce this error.

Removed away] Argum. 3. By this error ye are removed from the Gospel of
Christ, into another, I know not what Gospel feigned by men; Therefore you must
renounce this error.

Verse. 7. Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would
pervert the Gospel of Christ. Arg. 4. There is no other Gospel besides that
only true Gospel preached by me amongst you, but all other Doctrine of the
Gospel is feigned and counterfeit, which does not accord with my Doctrine:
Therefore ye must renounce this error.

Trouble] Arg. 5. Those Teachers which have seduced you, are enemies to your
peace, because they take away from you that peace, which the justified by Faith
have toward God: Therefore ye must renounce their Doctrine.

Pervert] Arg. 6. The supplantours and overthrowers of the Gospel of Christ,
are those seducers, which would seem Teachers: For nothing, is more contrary to
the Gospel concerning free Justification by Faith, than Justification by Works:
Therefore you must renounce this error.

Verse. 8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Arg. 7.
If there be any one who has preached another Gospel besides that which I have
preached unto you, he is obnoxious to an eternal curse, I do not except my
self, yea, neither the Angels, if it could be, that if I should teach another
Doctrine, or that if they should propound any other than that which is preached
by me: Therefore you must renounce this error.

Verse. 9. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed. He urges
this Argument, that they might understand that he spoke not from any
perturbation of mind, concerning the curse pronounced against them, who
preached that any thing was to be joined with the Gospel, either contrary to,
or besides the Doctrine which he had preached.

Verse. 10. For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for
if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Arg. 8. From the
comparing himself with the false Apostles: my Doctrine does not persuade you
that men are to be heard, as the Doctrine of your seducers; who always boast
of the authority of so many Jews. But my Doctrine persuades, that God is to
be heard. I do not seek to please men, as your seducers, who by seducing you,
endeavor to make themselves acceptable to the unconverted Jews, as to those
that superstitiously are zealous of the Law: Therefore ye must renounce the
error, which they have taught you.

For] He confirms this Argument: Because if he had as yet studied to please
men, as he did in times past when he was a Pharisee, he could not be the
servant of Christ, but of men, viz. of those which he had endeavored to
please.

Verse. 11. But I certify you Brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of
me is not after man.

12. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

Arg. 9. My Doctrine is heavenly, from the immediate revelation of God, not
feigned by men, neither derived to me from God by a mere man, after an
ordinary manner, but immediately revealed by Jesus Christ: Therefore ye ought
to persevere in that, and to renounce the contrary error.

The third Part.
Verse. 13. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past, in the Jews
Religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted
it. In this Chapter he gives six signs of this matter. Sign 1. Is the enmity
of his mind, which he bore against Christ and his Church, in times past when
he was a Pharisee, which mind he had never changed, had not God from Heaven
convinced and turned him to the Faith.

Verse. 14. And profited in the Jews Religion, above many my equals in my own
Nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my Fathers. Sign 2.
That being bewitched by the knowledge of the Law, and zeal of the traditions of
his Fathers, he could neither see, nor bear the Truth of the Gospel, unless
he had been taught by inspiration concerning the Truth, much less know and
preach the hidden mysteries of it.

Verse. 15. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my Mothers womb, and
called me by his Grace,

16. To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen,
immediately, I conferred not with flesh and blood.

Sign 3. His wonderful and free calling to the Faith and Apostleship (the
history whereof is contained in Act. 9.) powerfully derived from the
predestinating counsel of God, which Grace God most clearly manifested in his
embassage to the Gentiles, and his providence prepared a way to the
manifestation of grace in his nativity and education: That he was born of such
Parents, of such a temperament and constitution of body, that he was brought
up at the feet of Gamaliel, that he was a Pharisee, that the providence of God
concerning him worthy of special observation was apparent in all things, and
brought it so to pass, that he may say, that he was prepared from the womb,
and ready to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles: so that all things by the
counsel of God did make for the preparation of the Apostle to this business.

I conferred not] Sign 4. That being so manifestly convinced concerning the
certainty of the voice from Heaven, and his immediate calling, and being
sufficiently persuaded of this, he durst not deliberate of a matter so
certain, neither hear humane reasons or counsels, which might withdraw him
from the obedience of his calling.

Verse. 17. Neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles before
me, but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus.

18. Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with
him fifteen days.

19. But other of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords Brother.

Sign 5. That being sufficiently by Christ himself immediately instructed in
the mystery of salvation; he went not to the Apostles called before him, but
he preached the Gospel, the three first years of his Apostleship in Arabia and
Damascus. And after three years, coming to Jerusalem, he visited Peter, and
James only, and tarryed with them a few days, and that by reason of that
intimacy betwixt them, and not for the confirmation of his knowledge.

Verse. 20. Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie
not. For the confirmation of which history, besides those witnesses that now
live, who could not be ignorant of so notable a matter, he uses an oath.

Verse. 21. Afterward I came into the Regions of Syria and Silicia,

22. And was unknown by face unto the Churches of Judea, which were in Christ.

23. But they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in times past, now
preaches the Faith which once he destroyed.

24. And they glorified God in me.

Sign. 6. That he had publicly taught, and that by his Apostolical authority
in Syria and in Cilicia, all the Apostles, and all the Churches approving of
it, and by name the believing Jews, who had never seen him, but being certified
of his conversion from a Persecutor to a Preacher, did glorify God. All which
signs do assure you of the heavenly original of his Doctrine.

CHAP. II.
THere are two parts of the Chapter: In the first he proceeds to write the
history, which he declared, and to add the other signs of his Apostleship, or
his divine Doctrine, to verse. 15. In the remaining part of the Chapter he
confirms, that Righteousness is by Faith, and not by the works of the Law.

Verse. 1. Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas,
and took Titus with me also;

2. And I went up by revelation, and communicated unto them the Gospel, which I
preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of reputation, lest
by any means I should run, or had run in vain.

Six Signs of the heavenly and divine Doctrine of the Apostle went before, five
others follow. Sign 1. That God directed the course of his Ministry by special
revelation, that he might know from whence and wherefore he came; The example
whereof he shows in his ascending to Jerusalem by revelation: which revelation
was a divine approbation of his Apostleship and Doctrine.

Communicated] Sign 2. That he communicated to the Apostles the manner of his
doctrine delivered amongst the Gentiles, that his consent with them might be
made manifest, and namely with Peter, James, and John, lest he should be
deprived of the fruit of his Ministry amongst some by the calumnies of his
Emulators, who falsely said, that the Doctrine of the Apostle Paul did disagree
from the Doctrine of the rest of the Apostles.

Verse. 3. But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greek; was compelled to
be circumcised:

4. And that because of false Brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily
to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring
us into bondage.

5. To whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour, that the Truth
of the Gospel might continue with you.

Sign 3. That in the presence of the Apostles, he pleaded this very cause in
the person of Titus, of freeing Christians from the yoke of Circumcision, and
defended him lest he should be circumcised, against the false Brethren, who
went about to take away Christian Liberty from Believers, that they might bring
the Churches of Christ into bondage, to whom the Apostle does not in the least
give place, that the sincerity of the Doctrine of the Gospel might remain pure
amongst the Gentiles, and namely amongst the Galatians, which was an evident
sign of his heavenly and divine Doctrine, wherein he had instructed the
Galatians.

Verse 6. But of these, who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it
makes no matter to me, God accepts no man's person) for they who seemed to
be somewhat, in conference added nothing to me. Sign 4. Whereof there are
four Branches.

(1.) That the Apostles which were called chief, Peter, James, and John, having
heard his Doctrine, corrected nothing, added nothing to his knowledge: In the
mean while he prevents an Objection concerning their personal prerogatives, of
which he will not speak, as of those that had seen Christ in the flesh, that
were called to the Apostleship before him, that were nearer of kin to Christ,
etc. Because these and such like did conduce nothing to their doctrine, to
their Apostolical authority, to the commendation of man before God, seeing that
God does not accept the persons of men.

Verse. 7. But contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel of the uncircumcision
was committed unto me, ^s the Gospel of the Circumcision was to Peter.

8. (For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
Circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles.)

(2) That those three Apostles acknowledged the Apostleship of Paul amongst the
Gentiles, to have no less authority and efficacy from God, than the Apostleship
of Peter amongst the Jews.

Verse. 9. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be Pillars,
perceived the Grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the
right hands of fellowship, that we should go unto the Heathen, and they unto
the Circumcision. (3) That those three Apostles perceiving the gifts and signs
of Apostleship in Paul, gave to Paul and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship,
that with the like authority they should execute their Apostolical charge
amongst the Gentiles, as they amongst the Jews.

Verse. 10. Only they would that we should remember the poor, the same which I
also was forward to do. (4) Those three desired Paul and Barnabas, that they
would procure a Collection to be made by the Churches of the Gentiles, for the
use of the poor Jews, that which Paul and Barnabas have faithfully performed.

Verse. 11. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I with-stood him to the face,
because he was to be blamed. Sign 5. Of his heavenly and divine Doctrine,
namely, in the Article of shunning the Ceremonial Yoke of Moses, That Paul
openly reprehends Peter himself turning off from this Doctrine, and brings him
into the way again, which that it may better appear, the things that follow are
observeable.

By the decree of the Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15. the necessity of the
Ceremonial Law amongst the Jews is abrogated, and liberty is left to the Jews
of using ceremonies for a time, all observation of the Levitical ceremonies,
amongst the Gentiles, is expelled from the Christian Churches, as from those to
whom the Law of Ceremonies was never designed, nor given: They are only
commanded to abstain from some meats, le^t they use their liberty to the
scandal of the weaker Jews, and that by force of the Moral Law, which in
matters simply indifferent, does circumscribe the use of liberty with the
bounds of scandal. Peter the Apostle going down to Antioch, by the sentence of
the Synod at Jerusalem, uses his liberty, and eats meat with his Brethren, the
Gentiles; some who held the Ceremonies of Moses went down in the mean while to
Antioch from James: Here Peter ought not to counterfeit his Christian Liberty,
which the day before he professed, but to remain in fellowship with the
Christian Gentiles, and to defend his fact by the authority of the Synod; But
Peter fearing le^t he should incurr the hatred of the Jews, which came down
from James, with-draweth himself from the Table of the Christian Gentiles, and
eats no more with them; others imitate the example of Peter: The evil spreads
abroad to the drawing Barnabas into the same dissimulation: by this example
scandal was given to the Jews to the confirming of them in Judaisme, and not
put away the yoke of Moses (already broken and dissolved by the Authority of
God in the Synod.) Scandal also is given to the Christian Gentiles, who are
compelled by the example of so great an Apostle, either to take upon them the
yoke of Ceremonies, or renounce the society of the Apostle; what could Paul do
in this case? certainly as it became him, he resisted Peter to his face, and
reproved him publicly.

Verse. 12. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the
Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew, and separated himself,
fearing them which were of the Circumcision. The reasons of his reprehension
are three. Reason 1. Because he dissembled the freeing of Christians from the
yoke of Moses, for fear of the hatred of some Jews, when he ought rather to
fear, lest he should give scandal to the Jews or Gentiles.

Verse. 13. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that
Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation. Reason 2. Because by
his example he drew others with himself into the same dissimulation.

Verse. 14. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the Truth
of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew, live
after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews: why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live as do the Jews? Reason 3. For which, Paul rightly reproves
Peter, because when he had preached that a man is justified by Faith alone,
without the works of the Law; by this he confirms the false Doctrine of those,
that taught Moses Law necessarily to be observed to salvation: which was to
halt in his course toward the mark of Evangelical Truth, or to take a very ill
course, for the preservation of the Doctrine of Grace pure; which fact was a
most manifest sign that his Doctrine, which he had taught to the Churches of
Galatia concerning justification by the Grace of Christ, and freedom from the
yoke of Ceremonies, was so heavenly and divine, that thereby he had convinced
Peter himself of error, when he did not do things consentaneous to his
doctrine.

The Second Part.
Verse. 15. We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles,

16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the
Faith of Jesus Christ: even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might
be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law, for by
the Works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.

From the occasion of his contention with Peter, Paul comes to the other part
of the Chapter, wherein as in the Epistle to the Romans, he confirms that
Justification is not by Works of the Law, but only by Faith; whilst he
affirms this Doctrine, he repeats his discourse had with Peter, that all might
know, that he had taught nothing else to the Galatians than that (many
faithful both of the Jews and Gentiles hearing) speaking openly for the
convincing of Peter, which he had taught before and defended, viz. we who are
Jews by Nature, etc. The sense whereof is, if referred to Peter, we who are
Jews by Nature or propagation, we are holy in Gods account by the Covenant,
and not sinners, i. e. strangers from the Covenant, as the Gentiles; we,
(says he) Jews and Apostles, knowing that man is not justified by the Works
of the Law, but by Faith in Christ, fly by Faith to Christ to this end, that
we may be justified by Faith, and not by the Works of the Law: Therefore the
Gentiles are not to be compelled to Judaize, and to undergo the yoke of the
Law, as if they were any way under the Covenant of Works.

But if these words be referred to the principal intent, it is a Proposition
of the Doctrine, and of the same kind with that, which he had taught the
Galatians, and to which he exhorted them to return, to this sense; we Jews,
who by the Covenant are born the holy people of God, and not strangers from the
Covenant, as you Gentiles, we are compelled to renounce the Works of the Law
in point of Justification, and to seek Righteousness through Faith in Christ:
Therefore much more to be done by you gentile Galatians: Furthermore, he
confirms this Doctrine in this Chapter with three Arguments, by the way
answering Objections.

Argum. 1. No flesh is justified by the Works of the Law: Therefore the Jews
nor Gentiles.

Verse. 17. But if, while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves
also are found sinners: is therefore Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid.
Turning his speech to the Galatians, he solves the adversaries Objection; The
adversaries might say, If whilst ye seek to be justified by Christ, and not by
the Law or Works, ye are found sinners, as from your own confession, and your
own mouth we may judge of you, then it will be lawful for you Christians,
justified by the Faith of Christ, to give your selves liberty to sin, and
through you Christ will be the Author and Minister, or the Teacher of sin,
that you may sin by his authority.

He answers by abhorring the Objection, as blasphemy: God forbid (says he)
confidently denying it to follow from the Doctrine of Justification that it is
lawful for him that is justified by Faith, to sin, or that Christ can be said
to be the Minister or Teacher of sin.

Verse. 18. For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor. He gives four reasons of his Answer; The first is this, I
betaking my self to Justification by the Faith of Christ, have entered upon a
sure course for the destroying of sin, because I betook my self to Christ, that
he might both forgive my sin, and administer grace to the mortification of
sin: Therefore if I should again give my self up to sin, (as is objected) and
build the work of the Devil in me, I should be contrary to my self, I should
transgress the means which is now laid for the destroying of sin, and so I
should be foolish and mad, not following the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith: Therefore from the Principles of Justification by Faith it is
impossible, that I should abuse the Grace or Name of Christ to sin more freely.

Verse. 19. For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto
God. Reas. 2. I by the strength of the Law, am slain in the death of Christ,
and in respect of the Law or Legal Covenant I am dead to the Law, and so set
free from the Covenant of the Law, to that end, not that I should sin, but that
I should live unto God, and should obey him: Therefore from the Principles of
this Doctrine I cannot indulge my self to sin. The Argument is of force, for if
through the Law or Covenant of Works, Christ is dead, in the place of those
that are to be justified, to this end, that they being justified should live
unto God; It is impossible, that the justified, who in Christ are dead to the
Law, and would be accounted free from the Covenant of Works, should not also
acknowledge themselves bound to live unto God, and consequently, that they
ought not to indulge themselves in sin.

Verse. 20. I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Reas. 3.
Confirming the former: I being justified by Faith, am judicially united unto
Christ crucified, and in him I am judicially bound to dye unto sin, to crucify
the old man: Therefore I cannot consent to sin from the principles of the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith. This is the Reason, Christ our Surety on
the Cross, did not only expiate the sins of the redeemed, but also for their
sakes he promised that they should dye to sin, and crucify their corrupt
nature: Therefore he which by Faith apprehending his judicial union with
Christ crucified, it is necessary also that he acknowledge his obligation, to
dye to sin, or to crucify his old nature by the virtue of Christ.

Nevertheless I live] I justified by Faith, am a new Creature, by the Spirit of
Christ living in me, so that I live not, as to the old man, but Christ
dwelling in me uses this natural life as his Organ and Member, and Effects,
that by Faith, in his strength, I may lead this life, taking care of all my
affairs, that I may, as it were, bring the Spirit into obedience unto God, and
that out of his same love, by which he dyed for me: Therefore I cannot
consent to sin from the principles of justifying Faith. The force of the
Argument in short is this; The Spirit quickens us that are justified by the
Faith of Christ to live holily: Therefore Justification by Faith does not give
liberty to sin.

Verse. 21. I do not frustrate the Grace of God: for if Righteousness come by
the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. The Objection is removed: The second
Argument for Justification by Faith, and not by the Works of the Law follows:
If Justification be by the Works of the Law, the Grace of God is in vain, and
made of none effect; for if Justification be by Works, it cannot be by Grace,
as Romans 11.6. But God forbid, that I should make the Grace of God of none
effect: Therefore God forbid, that I should determine Justification to be by
Works.

For if] Argum. 3. If Justification be by the Law, Christ is dead in vain,
because then both otherwise, and more easily Justification might be obtained,
than by the death of Christ: But it is absurd to say that Christ is dead in
vain: Therefore Justification is not by the Law, but by Faith.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. O Foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey
the Truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth,
crucified among you? Because he knew that the minds of the Galatians were
prepossessed with a false opinion, Therefore lest they should faint upon the
following disputation, he by a grave objurgation shakes them out of their
drowsiness, and pricks their consciences, as it were, with four stings. For
first of all he calls them foolish and unadvised, Because they suffer
themselves foulely to be deceived, although not out of malice, yet by their
own imprudence. (2) He calls them bewitched, i. e. deluded by the delusions of
Impostors. (3) He objects to them their defection from the saving Truth of the
Gospel, concerning the Grace of Christ. (4) He amplifies their crime from
this, that Christ was so evidently preached amongst them, and his sufferings
with the causes of them so clearly explained, as if the whole matter (as in a
painted Table) had been set before their eyes. The Preface being premised, he
goes on to confirm, that Justification is by Faith, and not by the Works of the
Law; in four and twenty Arguments.

Verse. 2. This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the Works
of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? Argum. 1. Ye have not received the
Spirit of Regeneration and other graces (by which the preaching of the Gospel
is sealed amongst you) by Works, or by Doctrine received from the Covenant of
Works, but by Faith, or by the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace applied by
Faith: Therefore ye are not justified by Works, but by Faith.

Verse. 3. Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the flesh? Argum. 2. Although some Impostors have persuaded you that
the beginning of Justification is by Faith, but the accomplishment of it is to
be had from Works, yet this opinion is to be condemned of folly, because it is
impossible, that the spiritual way of justifying by Faith, should consist with
that carnal way of justifying by Works, much less, that it should take its
perfection from this: Therefore we are not justified by Works, but by Faith.
Righteousness by Works is called flesh. (1) Because although now this kind of
Justification is impossible, yet it is a common and foolish surmise of corrupt
nature, that we are justified by Works, and by the pride and vaunting of the
flesh, this is every where defended. (2) Because all the Works of the
unregenerate, or a man not justified by Faith, all his Works, by which he
seeks Justification, are mere flesh, or the effects of corrupt flesh, as they
come from those that are not justified: It is as absurd therefore to say that a
man is justified by the continual violation of the Law, or can acquire
Righteousness by sinning. But as touching Works which follow Justification, or
the remission of sins, they cannot be the cause of a thing already past before
they were or could be, except you take Justification for the declaration of
Justification amongst men already passed and pronounced by God.

Verse. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain.
Argum. 3. If in your foolishness you proceed (...) seek for Justification by
Works, or to be justified partly by Faith, partly by Works* ye will lose all
the fruit of your constancy hitherto, and afflictions, which ye have through
Faith already suffered for the defense of Righteousness by Faith, but I hope
better things: Therefore ye are not justified by Works, but by Faith alone.

Verse. 5. He therefore that ministers to you the Spirit, and works miracles
among you, does he it by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?
Argum. 4. The Ministers by whom God gives his Spirit, and works miracles among
you, are only they, which teach Justification not by Works, but only by Faith
in Christ: Therefore Justification by Faith alone is approved by God, but not
that which is feigned to be by Works.

Verse. 6. Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
Righteousness. Argum. 5. Abraham although he did very much abound in virtues,
yet he was justified by Faith alone; for he believed God, and it was imputed
to him for Righteousness. For God has promised to bless all Nations in his
seed, i. e. in Christ. He has applied this blessing, (which contains in it
self Righteousness, and life eternal in Christ) to himself by believing:
Therefore we are justified not by Works, but by Faith.

Verse. 7. Know ye therefore that they which are of Faith, the same are the
children of Abraham. Argum. 6. Those alone who are justified by Faith, or seek
to be justified by Faith, and not by Works, are the Sons of Abraham: Therefore
the only cause of Justification is by Faith.

Verse. 8. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen
through Faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall
all Nations be blessed. Argum. 7. The Spirit which is the Author of the
Scriptures, has known this to be the Counsel of God; that the Gentiles should
be justified by Faith, and foreseeing that this would come to pass, he
preached the Doctrine to Abraham, concerning the blessing of the Gentiles in
him, as in the Father, the example and type of the faithful: in him in whom the
blessed seed Christ was included, as being in his loins, as it is said of Levi,
Heb. 7.10. Therefore necessarily this way alone of Justification is firm.

Verse. 9. So then, they which be of Faith are blessed with faithful Abraham.
Argum. 8. The faithful alone, or they which by Faith seek Righteousness, do
obtain a blessing with faithful Abraham: Therefore this way of Righteousness by
Faith is only solid.

Verse. 10. For as many as are of the Works of the Law, are under the curse: for
it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law to do them. Argum. 9. How many soever are
justified by the Law, or seek justification by the works of the Law, are under
a curse, because they adhere to the Covenant of Works, yet perform not the
condition of this Covenant, that is, perfect obedience to the Law. Therefore
justification is not of Works, but of Faith.

It is written] He confirms the antecedent, because out of the Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed is every one that fulfilleth not the whole Law: For they
that seek justification by works, do not fulfill the whole Law: Therefore they
are cursed.

Verse. 11. But that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is
evident* for the just shall live by faith. Argum. 10. The Scripture, Hab. 2.4.
pronounces that the just one shall live by faith, therefore no man by the Law,
or by Works shall be justified in the sight of God: He adds in the sight of
God, because he does not deny but that we are justified by Works in the sight
of men. For justification before men is nothing else but the acknowledgement
and declaration of justification already made by faith in the sight of God, by
reason of the fruits of faith that are manifested.

Verse. 12. And the Law is not of faith: but the man that does them, shall live
in them. Argum. 11. Proving the consequence of the former Argument: The Law or
the cause of justifying by Works, does not consist with faith, or with
justification by faith, because the legal promise is of giving life to him that
does, and performs the Law, or to him who has perfect inherent
righteousness. For faith brings righteousness imputed to them that believe in
him who justifies the ungodly, or brings righteousness to him, who is
destitute of Righteousness from himself: Therefore if any righteousness be
given, it is given by Faith, and not by the Law, and consequently righteousness
of faith is alone to be acknowledged.

Verse. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree.
Argum. 12. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us upon the Cross, undergoing a cursed death upon the Cross for us,
as it is manifest from Scripture, which declares that kind of death, which
Christ by the Counsel of God was to undergo (to wit, the hanging on a tree)
cursed: Therefore justification is not by the Law, but by faith in Christ, who
freed us from the curse of the Law.

Verse. 14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.
Argum. 13. For this end Christ was made a curse, that in Christ apprehended by
faith, the blessing of Abraham, i. e. Righteousness, and life eternal in the
blessed seed, might appear to the Gentiles, who are destitute of works to which
they may pretend to trust: Therefore justification is by faith, and not by
works.

That we might receive] He changes the person, and joins himself, and the
other believing Jews to the believing Gentiles, adding Arg. 14. Christ for this
end, is made a curse, that all we believers being Jews and Gentiles, becoming
one seed of Abraham, might receive the promised Spirit of adoption by faith.
Therefore the justification of all us Gentiles and Jews is by faith, unless we
affirm that Christ was frustrated of his end.

Verse. 15. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; though it be but a man's
Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth or adds thereto.

16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made: He says not, And to
thy seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ.

17. And this I say, that the Covenant that was confirmed before of Christ, the
Law which was four hundred and thirty years after cannot disanul, that it
should make the promise of none effect.

In these three verses is Argum. 15. confirming the former: Covenants and
Agreements justly performed, even amongst men, cannot be made void, or be
changed by superaddition, verse. 15. But a Covenant is duly made betwixt God
and Abraham for the uniting all the faithful, both Jews and Gentiles, into one
seed, Christ, an incorporation being made of Christ the head, and all his
members, into one Christ mystical, by faith, verse. 16. Therefore this Covenant
cannot be made void, nor by the superaddition of the Law be changed, and so
justification by faith shall stand. That this Argument might be understood,
verse. 15. The Apostle prevents an Objection, some might say, That the way of
justifying is changed, neither is there the same reason of justifying Abraham
before the Law, and his posterity, with whom the Law was made. For latter
things use to derogate from former. He answers, that in a ratified Covenant,
and now confirmed by Will and Testament, nothing even amongst men can be made
void or changed, much less in the divine Covenant, now established after the
manner of a Will. Furthermore verse. 16. he assumes, that so God covenanted
with Abraham concerning a blessing freely to be given to those that believe in
Christ, that he might take into one body his seed (which consists both of
Gentiles and Jews) by the words of the Covenant: This he proves from the words
of the promise, because God said not to Seeds (as if there should be more
seeds, to wit, Gentiles asunder, and Jews asunder) but he said to thy Seed, as
of one, viz. meaning Christ, in whom the faithful both of Jews and Gentiles
become one seed, i. e. one Christ mystical by faith.

Lastly, verse. 17. He concludes that this Covenant confirmed by a sacrifice
after the manner of a Will, and established by God, with relation unto Christ,
could not be made void, or of none effect by the Law, which was given four
hundred and thirty years after.

The Promise] He includes a reason why this Covenant could not be changed by
the Law, viz. because the Covenant is Gods absolute promise, which, as it were,
obliges God promising, that he cannot change it: But the Law has the nature
of a commandment, which binds not the Legislators, but the subject: For the
Legislator can change Laws, but he cannot change absolute promises. Therefore
the Law after so many years made, cannot disanull the Covenant, or the promise
absolutely made to Abraham.

Verse. 18. For if the inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of promise; but
God gave it to Abraham by promise. Lest any one should object that the Law and
the Promise may be conjoined: He answers, and adds, Arg. 16. If the
inheritance be of the Law, or works, then not of the free promise, for the one
of these takes away the other; but the inheritance is freely given to Abraham
by a free promise: Therefore not of the Law, and consequently, because the
inheritance, or life eternal is not of the Law, or any works, neither shall
justification be by the Law, but only by grace through faith.

Verse. 19. Wherefore then serves the Law? It was added because of
transgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the promise was made, and it
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.

20. Now a Mediator is not a Mediator of one, but God is one.

He moves a question concerning the use of the Law, inquiring to what purpose
the Law was made; He answers and adds, Arg. 17. The Law is given, that
transgressions might be manifest, and held in as it were with some bridle
until Christ should come, who is the seed to whom the promise of blessing is
made. Therefore seeing that only the manifestation of sin comes by the Law,
justification is not by the Law, but by Christ, or by faith: And it was
necessary to the manifestation of sin, that the Law should be renewed, because
the Jews sinned, and yet did neither acknowledge the power of sin, nor their
own impotency to obey the Law: Therefore the Law was urged, until that complete
seed arose, made up of Jews and Gentiles, united (the partition Wall between
the Jews and the Gentiles being thrown down) into one body with their head
Christ by Faith.

Ordained] Argum. 18. A terrible manner of giving the Law, by the Ministry of
Angels, and by the hand of a Messenger or Mediator, it was a sign rather of
discord, than of peace and concord betwixt God and men: Because a Mediator or
a Messenger uses not to be only of one party (seeing no man disagreeth with
himself) but of parties, whereof one has made a breach with the other; But God
is one, and always constant to himself: Therefore the dis-agreeing party is
man, and the manner of making the Law did both signify and argue that; This is
the force of the Argument; which being granted, reconciliation is not made, but
discord betwixt God and man remains, by that Justification is not: But the
Law being given, reconciliation is not made, but discord betwixt God and the
people remains, as it appears from the manner of giving the Law: Therefore
Justification is not by the Law.

Verse. 21. Is the Law then against the Promises of God? God forbid: For if
there had been a Law given, which could have given life, verily Righteousness
should have been by the Law. He propounds another question, whether the Law is
contrary to the Promise, showing to men the contrary ways of justifying.

He answers by denying, and adds Argum. 19. If a Law had been given, which
could communicate life to sinners, and strength for the performing those things
that were commanded, surely Justification had been by the Law; we may assume;
But such a Law is neither given to sinners, nor can be, Romans 8.3. Therefore
Justification is not by the Law.

Verse. 22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the Promise by
Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. Argum. 20. The Law
of God, and the whole Scripture has concluded all men, and whatsoever comes
from man, under sin, and renders all men guilty of sin, that now nothing else
can remain to man, but Faith in Jesus Christ: by which the Promise of free
blessing belongs to all that believe: Therefore Justification is not by the
Law, but by Faith: For if all are sinners, no man by Works, no man, but by
Faith can be saved.

Verse. 23. But before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut unto the
Faith, which should afterward be revealed. Argum. 21. From the end and use of
external Discipline, before the coming of Christ in the Church of the Jews,
who were daily urged under a curse to perform Obedience to the Law, according
to the Covenant. They were daily instructed by the yoke and observance of
Ceremonies imposed touching due Obedience to the commands, of their impotency
to obey the Law, and of their manifold sins; they were also daily taught that
they should fly to the Altar, to sacrifice, to washings, that by this
Discipline they might acknowledge themselves to be sinners, and not to be
freed, but by the oblation of the Lamb of God that was to come, and by
expiation in his blood, or by Faith in the promised Messiah.

From hence is the Argument, we Jews before the coming of Christ, or before
the full revelation of the Doctrine of Faith come, were kept under the external
Discipline of the Legal Covenant, as under a Garrison circumscribed with
boundaries, that we might not by any way turn our selves from the curse*
unless unto that Faith alone which was to be revealed, i. e to seek
Righteousness, and a blessing in the promised Messiah: Therefore we are so far
from Justification by the Law, that on the otherside, by the Discipline of the
Law, the ancient Church was shut up in streights, and compelled to look unto
Justification alone by Faith. But the Discipline of the Law is abused by many
to a contrary end; yet this was the end of the Legal Discipline instituted by
God.

Verse. 24. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ,
that we might be justified by Faith. Argum. 22. Illustrating and confirming
the former, The Law or the external form of the Legal Covenant like a
Schoolmaster sent to us by God, did instruct our childish Church, and lead it
by the hand to Christ, that we might be justified by Faith: Therefore we are
so far from Justification by the Law, that on the other side, unless we be
justified by Faith, the Law is frustrated in its end. For what else did the Law
do by propounding moral Precepts, than that, (as in a Glass) it might show to
the Church how far men are distant from Righteousness? what else did Legal
Promises and Threatenings speak, if thou can not perform these conditions; if
now thou do shamefully violate all those, thou art undone, and utterly lost,
unless thou take another course for salvation? Lastly, To the same end did
the Ceremonies tend. For what purpose were Sacrifices and Washings, but that
they should be exercised in the daily meditation of their filthinesses, and
deserved damnation, and should behold in the image of an innocent Creature
killed before their eyes, the necessity of their Redemption by a Messiah (who
is that immaculate Lamb of God) and believing in him to Justification.

Verse. 25. But after that Faith is come, we are no longer under a
Schoolmaster. Argum. 23. From the abolition of the external Discipline of the
Legal Covenant, which he intimates, verse. 23. when he determined that the use
of his Discipline was before the time of the Gospel, and until the time of
Faith; and verse. 24. when he compared this Discipline to a Schoolmaster
(whose office is only appointed for our childish age.) The Argument is
propounded; After Christ was manifested, and the time of the Gospel, the time
of manifesting the free Covenant, ^or the time of Faith is now come, we are no
more under the pedagogie of the Legal Covenant, or the external Discipline
wherewith the Church was exercised, only until the coming of Christ, i. e.
until, and not beyond the time of Faith: Therefore we are so far from being
justified by the Law, that the whole of the external Legal Discipline is now
abolished under the Gospel. He does not say that the Moral Law is abolished,
but he says that that pedagogical manner of urging the Legal Covenant,
together with the appendages of Ceremonies, is abolished. For although the
faithful are freed from the Law, as a Covenant, or as it imports the Covenant
of Works; yet they are not freed from the Law commanding, or as it is the rule
of manners, but rather they are obliged with a nearer and sweeter tie by the
Covenant of Grace to obey the Law.

Verse. 26. For ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. He
applies the former Argument to the faithful Galatians, and proves them not to
be under the Legal Pedagogie, but to be exempted from the yoke of Levitical
Ceremonies, by three Reasons.

Reason 1. All ye faithful Galatians are in the number of Children, i. e. of
those that are grown to full age, by reason of your Faith in Christ now
manifested: Therefore ye are not under the childish Pedagogie of Ceremonies or
Legal Discipline.

Verse. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. Reason 2. Confirming the former. Now Circumcision being made void, ye
by the Sacrament of Baptism, have so put on Christ the Son of God, and in the
presence of God, you carry the name and person of Christ, that ye may be
esteemed to be in him, and not in your selves: Therefore ye being the
Children of God grown up, are exempted from the Pedagogie of the Law.

Verse. 28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither Bond nor Free,
there is neither Male no Female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Reason 3.
Preventing a tacit Objection, and showing that the Gentiles have no need of
Legal Ceremonies, that by those they may be joined, after the manner of
Proselytes with the People of God. Because in the business of Faith there is no
difference of Nation, whether thou be Jew or Greek; nor of condition, whether
thou be a Servant, or Free; neither whether thou be the Male, or the Female.
For all you, whosoever are endued with true Faith, do constitute, and as it
were, make up one person in Christ: Therefore ye Galatians are no less
children grown up, than we Apostles, or some other faithful Jews: Therefore
ye are exempted by Christ from the childish Pedagogie of Ceremonies, Verse. 29.
And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the
Promise.

He prevents another tacit Objection, intimating as if they could not be the
seed of Abraham any otherwise, than by a being united to the People of God by
Circumcision, and the observation of Ceremonies, and withal, he brings
Argument 24. to prove that Justification is not by the Law, but by Faith, which
may be thus formed: They that are united by Faith to Christ, and so made that
blessed seed of Abraham, and heirs according to the Promise, and not according
to the Law, or Covenant of Works, they are not justified by the Works of the
Law, but by the Faith of the Promise. But ye are united to Christ, and made
Abraham's seed according to the Promise, and not Heirs hereafter according to
the Law: Therefore ye are not justified by the Work of the Law, but through
the Faith of the Promise.

CHAP. IV.
THere are three parts of the Chapter: In the first the Apostle does exhort
them to renounce the yoke of Ceremonies, to verse. 12. In the second there is a
courteous invitation, moving them to return to a sound mind, and to the
Doctrine which he had taught them in the beginning concerning Righteousness by
Faith, to verse. 21. In the third he confirms the whole disputation, and
illustrates it by a signal allegory, to the end. As to the first part of the
Chapter, be converts his disputation into an Exhortation to the Galatians,
that they renouncing the servile yoke of the Law, should carry themselves as
the Freemen of Christ. The hortatory Proposition is this, ye ought to
renounce the yoke of Ceremonies. The Arguments for confirmation are ten.

Verse. 1. Now I say, that the Heir, as long as he is a Child, differs
nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all,

2. But is under Tutors and Governors, until the time appointed of the Father.

3. Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements of
the world.

Argum. 1. From the servile and childish external condition in which the Church
before the coming of Christ was constituted, which he illustrates by this
similitude. As an Heir so long as he is an Infant, or under age, although he
be Lord of all his Fathers goods according to the Law, yet in respect of
possession and exercise of the Law, or as to external liberty, he differs
nothing from a servant, verse. 1. but remains in subjection to Tutors and
Guardians until the time appointed by his Father, verse. 2, so the Church of
God, whereof we are members, as to its external state under torrene figures
and worldly elements, or the rudiments of legal Ceremonies, as an Abe^edarian,
sticking in the rudiments of A B C, did undergo a hard bondage until Christ.

Hence the Argument; Childish and servile is the yoke of Legal Ceremonies,
only appointed to the Infant and under-age-Church before the coming of
Christ: Therefore ye Galatians who are under the Gospel ought to renounce that
yoke.

Verse. 4. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a Woman, made under the Law.

5. To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption
of Sons.

Having spoken of the servile and childish condition of the Church before the
coming of Christ, as to the outward man (for as to the Spirit and inward man,
the faithful that saw the day of Christ were freed, and rejoiced in the Lord;)
now follows the manner of delivering the Church by the coming of Christ.

The fullness of time] Argum. 2. Now the fullness of time is come, which the
Father had fore-appointed to the Legal Pedagogie, and that Guardianship of
Legal Ceremonies is finished: Therefore you Christians must renounce the yoke
of Ceremonies.

Sent forth his Son] Argum. 3. The Son of God is sent into the world, takes
upon him flesh, and is born of the Virgin Mary, and subjected to the Covenant
of Works, and the yoke of Legal Ceremonies, that he might redeem those that
were subject to the Law: Therefore ye Christians redeemed from the yoke, ought
to renounce it.

That the Adoption] Argum. 4. For that end Christ is made subject to the Law,
that we might clearly attain to the Adoption, or to the Privilege of Sons
grown up, held forth under the Gospel: Therefore we being under the Gospel,
ought to renounce the servile and childish yoke of Ceremonies, unless we would
render the benefit of Redemption of none effect to us.

Verse. 6. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Argum. 5. For a testimony of your
Adoption and advancement to the privilege of Sons now grown up, God has given
you the holy Spirit, by which together with other Sons of God out of Jews and
Gentiles, ye may call God confidently in every tongue your Father: Therefore
except ye would carry your selves as unworthy of this privilege, ye must
renounce the childish and servile yoke of Ceremonies.

Verse. 7. Wherefore thou art no more a Servant, but a Son, and if a Son, then
an Heir of God through Christ. Argum. 6. Ye are no more in that servile
condition, under the yoke of Ceremonies, but in a free state, as Sons grown up,
and Heirs actually partakers of their Fathers goods, or spiritual graces, in a
larger measure, than the ancient Church, and that by Christ manifested in the
flesh: Therefore now you must renounce that servi^e and childish yoke.

Verse. 8. Howbeit, then when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which
by nature are no gods:

9. But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how
turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to
be in bondage?

He upbraids them with their ingratitude, reprehending them for their
observance of Legal Ceremonies, as of days and months, etc. in which they were
neither born nor educated.

Howbeit] Argum. 7. Before ye were Sons, you were in a worser condition, than
the Jews, to wit, you were Idolatrous, knowing not the true God, and serving
feigned Idols, but now converted from that ignorance, ye have known God, or
rather by the preventing Grace of God known and beloved, ye are drawn to God
that you might know him, and are invested with the liberty of Sons. How is it,
that a fresh, as if you had been under no bondage, do you turn again to the
yoke of abolished ceremonial bondage? Therefore this yoke you must renounce.
The force of this Argument is this, ye bear the yoke of Ceremonies, having
less to pretend for your excuse, and with a more signal note of ingratitude
than the Jews born and brought up under the yoke: Therefore you must renounce
this yoke.

Again] Argum. 8. Ye being advanced to the liberty of Sons grown up, it is an
unworthy thing willingly to return again to the yoke of slavery, and to be
willing to be in bondage: Therefore you must renounce this yoke.

Beggerly] Argum. 9. Those Legal Ceremonies, the yoke whereof now ye affect,
although they had their pedagogical use before Christ came, yet now Christ is
come, they have no use, but are weak and beggarly rudiments, which neither have
virtue to justify, nor power to bring consolation, nor their old use to
prefigure Christ: Therefore ye ought to renounce this so unprofitable a yoke.

Verse. 10. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years.

11. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

Argum. 10. Your bondage begun again in the observation of Legal Ceremonies, as
for example, of days, Sabbaths, New Moons, set Feasts, and Sabbatical years,
etc. has given me just cause of fear, left I have preached to you the Gospel
of free Justification in vain; Because this is a sign that you are revolted
from Justification by Faith, or from the Grace of Christ, to seek
Justification* by Works of the Law: Therefore unless ye will renounce the
Gospel, ye must renounce this yoke.

The second Part.
Verse. 12. Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am: for I am as ye are; ye have
not injured me at all. The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein is
contained a loving Exhortation to return into the way, and the wholesome
opinion of Justification by Grace, through Faith, without the Works of the Law.

This Proposition of the Exhortation may be laid down. You must return to my
Doctrine of Righteousness by Faith, without the Works of the Law, be ye
(says he) as I am, or be ye in the same opinion with me. The Arguments of
the Exhortation are twelve.

Furthermore] Argum. 1. Because I, though in times past, a Pharisee, have been
very stiff for Righteousness by the Law, but now being made a Christian, I am
as you, and I seek with you your salvation, no less than you your selves seek
it: Therefore ye must return to my opinion.

Brethren I beseech] Argum. 2. My fear concerning you, has neither alienated
my mind from you, neither has it caused a doubtful judgment of charity
concerning you, but as Brethren let me friendly bespeak you, and as Brethren
let me beseech you to return: Therefore return ye.

No] Argum. 3. My severe reproof arises not against you, either from anger or
hatred, who have not privately injured me at all, but out of an earnest desire
of your salvation: Therefore return ye.

Verse. 13. Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the Gospel
unto you at first. Argum. 4. I have suffered many things for preaching the
Gospel unto you, for ye know that I have preached the Gospel to you
constantly, through infirmities, and a contemptible condition, as to the
outward-man, whereunto through afflictions I am driven: Therefore return ye to
sound Doctrine sealed by my sufferings.

Verse. 14. And my temptation which was in the flesh, ye despised not, nor
rejected, but received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. Argum. 5.
In times past you have allowed the causes of my afflictions, neither have ye
contemned me, whilst I was exercised with temptations in my flesh, but ye
have received me as an Angel, as bearing the person of Christ: Therefore now
do both the same thing, and return unto the same mind.

Verse. 15. Where is then the blessedness you speak of? for I bear you record,
that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and
have given them to me. Argum. 6. In times past you did account your selves
blessed in my Ministry: Therefore if you would be blessed, it behooves you to
adhere constantly to my Doctrine: He minds them the more earnestly of this
blessedness by an interrogation, because they seemed to have forgotten it.

Record] Argum. 7. In time past that you might every way gratify me, ye
spared not your most dear enjoyments: Therefore return ye, and by my example
cast off the Legal yoke; If you will do that which is acceptable unto me.

Verse. 16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the Truth?
Argum. 8. So far as ye are offended by this sharper reprehension, ye ought to
esteem me an enemy, whom therefore you would not imitate, that on the
otherside, because I speak the Truth for your good, ye are bound to make more
of me and my Exhortation.

Verse. 17. They zealously affect you, but not well: yea, they would exclude
you, that you might affect them. Argum. 9. From his unlikeness to the seducers:
The false Apostles (says he) who earnestly contend that you may be brought
under, and submit to the Legal yoke, they little regard you, and with a
preposterous zeal, are carried out toward you, and in very deed they go about
to destroy you, desiring to exclude you from me and my Doctrine, and
consequently from the society of Christ, that ye might follow them, and become
their Disciples: Therefore return ye to my Doctrine.

Verse. 18. But it is good always to be zealously affected in a good thing,
and not only when I am present with you. Argum. 10. My zeal for you is good,
and in a good thing, and constant, when I am absent, as well as present: The
zealousie of my Emulators concerning you is perverse and counterfeit: Therefore
return ye to my Doctrine.

Verse. 19. My little children, of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be
formed in you: Argum. 11. The Image of Christ consisting in the Knowledge and
true Faith concerning Christ, is deformed in you by your falling to the yoke of
the Law, and Justification by Works: Therefore return ye to my Doctrine.

I travel in birth] I am no less seriously anxious concerning your repentance,
nor less solicitously do I labor concerning the reparation of your Faith, and
the Image of Christ in you, than one laboring in birth for the bringing forth
of a child, or than I myself did labor for the conversion of you to the Faith:
Therefore return ye to my Doctrine.

Verse. 20. I desire to be present with you now, and to change my voice, for I
stand in doubt of you. He confirms this perplexed anxiety of mind by a sign,
to wit, from his desire of seeing their faces, and instructing them, and
accommodating himself to their necessity: Lastly, from the cause of this
anxiety, to wit, that he was uncertain and dubious about them, whether gently
or severely, or what course he should take with them: For how deeply this
error was rooted in them, how many infected, how every one was affected in his
business, unless he had been present, it could not easily be known to him.

The Third Part.
Verse. 21. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not bear the
Law? The Third Part of the Chapter follows, in which he confirms and
illustrates the whole disputation from the history of the condition of Abraham's
family, in which by a typical Allegory, God has prefigured the whole matter
now disputed. The sum of which is this. God in times past prefigured, that
they who seek justification by Works, or a Covenant of works, are in a servile,
miserable, and cursed condition, and at length shall be cast from the face of
God, and society of the Saints, they that seek justification by grace through
faith in Christ, are free Sons of the family of God, and blessed, and at length
shall certainly come to an inheritance of life eternal, why therefore are you
so foolish, O Galatians, that ye willingly affect this servile, miserable, and
cursed way of justification sought by the works of the Law?

For this end, the Apostle in this last part of the Chapter, First of all
provokes them to the Law, or to the books of Moses, that the whole question may
be decided, verse. 21. Furthermore he propounds a typical history of the
condition of Abraham's family, ver. 22, 23. Thirdly, he propounds the type, and
opens the mystery, verse. 24, 25, 26. Fourthly, he confirms the exposition out
of Isaiah, verse. 27. Fifthly, he applies the allegory or type to the truly
faithful Christians, and he comforts himself and the rest against the
persecution of the false brethren, strangers to the grace of God, verse. 28, 29,
30, 31.

Tell] That which appertains to the first, he reproves the Galatians of a
double error. The first error is, that willingly they had affected to be
under the Law, i. e. under the legal Covenant, or the Covenant of works, whose
condition is this, that thou bind thy self to the perfect fulfilling the Law,
and God deals with thee according to the Covenant of the Law, that is, he
saves thee if thou offend in nothing, but does curse and destroy thee, if thou
become guilty in the least tittle of that which is written in the book of the
Law, or art found in the least to turn aside from the Rule: For otherwise all
the faithful are under the Law, as a rule and direction of life, and they are
to endeavor obedience to it sincerely in all things, through grace administered
by Christ. The second error is, That they were very ignorant both of the sense
and scope of the Law, or of books that were written by Moses.

Verse. 22. For it is written, that Abraham had two Sons, the one by a
bond-maid, the other by a freewoman.

23. But he who was of the bondwoman, was born after the flesh, but he of
the freewoman, was by promise.

In the second place he propounds from Genesis 16. and 21. the typical history of
Abraham's family, wherein there were two wives that were mothers, Hagar, and
Sarah. The conditions of the mothers twofold, Hagar was a servant, Sarah
freeborn: Two Sons, Ishmael a servant of his mother a servant, Isaac free of
his mother freeborn; a twofold principle of their Nativity, viz. The power of
nature according to the flesh eminent in the nativity of Ishmael of a young
woman, and the virtue of the promise, or divine supernatural virtue, in the
nativity of Isaac of Sarah an old woman and conspicuously barren. From hence
arose the unlike disposition of Ishmael and Isaac, so great a discord, that
Ishmael persecuted Isaac, and the dissimilitude of both their conditions in the
upshot: Ishmael is cast out of the family, but Isaac obtains the Inheritance,
by which type God did figure out the diverse conditions of the visible Church
sprung from diverse principles and causes. For (1.) As there are two wives Hagar
and Sarah, so there are two Covenants of God with men, the Covenant of works or
legal, the Covenant of grace, or the Evangelical. (2.) Both the wives had
offspring, so both the Covenants had their worshippers and professors as born
of the Covenant. (3.) As Hagar a young woman according to nature and the flesh
brought forth; but Sarah barren, and an old woman according to the power of the
divine promise. So the Law or Covenant of works has the ordinary strength of
nature, or the powers of free will for its foundation; But the Gospel, or
Covenant of grace, has for its foundation, the special grace of God. (4.) As
Ishmael was of a servile and malicious disposition that he would persecute his
brother, but Isaac endued with an ingenuous and godly disposition patiently
endured persecution, so how many justiciaries so ever, seeking righteousness by
works, are of a servile and perverse disposition, and they do vex the true
faithful of God. But the truly faithful, and Sons of the promise worship God
with an ingenuous piety, and do suffer persecutions as it behooves them.

Verse. 24. Which things are an allegory, for these are the two Covenants, the
one from the Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Hagar. In the
third place the Apostle expounds the signification of the type, as much as
belongs to the present purpose; and first he shows that the two Wives are
figures of the two Covenants, whereof one is the Covenant of Works represented
by Hagar: The other is the Covenant Grace, or faith, represented by Sarah: As
to Hagar and the Covenant of Works, the Apostle teaches, First, That Covenant
had its rise from Mount Sinai, because in that mountain the Law was given, and
this Covenant was established betwixt God and his people. Secondly, he teaches
that this Covenant generated an offspring to bondage, or did render the
Disciples and professors of it, only servants, i. e. Mercenary worshippers of
God, who do nothing but the external work, and brought to that either by fear,
or hope of a reward, and they heing ignorant that this was the end of the Law
(that being sensible of our sins we might fly to Christ) do abuse the Law,
being mere hypocrites, seeking by it righteousness, which they never obtain,
but being not freed remain in their sins.

Verse. 25. For this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem,
which now is, and is in bondage with her children. He shows the convenience of
the exposition: (1.) From this, because Mount Sinai situated in Arabia, and far
removed from the promised Land, was called by the Arabians and Caldeans Hagar,
by the special providence of God. (2.) That it had affinity with the earthly
Jerusalem (as it was in the Apostles time) or with the Jewish Synagogue, which
is said to be in bondage with her children, because she was tenacious of the
Covenant of works, and continued with her Disciples in a servile condition,
strangers to the Redeemer, and free deliverance by him.

Verse. 26. But Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the mother of us
all. He expounds what is figured by Sarah the freewoman, viz. The Covenant of
Faith or Grace, whereof the Church of the truly faithful is very tenacious,
which is the heavenly Jerusalem that is above, created by God, and studious of
heavenly things, the mother of all the faithful, called both of Jews and
Gentiles.

Verse. 27. For it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear not, break forth
and cry, thou that travellest not, for the desolate has many more Children
than she which has an husband. In the fourth place, The Apostle proves the
Exposition give^ out of Isaiah 54.1. where the Church of the faithful, the
upper Jerusalem, our Mother, is represented by Sarah, barren, as if she had
been a Widow. And the Synagogue of the Jews, unfaithful and tenacious of the
Covenant of Works, is represented by fruitful Hagar dwelling with her Husband.
But the Church of the faithful before the coming of Christ was compared, as it
were to a barren Widow, because her Husband, the Covenant of Grace, was unknown
almost to all, except a few, who dispersed hither and thither, did not make a
company, neither did Grace appear, but lay hid, like an Husband absent or dead
under the covers of Ceremonies. The Synagogue of unbeleeving Justiciaries is
compared to a fruitful Wife, dwelling with her Husband, viz. the Covenant of
Works conspicuous in the external dispensation of the Law. And it is foretold
by the Prophet that it should come to pass, that the Church of the faithful,
made fruitful by the Promises of God, shall bring forth more children under the
Gospel, than the Synagogue has brought Servants under the Law; and therefore
is commanded to rejoice and praise God.

Verse. 28. Now we, Brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of Promise. In the
last place he applies this typical history, and partly admonishes the truly
faithful Christians, and partly comforts them, by four Arguments.

Argum. 1. That we are redeemed children justified by Faith, and truly free
born, and regenerated by virtue of Evangelical Promises to the similitude of
Isaac, who is elder than those other Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem that
were after him.

Verse. 29. But as then he hat was born after the flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the Spirit. Argum. 2. Of consolation, That suffering persecution
by false Brethren, Patrons of free will and Righteousness by Works; were find
nothing unlike to Isaacs condition: For when in Abraham's Family, he who is
only begotten by the ordinary strength of nature persecuted him, who is
begotten by a divine and spiritual way; what wonder then, if the same now be
usual amongst us?

Verse. 30. Nevertheless, what says the Scripture? cast out the bondwoman and
her Son: for the Son of the bondwoman, shall not be heir with the Son of the
freewoman. Argum. 3. That the persecutors of the faithful, and Patrons of
Righteousness by Works, seeing they are not set at liberty by the Son, are to
be cast out of the society of the Saints, and the inheritance of life eternal;
as it was figured by the sentence of God, concerning the casting Ishmael with
his Mother out of the family, and excluding him from the inheritance that was
to be enjoyed with Isaac.

Verse. 31. So then, Brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of
the free. Argum. 4. From the comparing of this verse with the former, that
seeing we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free, certainly we
shall obtain an inheritance of life eternal: which Argument with the former, as
it has the virtue of consolation, so also of admonition, that they would not
adhere to their error in seeking Righteousness by the Works of the Law, and
moreover of an exhortation, that they hold fast Righteousness by Grace through
Faith in Christ, unless they would exclude themselves from the inheritance.

CHAP. V.
THere are two parts of the Chapter: In the first he goes on to urge, that
shaking off the yoke of the Covenant of ^orks, and Legal Ceremonies, they may
defend their Christian Liberty, to verse. 13. In the other he gives Precepts
concerning the right use of Christian Liberty, to the end.

Verse. 1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. The Proposition to
be confirmed in the former part, is plainly proposed under the form of an
Exhortation. Ye must stand fast in the Christian Liberty, which is the scope
of the former Doctrine and disputation, and it is drawn from that as the
conclusion. The Arguments for the proving this Proposition are thirteen.

Argum. 1. Liberty from the servile yoke of the Legal Covenant or Ceremonies
thereof, is obtained by the blood of Christ: Therefore you must stand steadfast
in that.

Verse. 2. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing. Argum. 2. Is established by an Apostolical
obtestation. If you be circumcised according to the Ceremonial Law, now
abolished, and add but this one Ceremony to free Justification by Christ;
Christ, whom you declare by this fact an imperfect Savior, will not advantage
you to salvation: Therefore you must stand fast. For if they could not be
justified except they joined Circumcision together with the Grace of Christ,
making Christ the half of their Righteousness, they destroy the whole; making
him an imperfect Savior, they made him none at all.

Verse. 3. For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a
debtor to do the whole Law* Argum. 3. Is established by the same obtestation.
The Covenant of Works being abrogated, and the Ceremonial Law now abolished, if
any one returns to Circumcision, the Sacrament of initiation to this Legal
Covenant, he by this means makes himself a debtor to the whole Law, and
consequently obliges himself to the curse, unless he perfectly with his whole
strength fulfill the Law, which is the condition of the Covenant of Works. The
matter is clear. Because, although Circumcision by the purpose of God to the
faithful, expecting the Messiah, until Christ, was a Sacrament of the
Righteousness of Faith (as Abraham was circumcised) and although in the time of
toleration till the clear manifestation of Christian Liberty to them that were
born Jews, Circumcision was accounted amongst things indifferent (so Timothy
born of a Jewish Mother is circumcised, and Titus is not) yet to all the Jews
and Proselytes of the Gentiles seeking Righteousness by Works, or by the Law,
Circumcision is made part of the Legal Righteousness, or of the Obedience of
the Covenant of Works, yea, and the Sacrament of that Covenant. And after this
manner the false Apostles did urge Circumcision amongst the Galatians, to whom
religious Circumcision was every way unlawful. No wonder then if he said
Christ will not profit them, if they be circumcised, because they that were
circumcised, by that very fact did embrace the Covenant of Works.

Verse. 4. Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are
justified by the Law: ye are fallen from Grace. Argum. 4. Confirming the
former, whosoever of you return to Circumcision, and Legal Customs abolished,
seeking Justification by the Law, ye^ by that same fact renounce Christ, and
the Covenant of Grace, because the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace
in Christ, do mutually exclude one another, neither can they consist. For if
Justification is by Works, it is not by Grace, and on the contrary: Therefore
ye must stand in your liberty, except you would be separated from Grace and
Christ.

Verse. 5. For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of Righteousness by
Faith. Argum. 5. We Jews and Apostles that are circumcised, after our
conversion to the faith, being taught by the Spirit, renounce the Covenant of
works, and legal customs, and do expect life eternal, as the fruit of
justification by Faith: you that are Gentiles by nature cannot otherwise be
justified or saved, either by the Law or Circumcision: Therefore you must stand
fast in your Christian liberty.

Verse. 6. For in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision, avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. Argum. 6. Confirming the
former. In the Kingdom of Christ, or the new state of the Church under the
Covenant of Grace, the difference of circumcision and uncircumcision is taken
away; that neither helps, nor hinders any thing to justification: Therefore you
must stand fast in your liberty from the yoke of the Law.

But faith] Arg. 7. True faith alone, or that which works by love, without
respect to circumcision or uncircumcision, avails to the act of
justification: Therefore in this way of justification, ye that are in the
Kingdom of Christ must necessarily stand fast.

Verse. 7. Ye did run well, who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the
truth? Argum. 8. Not long since ye ran well in the course of the truth of this
Doctrine, neither can any account be given of your falling from the truth:
Therefore you must as yet go forward, and stand fast in that course.

Verse. 8. This persuasion comes not of him that calls you. Argum. 9. By
answering an Objection. Although perhaps ye are persuaded, that ye continue
in a right way, yet that credulity and persuasion to depart from that which you
have received from me, is not from God calling you, but some other way, viz.
from impostors, from your inconstancy, and from the Devil: Therefore this
persuasion is to be rejected, and ye must stand fast in the liberty.

Verse. 9. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Argum. 10. By answering an
Objection. Although it may seem that we mu^^ not contend about the
introduction of some few customs, for peace sake, and that the Jews might the
more easily be won, yet this little legal leaven, or Judaism, does corrupt the
whole sincerity of the Doctrine of faith. Therefore ye must have a care of
that, and stand fast in the liberty.

Verse. 10. I have confidence in you through the Lord, that you will be none
otherwise minded, but he that troubles you, shall bear his judgment,
whosoever he be. Argum. 11. Although the danger of your error, and
inconstancy, make me suspect the event, yet love, and the constancy of Divine
grace commands me to hope better things, which whilst I behold, I am persuaded
that you will return into that opinion with me concerning the casting away the
yoke of the Law, and defending your liberty by faith in Christ: Therefore it is
meet to satisfy my expectation.

Troubleth] Argum. 12. Your seducers, who trouble your faith, at length,
howsoever they are esteemed amongst you, shall be punished by God: Therefore
be ye not entangled in the same snares, but repent, and stand fast in the
liberty.

Verse. 11. And I, brethren, if I yet preach Circumcision, why do I yet suffer
persecution? then is the offense of the Cross ceased. He refutes the calumny
of his Adversaries, and produces Arg. 13. Thou thy self do teach
Circumcision, because thou have circumcised Timothy: Therefore undeservedly
thou do accuse us. He answers by denying that he taught Circumcision,
because although he circumcised Timothy born of a Jewish mother (for the use
of Ceremonies with the Jews after the yoke of necessity was broken by the
Decree of the Synod, for a time it was left free) yet he never preached that
Circumcision was to be observed, but he both admonished the Jews concerning
the abolition of Ceremonies, and taught that legal Ceremonies upon no account
should be received amongst the Gentiles; which he proves, because upon this
ground he suffered persecution by the Jews; and because the Jews were not
offended at the preaching of the Gospel, or the Cross of Christ, but freely
tolerarated the Apostle, if withal he would promote the reception of Jewish
customs amongst the Gentiles.

The strength of the Argument is this, I had rather suffer persecution, than
preach that Circumcision is to be joined with the Gospel; for if I should
conjoyn them, the offense of the Cross would cease, the Jews would tolerate my
preaching of Christ crucified: But I dare not in the least depart from the
purity of the Gospel: Therefore ye must also stand fast in that.

Verse. 12. I would they were even cut off which trouble you. At length shutting
up the whole Disputation, with an Apostolical Spirit, he both imprecates and
denounces destruction to the Impostors, by whom the Galatians were deceived.

The Second Part.
Verse. 13. For, Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty, only use not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. The second
part of the Chapter follows, wherein the reason of his imprecation is given,
viz. because the seducers called them back, and drew them again under the yoke,
whom God called to liberty; under the form of an exhortation, he gives three
Precepts concerning the right use of Christian liberty.

Onely] 1. That bridleing the flesh, or the sinful lusts of corrupt nature
(lest that being unsubdued it should draw Christian liberty into a
licentiousness to sin) they may serve one another in the duties of love.

Verse. 14. For all the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. He gives two reasons of this Precept, (1.)
Because the Law is fulfilled in love, and not in bare ceremonies.

Verse. 15. But if you bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not
consumed one of another. (2.) Because unless they follow after love, they will
mutually devour and destroy one another by contentions.

Verse. 16. This I say then, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lust of the flesh. The second Precept is for the confirmation of the former,
that they follow the guidance of the Holy Ghost walking as he himself out of
the Scripture has suggested to their hearts.

And that which] The reasons of the Precept are six, Reas. 1. Because so the
lusts of the flesh shall not rule over you, that ye may as servants obey its
commands: Therefore follow ye the guidance of the Spirit.

Verse. 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other. Reas. 2. Confirming the
former, because he that follows the guidance of the Spirit, will become
victorious in the contest betwixt the flesh, and the Spirit. That this reason
might be plain, the Apostle presupposes three things: (1.) He that is lead by
the Spirit has his nature partly renewed, which is called the Spirit, and
partly corrupt, which is called the Flesh. (2.) He presupposes these two
contrary principles with contrary endeavors to fight with one another, that
neither good, nor evil without opposition, and a mutual impediment can be put
in execution. (3.) He presupposes that the Holy Ghost does help Believers in
their striving by the Word and Grace. From whence it is concluded, that he
which hearkeneth to the Spirit, will become victorious in striving.

Verse. 18. But if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. Reason
3. Confirming the former. Because they that are led by the Spirit, are not
servants to sin under the servile Covenant of the Law, to whom only the
knowledge of sin is vouchsafed, but not the victory or strength against sin:
but Gods Freemen are they, who under the Covenant of Grace obtain strength of
God for the resisting of sin.

Verse. 19. Now the Works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,

20. Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, ^rath, Strife,
Seditions, Heresies,

21. Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like: of the which I
tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Reason 4. Because if they do not follow the Spirit, but rather the flesh,
doing the Works of the flesh (of which sort he reckons seventeen) they shall
not be heirs of the Kingdom of God.

Verse. 22. But the fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,

23. Meekness, Temperance: against such there is no Law.

Reason 5. Because if they follow the Spirit, and bring forth such fruit (of
whith sort he reckons nine) they will not have the Law against them, i. e.
cursing them, and condemning them; but for Reconciliation sake toward God they
shall find the Law their friend: Therefore it behoved you to follow the Spirit.

Verse. 24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts. He proves that they shall not have the Law against them,
because they that are Christ's, and judicially crucified in Christ, for
satisfaction to the Law, they are also judicially obliged to crucify the body
of sin, i. e. corrupt nature, with the affections and lusts. Wherefore they
that actually endeavor to peform that, and to bring forth the fruit of the
Spirit, they cannot have the Law against them, as they that now seriously
endeavor to promote the scope and end of the Law.

Verse. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Reason 6.
Because by the Spirit we have Consolation, Peace, and Joy, wherein life
consists: Therefore we ought to follow the guidance of the Spirit.

Verse. 26. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another,
envying one another. The third Precept is especially concerning the shunning
Ambition, with the attendants of that vice, viz. backbiting and envy, with
which evils the Churches used to be infected. But because the Doctors of the
Church were chiefly obnoxious to these vices: Therefore he includes himself in
this Exhortation with the rest, that the Galatians may more easily receive this
Exhortation.

CHAP. VI.
HE proceeds to prescribe Christian duties to the Galatians, much more
excellent than those Legal Ceremonies, and more worthy of their practice. There
are two parts of the Chapter; in the first he adds to the former Precepts, two
other, to verse. 11. In the other he compares himself with the false Apostles,
and deservedly prefers himself before them, lest the Galatians by the
admiration of those should be deceived.

Verse. 1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault* ye which are spiritual,
restore such a one in the Spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou
also be tempted. The first Precept concerning dealing gently with the
Brethren, who fall through infirmity, that they be restored in the Spirit of
meekness by those, who seem more confirmed in the Spirit, but he speaks
especially to the Presbyters, upon whom it lies by duty to recall those again
to repentance that are fallen into scandalls, by ecclesiastical censures, and
to restore again the dis-joynted members of the Church into their place. He
commands those to use me^kness toward them, that through infirmity are
fallen back, and not to deal severely with them, which without doubt belongs to
those, who have the power of punishing sinners. There are six reasons of the
Precept.

Reason 1. Because the same may happen through a temptation to any one, even to
the spiritual themselves.

Verse. 2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.
Reason 2. Because seeing that it may be presupposed, that sinning Brethren are
sorrowful and grieved for their backslidings and sins: Therefore it is fitting
that sinners which are dejected and cast down, in all moderation and sympathy,
should be succored and relieved under their burden.

And so] Reason 3. Because the Law of Love renewed by Christ, requires that
from us.

Verse. 3. For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he
deceives himself. Reason 4. He that despises others that backslide through
infirmity, and thinks himself more strong, deceives himself, is amongst the
weakest, yea, he is a man of no strength at all.

Verse. 4. But let every man prove his own Works, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, Reason 5. Propounded after the
manner of a Precept making for the quelling of self admiration, and shunning
the casting contempt upon a backsliden Brother, Because if every one would try
himself, and examine his actions according to the rule of the divine Law, no
man would arrogate to himself the praise of holiness from other men's sins, but
only from their good actions, if he found any of them worthy of praise. This
was said against them, who never cease to aggravate another man's sin, that they
may seem more holy themselves.

Verse. 5. For every man shall bear his own burden. Reason 6. Confirming the
reason foregoing. Because every one shall give an account of his Works to God,
not compared with others, but considered with himself: Therefore it is not safe
to despise those that are fallen into sin, and to be lifted up against them,
because in like manner thou art not fallen thy self.

Verse. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that
teaches, in all good things. The second Precept belongs to the people,
concerning liberality to be exercised toward the Ministers of the Word, that
we communicate coporal goods to them, who communicate unto us by their office
spiritual things, and give themselves to this Work.

Verse. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows,
that shall he also reap. He gives six reasons of the Precept, which are all
extended to liberality in general, and do confirm the Precept of Liberality to
Pastors the more strongly.

Reas. 1. Supposing these, who are ungrateful toward their Teachers, to be
also niggardly and slow to every good Work, because the excuses of
niggardliness, are the delusions of covetous men, with which God will not
suffer them to delude themselves*

Whatsoever] Reas. 2. Because every one shall receive fruit according to his
deeds, he that has only received, and refuses to be thankful, shall be
rewarded according to his ingratitude, and on the contrary.

Verse. 8. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption:
But he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.
He expounds this Argument in particular: He that bestows his goods or
substance, and his actions to the fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, he shall
of his doing reap corruption: But he that on the contrary lays out himself,
and all for the glory of God, and promoting the works of the Spirit, he shall
be graciously rewarded with eternal life.

Verse. 9. As let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not. Reas. 3. Because whatsoever may be said concerning
liberality showed by any one already, as if enough was done by him, yet he
must know, that good things past are not sufficient, unless we persevere in
well-doing.

Due] Reas. 4. Illustrating and confirming the former. Because an harvest of
rewards shall certainly in due time be to those alone that persevere in
well-doing, and faint not, or be weary.

Verse. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith. Reas. 5. Because the
time of exercising well-doing is short, therefore opportunity is to be
observed, whilst life and abilities last, and to reward them when they are
dying is somewhat late.

Especially] Reas. 6. The common bond of nature requires that we should be
liberal to all that are in want: The bond of brotherhood requires charity
toward the household of faith, therefore how much more does the bond of a flock
toward their Pastor require that he be nourished by the milk and the fleece
of the flock?

The Second Part.
Verse. 11. ^ee see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own
hand. The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein after his Doctrine
compared with the error of his Adversaries, now he compares the Teacher with
the Teachers, i. e. Himself, with the Seducers of the Galatians, and that for
their own edification, who admired those glorious Doctors, their Seducers.

Before he compares himself, he premises the commendation of his sincere love
toward the Galatians, that he writ this so large an Epistle with his own
hand, without the help of any Scribe, as a most ample testimony of his
solicitousness for their salvation.

Verse. 12. As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain
you to be circumcised: only lest they should suffer persecution for the Cross
of Christ. He begins his comparison, and proves the hypocrisy of his
Emulators by four signs.

A fair shew] Sign 1. That they study nothing more, than to carry themselves
fairly before men.

Onely] Sign 2. That they compel the Galatians to admit of Circumcision, not
out of love, but only lest they should suffer persecution by the Jews for the
Doctrine of the Cross, or free justification by the death of Christ, and not by
the works of the Law.

Verse. 13. For neither they themselves who are circumcised, keep the Law, but
desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.

Sign 3. That although they were circumcised long since, yet they little care
for the observance of the Law, which they required of others.

But desire] Sign 4. That they seek occasion from the circumcision of the
Galatians to glory amongst the Jews, that they had converted many Proselytes to
the Law.

Verse. 14. But God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. In
the other part of the comparison the sincerity of the Apostle is shown, in
these two things, (1.) That he only glories in his free Redemption by Christ
crucified, and in his sufferings for the Doctrine. (2.) That he does not
affect earthly pomp, but contemn the world (with all its pomp and glory) which
persecuted and despised him, for the Doctrine of the Cross sake, and by the
Cross learnt daily more and more to contemn the world.

Verse. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature. He gives four Reasons of his endeavor,
which are so many signs of his sincerity. Reason 1. I know that in the Kingdom
of Christ, neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision is respected by God, but a
new creature, i. e. I know that it is necessary, when any one is admitted by
faith into the Kingdom of Christ and justified, that he should be more and
more renewed and sanctified, but other privileges are of no value without
newness of life: Therefore I will only glory in the Cross of Christ.

Verse. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Reas. 2. The rule of my intention is the
sum of the whole Canonical Scripture, to which as to one only rule, or one
only Canon, the Doctrine and life of all is to be conformable: Therefore I
will only glory in the Cross of Christ, etc.

Peace] Reas. 3. I am persuaded, that whosoever shall order their faith and
life by this rule, they shall also obtain peace, i. e. a sense of their
reconciliation to God, all kind of blessings, or an accumulation of good
things, and mercy, or a remedy for the purging away all evils: Therefore I
will only glory in the Cross of Christ.

Israel] Reas. 4. They are alone the true Israel of God, that follow this Rule:
Therefore all things laid aside, I will only glory in the Cross of Christ, by,
etc.

Verse. 17. From henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus. After the Comparison, as a Conqueror he triumphs
over his Emulators, forbidding them to make him any further work, either by
gainsaying his Doctrine, or by detracting from his Authority, because he bare
the ensign of his Felicity toward Christ, viz. the mark of a servant most
devoted to Christ, i. e. He has all the signs of an Apostle, and a faithful
Witness, clearly to be seen in him.

Verse. 18. Brethren, the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
Amen. He shuts up the Epistle with his accustomed seal, wishing that the Grace
of Jesus Christ, manifested, believed, and effectual, might abide in their
minds, hearts, and whole life, that from thence they may draw consolation both
in life and death, to which Amen is subjoyned as a testimony of his vote, and
the faith of an Apostle, and for a seal of the truth of the precedent Doctrine.

The Epistle of Paul to the EPHESIANS Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
THe City of the Ephesians was the Metropolis of Lesser Asia, in which the
Apostle two whole years preached the Gospel, Act. 19. And when lastly he went
up to Jerusalem, he foretold a change of the Church to the Ephesians, Act.
20. Against which he fortifies them by this Epistle, when he was now held
captive at Rome, and plainly despaired of his return, he endeavors
diligently to confirm, their minds in Faith and Truth.

There are two principal parts of the Epistle, besides the Preface and the
Conclusion. The first is, The Doctrine of Grace for the confirmation of their
Faith, to Chap. 4. The other is the Doctrine of gratitude and thankfulness
tending to holiness of life, to the end of the Epistle.

That which belongs to the first part: First of all he shows that the whole
reason of our salvation is free, and solidly founded on Christ, in the first
Chapter. Furthermore he amplifies this Grace from the former misery of the
Ephesians, Chap. 2.

Thirdly, The scandal of the Cross lying upon him, being taken away, he
exhorts them to constancy and progress in the Faith, by the glorious
commendation of his Ministry, and by manifesting the cause for which he
suffered, Chap. 3.

In the second part he gives Precepts of keeping the unity of the Church, of
holiness of life, as well in general, as in particular, in the shunning of
evil, and following after virtue, by which the life of every one is ordered in
a Christian manner, Chap. 4. and in the former part of Chap. 5.

After these he descends to household duties, to which and all other Christian
duties that are to be performed, he arms the faithful, in the latter part of
Chap. 5. and in the former part of Chap. 6.

CHAP. I.
THis Chapter; besides the Preface, contains two parts: In the first is a
thanksgiving, tending to prove that the whole business of salvation, both of
Jews and Gentiles, is merely of Grace, and wholly built on Christ, to verse. 15.
In the other is a commemoration of the Apostles continual thanksgiving and
prayer, offered to God for the Ephesians, tending to the confirmation of Faith
(the assurance of their salvation) and of the perseverance of all truly
faithful, unto the end.

The Preface in the two first verses, contains a direction of the Epistle, and
a salutation of the Ephesians: which is very short, because he has not to do
here with envious persons, or enemies, but with conformable and obedient men,
to whom it would be sufficient briefly to intimate his divine authority in
writing this Epistle, and the Apostles good will toward them, and opinion of
them.

Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the Will of God, to the Saints
which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus: In the direction of
the Epistle, we have the description of the Writer, from his Name, Office and
Authority. And then of those to whom he writes, from the condition in which
they stood toward God, and from the place which they did inhabit on the earth.
The Writer is Paul the Apostle, who according to the Will of God by Christ,
speaking from heaven, was sent as an extraordinary Ambassador to the Church,
which should afterward be gathered to Christ: here is authority enough. Those
to whom he writes are the Saints and Faithful in Christ at Ephesus, who being
planted into Christ by Faith, were consecrated to the service of God; here is
praise enough.

Verse. 2. Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ. In the Salutation is contained an Apostolical Benediction, in
which (1) He wishes the Ephesians Grace, that is, all heavenly good things
which are necessary to Sanctification and Salvation. (2) He wishes them the
special fruit of this Grace, to wit, Peace, or all things which might conduce
to their happiness, but especially quietness of mind, arising from the
redemption of Christ; which Redemption applied to them by the Word and the
Spirit of God, would assure them of reconciliation with God, and assure them of
freedom from evil. (3) He opens to them the fountain and chanel of this Grace
and Peace wished to them, viz. God from whom, and Christ the Mediator by whom,
and for whose sake, this Grace and Peace is conferred upon us. Here Is good will
enough toward the Ephesians. And Arguments also sufficient to prepare their
minds to receive the following Doctrine with that submission and willingness of
mind which became them.

Verse. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. After the
Preface follows the Thanksgiving, containing a Proposition to be proved in the
first part of this Chapter, which is this; That the Grace of God in Christ
ought to be celebrated with an acknowledgement of Gods blessing toward us, in
the whole business of the Salvation of Believers: For our blessing, as it has
relation to God, is nothing else but an acknowledgement that God is every way
the Author of all blessing or Grace toward us.

In this Proposition he puts a difference between God the Father, and Jesus
Christ the Mediator God-man, that the person and office of the Mediator might
more manifestly appear. And he calls God the Father the God of Christ, (1)
Because of that Grace, whereby the humane nature of Christ was predestined to
the personal union with the Word, his Son. (2) Because of the Covenant of
Redemption made between God and Christ the Mediator. And then he calls him
the Father of Jesus Christ, (1) Because of the eternal Generation of the Son,
by which the Father has from all eternity communicated to him his whole
infinite essence. (2) Because of the personal union of the assumed humane
Nature, by which the Son of man is made the Son of God. The chief Arguments to
prove the aforesaid Proposition are Thirteen.

Has blessed] Arg. 1. The God and Father of Christ has blessed us believers,
or has graciously heart upon us all spiritual and heavenly blessings in
Christ. Therefore he is to be blessed, or his grace is to be celebrated by us:
To this purpose, that the grace of God might appear and be celebrated, all the
words of this Argument tend, every one whereof breathes ou^ grace. For (1.) The
giver of these benefits is called God, and the Father of Jesus Christ, and by
consequence the God and Father of all us which are in Christ, and that from the
Covenant made between the Father and Christ concerning us; and consequently our
Father, who with a fatherly affection gives us all things.

Has blessed] 2. The giving of these benefits is actively called the blessing
of God, that is, the actual or effectual demonstration of Gods grace (according
to his word) in deed toward us.

Has blessed us] (3.) And here is grace. For we whom God blesses, are by
nature the sons of wrath, and liable to the curse of God, in whom there is
nothing, nor can be any thing, which can deserve any good.

With all blessing] (4.) The nature and matter of the benefits themselves
includes grace; for a blessing taken passively, is nothing else but a benefit,
taking its rise from mere grace.

Spiritual blessings] (5) Here is grace also; For the benefits which are
bestowed on us before others are spiritual, such as have reference to the
eternal salvation of the spirit or soul, which do far exceed all measure of
proportion to any earthly and temporal works, which we can perform in this
body, and therefore they are of grace.

All blessing] (6.) This tends to grace too* Because every spiritual gift,
which pertains to the salvation of souls, is bestowed upon us; of which gifts
there is none, which flows not from the fountain of grace and blessing, and is
freely given to us without any merit of ours, or respect to our works, whether
they be knowledge of God, or acknowledgement of our sin, or repentance, or
faith, or any effect of faith, or any good work, or intention of a good work:
all this is freely given by him, who blesses us with all spiritual blessing:
Therefore they are of grace.

In heaven] Hear is a beam of grace too, because these benefits, with which
we, above others, are blessed, are heavenly, that is, they are such as take
their original from heaven, are conversant in heaven, and shall be completed
in heaven; nor do they any ways savor any thing of our flesh, but yet do
season to us our condition on earth.

In Christ] Here the whole ocean of grace is opened for all these benefits are
ours in Christ, who himself is ours, and all these are made ours in him, as in
the root and fountain, as in our head and common parent, before they come to
us, that so they may be derived on us by him: in whom as we are united
together, we possess those things we have, and in whom we have right to
those things which as yet we have not, and by whom we shall hereafter receive
those things which remain; and as he has obtained all things for us, so he
keeps both them in himself for our use, and us that we may use and enjoy them.
From all, and every one of which it follows, that all our spiritual benefits
are free and gracious, or effects of mere grace, and therefore we ought to
celebrate the grace of God as the fountain and cause of them.

Verse. 4. According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. Argum.
1. Confirming the former. God actually in time, freely bestows all these
spiritual blessings upon us in Christ, even as before time he of his grace
chose us in him, that at length we might obain these benefits: Therefore we
ought to bles^ him: All the wo^ds of this Argument also are proofs of his free
and gracious election: For,

(1.) Our election was of God unto life, before others our companions, who were
in the same condition, whom God leaving and passing by chose us: Therefore we
are chosen out of grace.

(2.) He chose us in Christ, as in the head who was first chosen, as in the
common Parent, root and fountain of the elect. After whom we in the
consideration of dignity, and order, and in whom we, as his body, members, and
offspring, are afterward chosen in the order of nature: Therefore our
election is free, there being no cause of it in us, which is to be sought for
in God alone.

(3.) He chose us before the foundation of the world, that is, from eternity,
before the world was, much more before any works of ours were; He chose us
before any matter of the created world was existent, much more before any
matter of our works or workings could be existent: for he elected us in order
of nature before he decreed that the world should be. For the decree of the
creation of the world, was subservient as a means to bring to pass the already
decreed salvation of the elect: Therefore he chose us of grace, and not for
foreseen works.

He chose us that we might be holy] (4.) He did not choose us because we
were holy, or because he foresaw that we would be holy, but he chose us
without any consideration of any holiness at all in us, nay he chose us as not
having holiness; to the end, that being chosen, we should be made holy, and
should become unblameable in his sight, that is, that being consecrated to God,
we should be by degrees truly and sincerely sanctified, and should at last
be presented fully and perfectly holy in heaven: Yea further, that being
unblameable without spot, without wrinkle, not only of sin, but also of all
misery, we should at length appear together before him blessed and glorious:
Therefore our election is not from faith foreseen, or works foreseen, but of
mere grace, which as it is the cause of election, so of all holiness, and
happiness, which follows election.

In love] Love or charity is merely free, in which as he has chosen us, that
we should be made holy and unblameable, so also that in that his love we
should perfect this our happiness; which love God will then fully put forth,
when he shall fully consummate our holiness and happiness. And so the charity
or love of God is hoth the cause of election, and the completing or perfecting
of those good things which follow election, and by consequence election is not
only of grace, but is for the perfect possession of free happiness in the
sight of God.

Verse. 5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ
to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. Arg. 3. Thus God of his
grace has blessed us in time, so also of grace he has predestined us to
the inheritance of Sons, which was to be obtained by Christ in his own person,
according to the good pleasure of his will: Therefore we should celebrate his
grace. The parts of this reason prove the same, that the whole reason it self
does.

Having predestined us] (1.) As our election before time was free, so is our
predestination also before ages unto life eternal, and to fit means, which
should be effectual to bring us to that end: Therefore predestination is free,
in that it does not only assign the end and persons, but also appoints the
means by which we must attain that end.

Unto the adoption of children] (2.) Here also the Apostle manifests the grace
of God. We are predestined, not because we are foreseen as Sons, but that
being not as yet Sons, we should by Grace attain the Adoption of Sons. Now the
Adoption of Sons includes these four things. (1) An effectual Calling, or Faith
to embrace the offered communion with Christ the only begotten Son. (2) A
towardliness and good disposition of Sons, or the renovation of our nature,
that we might love God as our Father. (3) The dignity and honor of Sons. (4)
The Riches or Inheri^ance of Sons, even to the glorifying of our Bodies, Romans
8.23. Therefore both our Predestination and Adoption is free, and not for any
work of ours.

By Christ] (3) And this does make much for the advancement of Grace: We are
predestined that we may obtain the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ, who
is the first-begotten, and onely-begotten Son, that by his merit and efficacy
we might obtain all the foresaid degrees of Adoption: Therefore our
predestination is from mere Grace.

To himself] (4) That Grace might appear, he shows the end of Adoption. God
has predestined us that we should obtain the Adoption of Children by Christ
to himself, or to his use, viz. to the honor of him that predestinateth, or of
Christ by whom he communicates to us Grace, and the Glory of the Sons of God:
Therefore our predestination is free, for otherwise honor would not accrue to
God or Christ by our Adoption.

According to the good pleasure of his Will] (5) Here he excludes all causes
besides God, and makes the Grace of God the only cause. For he predestined
us according to the good pleasure of his Will: Therefore only Gods Grace,
only his Will, only his good pleasure is the cause of our predestination, and
not any work of ours.

Verse. 6. To the praise of the glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us
accepted in the Beloved. Argum. 4. God to that end and purpose, that he might
bring praise to his glorious Grace, chose and predestined us to the Adoption
of Sons. It necessarily follows, that God has elected and predestined us out
of Grace: For else he could never attain that end; and consequently ought we
to give praise to Gods Grace, and to bless God, who has thus blessed us.

Of the Glory of] Words of this Nature have an Emphasis; for (1) This Grace
has glory in it self, that is, it is every way glorious, and most worthy in it
self that we should highly esteem it, acknowledge and publish it, because who
is most great and most good has vouchsafed to advance us, who are most vile
and most unworthy, unto the dignity of sons, and the riches of the inheritance
of sons.

To the praise] (2) God does both intend and expect from us the praise of this
his glorious Grace, that we should acknowledge the benefit in words and deeds,
and that by all means possible we should give praise to this wonderful Grace
of God.

Wherein] Argum. 5. In this Grace whereby God has chosen and predestined us
to holiness and happiness, I say, in this very Grace he has made us welcome
and acceptable to himself, in his beloved Son: Therefore we should celebrate
this Grace of God. In which reason he intimates four things. (1) That God did
of his Grace intend our salvation in election and predestination, and does
actually and in deed begin to put forth, and exercise Grace in our effectual
Vocation to Faith. (2) That Christ not only as Son, but as Mediator
undertaking for us, and paying the price of our Redemption for us, is beloved
and accepted with God, in whom the Father is fully satisfied and pleased, as
one in our stead. (3) In him, and by him sin is removed, which might hinder the
course of Grace toward us. (4) He intimates, that by Christ and in Christ,
the cloud of sin being dissolved, the Grace of God shines upon us, and we are
embraced and entertained, as reconciled, as now pleasing and acceptable in
Christ, who a^ our Surety and common Parent comprehends us all in himself.

Verse. 7. In whom we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins; according to the riches of his Grace. Argum. 6. In Christ by the rich
Grace of God we receive Redemption and pardon of sins: Therefore we should
give praise to the rich Grace of God only in our salvation. And to this
purpose all the parts of this reason tend.

Redemption] (1) We were in our selves lost, and held captives under the bonds
of blindness, sin, wrath, and death, whence we could by no means free our
selves: whence there had been no coming forth, if Grace had not both opened
the way, and led us out: Therefore our salvation is of Grace.

In whom] (2) Christ alone redeemed us without any merit or help from us, the
price of our salvation being both covenanted for, and paid by himself alone;
lest any praise should be given to any thing besides his Grace.

Through his blood] (3] We are not redeemed with Silver or Gold, but with the
Blood of Christ, that so the price might show the danger wherein we were, and
exalt Gods Grace.

The forgiveness] (4) The Blood of Christ is that which procures for us in
particular the pardon of our sins, in which we lay polluted, and which was all
the riches God saw in us, we being void of every good work, that the Grace of
God might be more apparent in our sins and unworthiness.

In whom] (5) This Redemption and remission of sins we (being once become
Believers) have not in our selves without reference to Christ, but in Christ as
our Surety, Redeemer and Head, we being united and graffed into him by Faith.

The riches of] (6) The only cause and measure of so great a benefit, is the
rich Grace of God; according to the abundance whereof Christ and Redemption in
Christ is bestowed upon us: Therefore Gods Grace only may deservedly be
praised, as the cause of our salvation.

Verse. 8. Wherein he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence.
Argum. 7. From this abundant Grace, as from a fountain, Christ, or the Father
in Christ, has according to his great wisdom, communicated to us in our
effectual Vocation all Wisdom and Prudence, that is, has given us saving
Faith, in the object whereof consists the sum and perfection of all Wisdom
and Knowledge; for though saving Faith be in it self imperfect, yet by it we
apply a known Christ to our selves, who is the treasure of all saving Wisdom
and Prudence, as a general medicine and remedy for all evils, which is an
abbreviate of Wisdom and Prudence. In this Argument the particulars prove the
same also.

Toward us] (1) We who as well as the rest of the world, were ignorant,
imprudent and foolish, erring in the blindness and vanity of our minds. It is
of Grace therefore that we are endowed with Wisdom.

He has abounded] (2) Christ the Author first comes to us, and bestows Faith
upon us, which consists in the Knowledge and Application of the saving Truth of
God, which is true Wisdom and Prudence: Therefore it is of Grace.

Wherein, viz. In which Grace] (3) Here Grace is expressly mentioned, he out of
his Grace has plentifully bestowed upon us this Wisdom and Prudence.

Has abounded] (4) He who was full of Grace, has shown himself to be such
in this, as if he could not any longer restrain his Grace within himself, but
it overflowing, brake forth upon us: Therefore Grace is the sole cause in
effectual Vocation and Donation of Faith, and so deservedly to be praised.

Verse. 9. Having made known unto us the mystery of his Will* according to his
good pleasure, which he has purposed to himself. Argum. 8. The manifestation
of Gods secret Will, touching salvation to be obtained by Christ, to the
communicating of Faith, or Knowledge, and Prudence to his, is of the mere Will
of God, according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself:
Therefore the Grace of God is worthily to be praised under the name of Gods
revealed Will, and of Faith bestowed upon us. To this end all the parts of this
Argument refer.

The Mystery] (1) The Will of God touching the business of Salvation to be
accomplished by Christ, was a secret Mystery sealed up from all eternity in the
breast of God, which neither Angels nor men could ever have brought to light,
but that God out of his Grace revealed it.

Having made known] (2) God took care not only that this Mystery should be
revealed, but out of his Grace, he provided that the blindness, both of our
minds and hearts being taken away, we should understand it.

Unto us] (3) He has manifested the Gospel of Grace to us rather than to
others.

Good pleasure] (4) God freely brought this to pass, not being induced or
excited thereunto by any external cause, but according to his good pleasure, or
gracious predestination, and his eternal purpose in himself: Therefore we
ought deservedly to give praise to Gods Grace.

Verse. 10. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather
together in one all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are
in Earth, even in him. Argum. 9. It depends merely upon Gods Will and pleasure
to appoint a full and fit time, wherein this Mystery of his Will should come to
man's knowledge; what, how much, and when, to what age, and to what particular
person this Mystery should be dispensed: Therefore the Will of God prevails in
assigning the time, in which Faith is to be given, and in this respect also
Gods Grace is praiseworthy. The several particulars in this Argument confirm
the same also.

In the dispensation] (1) The Grace of God is to be acknowledged, because here
is an economy, or, as the Master of a Family, a free disposing of his
domestic things, whereby every one orders them as he pleases; which liberty,
as it is by right to be granted to every householder, so to God also, that he
may act according to his own pleasure.

The fulness] (2) There is a mature and fit opportunity of time, in which it is
in Gods power alone to determine, what and how much of his secret Will it is
fitting to reveal to every age, and to each man. And therefore whatsoever and
how much soever is revealed to us, it is of Grace. For the good pleasure of God
which he had purposed in himself, of which verse. 9. belongs to this ordering
of the time: Therefore his Grace deserves here also to be taken notice of.

That he might gather] Argum. 10. The gathering, and manifestation of this
gathering the elect and redeemed together, into Christ their Head, otherwise
wandering and separated from God, is the sum and end of the revealed Mystery:
Therefore we ought to render praise to Gods Grace, by which we are gathered
together as well as others. It is true that by the sin of Angels and Men, the
whole world, like a mangled and almost dead body (whose members are pulled
asunder, and torn one from another) was almost brought to destruction: but
Christ confirmed the Elect Angels, and stayed the perishing world; but here the
Apostle chiefly respects the restoring of elect men, whereby Christ reconciled
the men gathered to him, unto God, and compacted as it were into one Kingdom
the elect Angels and spirits of just men in Heaven, the Jews and Gentiles in
Earth; with a most strict union amongst themselves.

Verse. 11. In whom also we have obtained an Inheritance, being predestined
according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the counsel
of his own Will. Argum. 11. Applying it to the Jews. The Inheritance of eternal
life in Christ is given to us elect Jews, not of works, or is it gotten by the
power of our free will, but is bestowed by divine order and dispensation upon
us, who are predestined according to the purpose of God, who works all
things according to the counsel of his will: Therefore we Jews and all others
ought to give praise to Gods Grace. These things make for the advancement of
Grace.

We have obtained an Inheritance] (1) Eternal life, or glorification is an
Inheritance, which we have not procured to our selves, but have attained to it
by divine appointment and dispensation.

(2) We are not able of our selves so much as to receive this Inheritance,
when offered to us; nor can we so much as take possession of this Inheritance,
though it be settled on us; but we are made possessors of it, by appointment,
for (...) is a passive: What then is here which is ours, and is not of Grace?

Being predestinated] (3) We were predestined by God, that we should be
called to this Inheritance: God did not take us into counsel with him, when he
decreed our happiness.

Worketh] (4) God who predestined us to this happiness, works all things,
not alone by preparing this happiness for us, nor only by framing and fitting
us for it, but also by effectually ordering all those means which should
conduce to the bringing of us into the possession of it.

After the counsel] (5) Nor does God go out of himself, to seek causes of his
purpose, or of his operation, but he works all things after his counsel, or
after his free and most wise will: Therefore our glorification or salvation is
of Grace, and not of Works, nor from the choice of our free will; for that our
will is carried to the choice of good and of life, and that we perform any
good works, is of the mere, free, good pleasure of God, who works all good
things after the counsel of his Will: Therefore Grace is praiseworthy.

Verse. 12. That we should be to the Praise of his Glory, who first trusted in
Christ. Argum. 12. From the last end of the Calling of the Predestined Jews,
unto the possession of this Inheritance. As God has performed this Grace to us
elected Jews, that first, or that before the Gentiles, we should believe in
Christ to come, and also that we should first believe in him present or
already come; so according to the prerogative which by grace is granted to our
Nation, he has chosen us first into the right of the heavenly Inheritance, to
the end that he might obtain the glory of his Grace in us and from us:
Therefore we Jews and all others deservedly ought to bless and adore God, and
to give praise unto his Grace.

Verse. 13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the
Gospel of your Salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with the holy Spirit of Promise. Argum. 13. This is applied to the Gentiles, and
particularly to the Ephesians. You Gentiles also, lately strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel, are now called and chosen into the right of this
Inheritance, to the same end, viz. the praise of the glorious Grace of God:
Therefore both you Gentiles, and we, should join together to declare and set
forth the Grace of God. Now he proves that the Ephesians were made partakers
of this Inheritance as well as the Jews, by six Reasons.

Ye trusted] Reason 1. Ye have believed in Christ, Therefore ye are made
partakers of this inheritance.

Heard] Reas. 2. God has sent the word of his truth, or saving Gospel to you,
that hearing ye should believe and obtain salvation: Therefore you are not now
as of old, like Proselytes, but had in equal honor with the Jews, you do
partake of the same inheritance.

Sealed] Reas. 3. Taken from the pledge and earnest of salvation, given them,
and from its first use. After that ye had believed, ye were sealed as
peculiar ones to God, by the gift of the Holy Ghost: Therefore you are
partakers of the same inheritance.

Of promise] Reas. 4. From the other use of sealing. The promises of the
inheritance are sealed to you by the promised Spirit, who confirms the promises
to believers. Therefore you also, etc.

Verse. 14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of
the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory. Reas. 5. From the third
use of sealing, or of the pledge of salvation given to us. The gift of the Holy
Ghost is the earnest of our inheritance, to wit, the pledge and part of our
happiness which shall be consummate hereafter: Therefore, etc.

Until the Redemption] Reas. 6. From the fourth use of sealing. The Spirit
shall remain with you for your comfort, and not depart from you until the
covenanted Redemption be fully perfected and completed, in an absolute
freedom of your souls and bodies from all the bonds of sin and misery:
Therefore you have a right unto this inheritance.

To the praise] In the last place he shows us that the end of all these
benefits is the praise of Gods glorious grace, that God should be blessed and
acknowledged, and his grace have the praise in all the forementioned
particulars, viz. in our Election, Predestination, Redemption, Vocation,
Donation of Faith, remission of sins, Adoption, gathering unto Christ, and
fellowship with his people, participation of the inheritance, and sealing by
the holy Ghost.

Verse. 15. Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and
love unto all the Saints, The Apostle proceeds to the second part of this
Chapter, where he endeavors to strengthen the Ephesians faith; the
proposition to be confirmed may be taken into this sense, in this or the like
Rule; you Ephesians ought to be confirmed in the faith of the Gospel. The
Arguments to prove this proposition are Fifteen.

Faith in] Argum. 1. Your faith in Jesus Christ is not that dead and
hypocritical faith, but the lively faith effectually working by charity toward
all Saints, and openly manifested to me an Apostle, and others: Therefore you
Ephesians should be confirmed in the faith.

Verse. 16. Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my
prayers. Arg. 2. You are esteemed worthy that thanks should be daily given
unto God for you, even as I do: Therefore you ought to be strengthened in the
faith of the Gospel.

Mention] Argum. 3. Because the sincerity of your faith is manifested in the
love of the Saints, I continually keep you in my memory, and make daily mention
of you in my prayers, begging that the work of God may be perfected in you,
and your faith confirmed: Therefore unless you think the motion of the Spirit
in me, who pray for you, be in vain, you ought to have your faith
strengthened.

Verse. 17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give
unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the knowledge of him. Now he
comes to set down the sum of his prayers which he put up for them, wherein
are contained the other Arguments for the confirmation of their faith.

Give unto you] Arg. 4. In praying that God would give them the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation, he intimates that they have more and greater causes (
viz. in the Scripture, which is the fountain of Wisdom, and the sum of
saving Revelation) for the confirmation of their faith, than they did yet
understand. You have such and so many Arguments in Scripture for your
confirmation in faith, that I cannot wish any thing more to the strengthening
of faith, than a larger measure of the working of the Spirit of God, that
having more wisdom given you, and the mysteries of the word being more clearly
disclosed to you, you may know what is the mind of God and Christ toward you:
Therefore even from this my evidence and prayer for you, you ought to be
confirmed in the faith.

The God of our Lord] Arg. 5. Drawn from the description of God, of whom this
gift is craved. God who bestows the Spirit of faith, or of wisdom on the
Saints, is the glorious God and Father of our Lord, and of all us the servants
of Christ, who both out of Covenant, as he is our God, and out of fatherly
affection, as he is our Father, will give the Spirit of faith to you, upon our
request for it: Therefore even from those relations which pass between God,
Christ, and you, you should be strengthened in faith.

Verse. 18. The eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know
what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints. Argum. 6. It is not possible that I should express
with tongue, what and how great those good things, which God by calling you to
Christ has commanded you to hope for, or how glorious the riches of that
inheritance are, which is prepared for you in the sanctuary of heaven, I only
beg, that your eyes may be enlightened, that ye may apprehend them: Therefore,
etc.

Verse. 19. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward; who
believe, according to the working of his mighty power. Argum. 7. That power of
God is unspeakable, which he has put forth into act in the converting you to,
and in thus long upholding you in the faith, and which he has in a manner
bound himself that he will put forth, that so by the infinite power and
efficacy of his strength, believers may be carried on to salvation, I only
pray for the illumination of your eyes, that ye may know it: Therefore, etc.

This Argument he confirms by a threefold comparison: (1.) Of the power of God
with the adversaries power, and with the Ephesians weakness, in which respect
he calls the greatness of that power super-excellent, which was actually
apparent in them, that they might know there was no power in Satan, the world,
sin, death, or any other hindrance without them, which the greatness of the
power of God does not, and will not for ever overcome. (2.) Of the powerful
work of God in their conversion, with the original of that work, that is, Gods
Omnipotency, in which respect he makes mention of the efficacy, or working of
his mighty power, that they might know the work of God in converting them, and
induing them with faith and holiness, was such a manifestation of that working,
which proceeds from the actual and exerted power of the Omnipotent God, as was
suitable to Omnipotency, and becoming an Omnipotent God, in a word, it was a
work very well befitting God. (3.) Of the power of God, now actually declared
in their conversion, with that power which God had shown in raising Christ from
the dead. (1.) That they might know that as a great power was required to a
man's conversion, regeneration, and endowment with faith, and other saving
graces, as to revive one dead and buried. (2.) That they might know the very
same power was exercised in our conversion, as in Christ's Resurrection. (3.)
That they might understand, it was no less easy for God to bring to pass all
other things which pertained to the perfecting of our salvation, than it was
for him to perform the forementioned particulars.

Verse. 20. Which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and
set him at his own right hand in heavenly places, Argum. 8. Taken from the
raising up of Christ our Head. Christ our Head who was killed in our stead, God
raised from the dead, in our stead, and for our good, unto eternal life:
Therefore you who are his members, even in the midst of afflictions, and in
death it self, should be steadfast in Faith touching your deliverance.

And set him] Argum. 9. From Christ's ascension and sitting at the right hand of
the Father. Christ our Redeemer is ascended into Heaven, and reigns with the
Father, being partner in that great authority, that he might take us into
fellowship in that happiness, and make us partners of that condition in which
he is: Therefore you ought to be confirmed in the Faith and hope of your
future glorification in Heaven, unless you imagine Christ's dominion is to no
purpose.

Verse. 21. Far above all Principality and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come. Argum. 10. Christ even in his flesh is exalted far above all, both Angels
and Men, so that nothing should be so high, so powerful, so excellent, either
in the earth, this present world, or in Heaven, the world to come, as that
Christ should not be infinitely higher even as he is man; and therefore there
is not any thing wanting in him to the perfecting, nor can any thing oppose him
to hinder him from perfecting our salvation: Therefore you should be
strengthened in the Faith of the Gospel.

Verse. 22. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head
over all things to the Church. Argum. 11. All our enemies, the Devil, the
wicked in the world, Persecutors, Heretics and Impostors, the power of sin in
us, prisons, banishments, all kinds of death are put under Christ's feet, that
he may order them and dispose of them to our good, and put them under our
feet: Therefore, etc.

The Head] Argum. 12. Christ is appointed Head over all things in the Church,
that is, the Father has committed the full power and administration of all
things unto him, that he only should be the most near Head of the Catholic
Church, for the illumination of the Church and all its members, for the
vivification, exciting to all spiritual duties, and preservation of spiritual
life in them, by the immediate presence and operation of his Spirit in the
whole Church, and its several members: Therefore unless you will doubt of your
Heads Wisdom, Power, and Faithfulness in his office, you should be
strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 23. Which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all.
Argum. 13. The Church is the mystical body of Christ, and all believers are his
members: Therefore you should not doubt but he will look to, and have a care
of your salvation, unless you will deny that Believers are his members.

The fulness] Argum. 14. The Church is the fullness of Christ, so far as he is
its mystical Head, so that he does not judge himself to be perfected, and
completed, till all and every of the Elect be gathered into one, united to
him, have attained that full increase suitable to, and appointed for every
member, and till at last they enjoy with him a plenary happiness: Therefore you
should be as sure of the perfecting of your salvation, as you are that Christ
will not suffer himself to be incomplete, imperfect and maimed.

Filleth] Argum. 15. Christ fills all in all, that is, according to every
Creatures capacity, as he is the God of Nature, he works all things, as he
is the Head of the Church he perfects all things which belong to the Spiritual
Life, Sanctification and Salvation of Believers, filling all his members by
degrees: Therefore it is not to be questioned, but he will accomplish the
begun work of Faith, Sanctification and Salvation in you. This, that he
fills all in all, is adjoined by way of correction or exposition to the
former phrase of the fullness of Christ, by the Church, lest we should conceive
that Christ's or our perfection depends upon any besides himself, who of his own
free love has brought this necessity upon himself, of communicating himself to
us unworthy wretches, who stirred up this desire of us in himself; who himself
has the power to satisfy this his own desire, and who by degrees fulfills his
desire of sanctifying us, and induing us with Faith, and will proceed to fulfill
it, till he has performed all things necessary to the perfecting of
salvation, and that in all the faithful, the greatest and least: To him be the
glory of his Grace, his power, and his constancy for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. II.
THe Apostle proceeds to prosecute the same Argument, proving sometimes in the
Supposition, that the believing Ephesians, sometimes possitively, that all
Believers are saved by Grace. The Proposition to be made good is this: you, O
Ephesians, are saved by Grace, or Believers are saved by Grace. His Arguments
are fifteen, upon the last whereof he insists to the latter end of the Chapter.

Verse. 1. And you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins,
Argu. 1. If you, O Ephesians, are considered in the common State of Nature, you
will be found to have been in that condition, that you could not have
recovered thence but by Grace. There are seven parts of this Argument, every
one whereof heightens our first misery, and proves Grace to be the only cause
of salvation.

Dead] (1) In the State of Nature you were not only defiled with, but dead in
sin; and not only judicially dead, because guilty of, or liable to death, but
also really in effect spiritually dead, so that the dead could as easily raise
themselves to life, or perform actions of being, as you could free your selves
from this death, or do any good deed: Therefore you are saved by Grace.

Verse. 2. Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this
world, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that now
works in the children of disobedience. (2) In reference to this natural life,
you did wholly pass that in sin, being wholly busied and walking in them, or
else waxing worse and worse: Therefore, etc.

Of this world] (3) You walked in the ways of worldly and carnal men, who
favor this natural life only, and followed their manners and customs, as the
rule of life: Therefore, etc.

The Prince] (4) You followed the Captain of this way, the Devil, the Prince of
unclean spirits, who with his Executioners, or other evil Angels, flying in the
Air, rules and governs effectually.

Which worketh] (5) The Devil did reign and execute his will in you as now he
does in the disobedient: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the
lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of our flesh, and of the mind, and
were by nature the children of wrath, ever as others. (6) You did fulfill the
lusts of your flesh, and wallowing in them did commit whatever your vain mind
dictated, whatever your corrupt appetite and affections of the flesh
prescribed: To these the Apostle adds himself before his conversion, that they
might see this Argument propounded in an Hypothesis, would serve to confirm the
general Thesis.

Children] (7.) By nature ye were children of wrath, that is, guilty of death,
and liable to divine wrath, which God might justly pour upon us, even to our
utter destruction. Hereunto he joins all other men, as they are considered in
the state of nature: Therefore we are beholding to Grace for our salvation.

Verse. 4. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved
us, Argum. 2. God out of his rich mercy and love has delivered us who believe,
from this most miserable condition: Therefore our salvation is of Grace. The
several parts of this Argument manifest the same.

God] (1.) He shows God to be the sole Author of our deliverance, who alone
is meet for so great a work.

Rich] (2.) That Grace might appear, the cause of our salvation is mentioned to
be the abundant or rich mercy of God, whereby as it were touched with a sense
of our misery, he is moved to deliver us.

For his] (3.) The love of God, wherewith he loved us from eternity, is annexed
as the cause both of mercy and salvation.

Us] (4.) It was of mercy that God was pleased to take us rather than others,
and choose us for his sons: Therefore, etc.

Ver. 5. Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ
(by grace ye are saved.) Argum. 3. In the instant of our Redemption by Christ,
and Regeneration by the Spirit of Christ, we as dead in sins were quickened
together with Christ, that is, in Christ, and by Christ: Therefore we are
saved by grace; For it is of grace that in the Covenant made between God and
the Mediator, we who were dead in sins, were given to the Son the appointed
Redeemer, that by him we might be restored to life. It is of grace that in the
payment of the agreed-upon price of our Redemption, life in Christ (who was
raised from the dead) should be adjudged to be given to us. It is of Grace
that in the application of Redemption, and in the moment of Regeneration, life
should be communicated to us in, and from Christ, that together with other
Saints we should be grafted into Christ, enjoy the common spiritual life with
them, and thrive and wax stronger in him; For which reasons our life ever
depends on the life of Christ, and coupled with it in an indissoluble knot.

Verse. 6. And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus. Argum. 4. God in Christ, who was raised up, has raised
us up also, and in Christ who is placed in the heavens, has placed us together
with him: Therefore he has saved us of his grace. For as whatever Christ
either did or suffered in our name and place is reckoned ours in Gods account,
so what ever Christ received in our name and place is reckoned ours also:
Therefore in the Resurrection of Christ, by the Covenant of Redemption, the
Redeemed did also rise with him judicially, or in a judicial way. In Christ's
ascension into heaven, the Redeemed judicially ascend with him; In Christ's
sitting, or glorious possession of eternal life, the Redeemed in a judicial way
do sit, and are placed with him. This right is obtained for believers, by
Christ before faith be actually given: but in conversion this right before
obtained by faith by a special act is applied to us, that as Christ ascending
might say from the Covenant made between God and the Mediator, or from the
Covenant of Redemption, I ascend in the name of the Redeemed, for whom I have
gotten this right that they may be reckoned to ascend in me; so those that
fly to, and believe in Christ may say, now I have gotten right, from the
Covenant of salvation made by the Mediator between Christ and the Church, that
I may reckon the Resurrection of Christ rightfully mine, I may reckon the
ascension of Christ rightfully mine, and so in the rest. What abundance of
grace is here?

Verse. 7. That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his
Grace, in his kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus. Argum. 5. The end for
which we lost sinners both Jews and Gentiles, even after we have so wickedly
led our lives, should have salvation bestowed upon us in Christ, is, that those
which shall live in after-ages may see, and acknowledge the superabounding
grace of God; and that by our example they may learn to come unto God who is
the fountain of salvation in Christ, that they also might in like manner,
though most unworthy, obtain Grace: Therefore you are saved only by Grace.

Verse. 8. For by Grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God. He repeats the proposition to be proved in the
very terms, and adds Arg. 6. Ye are saved by faith, and therefore by Grace:
for faith disclaimes our merits, and relies only upon the free and gracious
promise of God, and that God has appointed faith to be an instrument of our
salvation (the nature whereof requires that forsaking our own works and
strength, our own wisdom and honor, we should go out of our selves, and seek
salvation in God) is also of Grace.

It is the gift] Arg. 7. Neither our salvation, nor our faith is from our
selves, or our own natural strength, but like as salvation so is faith the free
gift of God: Therefore we are saved by Grace. For when the Spirit of God
begins to work conversion in us, it finds us dead in sins, and unless we are
quickened by him, we cannot contribute any thing to our own regeneration or
salvation; nay we are not able so much as to act faith on the promises of God,
unless faith, and the act of this faith be granted us from above.

Verse. 9. Not of works lest any man should boast: Argum. 8. We are not saved
by works; Therefore by Grace: for these do mutually, take away one another.

Lest any one] Argum. 9. If we were saved by works, and not by mere grace, we
might have occasion and cause to boast, but this is absurd: Therefore, etc. as
in Romans 3.

Verse. 10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them. Argum. 10.
So far as we are regenerated, so far as endued with spiritual life, we are
grafted into Christ, we are the work of God, and a new creature, being anew
created by the power of God alone, before we are able to do any good work:
Therefore we are not saved by the merit of works, but by mere Grace.

Created] Argum. 11. In Christ we are created to do good works: and by the
same grace by which we are grafted into Christ, we are ordained unto the
performance of good works: Therefore we are not saved by any virtue of our
good works.

Has before ordained] Argum. 12. Those works which we are to do after
regeneration, are prepared by God, that we should do and perform them, to
which end our understanding is prepared our will is prepared and formed, and
power is prepared, to be given us of God, who works in us both to will and to
do: Therefore we are not saved by works, but by Grace alone.

Should walk] Argum. 13. The end of these prepared good works is, that being
quickened, and planted into Christ, and new born, and justified, and having
gotten a full right to obtain Righteousness and Salvation in Christ, we should
walk in them, as in the Royal way and rode to the possession of salvation,
already bought by Christ, and granted to us in Christ: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 11. Wherefore remember, that ye being in time passed Gentiles in the
flesh, who are called uncircumcision by that which is called circumcision in
the flesh made by the hands, Argum. 14. Which contains an amplification of
Grace toward the Ephesians, in respect of their former condition in
Gentilisme. If you Ephesians be considered in your special estate, as ye were
Gentiles, your condition will appear so miserable and deplorable, that you
could not be otherwise delivered from it, than by Grace: Therefore the very
changing of your condition will evidently show that your salvation is of Grace.
He sets forth this miserable state in these eight things. (1) They were in the
flesh, living after the flesh, so that they could not please God. (2) They were
uncircumcised, that is, had in reproach by the Jews, who boasted in an external
circumcision made with hands.

Verse. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world. (3) They were without Christ, or destitute
of all actual communion with Christ in the Spirit. (4) Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, that is, without the Church of God. (5) Strangers from
the Covenants of Promise, that is, from all right to apply unto themselves the
Covenants and Promises of God. (6) They were without any certain hope of future
good. (7) They were without the true God, that is, without his knowledge and
worship. (8) They were worldly, or a part of the world, which wallows in sin,
and which is the Kingdom of Satan: Therefore that ye are delivered from this
so miserable a condition, cannot be any thing else but of Grace.

Verse 13. But now in Jesus Christ, ye who sometime were far off, are made nigh
by the blood of Christ. Argum. 15. If the happiness of this present state were
compared with the former state, it would be found to be so great, that it
could proceed from nothing but Grace. There are eight parts of this Argument,
every one whereof has the same tendency. (1) The Ephesians who were far off
from the Covenant and from the Church and its privileges, are now made nigh,
their way unto the Covenant, and to the Church, being laid open, which benefit
has for its meritorious cause the blood of Christ, for its instrumental,
Faith, whereby they are implanted into Christ, and consequently it is of Grace.

Verse. 14. For he is our Peace, who has made both one, and ha^h broken down
the middle wall of partition between us: (2) Christ has reconciled the
Gentiles and Jews to one another; he is a peaceable Mediator, and the very
cause of Peace; he has joined both his people into one body; he took away
the Ceremonial Law, which as a body or partition wall, did divide betwixt Jews
and Gentiles, and was a cause of enmity, by his suffering in the flesh, he
has procured this Peace: And are not all these of Grace?

Verse. 15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of
Commandments, contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself, of twain, one
new man, so making Peace. (3) This is propounded more specially, and in express
words; Christ has abrogated the Law of Commandments, consisting in
Ordinances, that is the positive Ceremonial Law, which was fulfilled by his
coming; thus that Law being taken away, which stirred up enmity between the
two people, he joined them both, being reconciled, to one another, as one new
man in himself the common head, making one mystical Christ, or joining the Jews
and Gentiles as the members of one mystical body, into one body, he himself
being the Head thereof. And here, we may perceive Grace in the highest degree.

Verse. 16. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross,
having slain the enmity thereby: (4) Here he brings another end of the
abolished Law, that he might reconcile in this his own body, not only both
people to one another, but unto God, paying the price of their Redemption from
their sins by the death of the Cross, and removing the enmities between God and
his redeemed people by his own death: Here Grace also is very conspicuous.

Verse. 17. And ^ame, and preached Peace to you which were afar off, and to them
that were nigh. (5) Here he declares how this Peace was made known to the
world, viz. in the preaching of the Gospel by Jesus Christ, who as he was the
Author of Peace, so he was the first publisher of this Peace in the Gospel, to
the consolation and salvation of the Jews (who were called such as were nigh,
because of the Covenant) and to the salvation of the Gentiles (who were called
Aliens, because they were strangers to the Covenant.) Here also Grace shows it
self.

Verse. 18. For through him we both have an access by one Spirit unto the
Father. (6) Here he gives the reason why this Peace was preached to both,
because the price being paid by one Christ, there is one way and access opened
to both Jews and Gentiles, that Gentiles as well as Jews might call upon one
Father through one Spirit; and therefore Peace was preached to Jews and
Gentiles. Here is nothing but Grace.

Verse. 19. Now therefore we are no more strangers and foreigners, but
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God: (7) In this he
gathers by way of a Corolary, that the Ephesians are now no more guests or
strangers, but Citizens of the City of the Saints, and of the family of God,
which also is the privilege of all us that believe.

Verse. 20. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, (8) In which explaining more
at large the union of the Ephesians with Christ and the holy Church, he shows
that they are living stones of the Temple of God, as straightly united with
other Believers, and with Christ, as stones are to the foundation of a
building. And here is a graphical description of the Church in its likeness to
a Temple; the parts whereof are three. (1) The Church is like to the Temple of
God, whose foundation is Christ, not only upholding the whole building, but
also joining together the several walls, the Jews and Gentiles, and uniting
them in himself. (2) The Apostles and other faithful Ministers after them, are
the builders, who teach that Christ (who alone is able to bear the whole
business of Redemption and Salvation) is the only foundation of this Temple,
and by thus teaching, do edify and build the Saints upon Christ, according to
the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. (3) The stones of this Temple are
the Elect, or all true Believers, who ^re built upon Christ by the preaching of
the Truth, amongst whom were these believing Ephesians.

Verse. 21. In whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy
Temple in the Lord: He proceeds in his allegorical description of the true
Catholic Church, and explains four conditions and properties of the Church, or
Temple of God. (1) This Temple is said to be artificiously made, or fitly
compiled, because the whole building of the Church and all its members are then
fitly compacted with the greatest wisdom, when Christ and his will is so
preached, that every Believer, has his proper place and function, according to
the quality of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, so that some in public office,
some in their private calling, and all in their several places concur to the
edification of the whole Temple. (2) This Temple is living, because Christ who
is the foundation is living and quickening: and his true members, all Believers
are living stones, being quickened and preserved in spiritual life by Christ
the living foundation. (3) This Temple is vegetable or growing* and thriving
like a Tree, because the whole building increases by the addition of stones,
or converted Believers, and by the nourishment of the Word of God, which all
the living stones (as boughs from a tree) draw from Christ by the Holy Ghost,
and holding Christ the Head, and being fastened to Christ the root, do
continually grow in holiness. (4) This Temple is rational and spiritual,
because it is a holy Temple, that is, not a society of earthly, profane, and
unclean men, but a spiritual society of holy men, as it were a heavenly
habitation, in which God truly dwells, is truly known, loved, called upon, and
worshipped.

Verse. 22. In whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God
through the Spirit. He applies these to the Ephesians, contracting all the
parts of the Argument into one, that the happiness of their condition in Christ
might at once appear, that they might know they were Gods dewlling place, or a
part of this Temple, and communicated with the Catholic Church; and that
themselves were partakers of the properties of the Church by the Holy Ghost
dwelling in them: from all which we may conclude, that the Ephesians had so
much and so great happiness, that nothing else but Grace could bestow upon them.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, that having overcome the
scandal of the Cross of Christ, for the defense of the Gospel, they should
constantly persevere in maintaining the Grace of God, that is, that they should
steadfastly believe, openly confess, and in all streights exactly defend, that
we, elected in Christ through Grace, redeemed through Grace, called through
Grace, justified through Grace, endued with Faith through Grace, regenerated
through Grace, have all things perfected in us through Grace, that we are
saved by Grace alone, and shall hereafter be glorified in Christ through
Faith, and not by Works; and that Faith is not of our selves, but is the gift
of God, that in the whole business of our salvation Gods Grace alone might have
glory. The sum of all is, that they should live without offense, and make
proficiency in the Faith of the Gospel.

There are two parts of this Chapter: In the first, lest the Ephesians should
be offended at the scandal of the Cross, and of the Apostles captivity, he
shows them the glory of his Ministry, and of his bonds, to verse. 14. In the
second part we have the Apostles prayer for the Ephesians perseverance and
progress in the Faith, unto the end.

The chief matter of the first is comprehended in this Enthymeme. My Ministry
and my bonds are a great glory to me* I entreat you therefore be not offended
at my afflictions: The Antecedent reaches to verse. 13. the consequent we have
in verse. 13.

Verse. 1. For this cause, I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you
Gentiles, He alleges twelve Arguments for the commendation of his Ministry.

For this cause] Argum. 1. Because I am bound to preach the Truth before
described, that the Gentiles as well as Jews may obtain salvation by Faith in
Christ, and therefore I am the captive of Christ, or for maintaining the glory
of Christ, and of you Gentiles, or for maintaining your right unto salvation
with the Jews* Therefore you at least should esteem my Ministry.

Verse. 2. If you have heard of the dispensation of the Grace of God, which is
given me to you-wards: Argum. 2. I am peculiarly appointed by Christ to be an
Apostle of the Gentiles, if ye have rightly understood the dispensation of
Grace, or the Evangelical Doctrine, which was committed to me, that I should
preach it unto you: Therefore my Ministry should be had in estimation by you.

Verse. 3. How that by revelation he made known unto me the Mystery (as I
wrote before in few words; Argum. 3. The knowledge of the Gospel with which I am
endued, was most certain, for I received it by extraordinary revelation
immediately from God, and not from men: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 4. Whereby, when you read, ye may understand my knowledge in the
Mystery of Christ.) Argum. 4. The measure of my understanding and knowledge, by
which I know the revealed Mystery of Grace, is not ordinary, as will manifestly
appear to those who attentively read what I have writ in the first and second
Chapters of this Epistle: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 5. Which in other ages was not made known to the Sons of men, as it is
now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit. Argum. 5. The
Mystery of this Gospel has not been made known to many, nor so plainly to any
age before us, as it is now revealed by the Holy Ghost to us Apostles and
Prophets; to whom God has extraordinarily granted the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and of his will touching man's salvation: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 6. That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and
partakers of his Promise in Christ, by the Gospel. Argum. 6. That part of the
Mystery, which is touching the accomplishment of all the Promises of Grace in
Christ, and touching the calling of the uncircumcised Gentiles into the
fellowship of the heavenly Inheritance, that they should be admitted by God
equally with the Israelites themselvess into the union of the Israelitish
Church, and the participation of Christ by the Faith of the Gospel, without
circumcision and other ceremonies; I say, this part was not before manifested:
Therefore, etc. Nay, Peter himself who was an Apostle also did not admit this,
till he was taught it by a special revelation, Act. 10.

Verse. 7. Whereof I was made a Minister, according to the gift of the Grace of
God given unto me, by the effectual working of his power. Argum. 7. The
authority committed to me to dispense this Grace of God, is joined both with
gifts necessary to an Apostolical function, and with the effectual blessing of
God, wheresoever and whenever I have opportunity of preaching: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 8. Unto me, who am less than the least of all Saints is this Grace
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ. Agum. 8. The Grace (...) me in calling me to the Apostleship is so
much the more excellent, by how much the more deadly an enemy I was to the
Church, and in this respect I am inferior to all Saints, and by how much the
greater the number of the Gentiles is, and lastly by how much the more glorious
the matter which I preach. viz. the unsearchable riches of the Grace of Christ:
Therefore, etc:

Verse. 9. And to make all men see, what is the fellowship of the Mystery, which
from the beginning o^ the world, has been hid in God, who created all things
by Jesus Christ. Argum. 9. The ends of my Ministry are glorious, (1.) That the
secret things which lie hid in the counsel of God, should be brought to light.
(2.) That the blind may be illuminated to see and understand things revealed.
(3.) That all men may know they are to be made partakers of salvation only by
the faith of Jesus Christ, without Circumcision, and the works of the Law. (4.)
That all men may evidently see the excellency of Christ, not only as Redeemer,
but also as the Creator, by whom as the Church is redeemed, so the world, and
all things therein are created: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 10. To the intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers in
heavenly places, might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God,
Argum. 10. The use of my Ministry is glorious, because by it the manifold
wisdom of God, in declaring his counsel touching the gathering of a Church out
of the circumcised, and uncrcumcised, is more clearly laid open then ever
before, even to the holy Angels in heaven, much more to men on earth:
Therefore, etc. For the Angels know nothing of the mystery of man's salvation
but by the revelation of it to the Church.

Verse. 11. According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus
our Lord: Argum. 11. And all this is not come to pass by chance, but according
to the eternal purpose of God, which as at first he determined and established
in Christ, so at length he has completed and perfected it in him. Therefore,
etc.

Verse. 12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of
him. Argum. 12. The fruit of this Ministry is glorious, because by the
preaching of the Gospel to Jews and Gentiles believing on Christ, there is
equally afforded liberty in Christ, of going to God in confidence, and of
freely pleading with him, for all our necessities, as with a most loving
Father: Therefore my Ministry ought to be accepted with you.

Verse. 13. Wherefore I desire that you faint not at my tribulations for you,
which is your glory. From all these foregoing things, as from one antecedent,
the Apostle infers this consequent conclusion, That they should not be
offended in his bonds or captivity, that is, they should not faint, nor become
weary, or slothful in the cause of faith for his afflictions, but rather
constantly persevere, and make proficiency therein. To which Exhortation, he
adjoyns two Reasons, (1.) Because he suffered these afflictions for them, that
is, for vouching their privileges in Christ, and for the confirmation of their
faith. (2.) Because his afflictions were a glory to the Ephesians; for from
hence (...) did appear how much God esteemed them, in that he had sent
Apostles to them, who should not only teach them the way of salvation, but
also undergo afflictions for to witness the truth they preached, and for the
confirmation of their faith.

The Second Part.
Verse. 14. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The second part of this Chapter contains the Apostles prayer for the
Ephesians perse^^rance and progress in the faith of the Gospel: Which prayer
does, and that not obscurely, include an exhortation to perseverance and
constancy in faith, there being twelve Arguments couched in it tending to that
purpose, every one whereof proving that they ought steadfastly to continue in
the faith.

For this cause] Argum. 1. To this end I pray every day upon my bended knees,
that ye may continue in the faith without offense: Therefore you should
cheerfully proceed therein.

Unto the Father] Argum. 2. The God which gives us this grace is propitious and
easy to be entreated, he is the Father of our Lord, and the Father of all us
that are the servants of Jesus Christ, and he will not refuse to bestow
perseverance on us if we pray for it: Therefore you should proceed upon the
account of this hope.

Verse. 15. Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named. Argum. 3. Our
God, the giver of perseverance, is the Master of the household of the Catholic
Church adopted in Christ, who equally favors believing Gentiles and Jews, and
embraces you his household servants who are militant in earth, with the same
Fatherly affection, as he does the triumphant in heaven, and will have you as
well as they named his Sons, not being ashamed to receive your weakness and
unworthiness into his embraces: Therefore you should courageously proceed in
the faith.

Verse. 16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory to be
strengthened with might, by his Spirit in the inner man. According to the
riches] Argum. 4. The mercy of God is rich and glorious, and rejoices to
advance its glorious greatness, in plentifully bestowing the grace of
continuance in faith to those that ask it: Therefore you should boldly seek
grace, and hold on in faith.

Strengthened] Argum. 5. Though you are weak and unable to resist the
difficulties in the way, yet there is sufficient strength to be communicated
to you from your Father, who is most willing of, and inclinable to your
confirmation, we do not then in vain pray to God for this grace: Therefore,
etc.

In the inner] The Apostle intimates by the way^, that there is not so much as
in the inner man and inmost faculties of the new-begotten soul, any strength of
freewill, any merit of good work, or any efficacy and power, which will be
sufficient for our perseverance, but that they have need of the Holy Ghost, who
must give them both to will and to do, who must furnish them with strength and
power to persevere, and of his rich grace, passing by their sins, must
constantly maintain, and put forward his own work in them.

Verse. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted
and grounded in love, Argum. 6. Though you are weak, and the Devil who fights
against you be powerful, yet Christ is more powerful dwelling in you by faith,
fashioning you to his own Image, confirming you, and ruling you to the
obedience of his own will; and our desires and prayers to God shall not be
wanting, that he may constantly, and more fully dwell in you. Therefore.

Verse. 18. May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height. Argum. 7. The love of God toward you is
immutable, being firmly laid as a living root, and sure foundation of the
perfecting of your faith, whence therefore you may derive both stability to
increase, being persuaded of this love, ye may be able to persevere most
steadfastly in the faith, and I will pray that this persuasion may be given
you: Therefore press forward.

The breadth] Argum. 8. The grace of God offered in the Gospel to be
comprehended by you, in its immense length reaches from eternity to eternity;
in its breadth it extends it self to all ages and orders of men; in its depth
it descends to the abyss of sin and misery, that it may hale men out: And
lastly, in its height it rayseth it self to the highest happiness in heaven;
yea this offered grace does already comprehend you, whereof I wish you a fuller
knowledge, that ye may be more steadfast in faith, till at length in a perfect
happiness with all other believers ye may by experience fully know and
comprehend this love of God: Therefore hold on, and proceed daily in the
obedience of faith.

Verse. 19. And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, that ye
might be filled with all the fullness of God. Argum. 9. So great is Gods love
toward you in Christ, and so great is Christ's love toward all his, and
toward you, that it can never be known enough, for it surmounts the
understanding of both men and Angels, and of this I wish you a more full
knowledge, that ye may persevere steadfast in the Faith.

That ye might be filled] Argum. 10. All the fullness of God which suffices
to fill you, and fully to perfect salvation, is opened and communicated to you
in the Gospel, that ye might be more and more united to God in Christ by
Faith, might more and more partake of holiness, or the divine Nature, and might
become more and more blessed, by a more abundant in-dwelling of Christ, till at
length ye be filled with it in the world to come, in which God will be all
in all to your complete holiness and happiness: which I continually beg of God
for: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 20. Now unto him that is able to do exceedingly above all that we ask
or think, according to the power that works in us: He concludes his prayer
with a thanksgiving, adding Argum. 11. God is both able to give more than we
ask, yea and abundantly more than we can ask or desire, and also so good and
free that he wills what he can do; yea he has already exercised both his
power and his good will in converting us, and also in preserving us: Therefore
you should be encouraged to a steadfast continuance in Faith.

Verse. 21. Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all
ages, world without end. Amen. Argum. 12. The everlasting praise of the
effectual good will and power of God, to the perfecting of Believers salvation
by Christ, shall be for ever celebrated in the Church: And you are bound to
subscribe and say AMEN with me unto this Truth: Therefore you should continue
and make progress in Faith, glorifying God, unto the end. Some of these
Arguments prove that the Saints perseverance is sure and certainly established.

CHAP. IV.
NOw follows the second part of this Epistle, wherein he gives several
Precepts touching holiness of life and manners. There are two parts of this
Chapter, in the first he jointly exhorts all to the study of Christian Peace
and unity in the Church, to verse. 17. In the other he gives Precepts to every
one severally, touching the ordering and leading of their lives holily, to the
end.

Verse. 1. I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called,

2. With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
another in love;

3. Endeavoring to keep the union of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

As for the first, having begun with a grave entreaty, and a general
exhortation to a holy conversation (which indifferently concerns all things
that follow) viz. that they should be holy as God, who called them was holy,
verse. 1. He descends to a particular exhortation unto the study of peace and
unity, laying down seven special virtues which are necessarily required to
preserve the unity of the Church, that so concord might abound in all its
members. The (1) is Humility, to which pride is opposite. (2) Gentleness, to
which cruelty is opp^site. (3) Quietness of mind, or easiness to be pleased,
to which is opposed rashness or a readiness to be angry. (4) Forbearance, to
which revenge is opposed. (5) Charity (whence he would have the rise of all
other virtues especially forbearance) to which is opposed hatred of ones
neighbor, and self-love, and without these virtues it is not possible to
maintain the unity of the Church, verse. 2. The (6) Virtue is the unity of the
Spirit in the Faith, and in its opinions touching things belonging to Religion.
(7) Peace or external concord; and if these precede, both the spiritual and
external unity of the Church will be easily preserved, it being one and the
same labor to keep it and these virtues.

Verse. 4. There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope
of your calling; The Arguments for this exhortation are fifteen. Argum. 1. The
Church is one body made up of diverse members* Therefore you should study the
Churches unity and concord.

One Spirit] Argum. 2. The Holy Spirit is one, by whom the whole body is
quickened and governed: Therefore, etc.

One Hope] Argum. 3. All are called to one hope of their calling, that is, to
the same eternal happiness* Therefore, etc.

Verse. 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Argum. 4. There is one Lord of us
all, even Christ, whom we are all bound to obey, and who should not be
divided in his members: Therefore, etc.

One Faith] Argum. 5. There is one Faith, or one Doctrine which is to be
believed, and such also is that saving gift of Grace, viz. justifying Faith by
which we believe: Therefore the unity of Believers should be preserved.

Baptisme] Argum. 6. There is one Baptism, both in respect of the sign and the
thing signified, confirming us all in the fellowship of one mystical body.

Verse. 6 One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all. Argum. 7. We have all one God, who requires that those that worship
him should be unanimous, and we have all one Father, whose will is that his
Sons should be linked together in a brotherly love, who in excellency
infinitely surmounts all, who in his providence sustains and governs all, and
who in a special manner by Grace dwells in all the Elect: Therefore you ought
diligently to practice concord among your selves.

Verse. 7. But unto every one of us is given Grace according to the measure of
the gift of Christ. Argum. 8. How different soever our gifts are, yet the unity
of the Church should not therefore be ^ broken, but rather maintained, because
Grace is given to every one according to the measure of the gift which Christ
thought fit to be given: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 8. Wherefore he said, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, giving gifts unto men. He confirms this Argument touching gifts and
the different measure of them, from the testimony of Psalm. 68. where there is a
Prophecy, first, of Christ's Ascension, then of his Triumphing over his enemies,
the Devil, Death and Sin; and lastly, of his bestowing gifts for the use of the
Church.

Verse. 9. (Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he also descended first
into the lower parts of the earth? From this Prophecy of Christ's Ascension,
the Apostle proves that we must first necessarily presuppose Christ's preceding
humiliation, that is his incarnation, and his abasement of himself unto the
common infirmities of the flesh, unto the suffering of both soul and body, and
unto burial: Whence is hinted. Argum. 9. For the preservation of the Churches
unity.

Christ descended into the lower parts of the earth (by this very phrase David
describes his conception in the womb, Psalm. 139.18.) and also ascended again,
for the gathering of the Church into one, and uniting it to God* Therefore, etc.

Verse. 10. He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens, that he might fill all things.) From the same prophecy he gathers
that Christ God who descended to be incarnate, or that he might take flesh,
was not made another, or any other person when he ascended as God incarnate,
or having taken flesh upon him; that the humane nature assumed, did not add any
thing to the constituting or perfecting the person of the Son of God, but only
was taken into the unity of the person: and therefore Christ's descending and
ascending was the same, even as he that puts on a garment is the same as he
was when naked. Furthermore coming to show the end of his Ascension he adds,

Argum. 10. Christ ascended into Heaven, that he might accomplish all things
which were to be accomplished, viz. that he might gather and preserve the
Church, and communicate unto it, what was necessary for it: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 11. And he gave some, Apostles: and some, Prophets: and some,
Evangelists; and some, Pastors and Teachers; He in part shows how Christ has
accomplished all things, as much as is sufficient to his purpose, by
ennumerating the several orders of Ecclesiastical Ministry, some temporary and
extraordinary, as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists ordained for the laying the
foundations of all Churches; some ordinary and perpetual, as Pastors and
Teachers, instituted for the continuing of the Church.

Verse. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ: Argum. 11. From the end and use for which
Christ did bestow these offices and gifts. (1) That the Saints might be
restored even as members loosened and out of joint set and brought to their
proper place. (2) That the Ministers avoiding idleness, and tyrannizing
government, should follow the work of their Ministry, that so every of the
Elect, as straying sheep might be brought home to Christ their Shepherd and
abide in him. (3) That the whole body of the Church might be edified and built
up; and every one make proficiency in Faith and Holiness, and to this purpose
Christ appointed Offices in the Church, that by the help and Ministry of men,
all the Saints might so grow up together, as to constitute one mystical body of
Christ: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. Argum. 12. From the term of the duration of the Ministry.
This Ministry must continue until all we Elect come unto the unity of the
Faith and the Knowledge of Christ, that is, not only until we be united to
Christ by Faith and Knowledge which is of Faith, but also until all we that
are redeemed, or that are elected, as many as do live or shall live, I say,
until we all come one after another, to a present Knowledge in an immediate
vision, or to a perfect regeneration, and incorporation in Christ, when all the
Elect being now united and perfected, shall constitute one Mystical Christ, who
shall be every way complete and perfect, and attain his full stature, which
shall be in the resurrection: Therefore for this end and purpose that this
business may be advanced, we should strive for unity and concord.

Verse. 14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive: Argum. 13. From another end of
the institution of the Ministry. Christ appointed the Ministry, that we
should not be always children, ignorant of those things which we ought to
know, that we should not be wavering and inconstant, tossed with the wind of
contrary Doctrines, that we should not be separated from Christ and his
Church through unsetledness in Faith; that we should not be deceived by the
subtilty, deceit, and treacherous seducing of corrupt men: Therefore for the
furtherance of this end, we should as much as in us lies, endeavor the unity
of the Church.

Verse. 15. But speaking the Truth in love, may grow up into him in all things,
which is the Head, even Christ: Argum. 14. From the third end of the
institution of the Ministry. Christ ordained the Ministry in the Church, not
only that we might shun seducing, but also that we might follow the Truth of
the heavenly Doctrine with charity, and so by truth and charity we might
thrive in all virtues into one Christ mystical: Therefore for this end we
should study the unity of the Church, and charity, that Christ our Head might
appear excellent among us, and we, who cannot otherwise increase, should
become strong and mighty in him.

Verse. 16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by
that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self
in love. Argum. 15. Taken from the description of Christ mystical, or of Christ
and the Church, wherein by a similitude of the natural head and body, he
illustrates what he said touching increase in charity, and the knowledge of
the Truth, to the advancing the glory of Christ, and the good of the Church: In
this description he shows,

(1) That the whole body of the Church depends upon Christ as its head and
original, and from him all the nourishment of its body, that is, all saving
Truth, together with the living Spirit of Christ, is derived upon all its true
members, so that no man knows any thing unless he be taught by Christ.

(2) That for the diversity of the gifts of the Spirit, of the offices, and of
the condition of every member of the Catholic Church, the body should be
fitly framed, or composed in the most beautiful and most befitting order, and
should be tied to him, and joined in him by the most strict bond of the Spirit
of Faith and of Love, also by the several relations, partly betwixt Christ and
us (such as are of the Head and Members, the Bridegroom, the Advocate, the
Surety, etc.) Partly betwixt one another (such as are the relations of Brethren
and Sisters, of coheirs, of Pastors and the Flock, of Parents and Children,
etc.) by all which we are daily tied more strictly to Christ, and among our
selves.

(3) That there are several bands for the administration of nourishment,
through which, as through channels, or veins, the knowledge of saving truth,
faith, experience and power are conveyed by Christ, in the several functions
and offices in the Church; in which are the Apostleship, Pastorship, Eldership,
etc.

(4) That the mere Administration or Ministration is in the members: for the
dispensation of a blessing, of power and virtue, depends immediately on Christ
alone.

(5) That a distribution among the members is necessary, who in regard of their
finite measure and capacity have need of mutual communication, that they may
mutually edify one another.

(6) That increase is to be had by the effectual operation of the same Head
Christ in the Ministration, and by the mutual communication of the members
among themselves.

(7) That for the measure and capacity of every member, every one does
increase, and make progress in the life of God, in holiness, in true Religion,
as it pleases the Lord to distribute to every one.

(8.) That that increase only is profitable, and by the virtue of Christ
advantageous, which adds something to the whole body, and brings something to
the Church in general, but not that increase which seems to profit some members
with the hurt of others, or some Churches with prejudice to others.

(9.) Lastly, That this communication of knowledge, and of the Christian
Doctrine, and the edification of the body, is effected by the love of the
members to one another, and without love it cannot be done. Hence the
Argument: As it is in the natural and organical body, so in the Church, Christ
who is the head of the Church bestows not the same, but diverse gifts upon his
members, distributing to every one, as the place which it bears in the body
requires, that by this means the whole may grow, whilst the several members
every one in its place, uses its gifts to the common good, which cannot be done
unless there be concord: Therefore for this purpose every one should carefully
endeavor the concord and unity of the Church.

The Second Part.
Verse. 17. This I say therefore and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth
walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind.

18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart:

19. Who being past feeling, have given themselves over to lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness with greediness.

Now follows the second part of this Chapter, in which he gives seven Precepts
for the holy leading of the life of every one of them severally taken.

Precept 1. That they should not any longer walk as other Gentiles, but as
became those who were effectually called from the state of sin, unto Christ.
The Reasons of this Precept or Exhortation are four.

I say] Reas. 1. I who am an Apostle by authority given me of God, do
earnestly beseech you for the Lords sake, to whom you must give an account if
you neglect and despise this my earnest desire.

In the vanity] Reas. 2. From the miserable condition of the Gentiles, and of
all those that are unregenerate; which condition is couched in these seven
particulars: (1.) That they were led by a vain mind, which does not dictate
any thing certainly in divine things, nor directs humane actions to any
profitable end, verse. 17.

Darkned] (2.) That the reason of unregenerate Gentiles, in things pertaining
to God and happiness, is darkened and blinded. (3.) That they are alienated from
the spiritual life of God, and from all communion with God. (4.) That they have
no saving knowledge of God, but are quite ignorant of God as to salvation, or
as he is in the Church revealed in Christ. (5.) That they have a heart
hardened by natural, voluntary, and judicial obduration; for when they do
willingly harden themselves in sin, they are also by the just judgment of God,
further hardened in sin, and the blindness of their minds, verse. 18.

Past feeling] (6.) That being buried in unsensibleness, and griefless
quietness, they do not any more fear sin, or feel the natural bitings of
conscience. (7.) That the Gentiles are freely, and unrestrainedly carried away
in the lust of sinning, not only to a mere desire, but also to a full
commission of all uncleanness with greediness, and to follow their pleasures
with an unsatisfiable desire and study to fulfill them, verse. 19. Hence the
second Reason holds good, the condition of all other Gentiles is most
miserable: Therefore walk not as they do.

Verse. 20. But ye have not so learned Christ:

21. If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the
truth is in Jesus.

Reas. 3. The knowledge of Christ, or the Doctrine of faith in Christ, in which
you are instructed, and which you have learned, requires another manner of life
from you, than that which the Gentiles follow: Therefore you should not imitate
them, verse. 20.

If so bee] He limits the former Reason, and restrains it to the truly
regenerate, who have sincerely and truly heard Christ, and are effectually
taught by his Spirit what that true holiness in Christ is, what that right
manner of living prescribed by Christ is, and how great the virtue and
spiritual power in him is to make his true and genuine Disciples live according
to his orders (I say) with these at least the former Reasons will be valid,
verse. 21.

Verse. 22. That ye put off, concerning the former conversation, the old man,
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts:

23. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind:

24. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

Reas. 4. The Doctrine of Christ does expressly require of believers that they
perform these three things. (1.) That following repentance, they should more
and more put off, and lay aside the old man, or that corrupt nature, which
showed it self in their former conversation, which corrupt nature, or old man
is daily made worse, and more corrupt through deceitful lusts, and so it does
more and more corrupt and destroy man, verse. 22. (2.) That they should be more
and more renewed in the spirit of their mind, that is, that believers should
do their endeavor, through the Word and Spirit of God, to make their
understanding more and more spiritual, which of its own nature is repugnant to
the wisdom of God, and argues against it. (3.) That believers should put on
the new man, or should study to manifest and declare in themselves the actions
and qualities of the new creature, renewed after the Image of God, and
therefore should carefully yield obedience to the divine Law in those things
which respect God and their neighbor. Hence the Argument is thus, The
Christian ^octrine requires of you that putting off the manners o^ the old man,
your mind being renewed, you should study to approve your selves new
creatures, in the exercise of righteousness and holiness. Therefore you should
not walk as other Gentiles.

Verse. 25. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbor, for we are members one of another. Prec. 2. In this he does
particularly command them to lay aside the custom of lying, and to speak the
truth; and alleges one reason for this exhortation or command, viz. because we
are, as it were members one of another, therefore as it is in the natural body,
where, if the members should defraud one another, it would be a Monster; so
we should account it in the Church, when those that profess the faith deceive
one another.

Verse. 26. Be ye angry and sin not, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath:

27. Neither give place to the Devil.

Prec. 3. Touching refraining from anger, whether it be unlawful or lasting.
Sin not by being angry, that is, be not too soon, or too long angry, do not
favor anger in your souls, nor suffer it to sleep with you, but be sure to
observe a measure even in lawful anger, and if any unlawful anger chance to
overtake you, which indeed very often falls our, I counsel you presently to
forbear, and leave it off.

To the Devil] The reason of this Command is from the damage which they might
otherwise receive. If they did show any liking to anger, they would give way to
the Devil to tempt and egg them on to sin more, to whom they should not at all
give place, either in the allowance of this or any other sin.

Verse. 28. Let him that stole steal no more; but rather let him labor, working
with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that
needs. Prec. 4. Touching their laying aside the custom of stealing and
fraudulent dealing. And the reason of this Command is, because it is far better
they should betake themselves unto laboring with their hands, that so they
might be able to help themselves, and releeve others necessities, than to
steal.

Verse. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers.

30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day
of Redemption.

Prec. 5. To take heed of the faults of the tongue. That they should not speak
filthy, hunful, or unprofitable things, which neither make for the glory of
God, nor for their own, or others advantage; and on the other side, that they
should speak those things which were honest, and which did tend to the
edification of their Neighbor.

And grieve not] He adds the reason of the Command, lest the Holy Ghost, which
dwells in you, should be grieved with your corrupt and filthy speeches. He
urges this reason, and renders it more strong, and weighty, in that by the Holy
Ghost they were sealed to the day of Redemption, and by his presence, they were
in a manner noted and marked for Gods proper and peculiar ones, that in the day
of their perfected redemption, which is the day of resurrection, they may be
brought into Gods Mansion-place: Therefore they ought to show their
thankfulness to this Spirit in another manner, than by thus offending him with
their uncleanness.

Verse. 31. Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil
speaking, be put away from you, with all malice. Prec. 6. In which he forbids
bitterness, and rancour of mind, and wrath, and clamor, and evill-speaking,
and all kind of roughness, and malice, or frowardness toward their neighbor.

Verse. 32. And be ye kind one to anot^^^, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Prec. 7. In which on
the contrary he commands mutual mercy, friendship, and forgiving one another
faults. To which is added the most weighty reason, because God in Christ has
forgiven you your sins, and has shown abundance of grace to you in Christ:
Therefore you should be bountiful and merciful to one another.

CHAP. V.
THere are two parts of this Chapter, the former contains nine general Precepts
touching the practice of holiness, which indifferently concern all believers,
to verse. 21. The latter contains four more special Precepts touching
Oeconomical, or household offices, unto the end.

Verse. 1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children. Precept 1.
Touching holiness in general, That they should study to imitate God in
holiness: The reason is, because ye are the beloved Sons of God: Therefore you
should imitate God your Father, who is holy.

Verse: 2. And walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given
himself for us, an offering, and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savor. Prec. 2. That they should walk in mutual love; he adds the reason
thereof, because Christ has so loved us, that he offered himself a sacrifice
for us, that God might forgive us our sins; the power of this sacrifice appears
in this, that it has pleased and appeased God toward us: These two Precepts
also may serve to confirm the preceding exhortation in the end of the former
Chapter, concerning forgiving one another faults.

Verse. 3. But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be
once named amongst you, as becomes Saints. Prec. 3. That they should beware
and avoid fornication, and all kind of uncleanness and covetousness, yea that
they should not be so much as named among them without detestation, much less
committed: The reason thereof is, because it becomes Saints thus to carry
themselves, who have devoted themselves to the service of the most holy God.

Verse. 4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jeasting, which are not
convenient, but rather giving of thanks.

5. For this ye know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous
man who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of
God.

6. Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these things comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.

Prec. 4. That they should avoid filthiness of speech, foolish talking, and
scoffing. Of these two Precepts, he gives five Reasons.

Which are not] Reason 1. Because filthy speech does not at all become Saints.

But rather] Reas. 2. Because we have other matters of joy afforded us to take
up our talk with, viz. Thanksgiving for Gods benefits, verse. 4.

This ye know] Reas. 3. Because uncleanness and covetousness are excluded from
the Kingdom of heaven, which is called God the Fathers and Christ's, because it
is a Kingdom common to both.

Idolater] Reas. 4. Because covetousness is Idolatry, substituting the creature
in the place of the Creator. We may understand the same of other vices, verse.
5.

No man] Reas. 5. Because whoever are addicted to these vices, are reckoned
among the sons of disobedience, or Rebels against God, and shall feel the most
heavy wrath of God, whatever Seducers may say to the contrary, verse. 6.

Verse. 7. Be not ye therefore partakers with them. Prec. 5. This he adds as
an inference, wherein he generally disswades them from partaking in these
aforesaid vices, and all others wherewith the sons of disobedience defile
themselves. The Reasons hereof are eight: The first went before, lest they be
made partakers of the future wrath hanging over the disobedient.

Verse. 8. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord,
Walk as children of light. Reas. 2. From their changed condition, because
before your conversion to faith, you were slaves and bondmen to ignorance and
wickedness, but now in Christ ye are beautified with the light of wisdom and
holiness, that ye should commend this light to others (where he gives a hint
of the same Precept affirmatively, viz. That they should not walk as the sons
of darkness, but as the sons of light, obeying the word of God, which affords
light to the right ordering of our lives) therefore you should not be
companions of the obstinate.

Verse. 9. (For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, righteousness, and
truth.) Reas. 3. Because the fruit of the Holy Ghost, by whom ye are
translated from darkness to light, consists in goodness, righteousness, and
truth: Therefore ye should bring forth these fruits, and not be companions of
the obstinate, in the fruits of the flesh.

Verse. 10. Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord. Reas. 4. In which he
explains the Precept touching walking in the light, Because endeavoring to
walk as Sons of the Light, ye may experimentally know, and certainly try what
is acceptable to God, what not: Therefore be not ye, by walking in darkness,
of the fellowship of the disobedient.

Verse. 11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them. Reas. 5. Here also the Precept is repeated and explained.
Because walking as the Sons of Light, ye will not only not partake of the
sins of others, but by the example of your holy life you will condemn the sins
of others: Be not ye therefore their companions, but rather abhor their
manners.

Verse. 12. For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of
them in secret. Reas. 6. Because the works of darkness, which the rest of the
unconverted Heathens secretly commit, for their filthiness are not worthy of a
Christians ear: Therefore you ought not to have any intercourse with their
sins, but rather reprove them, as the Sons of Light.

Verse. 13. But all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light:
for whatsoever does make manifest, is Light. Reas. 7. Because the rebuke of
secret sins, which is given by your openly-declared holy life, does prick the
consciences of the wicked, and does manifest that their works are evil: and
this does very much conduce to their conversion; for thus it brings them to the
knowledge of themselves.

Is Light] He confirms this reason, and proves that an holy life is Light.
Because it has the property of Light, so far as it manifests to the wicked,
that their works are evil.

Verse. 14. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee Light. Reas. 8. Confirming the former. Because
the voice of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, or the Prophetical and
Apostolical Doctrine, both taken together, have this tendency and drift, that
those that sleep and are dead in sins, should be raised to repentance, and
come unto Christ by Faith, that so they may be enlightened and saved by the
Light of Christ's Grace: Therefore all the Sons of Light ought both in words and
deeds to commend this Doctrine to others, and propagate it to the salvation of
others, shunning in the mean while all intercourse with sinners.

Verse. 15. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise;
Prec. 6. Making for the observation of the former. That they should take care
to walk accurately, as becomes those who are endued with the Wisdom of God
revealed in the Gospel, and not being deceived, decline from the way, as those
who are ignorant of Gods Will.

Verse. 16. Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Prec. 7. Having the
same drift. That they should not suffer their time to be spent in idleness and
pleasures, and to pass unfruitfully, but with the loss of pleasures, or of
sluggish idleness, or unprofitable business, they should take hold of, and as
it were redeem opportunities of well doing: He gives the reason, Because the
times are full of dangers, through the malice of men, who (no one knows how
soon) may take away their liberty, goods, yea life it self, and deprive them of
all opportunity of doing good.

Verse. 17. Wherefore, be ye not unwise, but understand what the Will of the
Lord is. From this reason he inferrs a conclusion: Therefore (says he) be
wise, and not fools, observing what God requires of you, that ye should
perform it diligently without delay, while time is afforded.

Verse. 18. And be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess: but be filled with
the Spirit: Prec. 8. Forbidding them to be drunk with Wine, or any other
drink. The reason is, because in this drunkenness is the destruction of
estates, credit, body and soul.

Be filled] Prec. 9. This is delivered by way of Antithesis; that rather they
should be filled and exhilerate themselves with the saving water of the Holy
Ghost, that is, they should strive to abound in the experience of joy, which is
from Gods Spirit: in which fullness there is no excess.

Verse. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
singing, and making melody in your heart to the Lord, The reason of the Precept
is from those better fruits which spiritual joy produces, such are all sorts
of spiritual Songs, especially those which are in the holy Scriptures, with
which they should mutually edify one another, and glorify God from their
heart or spiritual affection. A Psalm is a sacred song in general, especially
that which is by playing on the harp. A Hymn properly contains Gods praise. An
Ode or Song, is a common name.

Verse. 20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, He shows the special use and end of Christian
Songs, that we should always, in what condition soever we are, through Jesus
Christ, give thanks to God our Father for all his benefits.

The Second Part.
Verse. 21. Submitting your selves one to another, in the fear of God. The
second part of this Chapter follows, wherein that he may descend to
oeconomical Precepts, he premises an exhortation touching submission to one
another in general, that still keeping that order which God had placed them in,
they should each one in his office help one another; for wherever there is
love, there will be care to serve one another: He adds in the fear of God,
because it is requisite that from this fountain should flow sincere obedience
of this Precept from the heart, to the glory of God; for is is only the fear
of Christ which can bring our fierceness into subjection, that we should not
refuse the yoke, and can bring down our pride, that we should not be ashamed
to serve our neighbors.

Verse. 22. Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord.
Now follow the oeconomical Precepts. (1) That Wives should be in subjection to
their own Husbands, chastely, sincerely, and in lawful things. The reasons
whereof are four.

As unto the Lord] Reason 1. Because Christ commanded that the Wife should be
subject to her Husband, and accounts of that subjection as if she yielded
obedience to himself, and in like manner looks upon the Wives rebellion against
her Husband, as rebellion against himself.

Verse. 23. For the Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head
of the Church: and he is the Savior of the body. Reas. 2. Because the Husband
is in honor and authority over the Wife, as the head is over the body.
Therefore it is meet that the Wife should be in subjection to him.

As Christ] Reas. 3. Because (...) will have the Husbands authority over the
Wife to ^ee a similitude of Christ's authority over the Church.

And he is] Reas. 4. The same similitude is illustrated. As Christ is the Head
of the Church for its good: so the Husband is the Head of the Wife for her
good, whom he ought in all things to defend, ch^rish and comfort: And as it is
expedient for the Church to be obedient to Christ; so it is for the Wife to
be obedient to her Husband.

Verse. 24. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the Wives be
to their own Husbands, in every thing. From these reasons he inferrs the
conclusion: that it is necessary for the Wife to be obedient to her Husband in
all things, which hinder not her due subjection unto God and Christ.

Verse. 25. Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and
gave himself for it. Prec. 2. Which is given to men, that they should love
their Wives; the reasons thereof are five.

As] Reas. 1. From the example of Christ's love toward the Church, which love
the Apostle commends from these four marks.

(1) That Christ out of his love offered himself for the Church which was then
lost.

Verse. 26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water,
by the Word; (2) That he loved his Church, and offered himself for it, to the
end that he might sanctify it, or of a profane and impure Church make it a
holy one.

Washing] (3) That Christ does effectually cleanse his Church by virtue of his
blood, and of his free promise, which he applies to us by the ordinary means
of Baptism, and of the Word, as by instruments of his Spirit, ordained for the
confirmation of Faith, and the communication of virtue.

Verse. 27. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinckle, nor any such thing; but that it should be holy and without
blemish. (4) That he has loved his Church for this end, that he might at
length present it glorious in Heaven, without any mark or token either of sin
or misery, and he will ever prosecute this his work till he has brought it
to pass.

Verse. 28. So ought men to love their Wives, as their own bodies; he that
loves his Wife, loves himself. Reas. 2. Of the Precept given to men touching
loving their Wives. Because Wives are the bodies of their own Husbands,
according to that Law of God, They two shall be one flesh.

He that loveth] Reas. 3. Because he which loves his Wife, loves himself,
and performs the office of love unto himself, for that love of a man's own Wife,
does every way redound to the Husbands good.

Verse. 29. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church: Reas. 4. Because it is as unnatural
to a Wife and good Husband not to love his Wife, as it is to hate his own
flesh, and it is as agreeable to reason, to favor and make much of his Wife,
as it is to regard his own flesh.

As] He confirms and illustrates this reason by the example of Christ, which
he wills us always to have in our eye, as the most perfect example of love.

Verse. 30. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. He
proves that Christ loved us as his own flesh, and that it was not possible for
him to hate us, but he was as it were constrained out of love to maintain and
cherish us: because we are members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bone, that is, we are as nearly joined to him, as Eve was to Adam: for
what Eve owed to Adam in the flesh, we owe to Christ in the regeneration of
our spirit, and much more. In the forming of Eve, Adam lost only one rib: but
in the reforming of the Church, Christ lost his life. Only the matter of Eve
was from Adam: but the Church has from Christ its natural formation, and
spiritual reformation, in respect of both the body and soul of every member.

Verse. 31. For this cause shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and shall
be joined unto his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Reas. 5. Where he
proves both that the Church owes its beginning to Christ; and that Husbands
ought to love their Wives, even from the institution of marriage, which
requires that by reason of the straight knot between Husband and Wife, a man
shall leave Father and Mother, and be joined to his Wife, and they two shall
be united into one flesh, by the bond of wedlock, by which they now have a
mutual right to, and power over one another: the words of this institution have
a typical sense: for God, in that saying, Genesis 2.23. Thou art flesh of my
flesh, and bone of my bone, intended to represent the union of Christ, and the
Church, and to show that we are bone of Christ's bone, and flesh of Christ's
flesh, that is, that we are most nearly united to Christ, because in the
speech of Adam to Eve, it was prefigured, that Christ (as he was one flesh
with us, and made us one flesh with himself by a spiritual wedlock) did as it
were leave his own Father (laying aside after a manner that glory which he had
with the Father, abasing himself when he was in the form of God, and taking
upon him the form of a servant.) Also it was prefigured that Christ should
leave Mary his Mother, that by dying he might buy the Church to be his
Spouse, with which he would be one flesh.

Verse. 32. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church. The Apostle viewing this last thing, not the carnal wedlock, but the
union of Christ with the Church, calls it a great mystery: and lest any one
should otherwise understand his saying, he signifies in express words, that
he does not speak this of the mystery touching the carnal marriage of Husband
and Wife, but concerning the spiritual conjunction of Christ and the Church,
which is made by virtue of the Spirit, not of the flesh, by Faith, and not by
any natural bond or tie.

Verse. 33. Nevertheless, let every one of you in particular, so love his Wife
even as himself, and the Wife see that she reverence the Husband. Letting the
mystery pass, he returns to the Precepts touching the duties of Husband and
Wife, and in the last place adds Precept 3. wherein he reduces all the duties
of the Husband to sincere love, such as is the love wherewith he loves
himself, and this love he presses upon them; On the other side he reduces all
the duties of the Wife to fear, and reverence toward her Husband, that she
offend him not, but endeavor in the Lord to please him in all things.

CHAP. VI.
HE proceeds to give Precepts touching oeconomical and common Christian
duties. There are two parts of the Chapter: The first contains four Precepts
touching oeconomical duties, to verse. 10. The other is the conclusion of the
Epistle, containing some common duties, unto the end.

Verse. 1. Children, obey your Parents in the Lord: for this is right. Precept
1. to children, that they should honor their Parents, and yield reverence and
obedience to them in all things, so far as is possible, and pleasing to God:
the reasons hereof are four.

(1) Because it is required by all Law both of God, and of Nature, that
children should obey their Parents.

Verse. 2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother (which is the first Commandment
with Promise.) Reas. 2. Because the obedience of children is expressly
mentioned in the Commandments, as a part of honor due to Parents, and
commanded in the Law.

Which is] Reas. 3. Because this is the first command which has a particular
promise particularly applied.

Verse. 3. That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the
earth. Reas. 4. Because the obedience of children toward their Parents,
conduces to the childrens good, and has a special blessing, the lengthening of
temporal life: which Promise is either simply fulfilled, or else by change of
the benefit, for one much better, of a better life.

Verse. 4. And ye Fathers provoke not your children to wrath; but bring them up
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Prec. 2. Touching the part and duty
of Parents toward their children, that on the one side, by too much severity
toward their children, they abuse not their Fatherly power (lest they drive
their childrens affection from them) and on the other side, that by too much
indulgence, they do not nourish any childish malepertness in their children,
but that rather they strive to correct their vices, and instruct them in good
manners in the fear of the Lord.

Verse. 5. Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the
flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ:
Prec. 3. Of the duty of Servants toward their Masters: the parts whereof are
six. (1) That they obey their Masters, acknowledging their external servile
condition to be from God, and that they are not freed from a political
servitude by Christ, who neither takes away, nor changes Governments. (2) That
they remember that their Masters are not Masters of their consciences, but of
the flesh or outward man, and in things which concern this life. (3) That they
serve them in reverence, and in fear of their anger. (4) That laying aside
deceit, they deal truly and sincerely with their Masters. (5) That they serve
them with reference to Christ's command, and so in obeying them they will serve
Christ.

Verse. 6. Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ,
doing the Will of God from the heart:

5. With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men:

(6) That without flattering deceit, they take care of their Masters business,
no less in their absence, than when they are present to overlook them, and not
only that they may please their Masters, but that they may please God. Lastly,
That they serve, not out of self-love, or mere fear, but out of good will, as
those that serve God, and not men: for he serves God, who obeyes him
commanding him to serve his Master.

Verse. 8. Knowing that whatsoever good thing man does, the same shall he
receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Besides the Arguments which
are tacitly couched in what went before, to confirm this Precept, he adds the
hope of reward, which they shall receive from God, who liberally rewards the
works of his servants whether they be free or bond in the flesh.

Verse. 9. And ye Masters do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening:
knowing that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there respect of persons
with him. Prec. 4. Concerning the duty of Masters toward their servants. That
proportionably making use of the same virtues, they should exercise their
masterly power over their servants after a Christian manner: and particularly
that they should be moderate in threatenings, lest they rule tyrannically over
them.

Knowing] He adds two reasons. (1) Because they have the Lord above them, who
is able to revenge their weak tyranny. (2) Because God is just, who does not
respect the person of the Master or servant, but beholds the cause and work of
both according to equity.

The Second Part.
Verse. 10. Finally my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might. The other part of the Chapter contains the conclusion of the Epistle;
which has in it four points. In the first he exhorts them to constancy in
Faith and Holiness of life, and to put on the spiritual armor against our
enemies, with whom we must grapple as long as we live, Brethren (says he)
be ye strengthened in the Lord. The Arguments to press on this Exhortation
are three.

Argum. 1. Because they have communion with the Lord, in whom is power and
strength, in whom, if ye continue by Faith, and make use of his Grace, he
will be ready to help you, with his power and effectual operation; that so you
will both dare to venture on, and be able valiantly to oppose all your enemies
and hindrances: Therefore be ye strengthened in the Lord.

Verse. 11. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil. Argum. 2. Because you are armed with all sorts
of weapons, which are necessary for your war; which weapons he exhorts them to
put on, that they may be able to stand in the fight against the Devils
assaults and treachery.

Verse. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Argum. 3. Because our
strife is not merely with men, or against our own flesh, or against men only
(such a fight might seem tolerable) but we are to fight against the author of
all these evils, the Devil, and the whole army of unclean spirits, who are no
weak and ordinary soldiers, but all of them principalities and powers, or
spirits which bear rule over worldly men: and govern the wicked (who are here
and elsewhere called darkness) and stir them up against us: these also as they
are very powerful and very crafty, so they are most wicked and malicious: And
lastly, they are spiritual, such as we cannot discern with our eyes, and fly
about in the open air, so that they can when they will set upon us at unawares,
unless we watch.

Verse. 13. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that you may be
able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Here he
repeats the Exhortation, that they would put on the whole armor of God, that
they might be able to stand in the evil day, or the day of temptation, and in
the day of victory, expecting new on-sets of the enemy, and at length having
overcome him, might triumph.

Verse. 14. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with Truth, and having
on the breast plate of Righteousness. He takes a similitude from bodily
weapons, and names those helps against the Devil, which answer to bodily
armor, fitted to defend us from, and to offend the enemy; to this end he bids
every one stand, that is, keep himself within his general and particular
calling, and watch against the enemy. The parts of the armor for the defense
of the Truth, are seven.

Loyns] (1.) Constancy in the Doctrine of Truth, which he compares to a
girdle, which binds the looser parts of the body that they do not fall
asunder; for knowledge strengthens us, that we do not waver through weakness.

Having on] (2.) The breast plate of righteousness by which we understand the
righteousness of Christ applied to us, which is always accompanied with an
endeavor after a holy life, and a good conscience; which as it were fortifies
our breasts against the adversaries assault upon our faith, and manifests it to
be sincere.

Verse. 15. And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. (3.)
A readiness of mind to acknowledge and advance the Gospel in our place,
against all hindrances and difficulties; this is, to have our feet shod with
the preparation of the Gospel.

Verse. 16. Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. (4.) The shield of faith, or trust
in Christ, by which as by a shield are received, and kept off all those
poisoned temptations of the Devil, which he, our great enemy, does brandish
against us as his weapons.

Verse. 17. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which
is the Word of God. (5.) The helmet of salvation, or a certain hope and
assurance of our salvation, by which being armed and assured of the victory,
we may confidently continue the fight.

The sword] (6.) The sword of the Spirit, or the Word of God, wherewith drawing
and brandishing it, we may repel the Devil himself, and put him to flight.

Verse. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints: (7.)
Prayer, wherewith a Christian soldier betaking himself to his General, Christ,
begs his assistance, not once only, but at any time when necessity urges; not
coldly, and with his lips only, but with a fervent Spirit; not faintly, as if
he feared not the enemy, but watching and attending to this duty with greatest
earnestness; not for himself only, but also for the whole Church, or for Gods
whole Army, and for every one of the Saints, so far as he shall be acquainted
with their necessities.

Verse. 19. And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open
my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel: The second point of
the Conclusion is an exhortation to pray for the Apostle, that God would enable
him to declare and preach the Gospel, fully, plainly, and boldly.

Verse. 20. For which I am an Ambassador in bonds; that therein I may speak
boldly, as I ought to speak. There are three Reasons of this Exhortation.

Reas. 1. Because for this very end I am sent an Apostle with Authority, that I
may declare the Gospel.

In bonds] Reas. 2. Because I am held in bonds for the testimony given, in
which it is necessary that God should confirm me by means of your prayers.

As I ought] Reas. 3. Because it becomes me wh^ ^m an Apostle to preach the
Gospel with liberty of speech, and in a free manner.

Verse. 21. But that ye may also know my affairs, and how I do, Tychicus a
beloved brother and faithful Minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all
things.

22. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know our
affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts.

The third point is about the sending of Tychicus unto them, for which he
gives a reason from the end, viz. That so the Ephesians might be acquainted
with the Apostles business, and might receive comfort by reason of Gods
presence with him in his bonds, and so might be confirmed in the faith.

Verse. 23. Peace be to the brethren, and love, with faith from God the Father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

14. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.

(4.) Point is an Apostolical benediction, wherein under the form of a wish,
he prays that peace and love, with faith, may be still bestowed and
communicated from God and Christ to the believing brethren.

And then he pronounces grace on all those who love Christ with a sincere
affection; which grace is the fountain of that faith which works by love, and
by which we have peace with God for ever.

The Epistle of St. Paul to the PHILIPPIANS Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
PHilippi was a City of Macedonia, wherein the Apostle, that he might begin a
Church, did both notable things, and suffered hardships, as appears, Acts 16.

The occasion of writing the Epistle was this: The Philippians had sent their
Pastor Epaphroditus with money to the Apostle, to relieve his wants, while he
was kept prisoner at Rome: The Apostle taking hold of this occasion, writes
this Epistle to confirm them in faith and godliness.

( 1.) By arming their hearts against the scandal of the Cross, and of his
bonds, and exhorting them to constancy, in the first Chapter.

( 2.) By exhorting them to agreement among themselves, and other virtues which
conduce thereunto, Chap. 2.

( 3.) By exhorting them with joy to rest upon the grace and virtue of Christ,
as abundantly sufficient for their sanctification and salvation; and that they
would beware of false Apostles, and follow the example of the Apostles and holy
Ministers of Christ, Chap. 3.

( 4.) After some Rules given touching Christian virtues, by declaring his
thankfulness for their bounty toward him, Chap. 4.

CHAP. I.
OMitting the Preface of the Epistle, which is comprehended in the first and
second verses, there are three parts of this Chapter: (1) A confirmation of the
Philippians Faith, in which also the Apostle assures them of his love toward
them, unto verse. 12. (2) A removing the scandal, that the Philippians should
not be offended a^ the afflictions which he under-went, unto verse. 27. (3) An
exhortation to continue inoffensively in the course of holiness, unto the end.

Verse. 1. Paul and Timotheus the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints in
Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons. The Preface
is taken up in a direction of the Epistle, and a salutation of the Philippians.
The direction of the Epistle is from Paul, and from Timothy a Disciple, as it
were a witness of the Apostles diligence, in this his admonition to the Church
of the Philippians, and its Bishops and Deacons, that is, Pastors and other
Ecclesiastical Rulers, who were joined to the Pastors, to take care of the life
and manners, and other necessaries of the Church.

Verse. 2. Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ. The salutation contains an Apostolical benediction, wherein he
wishes them Grace and Peace from God through Christ, as his custom was to
other Churches which he wrote to. This Church was well enough acquainted with
the Apostles authority: for he was very much esteemed and favored by the
Philippians; therefore it was meet that he should be brief in confirming his
authority over them, and winning their good will toward himself.

Verse. 3. I thank my God upon every remembrance of you. The first part of the
Chapter; wherein he confirm^ the Philippians in the Faith of the Gospel, and
assures them of his love toward them, by seven Arguments: The Proposition to
be proved is, That ye ought to be strengthened and confirmed in the Faith.

Argum. 1. Your condition in the Grace of God deserves that I should
continually give thanks to God for it, as often as I remember you: Therefore
you should be strengthened in the Faith.

Verse. 4. Always in every prayer of mine for ^ou all, making request with joy,
Argum. 2. I am so certainly persuaded of your salvation, that I cannot pray for
you but with joy: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 5. For your fellowship in the Gospel from the first day until now;
Argum. 3. You have carried your selves steadfastly ever since ye were called
unto the fellowship of the Gospel; even as it becomes Believers and Saints; so
that your communion and fellowship in the Gospel was ever most pleasing to me:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good
work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ: Argum. 4. I am
persuaded that God has begun the work of special Grace in you, and that he
will not leave off that his work in you, till he has perfected it in your
perseverance, and manifested it to be perfected in the coming of Christ:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 7. Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have
you in my heart, inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defense and
confirmation of the Gospel, ye are all partakers of my Grace. Argum. 5.
Confirming the same. It is fit that I should think this, because I assuredly
find by certain marks, that you are true Believers, and living members of
Christ. A sign whereof is, that ye were in heart and deed partakers with me
of the Grace bestowed on me (that is, of my sufferings, which through the
Grace of God, I underwent for the Gospel, when I was in bonds) and partakers
also of my labors, which I performed in the defense and propagation of the
Gospel: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 8. For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all, in the bowels
of Jesus Christ. Argum. 6. God, who has united my soul to you, is witness how
greatly I love you in the bowels of Christ, or in the most near affection of
Christian love, and how I desire to enjoy your fellowship.

Verse. 9. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment. Argum. 7. As I must needs confess there is no
small Faith and Love, and experimentally-confirmed knowledge of divine things
in you, so upon hope of your future increase, I beg that your love may abound
more and more, from a more full knowledge and feeling of Gods love toward you
in Christ: Therefore unless you will disesteem and vilify my hope of you, and
continual prayer for you, more than is fitting you should, you ought to be
strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 10. That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere and without offense till the day of Christ,

11. Being filled with the fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ,
unto the glory and praise of God.

He shows four ends of this his prayer, and also adds as many more points of
his prayer. (1) That ye may be able to prove those things which differ, that
is, that ye may discern truth from fashood in doctrine, and good from evil in
framing your lives: and to choose that which is most excellent. (2) That ye may
be sincere without any mixture of humane traditions in worship and heart, and
also pure in life and manners. (3) That ye may walk inoffensively, and without
occasioning scandal to others, and make progress in the Faith unto the meeting
of the Lord. (4) That ye may be filled with the fruits of Righteousness,
which arise from Faith in Christ, and tend to the glory of God.

The Second Part.
Verse. 12. But I would you should understand, Brethren, that the things which
happened unto me, have fallen out rather to the furtherance of the Gospel. The
second part of the Chapter follows, in which the Apostle removes that scandal
which they might take from his afflictions, which he suffered for the Gospel;
and this he does by nine Arguments, which prove that the Philippians ought not
to be offended at the Apostles afflictions.

Argum. 1. Generally. My afflictions have occasioned the furtherance of the
Gospel, and not its hinderance: Therefore you should not be offended at them.

Verse. 13. So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in
all other places. Argum. 2. More specially. The cause of the Gospel for which I
suffered, is by my afflictions made more famous both in Neroes Court, and other
places: Therefore you should not be offended at them, but rather confirmed by
my constancy under bonds.

Verse. 14. And many of the Brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds,
are much more bold to speak the Word without fear. Argum. 3. More Brethren are
encouraged more freely to declare and preach the Gospel: Therefore there is no
reason you should be offended at my cross, but being instructed by others
example, rather that you should be confirmed in the Faith.

Verse. 15. Some indeed preach Christ, even of envy and strife, and some also of
good will.

16. The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add
affliction to my bonds:

17. But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the Gospel.

Argum. 4. Proposed by way of redargution to an objection: Though it be true
that some envy my glory, which I get by constancy under my bonds, such as are
the Jewish false Apostles, who were wont to contend with me about their Legal
Ceremonies, and who preach the Gospel of Christ, mixing it with their leaven,
partly to trouble and vex me, and to breed envy in their hearers; partly, lest
I should seem to surpass them in any thing; and in the last place, partly that
by these means they may add affliction to my bonds: yet there are others who
preach Christ with an honest mind, and out of love endeavor to uphold my
cause, knowing that Christ has appointed me an Apostle for the defense of the
Gospel; and now honored me with the glory of bonds: Therefore you ought not
to be ashamed of my chain, or offended at my cross.

Verse. 18. What then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in
truth, Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.
Argum. 5. Every way I occasion the preaching of the Gospel by those that envy
me; for this I rejoice, that the name of Christ is made famous by my bonds,
and by others preaching, let it be what it will: Therefore you also should
rejoice with me, and not be offended at my bonds.

Verse. 19. For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your
prayers, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Argum. 6. I am so far
from being dejected at my afflictions; that I am fully persuaded, that even
this affliction shall turn to my salvation, and that by the help of your
prayers the Spirit of Christ shall daily be more plentifully bestowed upon
me: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 20. According to my earnest expectation, and my hope, that in nothing I
shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ
shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death. He explains
this persuasion more particularly, and adds,

Argum. 7. In Christ my advanced Head, I do with hope expect, not only that I
shall never be ashamed, as being destitute of Christ's help, but also that
Christ shall be glorified in me by a free preaching and confession of the
Gospel, whether my life be further prolonged or ended by Martyrdom:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain: Argum. 8. I am
prepared to dye for Christ, and am indifferent whether I live or dye, whether I
be afflicted or no, so that Christ be glorified: for Christ is gain to me,
if I live longer, because being alive, I shall preach Christ, Christ is gain
also though I dye presently, because then I shall go to Christ, and for ever
continue with him. And therefore you, regarding nothing but what advances the
glory of Christ, ought not to be offended at my chain.

Verse. 22. But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor; yet what
I shall choose, I wot not. He confirms this Argument, in that it would be very
difficult for him to choose what to do, if he had his liber^y, either to dye or
live; for the fruit of the work of his Ministry encouraged him still to live;
but his desire to enjoy Christ persuaded him to dye, so that he could not
easily determine which of these he should choose. Hence it is plain, that the
Apostle was not troubled at his bonds, as long as they made for the glory of
Christ.

Verse. 23. For I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is far better:

24. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.

He further illustrates the same, showing that he is mightily straightned on
the one side with a desire to enjoy Christ, than which nothing could be more
desirable if he respected his own advantage, but on the other side he saw it
would conduce to the Churches profit, if his bodily life were yet continued.
It Is therefore evident that not only affliction, but death also would be
acceptable to him for Christ.

Verse. 25. And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue
with you all, for your furtherance and joy of Faith,

26. That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me, by my
coming to you again.

Arg. 9. To remove the scandal of the cross lying upon him, he further adds,
that although I am prepared to dye, yet I am assured by revelation I shall not
dye yet, but shall live to further your salvation, and the joy of your Faith,
and that I shall return to you, and be with you, that your glorying in Christ
may abound, considering and seeing the power of Christ in my freedom and
return: Therefore you ought not to be offended at my bonds, but to be
confirmed in the Faith.

The third Part.
Verse. 27. Only let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ;
that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your
affairs, that you stand fast in one Spirit, with one mind striving togethar for
the Faith of the Gospel; The third part of the Chapter follows, containing an
exhortation to constancy in Faith, that they would persist unanimous in the
profession of the Gospel, striving by Faith against all adversaries. The
Arguments hereof, which prove they must steadfastly persevere in the profession
of Faith, are nine.

Onely] Argum. 1. I only desire one thing of you, that ye would walk worthy
of the Gospel, that is, that ye would order your conversation according to the
rule of the Evangelical Doctrine, only looking to your own duty, but not
meddling with any thing else: Therefore whatever does befall, you must proceed
steadfastly in the Faith of the Gospel.

Worthily] Argum. 2. The worthiness of the Gospel of Christ, and your right
unto the City of the Saints, requires this of you: Persevere therefore
steadfastly.

That whether] Argum. 3. Whether I am present or absent, I shall receive
comfort from your courage and constancy in the Faith: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 28. And in nothing terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an
evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. Argum. 4.
There is no reason you should be afraid of your adversaries threatenings, or
power: Therefore, etc.

Which is to them] Argum. 5. It is a token of sudden destruction to all your
persecutors, that they bear a hostile mind toward the Church: Therefore, etc.

To you] Argum. 6. Your constant defense of the Gospel against opposers, is a
certain mark and sign of victory and salvation, which God will bestow upon you
that are defenders of the Gospel: Therefore, etc.

Of God] Argum. 7. It comes from God by his special counsel, and it is for your
salvation which defend the Gospel, that you are to engage with adversaries:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 29. For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Argum. 8. It is a singular
gift bestowed upon you, above many other believers, and that for the merits of
Christ, that you are not only to believe in Christ, but also that ye now do
suffer, or hereafter shall suffer for the Faith of Christ.

Verse. 30. Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be
in me. Argum. 9. You have me for your companion and copartner in your
afflictions, who, as you know, have suffered many things both at Philippi, and
elsewhere, and now do suffer bonds at Rome: Therefore you ought without fear to
continue in the faith and profession of the Gospel.

CHAP. II.
THe Apostle before exhorted the Philippians to be armed against their
enemies, here to be at agreement with their brethren.

There are two parts of the Chapter: The first contains an exhortation to
mutual peace, unto verse. 19.

The second their comfort: To persuade them to peace, he propounds fifteen
Arguments: All which prove that they ought to embrace agreement in faith, love,
and the study of good works.

Verse. 1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies: Argum. 1. Is
very swasive and pathetical, it runs thus, I earnestly entreat, that ye would
maintain concord among your selves, engaging you thereunto by your duties, and
by what ever is most dear to you: Therefore, if either my Apostolical
exhortation have any weight with you, or if you have ever found any consolation
in Christ; if I who am bound may expect any comfort from you, if there be any
communion of the Spirit betwixt me and you, if you will show any mercy toward
me, you must preserve mutual peace among you.

Verse. 2. Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, of one mind: Argum. 2. You have already many ways
occasioned my joy, as to what remains, if ye maintain peace, you will fulfill
and complete my joy: Therefore let it be your endeavor that ye believe the
same things, and will the same things, or that being unamimous in love, ye may
approve the same thing, and being alike affected, you may be united together
in minds and hearts. Here the exhortation is expressly mentioned.

Verse. 3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness
of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. He subjoyns four Helps
which will make the obedience to his Exhortation more facile and easy, and
which may be reckoned as members of the Exhortation, and may serve also as
Arguments to prove the Position.

(1.) That they would shun contention and vainglory, to which if any one give
way, he will presently discontinue peace. Hence Arg. 3. If ye will shun
contention and vainglory, you will preserve peace: Therefore unless ye will
profess these vices, you must maintain peace.

But in] (2.) That they would study in lowliness of mind from their heart to
prefer others before themselves, as better than themselves; which thought may
consist with truth, and be without deceit, because this our opinion of other
our brethren, does not require an absolute judgment, but is contented partly
with a suspended, partly with a negative judgment, by which we may say, that
happily one thing being compared with another, he is better than I, or for as
much as I know of him, and my self, I will not prefer my self before him; but
him before me, because I am ignorant of the secrets of his heart, but I know
the perverseness of my own heart. Hence Arg. 4. If from the humbleness of your
mind, you judge others to excel you, you may preserve concord: Therefore
unless you will manifest your pride, you must preserve concord: For the
excellency of a man is not valued according to the measure of his gifts, but
according to the measure of his faithfulness, sincerity and honesty.

Verse. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others. (3.) The next Help for the maintaining of humility and
concord, That every one should consider not his own virtues only, and what
makes for his own advantage only, but the virtues of others also, and those
things which conduce to the profit of all; thus we shall esteem others more,
and our selves less, and be less offensive in all things. Hence Argum. 5. I^
ye will respect the virtues and good of others, you will easily preserve
unity: Therefore unless you will be envious, and be accounted so, Follow
peace.

Verse. 5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Jesus Christ: (4.) The
example of Christ which he proposes for imitation, that they would learn
humility, and exercise a true love unto concord: Here he first generally
requires that they would have the same mind which was in Christ. Hence Argum.
6. Ye ought to be like-minded toward one another, as Christ was minded
toward us, imitating his modesty and sweetness of behavior: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 6. Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
with God: Argum. 7. Here he more particularly handles the imitating of Christ's
example before proposed, in these six and seven verses, to this purpose, though
Christ was equal to the Father, yet he abased himself unto the death of the
Cross, that he might procure a peace and concord betwixt the Father and us:
Therefore much more you ought to humble your selves for concords sake. The
excellency of Christ is described in this verse, and his humiliation in the two
following.

In the form of God] The excellency of Christ before his assumption of the
flesh is branched out into five particulars; (1.) That he was a subsisting
person. (2.) That he was in the form of God, that is, that he had the Essence
of God endued with the natural properties of a Deity, or that he was true God.
(3.) That he was the substantial Image of the Father. (4.) That he was equal
to the Father in all things, because he had the same Deity which the Father
had. (5.) That he did fully know he offered no injury to the Father in
maintaining himself to be equal with the Father, nor should he at all injure
him, supposing his humiliation had not been before decreed, though he had
pleased to manifest himself to the world in the glory of his Deity: This is the
excellency of Christ.

Verse. 7. But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men:

8. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.

Here follows Christ's voluntary humiliation, which is called his exinanition or
emptying of himself, not that he did in himself cease to be what he was, but
that he laid aside the manifestation of his Glory and Majesty, and so hid it
under the form of a servant, as if he had had none, or as if he had so left
it off, that it could not be perceived by the world (nay nor by his servants
that were eyewitnesses) unless it were so much of it through the chinks of his
Words and Works, as was requisite for the dispensation of the Work of
Redemption.

The degrees or parts of this voluntary humiliation or exinanition are five;
(1.) That he took or assumed the form of a servant, or the true humane nature
(such as is found in the vilest servants, or in men of the lowest rank) and
united the humane nature to himself by a personal union; thus he debased
himself from Heaven to Earth. (2) That in the humane Nature he debased himself
below the condition of free men, to an external condition most reproachful
among men, which is servile: for he took upon him the form of a servant.

The likeness] He shows the truth of his incarnation in that he was made like
to us, as one of us in the essential parts of humane nature, body and soul:
like in the natural properties of the humane nature, and in all the affections;
like in the common infirmities which follow mankind: Lastly, that he is like
to us in all things, sin only excepted.

Being found in fashion] He confirms the truth of his incarnation, that he
was found in fashion as a man, for all that were conversant with him, both good
and bad, by all ways whereby a man is known to be a man, observed and found
that he was true man, and they did certainly know it, from the true shape and
substance of his humane body, from the true actions of humane life, and from
the true properties of one truly man, and from every fashion that any man is
found in.

He humbled himself] (3) That being now made man, though he was not obliged
but by his voluntary Covenant (because he was not merely man, though truly
man, but God in the flesh, whose flesh was the flesh of God; and therefore
being Lord of the Law, he was not subject to it) to stay in the earth, or to
undergo the yoke of the Law, (imposed upon those that are merely men) yet he
humbled himself, or by his voluntary disposition and order, he made himself in
the state of humiliation less than his Father (for in respect of the Divine
Nature, which is the same in both Father and Son, he could not be less) and
took upon him the yoke of the Law, appointed for mere men, and not only so,
but he also absolutely submitted himself to perform all things which the
Father should command for the perfecting the redemption of men.

Became obedient unto] (4) That he did all his lifetime patiently bear the
yoke he took upon him, fulfilling his Fathers commands in all things, even
unto death, or the laying down his humane life for his sheep, according to his
Fathers command.

Of the Cross] (5) That he was obedient to the violent, cursed, most
dishonorable death of the Cross.

Verse. 9. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name.

10. That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, and things under the Earth.

11. And that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father.

Here in these three verses we have Christ's reward according to his humane
Nature, for his being humbled for us, which is by his exaltation, and that for
us too: Whence we may gather; Argument 8. to this purpose, As Christ after he
had humbled himself to reconcile men unto God, and to procure the confirmation
of peace betwixt the parties, was exalted by God, and crowned with glory: so
you may expect exaltation, if you humble your selves that ye may maintain the
Churches concord: Therefore if ye will keep the true way to glory, you must
imitate Christ, and humble your selves: for the preservation of unity.

Wherefore] The meaning is this. Because Christ of his own accord has humbled
himself for our sakes in our flesh, being made obedient even unto death, God
has for our sakes, and in our flesh also advanced him to the highest honor:
For having raised Christ from the dead to a glorious and immortal life, he
lifted him up to the highest Heaven, and placed him at his own right hand, in
dignity and authority above all creatures; he has according to his gracious
will, and the gracious dispensation of the business of our salvation, given him
a name above every name, glorifying him with that glory which he had from the
beginning with the Father, (to wit, by manifesting the glory of the deity,
which before was obscured, and by making known the hypostatical union of the
humane Nature) commanding and causing that Christ crucified should be
preached, rule, be adored, be called upon every where as true God, and the
only begotten Son of God.

At the name] The Apostle shows how the efficacy and effect of this exaltation
of Christ does follow, viz. That every creature shall at length be subject
unto Christ, so that unless it willingly submit, it shall at last be compelled
to acknowledge his name, or his power, authority and dominion (which is
expressed by a Metonymy of bending the knee.) As to heavenly things, there is
no doubt but Angels and the spirits of just men shall bow the knee, that is,
submit to him; for spirits properly have no knees. As to earthly things, all
men shall at last, if not willingly, at least unwillingly and compelled confess
Christ crucified to be the Judge, the Lord, and the Son of God. And lastly,
for things under the earth, (by which name are understood the Devils, and the
spirits of the damned, who are in prison) All those unclean spirits shall
appear before his tribunal, whether they will or no, and shall yield to the
sentence of the Judge with acknowledgement of his dominion and Majesty. And
thus all his enemies* whoever they be, that now oppose him, shall bow the knee
unto him.

And every tongue] Lastly, lest all acknowledgement of the name and power of
Christ should wholly seem to be deferred till the last judgment; he shows
that it shall come to pass, that every tongue, or that of every Country and
Nation Christ shall receive glory, either in the voluntary confession and
profession of the converted Gentiles, that Christ is the Lord, and that to the
glory of the Father (who will be honored in the glorifying of his only
begotten Son) or, seeing that many shall not be converted, it shall come to
pass at last in the judgment of God, that the dominion of Christ shall be
clearly and fully manifested, when all creatures in Heaven, in Earth, and Hell,
shall acknowledge him to be the Lord.

Verse. 12. Wherefore, my Beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling. Argum. 9. For the maintenance of peace, drawn from
what went before in the manner of a conclusion. Hitherto ye have ever
hearkened* to me, and when I was present with you, ye obeyed my exhortations:
Therefore ye should much more now in my absence practice this my exhortation
to the preservation of Peace among you, seeing ye have fewer helps for your
edification, and more enemies to ^ow discord among you.

With fear] Argum. 10. Ye should finish your begun voyage to salvation, in an
endeavor after righteousness, with fear and trembling, lest ye offend in the
way, or any way provoke God to anger: Therefore you should preserve concord
among you, viz. in Faith, Love, and the study of good works, as in verse. 2.

Verse. 13. For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do, of his
good pleasure. Argum. 11. Ye have nothing in you that ye should boast of, or
for which through contention ye should contemn one another: But every good
thing in you is from God, who of his own free and gracious good will causes in
you both to will that which is good, and to perform it: Therefore ye should
preserve agreement in Faith, Love, and the study of good works, and finish your
begun voyage of salvation in fear and trembling, lest ye provoke and anger God
working in you.

Verse. 14. Do all things without murmurings, and disputings: Argum. 12. Which
is proposed after the manner of an exhortation, Ye ought to avoid and abhor,
not only open strife and contentions, but also all malicious and secret
grudging: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 15. That ye may be blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God, without
rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as
lights in the world:

16. Holding forth the word of life, that I may rejoice in the day of Christ,
that I have not run in vain, neither labored in vain.

Argum. 3. There is no other way to approve your selves true Christians in the
sight of the wicked, but by seeking peace, and avoiding contention. Therefore
you should preserve concord, and avoid contentions: The general Christian
duties which he here requires, he commends unto them in different
expressions, ye ought, says he, to be blameless, such as no one can justly
accuse, and harmless, or sincere, in which appears innocence and purity, and as
the Sons of God, without rebuke, ye should resemble God your Father in
holiness and innocence, so that even wicked and perverse enemies may not justly
reprove you, or find fault with any thing in you; ye ought as the greater and
less spiritual lights, both in word and work, to show your selves examples of
righteousness to the world lying in darkness. Lastly, being illuminated by the
Sun of Righteousness, or by the living Word of God, ye should by your words
and works commend and communicate the light, truth and virtue of this word, to
the perishing world, that, as much as in you lies, it may be saved.

That I may rejoyce] Argum. 14. If ye live unanimously, and behave your selves
as it becomes Believers, I shall rejoice in your salvation at the day of
judgment, when it shall appear that my labors in the Gospel have not been in
vain, but have conduced to your salvation: Therefore unless ye grudge me and
your selves, so much happiness, labor for agreement in faith, and the study of
good works.

Verse. 17. Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your
Faith, I joy and rejoice with you all.

18. For the same cause also do ye joy and rejoice with me.

Argum. 15. Containing a consolation, lest they should be troubled at the
Apostles afflictions; to this purpose, I brought you by the Gospel unto Christ
as a sacrifice, that your evil affections being killed, ye may be presented
unto God a holy and acceptable sacrifice: And if the spiritual sacrifice of my
Ministry, and of your Faith, may be perfected by the blood of my Martyrdom,
as by an additional offering, I shall rejoice at my advantage in it, and be
glad in your behalf for yours: Do ye therefore the like for me, and rejoice
in the perfection of this unanimous sacrifice, and whatever befalls, rejoice
ye at the fruit of my labors. This is the same with the Position, verse. 2.
Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same love, etc.

The Second Part.
Verse. 19. But I trust in the Lord Jesus, to send Timotheus shortly unto you,
that I also may be of good comfo^t, when I know your estate. The second part
of the Chapter follows, wherein he comforts the Philippians by the
commendation of Timothy, who was about to come unto them; (adding hope of his
coming) and of Epaphroditus, who was now come to them: for the Philippians had
need of these helps against seducers, and ill-spirited idle men, who lay in
wait to ensnare them, and to make work for them.

That I also] The Apostle shows the end of his sending Timothy to be this,
That they might receive comfort from the tidings of his freedom from bonds,
brought unto them by Timothy, and that he also by Timothies return from them
might have comfort from the tidings of their prosperous condition.

Verse. 20. For I have no man like-minded, who will naturally care for your
state. The Arguments of Timothies commendation are three.

Argum. 1. Because there was no one who had so ready and sincere a mind for
their salvation, or their state, and to further their comfort, as Timothy.

Verse. 21. For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.
Argum. 2. Because that when almost all that were with him, seeking their own
profit and ease, did refuse to take so long a journey for the Philippians
comfort; Timothy alone was ready for the journey, preferring the business of
Christ and the Church, before his own ease and advantage.

Verse. 22. But ye know the proof of him, that as a Son with the Father, he
has served with me in the Gospel. Argum. 3. Because they knew by experience
that Timothy had formerly served them in the Gospel with the same mind that the
Apostle did.

Verse. 23. Him therefore I hope to send presently, so soon as I shall see how
it will go with me.

24. But I trust in the Lord, that I also my self shall come shortly.

He shows that the time of sending Timothy shall be as soon as he is assured
of his freedom from bonds; he also gives them hope of his own coming: for
he himself did hope that by the goodness of God, ere it were long, he should
be delivered from prison.

Verse. 25. Yet I supposed it necessary, to send unto you Epaphroditus, my
brother and companion in labor, and fellow-souldier, but your messenger, and
he that ministered to my wants. Th^s far of the hope of the Apostles own
coming, and of Timothies; now follows the sending back of Epaphroditus the
Philippians Pastor, who had brought money for Paul's use, and for a time had
ministered to him in prison: He commends him in five honorable Epithites or
Titles. (1) His Brother. (2) His companion in labor. (3) Fellow-souldier. (4)
The faithful messenger of the Philippians: And (5) The public Minister to the
Apostles necessity in prison.

Verse. 26. For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because
that ye had heard that he had been sick. He adds four causes of sending him
back, which would serve also for his commendation. (1) The Pastoral love of
Epaphroditus toward the Philippians. (2) His trouble for the Philippians
grief, because he knew they would hear certainly of his sickness, but nothing
of his recovery.

Verse. 27. For indeed he was sick nigh unto death, but God had mercy on him;
and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.
He confirms the tidings of Epaphroditus his sickness, and commends the special
grace of God shown to Epaphroditus and himself, whereby God was careful to
restore Epaphroditus to health, lest the Apostle should be too much afflicted.

Verse. 28. I sent him therefore the more carefully, that when ye see him
again, ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful. (3) The joy of
the Philippians was another cause. (4) The ease of the Apostles sickness, who
for the Philippians sake would deprive himself of Epaphroditus his service,
otherwise very necessary to him, rather than he would suffer them any longer
to want their Minister.

Verse. 29. Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness, and hold such
in reputation. Hence he wishes them to receive him according to his worth,
and to esteem of him and such Ministers, as Jewels and treasures.

Verse. 30. Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not
regarding his life to supply your lack of service toward me. He adds four
Reasons of his desire; (1.) Because he had carried on the work of Christ in
comforting the Apostle. (2.) Because he had ministered to the Apostle with
danger of his life. (3.) Because he preferred the service he undertook before
his own life, being more heedless of his own health, than of taking care of the
Apostles business. (4.) Because he had supplied the Philippians absence (who
as they ought) did earnestly desire to serve the Apostles necessities.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter the Apostle exhorts them joyfully to rely upon Christ alone,
or only upon his Righteousness, Grace, and Virtue, as abundantly sufficient
for holiness and happiness, that they would beware of false Apostles, and
follow the examples of the Apostles and faithful Ministers of Christ.

There are three members of the first Exhortation contained in the three first
verses. ( 1.) That they would rejoice in Christ alone. ( 2.) That they would
take heed to themselves of false Jewish teachers. ( 3.) That they would imitate
the example of the Apostles and faithful, who do wholly adhere unto Christ.

The Arguments of this Exhortation are nine, all which do urge, that cleaving
unto Christ, they should follow the example of the Apostles.

Verse. 1. Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord, to write the same things
to you, to me indeed is not grievous, ^ut for you it is safe. The first member
of the Exhortation, That they would rejoice in Christ, that is, that with joy
they would rest upon his Righteousness and Virtue, nor seek for any other helps
to their salvation besides him: This is propounded as the end of the whole
former Doctrine, and as a brief of all Christian duties.

The same things] Argum. 1. By prevention of an Objection. This Exhortation is
so profitable for you, that it is not at all troublesome to me to inculcate and
repeat it often to you, nor should it be tedious to you to hear the same
often: Therefore cleave unto Christ, earnestly embracing this Doctrine of his
sufficiency.

Verse. 2. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. The
second member of the Exhortation is, That they would beware of false Apostles,
who endeavoring after an impossibility, would join righteousness by the works
and ceremonies of the Law, with free justification by faith.

Dogs] Argum. 2. These false Apostles that act the part of Jews, confounding
the righteousness of the Law with the righteousness of faith, and so teaching
that we must not rest only on Christ's righteousness, are not holy worshippers
of God, as they pretend, but unclean Dogs, barking at the pure Doctrine of the
Gospel, and defaming the sincere servants of Christ, with their revilings: They
are not upholders of good works, but evil workers, they are not worthy to have
the honor of Circumcision, but they shall be called authors of Concision and
perdition, because that by their false doctrine, they do ruin and separate
both themselves and others from Christ, and of these you must take heed by
reason of the imminent danger: Therefore you must rely only upon Christ's Grace
and Virtue.

Verse. 3. For we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. The third member
of the Exhortation is, wherein he proposes the example of the Apostles and
faithful, who do wholly cleave unto Christ, first in general, then more
particularly, further repeating the Exhortation, unto verse. 18.

We are] Argum. 3. Only we Apostles, and other believers who rest upon
Christ's righteousness, are to be honored with the title of truly Circumcised,
viz. Those (1.) who worship God with an internal and spiritual affection of the
heart. And (2.) who glory in Jesus Christ as the only and sufficient Savior.
(3.) Who do not place our confidence in Ceremonies, in carnal Circumcision, in
any external privileges, or any other such Helps: Therefore you should, as we
do, only rest upon the Grace and Virtue of Christ, if ye will be accounted
truly Circumcised.

Verse. 4. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh; if any other man
thinks that he has whereof he may trust in the flesh, I more. Argum. 4.
From the particular example of the Apostle, preventing an Objection: I Paul,
who have more cause to glory in fleshly, or external privileges, than any
false Apostles can have, do nevertheless, renouncing all confidence in
privileges, or my works, only rely on Christ, and endeavor through Christ
alone to make progress in holiness unto salvation: Therefore you ought to
acquiesce with me in the Grace and Virtue of Christ alone.

Verse. 5. Circumcised the eighth day, of the flock of Israel, of the Tribe of
Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the Law a Pharisee:

6. Concerning zeal, persecuting the Church, touching the righteousness which
is in the Law blameless.

He clearly explaines this example, by reckoning up eight causes of carnal
boasting, verse. 5. and 6. (1.) I am circumcised, and so brought into the number
of Gods people. (2.) I was circumcised the eighth day, exactly according to the
Law, not as a Proselyte, but as a born Jew. (3.) I am of the most famous people
of Israel. (4.) And of one of the nobler Tribes of Israel, Benjamin, who with
Joseph was born of the free mother, Rachel, out of which Tribe, Saul the first
King was chosen, after whose name it may ^eem that the Apostle was called Saul.
(5.) I am an Hebrew of the Hebrews, that is, of such a family that has not
mingled it self by marriage with the Gentiles. (6.) I was a Pharisee, which is
the most famous sect among the Jews. (7.) I was forward in zeal above other
Pharisees, even unto persecuting the Church; this zeal though it were worst in
it self, yet it was highly accounted in the eyes of those who did glory in the
zeal of the Law. (8.) In outward righteousness, which may be obtained by the
Law, I was before men blameless: Verse. 7. But what things were gain to me,
those I counted loss for Christ.

First he reckons up all his privileges, and more matter of boasting, than
any false Apostles could have. And then he casts away all these ornaments of
Religion, which were highly esteemed by the Jews: And though formerly before
his conversion to Christ, he had prized these, falsely thinking they did much
conduce to salvation, yet now after he had attained the knowledge of Christ,
being instructed by the Holy Ghost, he did vilify them, yea for Christ, he
did account them all hurtful to him, so far as they drew him from the faith of
Christ, or so far as they cost him some trouble and labor, that he should
renounce them all, and keep himself pure, lest they should any ways hinder his
faith in Christ: For it is a very difficult thing for those who excel in any
thing, and have any privileges, not at all to trust and rely upon them.

Verse. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ. In the third place,
besides these things which in Judaism he did excel others in, he throws away
all things else: For it is known that he converted many thousand souls unto
God, that he did, and suffered many things for Christ, in which if any one
might glory, he more: yet in the matter of justification he rejects all his
inherent righteousness, or all his own works which he had done since faith, or
should do, as losses and hindrances, not that it repented him of his labors,
or that he did not expect the reward, through grace promised unto them, but
that those privileges, and confidence of works would altogether hinder the
application of Christ's righteousness, if in the matter of justification he
should bring them to Gods Tribunal, where works exclude grace, and grace
excludes works: nor did it grieve him for this loss, because it was exceedingly
recompensed by the excellency of Christ's righteousness, which was imputed to
him, and should be more and more applied to him by faith.

For whom] He proves the sincerity of his purpose in rejecting all things, for
the desire of having Christ's righteousness, by two Signs; (1.) That he forsook
Friends, Country, and all things which could be dear to him in the flesh; when
he first betook himself to the preaching of Christ, and the bearing of his
Cross. (2.) That being rejected, he did despise them as base things, in
respect of Christ's righteousness, or in respect of Christ applied by faith unto
righteousness. Here the force of the Argument more clearly appears, I who may
trust to outward privileges and works, if any one may, do renounce them all,
that I may rely upon the Righteousness and Virtue of Christ: Therefore you,
etc.

That I may win Christ] He gives several Reasons of this his settled
resolution, which may serve as Arguments to confirm the Exhortation.

Argum. 5. I renounce all privileges, and the merits of my own works, that I
may gain Christ, who does not communicate himself, and his Righteousness to
any, but such as have renounced their own righteousness, and throw aside all
confidence in their own works and worthiness: Therefore you must do the same
with me unless ye will lose Christ.

That I may win] Argum. 6. By renouncing confidence in my own works and
privileges, and embracing Christ in their stead, I gain Christ, and all things
that are Christ's, so far I am from losing any thing, by this renouncing my own
works and privileges: Therefore do you likewise, as well as I, cast aside all
carnal confidence, and win Christ by relying on him.

Verse. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the Righteousness which
is of God by faith. Argum. 7. This explains the former. When God comes to
judgment, I cannot be found in Christ, but by renouncing my own merits, being
void of all confidence in the inherent righteousness of my own works, and
endued with that Righteousness of Christ, which God gives by grace, and we
apply by faith: Therefore you, as well as I, must renounce your own merits, and
rely upon Christ's Virtue and Righteousness, unless you will be found out of
Christ at the day of Judgment.

Verse. 10. That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death. This Verse
depends upon Verse. 8. The meaning is this, I account all matter of confidence
out of Christ as dung, to the end that I may know Christ, etc. Whence we have
Argum. 8. I shall never be able by experience truly to know how faithful,
good, powerful, etc. Christ is, unless I more and more renounce all matter or
object of confidence besides Christ, nor shall I otherwise ever experimentally
find the virtue of his Resurrection to free me from the guilt and power of
sin, nor the fellowship and virtue of his sufferings, in which consists
conformity with his death; therefore I count all things but dung, that I may
more and more have the benefit of this fruit: Therefore do you likewise rest
upon Christ, renouncing your own excellencies, that ye may more and more find
his Grace and Virtue.

Verse. 11. If by any means I might attain to the Resurrection of the dead. He
explains what he had said of the Communion of Christ's sufferings and
conformity with his death, and adds Argum. 9. To this purpose. After that I
have now renounced all my privileges, and all the worth of my own works, as
dung, that I might win Christ, though I know I must tread Christ's steps in my
journey to salvation, by the continual sorrows of the Cross, and the communion
of his sufferings, yet I shall think I have done well if I may any ways at
length attain the perfection of Holiness and happiness in the resurrection of
the dead: Be ye therefore of the same mind with me, and do as I do.

The Second Part.
Verse. 12. Not as though I had already attaianed, either were already perfect,
but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am
apprehended of Christ Jesus. The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein
the Apostle exhorts them, that imitating himself and other faithful Ministers,
they would make proficiency in holiness, to which end he uses seven
Arguments. And in this place he proposes himself for an example to them, by
removing an objection. Some one might say, O blessed Paul, who has renounced
all things, that he might know Christ, and gain him, and who is now made so
conformable to Christ, that there is nothing wanting to him, but the reward of
immortality: He answers that this is not the meaning of his words: as if he
should have said, I do not speak this as if I had attained the perfection of
Holiness, or were already perfected, but I follow after the prize of
perfection. Whence Argum. 1. I am not absolute or complete in happiness, but I
follow after perfection: Therefore ye that are likewise imperfect should do
the same thing that I do.

That I may apprehend] Argum. 2. I am apprehended by Christ in effectual
vocation, to this very end, that being converted, I may profit in Faith and
Holiness, until I be completed; and to this end I follow after this mark,
that I may apprehend it: Therefore you also should do as I do.

Verse. 13. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one
thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before,

14. I press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.

Argum. 3. Out of a sense of my imperfection in holiness, I do not regard or
call to mind the progress which I have already made, but with as much eagerness
as I can I run the race which is set before me, that I may at length attain
the prize in the end of this life, and the reward of life eternal, to which God
from above has called me in Christ: All ye therefore, even who are full
grown, and who have hitherto made, or think that ye have made the greatest
proficiencies, whether with others or your selves, do ye think and endeavor
the same thing that I do; that is, having forsaken all carnal confidence,
glorying in Christ's Righteousness alone, by virtue of him, seek after
proficiency in holiness: that ye may at length come unto the blessed
resurrection.

And if in any] Argum. 4. If ye being seduced by false Apostles, think
otherwise of Christian perfection. I hope God who converted you unto the Faith
of the Gospel, will also reveal this truth unto you, and either will cause that
ye may be of my opinion touching the Righteousness of Christ, and his virtue
for your increase in Holiness, or else will manifest unto you, how dangerous
and evil it is for you to take up another opinion different from my Doctrine:
Therefore you, etc.

Verse: 16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same Rule, let us mind the same thing. He limits his hope touching the saving
revelation of the truth, whereupon he speaks unto those that are desirous of
truth and peace, inciting them by a special exhortation to constancy and
agreement in that truth wherein they did already agree, touching grace and
salvation by Christ according to the Rule of Scripture, not daring to hope well
of any but such as followed that Rule; as if he had said, Let us, who are
lovers of Truth and Peace, and who embrace the Scripture as the only rule of
saving Truth, persevere in that which by Gods goodness we have attained unto,
and walking according to this Rule, let us be of the same mind: but let us
leave the rest to God and his Discipline, which is set down in Scripture.

Verse. 17. Brethren, be ye followers together of me, and mark them which
walk so, as ye have us for an ensample. Argum. 5. Besides me you have other
servants of God which tread the same way that I do in the matter of doctrine
and conversation, who teach nothing but Faith in Christ, and holiness to be
obtained by him: Therefore follow ye those examples.

Verse. 18. (For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: Argum. 6. There are
many Teachers, false Apostles, and false Brethren, who are enemies to the Cross
of Christ, that is, who teach that sins may be expiated, and men saved,
otherwise than by the Cross of Christ alone, and who will not profess the truth
of Christ where there is any danger of the Cross, or of persecution: Therefore
do ye the more diligently observe and imitate the manner of my doctrine and
life, and of other such Pastors like me.

Told you often] He confirms this Argument touching their shunning of
Impostors (who did draw men from the Righteousness and Holiness, which is by
the Cross of Christ) with seven Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because this is not the first time, But I have often formerly
forewarned you of the coming of these vile fellows.

Weeping] Reas. 2. Because now weeping I advise you to beware of them,
seriously grieving that such men have crept into the Church, and are received
by some for true Teachers.

Enemies] Reas. 3. Because they are Christ's enemies in this very thing, that
they are enemies to the virtue of Christ's sufferings: and who will not bear the
Cross of Christ for the defense of the Truth.

Verse. 19. Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory
is in their shame, who mind earthly things.) Whose end] Reas. 4. Because those
Impostors shall perish, and as many as follow their ways: Therefore shun them.

Belly] Reas. 5. Because they are servants and lovers of their own belly, that
is, they care neither for God, nor the salvation of men, but only their own
gluttony and pleasures.

Glory] Reas. 6. Because that glory which they seek among men by their riches,
prosperity, and carnal prerogatives, shall be their disgrace.

Earthly things] Reas. 7. Because they only savor earthly things, as riches,
honors, friends, gluttony, pleasures, and such like: Therefore ye that desire
a spiritual and heavenly life must shun them.

Verse. 20. For our conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, Argum. 7. Our condition is very heavenly, who
trusting only in the grace and virtue of Christ, strive for proficiency in
holiness: We are true Inhabitants of Heaven, and therein we are conversant in
mind and affection, where we shall sometime be glorified: Therefore follow
our example. But the happiness of true Believers is declared in these four
things. (1) That we have right unto the heavenly City, wherein we are now
conversant in mind and affection, as Citizens of the Kingdom which is above.
(2) That knowing Christ is corporally and locally in Heaven, we expect him to
come from thence at the last day, not as a Judge, who will condemn us, but as
our Savior, who will perfectly accomplish our salvation.

Verse. 21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto
his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue
all things. (3) That though our bodies are now corruptible, vile and miserable,
yet Christ will hereafter thoroughly change them, as to the condition which they
are now in, and free them from corruption.

Fashioned] That (4] Christ will make our bodies conformable unto his glorious
body, that as Christ's body continues the same, as to substance and lineaments,
as it was in the earth, but is changed in qualities; so our bodies also shall
remain the same in substance, and being freed from their base, shall be
adorned with glorious qualities.

According to the working] He confirms the certainty of this future condition
from Christ's power and efficacy, whereby he can destroy death and the grave,
and subject all creatures unto himself, and therefore is able to endow our
bodies with what qualities he please.

CHAP. IV.
THere remains now the last way of confirming the Philippians in Faith and
Holiness, by some Exhortations, and a Commendation of their liberality toward
him.

There are especially two parts of the Chapter: In the first he exhorts them
unto Christian virtues, unto verse. 10. In the other he shows his gratitude
toward the Philippians for that present which they sent him, to verse. 20.
After these follows the conclusion of the whole Epistle.

Verse. 1. Therefore, my Brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my Joy and
Crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved. The Exhortations to
Christian Virtues are seven.

(1) That they would safely keep the Doctrine of Christ's Grace and Virtue,
steadfastly persevering in Faith and Holiness. The Arguments hereof are two, (1)
From the earnest love which the person exhorting bears toward them, which he
discovers by various compellations. (2) Ye have hitherto been so constant, and
have so profited in the Faith of the Gospel, that you have brought both joy and
credit to me your Teacher: Therefore hold on still.

Verse. 2. I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntiche, that they be of the same
mind in the Lord. Exhort. (2) Is particular, unto two women that were no mean
ones in the Church, who, as it seems, did not agree with the Church in matters
pertaining to Religion, and were at variance betwixt themselves, these he
entreats by name, that laying aside disagreement in opinions and affections,
they would maintain such a holy and sincere peace, as God should approve of.

Verse. 3. And I entreat thee also, true yoke follow, help those Women which
labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my
fellow laborers, whose names are in the book of life. Exhort. (3) To some one
of the Pastors, who was intimate with the Apostle, and better known to him than
others, that he would do his endeavor to reduce these women to the right way,
and to agreement betwixt themselves. The reason i^, Because that when the
Apostle did first gather a Church at Philippi, these two women did earnestly
labor and strive, according to their place, to promote the business of the
Gospel, together with other brethren, whereof Clement was one, and some other
private believers who were the Apostles helpers in gathering the Church of the
Philippians, all which though it were needless to name, yet he says their
names were written in the book of life, that is, they are of the Elect, which
may suffice them.

Verse. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say, Rejoice. Exhort. (4.)
That acknowledging the matter of joy in Christ, they would rejoice with
steadfast gladness in both prosperity and adversity, and in every change of
their condition whatsoever.

Verse. 5. Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand.
Exhort. (5.) That they would not deal in strictness of Law with their
neighbors, but rather considering their condition, lose something of their own
right, that every one might take notice of this their moderation. The reason
is, because the Lord is in the midst of us, by the presence of his Spirit, and
also his visible coming to Judgment is not far off.

Verse. 6. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.
Exhort. (6.) That endeavoring to fulfill their duties, they would take heed of
having a distrustful carefulness in any business, and that in prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving they would cast their cares into the lap of God.

Verse. 7. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. The reason of the Exhortation is,
because by this means they might gain that peace or tranquillity of mind
(transcending any capacity of natural reason) which God has granted to
believers, as if thereby he would guard their hearts by a kind of Military
engine, against the temptations of the Devil and the world, and would preserve
their minds steadfast in Christ.

Verse. 8. Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Exhort. (7.) That
they would not be averse from any virtue which they observed among the
Heathens, but on the other side, after a serious examination would embrace
whatever they found true, grave, or honorable, just, and pure, and whatever
was lovely in manners, or worthy of commendation.

Verse. 9. Those things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do; and the God of peace shall be with you. He confirms this
Exhortation by two Arguments.

Argum. 1. From his own example, that the Apostle had both taught and done
these things when he was among them, as they themselves could witness.

And the God] Argum. 2. From the blessed effect, that by this means, they
should find the peace of God, and communion with the God of peace more firm
and constant.

The Second Part.
Verse. 10. But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care
of me has flourished again, wherein you were also careful, but ye lacked
opportunity. The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein that he may show
his thankfulness to the Philippians, for the money they sent him by
Epaphroditus, he commends this their action by ten Arguments. (1.) Because
that relief sent from them was very acceptable to him. (2.) Because the sending
of that present did proceed from the virtue and habit of Christian liberallty
which was in them, which habit like a living root, had manifested it self in
this action. Argum. (3.) Because hereby it might be perceived their
backwardness to send this succor, was not caused by any defect of charity, but
want of opportunity.

Verse. 11. Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.

12. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, and
in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to
abound and suffer need.

By the way in preventing an Objection, he removes a suspicion of himself, as
if he had been more sorrowful before the receiving of this succor, or that
for his own sake he was glad of the money sent to him: This he proves by his
own equanimity and moderation of mind in every condition, that he was one who
had learned to bear both prosperity and adversity with an equal mind, and was
ever content with the present maintenance of his life.

Verse. 13. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me. He
ascribes the glory of this equanimity and moderate mind in all things unto
Christ, by virtue of whom he was enabled thereunto.

Verse. 14. Notwithstanding, ye have well done that you did communicate with my
affliction. Argum. (4.) He commends their deed, in that it was a communicating
with his affliction.

Verse. 15. Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the Gospel,
when I departed from Macedonia, no Church communicated with me, as concerning
giving and receiving, but ye only. Argum 5. Because they only of all the
Churches in Macedonia, from the first preaching of the Gospel, until that time,
had communicated with him, by way of giving and receiving.

Verse. 16. For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity.
Argum. 6. That this was the third time they had exercised their liberality
toward him.

Verse. 17. Not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit that may abound to
your account. Argum. 7. Because this was a fruit of their faith which God would
recompense at the day of judgment, in which fruit he professes, he is more
delighted than in any particular advantage of his own.

Verse. 18. But I have all, and abound, I am full, having received the things of
Epaphroditus which were sent from you, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable, well-pleasing unto God. Argum. 8. That the sum of money they writ to
him of, was very large (at least in respect of the Apostles esteem and
thriftiness) all which whole sum he acknowledges was delivered to him by
Epaphroditus.

An odour] Argum. 9. That this benevolence was no less pleasing and acceptable
to God, than any sacrifice which was wont to be offered under the Law with the
most fragrant incense.

Verse. 19. But my God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in
glory, by Christ Jesus. Argum. 10. Because that God will reward them in this
life for what ever they have bestowed on him, and that not for any merit of
theirs, but out of his own rich and glorious grace through Christ.

Verse. 20. Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Now
follows the conclusion of the Epistle, which has three parts. In the first,
he praises God for all the aforesaid benefits bestowed, or to be bestowed,
as the God, and Father of Believers, who out of his Covenant and Fatherly love,
does, and will bestow all good things on them.

Verse. 21. Salute every Saint in Christ Jesus; the Brethren which are with me
greet you.

22. All the Saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's household.

In the second he places his, and those Evangelists salutations which were
with him, whom he particularly calls Brethren, in respect of their Pastoral
office; then he adds the salutations of the rest of the Saints which were at
Rome, putting a distinction betwixt Brethren, laboring in the Ministry of the
Gospel, and other Saints, among whom he particularly names those of the
household of Nero, that they might know there were also some Courtiers even in
Neroes Palace, who durst profess Faith in Christ, and communion with other
loving Christians.

Verse. 23. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. In the
third he shuts up the Epistle with the accustomed Apostolical benediction,
wishing the Philippians the favor of Christ, and all good things which flow
therefrom.

The Epistle of Paul to the COLOSSIANS Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
THe City of the Colossians was placed in Asia the Lesser, viz. in that Country
which was called Phrygia Pacatiana, not far from Hierapolis and Laodicea, which
Cities the Apostle expressly mentions in this Epistle.

The occasion of his writing was this, The Apostle understood by Epaphras
Pastor to the Colossians, and other credible witnesses, that the Colossians
were infested with false Apostles, who labored partly to draw them to Jewish
Ceremonies, partly to Philosophical Speculations, about the worshipping of
Angels: That he might therefore establish them in the truth, he evidently
shows that in Christ alone, and his Gospel, the whole knowledge of the Divine
Will, and all the helps to eternal salvation are sufficiently explained, and
that nothing in this kind is to be enquired after out of Christ and his
Doctrine. This Epistle has the same Argument with-that to the Ephesians; and
may be justly called a Com pendium of that.

The principal parts of this Epistle, besides the direction of it, and the
Conclusion (which comprehends salutations and private affairs) are two. In the
first, he commends the Doctrine of Epaphras, to the establishing the
Colossians Faith, and more especially he sets forth Christ magnificently with
his benefits, exhorting them to constancy in the Faith of Christ, and to avoid
corruptions contrary to sound Doctrine, Chap. 1. and 2.

In the second part he gives common Precepts pertaining to the right
instruction of the faithful in their conversations, wherewith he mixes certain
special directions, serviceable to the directing of all orders in the Family,
Chap. 3. and 4.

CHAP. I.
IN the first Chapter, after the direction of the Epistle, verse. 1. and 2. he
confirms the Faith of the Colossians, and his love toward them, four ways.
First, By giving thanks for their sincere conversion, to verse. 9. Secondly, By
praying for them, to verse. 12. Thirdly, By declaring thankfully the certainty
of our redemption founded in the Grace of God, and the excellency of Christ, to
verse. 23. Fourthly, By exhorting them to perseverance, to the end of the
Chapter.

Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and Timotheus our Brother, In the
direction of the Epistle, First of all the persons saluting, Paul and Timothy,
are described: Paul from the authority of his embassage, granted immediately
from Christ, and from God the Father, through the mediation of Christ, by whose
will he executed his Apostleship: But Timothy (whom he took to be the
witness of his Apostolical diligence for the confirming the Colossians) is
described from his fellowship with Paul, as his Brother, not only for
profession of Faith, but also for the office of preaching the same Gospel.

Verse. 2. To the Saints and faithful Brethren in Christ, which are at Coloss:
Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Furthermore, the persons saluted are described, or the Members of the Colossian
Church, and are called. (1) Brethren, Because they are begot again by the same
Father, to the same hope of the inheritance. (2) Holy, Because they are
consecrated to God, and sanctified by the Holy Ghost. (3) Faithful, Because
they were ingrafted into Christ by Faith. Lastly, By an Apostolical blessing,
Grace and Peace are applied to the Colossians, Grace comprehends all the
special effects of Gods favor, which by way of Sanctification tend to
happiness. But Peace comprehends all the degrees of happiness, even to
perfection in Heaven; God the Father and Jesus Christ is counted the Author and
efficient cause of good things, as he is the Son and Mediator, he is after
the Father, in effecting according to order of working.

Verse. 3. We give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
praying always for you.

Verse. 4. Since we heard of your Faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which
you have to all the Saints;

The first way of his confirming the Faith of the Colossians is by giving
thanks for their sincere conversion. Of this kind there are seven Arguments,
all which do prove that the Colossians ought to be strengthened in Faith.

Argum. 1. You gave me much cause of thanksgiving and prayer to God, after I
heard of your conversion to the Faith: Therefore even upon this account you
ought to be steadfast in the Faith.

And love] Argum. 2. The sincerity of your Faith in Christ appeared openly in
your love toward all the Saints, the report whereof came to my hearing:
Therefore it is fit you should be stablished in the Faith.

Verse. 5. For the hope which is laid up for you in Heaven, whereof ye heard
before in the word of the Truth of the Gospel, Argum. 3. I know of a truth that
the happiness ye hope for is laid up in Heaven for you, and as it were
conferred upon you, I give thanks to God for that favor: Therefore, etc.

Ye heard] Argum. 4. Confirming the former; You have the unquestionable Word
of God, the Word of Gospel Truth, for the foundation of your Faith and Hope:
Therefore ought you to be steadfast in the Faith.

Verse. 6. Which is come unto you, as it is in all the world, and brings forth
fruit, as it does also in you, since the day ye heard of it, and knew the
Grace of God in truth. Argum. 5. The Word of the Gospel, whereby ye are
converted, is the same Gospel which was dispersed abroad to the rest of the
world, and has the same efficacy to make you fruitful from the day wherein by
Faith ye embraced the Grace of God, which he has communicated to other
Christian-Churches: Therefore it is fitting you should be established in the
Faith.

Verse. 7. As ye also learned of Epaphras, our dear Fellow Servants, who is for
you a faithful Minister of Christ: Argum. 6. Your Pastor Epaphras, taught you
no other things than we Apostles every where teach, who therefore willingly
acknowledge Epaphras our fellow servants, and a faithful Minister of Christ:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 8. Who also declared unto us your love in the Spirit. Argum. 7. You have
given a special token of your sincere Faith, viz. the demonstration of your
Christian love toward me, whereof I have the testimony of Epaphras your
Minister; which, as all the former, affords me Arguments of thanksgiving unto
God, and of the confirmation of your Faith toward God.

Verse. 9. For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his
Will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. The second way of confirming
the Colossians Faith, and of the Apostles love toward them, is his earnest and
constant prayer for them, excited upon the report of their Faith in Christ, and
love toward the Saints; there are six branches of his prayer.

(1) I pray that ye may obtain a large measure of knowledge of the Divine Will
revealed in the Word of the Gospel concerning Christ and his benefits.

In all Wisdome] (2) I pray that this knowledge may abound in you in wisdom
and spiritual understanding, i. e. in an holy contemplation of the mysteries of
Faith, and in a prudent application of knowledge received to practice in the
exercise of every virtue.

Verse. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. I pray (3)
That you may walk, or lead your lives, worthy of the Lord, or as it becomes
those that are converted in the sight of God, that in all things you may please
him.

Every] I pray (4) That you may be fruitful, not in one, but in all kinds of
good works.

May increase] I pray (5) That you may grow up in experience, and
acknowledgement of the Divine Virtue through obedience of his Will,
endeavoring more and more to know, love, and cleave to him more and more.

Verse. 11. Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto
all patience and long-suffering, with joyfulness: I pray (6) That such a
measure of heavenly strength may be vouchsafed to you, out of the rich
treasury of his glorious power, that you may be able to endure any burden of
afflictions, or persecution, with a good courage, and that so long as it shall
seem good to the pleasure of God, not only without disturbance of mind, but
with the greatest delight, and rejoicing: Therefore ye ought to be
established in the Faith, unless you think the prayers which the Holy Ghost
stirs up in my heart for you are in vain.

Verse. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. The third way of
confirming their Faith, is a thankful declaration of the certainty of our
Redemption, founded in the Grace of God, and the excellency of Christ's person.
The reasons of the thanksgiving are five.

Reas. 1. Because God the Father has prepared us to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: This benefit is more especially seen in the following Reasons. (1) The
donor of the benefit, is God the Father, the Author and first Fountain of all
good, bearing a Fatherly affection toward us. (2) When we are said to be
made meet, etc. Our misery is presupposed, and that we are unfit by nature,
born wretched, and polluted by sin, and the sons of wrath. (3) Although we
were unmeet, yet the Grace of God has made us meet by an efficacious vocation,
and regeneration of us. (4) The felicity whereunto we are called, is an
enduring inheritance, (...) which is given by lot, it is not obtained by any
humane merit, but by free election, and once given, it is not taken away. (5)
It is called the Inheritance of Saints, because by that we shall have society
with the Saints alone, whose communion makes the Inheritance more delightful to
us. (6) This Inheritance consists in the most perfect light, viz. of
Knowledge, Holiness, Joy, Glory, immortal and eternal life.

Verse. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, The 2. Reas. Of his
thanksgiving explaineth the former, because the Father has delivered us from
the power of darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of the Son of
his love; This benefit is commended to us by these four things. (1) Because
power is used to our perverse nature, and the power of Satan, by whom we are
kept bound, from whence God by force has delivered us. (2) Because he has
delivered us from the darkness of ignorance, sin and misery. (3) because he
has not suffered us, being delivered, to wander and err without a King and
defender, without governance and society, but has translated us into a better
Kingdom, i. e. the Kingdom of Light, Knowledge, Sanctity, and spiritual life,
where we may safely and securely inhabit, that we fall not back, or be
brought again into darkness. (4) Because the Kingdom into which we are
translated, is the Kingdom of his Son, a Kingdom most pleasant to God,
wherein the Son of God, the Son of his love, rules and reigns, whom the
Father intimately loves, and does represent himself a Father in his love
toward us, whose Kingdom and all things are most beloved by God, yea in whose
Kingdom all subjects are beloved Sons.

Verse. 14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins. The 3. Reason of his thanksgiving is the benefit of his liberty from
the revenging Justice of God; this benefit more especially appears in these
five things. (1) We are not only kept by force in the power of darkness, that
we might be delivered from thence, a greater strength was required, but also
we were captives to the Law and Righteousness, from whence without a price
paid, we cannot be freed, and where that price is already paid, there is made
already a lawful redemption. (2) We have this our redemption made by the
consent of parties upon the best right. (3) We have the same redemption in the
person of the Son, who is our Advocate, and he who keeps us and all ours.
(4) We have that by the blood of the Son, who existing in the image of God, i.
e. true God, has taken upon him our nature, and in that made obedient unto the
death of the Cross, has paid the price of Redemption for us. (5) This
Redemption is free in respect of us, who have paid nothing, and yet obtain the
remission of sins, and consequently also free liberty from wrath and death
which follow upon sin.

Verse. 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born of every
Creature. The 4. Reason of his thanksgiving, showing the solidity of the
foundation of Redemption in the description of the excellency of Christ the
Redeemer, of which description there are twelve Articles.

The Image] Artic. 1. Christ is the most perfect Image of the invisible God,
not only because he is the substantial Character of the Fathers person,
substantially representing the Father, that so the Father cannot be beholden
unless in the Son, and brightness of him, but also because the incarnate Son
has represented to the world, in word and deed, in sanctity, power, and mercy,
the Fathers Nature, Will, and Goodness.

The first born] Artic. 2. Christ is the first born of every Creature, i. e.
begotten from eternity before every Creature, and because of his eternal
Generation of the Father, he is the Lord of all Creatures by right, as the
first born, in the Law, is Lord of his Brethren, and the Family.

Verse. 16. For ^y him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are
in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him. Artic.
3. Illustrating the former: Christ is the efficient cause, or the Creator of
all Creatures, For by him were all things created: he amplifies this Article
by a threefold distribution of the Creatures. (1) From the place wherein they
are, in Heaven and in Earth. (2) From their nature, into visible and invisible.
(3) From the division of Angels, both from their dignity, office, and
honorable names: From which the glory of Christ appears who has created all.

From him] Artic. 4. Christ is the end of all; for whom, and for whose glory
all things were created: For all things whatsoever, and of what sort soever
were created, all these were created for the glory of Christ, God-man, he is
the beginning and end of all, to whose glory it is necessary all things
whatsoever in their manner should be serviceable, as the means to the end.

Verse. 17. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. Artic.
5. Christ is eternal, because he in himself was before all Creatures, neither
is he any thing changed, by the Creatures, as to his subsistence.

By him] Artic. 6. Christ is not only the Creator, but is the preserver and
conserver of all.

Verse. 18. And he is the head of the body, the Church: who is the beginning,
the first born from the dead, that in all things he might have the
pre-eminence: Artic. 7. Christ is the Head of the Church, i. e. of his body,
from whence the vital spirits, sense, and spiritual motion flows through all
the members, who both governs and defends all of them.

The beginning] Artic. 8. Christ is the beginning, fountain, and spring of the
Church, viz. that new Adam, the root and principle of the regeneration of the
Saints, by whose virtue all Saints are begotten.

The first born] Artic. 9. Christ is the first born from the dead, and the
first fruits of them that slept; because he alone has risen by his own
strength, and is the cause of the resurrection of the dead to life everlasting.

That in] Artic. 10. He has the pre-eminence in all, and ought to have
amongst Angels and men, amongst the living and dead; And this is the end of the
former degrees of the excellency of Christ.

Verse. 19. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell,
Artic. 11. Confirming the pre-eminence of Christ, and the dignity of his
pre-eminence, because from the good Will of God, not only the fullness of the
gifts of the Spirit dwell in the Man Christ, but also the Godhead it self,
most fully comprehending all fullness.

Verse. 20. And (having made Peace through the blood of his cross) by him to
reconcile all things unto himself, by him, I say, whether they be things in
Earth, or things in Heaven. Artic. 12. Christ by the good will and purpose of
God is a Mediator, by whom God would have expiation for sin made (his life
being laid down upon the Cross) and expiation being made by his death, he
would that reconciliation and a renewing of friendship betwixt God and them
should be made, that are the members of the Church: no less betwixt God and
those members which are in the Earth, than betwixt God and those that are in
Heaven: yea, he would have reconciliation made in himself, or by the intuition
of his glory amongst the heavenly Angels, and earthly men, amongst whom, by
reason of sin there is a natural disagreeing. Lastly, He would have the Elect
Angels to be confirmed, whose various and changeable nature is already
demonstrated by the fall of wicked Angels, and that by a gathering of them
together to himself. For the Angels are added to Christ as a surplusage in the
Covenant of Redemption, for the use of his body, that is, the Church, that they
might be ministering spirits for the use of the redeemed ones. All which as
they did confirm the solidity and certainty of Redemption, so the Faith of the
Colossians very much in Christ, and ought also to confirm ours.

Verse. 21. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by
wicked works, yet now has he reconciled,

22. In the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy, and
unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight.

The 5. Reason of his thanksgiving is the grace of reconciliation made with the
Colossians by name. He amplifies this benefit by nine Arguments. (1) He
says, that you were sometimes alienated from God, strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and the life of God. (2) Ye were not only born
strangers, but were made more and more strangers by the custom of sinning. (3)
Neither this only, but ye were enemies, and with an hostile mind did both
disdain and speak against God. (4) That you were enemies, not only in your
sensitive appetite, and your affections, but also in your mind, which should
be the most excellentest faculty, the Mistress and Captain of all the rest.
(5) That ye have expressed the enmities conceived in your mind by wicked
works. (6) That nevertheless Christ now has reconciled you. (7) That he has
obtained reconciliation in taking upon him, in the body of his flesh, the
humane nature, like to us in all things, sin only excepted. (8) That by his
death he has paid the price of your Redemption and Reconciliation. (9) That
Christ has determined with himself that at length you should remain holy in
his sight, and the sight of God, without any spot of sin and misery, viz. to
the day of his coming, all which did chiefly make for the upholding of their
Faith.

Verse. 23. If ye continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and be not
moved away from the hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which was
preached to every creature which is under heaven, whereof I Paul am made a
Minister. The fourth manner of confirming the Colossians faith follows, by an
exhortation to perseverance in the faith of the Gospel, to which he passes,
giving a caution for this end, that he might suspend the benefit commonly
applied to them, given, as it were, the Characteristical note of them, to whom
the benefit of reconciliation belongs, viz. That they who have right to these
benefits may remain in the faith of Christ, upon which the other degrees of
perseverance depend. The Arguments of the Exhortation are chiefly three.

If] Argum. 1. It is contained in the condition of perseverance. Your constancy
in the faith of Christ, and hope of the Gospel, is a sign, not only of your
reconciliation made through Christ, but also of your holiness and salvation to
be perfected by him: Therefore persevere ye. In the mean while three things
are required to their perseverance. (1) That they be grounded in the faith,
that is, that they lay hold upon the foundations of faith solidly laid in the
truth, goodness, and power of God. (2) That they be settled, i. e. Now they
are grounded in Christ, they may fixedly abide, may adhere to Christ, and be
joined to this truth. (3) That they resist all temptations, with which they may
by any manner be moved from the hope of eternal life, or the good things
promised in the Gospel: The force of this Argument is, you shall not possess
the good things fore-spoken of, except you have persevered in the faith:
Therefore persevere ye.

Preached] Argum. 2. Of his exhortation to perseverance: The Gospel which you
have heard from Epaphras your Pastor, is the same with the Gospel preached by
the other servants of God to every creature through the whole world, or all
kinds of men, Jews and Gentiles without difference: Therefore abide you
founded and settled in the same faith.

Whereof] Argum. 3. I Paul my self am made a Minister to preach this Gospel to
the Gentiles, with great approbation from God, and his blessing poured upon all
that are faithful amongst the Gentiles. Therefore persevere ye in that faith.

Verse. 24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is
the Church. He insists in this Argument, and commends his Ministry to them,
by fourteen Arguments, all which confirm his glorious Ministry.

Argum. 1. I Paul in the administration of this Gospel do bear afflictions with
joy: Therefore my Ministry is glorious.

Argum. 2. I bare those afflictions for the sake of you Colossians, or for your
confirmation in the faith: Therefore my Ministry is glorious amongst you.

Argum. 3. Seeing that after the personal sufferings of Christ for our
redemption, the suffering of the Martyrs remain for a testimony of the truth of
Christ's doctrine, I Paul in some part do so fill up the appointed measure of
those afflictions, that I am prepared to seal this my Ministry, even with my
death: Therefore this my Ministry is glorious.

Argum. 4. I suffer these afflictions for Christ's honor, and his whole
Churches edification, viz. That his mystical body may be knit together in
faith: Therefore my Ministry is glorious. All these make to the taking away the
offense of the Cross incumbent upon the Apostle.

Verse. 25. Wherefore I am made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God
which is given to me for you, to fulfill the word of God: Argum. 5. I am
appointed a Minister of the Catholic Church, and am made an Apostle of the
Gentiles, both by special authority, and divine dispensation: Therefore is my
Ministry glorious.

To fulfil] Arg. 6. I am constituted an Apostle, especially for this end, that
fully manifesting the Gospel amongst the Gentiles I might fulfill by my
Ministry, not only my Office, but also the Decree of God, and the Prophecies
concerning the calling of the Gentiles, and the grace of Christ which was to
come unto them: Therefore this my Ministry is glorious.

Verse. 26. Even the Mystery that has been bid from ages, and from generations,
but now is made manifest to his Saints: Argum. 7. This word of the Gospel
administered amongst you, and the preaching of it afterward amongst the
Gentiles, was in times past a mystery; But now is laid open to the faithful by
us Apostles more plainly than ever since the beginning of the world: Therefore,
etc.

Verse. 27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this
mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. Would]
Argum. 8. The revelation of this mystery by my Ministry is made to the Saints,
not from their merit, but from the good pleasure of God: Therefore, etc.

The riches] Argum. 9. Glorious and rich is the grace of this mystery now
revealed, opening clearly all things which make for our complete felicity:
Therefore, etc.

Christ] Argum. 10. The sum of this glorious and rich grace manifested by my
Ministry, is Christ received by faith, and dwelling in you.

The hope] Argum. 11. Christ preached by me, and dwelling in you by faith, is
the hope of future glory, now manifested in the earnest and first fruits, viz.
Because Christ is the author, pledge, and finisher of our faith: For the
faithful seek no other glory than that they may enjoy Christ more and more in
this life, and at length fully in the life to come.

Verse. 28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Argum. 12. The
end of my Ministry and Christ preached, is this, that I might admonish and
instruct men of all sorts in the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is the most
perfect wisdom, that at length I may present believers perfect in all points
of holiness and happiness in Christ, in the sight of God: Therefore this my
Ministry is glorious.

Verse. 29. Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working, which
works in me mightily. Argum. 13. Hitherto by the grace of God I do earnestly
prosecute my Ministry, striving against all enemies and impediments that were
laid against me. From whence my Ministry is made glorious.

According to his working] Argum. 14. Lastly, through the grace and power of
God working in me, my Ministry is made powerful and effectual to the
appointed effect, i. e. to the salvation of the elect, and conviction of
others: All which, as they are Arguments of the commendation of Paul's Ministry,
so also they are so many Arguments of exhortation to the Colossians, That they
would persevere in the faith of the Gospel preached by Paul. For it follows
upon all: Therefore abide ye constant, and go forward in the faith of the
Gospel, the Ministry whereof is so glorious.

CHAP. II.
THere are three parts of the Chapter: In the first, He makes a way to his
Exhortation, that they satisfied with Christ alone, avoid the corruptions,
which might draw them from Christ, and that by showing his endeavor for their
constancy in the Faith, to verse. 6. In the second he follows his exhortation,
that they cleave fast to Christ, and be careful in general of any thing that
might draw them from Christ, to verse. 16. In the third there is a special
admonition, that they beware of special corruptions, to the end.

Verse. 1. For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for
them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh: That
which concerns the first. He shows his endeavor for their salvation and
constancy in Faith, in short clauses which are six. (1) I am very careful about
all the Churches which have not seen my face, and namely about you Colossians,
and your neighbors, the Laodiceans: Therefore do not ye think that you are
neglected by me.

Verse. 2. That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love,
and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ. (2) I
endeavor, that you may know you are no less dear to me, than other Churches
planted by me: Let your hearts then be comforted from the same Gospel.

In love] (3) I very much desire, that all those Churches, dissentions amongst
themselves, and with other Churches, and questions which are stirred up by the
Devil and his members, being laid aside, may be knit together in the bond of
love.

All] (4) I wish, and I have no mean conflict, that all those Churches may be
joined together in Faith and Hope. This more especially is explicated, for he
endeavored, that they might get understanding: Because Faith ought not to be
blind, or ignorant, nor that they might only have some taste of Faith, but
that they might obtain a (...), a full assurance, whereby doubts might be
excluded from their hearts; neither that they might only have an assurance,
but also all riches of assurance in the Faith, that Faith might abound in them,
and might be strengthened in a solid and peaceable certainty, and might be
established in all the riches of a more fully certain understanding: yet more
specially the Apostle endeavored, that they might profit in knowing the
mystery, or the Gospel that was in times past hid, but now revealed, concerning
the Grace of Christ, which is extended no less to the Jews than to the
Gentiles: He adds to these, that they might not only profit in the knowledge,
but also in the acknowledgement of the mystery, from a lively sense and
experience of the most sweet Grace of Christ, which is very far distant from
the natural capacity of men. Lastly, He most specially endeavored, that they
might profit in acknowledging the mystery concerning the unity of the divine
essence, and the distinction of persons, and the offices of the Mediator
Christ, and more and more applying those things to their use, might aquiesce in
the knowledge, and first fruits of so great a good, until they should enjoy a
full felicity by Christ.

Verse. 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. He gives
the reason of this desire, from the excellency of Christ, who is the sum and
foundation of the Gospel, who^e glory he does not only describe from the
perfection of his person, considered in himself (in which are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and understanding, infinitely as to the divine Nature, and
as much as he is capable of, to the humane) but also and most especially from
the perfection of his person, as he was clothed with the office of a
Mediator, as he is CHRIST anointed of God, the object, author and finisher of
our Faith, or all saving Knowledge: In which respect, there is in Christ all
sufficiency to eternal salvation, that there is no need of knowing any thing
besides him, who is made unto us by God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption; He calls this sufficiency of Christ Treasures, and all
Treasures, and hid Treasures, which the world cannot behold, which the sagacity
of the Saints cannot find out, nor the needs of all men exhaust or consume.

Verse. 4. And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with intising words.
(5) The endeavor and care of the Apostle is, that the Colossians may not be
seduced by the false Apostles, and that they might be fortified against all
the Impostures of them, who by teaching that which Christ has not taught, did
draw the unstable and unwary from Christ, partly by Paralogisms, and
Sophistical Argumentations, partly by insinuating and covering their errors
with a painted eloquence, to which subtilties of the false Apostles he aims in
the words (...) beguile, and (...) enticing words,

Verse. 5. For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the
Spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your Faith in
Christ. (6) His endeavor concerning their salvation, The joy which he received
concerning the Doctrine and Discipline rightly settled amongst them, not only
from the relation of Epaphras, but from a Prophetical Spirit, or the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost dictating this Epistle; for although he was
absent in body, yet he beholding all things by the Spirit, he did greatly
rejoice upon the observation of the most beautiful order in all Ecclesiastical
things, and of their solid Faith in Christ: So that he could not but be
careful concerning the preservation of so famous an heavenly work amongst them,
left this order be disturbed, or his Doctrine corrupted by the subtilties of
the false Apostles, and arts of the Devil.

The Second Part.
Verse. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
him. The second part of the Chapter follows, in which from his endeavor for
their salvation, and from the causes of this disputation undertaken against the
false Apostles, he inferrs an exhortation to persevere in the Faith of Christ,
and to beware of corruptions. The parts of his Exhortation are five.

(1) That they hold fast Christ Jesus already received by Faith, who is the
only and true Savior, and admit no other, invented by the false Apostles.

(2) That they being ingrafted into Christ by Faith, so abide and lead their
lives according to his prescription, following the guidance of the Spirit of
Christ.

Verse. 7. Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the Faith, as ye have
been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. (3) That they endeavor for a
most near, and firm conjunction with Christ, through the strengthening of their
Faith, according to the Doctrine of Epaphras: He illustrates this soundness of
Faith by a similitude taken partly from the firmness of trees spreading their
roots deep in the earth; partly from the stability of buildings, solidly
founded.

Abounding] (4) That they be not only confirmed in the Faith, but also make
progress in it, and abound to a fuller knowledge of the mysteries of Christ;
and that with a daily thanksgiving to God, the Author of this so great a
benefit.

Verse. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. (5) That they take heed to themselves touching seducers, who take the
people of God by their Impostures, as beasts are taken in nets, and make a prey
of them. He reckons three kinds of impostures, whereof the first is
Philosophy, or a vain deceit, so called, not simply, but as it exceeds its
bounds, and aspires to heavenly and spiritual things, and does from the model
of corrupt and carnal reason, determine concerning the doctrine in the word of
God. In which respect although it shows openly the form of wisdom, yet it is
found to be vain deceit; The other kind is, The tradition of men, concerning
the vain and superstitious rites invented by humane wit. The third sort is, the
injunction of Legal or Levitical rites, which are called here the Rudiments of
the world, because they are the earthly and carnal Rudiments of the ancient
people, by whom as by a Schoolmaster they were lead before the coming of
Christ, which after his coming vanished away like shadows.

Verse. 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. He adds
ten Arguments of his Exhortation, all which prove, that they must not go so
much as a nails breadth from Christ:

Argum. 1. It is in vain to seek any thing necessary to salvation out of
Christ, seeing that in him, or in his person, the fullness of the Godhead
hypostatically united to the humane nature, is founded, so that, he
necessarily seeks something to salvation out of God, who seeks things that may
bring salvation out of Christ: Therefore we must not depart from Christ.

Verse. 10. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all Principality
and power: Argum. 2. Christ is not only a most full fountain in himself, but
also he fills all the faithful believing in him, insomuch that he
communicates to them righteousness and life eternal (which he has in himself)
first by way of imputation, further by the infusion of grace for grace, till at
length they are perfected. Therefore we must not seek for any thing out of him.

The head] Argum. 3. He is the head of all Principality and Power, even of the
most excellent creatures in heaven and earth, partly because he created and
governs all things, even the Angels themselves; partly because by the influence
of his power, he upholds even the Angels, and also men, communicating to them
whatsoever they enjoy: Therefore from him alone, and in no wise from the most
excellent Angels, do we expect any good.

Verse. 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the Circumcision of
Christ. Argum. 4. The truth of all Legal ceremonies is in Christ; for in him
the faithful have that which is prefigured by them; as for example, they have
spiritual Circumcision wrought by the Spirit of Christ in the heart, which
consists in the subduing of the old man, or the flesh, or the body of sin,
which Circumcision was prefigured in the carnal Circumcision, made by hands:
Therefore it is not fit that you should in the carnal Circumcision of those
that Judaize, seek anything out of Christ.

Verse. 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him
through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead.
Argum. 5. Ye that believe in Christ are baptized, which is the lawful sign of
internal Circumcision, set up in the place of Circumcision by Christ; so that
neither the internal thing, yea, nor the external sign of an internal thing is
to be sought after without Christ: Therefore you must not depart from Christ.

Buried] Argum. 6. Ye believers have right to Christ dead and buried, and
communion with him in his death and burying, and so right to all the benefits,
and effects of his death and burying, in baptism, and by baptism sealed to you;
so that there is no need to seek any thing out of Christ, that belongs to the
full paying the price of Redemption: Therefore we must not depart from him.

Ye are risen] Argum. 7. Ye believers by baptism are brought into the
communion of Christ's Resurrection, or his victory that he gained over death
and sin, by which ye are not only risen to newness of life, in holiness, but
also ye shall rise in respect of your bodies to a glorious and immortal life,
so that nothing as to holiness and eternal life is to be desired out of
Christ: Therefore ye must not at all depart from him.

Through the faith] But yet lest too much be attributed to external baptism
from the work (as they say) done, he requires the faith of God efficaciously
working in those that are baptized, i. e. That we believe that God who
powerfully raised Christ from the dead, according to his promises, will also
effectually raise us according to his promise, to all manner of newness of
life. For by how much the nearer we embrace the power of God, that raised
Christ our head from the dead, by so much the more we shall make progress in
newness of life.

Verse. 13. And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your
flesh, has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.
Argum. 8. God has made you Colossians (in times past dead in sins, and lying
in the uncircumcision of irregenerate nature) partakers of the holy and
immortal life of Christ, as to right, and an inchoate possession, all your sins
by grace being forgiven, therefore as to a plenary remission of sins, and to an
holy and immortal life, nothing is to be sought out of Christ. This benefit is
called a quickening together with Christ (although Christ had risen some years
before they were converted) because in what moment soever any one is by faith
united to Christ, in the same moment is he united to him, now reigning in
heaven, yea in his dying, burial, and rising again after a judicial or
forinsical manner, so that in all things, in which he has, or does sustain
our person, it is no less than if we had in a Physical manner, been present,
and consented to every act of his, in our behalf.

Verse. 14. Blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nayling it to his Cross.
Argum. 9. In which also he explains how Christ obtained remission of sins for
us, viz. by taking away the handwriting, in this sense. The Covenant of works
is an handwriting, established partly in threatenings, partly in appointed
positive Ceremonials (excluding the Gentiles from the Church) was against us,
and contrary to us. But Christ has blotted out this handwriting, taking it
out of the way, and nailing it to his Cross: Therefore you must not look back
to the legal Covenant or ceremonial appointments in them, to seek for any
thing, neither must ye depart in the least from the death of Christ (by which
ye are delivered from that handwriting.) He compares this Covenant of works,
with its appurtenances, to an handwriting, by which any one binds himself for
the paying of a debt; for whosoever are convicted of sin by the light of
nature, are also by the force of the Covenant of Works, obnoxious to wrath, and
as often as we are convinced of sin, so often also by nature we confirm the
punishment of sin, or the condition of the legal Covenant, by the judgment of
our consciences against our selves, as by an handwriting: The conscience of
every one performs this much more, which has received the written Law, and
daily bears the punishment of the Law, for the breaking of it. But chiefly all
justiciaries are compelled to subscribe to this handwriting, who acknowledge
no righteousness besides inherent, or that which is by works: Of which number
were those that Judaized, and observeers of Ceremonies, who adhered to this
Covenant, seeking Righteousness by works, and the appointed Ceremonies: For by
how much they did endeavor by this means more manifestly to establish their
own Righteousness, by so much the more openly they did derive the punishment of
the Law broken, by the force of the Covenant, upon themselves: For no man
enters a Covenant, but he also admits all the conditions of the Covenant.

The handwriting is said to be in Ordinances, or rather subscribed to
Ordinances, so far as they took upon them those commands, or Legal Ordinances,
that they might be perfected in themselves, they did withal oblige themselves
to bear the punishment of the breach of those commands.

He calls it the handwriting against us, or contrary to us, partly because it
separated the Jews from the Gentiles, and the Gentiles from the Jews; Partly
because it was a yoke, which neither they nor their Fathers could bear; Partly
because as often as they did any work of the Law, either moral or ceremonial to
be justified thereby, so often by the imperfection of their work, and the
profession of their imperfection in the use of the Levitical Ceremonies, they
did argue themselves guilty, or rather did acknowledge themselves guilty of
death. As for example, when they offered Sacrifices, and did repeat them, they
not only acknowledged themselves sinners against the Moral Law, but did also
really confess that their frequent Sacrifices could not purge their consciences
from sin, and so the handwriting of the Covenant of works was always contrary
to them: But Christ has blotted out this handwriting, and took it out of the
way, nailing it to his Cross, insomuch as he for the sake of them that were
his, has paid for the redeemed the penalty due upon the handwriting by the
death of his Cross, and has completed and abolished the positive Ordinances
concerning those vanishing Ceremonies, by the real Sacrifice of his own body
once offered.

Verse. 15. And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of
them openly, triumphing over them in it. Argum. 10. Christ has brought all the
Devils, who exercise their power and tyranny upon the Elect, overthrown by the
price of Redemption paid upon the Cross, and gloriously triumphs over them
openly in the sight of God, Angels and men (whose eyes are open) unto their own
disgrace, and our deliverance: Therefore it remains that nothing is to be
sought out of Christ.

The Devils are called Principalities and Powers, (1) Because in the world they
potently exercise authority over all the reprobate children of disobedience,
and all the unregenerate, which do nothing else, but execute the will of the
Devil. (2) Because they are Sergeants executing the judgment of God, holding
those captive that are not reconciled to God in Christ. (3) Because they fight
against Christ the Redeemer, neither do they dismiss the redeemed and
reconciled from the prison of darkness, unless compelled by the stronger power
of Christ.

They are said to be spoiled by Christ on the Cross, (1) Inasmuch as Christ,
paying the price of our Redemption, has obtained by Covenant of the Father,
that all the redeemed should be delivered from the prison of darkness,
ignorance, sin and death. (2) Inasmuch as Christ, infinite in power, when he
had once satisfied justice on the Cross, broke the bars and chains of sin,
judgment, and the Law, wherewith the Devil, held the redeemed bound, that
henceforth they cannot have any power. (3) Inasmuch as he has made his
redeemed his possession, and peculiar people, that they might not any longer
be the flock of Satan.

Christ is said to have made a show of the Devils, and to have openly triumphed
on the Cross, (1) Inasmuch as he has valiantly received, overcome, and
extinguished all their temptations and poisoned darts, whether immediately cast
by them against him hanging on the Cross, or hurled by the poisonous tongues of
furious adversaries, or brandished by the provocation of the ingratitude of his
Disciples flying from him. (2) Inasmuch as Christ has turned the malice of the
Devils, all their subtilties and machinations (by which they sought his life,
incessantly stirring up their slaves to crucify him till he hanged upon the
Cross) to their own destruction, and to the most open ruin of their dominion.
(3) Inasmuch as he has shown himself Lord of Heaven and Earth, by signs and
wonders in the very time of his crucifying. (4) Inasmuch as he has shown
openly his power by converting the thief hanging at his right hand, and the
Centurion standing at his feet. (5) Inasmuch as the price of Redemption being
already paid, the Conqueror, not only in the sight of God, and Angels, but
also in the sight of these Devils, and also in the bearing of all beholders,
cried out, that his work was finished, and that to his own eternal glory, and
the perpetual ignominy of ^his enemies. From which it follows* that we must
not depart from Christ for the obtaining of any good, or that we might be
delivered from any evil.

The Third Part.
Verse. 16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or drink, or in respect of an
holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days: The third part of the
Chapter, in which by way of consequence he brings in a special admonition to
beware of some special corruptions of the false Apostles.

The admonitions are three. (1) That they do not regard the judgment and
censure of any who shall dare to condemn them for not observing of Mosaical
Ceremonies; as for example, for meat or drink, or for neglecting an holy day,
or an part of any holy day, or for not observing the Sabbath of the Jews.

Verse. 17. Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. The
reason of the admonition is, Because those Legal Ceremonies were the shadows of
future things, which were only to remain until the body, or Christ the truth
and substance of them should come; which therefore ought to cease after his
coming.

Verse. 18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. (2) Is, That they beware of the worshipping
and invocation of Angels: For this end he alleges seven Arguments.

Argum. 1. Because whosoever does teach you this worshipping, in very deed he
endeavors to defraud you of the reward of Religion, or Life Eternal.

Voluntarily] Argum. 2. Because not from the authority of God, but of his own
will and lust he does deliver this Doctrine.

Humility] Argum. 3. Because he that teaches the worshipping of Angels, does
hypocritically abuse you with the pretense of humility.

Intruding] Argum. 4. Because he that teaches the worshipping of Angel,
proceeds boldly without the light of the Word of God, yea, without the light of
right reason: For he never saw any thing concerning this Doctrine, either in
holy writ, or with bodily eyes, or by the light of sound reason.

Vainly] Argum. 5. Because whosoever teaches the worshipping of Angels, is not
humble, as he pretends, but swelling in his own carnal opinion, is most vainly
puffed up.

Verse. 19. And not holding the head from which all the body by joints and bands
having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase
of God. Arg. 6. Because whosoever teaches the worshipping of Angels, is void
of true faith, he is not joined, nor cleaves unto Christ; although he know
all other things, yet he is ignorant of the virtue of Christ, and the grace
that is in him, yea he is divided from Christ our head, and does renounce him.

From which] Arg. 7. Because in Christ alone is the storehouse from which all
grace, and whatsoever is required to life and spiritual growth, is abundantly
derived to all his members, so that neither is it necessary to ask any thing of
the Angels, neither can any thing be done in that kind without dishonor done
to Christ, either by invoking the Angels, or by worshipping them after any
other manner: Therefore ye are to beware of the invocation of Angels.

In this Argument by the comparison of the humane natural head, Christ is
described by a sixfold Similitude; (1) As the humane natural head has a body
subject to it; so Christ has the Church subject to him as his mystical body.
(2) As sense and motion is derived from the humane head to the whole body, and
so to all its members; so sense and spiritual motions are derived from Christ
to all the members of the Church. (3) As from the humane head the conjunction
of the nerves and ligaments which go through the whole body, are extended; so
from the head Christ the holy Spirit flows, and faith in Christ, and love
toward our neighbor, which are diffused through the whole body mystical. (4)
As by those junctures, life, sense, and motion is administered to the whole
body; so by these all spiritual grace is administered to the faithful. (5) As by
these the members are compacted with the head, and amongst themselves; so by
these Christ and his members are united. (6) As by these in the natural body,
so by these in Christ's body mystical, first of all there is made an increase of
every member, and also of the whole body mystical. (7) As there is the increase
of nature, so here of grace, the increase of God, i. e. great and solid,
according to the measure given to every one.

Verse. 20. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the
world; why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to Ordinances? The
third Admonition follows with a reprehension, because they had subjected
themselves to decrees or humane traditions and doctrines of men, determining
Religion, in those things which God has not determined. There are five
Arguments of the Admonition or Reprehension: (1) Because ye are freed by the
death of Christ from all carnal rudiments of Religion, such as Judaical
ceremonies, so that you have no further to do with them, ye ought not to admit
the decrees and precepts of men, as if as yet after the manner of children
under Rudiments, ye were obnoxious to such sort of Elements.

The force of this first Argument consists in these five things: (1) Christ
has fulfilled that which was prefigured by Moses his ceremonies, and by his
death has abrogated those typical ceremonies, and that shadowy manner of
teaching the Church and worshipping God, so that the legal Covenant cannot
exact any thing more from him, than that which was paid and perfected in his
death. (2) Christ dying, all in Covenant are dead judicially with him, whose
person Christ has born: Therefore the legal Covenant could exact nothing more
from them, for whose sake Christ dyed, than the Laws of men required of those
that are dead: For all in him are reckoned as dead. (3) All ceremonial Precepts
in respect of the authority commanding, were divine and heavenly until Christ:
But now abolished through Christ, they cease to be divine, and begin to be
humane elements, or rudiments worldly and carnal, not so much in respect to the
things commanded, as to the mundane authority commanding them. (4) So long as
the Colossians were not converted to Christ, but did live in the world as
worldlings free from righteousness, so they were slaves to devils and men,
obnoxious to all manner of servitude, and to all kind of evil. (5) But now
after they were one body with Christ, they were made free by faith, and also
were set at liberty from all evil, neither ought they to submit themselves to
any yoke, unless to that which Christ would have them subjugated, and
consequently they ought not to be subject in the business of Religion to the
opinions and traditions of men.

Verse. 21. (Touch not, taste not, handle not. Argum. 2. Because those your
superstitious commanders and authors of humane decrees, by their precise
prohibition of things left at liberty, do also discover their tyranny and
intolerable hypocrisy in the rigid exaction of their commands, such as he
recites with some indignation, Taste not, touch not, and the like, in which
they were not only willing to continue the Levitical Law contrary to the will
of God, but also to superadde their rigid exactions of the Law which was
abolished: Therefore do not ye subject your selves to them.

Verse. 22. Which all are to perish with the using) after the commandments and
doctrines of men? Argum. 3. Because these corporeal things instituted by God to
use, that at length in using they might be consumed and perish, etc. Therefore
it is unjust to prohibit their use under the pretense of Religion: Therefore do
not ye subject your selves to these commands.

Of men] Argum. 4. Because decrees of this sort are not the commands of God,
but the commands of men, according to which God has declared that he will not
be worshipped: Therefore do not ye admit them.

Verse. 23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in honor to the satisfying of the
flesh. Argum. 5. With the confutation of an Objection; because although these
observations have a show of wisdom as part of a voluntary, and not compelled
worship, as exercises of humility toward Angels, as of obedience toward the
Governors of the Church, as somewhat conducing to the mortification of flesh,
yet in very deed they have only a mere show of wisdom, and are of no value or
esteem before God: Lastly, so much as they seem to detract from the body, so
much they add to the satisfaction of the flesh, or corrupt nature, which
always most earnestly desires in its forgeries about Religion, to satisfy
itself.

CHAP. III.
THe second part of the Epistle is concerning the endeavors after a Christian
life. There are two parts of the Chapter: In the first are contained general
Exhortations, pertaining to true piety and holiness of life, to Verse. 18.

In the other, are special Exhortations, which belong to certain and particular
conditions of men, to the end.

Verse. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. The general Exhortations are
Nine: (1) Is, to the study of heavenly things, that they no longer spend their
endeavors and labors, in seeking earthly pleasures, honors and riches, but
that they seek Christian virtues, and those that pertain to eternal life.

If ye be risen] The Arguments of the Exhortation are six, all which prove
that we ought to study heavenly things. (1) In Baptism ye have taken upon ye
a resemblance of the resurrection, or of pursuing a new and spiritual life, and
ingrafted by Faith into Christ, ye have communion with Christ rising: who for
the sake of his own, as a surety, has risen to spiritual life, and has
undertaken to raise Believers by the virtue of his resurrection communicated to
them: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after heavenly things.

Where Christ] Argum. 2. Above, i. e. in Heaven, Christ (as to the local
presence of his body) is our head, and the fountain of all our felicity:
Therefore that ye may enjoy him, ye ought to seek things above.

The right hand] Argum. 3. Christ sits at the right hand of God, by which as
man, he has gotten the highest advancement, and a name above every name, that
he may grant to us all things above: Therefore things above are to be sought
by you.

Verse. 2. Set your affections above, not on things on the earth. He amplifies
this Exhortation, commanding that they savor heavenly things, i. e. that they
study to know, esteem, care for, effect, and with earnestness pursue those
things which pertain to an heavenly life, and not those things that pertain to
this terrestrial life: which although they may be lawful and necessary, yet
they are to be looked after by the by only.

Verse. 3. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. Argum. 4.
Ye by Faith in Baptism are partakers of the death of Christ, and are obliged
by the virtue of his death, to dye to the world, and sin, yea, ye are dead to
them, or in respect of them, viz. after a judicial and spiritual manner savor
not any more those earthly things, or serve them: Therefore ye ought to savor
and follow things above, heavenly and not earthly things.

And your life] Argum. 5. Although your life, i. e. your Adoption, your
Righteousness, your Inheritance, your full Sanctification, and Glorification,
is hid to the world, yea, to you your selves for the most part (for now you
receive them only by Faith, and a little possession of first fruits) yet it is
preserved in Heaven in its causes, with Christ, hid in God: Therefore ye ought
to savor and seek those things which pertain to life eternal.

Verse. 4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory. Arg. 6. By answering an Objection arising from the former
Argument; although your life is now hid, yet fully and openly it shall be
communicated to you, and we shall be gloriously brought forth in the sight of
Angels and men, when Christ shall be manifested in his second coming; The
reason whereof is given, because Christ is our life, so called (1) Because he
has procured life eternal for us. (2) Because he has in himself that life to
communicate. (3) Because he has actually begun to communicate that life by
his Spirit to us, which at length he will fully perfect. (4) Because he is
the object of this our life: For our felicity consists in communion with him,
to know him, to be, and converse with him, and at length fully to enjoy him:
Therefore seek ye things above, under the hope of life, that is to be
revealed to us.

Verse. 5. Mortify therefore your members, which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is Idolatry. Exhortation the second, as a corrolarie,
inferred from the fomer, by which he commands to mortify the vicious motions
and affections of corrupt nature, through which the deformed body of sin
dwelling in us, as members, works all actual sins, and does so put forth it
self in the members of the body, that it makes them as it were members of it
self, and the instruments of vices. This mortification is done, not only by
not committing the external acts of sin, but also by killing in the very
beginning those wicked internal motions exciting to those sins.

Fornication] He reckons up five vices, whereunto the Gentiles chiefly were
addicted, the last of which, viz. Covetousness, he calls by the name of
Idolatry, that he might stir them up to the hatred of Covetousness: Because
almost all accounted it frugality, and very many trust in riches.

Which are upon the earth] The Arguments of the Exhortation are three.

Argum. 1. Because these vices are earthly members, or vicious parts of that
nature, which only savours of earth, and does altogether alienate men from
Heaven.

Verse. 6. For which things sake, the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience. Argum. 2. Because although these sins may seem light, yet they
bring the anger of God upon those, who are disobedient, and do not repent.

Verse. 7. In the which ye also walked sometime, when ye lived in them. Ye
walk] Argum. 3. Because in times past ye have served too much these vices,
walking and living in them, no less than they who still are defiled in this
mire.

Verse. 8. But now you also put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,
filthy communication out of your mouth.

9. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his
deeds;

Exhortation 3. Drawn from the next Argument, in which he commands them to put
off, lay aside, and cast away six vices not to be resumed again, which are,
(1) Unjust anger. (2) Indignation or wrath, which is an higher degree of anger.
(3) Malice or malicious envy and hatred, which becomes permanent or lodging
anger. (4) Reproach or blasphemy against any ones fame. (5) Filthy speaking or
scurrility, and (6) and lastly, Lying.

Put off] The Reasons of the Exhortation are two.

(1) Because in Baptism the Sacramental Vow, and Obligation, and in the
beginning ye have put off the old man, with all his actions, i. e. ye have
renounced your old corrupt nature, and its bondage: Therefore ye must renounce
these vices.

Verse. 10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the
Image of him that created him. Reas. 2. Because by the Gift of God, Faith, Vow,
and Newness of Life begun in Regeneration, ye have put on the New Man, i. e.
new spiritual qualities, as it were a new Nature: Therefore ye must renounce
these vices.

But he describes the New Man in four things. (1) That there is a renovation
in Christ of the Holiness of our Nature lost in Adam. (2) That it consists in
the acknowledgement of the Mystery of the Gospel, i. e. in the same
illumination, which so changes the heart, and also the outward conversation,
that the Grace of God in Christ is really acknowledged by us, in mind,
affection, and deed. (3) That the Archetype, or exemplar, according to which
this New Man is created and renewed, is the Image of God, the Creator, who
alone made man that he might have a being, and he alone has also created man
again that he might be new.

Verse. 11. Where there is neither Greek, nor Jew, Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free; but Christ is all in all:
(4) That it is enough to the New Man to have Christ (which one thing suffices
for all things requisite to salvation) or that in this business of renovation
by Christ, our external condition neither hinders, nor promoteth, nor in this
work is any respect had to an external condition with God, (be there any of
the Gentiles or Jews circumcised or uncircumcised, born in this or that Nation,
learned or unlearned, bond or free) which is fitly spoken by reason of the
false Apostles, who did urge Legal Ceremonies, and the traditions of men, as if
all other things had been nothing, except they would Judaize.

Verse. 12. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering: Exhortation 4.
To five Virtues, viz. (1) To a tender pity toward the afflicted. (2) Toward
the poor. (3) To humility and modesty in all things. (4) To meekness,
gentleness in conversation with others. (5) To long-suffering where injuries
fall out.

Elect] There are three Arguments of the Exhortation.

(1) Because ye are the Elect of God, not only separated by special vocation
from the world, but also by eternal decree from Reprobates.

Holy] Argum. 2. Because ye are holy and consecrated unto God.

Beloved] Argum. 3. Because ye are beloved of God: Therefore adorn your selves
with these virtues, that ye may yield your selves worthy of so great
commendations.

Verse. 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. Exhortation 5.
That not only in long-suffering they mutually bear one another infirmities,
and harsh behaviors, but also that they mutually forgive injuries one to
another.

As Christ] The Reason of the Exhortation is, because Christ has forgiven you
your more grievous offenses: Therefore do ye forgive injuries one to another.

Verse. 14. And above all these things, put on Charity, which is the bond of
perfectness. Exhortation 6. That in the first place they put on Charity, and
that before all other virtues, Because it springs from the root of Faith, (as
the trunck of a tree) and sends forth all other virtues as branches, and both
cherishes and nourishes them.

Which is] The Reason of the Exhortation is, Because Charity is the mutual bond
of perfect binding together, whereby all the faithful are joined into one body,
and whereby all are perfected, i. e. made partakers of all gifts growing in the
Church, so that whatsoever either the privileges of the whole body are, or the
gifts of some member, may become as to use and profitableness, of good to all
the members.

Verse. 15. And let the Peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye
are called in one body: and be ye thankful. Exhortation 7. That if any
contention should arise amongst them, the Peace of God should be appointed the
Moderatour of contention, and all affections, and having, as it were, a reward
in its hand, should determine what is to be done.

He calls the Peace of God, that which is from God, that which pleases God,
and that which does not command the loss of truth, or any virtue, but of our
carnal affections.

To which] The Reasons of the Exhortation are three. (1) Because God has
called you to peace with himself, and that you should follow it amongst your
selves. (2) Because ye are all members of one body. (3) Because ye owe this
thankfulness to God, who has made peace with you, when he might have dealt
with you, as enemies: Therefore following peace amongst your selves, be ye
thankful.

Verse. 16. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching
and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing
with Grace in your hearts to the Lord. Exhortation 8. To study the Word of God,
and employ your selves in it; there are five branches of the Exhortation. (1)
That they derive the Word of Christ, or the Christian Doctrine propoun^ed in
Scripture from the fountains, and as a most acceptable guest entertain it in
their minds and hearts: that afterward it might not depart from thence, but
there constantly abide. (2) That they content not themselves, that they have
tasted the Word of Christ, or that they have in some sort known it, but they do
their endeavor for the procuring a rich and plentiful measure of it to
themselves. (3) That from thence they learn to be wise to their own salvation,
and the benefit of others. (4) That they suffer the Word of Christ not to be
idle in them, but that they prudently put it forth for the use of their
neighbors, that with mutual instructions they promote one another knowledge,
with mutual admonitions they may better order their conversations, and every
one stir up his own and others affections to the singing of holy Psalms, Hymns,
and spiritual Songs, composed of some spiritual matter, by the Spirit, and made
for mutual edification. (5) That they sing with their affections composed to
holiness according to the measure of Grace given to them, so that the Song may
be acceptable to God, and may administer Grace to the hearers, they beholding
in the sincerity of their hearts the glory of God in their singing.

Verse. 17. And whatsoevr you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him. Exhortation 9. That they do
all things in Christ, i. e. in his name, and authority, through him or his
grace, and to him and his glory: And because that cannot be done, but
forthwith they must have new experiences of divine goodness toward themselves,
that they may give thanks to God always in all things through Christ, without
whom God the Father will not be praised by us, nor will he grant any thing to
us, but through his Son, and in whom whatsoever things are sent in to us by
God, are turned to our good: And these are the general Exhortations to common
duties.

The Second Part.
Verse 18. Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as it is fit in
the Lord. The Other part of the Chapter follows, containing special
Exhortations to all degrees in a Family; The Exhortations are five.

Exhort. 1. Is to Wives, with whom he begins, because their condition is
harder and more difficult than men's, and therefore it is no wonder if God speak
first to them: He requires of them, that they be subject to their own
Husbands, i. e. that they give them obedience, honor, and reverence, but with
a limitation, in the Lord, that their obedience be in things lawful, and for
the command of the Lord, to whom Wives are first subject, and do owe obedience.

As it is fit] The Argument of the Exhortation is from equity and comeliness,
for what is commanded is fitting from divine Ordination, and from the Law of
Nature.

Verse. 19. Husbands, love your Wives, and be not bitter against them. Exhort.
2. To Husbands, whom he commands in the first place, that they love their own
Wives, and that with a singular and holy affection, and to rest satisfied in
one Wife: Further, he forbids them, that they be not bitter toward them,
either in word or deeds, although they be provoked by their infirmities, but
that they prudently rule them, as it becomes Husbands.

Verse. 20. Children, obey your Parents in all things* for this is well-pleasing
unto the Lord. Exhort. 3. To Children, with whom he begins as before with
Wives, and afterward he will begin with Servants, because their condition is
harder, and they have need of the instruction of God, that they do that which
is necessary for them to do, of their own accord, he requires of these
obedience from the heart, toward their parents in all things, viz. which their
heavenly Father has not prohibited: The Argument of the Exhortation is this,
because the performance of this duty is most acceptable unto God.

Verse. 21. Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged. Exhort. 4. Especially to Fathers who use to be more severe than
Mothers, That they by reproaches, injuries, and cruel chastisements do not
alienate the minds of their children from them: Besides the reasons which are
contained in the relation betwixt Fathers and Children, he expressly adds this
one, lest children used more severely, at length should despair of th^^r
Fathers love, and so be discouraged.

Verse. 22. Servants, obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh:
not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God.
Exhort. 5. To servants, wherein he more largely insists, because their
condition is hardest. The ^ranches of the Exhortation are six: In the first,
he mitigates the condition of servitude, from this, that it only belongs to
the carnal duties of this life, and does not infer any necessity of obeying in
things unlawful. In the second, he commands, that they obey and serve in all
things lawful, even when the commands are hardest. 3. That they do that
sincerely and faithfully, not only in the sight of their Masters, but also
when they are absent, lest they be accused of negligence. 4. That they in
sincerity of heart serve in the fear of the Lord.

Verse. 23. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto
men. 5. That in all service the outward action draws its original from the
mind, and more inward affections, from whence the outward action may be
derived.

6. That they acknowledge the authority of God in the commands of their
Masters, and that they do the will of God, whilst they perform the will of
their Masters.

Verse. 24. Knowing, that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance; for ye serve the Lord Christ. The Arguments of the Exhortation
are four: 1. Because God will give them a better reward, than their Masters
agree with them for, or can give them, viz. Life eternal, for a free
inheritance.

For] Arg. 2. Because they may be certain of a free reward, from this, that
they serve Christ, who cannot neglect his servants.

Verse. 25. But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has
done; and there is no respect of persons. Arg. 3. Because God will revenge
injuries done to servants by their Masters, and also the injuries of servants
against Masters, unless they submit themselves to this precept.

There is] Arg. 4. Confirming the former, because God neither accepts the
person of the Master, nor the servant, in judging, but exercises his justice in
punishing evils.

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chapter after an Exhortation to Masters, which belongs to the
preceding Chapter, general Exhortations are contained, to verse. 7.

In the remainder of the Chapter private matters are contained.

Verse. 1. Masters, give unto your servants that which is just, and equal,
knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven. He again exhorts Masters to a
just using of servants, and to that which is agreeable to reason, i. e. That
they pay to them, not only meat, clothing, and the wages agreed upon, but also
that they acknowledge the cheerfulness of their service, by some demonstration
of their liberality, for this it is to give to them that which is meet.

That you have] The Argument of the Exhortation is, because unless they do that
which is meet, the Lord of heaven is over their heads, who will render unto
them according to their works.

Verse. 2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving. The
general Exhortations are three: The first to prayer, whereof there are four
Branches: (1) That they be not weary in this employment, but constantly
persevere, because some daily necessity compels us. (2) That they observe and
take all occasions of praying offered by God, and that they frequently without
negligence continue in their supplications. (3) That always they adjoyn
thanksgiving to their prayers, if so be they desire new benefits should be
bestowed upon them of God.

Verse. 3. Withal, praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds.

4. That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak.

(4) That in their prayers they beseech God, that the Gospel may run with
success by the Ministry of the Apostle and other servants of God: To this end
he propounds three Arguments of Exhortation.

Arg. 1. Because so God would grant free leave to preach the Gospel, and make
manifest the mystery of salvation in Christ by opening the mouth of his
Minister, and the heart of the Auditors.

To speak] Arg. 2. Because I an Apostle in bonds for the preaching of the
Gospel, will have the liberty of the Gospel commended to you, rather than mine
own.

As I ought] Arg. 3. Because it is much available, that my mouth be open, that
I may speak fitly to persuade with the demonstration of spiritual power, as it
becomes me, that am an Apostle, to speak.

Verse. 5. Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time. The
second general Exhoration, that they wisely order their life according to the
will of God, diligently taking heed that their evil or imprudent conversation
offend not those that are without ( i. e. The Heathens not converted) and drive
them from the City of God: And lest they be corrupted with the corrupt
speeches or manners of unbeleevers, and also, for this end, that with the loss
of things less precious, they redeem the opportunity of well-doing, and
shunning evil, and especially of winning those that are without.

Verse. 6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye
may know how you ought to answer every man. Exhort. 3. That their speech be not
at any time vain or idle, which affords no advantage to the hearers, but that
it be always with grace to the edification of them, and to this end he
admonishes, that their speech be always seasoned with the salt of sanctity:
The Argument of the Exhortation is, that prudence and discretion be used, by a
custom of speaking holily to the answering every one fitly and properly
questioning about any thing.

The Second Part.
Verse. 7. All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved
brother, and a faithful Minister, and fellow servants in the Lord:

8. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your
estate, and comfort your hearts:

9. With Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you: They shall
make known unto you all things which are done here.

The other part of the Chapter concerning private matters, contains six
Articles.

Artic. 1. Appertains to Ambassadors. Tychicus the Evangelist, and Onesimus
the Colossian, who were sent together with this Epistle: (1) That they might
the better certify the Colossians, how the affairs of the Apostle stood, how
strongly he did endure bonds for the Gospel, and whatsoever other things it
concerned them to understand. (2) That after their return he might certify
them more fully concerning the state of the Colossians. (3) That the hearts of
the Colossians might be comforted; For which end he commends both of them,
but first of all Tychicus.

Verse. 10. Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner saluteth you, and Marcus sisters son
to Barnabas (touching whom ye received commandments) if he come unto you
receive him: Art. 2. Concerning the Salutations that were sent, whereof the
first was from Aristarchus, who with the Apostle did lie in bonds for the
defense of the faith of the Gospel. Salut. 2. From Marcus, sisters son to
Barnabas (concerning whom there was between Paul and Barnabas a contention)
whom, now received into favor, he would have especially commended to them, if
he should come to them, and that for this end, that they might understand,
that he was highly esteemed by the Apostle.

Verse. 11. And Jesus which is called Justus, who are of the Circumcision: These
only are my fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God, which has been a comfort
unto me. Salut. 3. Is from Jesus surnamed Iustus, who with the two above
named, did help the Apostle in preaching the Gospel, and these three alone were
of the Jews, who were a comfort to the Apostle.

Verse. 12. Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you,
always laboring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and
complete in all the will of God.

13. For I bear him record, that he has a great zeal for you, and them that
are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.

Salut. 4. From Epaphras a Pastor of the Colossians, whom he commends: (1)
From his sincerity in his Office, that he is a servant of Christ: (2) From his
special care of his flock, for which he did fervently every day pray unto God,
that the members of that Church, might constantly persevere in knowledge, in
faith, and obedience to the Divine will, and might make increase to perfection.
(3) From his zeal for the salvation of the Colossians, Laodiceans, and
Hierapolitans, of the fervency of whose zeal the Apostle bears witness.

Verse. 14. Luke the beloved Physician, and Demas, Greet you. Salut. 5. Sent
from Luke a Physician, and from Demas, who as yet had not revolted from the
society of the Apostle.

Verse. 15. Salute the Brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the
Church which is in his house. Art. 3. Contains the salutation sent from the
Apostle himself, wherein he salutes in his own name the Laodicean brethren, and
Nymphas, with the Church that was in his house. So he calls the family of
Nymphas, because it was instructed in godliness, well governed as Churches use
to be.

Verse. 16. And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read
also in the Church of the Laodiceans: And that ye likewise read the Epistle
from Laodicea. Art. 4. Of communicating this Epistle to the Laodiceans, who had
need of the same doctrine by reason of their like danger from the false
Apostles. But he mentions another Epistle written from Laodicea, which some
think to have been written by the Apostle, whilst he was at Laodicea, and that
now lost: But it is certain that no Epistle could have been written by our
Apostle from Laodicea, because he affirms, Chap. 2. verse. 1. That neither the
Laodiceans, nor the Colossians had ever seen his (...) the flesh, or had
beholden him present in body. It is more like to be meant that the (...) was
written from those Laodiceans to the Apostle (...) signified the state of that
Church to him, which the Apostle was willing to answer and satisfy by this
Epistle, whatsoever it was, certain it is, that it concerned the Colossian
Church to read that Epistle, and communicate this to the Laodiceans.

Verse. 17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. Art. 5. Concerning the admonishing
Archippus the Minister of the Colossians, and companion of Epaphras, who (as it
appears) was somewhat negligent, and had need of admonition from the Council or
Co-presbyters of his Church, whom the Apostle commands: (1) That they stir him
up to the duties of his Office, and to consider the weightiness of it. (2) That
they warn him to execute the Ministry, as one that was to give an account of
his Embassage committed to him of Christ. (3) That they furthermore seriously
exhort him to accomplish the Office committed to him: And the Apostle requires
these things of the Colossians, that Archippus might be more stirred up when
he should perceive them not want Apostolical authority, because the Church was
to admonish him concerning the executing his Office.

Verse. 18. The salutation by the hand of me Paul: Remember my bonds. Grace be
with you. Amen. Art. 6. Containing the conclusion of the Epistle, which the
Apostle used to write in all his Epistles, not by a Scribe, as the body of the
Epistle, but by his own hand; wherein he (1) Salutes all. (2) He shows the
characteristical note of his Epistles, lest they should acknowledge any
Epistle, as sent from him; which he himself with his own hand had not
subscribed. (3) He exhorts them, that praying for him now lying in bonds, they
would learn patience, and faith, being invited to it by so illustrious an
example. (4) Lastly, He wishes them the grace of God, from whence, as from a
fountain* all good things may flow to them, and hopes it will be communicated
to them: Sealing all things which hitherto he had writ, as it were with the
seal of faith. Amen.

The First Epistle of Paul to the THESSALONIANS Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
THessalonica in times past was the Metropolis of all Macedonia, in which Paul
and Silas (as it is supposed Act. 17.) converted many in a little time among
the Jews, and also the Gentiles, to the Christian Faith: But afterward a
sedition being stirred up by them that believed not, they were by force cast
out from thence; The Apostle first of all betook him to Berea, afterward to
Athens: And in the first place he sends away Timothy to them, that he might
comfort the afflicted. Afterward Timothy being returned, and he understanding
the constancy of the Thessalonians, sends this Epistle; in which he confirms
them in the Faith, and exhorts them to a life worthy of their holy Profession.
There are two principal parts of the Epistle: In the first, after his endeavor
to confirm them in the Faith of Christ, and persuasion of his affection toward
them, he encourages them to constancy, Chap. 1, 2, 3. In the second part he
instructs and exhorts them to an holy life, inserting consolation touching the
resurrection of the dead, Chap. 4, 5.

CHAP. I.
AFter his Apostolical salutation, verse. 1. In the rest of the Chapter he
confirms the Thessalonians in the Faith, by giving thanks to God for their
sincere conversion.

Verse. 1. Paul, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, unto the Church of the
Thessalonians, which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace
be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. The
persons saluting are Paul, Timotheus, and Sylvanus, who otherwise is called
Silas, whom that the Thessalonians might know to be those who had taught them,
he takes into the society of his testimony concerning the truth of this
Doctrine, and his respects toward the Thessalonians. The Church which is
saluted is described from its holy communion, no^ only with God the Father,
whom the unbeleeving Jews do falsely boast that they worship, but also with his
Son Christ, whom the unbeleeving Heathens and Jews did reject: Furthermore he
prays for Grace and Peace, for them from God the Father, and Christ,
signifying that true happiness which proceeds from the Grace of God, which as
it is purchased for Believers by the merit of Christ, so it is applied by the
intercession and efficacy.

Verse. 2. We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in
our prayers. In the remaining part of the Chapter, giving thanks for the
sincere conversion of the Thessalonians, he confirm^ them in the Faith by nine
Arguments, which both prove that they ought to be strengthened in Faith, and
also contain the reasons of giving thanks.

Argum. 1. The remembrance of your conversion to the Faith, is exceeding
pleasant to me, for which I cannot but give thanks to God, and daily pray that
ye may persevere: Therefore ye ought to be strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 3. Remembering without ceasing your work of Faith, and labor of love,
and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our
Father. Argum. 2. Your sincere Faith, which has showed it self lively, and
efficacious by works; your indefatigable charity visible in your daily labors,
and diligence, especially in your liberality toward the Saints: And lastly,
your lively hope shown in patience and suffering afflictions for Christ, have
left in me an indeleble impression, that I cannot but make mention of them
before God and man: Therefore it is meet that ye be strengthened in Faith:
But he calls them the virtues of Christ, because they did spring from Christ,
and tend to him, But he says in the sight of God, because they were of that
sort which were in the sight of God, genuine and no ways counterfeit.

Verse. 4. Knowing, Brethren beloved, your Election of God. Argum. 3. I know
certainly by certain signs that ye are elected, and my genuine Brethren in
Christ: Therefore it is that ye ought to be strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 5. For our Gospel came not to you in word only, but also in power, and
in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance, as ye know what manner of men we
were among you for your sake. Argum. 4. Confirming the former. I plainly
perceive that my Gospel has been efficacious amongst you, for there did
accompany my preaching unto you, (1) Strength and spiritual virtue to the
begetting of Faith in you. (2) The Holy Ghost by his inward testimony and gifts
withal bestowed upon you, did seal the truth received by you. (3) Much
assurance and persuasion in your hearts did ensue, which has freed you from
all doubting. (4) Such was the work and presence of God in you that heard, as
was to be seen in us Apostles that taught, as ye your selves have known:
Therefore it is, that ye ought to be strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 6. And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the
Word in much affliction with joy of the Holy Ghost. Argum. 5. Illustrating the
former. Ye, by embracing the Gospel, and firmly retaining it with joy, are
made in the midst of afflictions, both like unto the Lord Christ, and us his
servants, preaching that Gospel with joy in the midst of oppressions: Therefore
ye ought to be strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 7. So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and
Achaia, Argum. 6. Confirming the former. Ye were made exemplary to all
inhabiting the neighboring Countries, both of invincible Faith, and great
alacrity and patience in receiving and holding fast the Gospel: Therefore it
is, that ye ought to be strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 8. For from you sounded out the Word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia
and Achaia, but also in every place your Faith to Godward is spread abroad, so
that we need not to speak any thing. Argum. 7. Your Faith became most famous,
not only in the neighboring Countries, but also in those that are far
distant, that there is no need of any larger proof: Therefore it is, that ye
ought to be confirmed in the Faith.

Verse. 9. For they themselves show of us, what manner of entering in we had
unto you, and how ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true
God. Argum. 8. The wonderful power of God appeared in your conversion; that the
faithful in every place have published the history of the Thessalonians
conversion, viz. how the Apostle with manifest peril of his life preached the
Gospel amongst you, and how ye hearing him, after a wonderful manner renounced
feigned Idols, and addicted your selves to the service of the true and living
God: Therefore it is, that ye ought to be strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 10. And to wait for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead,
even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come. Argum. 9. Your
conversion to God was not, without his Son Christ, as the unbeleeving Jews
falsely boast of their conversion: But to God in Christ, or to the Father, and
to Christ, as the incarnate Son of God, the Redeemer, dead, and risen for us:
who shall come from Heaven, a Judge to destroy all unbeleevers, and to deliver
his own from the wrath which is to come upon the rest; which Faith alone is
saving: Therefore ye ought to be confirmed in Faith, reminding those works of
God in you.

CHAP. II.
HE proceeds for the confirmation of their Faith, to commend the sincerity of
his Ministry, and the efficacy of it amongst them, and to show his kind
affection toward them.

There are three parts of the Chapter. In the first he puts them in mind of
the manifest signs of his embassage to them, to verse. 13. In the second, he
shows the clear marks of divine Grace in their conversion, to verse. 17. In the
third, he confirms his kind affection toward them, lest they should think
themselves not enough regarded by the Apostle.

Verse. 1. For your selves, Brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was
not in vain. He recites thirteen signs of his spiritual, sincere, and divine
embassage to them, and the faithful administration of his office from the whole
time wherein he first of all preached the Gospel among them.

Sign 1. Ye your selves are witnesses that our entrance unto you, had nothing
of vanity, nor my Ministry was not without fruit, when I began to preach the
Gospel amongst you.

Verse. 2. But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully
entreated, as you know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you
the Gospel of God with much contention. Sign 2. The great persecution, which
not much before I suffered at Philippi, has not hindered, but that I dare
preach to you in this present danger: For I boldly use liberty of speech,
trusting in the power of God alone, striving earnestly against all enemies.

Verse. 3. For our exhortation was not of deceit, not of uncleanness, or in
guile Sign 3. Confirming the former, The Doctrine, Exhortation, and Consolation
administered by me, was not like the Doctrine of the false Apostles, for (1) It
was not adulterate and framed to deceive, but sincere, without any imposture. I
did neither use nor suffer impurity (as the false Apostles in their Doctrine)
but my Doctrine was without all mixture, not handled after a deceitful manner,
as it uses to be handled by them, which in their preaching endeavor their own
glory and advantage.

Verse. 4. But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel,
even so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, which tries our hearts. Sign
4. From the knowledge of my Election, and Vocation to so excellent an office
(wherein the preaching of the Gospel was committed unto me) I have determined
to preach the Word of God with an holy and sincere mind, and not to please men,
but God, who searches the hearts, and does bear me witness as his faithful
servant.

Verse. 5. For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a
cloak of covetousness, God is witness. Sign 5. More especially explicating that
which is before, I never used flattering words amongst you, of which thing I
call you to witness.

Nor] Sign 6. I never did any thing for the sake of covetousness under the
cloak of piety, as the false Apostles were wont, of which thing he calls God
to witness.

Verse. 6. Not of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when
we might have been burdensome, as the Apostles of Christ. Neither] Sign 7. I
was so far from ambition, and also covetousness, that I never required the
honor due to me, or an honorable stipend, either of you, or of others, when
as an Apostle of Christ I could have lawfully been burdensome unto you.

Verse. 7. But we were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her
children. Sign 8. Whilst I was conversant amongst you, I did carry my self
gently, as one of you, yea, as one equal to the lowest of you, laying aside all
haughtiness, morosity, and imperiousness, and all respect either to the
Nobility of my Kindred, or the excellency of my office and gifts vouchsafed to
me, and all other privileges, the consideration whereof uses to be accounted
of in civil conversation.

Verse. 8. So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have
imparted unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because
ye were dear unto us. Sign 9. As a mother cherishes her children, warmeth
them with her breath, nourishes them with her milk, and (if she could) is
ready to communicate her soul to them: So I affectionately taking care of all
the concernments of the Church, with the greatest satisfaction, together with
the preaching of the Gospel, I was willing to impart unto you, as it were my
soul, because of my vehement love toward you.

Verse. 9. For ye remember, Brethren, our la^our and travel: for laboring
night and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we
preached unto you the Gospel of God. Sign 10. Explaining and confirming the
former; the whole time which remains to me from the preaching the Gospel, I
did bestow laboring with my hands, lest any one of you be burdened by
allowing me maintenance, as an Apostle.

Verse. 10. Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and
unblameably we behaved our selves among you that believe. Sign. 11. I carried
my self amongst you in all things, justly, holily, and unblameably, whereof I
call you to witness as to external things, and I call God to witness of my more
inward sincere love to you in all things.

Verse. 11. As you know, how we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one
of you, (as a Father does his children) Sig. 12. As ye may remember, I did
exhort and comfort privately every one of you, no otherwise than as a Father is
wont to exhort and comfort his children.

Verse. 12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his
Kingdom and Glory. Sig. 13. I left nothing undone that might show greatest
faithfulness and diligence, that ye might lead an holy life, and that ye
might please God in all things, who has called you by his grace to a
participation of his Kingdom, and celestial Glory. These are the Signs of
Paul's celestial Embassage, and of his Apostolical Office faithfully administered
by him amongst the Thessalonians.

The Second Part of the Chapter.
Verse. 13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye
received the Word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word
of men, but (as it is in truth) the Word of God, which effectually works also
in you that believe. The Second part of the Chapter, in which are contained
manifest Signs of the Divine grace toward the Thessalonians in their
conversion, which afterward he publishes with Thanksgiving, and confirms them
against the scandal of the Cross and persecution, which they suffered from the
enemies of the Gospel, which were of the same Tribe. The Signs of the Divine
grace toward the Thessalonians in their conversion are three.

Sign 1. That you have attentively heard (says he) the word of the Gospel
preached by me, not as the word of man, but as the word of God, and ye have
received it with a true faith.

Which also] Sign 2. That the word of God received by faith efficaciously works
in you, and testifies it self to be Divine by its efficacy, no less in you,
than it has manifested it self in other believers.

Verse. 14. For ye brethren, became followers of the Churches of God, which in
Judea are in Christ Jesus; for ye also have suffered like things of your own
Countrymen, even as they have of the Jews: Sign 3. Confirming what was said
before: That hitherto ye have been constant in bearing persecutions from your
friends, kinsfolks, and those of the same Tribe, for the Gospels sake, and have
shown your selves like to the Christian Churches in Judea, who did constantly
suffer persecutions from the other unbeleeving Jews, of whom some are spiteful
to you.

Verse. 15. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men: That he
may remove the scandal of persecution whereby the Christian Churches were vexed
by the unbeleeving Jews, who called themselves the people of God, he takes off
the vizard from those perverse enemies of the Gospel, setting out their sins
with a most severe accusation, whereof there are seven branches. (1) The
unbeleeving Jews killed Christ himself. (2) They have not spared their own
Prophets being their Countrymen. (3) They persecute us Apostles which say that
the Thessalonians should receive consolation from the fellowship of the
sufferings of Christ, and the sufferings of his servants. (4) They are
adversaries unto God, and then they think that they please God most, when they
persecute his servants. (5) That as public enemies of mankind, they hinder
as much as they can, the common salvation of men.

Verse. 16. Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved,
to fill up their sins always: For the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.
(6) They are enemies to the Gentiles to their utmost, forbidding the Apostles
to preach the Gospel of salvation to the Gentiles, lest they should be saved,
so far as it lies in them. (7) By doing these and many other things, they daily
more and more fill up the measure of their sins. Having recited their faults
he annexes the judgment and wrath of God, which now had come upon them even
to the utmost.

The Third Part of the Chapter.
Verse. 17. But we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time, in
presence, not in heart, endeavored the more abundantly to see your face with
great desire. The third part of the Chapter, wherein, lest they should think
that they were neglected by the Apostle in their afflictions, because he did
not come to them in the midst of such afflictions, he confirms his love and
affection toward them in six Arguments.

Arg. 1. My absence from you was no less troublesome to me, than the absence
of any father uses to be from his children: Truly I sympathized with you, as
an orphane brother is wont to symphatize with his orphane brethren.

For a short] Arg. 2. I hope I shall not be absent from you long, but only
for a little time.

Not in heart] Arg. 3. I was not absent from you in heart and affection,
although in body.

More abundantly] Arg. 4. By how much the more I am troubled for my absence
from you, so much the more abundantly I desire to see you.

Verse. 18. Wherefore we would have come unto you (even I Paul) once and again;
But Satan hindered us. Arg. 5. I was ready to come once and again that you might
be confirmed in faith; but Satan prevented my business, and cast many
impediments in the way of my coming.

Verse. 19. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even
ye, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming?

20. For, ye are our glory and joy.

Arg. 6. Confirming the former. My hope concerning your perseverance is so
great; my joy concerning your conversion is so great; the crown of my glorying
in the fruits of my Ministry, and in you, is this, that ye may be accounted
with the chiefest Churches converted to the faith by my Ministry. And unless
ye were to be esteemed such, of whom, I pray you, could I hope well, rejoice,
or glory? Truly ye shall be esteemed the chief amongst those that are
converted by me, in the sight of our Lord at his coming; which I confirm to
you with a frequent affirmation: Therefore be ye very fully persuaded of my
friendly love toward you.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter he goes on to confirm his love toward them, and to establish
them in the faith which he had taught them.

Verse. 1. Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to
be left at Athens alone: For this end he produces ten Arguments: All which
prove that the Thessalonians were most dear to the Apostle.

Arg. 1. By reason of my desire of confirming you in the faith, I had rather
tarry alone at Athens in many storms of afflictions, than that ye should be
longer destitute of consolation and confirmation: Therefore ye are most dear
to me.

Verse. 2. And sent Timotheus our brother and Minister of God, and our
fellow laborer in the Gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you
concerning your Faith: Argum. 2. I have sent unto you Timothy my very familar
friend, who although he is my most intimate Brother, and a faithful Minister
of God, and my fellow laborer in the Gospel of Christ, yet I am willing to be
deprived of his company, That ye might receive comfort and confirmation in the
Faith: Therefore ye ought to be most dear unto me.

Verse. 3. That no man should be moved by these afflictions: for your selves
know that we are appointed thereunto: Argum. 3. I was more afraid, lest ye
should be offended at my afflictions for the Gospel, than I regarded my own
trouble: Therefore I would have you now strengthened against this scandal. (1)
Because ye have learned out of the Gospel, how it is appointed of God, that
we Apostles before all others should suffer many afflictions for the truth of
the Gospel.

Verse. 4. For verily when we were with you, we told you before, that we
should suffer tribulation, even as it came to pass, and ye know. (2) Because I
had told you before, that afflictions for the Gospel did abide for me, as the
event has made it manifest.

Verse. 5. For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your
Faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labor be in
vain. Argum. 4. I feared lest the Devil by some of his arts, had moved you from
the Faith, and so my labor had been lost: Wherefore I have sent to you
Timotheus, who might understand your constancy in the Faith: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 6. But now when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good
tidings of your Faith and Charity, and that you have good remembrance of us
always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you: Argum. 5. I much
rejoice upon the message that Timotheus brought of your Faith toward Christ,
of your love toward the Saints, and of your desire of seeing my face:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 7. Therefore, Brethren, we were comforted over you in all our
affliction and distress, by your Faith: Argum. 6. The consolation arising to
me from your Faith, has allayed, and excelled all my grief, which I took from
the afflictions and necessities, either lying upon, or hanging over me:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 8. For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. Argum. 7. It shall
be certain happiness, if you abide constant: Therefore it is necessary that
ye be most dear to me.

Verse. 9. For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy
wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God, Argum. 8. Confirming the
former; so great occasion was offered me of sincere rejoicing in the presence
of God for your perseverance, that I know not how great thanks to render to
God: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 10. Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and
might perfect that which is lacking in your Faith? Argum. 9. I continually pray
God, that I may see your faces, and amend the defects of your Faith, and
increase the measure of it, by opening to you more fully the mystery of the
Gospel: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 11. Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct
our way unto you. Argum. 10. How dear ye are to me, ye may gather out of the
sum of my prayer for you. There are three Articles of my prayer. (1) I
always pray that God would grant me a prosperous journey to you, whereby I
might confirm you in the Faith.

Verse. 12. And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward
another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: (2) Also I pray, that
God would grant you increase and abundance of love one toward another, and
toward all, as my love abounds toward you.

Verse. 13. To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness
before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all
his Saints. (3) Lastly, I pray, that God would stablish your hearts, and make
your consciences unblameable in true holiness, which is required before God,
and our Father, that at length, at the coming of our Lord, with all his Saints
(that is, Angels and men) ye may not be ashamed: Therefore do none of you
doubt, but that ye are most dear to me.

CHAP. IV.
HE passes from his praying to God, in the end of the former Chapter, to the
second part of the Epistle, which contains Exhortations and Precepts to
duties of holiness. The Doctrine concerning the resurrection and last judgment
being by the way taken in amongst them.

The parts of the Chapter are two: The former is Hortatory, to verse. 13. the
other consolatory, to the end.

Verse. 1. Furthermore, then we beseech you, Brethren, and exhort you by the
Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and to
please God, so ye would abound more and more. The first part of the Chapter
contains seven Exhortations. First Is general, That they be mindful of those
things which they heard from the Apostle, and daily more and more profit in the
endeavor of living holily, and pleasing God, that they may daily, as it were,
excel themselves; He adds four Reasons of the Exhortation.

Reas. 1. I an Apostle in the name of the Lord friendly desire that from you.

Ye ought] Reas. 2. This is necessary for those that are justified: For it
behooves you so to walk.

Verse. 2. For ye know what Commandments we gave you, by the Lord Jesus.
Reas. 3. Ye have already upon this account received commands from the Lord.

Verse. 3. For this is the Will of God, even your sanctification, that ye
should abstain from fornication. Reas. 4. This is the Will of God, that ye be
sanctified in soul as well as in body; which Will whosoever endeavors to
obey, shall please God.

That ye abstain] Exhort. 2. Is special, whereof there are three branches. (1)
That they abstain from all fornication or filthy lust.

Verse. 4. That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor: (2) That every one taught of God, continually keep
his body, as a vessel consecrated to the Lord, in chastity and honor, to uses
sanctified by God, and do not defile themselves.

Verse. 5. Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not
God: (3) That they endeavor to extinguish the feverish heats and flames of
inward concupiscence. Of which Exhortation there is a reason given, lest they
be like the Gentiles, which have not known God, and that they may be
distinguished from them by honesty, or purity and holiness.

Verse. 6. That no man go beyond and defraud his Brother in any matter, because
that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you, and
testified. Exhort. 3. Concerning the avoiding Covetousness, lest they by
deceit, violence, or evil arts, purchase their own profits by others losses, in
oppressing or deceiving their Brethren.

For a Revenger] He adds five Reasons.

Reas. 1. God will revenge such kind of injuries.

Reas. 2. As I have before admonished you, so I also again admonish you, and I
beseech you for Gods sake, that ye take heed.

Verse. 7. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. Reas.
3. From the end of our calling, to the Grace of Christ, which is not that we
defile our selves with any kind of sin, but that we be sanctified in all
manner of virtue.

Verse. 8. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, who has
also given unto us his holy Spirit. Reas. 4. Because he that does not obey
this Exhortation, is guilty of rejecting divine authority.

Who also] Reas. 5. Because God has given the Spirit to us true Christians,
whereby we may discern what is from God, what is an abomination to him, and
what judgments hang over sinners.

Verse. 9. But as touching Brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you:
for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another. Exhort. 4. To
brotherly love, and to exercise, for the future, kindness toward all: The
Reasons are three.

Reas. 1. Because ye are so propense to this brotherly love, that it is not
much necessary to urge this duty.

Reas. 2. Ye are already taught, that ye love one another.

Verse. 10. And indeed ye do it toward all the Brethren, which are in all
Macedonia: but we beseech you, Brethren, that ye increase more and more,
Reas. 3. Confirming the former. Now ye have really shown this kindness toward
all your Brethren near about you: Therefore go forwards, and excel in this duty.

Verse. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to
work with your own hands, (as we commanded you.)

12. That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may
have lack of nothing.

There follows other three Exhortations briefly conjoined in these two verses.

Exhort. 5. That ye be not curious, looking into other men's businesses, but
carry your selves quietly, and pleasingly.

To work] Exhort. 6. That ye be not idle, but take care about your private
matters, and do your businesses, work with your own hands, as I have commanded
you before.

That yee] Exhort. 7. Carry your selves decently toward those, and before
those, that are not in the Church, and in all these duties strive amongst your
selves, as it were for matter of honor; for this end especially besides
others, that ye may have no need to beg any thing from the household of Faith,
or of those that are without.

The Second Part.
Verse. 13. But I would not have you be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them
which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope, The
second part of the Chapter contains matter of consolation against the
immoderate mourning for the death of friends, which he disswades them from by
two Arguments.

Arg. 1. Immoderate mourning belongs to Heathens and Infidels, who have no hope
of the resurrection: Therefore immoderate mourning does not become you.

Verse. 14. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them
also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Arg. 2. How certain soever
we believe that Christ is risen from the dead, so certainly we may also know
that the faithful dead in Christ shall rise again, and be presented alive in
the company of Christ at the day of judgment: Therefore ye must have a care
of immoderate mourning.

Verse. 15. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which
are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which are asleep. That this consolation may be strong, by revelation from the
Lord, he fore-tells the manner of the coming of Christ, and the resurrection;
which is contained in these six Articles.

Artic. 1. The faithful that are alive at the coming of Christ, shall not
prevent the resurrection of those that are dead in Christ.

Verse. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangel and with the Trump of God: and the dead in Christ
shall rise first. Artic. 2. Christ shall descend from Heaven with all his
Angels.

With the voice] Artic. 3. The manner of his coming shall be with much
expression of authority and majesty, for as the chief Judge he shall command
by his authority, that every element give up their dead, from whereupon all the
dead shall be gathered together to his Tribunal, but his command shall be
promulged by some chief Angel, the Trumpet shall sound, or a voice in stead of
a Trumpet, and the sound shall be heard in all places where the dead are to
be raised.

And they] Artic. 4. The dead in Christ shall arise, before the living shall
be changed.

Verse. 17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air; and so shall we ever be with
the Lord. Artic. 5. The faithful that are alive at the coming of the Lord,
being changed suddenly, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, from
mortality to immortality, shall be caught up together with the Saints that are
raised, to meet the Lord in the Air.

And so] Artic. 6. The Saints after judgment shall go with the Lord into
Heaven, and shall remain with him to eternity. He speaks nothing concerning
the Reprobates, because consolation does not pertain to them; neither
concerning them, when they dye, can any comfort be taken.

Verse. 18. Wherefore comfort one another with th^se words. He applies a
Prophecy to the use of the Thessalonians, that from the Resurrection every
Believer should seek comfort in his grief, and also should administer it to
other Believers.

CHAP. V.
HE proceeds in the same Argument. There are three parts of the Chapter: In
the first he continues the Doctrine concerning Christ's coming to the general
judgment, to verse. 6. In the second he brings diverse Exhortations to all kind
of Christian virtues, to verse. 13. In the third the Epilogue and Conclusion of
the whole Epistle is contained.

Verse. 1. But of the times and seasons, Brethren, ye have no need that I write
unto you. There are added four other Articles concerning the Lords coming.

Art. 1. The time and hour of the Lords coming is not revealed, but lies hid
in the secrets of God, neither is it expedient to inquire curiously, or write
any thing concerning it.

Verse. 2. For your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes as
a th^ef in the night. Artic. 2. Containing the reason of the former. No less
suddenly will Christ come, than a thief in the night is wont, suddenly to creep
into other men's houses.

Verse. 3. For when they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction
comes upon them, as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. Art. 3. Explicating the former, and applying it to impenitent. As
unawares, certainly and necessarily the pains of travel ceize upon those that
are with child; so the unexpected day of the Lords anger shall ceize upon
impenitent secure sinners on the sudden.

Verse. 4. But ye, Brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake
you as a thief. Art. 4. In which he further explains this Doctrine, and
applies it to the consolation of the faithful; Ye believers need not fear that
day, because ye lie not in the darkness of sin and ignorance: The last day
cannot (as a Thief in the night) take hold of you.

Verse. 5. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we
are not of the night, nor of darkness. He gives a reason, because as many as
truly believe in Christ, are the sons of light, and of the day, living in the
light of faith and godliness: And therefore none of us can be in bondage to
ignorance and sin.

The Second Part of the Chapter.
Verse. 6. Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch, and be
sober. The second part of the Chapter contains thirteen Exhortations to
Christian duties:

Exhort. 1. An Exhortation inferred from the Doctrine of the last Judgment, to
watchfulness and sobriety, that we may expect that day without fear. That we
may not (says he) sleep or indulge our selves in our sins, as Infidels, but
on the contrary, studying moderation in all earthly things, we may earnestly
endeavor after works of holiness.

Verse. 7. For they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be drunken,
are drunken in the night. The Reasons of the Exhortation are six:

Reas. 1. Because they which sleep securely, and give themselves to
drunkenness, use to do that in the night, and in darkness, which does not
become you.

Verse. 8. But let us who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breast plate
of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope of salvation. Reas. 2. Because
Christians, who are the childr^n of the day, and live in the light of faith are
engaged to endeavor after sobriety of body and mind.

Putting off] Reas. 3. Confirming the former. Because Christians ought to live
as in a warfare, armed with spiritual Armor, putting on Faith and Love as a
breast plate, and the hope of salvation as an helmet: He adds Love to Faith,
that we may acknowledge that faith alone for a breast plate, which works by
love.

Verse. 9. For God has not appointed us to wrath* bu^ to obtain salvation by
our Lord Jesus Christ, Reas. 4. God has not predestined us to wrath:
Therefore let us not indulge our lusts and vicious desires, for which the wrath
of God comes upon the children of disobedience.

By the Lord] Reas. 5. God has chosen and predestined us to salvation by
Jesus Christ: Therefore let us strive unto salvation in the ways of the Lord.

Verse. 10. Who dyed for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live
together with him. Reas. 6. Because Christ for this end dyed for us, not that
we should walk and live with the devil, and the world, in sin, but that we
should walk and live with him in the ways of holiness, whether waking or
sleep^ing, i. e. night and day, in obedience to him, and dying in the communion
of his quickening life: Therefore we must not sleep in sin, but awake in the
works of holiness.

Verse. 11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even
as also ye do. Exhort. 2. Inferred from the former; That they mutually exhort,
comfort, and build up one another in faith and holiness. In the mean while for
the present their obedience to this precept is commended.

Verse. 12. And we beseech you brethren, to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: Exhort. 3. Which appertains to
the people; That they observe the Pastors and Presbyters, with the whole
assembly of the Elders, teaching and governing those which labored amongst
them in the Word and Doctrine, and who were over them in the Lord, ruling in
Ecclesiastical affairs, and according to their duty, did admonish, when there
was need: Concerning these he commands them, that as Saints, and as it became
thankful persons, they acknowledge in heart, words, and deeds, all the
Presbyters appointed for the Ministers of Christ to their salvation.

There are three Reasons of the Exhortation:

Reas. 1. Because I an Apostle do lovingly and earnestly desire this.

Did labour] Reas. 2. Because Ministers are worthy of this honor, in as much
as they labor for your edification, and are over you, or govern you, in the
name of Christ, in all Ecclesiastical matters, and those things which pertain
to the worship of God, and do with authority admonish you of your duties both
privately and publicly.

Verse. 13. And to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. And be
at peace among your selves. Reas. 3. Because the work of God for the salvation
of believers, which the faithful Ministers earnestly endeavor, requires, that
after a singular manner they be beloved by the people, and esteemed very
highly,

And peace] E^^^rt. 4. Chiefly to the people; That they be at peace both
amongst themselves, and with the Pastors from whom the Devil is wont to
alienate the minds of the people, even when the Pastors deserve best at their
hands.

Verse. 14. Now we ex^ort you, brethren, warn them that are ^^ruly, comfort the
fe^ble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men. Exhort. 5. To the
P^^sbyters (which in the former verse he distinguished from the people, and
here he describes them from their Offices, which especially belong to the
Government of the Church* from the authority of their Office) That they
diligently execute their Office, by admonishing those that live dissolutely, of
their duty, by comforting the feeble, by supporting the weak in their love;
lastly by showing a gentle mind toward all: Lest if they should do otherwise,
abusing their authority, they hinder the work of the Lord which they intend.

Verse. 15. See that none render evil for evil unto any m^n, but ^ver follow
that which is good; both among your selves and to all men. Exhort. 6.
Promiscuously to all: That they abstaining from (...) revenge, follow that
which is good, as well mutually among themselves as toward (...) tha^ are
without.

Verse. 16. Rejoice evermore. Exhort. 7. That rooted by faith in the free love
of God toward them, they endeavor through Christ and his Righteousness
imputed to life eternal, to rejoice and advance Peace in their hearts, both in
prosperity and adversity.

Verse. 17. Pray without ceasing. Exhort. 8. That they look toward God in every
condition, prosperity and adversity, and in every business, praying as the
matter required.

Verse. 18. In every thing give thanks: For this is the Will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you. Exhort. 9. That seeing they know that all things fall out
for good to those that love God, they should in every condition, but chiefly in
adversity, seek for matter of thanksgiving to God.

For this] The Reason of the Exhortation is, because God requires this duty
from all, and chiefly from Christians, upon whom he has poured forth his
grace and love in Christ.

Verse. 19. Quench not the Spirit. Exhort. 10. That they stifle not the gifts of
the holy Spirit whatsoever, either by negligence, or by evil-doing; but on the
contrary, that they continually stir up, and daily increase them by labor,
prayer, or all other means sanctified by God.

Verse. 20. Despise not prophesyings. Exhort. 11. That they contemn or neglect
not the holy public exercises, wherein the Ministers of the Churches do
interpret the Scripture.

Verse. 21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good. Exhort. 12. That
they do not rashly embrace every thing in matters of Religion, but that they
examine every thing by the Rule of the Divine Word, or by the analogy of Faith,
and that they constantly hold, and strongly defend that which is sound and
good, and found acceptable unto God.

Verse. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. Exhort. 13. That they take heed
not only of that which is evil in the worship of God, or their conversations,
but also of every thing that has the appearance of evil: of which sort are
dangerous phrases in Doctrine, and indifferency in practice, which because of
the appearance of evil, may yield offense to others.

The Third Part.
Verse. 23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your
whole Spirit, soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. The third part of the Chapter contains the Epilogue or
Conclusion, whereof there are six Articles. In the first he prays the God of
Peace, or the fountain of holiness and happiness, that he would more and more
sanctify them. (1) As to the Spirit or mind (already illuminated by the Spirit
of God) which is the supreme faculty of the rational soul. (2) As to the soul,
or will and affections, and (3) As to the body or outward actions, that so at
the coming of the Lord, when the holiness of the faithful is to be perfected,
there may be nothing found, but that which is blameless and commendable.

Verse. 24. Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it. Artic. 2. In
which he certifies them, concerning Gods hearing the preceding prayer. (1)
From Gods preceding efficacious vocation. (2) From the faithfulness of God,
whereby he performs that in them, to which he calls them, and does not de^^rt
a good work begun.

Verse. 25. Brethren, pray for us. Artic. 3. Wherein the Apostle does not
disdain to ask the help of the prayers of the least amongst the faithful.

Verse. 26. Greet all the Brethren with an holy kiss. Artic. 4. Wherein he
salutes all the Brethren in his own name, by this Epistle, no less lovingly,
than if he had saluted them, being present, with the ordinary sign of
salutation, ( i. e. with a kiss, not counterfeited, but proceeding from
Christian love.)

Verse. 27. I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read unto all the
holy Brethren. Artic. 5. Wherein he commands and charges in the Name of God,
that the Ministers or Governors of the Church (to whom immediately it appears
that this Epistle was sent) would produce this part of Scripture for the common
use of the Church, and take care, that it might be publishly, read threatening
divine revenge, except they published it to the whole Church.

Verse. 28. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. Artic. 6. And
lastly, wherein he concludes the whole Epistle, by wishing to them the Grace
of Christ, which contains in it self all good things. Amen.

The Second Epistle of Paul to the THESSALONIANS, Analytically expounded.
THE CONTENTS.
THe occasion of writing this Epistle seems to have been this: Some of the
Thessalonians abused the Doctrine touching the sudden coming of Christ, even
to negligence in their Vocations, and to the wasting of their goods, as if
there was no need that they should care for their Estates any more, seeing
Christ was about to come, perhaps to morrow, perhaps the day after, as they did
suppose, but others did abuse the simplicity and mistake of some, and intending
to live upon the goods of others, left off working. In the mean while the
persecution of enemies did rage, and concurred to cherish this error.
Wherefore the Apostle writes this second Epistle to them, solves the
difficulty, and first of all comforts them against persecutions or afflictions,
Chap. 1. Secondly, He explains the Doctrine touching Christ's coming, which
will approach before the Antichristian Apostasy from the true Faith of Christ
should appear, and be discovered to the world, Chap. 2. Lastly, He exhorts
them to Christian duties, and namely, to Diligence in every ones vocation,
Chap. 3.

CHAP. I.
Ver. 1. PAul and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, unto the Church of the Thessalonians
in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ:

2. Grace unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

In the direction of the Epistle the same persons salute the Thessalonians,
which did in the former: Here is nothing said as touching the authority of the
Apostle, neither in the former Epistle, because they were all confirmed
sufficiently in this Church concerning Paul's Apostleship; only mentioning
their communion with the only true God, and his Son Jesus Christ, he
distinguishes this Church, both from the assemblies of the Heathens, and
unbeleeving Jews; by wishing them both Grace and Peace, he certifies them of
all things which make to eternal salvation and righteousness, which are to be
communicated to them from God through Christ.

Verse. 3. We are bound to thank God always for you, Brethren, as it is meet,
because that your Faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of
you all toward each other abounds. In the remaining part of the Chapter, by
giving God thanks for them, he also confirms their Faith, and administers to
them comfort against all the rage of persecutors, wherewith they were vexed.
The Arguments of comfort and confirmation of their Faith are eight: All which
do prove that they ought to be strengthened in Faith, and be comforted in
their persecutions.

Argum. 1. The condition of your Church, (if I may judge) is most happy in the
sight of God, wherein all ye (none excepted as far as can be known) embrace
the Lord Jesus with a sincere Faith, and one another with a sincere love, and
proceed in both virtues, daily abounding more and more in both virtues:
Therefore whatsoever your condition is in the sight of the world, ye ought to
be comforted and strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 4. So that we our selves glory in you in the Churches of God, for your
patience and Faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure.
Argum. 2. The constancy of your Faith and Patience in the midst of
persecutions, and afflictions which you suffer, is so much, that I am compelled
to praise you, before other Churches, and to set you out for an example to
others: Therefore ye ought to be comforted and strengthened in Faith.

Verse. 5. Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye
may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer.
Argum. 3. Your afflictions which ye suffer by those impious persecutors, are a
manifest token that there will at length be a general judgment, wherein it
shall go ill with the bad, and well with the good, when you shall be pronounced
meet through the divine favor to enjoy the Kingdom of God, because ye suffer
many evils for promoting of it.

Verse. 6. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you:

7. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels,

8. In flaming fire, taking vengeance of them that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,

9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

Argum. 4. Explaining the former: God in his justice will punish in the day of
judgment, your persecutors, and will set you at liberty from all evil:
Therefore ye ought to be comforted, and strengthened in Faith.

With us] Argum. 5. Ye shall at length obtain, together with us, and with
others the Martyrs of Christ, as your fellow soldiers, rest from all evil and
misery: Therefore ye ought together with us to be comforted, and strengthened
in Faith.

In the Revelation] Argum. 6. From those circumstances of the last judgment,
which makes the revenge terrible, that shall be taken upon them. The Lord
Jesus, (1) shall be made manifest and visibly come from Heaven, a Judge and
avenger of injuries. (2) The mighty Angels shall accompany him, who shall
execute the sentence of the Judge, verse. 7. (3) He shall kindle a flaming
fire, wherein this whole world shall burn. (4) He shall be revenged of all
those that are found destitute of saving knowledge (which is joined with Faith
and Obedience) and that have not obeyed the Gospel, verse. 8. (5) Then the
wicked shall be punished with everlasting destruction. (6) This punishment
shall be inflicted by an angry Judge, who shall eternally cast them out from
his presence.

From his presence] (7) The Lord shall manifest to all how glorious his power
is, by punishing them mightily: Therefore ye ought to be comforted and
confirmed in Faith.

Verse. 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed)
in that day. Argum. 7. Of consolation, from those circumstances of the last
judgment, which make the glorious and joyful redemption of the godly: For (1)
In the same day wherein Christ will destroy his adversaries, he will set at
liberty his faithful ones, and especially you. (2) He will communicate his
glory to the Saints, and will manifest his glory for their glorification. (3)
His glory shall surpass all our hope and apprehension; for Christ shall be
admired in the greatness of his glory communicated. (4) He will show his glory
in all that believe, so that there shall be no believer, wherein Christ shall
not be admired: by the way he gives the reason of this consolation applied to
them, Because the Thessalonians had believed the Testimony of the Apostle
preaching the Gospel: Therefore he dare confidently apply the aforesaid
consolation to them, which indeed they shall find in that day: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 11. Wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would count
you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness,
and the work of Faith with power. Argum. 8. Of comforting and confirming them
in Faith. Ye have our continual prayers, that yeee may happily attain your
end: Therefore ye ought to be comforted in your afflictions, and strengthened
in Faith. There are four Articles of his prayer.

Artic. 1. I pray, that God, (who is ours by a free Covenant) would vouchsafe
to make you meet for the vocation or glory whereunto you are called. This
Article ascribes as well the glory unto which we are called, to the grace or
favor of God, as well as all the preparation which leads us to it.

And fulfil] Artic. 2. I pray that God would fulfill all the good pleasure of
his goodness according to his free bounty toward you. In which Article he
shows that not only salvation, but all means to salvation, are founded in the
good pleasure of God, acknowledging nothing except the Grace of God in the
whole course of salvation, and in all the parts of it.

And the work of Faith] Artic. 3. I pray, that God would complete the work of
Faith with power in you. In which Article he affirms Faith to be the work of
God, which he works in his, and he determines the beginning, increase, and
perfecting of Faith, as part of his good pleasure. Lastly, He shows that Faith
is not only not a work of our power, but exceeds whatsoever can be in us, and
requires the power of God, without which it can neither be begun, or continue,
or be increased, or completed.

Verse. 12. That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and
ye in him, according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Art.
4. I pray that both in this life, and in that which is to come, Christ may be
glorified in you, as in his members, and ye may be glorified in him, as in
your head, which is the end of the former Articles. Neither in this Article
will he have the grace of God concealed, but teaches that the whole glory
which Christ receives from his, or which he communicates to them, is to be
ascribed to the grace of God and Christ only; In all which the Thessalonians
had no mean supports for their consolation and confirmation in the faith.

CHAP. II.
THe resolution of the Doubt concerning Christ's coming follows.

There are two parts of the Chapter: In the first he confutes the error
touching Christ's last coming, whilst the Thessalonians were alive, to verse. 13.

In the other, he confirms the faith of the Thessalonians.

Verse. 1. Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, An error had crept in amongst
the Thessalonians concerning Christ's coming immediately, whilst they were
alive, which error the Devil cherished, that as for other causes, so also for
this, that at leastwise after that age he might expose the whole Christian
Doctrine, together with this Article, to a mockery; therefore the Apostle
admonishes them, that they suffer not themselves to be moved from the sound
sense and faith of this Article. In the mean while he affirms two things, as
most certain, whereof he would not have them doubt: The first was, That Christ
will come, as he had taught before, in his appointed time. The other was, It
will come to pass that all the faithful should be gathered together from the
four quarters of the world to meet the Lord: But he beseeches them, if they
would be wise for themselves in that day, that they would have a care of that
error, whereof we speak.

Verse. 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at
hand. Because Impostors did brag partly of some Revelations from the Spirit,
partly some speech of the Apostle, which they affirmed they had heard, they did
partly say, that it was manifested by the former Epistle written by the Apostle
to the Thessalonians, as if in the fourth and fifth Chapters, he had taught
that Christ would come while they were yet alive, the Apostle commands to take
heed, lest they should be by this, or any like imposture deceived, troubled,
or by any other means be moved from the faith.

Verse. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come,
except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the
son of perdition. He gives a reason of his dehortation, Because Christ would
not come before the Antichristian defection should be, and Antichrist should
be revealed, the chief Captain and Patron of this Apostasy: Therefore it
behooves two things to precede Christ's coming, a falling from the faith
received (whereof 1 Timothy 4.1.) and the revelation of the chief or great
Antichrist: That which concerns the falling away, he does not understand the
falling away of one or a few, or of many in many Churches, for day by day in
those times there were not a few Runagates from the tents of Christ, almost
through all the Churches, and many followers of many errors; but he
understands the universal falling away of the external or visible Church; so
that false opinions contrary to the Gospel should be received, and openly
defended, and that commonly in the visible Christian Church, by those that
should boast in the name of Christians.

As concerning him, who should be the head of this Apostasy, he fore-tells
that he shall be revealed by God, partly by permitting him to erect his
Kingdom in his Church, and openly, and in very deed, show himself to be
Antichrist, partly by making of him manifest by the Doctrine of the Gospel
(which should make his impostures manifest, and open to all those that are
unwilling to be deceived) of which Antichrist, or head of Apostates, that he
may be better discerned in his time by those that were circumspect, The
Apostle propounds seven Articles, which are exactly to be observed.

Art. 1. Contains the description, and nine Notes of Antichrist, all which, and
every one, agree to none better, yea to none other than to the Pope of Rome, as
it will appear by those that observe them.

Man] Note 1. He shall be a Man, in spite of those that in favor of the
Pope, feign, that the evil Spirit Antichrist is to come: Therefore he is
called (...), a Man, both in nature and kind, and (...), The Man, in the
singular number, that he may show that the famous, chief and great Antichrist
in kind so called, is described; He does not only intimate some individual
man, or a single person, but the series of shavelings that were to succeed in
one seat, Heb. 9.7.25. (...), The high Priest denotes the whole series or
succession of Priests, and (...), The man of God signifies not one Pastor, but
the series of faithful Ministers; and that according to the style of the
Prophets when they speak concerning the order of Kings, as Dan. 7.2.

Of sin] Note 2. He shall be the man of sin, as well because he is a notable
sinner, yea highly addicted to sin, as because both by fraud and impostures,
and by force and tyrannical compulsion, he was to be the famous author of
sinning unto others.

The son] Note 3. He shall be the son of perdition, or the successor of Judas
the Traitor: For by this title Christ heretofore noted Judas in the New
Testament, Ioh. 17.12. which Judas Antichrist resembles, partly in the assumed
title of the Apostolical calling, partly by dissimulation, covetousness,
cruelty, obstinacy, and final perdition, bringing destruction upon many, and
principally upon himself, destroying others, and destroyed himself.

Verse. 4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped: So that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. Note 4. He will be (...), an Adversary, who really
and indeed will be opposite to God and his Ordinances, whatsoever he
pretends, he will really prove and show himself an Adversary, who will also
oppose the Gospel of Christ in fundamentals, such the Apostles shows some of
his forerunners, 1. Cor. 16.9. For he will be an adversary to Christ
himself, as to the carriage, offices, and benefits of Christ: We see that the
Roman Bishop is such an one, who has opposed himself against Christ more, and
in more things, and more cruelly and subtly: and longer than any one ever did.

Exalteth] Note 5. He exalts himself by his pride above all that is called
God, or every thing that is worshipped, i. e. above all Magistrates, Princes,
Kings, and Emperors, who in Scripture are called Gods, or are worshipped as it
were (...) August or illustrious, as Act. 25.21.25. and Psalm. 82.1.

In the Temple] Note 6. He will be in the Temple of God, or in the visible
external Christian-Church, which will profess indeed the Faith of Christ, and
vaunt himself to be the Temple of God.

Sitteth] Note 7. He will sit in that society which profess themselves the
Temple of God, i. e. he will possess the public Ecclesiastical office, the
Episcopal seat or chair.

Note 8. He will sit in the Temple, he will set himself over the Temple, he
will sit super-incumbent over the Church, arrogating to himself the chief seat,
the pre-eminence, the Bishopric, the Prelacy in the Christian-Church.

Showing himself] Note 9. He will boast himself, as if he was God, i. e. not
thinking that he is sufficiently exalted above the Commonwealth, and the
Church of God, as the Prince and chief Governor thereof, he will also
endeavor to carry himself as God: partly by falsely boasting himself to have
all the power of Christ communicated to him, and that he is by delegation, the
Vicar of Christ, i. e. Vice-Christ, or Antichrist, according to the
signification of the Preposition, (...), in the words, (...), like to God,
equal with God, and (...), a Viceroy, partly by assuming the Titles which are
prop^r to God, as the chief Pastor, or Prelate, the head of the Church, etc.
which Titles are due only to Christ. Lastly, by arrogating to himself
privileges in Heaven, Earth, and Hell, which belong to God alone, such as now
the Pontificians acknowledge without shame in the Roman Pope. About which
things ye may read more at large in the controversies touching the Bishop of
Rome amongst the writers of Controversies.

Verse. 5. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these
things? Artic. 2. Containing the certainty of this Prophecy, as that which the
Apostle had taught before, and whereof, he being present, had instructed the
Thessalonians, and now being absent, he repeats it, that he may confirm the
Truth, and may fasten it in their memory.

Verse. 6. And now ye know what withholds, that he might be revealed in
his time. Artic. 3. Containing that which hindered the Revelation of Antichrist,
whose spirit did then attempt to erect himself a Throne, but he could not,
because as yet the seat was not vacant, designed to receive the Throne of
Antichrist, in that seven-hill'd City, Rome, as the Spirit of God describes,
Apocal. 17.9. For the Roman Empire must be taken away in the West: Caesar was
to be taken away from that City before Antichrist could be revealed, wherein
we have also the Pontificians consent: Touching this hinderance, our Apostle
in express words had before admonished the Thessalonians, and knew that they
understood and remembered it, but the reasons were weighty, wherefore the Spirit
of God was unwilling to express that hinderance to them in this Epistle: For it
was not much matter to them that he should discover it, nay, this mystery
ought to be kept secret from the world: Partly, that more easily the
permission of this mystery of iniquity decreed by God might be fulfilled:
Partly, lest from hence he should give any occasion of persecuting the
Christians: For if the Emperors had understood that any one amongst the
Professors of Christ, would erect unto themselves a Throne at Rome, and that
he should extinguish the Roman Empire, and that Emperor; All of them might
have thought it very just to show their cruelty against the whole name of
Christ.

Verse. 7. For the mystery of iniquity does already work: only he who now
lets, will let, until he be taken out of the way. Artic. 4. Containing,
together with the imp^diment of the Revelation of Antichrist, the beginning of
his falling away; or of Antichristianism, which is called here the mystery of
iniquity: Because, as all Christianity, the Head whereof is Christ, is the
great Mystery of Godliness, so all Antichristianism, whereof Antichrist is the
Head, is the great Mystery of Iniquity. The Devil had before, from the
beginning of the Gospel preached, spread abroad in the Church the seeds of this
mystery, in ambition, covetousness, wickedness of teachers, in humane
ceremonies, errors, and false Doctrine, and did now daily cherish, diligently
endeavoring, that at length he might erect openly the Kingdom of Antichrist,
in the visible Church, under the color of piety, but God putting a let, it did
remain until when those things were written. The Roman Emperor did possess
Rome, which was to be the seat of Antichrist, and being vacant Antichrist
would invade, and also assume to himself the dominion both of God and men.

Verse. 8. And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall
consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming. Artic. 5. It contains the visible Kingdom of Antichrist, or the
beginning, middle, and end of his Kingdom.

What pertains to the beginning of his Kingdom, So soon as the Roman Empire,
or the Roman Emperor shall be removed from that which was to be the seat of
Antichrist, i. e. Rome, then in that City the Patron of Antichristianism will
advance and discover himself, by exalting himself above all Laws, and that he
is bound to none, neither Civil nor Ecclesiastical, and also to have power in
dispensing in divine matters, openly professing himself to be (...), that
lawless one (whereof the Spirit of God had foretold) this shall be the manner
of revealing him, and the beginning of the clear possession of his Kingdom.
The Roman Pope hitherto does boast himself to be such an one from that time
wherein Rome ceased to be the seat of the Empire, who impudently does break in
pieces the bars of Laws, does extol himself above right and the Laws, he
disanulls the Laws made by God, and does dispense concerning them, as they say,
and does establish others in their stead, he determines his will for reason,
as the Orthodox have made manifest in their controversies: The Pontificians are
not ashamed to confess these, and many other of the like sort concerning their
Bishops, and publicly in their writings, so that there is no further need to
enquire who he is, that sits Antichrist in the Temple, or in the Visible
Church, as to his Title, when we know that the name (...) may signify two
things, according to the various acceptance of the Preposition (...), viz. the
Vicar of Christ, and the Adversary of Christ, and we hear the Pope of Rome
boasting himself Antichrist in one of these significations, i. e. professing
himself the Vicar of Christ, but in the mean while we apprehend, the same as
it were in the very act, openly affirming himself to be amongst Christians,
that he is neither subject to Civil nor Ecclesiastical Laws, but without
blushing to profess himself above them: And whereas now it is manifest to the
world that the authority of the Pope of Rome is by himself, and by his
attendants, extolled above Scripture, or divine Laws, as to the constitution of
the Canon, determination of the sense, judgment and deciding of controversies,
dispensatian (as it is called) about divine commands, etc. shall we doubt who
he is that sits lawless in the Temple of God, or amongst the Professors of
Christian Religion? As to what concerns the second, or the possession of his
Kingdom, Antichrist shall not possess his Kingdom without war, Christ shall
fight against him with the sword of his mouth, i. e. by preaching of the Truth
revealed in the Gospel, and by the power of his Spirit concurring with the Word.

As to the third, touching the end of Antichrists Kingdom, or the issue of his
War and Kingdom. Christ will detect and confute the lies of Antichrist, the
deceits, wickednesses, tyranny, false interpretations, and allegations of
Scriptures, and will by degrees demolish, consume, and waste his Kingdom, and
at length will destroy and abolish it by the illustrious manifestation of his
coming to the last general judgment.

Verse. 9. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power
and signs, and lying wonders, Artic. 6. Wherein he resumes, and furthermore
describes the rise and progress of Antichrist, his arms, arts, and helps,
wherewith he will acquire his Kingdom, and as much as he can, will uphold it.

The first help is Satan, who will with his manifold crafts instruct
Antichrist, and by him he will strongly put forth his effectual power in the
whole time of Antichrists dominion.

Signs] Help 2. His faculty of dissimulation or power of setting forth some
miracles, with deceitful signs and wonders, used for the confirmation of their
false opinions: In the Popish Legends, as they are called, thou may read a
thousand such.

Verse. 10. And with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, in them that
perish; because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be
saved. Help 3. All deceiveableness of unrighteousness, or all unjust or
fraudulent deceit, such are false, counterfeit, or fawning Doctrines,
sophistical disputations, the inticements of riches, honors, or dignities of
this world, together with threatenings and terrors, the top and height of which
deceit will be in him, because he will not openly or directly fight against
Christ, but he will set upon the matter secretly, and in an hidden manner,
counterfeiting himself to act the cause of Christ, when, as much as he can,
he subverts it.

Because] Artic. 7. Touching the subjects of Antichrist, and their perdition,
and the causes thereof: The retinue of Antichrist, properly called his
household, and familiars, are described to be such as with obstinate minds
stubbornly cleave unto him, even to the end, and in whom the Devil is very
effectual. (1) From the property of Reprobates, They perish, they are of the
number of those that perish. (2) From the meritorious cause of their perdition,
because they receive not the Truth offered in the Word of God with love, that
they might be saved.

Verse. 11. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie. They are described (3) From the most just revenge of the
Judge upon them, punishing sin with sin, and delivering them to be blinded by
the Devil, that they which have refused to behold light, and have renounced
divine truth, should believe errors and delusions, the devices of men, most
gross fables, and lies, and so should perish.

Verse. 12. That they all might be damned, who believed not the Truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. They are described (4) From their last condition,
and from the meritorious cause of their condemnation, They shall be all
eternally damned at that last judgment, because they have not believed the
plain truth of God, laid open in the Gospel, but with a full will have most
unrighteously rested in the belief of lies, and obedience to their carnal
desires: And this is the issue of them, who obstinately cleave to the Bishop of
Rome, and his errors, foretold by the Spirit of God.

The Second Part.
Verse. 13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, Brethren,
beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. The
other part of the Chapter follows, wherein he confirms ( three ways) the
Faith of the Thessalonians, lest they should be moved by this sad Prophecy.
(1) By thanksgiving in their behalf. (2) By an exhortation of them to
constancy; and (3) By prayer for them: As for the first way in their
thanksgiving he produces three Arguments for the confirmation of their Faith.

Brethren, beloved] Arg. 1. Ye are our Brethren, comprehended with the same
love of God with us: Therefore ye need not fear perishing with the
Antichristian sect.

Chosen] Arg. 2. In his decree touching the end and saving means, God has
chosen you that ye may obtain salvation through Faith, and Sanctification by
the Holy Ghost, as by means, whereby ye may attain salvation, freely appointed
for you: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the
Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. Arg. 3. God has now effectually called you
through the Gospel preached by me, that ye may obtain glory purchased by
Christ: Therefore there is no reason, that ye should be moved by this sad
Prophecy.

Verse. 15. Therefore, Brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye
have been taught, whether by word, or our Epistle. The second way of confirming
their Faith, By an exhortation to constancy in the Faith, that they stand fast,
and strongly maintain the traditions, or the Doctrines delivered to them by the
Apostles, against all enemies, which Doctrines they had learnt, either by
voice, whilst Paul was present, or by writing, as they had received in the
former and this Epistle, and in other Scriptures.

Verse. 16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even our Father, which
has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
Grace,

17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.

The third way of confirming their Faith is, Prayer to God, that he would
effectually comfort their hearts, and stablish them in the Faith of the Gospel,
or of all sound Doctrine, and in holiness of life. The Arguments of his praying
and confirmation of their Faith are four.

Arg. 1. From the relation of God and Christ to them. Jesus Christ is our Lord,
and God the Father, is our Father: Therefore he will confirm us in the Faith,
or will stablish you with us.

Has loved] Argum. 2. Because God has loved us.

Has given] Argum. 3. Because God has given us solid reasons of perpetual
consolation, and right to all those which may everlastingly comfort us.

And hope] Argum. 4. Because God has given us good hope, i. e. not only the
best object of good hope, or the best reasons or causes of hoping well, but
also a large measure, as to the habit of this hope, and because he has
granted all these things to us out of his grace and mere favor, induced by
none of our good deservings, which are none, or hindered by our evil deserts,
which are great and many: Therefore he will confirm you together with us, lest
ye be deceived by the errors of Antichrist, and perish.

CHAP. III.
He exhorts in this Chapter, partly expressly, partly indirectly, to some
Christian duties, after which he shuts up the Epistle. The Exhortations are
seven.

Verse. 1. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have
free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you: Exhort. 1. That they
ask these two things:

(1) That by the Apostles Ministry, the Gospel might be speedily and
fruitfully propagated, and be magnified amongst other Nations, as it was
magnified amongst them.

Verse. 2. And that we may be delivered from [unreasonable and wicked men: For
all, men have not faith. (2) That God would keep the Apostle, and deliver him
from the snares of his enemies, who without all reason perversely opposed
themselves against him: He gives the reason of their hostile mind, because
many were destitute of true faith: Therefore that they might be delivered from
them, there was need of Divine assistance.

Verse. 3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from
evil. Exhort. 2. Indirect, To confidence and courage of mind, lest being
forewarned touching the Infidelity and Apostasy of some, and hearing of the
dangers which the Apostle underwent, they should be shaken in mind, or some
way made weaker: For which end he would have them certified, and confirmed
touching the purpose of God ^^wards them, viz. That he will establish them in
goodness, i. e. in faith and holiness, and will defend them from the evil,
dangers, or temptations of Satan, and his instruments, whereof he gives a
reason, because that he, who had effectually called them, is constant and
faithful for the promoting his work, and completing it in them.

Verse. 4. And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do,
and will do the things which we command you. Exhort. 3. To the performance of
obedience to Apostolical commands, which he had given to them in the Name of
the Lord, or should give. He propounds this Exhortation indirectly, by
commending their readiness to obey, of which alacrity he was already persuaded.

Verse. 5. And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the
patient waiting for Christ. Exhort. 4. To the love of God, and patience until
the Lords coming, folded in a prayer to the Holy Ghost, whom he calls the
Lord, praying for them, that the Lord would go before them in the way, and
keep, and direct them in straight paths.

Verse. 6. Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and
not after the tradition which he received of us. Exhort. 5. That they by
Ecclesiastical censures would restrain the sluggish, and drones eating up the
honey, and by fit course^ would correct all that are employed in no honest
labor or business, but covered after other men's goods: The censure of these
(the remedies of lighter censures and admonitions being premised) is
excommunication: For he forbids their being familiar with them, viz. after
their rejection of private admonitions, and the public sentence of the Church:
And that they withdraw themselves from them, nor admit them to their society,
which is the consequent of excommunication. The reasons of the Precept are five:

Reas. 1. Because this is the will of Christ, in whose authority he comm^nds
that.

Disorderly] Reas. 2. Is contained in the description of sin, because whosever
lives disorderly, and not according to the rule of the Doctrine, delivered to
the Church by me, are to be excommunicated.

Verse. 7. For your selves know how ye ought to follow us, for we behaved not
our selves disorderly among you.

8. Neither did we ^at any man's bread for naught: but wrought with labor and
travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you.

Reas. 3. Because, he that lives disorderly, does not carry himself according
to my example, who have labored day and night, that I might not be burdensome
to any one.

Verse. 9. Not because we have not power, but to make our selves an ensample
unto you to follow us. The confirmation of the reason, by preventing an
Objection, from that, that the Apostle might use his own liberty, and require
wages due to him from them, yet he of his own accord departed from his right,
that he might propose an example to them: Therefore these sloathful Drones,
profitable to none, were bound to work, that if they would not be helpful unto
others, at leastwise they should not be burdensome to them.

Verse. 10. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any
would not work, neither should he eat. Reas. 4. Because it is meet, that he
should not eat, who withdraws himself from honest labor, as I have heretofore
advised you.

Verse. 11. For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly,
working not at all, but are busy bodies. Reas. 5. Wherein he alleadges the
cause why he urges this Precept. Because sloathful idleness nourishes busy
curiosity, as they had sufficient testimony of it by some examples amongst
themselves: For some known well enough to them worked not honestly in their
affairs, but busy bodies, wandering up and down, were curious about the affairs
of others, which did nothing belong to them.

Verse. 12. Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread. For the sake of
this idle sort of persons he repeats and applies the Exhortation.

Verse. 13. But ye, brethren, be not weary in well-doing. Exhort. 6. Lest in
the mean while they should be weary of well-doing to them that had need (poor
indeed, who were not brought to poverty by idleness, but by calamity) lest they
wax sloathful in the actions of any virtue, but go courageously forward to do
th^se things, which are decent and excellent.

Verse. 14. And if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. Exhort. 7. That they note
the refractory, and brand them, that obey not the Apostolical doctrine, that
is, that they excommunicate those, which is manifest from this, that he
commands that they have no society with him that is thus noted, which is the
consequent of excommunication, and for this end commands that the excommunicate
person, segregated from the society of others, being ashamed might enter into
himself, and repent.

Verse. 15. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. He
expounds the Commandment, that they be not cruel toward the excommunicated
person, or esteem him as an enemy, but to show their hatred to his sin, that
the excommunicated person may understand that under that severe correction,
there is brotherly love, and so he may be reduced into favor with God, and
the Church, by repentance.

Verse. 16. Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always, by all means.
The Lord be wi^h you all. The Epilogue remains, whereof there are three
Articles.

In the first he prays the God of Peace so to direct their ways, and bridle
the turbulent spirits of the disobedient, that they may enjoy peace toward
God, and amongst themselves, and with those that are without, which work did
require a divine hand. Furthermore, he prays that God by his gracious
presence would be always present with them all.

Verse. 17. The salutation of Paul with my own hand, which is the token in every
Epistle: so I write. Artic. 2. Contains the obsignation of the Epistle by the
subscription of Paul himself, who for the most part did use the help of Scribes
in writing the body of every Epistle, but he subscribed the conclusion with
his own hand, that his genuine Epistles might be known from the adulterate and
counterfeit, which were carried about in the name of Paul, and by Impostors
thrust upon the Churches.

Verse. 18. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. Artic. 3.
Contains the Apostolical vote set down by his own hand, wherein he wishes the
eternal influence of the Grace of Christ (as the fountain of all good things)
to them, for their sanctification and salvation.

The First Epistle of Paul to TIMOTHY, Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
THe Apostle departing from Ephesus into Macedonia, did not think it sufficient
to commit the Church of Ephesus, now publicly founded, to the care of ordinary
Pastors, but desired the Evangelist Timothy that he would tarry there a while
to establish the Church in all things that appertained to Doctrine and
Discipline: which work being accomplished, the Apostle intended to call him
back, and employ him, for the confirming of other Churches, as appears in the
end of the Epistle, and other places. But because Timothy was young as yet, and
might seem not sufficiently furnished with authority, for the restraining of
unruly men, which possibly might make insurrection against him, in this
Epistle, he does not only admonish him concerning his office (as one that he
knew very well instructed already) but all the Churches, and their Governors,
are informed touching the Authority of Timothy; and their own duties.

The special parts of the Epistle are six, according to the number of the
Chapters: In the first Chapter he lays down the manner of his preaching the
Law and the Gospel duly, and with profit.

In the second Chapter he sets down how Pastors, and Hearers, Men and Women,
ought to behave themselves in their public prayers and Ecclesiastical meetings.

In the third Chapter he treats of the right institution of Pastors and
Deacons, and concerning the Heads of Doctrine whereof they were to take special
care.

In the fourth Chapter he speaks of avoiding the Apostasy that was coming,
and touching the diligence which ought to be used by a faithful Pastor to that
end.

In the fifth Chapter he treats of private admonitions to be performed by the
Elders, and how they ought to carry themselves toward Widows, and other Elders.

In the sixth Chapter he delivers Precepts to Timothy, wherein he is
instructed what he ought to teach concerning Christian duties, as well of
private persons, as of Ministers.

CHAP. I.
BEside^ the Inscription which is contained in the two first verses: There are
three parts of the Chapter: In the first he enjoins Timothy, to observe the
right method and course of teaching, and to suppress the perverse Teachers of
the Law, to verse. 12.

In the second he asserts his Apostleship, that with authority it might be
avouched by Timothy, as he had commanded, to verse. 18.

In the third he encourages Timothy to carry himself stoutly in the discharge
of his Ministry.

Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the Commandment of God our
Savior, and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope. The Inscription of the
Epistle, wherein (1) That he might win authority to this Epistle, Paul affirms
that in writing of it, he fulfilled his Apostolical Embassage for Christ (2)
He confirms his Apostleship by a special command from God the Father, (whom
he calls the Savior, because he is the Author of our Salvation) who had
called him to the office of an Apostle, and used him in the execution of his
office about the present matter he was in hand with. (3) He confirms his
Apostleship from the command of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom he calls our hope,
because the Author, the meritorious cause, the object, and the finisher of our
hope.

Verse. 2. Unto Timothy my own Son in the Faith; Grace, Mercy, and Peace from
God our Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord. Timothy, to whom this Epistle is
written, is called the Son of the Apostle, not simply, but in (...) Faith,
because he was his Disciple, and as the Son represents the Father in face and
manners, so Timothy resembled Paul in Doctrine and an holy conversation.

In his salutation he wishes to Timothy (1) Grace, i. e. the renovation of the
Image of God, from the fountain of Gods free good will. (2) Mercy, i. e. free
remission of sins, because he knew that the holy young man, affected with the
sense of his sins, with many tears did daily prostrate himself before God. (3)
Peace, i. e. Quietness of conscience, and joy from the apprehension of divine
favor, and finally a complete felicity in the life to come, which is
comprehended under peace.

Verse. 3. As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia, that thou might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine.
The first part of the Chapter follows, touching the right manner of teaching,
wherein after he had confirmed to Timothy, not an ordinary Episcopacy in the
Church of Ephesus, but a special, temporary and extraordinary Commission, he
repeats the command given him, about restraining certain perverse Zelots of the
Law, and admonishing them that they teach no Doctrine diverse from that which
is Apostolical. In prescribing of which the Apostle chooses to use words of
beseeching and entreating, rather than to speak imperiously, that he might
supply the stead of Timothy, who could scarcely be loosed from the most sweet
society of Paul (not for a time) even by the entreaties of the Apostle.

Verse. 4. Neither give he^d to fables, and endless genealogies, which minister
questions, rather than godly edifying, which is in Faith: so do. For example:
He commands that Fables and Jewish Genealogies be avoided, i. e. newly
devised opinions (or traditions besides the holy Scriptures) and curious
speculations, about unnecessary things, such are very many Talmudical and
Cabali^tical, such also are to be found amongst the Schoolmen.

Endless] The Reasons of his admonition are six.

Reas. 1. Because those vain speculations are idle, and endless, whereof there
is no use.

Which rather] Reas. 2. Because they beget curious and contentious questions,
nor do they promote the knowledge of piety, which lead unto God, for
edification proceeds not from probable and dubious questions, but by the solid
believing of the Word of God.

Verse. 5. Now the end of the Commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and a
good conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. Reas. 3. Because those Teachers that
are wholly exercised in discussing of smaller matters, which may be fetched
from the Law, though they seem to be carried with a Zeal to the Law of Moses,
yet they refer not the Law to its true end, or to the proper scope of the whole
Scripture, which is, that men by the Law being led to the knowledge of sin, and
deserved misery, may seriously betake themselves to Christ, by Faith unfeigned.

Charity] This Faith he describes from a threefold effect. (1) That true
Faith in the propitia^ory blood of Christ renders the conscience good, or
peaceable and quiet. (2) That the conscience being now pacified, Faith will not
suffer that the heart be any longer delighted in evil, but rather endeavors
after purity, and that it may be purged from all evil affections. (3) That
true Faith is not idle in that which is good, but stirs up a man diligently to
labor in the obedience of every Precept, by love to God and men.

Verse. 6. From which some having sw^rved, have turned aside unto vain jangling,
Reas. 4. Confirming the former, Because it is approved by the experience of
some, that unless Teachers abstain from their vain curiosities, and intend more
earnestly the edification of m^n, in Faith and Charity, they cannot but be
drawn away from the simplicity of Doctrine, into vain babbling; for where there
is vanity, there verity is not.

Verse. 7. Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they
say, nor whereof they affirm. Reas. 5. Because it is also known by experience,
that those ambitious Teachers, while they affect a new kind of teaching, and
seek after applause from their knowledge of the Law, betrayed their ignorance,
whilst they understood not the questions whereof, nor the Arguments from which
they disputed; Therefore avoiding idle speculations, Timothy was to take care,
that in the Apostolic Doctrine, or the manner of teaching it, no innovation
was made by any one.

Verse. 8. But we know that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully. He
answers an Objection: Therefore are thou against the divine Law, who so
earnestly rebukest the Teacher^ of it? The Apostle answers, that he did not at
all detract from the Law (reproving those that abuse it) but rather commends
and teaches the right use of the Law.

Verse. 9. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for
the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners, for unholy and
profane, for murderers of Fathers, and murderers of Mothers, for man-slayers;

10. For Whore-mongers, for them that defile themselves with man-^ind, for
men-stealers, for liars, for perjur^^ persons, and if there ^ee any other thing
that is contrary to sound Doctrine,

11. According to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, which was committed
to my trust.

He confirms the Answer with three Reasons: The first is, from the end of the
Law, or the Legal Covenant, so far as it is opposed to the Gospel; the Law is
established, not that the faithful, justified by Faith in Christ, should be
justified by the Law (as the perverse Teachers of the Law intended) but that
the unrighteous, and unbeleevers, as are all wicked and profane persons,
condemned by the Law, might acknowledge their unrighteousness, and deserved
condemnation, repent, and fly unto Christ: Therefore the Apostles Doctrine
detracts nothing from the Law.

According] Reas. 2. All sins which are forbidden by the Law, are also
prohibited by the sound Doctrine of the glorious Gospel; and all the duties
which are commanded by the Law, are earnestly urged and taught in the Gospel,
so much as concerns the performance of our obedience unto God, the
demonstration of our thankfulness, and the proof of the sincerity of Faith in
the fruits of holiness: Therefore the Doctrine of the Gospel detracts nothing
from the Law.

Committed] Reas. 3. I an Apostle, to whom the Gospel of God (in himself most
blessed, and the Author of all blessings toward us) is committed, do no less
urge this wholesome doctrine of Sanctification, and all good works which in the
Law are commanded, than any Zelot of the Law, although not to the same end:
Therefore the Apostolical Doctrine nothing at all detracts from the Law.

The Second Part.
Verse. 12. And I thank Jesus Christ our Lord, who has enabled ^ee: for that
he coun^ed me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, The second part of
the Chapter follows, which contains the vindication of the authority of his
Apostleship against those that denied it, or in consideration of his fore-acted
life did lessen it, and that with thanksgiving for the Grace that was bestowed
upon him: Seven Reasons are laid down of his thanksgiving; All which prove that
his Apostleship is in no wise to be disparaged.

Reas. 1. Christ by the grace of his Spirit has strengthened me an infirm
man, and heretofore a slave to sin, the Devil, and the world, appointed an
Apostle by him, that as a leader, I should with an invincible courage, stand up
for the defense of the Gospel, against all the insul^^tions of the world* the
flesh, and the Devil: Therefore thanks are to be given for my confirmation in
the Apostleship, so little reason is there, that any thing should be detracted.

Accounted me faithful] Reas. 2. Christ has endued me, being appointed an
Apostle, with the gifts of his Spirit, and has so far honored me, that he
made and accounted me his faithful friend, who would commit to me the Gospel,
to be dispensed to the souls of his Elect: Therefore my authority is not to
be disparaged.

Has appointed] Reas. 3. Christ the Lord has placed me in the Minist^ry, i.
e. in the office of an Apostle, that I might wholly attend to the preaching of
the Gospel, separated from the world to this business: who is it therefore that
dares detract from my authority?

Verse. 13. Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and injurious, but I
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbeleef. Reas. 4.
Notwithstanding the wickedness, and the evil deserts of my former life, God is
not hindered from taking me into his service, who was in times past an enemy:
Who therefore will disparage my authority upon the wickedness of my former
conversation?

Ignorantly] He prevents an Objection; Some man might say, how could so open
an enemy of Christ obtain pardon?

He answers that his sin was out of ignorance, and so he proves that it was
not that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, or a malicious insurrection
against Christ, which the devilish enemies of the Gospel, knowingly practice,
in opposition to the Kingdom of Christ; but sin committed out of ignorance,
while he was yet an unbeleever.

Verse. 14. And the Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with Faith and
Love, which is in Christ Jesus. Reas. 5. God has vouchsafed me more than an
ordinary measure of Faith and Love, and has abundantly showed forth his Grace
in the bestowing of his saving gifts: Therefore there is no reason that any one
should detract from my Apostolic authority, from my former conversation.

Verse. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to sav^ sinners, of whom I am chief. Reas. 6.
Christ through his eminent mercy toward me, has effected this, that being
taught by experience, I should be drawn first (as the chief of sinners in my
o^n opinion) to subscribe to that sentence of the Gospel concerning the person
of Christ, his office, coming, virtue, merit and efficacy to save sinners, so
that I cannot but declare openly to the whole world the truth and benefit of
that sentence: for by experience I speak: It is a faithful saying, etc.
Therefoee no disparagement ought to be offered to my authority, who not only
believe my self what is committed to me, but I also preach what I have
experience of.

Verse. 16. Howbeit, for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus
Christ might show forth all long-suffering for a pattern to them that should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. Reas. 7. The Lord has set me
for an example of his long-suffering, mercy, goodness, and admirable grace,
that sinners to the end of the world, who shall hear of my wonderful
conversion, and the bounty of God toward me, may be abundantly confirmed in
the love of Christ, and expect the like goodness toward themselves, looking
upon me, as a type, and exemplar of unspeakable mercy: Therefore am I most fit
to be made a Preacher of that grace; and far be it from any one to detract
from my authority, because of my former conversation, while I was an unbeleever.

Verse. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God,
be honor, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen. The Apostle now affected with
the greatness of the benefit, not satisfying himself in the amplification of
it, with a pathetick thanksgiving, he concludes his speech, with an illustrious
celebration of Christ, concerning whom he produces four Epithites, which are
so agreeable unto Christ, that they may also be ascribed to the Father, and to
the Holy Ghost. 1 God, or Christ as God, is King of ages* i. e. by an Hebraism,
the eternal King, that he may be distinguished from mundane and mortal Kings.
2 Immortal, because God is without all alteration, change, and corruption, and
always the same like himself* 3 Invisible, because he cannot be comprehended
by the eyes, or any senses, because their faculties are corporeal, and
circumscribed with narrow limits* 4 He is only wise, because he alone knows
all things, not by objects, nor by [(...)] ratiocination, but in, and by, and
of himself, as one in whom are all things, as in their first efficient, and
their ultimate end. Hence the Apostle ascribes honor to God, or a
testification to his eminency, Glory, a celebrious fame with praise, which is
eternally due unto God, adding Amen, as a seal of his faith and willingness to
glorify God.

The Third Part of the Chapter.
Verse. 18. This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, according to the
Prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them might war a good
warfare. The third part contains his Exhortation to Timothy, that he would
behave himself courageously in his Ministry, viz. That he would war a good
warfare, or that he would prepare himself to fight against all enemies, and
all impediments, and would use all diligence that the Church might receive no
detriment by any one.

According] The Arguments of his Exhortation are two:

Arg. 1. Because certain things are foretold Prophetically of pious men, by a
kind of divine instinct, which afford great hope of famous actions to be done
by thee (as appears out of Act. 16.2.) Therefore war a good warfare.

Verse. 19. Holding fast faith and a good conscience, which some having put
away, concerning faith have made shipwreck. He explains his Exhortation, by
showing the manner of warring, to wit, that he would defend faithfully, and
profess sound Doctrine, and by an holy life according to the truth preached by
him, that he would maintain the light and peace of a good conscience, which
would inwardly acquaint him with his duty toward God, and men, if he would
attend to it, and would administer comfort to him, if he suffered for
defending the truth.

Which being put away] Arg. 2. Because ^^less thou behave thy self with a good
courage, and observest this law of war concerning the joining of a good
conscience, with the profession of the faith, there is danger upon the loss of
a good conscience that thou make shipwreck of sound Doctrine, or the profession
of the faith, as some have done: Therefore war a good warfare. In the mean time
he casts in no scruple here to Timothy about the uncertainty of perseverance,
but uses the best and most effectual argument to persuade him to it. For it
makes nothing in Hypothetical propositions, that the parts of it, taken by
themselves, and Categorically, may be false or impossible; It is sufficient to
the truth of the rule annexed, that the connection of the parts is certain.

Verse. 20. Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan,
that they may learn not to blaspheme. The Apostle names two Apostates for
example, Hymeneus and Alexander, whom he had not long before delivered unto
Satan, i. e. excommunicated; For they that are cast out from the face of God,
shining in the Church, fall into the kingdom of Satan, as to the condition of
the outward man, or the enjoyment of Church privileges. The end of this
Excommunication he shows to be this, That being led to repentance, they might
return to a right knowledge and profession of the truth; For the Apostle does
not declare any thing concerning the total loss of faith in Christ, but on the
contrary hopes for their repentance, and their possible salvation hereafter.

CHAP II.
IN this Chapter he delivers four Precepts, wherein all the faithful are to
be instructed, how they ought decently to behave themselves in their public
Assemblies, both men and women.

Verse. 1. I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. Precept 1. That
prayers in the public Assembly especially, might not be neglected, but that
supplications ought to be made for the turning of evils away, and prayers for
the obtaining of good things, intercessions for other men, and thanksgiving for
benefits received in public prayers, which the whole Church, the Pastor going
before, ought to conceive, and that for all sorts of men, be they of what
condition they will.

Verse. 2. For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. He expounds the special
Precept, and in particular commands them to pray for Kings, and all Magistrates
in great places, who because they sit at the helm of the Commonwealth, ought to
be most dear to us, and upon that account ought they to be mentioned by us in
the prayers of the Church.

Peaceable] The Reasons of the Precept are nine:

Reas. 1. From the profitable end, because the Magistrates being safe, and
managing their offices in peace, the faithful may lead a quiet and peaceable
life,

In godliness] or obedience to the first Table:

And honesty] or obedience to the second Table: Therefore must we pray for
them.

Verse. 3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior*
Reas. 2. To pray for Kings, and all orders of men, is good or acceptable unto
God: Therefore ought we to pray for them. God is said to be our Savior,
because although Christ is our Savior by special office, yet in the effecting
and execution of his office he does not actually save us, but with the Father,
and the Holy Spirit.

Verse. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of
the truth. Reas. 3. Confirming the former, God will have all sorts of men
(therefore some amongst Kings and Magistrates, and all orders of men) to be
saved, and come to the Faith of the Gospel: Therefore he wills that we pray
for all sorts or men, and by name for Kings, and those in authority, concerning
whom we are obliged to hope well.

Verse. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus. Reas. 4. Although men are distinguished several ways amongst
themselves, and there are diverse orders, whereof many are strangers to the
Faith, and many enemies, yet it is enough to engage our prayers for all,
because God is one; under whose power and dominion all are comprehended, and
that God is the God of the Jews, as well as the Gentiles, without acception of
persons: Therefore ought we to pray for all sorts of men.

And one Mediatour] Reas. 5. What ever distances there are amongst men, by
which they may be distinguished from each others, it is enough notwithstanding
to engage us to pray for all, because to all Nations, and all conditions of
men, there is one Mediator appointed, betwixt God and men, by whom an access
is open to all that come unto him: Therefore ought we to pray for all.

The man] Reas. 6. We have reason to pray for all men, inasmuch as that One
Mediator of all men, is Man; By the incarnation of the Word, by the common
bond of humane nature he is united to all m^n, viz. Jesus Christ, who
intercedes for all, i. e. for his sheep, collected out of all sorts of men:
Therefore we ought to pray for all.

Verse. 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.
Reas. 7. Christ gave himself a full and sufficient price of Redemption, for men
of all kinds: Therefore ought we to pray for all sorts of men.

A Testimony] Reas. 8. The Gospel or Testimony of Christ's redeeming all sorts
of men, which God had designed in due time to reveal, is now made manifest:
Therefore in making prayers for all men, the testimony of this truth is to be
produced in Christian Churches.

Verse. 7. Whereunto I am ordained a Preacher, and an Apostle, (I speak the
truth in Christ, and lie no^) a Teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity.
Reas. 9. The preaching of this Testimony or Gospel, and the Doctrine of the
price of Redemption paid for all sorts of men by Christ, is in special manner
committed unto me, that I might be also a Teacher of the Gentiles, to
instruct them in the Faith, and all Truth, which leads to eternal life; seeing
therefore I know, that many of the Gentiles are to be saved, and now I
publicly teach you this, prayers ought publicly to be made in all Christian
Churches for all sorts of men. In the mean time, because he knew that some
amongst the Jews would take ill the mentioning of his Apostleship, and his
embassage to the Gentiles; he confirms that expression of his being sen^ to
the Gentiles with a grave asseveration, lest any one should doubt.

Verse. 8. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands*
without wrath, and doubting. Those things that follow belong to the
circumstances of public worship: Therefore the second Precept follows,
touching persons fit for conceiving public prayers in the Church; Also
concerning the place and dispositions both of the soul and body, accommodated
to that matter.

As for the persons; He commands the men only, not women to speak in the
Church, and to precede the people in their prayers.

In every place] As to the place, he shows, (according to that prediction of
Christ, Ioh. 4.) that all difference of places, which was in the Old Testament
(when they were thrice a year to meet at the Temple in Jerusalem, and their
face was to be turned to the Sanctuary, whether they were near or afar off
from the Temple) is taken away, and that now liberty is granted, that
Christians in every place may honestly and decently celebrate their Assemblies.

Lifting up] As to the body, he requires that the gesture should be such, as
may testify reverence to the divine Majesty, and may enkindle our devotion,
which kind of gesture is the lifting up of the hands, whether they be spread
abroad, or closed together.

Purely] As for the whole man, and chiefly the soul, he requires, first,
Integrity and innocence of life, which h^e means by purity of hands. (2) That
wrath be laid aside, strifes, and all evil affections, that they all be of
one accord. (3) That they make no doubt whether God will hear or grant those
things which we (who come to him by Jesus Christ) ask of him according to his
revealed will.

Verse. 9. In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel,
with shamefastness, and sobriety: not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls,
or costly array. Precept 3. That women while they pray together with the
Assembly, and are present in other sacred performances, in their clothes, and
other habits, compose themselves to honesty and modesty, which will prove a
greater ornament to them, than if they should come into the public with
broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel: In which if there be
superfluity, the adorning is unlawful, and forbidden in this place.

Verse. 10. But (which becomes Women professing godliness) with good works, He
requires further to the adorning of women, both private and public, that they
be eminent in good works: the reason whereof is given from their Christian
profession, whereby in Baptism they promised to renounce the vanity and pomp of
the world.

Verse. 11. Let the Woman learn in silence with all subjection. Precept 4. That
women always in Church Assemblies undertake the part of learners, of teachers
never: And that they learn with silence, and that in the acknowledgement of
their infirmity, and the natural subjection of their sex, although in personal
indowments some womee may excel many men.

Verse. 12. But, I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the
man, but to be in silence. He explains the special Precept, and according to
his authority forbids women to teach in public.

Usurp Authority] The reasons of this prohibition are three: The first reason
is contained in the latter part of the prohibition, because should a woman
teach publicly, the woman should have authority over the man: she should be
over, and instruct the man, who ought with silence to be in subjection to her
own Husband.

Verse. 13. For Adam was first formed, then Eve: Reas. 2. Confirming the former,
The manly sex is more worthy than the female: for the man Adam was first
formed, and not for Eve the woman, but Eve was last formed for the man Adam:
Therefore a woman ought to be prohibited the office of teaching in the Church.

Verse. 14. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the
transgression. Reas. 3. The first seducement and sin was not by the man, or
Adam, but by Eve, who deceived by the Devil, persuaded her Husband, to
transgress the command: Therefore is it appointed of God, that afterward she
should be in subjection to her Husband, and not publicly teach the man: And
these reasons are sufficient that the woman in the Church at least, where the
matter concerns souls, should not have the pre-eminence.

Verse. 15. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they
continue in Faith, and Charity, and Holiness with Sobriety. He answers an
Objection, and comforts the woman against this seclusion from the Pastoral
office in the Church, against the entrance of sin into the world by her,
against the subjection of her sex, and against other inconveniences, which are
consequent to her sex: So that her exclusion from the office of a Teacher, nor
the evils recited should hinder the salvation of women, if so be they were
endued with true Faith, and continued therein, constantly maintaining charity,
holiness, and modesty, and the other fruits of true Faith in their domestic
calling, which for the most part and ordinarily is employed in bringing forth,
and educating children (under which office, figuratively all other duties are
contained, which pertain to a family, to which the woman is designed, that she
attend according to her office in domestical affairs;) And the Apostle
promises that true believing women, no less than believing men, or faithful
Pastors of the Church, should obtain eternal life in this their subjection, as
certainly and easily, as if they had been admitted to the Ecclesiastical office
of teaching, in which they cannot be saved, unless they had such a Faith,
which shows forth its efficacy by love and good works.

CHAP. III.
THere are two parts of the Chapter: In the first is treated of the Election of
Ministers of the Church, to verse. 14. In the other concerning the principal
Articles of Doctrine to be held in the Church, to the end.

Our Apostle divides Ecclesiastical offices, Romans 12. into Prophecy, and the
office of a Deacon: under Prophecy comprehending Pastors and Teachers, who in
this Chapter are called Bishops; under the office of a Deacon comprehending, as
here, both those Elders, who had an oversight of the manners and carriage of
the Church, and Deacons properly so called, who were to look to the Church
goods and the poor.

Verse. 1. This is a true saying, if a man desire the office of a Bishop, he
desires a good work. In this verse that he might open the way for describing
the properties of a Bishop, he commends the Pastoral office (premising a grave
asseveration) as the most honorable function, and laborious employment, which
who ever desires to that end, that by laboring in the Gospel, he may bring
men to eternal salvation, by the true worship of God, is worthy of commendation.

Verse. 2. A Bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant,
sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach. He describes the
gifts and properties of a Bishop, i. e. of a Pastor and Teacher, partly
affirmatively, partly negatively, prescribing, as it were, certain rules to be
observed in the election of a Bishop.

Without rebuke] The properties of a Bishop are in number sixteen. First, It
behooves a Bishop to be unblameable in his life, i. e. free from scandals, that
he may not justly be accused by men, nor such a one that is altogether
without sin, but such an one as is without scandal.

Of one] 2. Property: It behooves him to be (...), the husband of one wife:
which property is not laid down by way of precept, as if it was necessary for a
Pastor to be married, but by way of limitation, because if he purpose to
marry, he ought to content himself with one wife, so long as she lives, and
to keep himself from Polygamy, which was frequent in those times.

Vigilant] 3. It behooves him to be vigilant in his office, to take care of
those things which lie upon him in respect to the edifying of the flock, and
the preservation of it from the snares of spiritual adversaries.

Sober] 4. It behooves him to be sober in food and apparel, and moderate in his
affairs, to manage all things with right reason, undertaking nothing lightly or
rashly, but gravely weighing and considering all his words.

Of good behaviour] 5. It behooves him to be of good behavior, neither
exposing himself to contempt by his rudeness, nor by his Stoical severity.

Given to hospitality] 6. It is required, That he be given to hospitality,
and according to his revenues he be ready to refresh the servants of God,
those that are in need, especially strangers and banished persons.

Apt to teach] 7. It is required, That he be apt to teach, i. e. that he be
not only skilful in Divinity, and well instructed in the Doctrine of
Christianity, but also such an one as is skilful to divide the word aright, and
to accommodate himself to the capacity and edification of his auditors.

Verse. 3. Not given to Wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but
pat^ent, not a brawler, not covetous: 8. It is required that he be not given
to Wine, or such an one that uses to spend the day in sipping and bibbing of
Wine.

No striker] 9. That he be no striker, or prone to strike either his
servants, or any others.

Not greedy of filthy lucre] 10. That he mind not filthy gain, or such an one
that minds his gain to the prejudice of his Ministerial dignity.

Patient] 11. That he be just and moderate in bargaining, and when it is
convenient, ready to remit of his own right.

Brawler] 12. That he be free from strifes and contentions, both in words and
blows.

Covetous] 13. That he be free from Covetousness, not over much solicitous to
increase his estate.

Verse. 4. One that rules well his own house, having his children in subjection
with all gravity: 14. That he understand how to rule his own family well, i.
e. his wife, children, servants (if he have them.)

Verse. 5. (For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take
care of the Church of God?) He gives the reason of these requisite
qualifications, Because he that knows not how to govern his own house, or a
little family, cannot govern or take care of the Church of God prudently.

Verse. 6. Not a novice, left being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil. 15. He requires that he be not a Novice, or a new
sprig of the Church, i. e. newly converted to the true Religion, not
sufficiently instructed in the mysteries of godliness, or confirmed by
experience, not sufficiently subdued and humbled by the exercises of
Christianity: The reason whereof is given, lest being suddenly elevated to the
top of Ecclesiastical dignity, and puffed up, he fall into the fault, and
condemnation of the Devil, who by reason of pride, abode not in his station;
and therefore was rejected of God.

Verse. 7. Moreover, he must have a good report of them which are without, lest
he fall into reproach, and the snare of the Devil. 16. The last qualification
is, That he have a good report from them that are without, or those that are
strangers from the Church, i. e. That he be of good repute amongst all, whose
conversation his very enemies cannot justly blame: The reason whereof is given,
lest he fall into ignominy and reproach, and the snare of the Devil, who may
(not only upon that occasion) load his person and office, with calumnies and
reproaches, but render him impudent, regardless of his credit, and at length
dissolute in his conversation.

Verse. 8. Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not double-tongued, not given to
much Wine, not greedy of filthy lucre. As to what is required in the Election
of Elders, and public treasurers, nine virtues are requisite in them.

(1) That they be grave, i. e. accomplished with honest manners.

(2) That they be not liars, double-tongued, or fraudulent.

(3) That they be not given to Wine.

(4) That they love not filthy lucre, which may any whit detract from their
reputation amongst good men.

Verse. 9. Holding the mystery of the Faith in a pure conscience. (5) That they
be rightly instructed in the Faith, or Doctrine of the Gospel revealed from
Heaven, and that they maintain this in a firm profession, together with
holiness of life, which may bear witness of the purity of their conscience, and
the sincerity of their Faith.

Verse. 10. And let these also first be proved; then let them use the office of
a Deacon, being found blameless: (6) That not only the Pastors, and Candidates
to higher offices, but also that the Deacons be proved, before they are
admitted to their function, i. e. lest they be obtruded upon the Church
rashly, and without their choice, but that they alone be chosen, whose former
life commends them; so that after trial their fitness appears, and such as
cannot justly be blamed.

Verse. 11. Even so must their Wives be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful
in all things. Because the dissolute conversations of wives and children, turns
to the reproach of the men; he requires,

(7) That the Wives both of Pastors and Deacons be grave, endued with honest
behavior: not slanderers, or such as detract from the credit of their
neighbors, studious of sobriety, as also in all affairs, faithful.

Verse. 12. Let the Deacons be the Husbands of one Wife, ruling their children,
and their own houses well. (8) He requires that Deacons be the Husbands of
one Wife, i. e. free from the sin of Polygamy.

(9) He requires, That they understand how to govern their own family well,
and to keep their household within the bounds of holy Discipline.

Verse. 13. For they that have used the office of a Deacon well, purchase to
themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the Faith which is in Christ
Jesus. Lest any man should despise the Deaconship as a mean office, he
teaches, that they who have well discharged this office, are worthy of honor,
while they manage it, and lay a foundation to an higher degree in the Church,
and finally they gain a large opportunity for the confirming their boldness
toward God, by Faith in Christ, which the faithful administration of their
Deaconship (as a testimony of the sincerity of their Faith) ought to confirm.

The Second Part.
Verse. 14. These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly.

15. But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and
ground of the truth.

The other part of the Chapter contains the principal Articles of Doctrine,
that are to be maintained in the Church. The first Article comprehends the
Doctrine touching the end of this Epistle, and especially of the precedent
precepts, which is this, That the rule of governing the Church (entreated of by
the Apostle) be always laid before their eyes, which when he came, he would
explain and confirm, as need required: and by which rule (if he came not the
sooner) Timothy might direct the Governors of the Church, how they ought to
behave themselves in the house of God, or in governing the Church.

The Church of God] Artic. 2. Contains the Doctrine touching the excellency of
the Church. (1) That it is the House of God, wherein he dwells, and feeds his
family, and wherein he is worshipped. (2) That it is the Church of the Living
God, or a company called out of the world by the Living God, besides whom, all
the Gods which Heathens worship, are dead Idols. (3) That as the Church is
called out of the world, begotten, nourished, and preserved of God, by the
Truth, that it should be the Church of the Living God; so the Truth is
sustained, as with a pillar, and certain Butteress, by the Church. Because the
Church preserves the Truth as it were in a treasury: In the Church only divine
Truth is held forth to the world, and there has its seat and abiding, and the
Church alone it is, that by her Ministers, takes care that this truth be every
where preached, proclaimed, and communicated; and defends it against all
adversaries, and that with weapons properly appertaining to the truth.

Verse. 16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. Artic. 3.
Contains the great mystery of godliness, and the pillar and ground of all
Evangelical truths, or the first foundations of the Gospel, whereupon all other
saving Doctrines lean, which foundations the Pastors of the Church by all means
ought to defend*

The fundamental Doctrines which are comprehended in this Article, and which
are necessary to be acknowledged with an unanimous consent of all true
Christians, are seven: (1) The Sum of the Gospel is the Mystery of godliness,
and that indeed is great. The Gospel is called a Mystery, because it is hid
from natural reason, nor can ever be understood by any one, without Divine
manifestation, and supernatural Revelation; so that in this Mystery, we must
not confide in our own reason, but in the word of God: And that we may
understand the word of God, we must beg the illumination of the Spirit. It is
called the Mystery of godliness, because it has for its end Christian piety,
which consists in faith and obedience to the commands of Christ, or in faith
which works by love.

Great] It is called Great, because it treats of God, Christ, the great work of
Redemption, of the glory of Righteousness, and Divine grace, and our salvation,
which of all things are the greatest.

God] The second fundamental Doctrine is this, In the person of Christ, God was
manifested in the flesh.

God] viz. The only begotten Son of God, and consequently truly and eternally
God.

Manifest] viz. To the whole world visibly and openly showed forth.

In the flesh] viz. In the humane nature, even mortal and frail, but free from
sin, he showed forth himself the true Immanuel, and God with us: And here the
two Natures are pointed out, the Divine which did assume, and the Humane which
was assumed, and the whole debasement of Christ in the flesh is herein
contained.

Iustified] Doct. 3. In the person of Christ, God was manifested in the flesh,
justified by the Spirit, i. e. Christ by his Divine power (which showed it self
forth in his doctrine and life, also in his Miracles, especially in his
glorious Resurrection from the dead) was not only just and true, but also
abundantly declared the only begotten Son of God, and the supreme Prophet of
the Church, and King and Priest eternal; and acquitted from all the calumnies
and reproaches of the Jews, and all his enemies.

Of Angels] Doct. 4. God manifested in the flesh, was seen of Angels, i. e.
acknowledged of the Angels, and by the clearer manifestation of his Majesty,
and also of the Divine will, Christ, God incarnate, was more apparently seen;
and therefore the Angels are made use of by God, as fit witnesses of the
Conception, Birth, Suffering, and Resurrection of Christ, who hitherto admire
this mystery, amazed with the excellency of the matter, desire further to look
into it, stooping down to behold the things which are revealed to the Church by
the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10. For touching the manner of our Redemption,
it was thought meet to conceal it from the Angels for a time, that the goodness
of God might be the more admired.

Preached] Doc^. 5. God manifest in the flesh, and preached to the Gentiles, is
a great mystery, for it is a wonderful thing, that the Gentiles, (who as yet
wandered in the blindness of their minds) should have the Revelation of the Son
of God, which Doctrine was at first concealed from the Apostles themselves, as
also the Angels of Heaven.

Believed on] Doct. 6. Its no small part of this Mystery, that the efficacy of
the Gospel should be such, in the world (which lies in evil, and is contrary
unto God) by the labor of mean men, and no ways garnished with humane
splendour, when all passages were stopped and locked up, the faith of Christ
conquering all difficulties, should be entertained, and gain the victory after
an incredible manner, so that the name of Christ is believed in, and
acknowledged in the world, which way soever the preaching of the Gospel spreads
it self.

Received up] Doct. 7. The Mystery is great, and worthy of admiration, that
Christ, who in the infirmity of the flesh, in the most abject condition of a
servant, lay hid so many years in the world, and at length crucified, seeming
to end his life most miserably, yet notwithstanding should be received up into
glory: From whence sending the Holy Ghost, and giving gifts unto men, to this
very day he manifests the glory of his Deity, showing what power he has in
heaven and earth, that all things are put under his feet. These are the
Doctrines which he wills the Churches to hold fast, from whence all the rest
derive their original and establishment.

CHAP. IV.
He proceeds to the instruction of Timothy, how he ought to carry himself in
the house of God: There are two parts of the Chapter: In the first, he
forewarns him about Apostasy from the true faith, which would fall out in the
Church, in the last times, to verse. 6.

In the latter part, he sets down the duties of a good Pastor, and Governor
of the Church, whereby they might preserve themselves and their people free
from that defection and Apostasy.

Verse. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
Devils: As to what concerns the Prophecy of the future Apostasy from the
faith, or sound doctrine of the Gospel, he premises four things: Whereof the
first is concerning the certainty of the Defection, because the Holy Ghost, not
obscurely, or darkly, but expressly forewarned them of this Apostasy, and
foretold them of the times immediately following, wherein the defection from
the faith should begin, and should prevail in the visible Church.

The second contains three causes of their defection; Cause (1) Deceiving
spirits, i. e. Devils, authors of all kind of errors and impostures; Cause (2)
False teachers, who taught and propagated by the inspiration of the Devil,
false doctrines, or doctrines of Devils, invented by him in the Church: Cause
(3) Attention, harkening to, and miserable men, giving credit to those Teachers
and Devils.

Verse. 2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with an
hot iron, In the third place, he describes those Diabolical Teachers, or
instruments of the Devil, by whom the Devils bring in those false Doctrines
into the Church, from two Properties. (1) There shall be Hypocrites,
counterfeiting themselves lovers of the truth in all things, even then when
they obtrude their false opinions upon the Church. They shall dissemble
holiness and sanctity, while they cry up their fictions as the worship of God.
(2) They shall have consciences seared with an hot iron, because they shall
speak, and do many things, against the dictate of conscience, nor shall they
be affected with any sorrow after they have offended God, and destroyed the
souls of men by their Sacriledges, heinous wickednesses, and false Doctrines.

Verse. 3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know
the truth. In the fourth place, he propounds two Examples of these Diabolical
doctrines in things indifferent, by which Doctrines, as by certain marks we
may know those Diabolical teachers with their Apostate followers. The first is,
forbidding to marry, which error, it matters not what authors it has besides
the Devil, it has the Pontificians patronage, with whom it has of a long time
been favored, and still is, from the time that all their Clergy was enjoined
singleness of life. Another Doctrine of Devils, is, about the choice of meats,
and abstaining from some, as impure, which error amongst the Romanists is
urged, observed, defended with more Religion, than the most exercises of Piety
and Justice prescribed by God.

Which God] He proves by six Reasons the latter branch of this Doctrine,
touching the forbidding of certain meats for Religions sake, to be false and
diabolical; First, From the end of the Creation, Because God had created all
kinds of meat, to that end that we should partake of them, and feed upon them:
Therefore it is a diabolical Doctrine, which gives Precepts about the avoiding
certain meats, when God affords them, and their use is seasonable and
convenient.

Thanksgiving] Reas. 2. God will have all kinds of meats acknowledged for
favors, and therefore received with thanksgiving: Therefore the Doctrine of
avoiding and refusing certain meats when God affords them, is diabolical.

Of them which believe.] Reas. 3. The use of the Creatures, whenever it is
convenient, is allowed of God, to Believers, or to those who have the knowledge
of the Gospel: Therefore to prohibit any meats to Christians, to which they
have right granted, and may be convenient to nature, is the Doctrine of Devils.

Verse. 4. For every Creature is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving. Reas. 4. Generally, Touching upon the forbidding of
marriage, and meats; whatsoever God has created is good, in its lawful use, as
meat, marriage, and the rest of the creatures: For God looked upon what he had
created, and behold it was very good: Therefore the Doctrine that prohibits the
natural lawful use of the creatures of God is diabolical.

Nor any thing] Reas. 5. None of the creatures or ordinances of God are to be
rejected, if they be used lawfully, and with thanksgiving: Therefore the
Doctrine that rejects Marriage or Meats, when the use of them may be lawful,
and convenient, is the Doctrine of Devils.

Verse. 5. For it is sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer. Reas. 6.
Confirming the former; Every Creature of God, as Meat, Marriage, etc. is
sanctified to us for a lawful use, joined with a good conscience, by the Word
of God and Prayer (for by the Word of God, or the divine Ordinance, we
understand a liberty and right restored to us by Christ, and by Prayer we
acknowledge the gift of God, and desire his blessing:) Therefore the Doctrine
which commands us to abstain from the Creatures, and makes them impure, when
God has sanctified and prepared them for a holy use, and vouchsafes them to
us, is diabolical.

The Second Part.
Verse. 6. If thou put the Brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall
be a good Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of Faith, and of
good Doctrine, whereunto thou have attained. The second part of the Chapter
follows, containing the duties of Timothy in the execution of his present
embassage. The Exhortations are four.

Mind] Hort. 1. That he propose to the Brethren the admonitions hitherto
expounded, and remember them of them: There are two Reasons of the Exhortation.

A good] Reas. 1. If thou do these things thou shall show thy self a famous
Minister of Christ, and careful that all things be managed in the house of
God, according to his will.

Nourished up] Reas. 2. Thou shall demonstrate thy self nourished up in sound
Doctrine, as it were with wholesome food, which thou have attained from my
teaching, (from whom thou have never been absent.)

Verse. 7. But refuse old wives fables, and exercise thy self rather unto
godliness. Exhort. 2. That rejecting humane traditions, and the inventions of
men, devised to support their traditions (as it were profane fables, with
which old women, and children are taken, rather than wise men) he exercise
himself in solid virtues, which are prescribed of God, to the promoting of
piety, and the worship of God, and that he take care that others exercise
themselves therein.

Verse. 8. For bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable
unto all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and that which is
to come. The Reasons of this Exhortation are four. 1. Because those bodily
exercises, in watchings, and abstinence from meats, and such like voluntary
kinds of afflicting themselves, which are prescribed by the Precepts of men,
are profitable to little, i. e. they do not recompense the labor with their
advantage, but are altogether unprofitable, for the due use of such exercises,
when God calls us extraordinarily to them, are profitable helps, but commanded
by men, as superstitious, they are disadvantagious.

Godliness] Reas. 2. Christian Piety which is exacted by divine Precepts, is
profitable to all things, whether to our selves, or others, whether we regard
the present, or the world to come, because it has the divine promise of
happiness, in this and that life which is eternal.

Verse. 9. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. Reas. 3.
Confirming both the exhortation and the precedent reason: Because this Doctrine
touching the rejecting the inventions of men, and following the exercises of
true godliness, is a true saying, which will deceive no man, and indeed a
saving Doctrine, and therefore such as all men ought to embrace and defend.

Verse. 10. For therefore we both labor, and suffer reproach, because we
trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of those
that believe. Reas. 4. Confirming the former Reasons. Because we suffer
afflictions and streights, labors and reproach enough from unjust persecutors,
for rejecting the inventions of men, and defending of true godliness, which
consists in the exercises of Faith and Obedience, and those afflictions we
bear valiantly, from the hope of the promises, which are made to us that walk
in this way of godliness: Therefore rejecting the inventions of men, follow
after godliness.

Living] He amplifies this Reason, and confirms it from two properties in God,
in whom we trust: The first is, God is the Living God, not only subjectively,
or as to the subject Actuous, but also effectually, or in respect of us, he
that gives life, who so performs his promises, that we know him to be the
author of truth and life. Secondly, God is the Savior of all men, as it is
said, Psalm. 36. Thou preservest man and beast, by his general goodness
nourishing and supporting all men, making his Sun to rise upon the just and
unjust: But chiefly and upon a more special ground, the Savior of believers,
who relying upon his promises concerning the happiness of the life to come,
renounce and reject humane inventions and opinions even in the dangers of
persecution, and follow after the exercises of godliness.

Verse. 11. These things command and teach. He repeats and amplifies this
Exhortation; He entreats Timothy, according to his authority, that he commend
this Doctrine to his Brethren to be taught, and urged, and that he himself
also diligently press it.

Verse. 12. Let no man despise thy youth, but be thou an example of Believers,
in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. Exhort.
3. That he endeavor to maintain his authority, and to this end, Lest any one
should have just cause of despising his youth, he commands him to show himself
a Pattern, and as it were, a speaking. Rule, in life and Doctrine, in word and
deed, in whom love to God and his neighbor, spiritual affection, fidelity in
his office, chastity or purity from defilements (with which they who are given
to carnal pleasures, use to pollute themselves) may shine forth.

Verse. 13. Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine. Exhort. 4. That he diligently apply himself to his office of
teaching: partly by diligent reading the Scripture, partly in frequent
exercising himself in preaching, especially so long as he may abide in one
place; and by name so long as he should continue at Ephesus: for such an
occasion could not easily be expected, after the Apostles coming, by reason of
his travels with the Apostle.

Verse. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. The reasons of his
Exhortation so often repeated and pressed, are five. 1. Because that holy
office of an Evangelist, whereunto he was called, is the gift of Gods Grace,
and therefore not to be neglected.

Given] Reas. 2. Because this office of preaching is committed to thee, by a
special Prophetical Revelation, which God put into the Prophets, that Timothy
should be taken into the Ministry of the Gospel: Therefore thou ought not
to manage it negligently.

Laying on of hands] Reas. 3. Because thou art also called by the Church to
this office, by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, that is, the
College of Presbyters: Amongst whom for the time Paul himself was President,
who in the name of the Presbytery, and together with other Presbyters, laid his
hands upon him, as it appears by comparing 2 Timothy 1.6. By which imposition of
hands, they intimated that the man was consecrated and dedicated unto God:
Therefore the execution of thy office so solemnly committed unto thee, is not
to be neglected by thee.

Verse. 15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear to all. Reas. 4. This Ministry is to be heeded so, as
that thy profiting, in Doctrine, and also in Life, or in all the parts of thy
Ministry, may evidently appear unto all: Therefore it is thy duty seriously to
attend to thy Ministry, with mature deliberation and meditation.

Verse. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto the Doctrine, continue in them:
for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee.
Reas. 5. Because so, as an instrumental cause, thou shall bring those that hear
thee to eternal salvation: Therefore it behooves thee constantly to attend to
thy Life and Doctrine in this thy Ministry.

CHAP. V.
IN this Chapter he instructs Timothy, how he ought to carry himself in
private admonitions toward all, and how toward Widows that distribute the
Alms of the Church, and how toward Presbyters: The parts of the Chapter are
three. In the first private Admonitions are handled, to verse. 3. The second
part concerns Widows, to verse. 17. The third concerns Presbyters, to the end.

Verse. 1. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father* and the younger men
as Brethren. As touching the first part of the Precept, concerning private
admonitions, there are four branches* of it, (1) Concerning the Elder sort,
whom he would have gently dealt withal, with a modest exhortation, rather
than a severe reprehension; that honor may be given to their age, according
to the fifth Precept. (2) That the younger sort be admonished, with the
expression of brotherly love.

Verse. 2. The Elder Women as Mothers, the Younger as Sisters, with all purity.
(3) That the Elder Women be admonished with due respect to their age, that the
admonition may be more acceptable. (4) That the Younger Women be admonished
as Sisters: But he adds, with all purity, or expressions of chastity, left by
occasion of their private discourse, whilst admonishing, the Devil ensnare them
in their chastity or credit, whether of Timothy admonishing, or the woman that
is admonished.

The Second Part.
Verse. 3. Honor Widows that are Widows indeed. The second part of the Chapter
follows, wherein he gives seven Precepts concerning Ele^mosynary Widows, who
were to be kept by the public charges of the Church.

Precept 1. That he honor Widows indeed, i. e. that he take care they be
provided for by the public charges of the Church, and so he should preserve
their reputation, lest being reduced to poverty, they become contemptible.

Verse. 4. But if any Widow have Children, or Nephews, let them learn first to
show piety at home, and to requite their Parents; for that is good and
acceptable before God. Precept 2. That he should not burden the Church in
providing for those Widows, who might be provided for by their Children or
Nephews, but take care that the Children and Nephews, performed the duty of
Piety, first, toward their own families, their Mothers and Grandmothers: There
are two Reasons of the Precept.

R. (1) Because so they should requite their Parents, who had trained up their
children with this hope, that their Children (if need were) might (...), after
the manner of Storks, nourish and cherish their aged and weak Parents,
destitute of sustenance.

For that] R. (2) Because this duty performed toward Parents, is acceptable to
God, and enjoined by him.

Verse. 5. Now she that is a Widow indeed, and desolate, trusts in God, and
continues in supplications and prayers night and day, Precept 3. That he
observe in the choice of Widows, that she which is chosen be not without the
qualifications of a true Widow, or a Christian Widow to be provided for by the
Church: Here he sets down four qualifications. (1) It is required that she
be alone, i. e. destitute of Children and Nephews, and all humane supply. (2)
That she be faithful, trusting in God, not getting her living by evil
courses, but relying upon God. (3) That she be daily given to the exercises
of Piety.

Verse. 6. But she that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. (4) That
she be not of the number of wanton Widows, who indulge themselves in idleness
and pleasures, not regarding the exercises of godliness.

Dead] The reason of this qualification is given, Because those unprofitable
women, are as it were, dead while they live, both in respect to God, whom they
do not serve, and in respect to humane society, whom they no ways endeavor to
benefit by their work.

Verse. 7. And these things give in charge, that they may be blameless. He
shuts up the Precept of urging any further qualifications of Widows indeed,
taking a reason from the end, that all Widows whoever they are, learn to live
unblameably.

Verse. 8. But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his
own house, he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. Precept 4.
Of censuring those who refuse to provide for Widows, their Mothers or
Grand-mothers, as it is prescribed in the second Precept of this Chapter, viz.
That they should be excommunicated by the Church, and accounted deserters of
the Christian doctrine, for Heathens, or Infidels, till they repent, which is
the consequence of excommunication.

Verse. 9. Let not a widow be taken into the number, under threescore years old,
having been the wife of one man, Precept 5. Of observing three other
Qualifications requisite in the admission of Widows to the common table, that
they may be sustained by the public charges. (1) That she be a Widow sixty
years old at the least, at which age the desires of the flesh begin to abate,
and are unable by the labor of their hands to get their living. (2) That she
has been the wife of one husband, or has not violated the Laws of Marriage,
whereupon it may be hoped she is a chaste and continent woman.

Verse. 10. Well reported of for good works, if she have brought up children,
if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the Saints feet, if she
have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work.
(3) That she have a testimonial of her piety, declared in her deeds and works,
especially in these five, which may demonstrate her meet to serve the poor,
when they are sick, viz. (1) If she bring up her children honestly. (2) If
she has been given to hospitality. (3) If she have submitted to the lowest
offices of charity, or was ready to submit, even to wash the Saints feet, if
need required. (4) If she have succored those that were afflicted. Finally,
If she has exercised her self in all sorts of good works.

Verse. 11. But the younger Widows refuse: For when they have begun to wax
wanton against Christ, they will marry, Precept 6. That they admit not into the
College of widows those that are younger Widows.

When they have, etc.] He gives two Reasons,

Reas. 1. Because there is danger, lest being pampered with the Churches bread,
they begin to wax wanton against Christ (as some younger Widows have done
already) and despairing of Marriage in the Church, they think of falling away
from the faith of Christ, and afterward openly revolt, that they may marry
some infidel out of the Church.

Verse. 12. Having damnation, because they have cast off their first faith. He
seems to point at some Widows of this sort, whose condition he shows to be
damnable and miserable, upon this that they have rejected the profession of
their faith, which they first made in Baptism.

Verse. 13. And withal they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to
house, and not only idle, but talkers also, and busybodies, speaking things
which they ought not. Reas. 2. Because the younger Widows (as it seems to be
evident upon experience) will become idle, wanderers, trif^ers, busybodies,
^atlers, wandering from house to house, curiously inquisitive into other bodies
mat^ers, and speaking things which they ought not.

Verse. 14. I will therefore that the younger women marry, bear children, guide
the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. Precept
7. or Concession, That the younger Widows marry in the Lord, rather than be
burdensome to the Church, and that they look after household affairs, as it
becomes Wives.

None] He adds two Reasons of the Precept: (1) Lest by their unconstancy, and
other offenses they give occasion to the Adversaries, or Infidels, to speak
evil of the Professor^ of the Gospel.

Verse. 15. For some are already turned aside after Satan. (2) Because it is
found by experience that some younger Widows have declined the true Religion,
and have betaken themselves to the Tents of Satan, out of the Territories of
the Church.

Verse. 16. If any man or woman, that believes, have Widows, let them relieve
them, and let not the Church be charged, that it may relieve them that are
Widows indeed. He inculcates the second Precept, whereof verse. 4. of
succouring Widows by their Children or Nephews, adding two Reasons: (1) That
the Church be not burdened with unnecessary charges. (2) Lest there should not
be sufficient to maintain those that are Widows indeed. From whence it
appears, that if there were no poor and honest Widows in the Church of sixty
years old, there was no necessity to make provision for any, and by consequence
the Ministry of women in the Deaconship, was not needful, unless by accident
they be maintained by the public charge, that they be not altogether
unprofitable.

The Third Part of the Chapter.
Verse. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. The third part of the
Chapter concerning Presbyters contains five Precepts.

Precept 1. That an honorable stipend be afforded to the Presbyters, who well
discharge their duty in feeding the Church. And it is said, Let them he
accounted worthy, because if perhaps in some poorer Churches, the maintenance
be not sufficient, or if it shall seem good to some Elders, upon reasons known
to themselves, to serve the Church freely, in such a case it is fitting, that
they be accounted at leastwise worthy of double honor, or a liberal stipend,
whether they exact it or not.

Especially] He makes two orders of these Elders, one that labor in the word
and doctrine, such are Pastors and Doctors: Another of those that rule well* i.
e. That endeavor to govern the Church in life and manners, but labor not in
the word and doctrine, such are Elders, which are called Rulers, 1 Cor. 12.28.
Romans 12.8. He would have both these kinds of Elders, rightly managing their
Offices, accounted worthy of double honor, but especially those that labor in
the word and doctrine, because they are wholly set apart to the word and
prayer: Therefore it is fitting that they should be liberally maintained. He
calls the stipend given them by the name of Honor, because of such moment is
their work, that it cannot be valued at any rate: And because the stipend
which is allowed them, is to be given not upon the account of wages, but an
Honorary, or an honorable reward.

Verse. 18. For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads
out the corn; and the labourer is worthy of his reward. He lays down two
Reasons of the Precept; (1) From Deuteronomy. 25.4. Where from the Allegory of an Ox,
treading out the corn with his feet, God commands that the Pastors of the
Church should be maintained, reasoning from the greater to the less.

Worthy] 2. From Levit. 9. or Luke 18.7. Where from the Precept of giving a due
reward to the labourer, it is gathered from the less to the greater; Honor is
much more to be repayed to him, who is not an hireling, but a Father, and a
laborious Pastor.

Verse. 19. Against an Elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three
witnesses. Precept 2. That an accusation against an Elder be not received, or
taken for true, unless upon the testimony of three witnesses, or at the least
two, (worthy of credit) it be affirmed: And that which is here spoken to
Timothy alone, is spoken to all that sit in the Presbytery, because other
where, judgment is committed to the whole Presbytery; yea what is spoken here
to Timothy, is spoken to the whole Presbytery at Ephesus, touching the
administration of the whole Discipline of the Church, Act. 20.28. Timothy the
Evangelist, in the mean time might exercise extraordinary power, as he was an
Evangelist, and the Apostles Legate.

Verse. 20. Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear. Precept
3. Of avoiding scandals; If the Elders, or any other in the Church should
offend openly, that they be publicly reproved: The reason is, That the rest
may be afraid, being admonished by their example, and may take heed to
themselves that they do not offend.

Verse. 21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect
Angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another,
doing nothing by partiality. Precept 4. In which (by way of Epiphonema) he
most gravely charges Timothy, and in him all Ecclesiastical Judges, that
nothing be done in Church affairs, or censures, with pa^tiality, or that
nothing in these Precepts be altered upon the accepting of any man's person.

Verse. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man; neither be partakers of other men's
sins: Keep thy self pure. Precept 5. That he do not rashly receive any one
into the sacred Ministry, without mature deliberation, and examination
preceding, he do not lay hands (which was the sign of Ordination) upon any
one: He gives two Reasons of it.

Neither] Reas. 1. Lest if he should ordain one unfitting, in this very thing
he should communicate with him in his sins, and by consequence in his
punishments.

Thy self] Reas. 2. Because thou ought to keep thy self pure from
defilements; and therefore from the ordaining of an unworthy man; If happily
the rest of the Presbytery at any time shall determine to admit an unfit man to
the Ministry, or one that is not approved, keep thy self pure, neither consent
thou, but labor by all means so to preserve purity and holiness, that thou
keep off from all affinity with sin, as much as in thee lies. He explains the
parts of this Precept in the two next following verses, the meaning of the
latter part, of being himself pure, verse. 23. and shows the meaning of the
former part, verse. 24.

Verse. 23. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake,
and thine often infirmities. As to the latter part of the Precept, of keeping
himself pure; because the Apostle knew that Timothy by reason of his earnest
endeavors after purity and chastity, had been injurious to his own health,
therefore by the way he advises him, that he do not so understand the
Precept of keeping himself pure, as to neglect his health and render himself
unfit for the works of his Calling, but use an holy prudence, and in subduing
his body, by drinking of water, to use a little wine as it were physically, and
for the necessity of health, lest if he should proceed in not favoring his
weak stomach, and his body laboring under often infirmities, immediately the
tabernacle of his body should fall to decay, and the Church should be deprived
of so profitable an instrument.

Verse. 24. Some men's sins are open before hand, going before to judgment: And
some men they follow after. As to what concerns the meaning of the former part
of the Precept, Lest he should partake of other men's sins; he shows that he
spoke of open sins, which may be known, and avoided, not of private, which
fall not under observation; and that he beware, lest he partake of other men's
sins, and in laying hands rashly on no man; he shows in this, that using
examination, and trial, the open sins of any one that is unworthy may be
known, as also the open virtues of men meet to be admitted to the Ministry of
the Gospel. For the sins of some Candidates of the Ministry are so manifest,
that they prevent the examination and judgment of the Church, that they may
easily be rejected. For before the judgment of the Church can determine about
them, there is matter in readiness, in their open sins, for their condemnation,
or rejection from the Ministry, by the opinion of the Ecclesiastical Senate:
And the sins of other^, upon examination premised, and the judgment of the
Church concerning them being given, are brought forth into the light.

Verse. 25. Likewise also the good works of some, are manifest beforehand, and
they that are otherwise cannot be hid. In like manner the virtue of some that
are Candidates to the Ministry, and their good works, are so manifestly known,
that it is easy for the Church to judge them fit to be admitted. But the
works of those that are otherwise, or upon examination had, and inquisition
made, are not manifest, or so secret, that they cannot be known of men, they
are to be left to God, nor can they long be hid, but in their own time will
be brought to light, that if the Church cannot prevent, but those hypocrites
are admitted to the Ministry, yet care may be had, where they are already
made manifest, that they be dealt with according to the Discipline of the
Church.

CHAP. VI.
IN this Chapter he gives seven Precepts to Timothy, whereby he may be
instrusted in the Doctrine concerning the duties of private persons, and the
duties of Ministers, and how he ought to behave himself toward the people,
and toward the Elders.

Verse. 1. Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own Masters
worthy of all honor: that the name of God, and his Doctrine be not
blasphemed. Precept 1. Concerning the instructing of Christian servants, who
are servants by condition, and under the yoke of another, the Precept is this,
That they account their own Masters, though Infidels, worthy of all honor,
whom they serve, as those that are placed, by the providence of God, in a
degree above them.

That the name of God] The reason of the Precept is this, lest if they should
do otherwise, the Gospel might be evil spoken of, and reproached by Infidels,
through the miscarriage of Christian servants.

Verse. 2. And they that have believing Masters, let them not despise them,
because they are brethren: but rather do them service, because they are
faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things teach and exhort.
But if their Masters be believers, He retorts what servants were ready to
object; And because being Brethren in Christianity, does not take away
diversity of conditions in civil policy, he forbids servants to despise their
Masters upon that account, because they are equal in Christ, and he commands
that they serve them so much the more readily, because their Masters were
faithful, and beloved of God, and for this cause so much the more worthy to
receive the fruit of their service. He enjoins Timothy himself to teach these
things, and to exhort other Pastors to teach the same.

Verse. 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
godliness: Precept 2. Of a voiding perverse Teachers, i. e. to put them from,
or to eject them out of the Ministry, or to excommunicate them from the
Church: Many such there were in those times, who taught otherwise, who departed
either from the Apostolical verity in the matter of their word, or from
Apostolical simplicity in the manner of their teaching other things, or
otherwise than the Apostles: not resting satisfied in the simplicity of
Christian Piety, from whose carriages and manners, the meritorious causes of
the chastisem^nt, he gives six Reasons.

And consent not] Reas. 1. They are obstinate who submit not themselves to the
wholesome words of Christ, or to sound Doctrine, which in the ma^^er, and
manner of teaching, is after Godliness.

Verse. 4. He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and
strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, Reas.
2. Because they are proud, puffed up with a vain opinion of their own
knowledge, whereas they know nothing solidly in the mystery of the Gospel.

Doting] Reas. 3. They are of such a contentious disposition, that they dote
about foolish questions, and strifes of words.

Whereof] Reas. 4. Because by these cavillations they stir up envy, contention,
railing, evil surmizings.

Verse. 5. Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thy self. Reas. 5.
Because by their perverse disputings they discover themselves to be of a
perverse and corrupt mind, destitute of the truth, and more studious of gain
than godliness, yea to be such who make a gain of godliness. Whereupon he
infers the censure of withdrawing from them, which is the consequence of
excommunication.

Verse. 6. But godliness with contentment is great gain. Precept 3. Of following
after godliness, as the greatest gain, and avoiding covetousness. The Reasons
of the Precept are eight.

Reas. 1. Because godliness is such a gain, sufficient to it self, rendering the
mind contented in every condition; or it is a gain that carries along with it
true sufficiency, and contentment.

Verse. 7. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can
carry nothing out. Reas. 2. Because riches only have their use in this life,
not after death: Therefore we ought not to hunt after riches.

Verse. 8. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content. Reas. 3.
Because we may be without riches even in this life, and ought to be content
with meat and clothing whatever it is.

Verse. 9. But they that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition. Reas. 4. Because they that most mind getting of riches, and
resolvedly hunt after them, are near to the greatest sins, vexations of mind,
and misery in this world, and eternal perdition hereafter.

Verse. 10. For the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some
coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and peirced themselves thorough
with many sorrows. Reas. 5. Because the love of money is the root of all evil,
as of ungodliness, lying, perjury, cruelty, and tyranny, etc.

Which some] Reas. 6. From the experience of some, who being covetous of money,
fell away from the Christian Religion, and became most miserable.

Verse. 11. But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after
Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness. Reas. 7. With a
special Application, Because this vice is unworthy a Minister, who is a man of
God, and separated to the heavenly employments of God, who therefore ought to
avoid covetousness, and earthly desires.

Follow] Reas. 8. Because it becomes the man of God, or Minister of the Gospel,
to be in love with the riches of virtue, and to accumulate these one upon
another, whereof he enumerates six.

Verse. 12. Fight the good sight of Faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto
thou art also called, and have professed a good profession before many
witnesses. Precept 4. That all lawful means being used, for the propagating of
the Gospel, and defending the truth of his Doctrine, he should strive against
all adversaries and impediments whatsoever.

Good] The Reasons of the Exhortation or Precept, are four.

Reas. 1, Because this fight is good, commendable and profitable.

Life] Reas. 2. Because so thou shall lay hold on eternal life.

Whereunto] Reas. 3. Because thou art called to the defense of the Gospel, to
the partaking of life, or faith.

Professed] Reas. 4. Thou have already before many witnesses published a famous
testimony of thy Faith: Therefore go on to fight that good fight of Faith.

Verse. 13. I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickens all things,
and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession,

14. That thou keep this Commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ:

Precept 5. With a most grave and vehement charge before God and Christ the
Mediator, he exhorts Timothy, and all Pastors after him, and all others upon
whom the care of the Church lies (whom he speaks to in his person) that they
observe these commands, or that they so discharge the office committed to them,
faithfully observing these Rules touching the governing of the Church, that
they may be found unblameable, and unreproveable in doctrine and manners. And
because that which he exhorts to was difficult, he lays down six Arguments
of the Precept, all which prove that all the former commands are to be
observed with the greatest fidelity.

Quickeneth] Argum. 1. There is sufficient support in God that quickens all
things, to uphold thee under thy infirmity, and to defend thee against the
dangers of thine enemies: Therefore nothing hinders but thou may faithfully
observe all these commands.

Before] Argum. 2. Christ in his example has gone before thee, who faithfully
ope^ed his Doctrine for the salvation of the Church, and at last asserted it
before the Tribunal of Pilate, sealing it with his voluntary death.

Appearing] Argum. 3. Christ shall come the Judge of quick and dead, that he
may give to every man according to his works: Therefore all the former commands
are faithfully to be observed.

Verse. 15. Which in his times he shall show, who is the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: He insists upon this Argument,
and lest any one should take the delaying of Christ's coming ill, he shows that
he will come at the time appointed, at the most seasonable time.

Blessed] Argum. 4. Christ, or God the Father, Son* and Holy Spirit, whose
Ministry thou have in hand, is alone in himself Blessed, and Powerful, who can
bless his own, and destroy his and their enemies, so that the friendships or
enmities of all Kings compared with his favor or anger, are nothing: because
all Kings and Emperors borrow their Empires from him, depend upon, and are
ruled by him, and stand or fall at his beck: Therefore these his commands are
to be observed.

Verse. 16. Who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can
approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see; to whom he honor and power
everlasting. Amen. Onely] Argum. 5. Because eternal life is in the hand of
Christ, who is one God with the Father and the Holy Ghost; because he only is
of himself immortal, and alone has immortality in his power, that he may
communicate it to whom he will: Therefore the former commands are to be
observed.

Whom no man has seen] Arg. 6. Although the reasons of his commands should not
be manifest to us, yet for our Obedience and Faith it is sufficient to know,
that God in himself is a light which cannot be approached, and an hidden
Majesty, having his peculiar and proper essence, which our understanding cannot
apprehend, nor see with a beatifical vision in this mortal life: Therefore it
becomes us to adore, observe, and extol the pleasure of his will, rather than
curiously to search into it: To him be honor and power for ever.

Verse. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives
us richly all things to enjoy. Precept 6. Of admonishing the rich, touching a
twofold duty which belongs to them; The first is, That as to the inward man,
they be not puffed up because of their riches, despising the poor in
comparison with themselves, nor trust in their riches, but in the Living God;
of this duty he gives three Reasons. (1) Because riches are uncertain. (2)
Because, not riches, but God is the Author of life to them that trust in him.
(3) Because God gives and takes away riches at his pleasure, as also all other
things.

Verse. 18. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, Another duty of rich men is this, That as
to external works, they exercise liberality toward the poor, and also study to
abound generally in good works, free to communicate the use of their
possessions and goods unto others.

Verse. 19. Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time
to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. The Argument to this duty is,
the promise of a free reward, because by bestowing their uncertain riches, they
shall lay up for themselves in Heaven, a more enduring and solid treasure, and
walking in the way of good works, they shall lay hold upon eternal life.

Verse. 20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of science, falsely so called.
Precept 7. And last: Wherein he seriously commends to Timothy the Doctrine of
the Gospel hitherto delivered, that he faithfully keep it, as that which is
committed to his trust, and that he restrain the profane wranglings of
sophisters about divine matters; upon three reasons. (1) Because true Doctrine
is as precious as a treasure. (2) Because wrangling disputations are vain and
unworthy the name of Philosophy or Science.

Verse. 21. Which some professing, have erred concerning the Faith. Grace ^ee
with thee. Amen. (3) Because it is found by experience that some Professors of
Philosophical Sciences, when they were weary of the truth and simplicity of the
Gospel, boasting of their skill, erred from the scope of the Gospel, yea even
fell away from the Faith. At length with an Apostolical vote he concludes the
Epistle, commending the Grace of Christ to Timothy, without which no spiritual
work can be undertaken or perfected, no temptation of the Devil or the world
can be overcome.

The Second Epistle of Paul to TIMOTHY, Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
THe intent of this Epistle is the same with the former, not only that Timothy
may be instructed and confirmed in the preaching of the Gospel, but also that
in his person, all Teachers may learn how they ought to discharge the Ministry
of the Gospel duly. To which end, having assured Timothy of his good will
toward him, he subjoyns four Admonitions, Chap. 1. and as many in the second
Chapter: Furthermore, he confirms and comforts Timothy against false Brethren,
and afflictions, which he must suffer for the defense of the Gospel, in Chap.
3. Lastly, As it were making his will, he most gravely charges Timothy, that
he faithfully discharge the parts of his duty, propounding diverse Reasons to
this end, in Chap. 4.

CHAP. I.
AFter the Preface, which is wholly designed to persuade Timothy of the
Apostles good will toward him, verse. 6. He subjoyns four admonitions, whereby
he might be encouraged to a faithful discharge of his Ministry.

Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the Will of God, according to the
promise of life, which is in Christ Jesus. That the authority of this Doctrine
might appear to all, the Apostle premiseth his Name to his Epistle, his Office,
Calling, and the Authority immediately conferred upon him by God: and lastly
the sum of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which he preached, which is the
Promise of life eternal to them that believe in Jesus Christ, according to the
promises of the Prophets in the Old Testament.

Verse. 2. To Timothy my dearly beloved Son, Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God
the Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord. That Paul might commend Timothy (to whom
he writes) to all the Churches, He calls him beloved Son, most especially,
because he preached the Doctrine which he had learned of Paul faithfully, as
Paul himself, and resembled him as a Father in the whole course of his
conversation; Therefore he was beloved of Paul, and had in estimation by him,
as a Son, to whom he wishes all excellent things from God, as he had done in
the former Epistle.

Verse. 3. I thank God, whom I serve from my Forefathers with pure conscience,
that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day. By
three other Arguments he endeavors to persuade Timothy of his affection
toward him.

Remembrance] Argum. 1. Because he continually remembers Timothy in his
prayers.

I thank God] Argum. 2. Because he values it as a favor given him from God,
that he remembered Timothy, for whom he acknowledges that thanks are to be
rendered unto God: for it is an excellent benefit, and only vouchsafed to the
Saints, to love the Saints, or those whom God loves: These two Arguments he
explains and confirms from this, That with a sincere unfeigned mind he prayed,
and gave thanks to God for Timothy; and he proves his sincerity from this,
That not only in his whole life past, he endeavored to keep a conscience
inviolated, lest he should do any thing against it, but also that after his
conversion to the Faith, in a pure conscience, i. e. illuminated by the Holy
Spirit, and purified by the blood of Christ, he endeavored to serve God, the
God of Israel, or of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the God of all the rest of
his faithful Ancestors: for he that serves Christ with a sincere mind, serves
also the Holy One of Israel, the Father and the Holy Ghost: he serves the true
God three in One, and maintains the same true Religion with all the holy
Patriarchs.

Verse. 4. Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may
be filled with joy. Arg. 3. Because he had an earnest desire to see the face
of Timothy, that he might enjoy his company. He illustrates this Argument
from three Reasons of his desire. Cause 1. The remembrance of Timothies tears,
or his most tender affection, as well toward God, as toward himself for Gods
sake, from whom when he was departing, Timothy could not be drawn away, but
with tears. Cause 2. The hope of rejoicing exceedingly when he should see him.

Verse. 5. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which
dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded
that in thee also. Cause 3. It was the remembrance of his sincere faith, such
as was in his Grandmother and mother, who dyed in the faith of the Mediator
(whether before Christ was revealed to them, God manifested in the flesh, is
doubtful, but certain it is that they believed in Christ that was to come
according to the promises) in which hope Timothy was brought up from a child
by his mother, and was instructed by her in the Scriptures.

Verse. 6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of
God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands. After the Preface, four
Admonitions follow.

Admon. 1. Inferred by way of consequence from the former, That he would stir
up in himself those sparks of his ability in preaching the Gospel, and the
gifts conferred upon him, to this end, by the prayers of the Church, when in
the name of the Presbytery Paul ordained him to be a Preacher: And that he
would boldly manifest the virtue of the gifts conferred upon him, in the
execution of his Ministry, notwithstanding all lets, which the flesh, the
world, and the devil might oppose against him.

Verse. 7. For God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, of love,
and of a sound mind. There are two Reasons of the Admonition: (1) Because the
spirit of fear (by which any one dare not speak and do what he ought, and what
he would speak and do in his Ministry, was he not subdued by fear) is not
from God, nor becomes the Minister of God.

Of power] (2) Because the gift of the Spirit which God vouchsafes to his
Ministers, is a Spirit, (1) Of power and efficacy, which dares, and is able to
oppose it self against every thing that exalts it self against Christ: And (2)
a Spirit of love, which is not drawn away from true love to men. And (3) the
Spirit of a sound mind, which neither with preposterous zeal, nor by foolish
and carnal love is drawn away from the truth of sound Doctrine, but such as
renders the mind sound in the Doctrine of faith, and the heart filled with
charity, and enkindles a zeal in the heart boldly to manage the things of
Christ, and contains all these gifts conjoined amongst themselves with a sacred
tie.

Verse. 8. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of
me his prisoner, but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel,
according to the power of God, Admon. 2. That Timothy be not ashamed of the
simplicity of the truth of the Gospel, nor of the Cross of Christ i^ his
servant Paul, but that he prepare himself to bear afflictions for Christ, and
accompany himself with those that bear the Cross.

According to the power] The Reasons of these Admonitions are eight.

Reas. 1. Because if any thing be laid upon us to be born for Christ above
our strength, The power of God will be present to help and deliver us,
trusting in whose power, and supported by his aid, we are bound to be
confident, and rely upon him above our own strength.

Verse. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to his own purpose, and grace, which was given us
in Christ Jesus before the world began. Reas. 2. Confirming the former. Because
God has given us eternal life, and by his holy calling has separated us from
the world, to this very end, that we might confess Christ: Therefore we ought
not to be ashamed of his testimony or cross.

Not according] Reas. 3. Because God freely does all these things, not
respecting our works, but his own grace, and gracious purpose: Therefore it is
not fitting that we should be ashamed of the testimony of Christ, or his
cross, or afflictions for his sake.

Before] Reas. 4. Confirming the former. Grace is given to us in Christ, before
the world began, before we, or our works could have any being, i. e. before
all time: Therefore it is not meet that we should be ashamed of the testimony
or cross of Christ. It is called Grace given to us in Christ, Because although
we had not any being, yet Christ the designed Mediator, the second person of
the Trinity, subsisted from eternity, who covenanted with his Father, for us
his Elect, before all time, and afterward in time paid the price of our
Redemption, and in our name received the grace assigned to us, by which in time
we should be called, justified, and freely saved in due season.

Verse. 10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to
light through the Gospel. Reas. 5. Proving the position, showing also that all
the favors which are bestowed upon us are from Grace, Because the abolishing
of death, life and immortality, and the rest which concern our salvation, were
unknown to us, till revealed by Christ, and brought to light, being all acted
and finished by him: Therefore considering this Grace conferred upon us, we
ought not to be ashamed of his Gospel.

Verse. 11. Whereunto I am appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle, and a teacher
of the Gentiles. Reas. 6. God so much esteems the Testimony of the Gospel, that
he appointed Paul an Apostle to declare it to the whole world, and specially
to the Gentiles: Therefore let not Timothy be ashamed, or any other, of this
Gospel, or of Paul a Minister of it, although afflicted for the Testimony of
the Gospel.

Verse. 12. For the which cause I also suffer these things; nevertheless I am
not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is
able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day. Reas. 7.
From the example of the Apostle; I my self suffer bonds for the Gospel, and yet
I am not ashamed: Therefore in like manner ought Timothy to be of good
courage, and not be ashamed in the cause of the Gospel.

I know] Reas. 8. Also from Paul's example, confirming the former. I Paul have
committed my body and soul to God who is faithful and powerful, to keep what I
have betrusted him with to the day of judgment: And I am persuaded that I
shall be kept: Therefore neither ought I to be ashamed, nor thou, O Timothy,
whatever befalls us, for the Testimony of the Gospel.

Verse. 13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me, in
faith, and love, which is in Christ Jesus. Admon. 3. That he retain and follow
that same way of teaching (both as to Doctrine, and the manner of teaching)
which he had learnt from Paul, and that he set it forth as near as he can to
the quick: He adds in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, that he may
set forth the Summary of Doctrine, which may be wholly reduced to Faith and
Love, flowing from the knowledge of Christ.

Verse. 14. That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep, by the Holy
Ghost, which dwells in us. Admon. 4. More general, That he faithfully
preserve both the sincerity of the Christian Doctrine, and the gifts of the
Spirit in his Ministry, lest by his slothfulness, or ^imorousness, any
prejudice might accrue to it, but that he should secure it against the snares
and force of the enemies of the Gospel.

The Arguments of the Exhortation are five; all which prove that the form of
sound Doctrine is to be held fast.

Argum. 1. This form, is that which is deposited, or that which God has
committed to thy trust, who will take an account of thee for what he has
committed to thee: Therefore this form of Doctrine is to be held fast.

By the Holy Ghost] Argum. 2. Although thy own strength should fail thee in the
defense of thy Doctrine, yet the assistance of the Holy Ghost dwelling in thee
will be at hand for the upholding of his sincere servant, if thou implore his
aid: Therefore this form of sound Doctrine is to be held fast.

Verse. 15. This thou know, that all they which are in Asia, be turned away
from me, of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes. Arg. 4. On this hand
temptations are in readiness, by which thou may be drawn away unawares from
the defense and profession of the Gospel, as thou have been taught by the
example of the brethren of Asia, by name Phygellus and Hermogenes, by whose
example, thou and all other the Ministers of the Gospel being warned, should
be watchful: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 16. The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. Arg. 5. On the other side, the
Spirit and grace of God is so prevalent in thee, and others that are faithful,
to constancy in trialls, that if ye be watchful, ye need not fear the losing
of sound Doctrine: Therefore ye ought to endeavor the holding fast the form
of sound Doctrine.

Verse. 17. But when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and
found me.

18. The Lord* grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day;
and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou know very
well.

He propounds and confirms this Argument, in Onesiphorus, who (says he)
boldly professed the faith, and was not ashamed of my chains, nor did he fear
bonds himself, but at Ephesus and Rome showed himself the same in the
profession of the Gospel: For whom I pray God, that he may find mercy, both
he and his whole household, in the day of the Lord: He wills Timothy to take
courage (by this man's example) as also all Teachers to constancy in the
profession of the faith, and the keeping that good thing which is committed
unto them, and the defense of the Doctrine of the Gospel: That which the
Apostle draws from hence, in the beginning of the Chapter following.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter he proceeds to instruct Timothy in the due management of his
Ministry, adding four Admonitions more to them that he had laid down in his
former Discourse.

Verse. 1. Thou there fore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ
Jesus. Admon. 1. That he endeavor the propagation of the Gospel, not only by
himself, but also by others, that were to succeed him in the Ministry, standing
upon no pains, that were requisite for the promoting of it. There are three
branches of this Admonition.

Branch 1. That he arm himself with strength to the work of the Ministry, and
put on courage, and address himself to manage his affairs well. He insinuates
two Arguments.

Son] Arg. 1. Because it becomes Paul's Son, to put on courage, and be valiant.

In the grace] Arg. 2. Because the grace which is in Jesus Christ alone, will
not be wanting to thee, when thou preparest thy self for thy work.

Verse. 2. And the things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the
same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.
Branch 2. That he teach not the people only Sermon-wise, but also
Scholastically instruct the Candidates in Divinity, or those that are designed
for the Ministerial function, by opening the Apostolical Doctrine, and
betrusting it, as it were, with faithful Depositaries, which may teach others
the same Doctrine, that so the Doctrine of the Gospel may be delivered and
propagated from hand to hand. He adds an Argument from his own example, who
had instructed Timothy, and many others, his fellow-disciples, in this
Doctrine, not only teaching them publicly together with the people, but also
instructing them Scholastically apart from the people.

Verse. 3. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.
Branch 3. That he neither fear nor fly from the pains, which was required to
this double work, nor the afflictions or persecutions that followed it, but
receive and bear them with a good courage.

As a souldier] The Arguments of the Exhortation or Admonition, are eleven, all
which prove that he ought valiantly to manage his warfare in the Ministry of
the Gospel.

Arg. 1. Because thou are a soldier of Jesus Christ, to whom as to thy
General, thou have bound thy self by a Military oath: And it becomes a
Christian soldier to follow the example of Christ, not fiercely to strive
against his Adversaries, but patiently inuring himself to the Cross, and in the
carrying on of his work (contending with difficulties) to proceed forwards.
Therefore thou ought to behave thy self courageously in managing thy warfare
in the Ministry of the Gospel.

Verse. 4. No man that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this
life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier. Arg. 2.
Propounded by way of comparison, because otherwise thou can not please thy
General Christ, unless (setting aside all thy occasions that might call thee
away from the work of Christ) thou addict thy self wholly to his service:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 5. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned except
he strive lawfully. Arg. 3. Propounded by way of comparison to the sports, and
noble striving which were amongst the Heathen, because thou can not be
crowned, if (wearied in the first onset) thou retreat out of the field to rest
and ease, but it behooves thee to strive lawfully, and to prosecute the
contention so far as the Law prescribes, i. e. persevere so long as thou
live, in this Christian warfare, that a^ length thou may be crowned
Conqueror: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 6. The Husbandman that labors, must be first partaker of the fruits.
Arg. 4. Propounded by way of similitude, as the former. Because it is necessary
that thou first labor, if thou will receive fruit, which (as an Husbandman)
without doubt thou shall reap, if thou followest thy work with a good courage:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things. That Timothy may gather and conceive more by these similitudes than
could be set down, or need to be explained, he leaves the applications of
these similitudes to Timothy, and further prays unto God, that he would open
his eyes to see those lessons which here and otherwhere he might learn for the
discharging of his duty; for these comparisons were weaker than to reach the
excellency of the Christian warfare, and the reward of those that labor in the
Ministry.

Verse. 8. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the
dead, according to my Gospel: Arg. 5. Because Christ the General, and Captain
of the Army, has conquered all adverse power, and death it self, by the virtue
of his Deity, rising again from the dead for us, in the same flesh which he
assumed from the Seed of David, as I have preached: Therefore, O Timothy, thou
may hope to be delivered from all evils, and from death it self, by the
power of Christ, very God, and very man. To which end also, he commands
Timothy to remember and keep in mind this Doctrine, because this is the chief
foundation of faith, hope, and Christian consolation.

Verse. 9. Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds, but the
word of God is not bound. Arg. 6. From the example of Paul himself. I suffer
bonds and disgrace willingly in the work of the Ministry: Therefore do thou
prepare thy self to suffer the like.

But the word] Arg. 7. All the endeavor of the Adversaries of the Gospel comes
to nothing, while they persecute us the servants of Christ, even unto bonds,
because although they may overcome us professors of the Gospel, yet they
overcome not, nor does the Gospel suffer bonds, or is it hindered in its course:
Therefore let us confidently carry on our warfare.

Verse. 10. Therefore I endure all things for the Elects sake, that they may
also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. Arg. 8.
The Elect of God are worthy, for whose edification and confirmation in the
faith, to eternal salvation purchased by Christ, we who are the Ministers of
Christ, suffer all kinds of evils: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 11. It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall
also live with him.

12. If we suffer we also shall reign with him; if we deny him, he will
also deny us.

Arg. 9. Although the flesh hardly admits this saying, yet certain it is, That
our communion with Christ's death in enduring the Cross, is annexed to our
communion with the life of Christ; And certain it is that they shall reign with
Christ, who suffer with, or for him: Therefore must we be of good courage in
our warfare, that we may live and reign with Christ.

If wee] Arg. 10. Whosoever being deceived by the terrors of persecution, and
the allurements of the world, cast off the profession of the Name of Christ,
shall also be cast off by Christ, and perish: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 13. If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny
himself. Arg. 11. They that are unfaithful, although they bring destruction
upon themselves, yet they shall detract nothing from the truth, or glory of
Christ, who will defend his truth against the power of Adversaries, and the
perfidiousness of Apostates, and will establish whatever he has said for his
servants, and against their enemies: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 14. Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the
Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the subverting of
the hearers. Admon. 2. That Timothy do not only enforce the things that are
spoken, but also take care that the word of God be wisely handled, both by
others, and himself also for example unto others. There are three Branches of
this Admonition:

Branch 1. That in the Name and Authority of Christ, he refrain unprofitable
disputations, such as theirs use to be, who seek after applause for their
accuteness in their Sophistry.

Unprofitable] The Reasons of this Branch are two: Reas. 1. Because such
contentions produce no profit at all.

Subverting] Reas. 2. Because the faith of some is overthrown, who lose the
truth in wranglings, or giving heed to perplexed disputations.

Verse. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not
to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. Branch 2. That he show
himself an example in a prudent administration of the word of God, studying to
approve himself to God, when others look after public applause; showing
himself a faithful workman, when others boast themselves as vain disputers:
Always doing his endeavor, that he neither do nor speak any thing unbecoming,
whereof he may be ashamed in the presence of God, whilst others fiercely strive
amongst themselves, only because they are ashamed to be overcome, or to be
accounted unlearned: Lastly, employing himself in preaching, not in mincing of
words, whilst the substance is neglected, but in a prudent dividing and
distribution of their plain meaning, and applying them to the advantage of the
hearers, in faith and obedience to the truth.

Verse. 16. But shun profane and vain bablings, for they will increase unto
more ungodliness. Branch 3. That he decline the lofty and sophistical manner
of speech, new, unusual, and profane phrases: He subjoyns three Reasons of
this Branch.

Prophane] Reas. 1. Because as those insolent speeches proceed from the
profaneness and impiety of the mind, so they foster and increase ungodliness
in others.

Verse. 17. And their word will eat as does a canker, of whom is Hymeneus and
Philetus. R. 2. Because the manner of teaching, and the Doctrine of Sophisters
will eat up the Church, as a Gangrene consumes the body, which (as Physicians
teach) unless it be very suddenly cured, it invades the contiguous parts,
seizes upon the very bones, and till the man is extinct it proceeds without
ceasing.

Verse. 18. Who concerning the truth have erred, saying, That the Resurrection
is past already, and overthrow the Faith of some. R. 3. Because experience has
demonstrated this evil, in the persons of two Heretics: (whom he names to
their disgrace, that they may be avoided as Rocks.) Who only acknowledge an
Allegorical Resurrection, erring from the Doctrine of Truth, overthrow the
Faith of some, and while they insinuated their perverse opinion into others,
gave occasion to some, not well settled in the Faith, to renounce the profession
of the Christian Religion.

Verse. 19. Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal,
the Lord knows them that are his, and let every one that names the name of
Christ depart from iniquity. Admonition 3. Of holding fast the Doctrine of
perseverance of true Believers, although the Faith of some was overthrown:
which admonition is propounded by way of consolation and confirmation of Faith,
against the scandal of Apostates, especially of the famous Doctors: whose
levity and perfidiousness ought indeed to stir up all to watchfulness, but it
ought not in any wise to weaken the assurance of Faith in the Saints. The
Doctrine to be maintained by Timothy, in this, Although the Faith of some be
overthrown, yet the building of the salvation of the Elect, or true Believers,
abides firm, or, The perseverance of the Saints is certain. This he proves by
six Arguments*

Sure] Argum. 1. By way of comparison from a building: The building of the
Faith, and salvation of the Elect, has a sure foundation, laid by God, which
stands unmovable, and this it is, The free Election of God, the constancy and
stability whereof he compares to a foundation laid upon a Rock: Therefore the
perseverance of the Saints is certain.

Seal] Argum. 2. By way of comparison from a Seal, to this sense, The salvation
of the Elect, is kept in the secret custody of God, as with a signet, so that,
though it appear not to the world, who they are that are elected, yet it is
certain that they were not of us, or the number of true Believers, who went out
from us that truly believed, or revolted from our society: Therefore the
perseverance of the Saints is certain.

Knows] Argum. 3. Those are known unto God, who in a special manner are his, or
belong to him, as his peculiar ones; he knows them and their names, and
number, and embraces them with his special favor, that he will not suffer
them to be pulled from him: To know them as his own, is to acquiesce in them
by his special love, as his peculiar ones: Therefore the perseverance of the
Saints is certain.

Seal] Argum. 4. As another seal, God has given this Precept to be read of
all men, which he makes effectual in all his Elect; Let every one that names
the name of Christ depart from iniquity, i. e. Let him hold fast the Faith with
the profession of Jesus Christ; let him also depart from the ways of sin, by
repentance and holiness of life: Therefore the Saints, those whom God has
sealed for his own, as it were, with this Seal, and in whom he works effectual
obedience to this Precept, they shall not perish in their Apostasy, but
persevere, and end their lives in the Faith and Obedience of Christ.

Verse. 20. But in a great house, there are not only Vessels of Gold, and of
Silver, but also of Wood, and of Earth: and some to Honor, and some to
Dishonor. Argum. 5. As in a well-furnished and great house, there are some
vessels more precious for decent uses; some baser vessels for dishonorable
uses; so in the Church, some are reprobate, who only lie in their filthiness,
by whom the Church is corrupted, they shall depart from the Church, by
Apostasy. Some are elected and sanctified of God, who shall persevere in the
Faith and Obedience of Christ, to the glory of God, and their own commendation:
Therefore the perseverance of the Saints is certain.

Verse. 21. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel
unto honor, sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every
good work. Argum. 6. It is not only certain that the Elect shall persevere,
but it is also to be affirmed, that they may be assured of their election and
perseverance: For if any one, by the Grace of God, shall endeavor to purge
himself from the manners of Hypocrites, and the defilements of sinners, (with
which* the vessels designed to shame are filled) he shall openly manifest to
himself and others, that he is of the number of those precious vessels,
prepared to sanctification and glory: Therefore the perseverance of the Saints
is certain.

Verse. 22. Flee also youthful lusts; but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity,
Peace, with them that call on the Lord with a pure heart. Admonition 4. To
moderation of mind, and to avoid all youthly affections, and whatsoever may
stir up contentions, or provoke the minds of others. There are three branches
of the Admonition. (1) That he avoid all youthful lusts or affections, not
only pleasures, but also headiness, contention, pride, desire of vainglory,
and the like evil affections, which young men use to be infected with, who
have taken upon them the office of teaching or disputing.

Follow] (2) That on the other side he follow [1] Righteousness, which offends
none. [2] Faith, which without disputation receives cheerfully the mysteries
revealed from God. [3] Charity, which is not envious, not puffed up, is not
ambitious, seeks not her own, but even those things which conduce to the good
of others. [4] Peace with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, i. e.
with the true worshipers of God.

Verse. 23. But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do
gender strifes. (3) That he shun Questions, by which no man comes to true
wisdom, and Christian edification. The Reasons of the Admonition are three.

Knowing] Reas. 1. Because they engender strifes and contentions, not without
the loss of Christian peace and charity,

Verse. 24. And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all
men, apt to teach, patient, Reas. 2. Because strife does not become the
Minister of Christ, who himself was most meek, and the Lord of Peace.

Gentle] Reas* 3. Because the contrary virtues become a Minister, whereof he
recites four. 1. Meekness toward all sorts of men, which comprehends courtesy
and affability. 2. Aptness to teach, or a disposition to teach rather than
compel. 3. Patience toward them that are evil, that he may overcome them that
are froward and averse from the Truth, with gentleness, if there be any hope
of their salvation.

Verse. 25. In meekness, instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth. 4.
Meekness, in reproving those that are otherwise minded, that he do not
presently use sharpness, but propound sound Doctrine to them, with gentleness,
and so rebuke them that they may understand that their salvation and amendment
is earnestly sought: The Reasons why he should endeavor after this last
virtue, and use meekness toward those that were otherwise minded, are three.

If peradventure] Reas. 1. Because the conversion of obstinate persons is
p^ssible, nor must we hastily despair of it.

God] Reas. 2. Because repentance, and the acknowledgement of the truth, and
every act of Faith, is the gift of God.

Verse. 26. And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil,
who are taken captive by him at his will. Reas. 3. Because their condition is
to be pittyed, for they abide in the snares of the Devil, acted according to
his will, so long as it shall seem good to God to suffer it.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter he strengthens and confirms Timothy, and in him all Pastors,
against false Brethren, Schismatics, and Heretics, and against troubles,
which they were like to create to the sincere servants of God. (1) Describing
their dispositions and manners, to verse. 8. (2) Comforting and arming him
against the dispositions and arts of false Teachers, to the end, which are the
two parts of the Chapter.

Verse. 1. This know also, that in the last days, perilous times shall come.
The first part of the Chapter, and the first way of arming him, is a
fore-warning him of false brethren that should arise, and were then risen up,
and of the troubles which they should cause, that being foreseen they might
the less hurt: The last days, are the time which remains after the ascension
of Christ to his second coming. The sum of his fore-warning is this, The
times are dangerous and troublesome, wherein it is an hard thing to be advised
how to carry thy self toward these kind of Monsters, which shall come out of
the bosom of the Church, with whom to conflict is most troublesome: Therefore
thou had need arm thy self.

Verse. 2. For men shall be l^vers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, The faults to
which the false Brethren were addicted he recites nineteen. (1) They are
lovers of themselves, i. e. they mind their own private advantage, not
regarding the salvation and benefit of others. (2) They are covetous, or lovers
of money. (3) Boasters* or disdainful, who betray the inward pride of their
minds by disdainfulness. (4) Proud, preferring themselves before others, and
contemning them in comparison with themselves. (5) Blasphemers, who make
nothing of injuring the reputation of others. (6) Disobedient to Parents, i. e.
Despising the lawful authority of those who ought to be honored by them, as
if they were Parents, (7) Unthankful, whom thou can not hire with good turns,
to require thee with love. (8) Unholy, or destitute of the true desire of
holiness.

Verse. 3. Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, (9) Without natural
affection, so much, that they regard not the bonds of nature. (10)
Truce Breakers, who make no account of covenants, but violate them. (11) False
accusers, who with feigned calu^^ies (...) the innocence of others. (12)
Incontinent, who let out themselves to all kind of carnal pleasures. (13)
Fierce, who are of a rugged and ill-natured disposition. (14) Despisers of
those that are good, who because of their different dispositions, abhor the
friendship of good men, and hate them.

Verse. 4. Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers
of God, (15) Traitors, who hazard the lives of their friends that deserve well
from them. (16) Heady, or rash, who are carried which way soever the force of
their lusts drive them. (17) High-minded, who please themselves most out of a
vain opinion of their own excellency. (18) Who prefer their own pleasures
before the will and commands of God.

Verse. 5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such
turn away. (19) Having a form of godliness, which they make show of in words
and profession, the power whereof in their works they so little regard, that
they seem to abjure and deny it: He commands him to shun these, i. e. After
admonitions and reproofs by the gender censures of the Church, at length being
excluded the Church by excommunication, to beware of them, and restrain them,
and by any other prudent course repress them, that the Church may not receive
any detriment by them.

Verse. 6. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and ^ead captive
silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, He proceeds in his
describing the false Brethren, and in the example of some deceivers of his
time, he sets them out as it were before their eyes, who for their bellies
sake did cunningly insinuate themselves into the families of others, and led
captive certain of the lighter sort of women, and did not free them from, or
unburthen them of their sins wherewith they were laden, as they promised, but
brought them into greater servitude, and multiplied their sins; He propounds
two causes of the deceiving these women. (1) Because those women were
transported with diverse lusts and affections, which they could not subdue.

Verse. 7. Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.
(2) Because not contented with the Doctrine received from the Apostles, through
the curiosity and instability of their minds, always sought after now things,
accommodated to their lust: Therefore though they seemed willing to learn, yet
it was impossible for them to attain to the Knowledge of saving Truth.

The Second Part.
Verse. 8. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the Truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith. The second
part of the Chapter follows, wherein he comforts Timothy, or the faithful
Pastor, against the prevalency of this evil; and that by ten Arguments. All
which prove that he ought to be comforted in the midst of his conflicts.

Now as] Arg. 1. Because the true Preachers of the Gospel suffer the same from
these Impostors, which Moses and Aaron suffered from the Magicians of Egypt
under Pharaoh: whose names, the Apostle having learned by the inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, sets them down to their perpetual disgrace, and a (...) unto
others.

The Truth] Arg. 2. Because this sort of men are adversaries unto the Truth,
and true Pastors because of the Truth.

Of corrupt] Arg. 3. Because seeing they are of corrupt minds, such as have
their judgments depraved with corrupt affections, and reprobate concerning the
Faith, who by the obstinacy of their minds, and the corruption of their
judgments, have debarred themselves of the sound Doctrine of Faith, true
Pastors ought the less to regard their judgments and opinions.

Verse. 9. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest
unto all men, as theirs also was. Argum. 4. Specially looking to those
Impostors in whom he had instanced* Because they shall not any further carry
on their designs undiscovered to the Church, nor shall so proceed, as to
deceive all by their hypocrisy (as if they were Orthodox) as they had done
heretofore: For the Apostle had determined to manifest their folly unto all, by
fastening upon them the mark of Excommunication.

Verse. 10. But thou have fully known my Doctrine, manner of life, purpose,
faith, long-suffering, charity, patience,

11. Persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at
Lystra, what persecutions I endured; but out of them all the Lord delivered me.

Argum. 5. Because he had Paul for a lively and familiar example: (1) Of the
virtues that are required in a Pastor, in Doctrine, Life, and those four
special virtues, which he reckons up. (2) In persecutions, which he underwent
in three places, which he names, for the defense of the Gospel. (3) In the
happy issue, and deliverance from all those troubles through the grace of God.

Verse. 12. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution. Arg. 6. Because it is the common lot, not only of Pastors, but of
all Christians, to suffer afflictions, and persecutions for the Gospels sake.

Verse. 13. But evil men, and seducers, shall wax worse and worse, deceiving,
and being deceived. Arg. 7. Because it cannot be avoided, but obstinate
Impostors, and false brethren, will wax worse and worse, and will bring
themselves and others to destruction by their errors; which it concerned
Timothy to know and consider of, that he trouble not himself too much about it,
but reverence the deep judgments of God, and comfort himself.

Verse. 14. But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have
been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them. Arg. 8. Propounded by
way of Exhortation, Because it concerned him only to discharge his duty
faithfully, and according to his utmost ability, to defend the Doctrine of the
Gospel which was committed to him.

Knowing] Arg. 9. Confirming the former, Because he was sufficiently
instructed in the truth of the heavenly Doctrine by the Apostle of Christ, whom
he knew to be an approved Apostle.

Verse. 15. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ
Jesus. Arg. 10. Confirming the former Exhortation propounded in the former
verse, and proving also the Proposition: The Doctrine which thou have learned
of me, and which is now committed to thee to defend, is agreeable to the
Doctrine of the holy Scripture, and the Prophets: Therefore continue thou in
these things, be thou stablished in the truth, and comforted.

Which are able] He inlarges this Argument from these five Considerations: (1)
I know thou have been brought up, and conversant in the Scriptures from a
child. (2) The Scripture is able to furnish thee with saving wisdom, which
consists in the knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ.

Verse. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. (3)
All Scripture is given by inspiration, therefore it is of Divine Authority. (4)
All Scripture tends to the teaching those things that are true, and reproving
the things that are false, in matters belonging to faith, and the correction of
evil manners, and instruction in things that are good.

Verse. 17. That the man of God may be perfect* thoroughly furnished unto all
good works. (5) Lastly, The Scripture can make the man of God, or the Pastor of
the Church perfectly meet to all the parts of his Office, and to every good
work, which God requires from him, whether to the saving himself, or others,
and the glory of God: Therefore continue thou in those things which thou have
learned of me according to the Scripture, seeing thou have the Scripture near
thee, as a Treasury, from whence thou may fetch whatever may make thee
perfect, and fully render thee complete to every good work.

CHAP. IV.
THere are two parts of the Chapter: In the firsts, as if he made his will,
he most gravely exhorts Timothy, that he faithfully discharge his office, to
verse. 9.

In the second part (after he has treated about private matters, which
concerned himself and Timothy) he concludes the Epistle.

Verse. 1. I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom: He
premises to his Exhortation (about the discharge of his Office) a grave
obtestation, wherein he sets before the eyes of Timothy, 1. The Majesty of
God. 2. The Lord Jesus Christ. 3. The Judgment seat of Christ, before whom he
was to give an account of his Ministry, with others to be judged in that last
day. 4. That glory of Christ, which will show forth it self at his illustrious
appearance, and the full manifestation of his Kingdom.

Verse. 2. Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine. The Exhortation it self,
in which he requires five duties: (1) Diligence in preaching. (2) Striving
against all impediments. (3) That he do not only take all occasions to
preach, which may consist not only with his own convenience, and the leisure
of the sloathful people, but that he stir up himself, sparing no pains, and as
it were with his hand, restrain the people busied about the vain employments of
the world, earnestly exhorting all to seek after that which is mainly
necessary. (4) That he leave no means unattempted, in exhorting the people
that they make progress in the faith and obedience of Christ, not only
preaching true Doctrine, and reproving that which is false, but also reproving
and correcting their evil conversations, and exhorting them to live holily,
justly, and soberly. (5) That he mix his reproofs with zeal and fervency, and
season them with gentleness, and that he back his confutations of errors with
sound Doctrine, that his labor may not be in vain.

Verse. 3. For the time will come when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but
after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching
ears. He subjoyns nine Reasons to his Exhortation:

Reas. 1. Because the time was at hand, when many would depart from the
sincerity of Doctrine, therefore it was necessary that Timothy should more
diligently attend to his Office: And this defection he describes from its five
degrees: (1) The Professors of Christ will not admit of sound Doctrine, they
will not endure that their sins should be reproved, or to be stirred up to
goodness, nor can any thing be savoury or relished by them. (2) They will
obstinately cleave to their own lusts, or carnal affections. (3) In their
hearts, they will hate the true Pastors, as open enemies, and that they may
restrain and suppress them, they will heap up to themselves teachers, that will
soothe up the people in their lusts. (4) The ancient truth of God conducing to
holiness and newness of life, will not relish with them, but out of a curiosity
always to hear some new thing, they will seek for such as gently claw their
itching ears, in the mean time making no small show how much they are desirous
to promote the Christian Doctrine and Religion.

Verse. 4. And they shall turn away their ears from the Truth, and shall be
turned unto Fables. (5) The fifth degree of their defection is this, They will
openly profess their impatience of hearing those strict Teachers of the Truth,
who produce nothing before them, but what they have learned from the holy
Scriptures, and shall turn themselves to hear those who urge in their
preaching, the inventions of men, their own dreams, histories, humane fictions,
fables and legends.

Verse. 5. But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an
Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry. Hence he infers and repeats his
Exhortation, That Timothy be so much the more vigilant, and execute all the
parts of his office, inuring himself to labors and afflictions, not yielding
for any adversaries or dangers.

Of an Evangelist] To the repetition of his Exhortation he adjoyns another
Reason, Because it became him to act the part of an Evangelist, i. e. more than
an ordinary Teacher, and to omit nothing of those things which may lawfully be
executed by a faithful Evangelist.

Verse. 6. For I am ready now to be offered, and the time of my departure is at
hand. The third Reason of his Exhortation is this, Because it is, as it were, a
testamentary Exhortation of Paul, now old, whose fellowship Timothy was not
long to enjoy, (for he speaks this, as one that was to dye for the Gospel of
Christ, and shortly to be loosed out of the prison of the world and his body,
that he might freely soar up to God) Therefore this Exhortation was to take
the deeper impression in the mind of Timothy.

Verse. 7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the Faith. Reas. 4. From the experience of Paul that exhorted him, who had now
almost finished the course of his Ministry, and had found by experience in the
running of it, not only not a troublesome conflict* but even full of
consolation and good hope, and that part of it which yet remained of his race,
he was fully persuaded it would be glorious. He explains this Argument with
its five Branches.

Branch 1. The fight which he had undertaken in his Apostleship, and now
almost accomplished, he calls a good fight, that Timothy might know that he
was not ashamed of the labors, afflictions and persecutions which he had
under-went.

Branch 2. He pleases himself in the consummation of his race, as now having
his desire, and almost obtaining the prize.

Branch 3. He rejoices that he had showed himself a faithful soldier to his
Captain Christ, through the Grace of God, both in Doctrine and life, observing
his Military oath.

Verse. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only,
but unto them also that love his appearing. Branch 4. As for the future he
professes his confidence of a free reward, which God has graciously promised
to all the faithful; and as a just Judge, justly and also of Grace will reward,
not out of any merit of ours, but by accumulating his former gracious gifts
freely upon his latter.

Branch 5. Wherein the Apostle presents his example for Timothy's use and all
the faithful, that the Crown of Righteousness was not to be set upon his head
alone, but upon the heads of all, who endeavoring to do those things which are
pleasing to the Lord, declare that they expect and love his appearance.

The Second Part.
Verse. 9. Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me. The second part of the
Chapter follows, wherein he treats of his private affairs, which concerned
Timothy and himself, and which it appertained to Timothy to be acquainted
with: The Articles of this part are seven.

Artic. 1. Of the coming of Timothy, whom (if he was then at Ephesus) he
calls from thence, after he seemed to have stayed there long enough.

Verse. 10. For Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is
departed unto Thessalonica, Cresens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia.

11. Only Luke is with me. Take Mark and bring him with thee: For he is
profitable to me for the Ministry.

He gives three Reasons why Timothy should hasten his coming.

Reas. 1. From the fewness of his companions, and helpers, whereof he was now
destitute: For Demas not liking the dangers and afflictions, which were
incident to Paul's companions, and wherewith they were often exercised (being
led by the love of ease, security, and the commodities of this life)
undervalues the care of Paul, and the Gospel now openly defended by him, in
comparison with his own private advantages, he went to Thessalonica, where he
might live more securely. Crescens was sent into Galatia, and Titus was gone to
Dalmatia, to propagate the Gospel. So that he only had Luke the Physician to
accompany him: He wills Timothy also when he comes to bring with him Mark,
Barnabas Sisters Son, who might be useful to the Apostle.

Verse. 12. And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. Reas. 2. Because he had sent
Tychicus to Ephesus, which is spoken without any reference to Timothy's abiding
in that place, whereupon it may be questioned, whether Timothy was at Ephesus
at that time, when these were written.

Verse. 13. The Cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou come, bring
with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments. Lastly giving the
third Reason of his coming, he wills Timothy when he came, to bring with him
the Cloak or the Chest wherein his books or parchments were kept, whereof he
had then need; It is not much material whether we understand a Cloak, or a
Chest, so long as we know that God disdains not to regard the meanest matters
of his servants, nor to refuse the place, wherein mention of them is made in
his book.

Verse. 14. Alexander the Copper-Smith did me much evil, the Lord reward him
according to his works.

15. Of whom be thou ware also, for he has greatly withstood our words.

Artic. 2. It relates to Alexander the Copper-Smith, an enemy to the Gospel,
who earnestly withstood the Apostle in his preaching, and was very troublesome
to him, to whom (out of well-tempered zeal) in the Spirit of God, he wishes
divine revenge; as to a malicious and obstinate enemy, and he warns Timothy to
take heed of him, lest he receive the like injuries from him.

Verse. 16. At my first answer no man stood with me. But all men forsook me;
I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge. Artic. 3. He mentions
four remarkable things, which befell him at his first defense, when he first
pleaded his cause before Neroes judgment seat; The first is, that none in the
Church at Rome assisted him, or became any ways helpful to him (which is an
Argument that he did not succeed Peter there, nor that he was Bishop of Rome)
which desertion of him, he imputes to the infirmity of the Saints at Rome:
Therefore he intercedes to God for them, and beseeches him to pardon them.

Verse. 17. Notwithstanding, the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, that
by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might
hear, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. The second is, That the
Lord was his help, in the defense of his cause, and supported him by his Grace
against all accusations, whereof he gives the Reason, That so the Lord did
more illustriously confirm and commend the preaching of the Gospel amongst the
Gentiles.

Out of the mouth] The third is, That God delivered him from the present danger
of death (or from the cruelty of Nero, and his adversaries which accused him)
as it were out of the mouth of the Lion.

Verse. 18. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom; to whom be glory for ever and ever.
Amen. The fourth is, That by this experience God had confirmed his Faith in
him, that he would preserve him, lest daunted with any danger, he should
defile himself in any evil work, even until he should translate him into his
heavenly glory, upon which account he gives thanks to God with confidence.

Verse. 19. Salute Prisca, and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.

20. Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.

21. Do thy diligence to come before Winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens,
and Linus, and Claudia, and all the Brethren.

Artic. 4. It contains the salutations sent to Prisca, or Priscilla and her
Husband Aquila, and to the household of Onesiphorus.

Trophimus] Artic. 5. Wherein to hasten the coming of Timothy, he mentions
the absence of Erastus and Trophimus, who might minister unto him, and supply
the place of Timothy.

Salutes] Artic. 6. It contains the salutations sent from some Saints at Rome,
who were with the Apostle while he writ these things.

Verse. 22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit; Grace be with you. Amen.
Artic. 7. He concludes his Epistle, wishing the presence of Christ with the
spirit and soul of Timothy, and prays for grace to the whole Church, whom it
concerned to understand the Doctrine set down in this Epistle, that with the
greater reverence they might receive the Ministry, and acknowledge the
authority of Timothy.

The Epistle of Paul to TITUS, Analytically expounded.
THE CONTENTS.
WHen Paul had only laid the foundation of a Church in the Isle of Crete,
which is also called Candia, making haste to some other place, as it became the
Apostle of the Gentiles, he leaves Titus, and enjoins him as an Evangelist to
prosecute the work. But when Paul understood that he was contemned by some,
and that he might be brought into further contempt by those that were
obstinate, as if he had been a common Pastor; Paul invests him with Authority,
and puts upon him, as it were his own person, as well in making Ministers, as
in the whole administration of the Church, and encourages him to go forward in
the work of the Lord. Besides the Preface and Conclusion, there are three parts
of the Epistle, according to the number of the Chapters. The first is
concerning the Election of Ministers, Chap 1. The second is concerning the
duties of each rank in the Family, Chap. 2. The third is concerning the duties
of all Christians, Chap. 3.

CHAP. I.
AFter the Preface to verse. 5. He instructs Titus about the choosing of
Pastors, showing who are to be admitted, to verse. 10. and who are to be
rejected, to the end.

Verse. 1. Paul a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to
the Faith of Gods Elect, and the acknowledging of the Truth, which is after
godliness. The Preface contains three things. (1) A description of the Penman,
verse. 1, 2, 3. (2) A description of him to whom he writes. (3) A salutation
with an Apostolical benediction, verse. 3, 4.

In the description of the Penman Paul, his authority is asserted from these
eight heads. (1) That he is a servant of God, and that is maintained against
the Jews, who reproached him as a deserter of the Religion of his Country. (2)
That he is an Apostle of Jesus Christ, who by an immediate commission to all
Nations, held the supreme degree of Ministry in the Church. (3) That his
Doctrine agrees with the Faith of Abraham, and the Fathers, and all the Elect,
which every one of them that are elected would receive, none but Reprobates
would reject, because it contains nothing but the known and acknowledged Truth,
instructing men to godliness and the pure worship of God.

Verse. 2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before
the world began. He adjoyns the remaining commendations of his Doctrine, and
the Arguments of his Authority. (4) That it brings a lively hope of eternal
life to Believers. (5) That it is upheld by the testimony of God, that cannot
lie, or it is impossible for him to lie, or to speak what is not, or not to be
able to effect what he says. (6) That the original of this Truth is most
Ancient, inasmuch as God has promised eternal life, not only in the beginning
of the world, preaching it to our first Parents in paradise, but also
covenanting with his Son (designed to be our Mediator) about it before the
world was made, in the Covenant of Redemption. (7) That this Truth was most
wisely revealed, i. e. by degrees, and in convenient seasons, as it seemed good
to God, it was made known, and now is openly manifested by the preaching of the
Gospel.

Verse. 3. But has in due times manifested his word through preaching, which is
committed unto me, according to the Commandment of God our Savior: (8) That
the charge of preaching this Gospel, by special Ordination and deputation of
our Savior Christ, was committed to him: And this is the description of Paul
the Penman of this Epistle: The description of Titus to whom he writes,
follows; He is called Paul's own Son, not according to the flesh, but first,
after the common faith, which he received from the Doctrine of the Apostle,
whose Disciple he also was, and his continual auditor, being always in his
company: Again, because he had fully received the impression of the faith
preached by the Apostle, and expressed it to the life in his Doctrine. Lastly,
because he resembled Paul, as it were an image, in his manner of life and
conversation.

Verse. 4. To Titus mine own son after the common faith, Grace, mercy, and peace
from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior. In his salutation
he blesses Titus, from God through Christ, wishing and applying to him, First,
Grace, i. e. That is the gifts of the Holy Ghost, both necessary to his own
salvation, and his calling in the Ministry. Secondly, Mercy, i. e. Remission of
sins, or infirmities, in the exercise of the gifts bestowed upon him. Thirdly,
Peace, i. e. Happiness from the fountain of Grace, by degrees to be
accomplished.

Verse. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order
the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had
appointed thee. This Preface being premised, that he might instruct Titus
about the choosing of Ministers, in the first place, he repeats three general
Precepts which he gave to Titus, when he went from Crete. First, That Titus
finish, in the Constitution of the Churches, that which the Apostle had begun;
Then that he appoint Elders ( i. e. all ordinary Governors of the Church) in
every City, wherein the faithful, lately converted, dwelt. Thirdly, That in
this business he carry not himself after his own will, but follow the rule set
him by the Apostle, as he had ordained.

Verse. 6. If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful
children, not accused of riot, or unruly. In the second place he sets down
three things requisite in Elders, or Governors only, or of Teachers also: (1)
That they be not defamed, to the derogation of their Authority. Again that
they be not guilty of Polygamy, too frequent in those times: And lastly, That
their whole family be a mirror of honest and chaste Discipline, i. e. That
their children be brought up in the faith, accustomed to temperance and
frugality, free from profuseness and luxury, and patterns of obedience: For he
esteemed it very necessary that the family of an Elder should be rightly
ordered, if the wife and children understood, that upon conjecture of their
evil manners and conversations, the Master of the Family might be cast out of
his Ecclesiastical Office.

Verse. 7. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God: not
self-willed, nor soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy
lucre. In the third place, because amongst the Elders, they that labor in the
Word and Doctrine are the chief; the properties of this Elder, whom he calls a
Bishop, are twelve, whereof he spoke in the former Epistle to Timothy. (1) He
ought to be free from any just blame, lest his Authority be diminished, yea so
far from blame, that nothing be found in him unworthy the steward of God, who
ought to be so much the more blameless, by how much his office is more holy.
(2) He ought not to be self-willed, or such an one that obstinately pleases
himself, for he that is too self-willed, is ready to displease all others. (3)
Not soon angry, for he that is so, cannot bear with the infirmities of the
people of God, or regard them. (4) Not given to wine and drunkenness. (5) Not
contentious; No striker. (6) Not given to filthy lucre, free from covetousness.

Verse. 8. But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy,
temperate, This he confirms, because it is requisite, that according to his
abilities he be ready to receive strangers, or the banished servants of God.
(7) That he esteem and love good men, such as excel others. For it is the sign
of a man of little honesty, to hate those that are good, upon any pretense. (8)
That in all things he be modest, sober, of a sound mind, or prudent. (9)
That he be just, desirous to restore every man his own. (10) That he be
pious and holy, who by his life and conversation may teach others. (11) That
he be continent and temperate, having dominion over his affections (...).

(...). Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he may
be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers. (12)
That he be not a Divine only, but that by faith he cleave to the truth, not
only able to feed the flock, but to stop the mouths of barking Wolves.

The Second Part of the Chapter.
Verse. 10. For there are many unruly and vain talkers, and deceivers,
especially they of the Circumcision: The second part of the Chapter follows,
wherein he gives an account of what diligence and care ought to be used in
the choosing of Pastors, viz. Because false Teachers did at that time abound:
He also describes those whom he would have rejected from this Office, whereof
are, (1) unruly or refractory, who will not be reduced into order, casting off
the yoke of subjection, or of the Eldership, or of any other lawful
jurisdiction, whether they be such as withdraw themselves from obedience to
Authority, either Natural or Civil, to whom they ought to submit in the Lord.
(2) Vain talkers, who given to vain boasting, follow after vain subtilties, or
frigid and trifling speculations, which conduce nothing to holiness, and the
fear of God. (3) Deceivers, or seducers of men's minds, who either by their
corrupt Doctrine, corrupt the Gospel, or by their fair rhetorical speeches so
inchant (as it were) the minds of men, that they will no longer admit the
sound way of teaching: Of which sort, for example sake, he points out the Jews
Doctors to be, who dwelt in Crete.

Verse. 11. whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake. He advises him that these
are not only to be refuted, but forbidden to preach either publicly or
privately; whereof he gives seven Reasons:

Reas. 1. Because they draw whole Families from sound Doctrine, and drive them
to perdition, and that either by teaching errors, or by ill applying the
general Doctrine, to foment the lusts of men, and that for filthy lucres sake.

Verse. 12. One of themselves, even a Prophet of their own said, The Cretians
are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies. Reas. 2. Because they followed the
disposition of their Nation, liars, given to idleness, serving their own
intemperance, and bellies, like beasts, which he proves by the testimony of
the Cretian Poet, Calimachus or Epimenides, to which Testimony Paul himself
assents.

Verse. 13. This witness is true; wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may
be sound in the faith. Reas. 3. Because a severe reproof of this kind of
Teachers, and the Cretian Disciples cleaving to them, was very conduceable to
the procuring and maintaining of their soundness in the faith: Therefore they
were severely to be reproved.

Verse. 14. Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men, that
turn from the Truth. Reas. 4. Lest otherwise the Cretians should attend to
fabulous traditions, and Jewish fictions, touching Legal Ceremonies, and the
Precepts of these kind of men, who could not beat the pure Doctrine of Christ,
but endeavored to corrupt it with their leaven.

Verse. 15. Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled,
and unbeleeving, is nothing pure: but even their mind and conscience is
defiled. Reas. 5. Because the truth of Christianity has determined contrary to
the Precepts of these Judaizing Teachers, asserting, That to the pure, all
things are pure, i. e. to Christians, purged from their sins by Faith in
Christ, all meats, and other creatures, which were unclean by the Ceremonial
Law, were now lawful after Christ was exhibited, that the faithful may use them
with a good conscience.

Defiled] Reas. 6. Because the same (...), that nothing can be used purely by
them, who are not justified by Faith in Christ, but that their minds and
consciences which falsely acquit them, being not renewed, are polluted: and so
he convinces them of vanity, who from the observation of Ceremonies endeavor
to attain to holiness.

Verse. 16. They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. Reas. 7. Because
although those Teachers did profess themselves worshipers of God, yet in works
they denied him, because they were enemies to the Righteousness which is by
Faith, and to the fruits of the Spirit, wherefore they were abominable
hypocrites, rebels against the Truth of God, and unmeet for the performance of
any good work: From which reasons it is manifest, that those false Teachers are
to be restrained, that they teach neither in public nor private.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter is handled the enforcing of sound Doctrine upon all, according
to the age, sex, and condition of every one in the Family, and by which they
are to compose their lives unto holiness, to verse. 11. And whereby their Faith
may be stablished in the Grace of God, from whence (as from a fountain) he
will have the fruits of their obedience flow forth in their conversation, to
the end.

Verse. 1. But speak thou the things which become sound Doctrine: That he may
really oppose himself to the vanity of these Teachers, he commands in general,
that Titus inculcate the Doctrine, which makes for holiness and salvation.

Verse. 2. That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in Faith, in
Charity, in Patience. He commands five things in particular. First, Concerning
old men, that he instruct them about these four things. (1) That they adorn
their old age with virtues befitting their age, viz. That they be sober,
taking heed of drunkenness. (2) That they be grave, and reverend, and free
from youthful wantonness. (3) That they be temperate, prudent, i. e. that in
every action they demean themselves temperately. (4) That they be sound, and
no ways counterfeit, in Faith, Charity, Hope manifested by Patience.

Verse. 3. The aged women, likewise, that they be in behavior, as becomes
holiness, not false accusers, not given to much Wine, teachers of good things.
Secondly, Concerning aged women he commands, that he teach the Matrons these
five duties. (1) That in their clothing and behavior, and the whole
deportment of their bodies, they observe comeliness. (2) That they be not
false accusers, injuring the reputation of others by their falsehoods. (3) That
they be not given to drinking. (4) That they teach the younger women, not old
wives fables, but those things that are good and honest.

Verse. 4. That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their
Husbands, to love their Children,

5. To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own
Husbands, that the Word of God be not blasphemed.

(5) That they teach the younger women (to whom they may have more free access,
than Ministers can) prudence and modesty, and that they love their own
Husbands, and Children with a Regular and Christian love; And that they be
discreet, chaste, keepers at home, not wandering out of their families,
courteous, obedient to their own Husbands, that the Christian Doctrine be not
evil spoken of for their sakes.

Verse. 6. Young men likewise exhort to be sober-minded. Thirdly, He gives
Titus charge about young men, that he exhort them to be prudent or
sober-minded.

Verse. 7. In all things showing thy self a pattern of good works: in Doctrine
showing incorruptness, gravity, sincerity.

8. Sound speech that cannot be condemned, that he that is of the contrary
part, may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.

Fourthly, Concerning Pastors in the person of Titus, to this end, that their
Doctrine might the better take place, he commands that Titus show himself an
example for others to imitate in every good work, but especially that in
Doctrine he show forth uncorruptness of the sound Truth, gravity of authority,
and his manner of speech fitted to the edification of his Auditors, that the
Adversary may have nothing justly to c^rpat.

Verse. 9. Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own Masters, and to please
them well in all things, not answering again:

10. Not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

Fifthly, Concerning servants he gives command, That he instruct servants
about their duties. (1) That they be obedient to their own Masters (though
Infidels) observing all their lawful commands. (2) That servants endeavor to
please their own Masters, and answer not again, when they command them hard
services, or reprove them more severely than is fitting, (3) Lastly, That they
steal nothing from their Masters, but show themselves faithful in all things;
whereof he gives the reason, that the Doctrine of the Gospel may be adorned
by them in all things, and may be acknowledged for Divine, as that which is so
effectual, that it makes men under the hardest terms of servitude, patient in
their condition, and in their calling honest and faithful.

The Second Part.
Verse. 11. For the Grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all
men. The second part of the Chapter touching the Doctrine of Faith, follows,
which he subjoyns as the fountain, from whence virtue is fetched, for the
performance of the foresaid duties: For they cannot be Christian duties,
except grace to perform them be derived from Christ by Faith. For in this the
works of regenerate and unregenerate men materially good, do differ: That the
works of these are done by the enemies of God, from the corrupt strength of
free will, for carnal ends, without any respect to the glory of God: But the
works of regenerate men are done by the servants of God, reconciled by Faith,
from the fountain of saving Grace, which administers knowledge and strength to
their performances. And this Doctrine of Faith is propounded, by way of
confirmation of the Precepts, or the Doctrine of manners, upon four Reasons,
All which prove that the aforesaid virtues are to be endeavored after.

Has appeared] Reas. 1. Because the Gospel of the Grace of God bringing
salvation of all kinds to men, being published and manifested, has appeared to
all sorts of men: Therefore it is meet, that men of all sorts, show their
thankfulness to God in an holy conversation, prosecuting the foresaid virtues.

Verse. 12. Teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: Reas. 2. Because
this Gospel of God does not only teach us what duties we are bound to
perform, but also instructs us how to draw strength from the fountain of the
Grace of Christ, from his death and resurrection, to deny ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, as to our selves; justly, as to our
neighbors; and holily, as to God: Therefore ought we to be ready for the
performance of these duties.

Verse. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Reas. 3. Because we expect eternal
life at the second coming of Christ, who is the great God, one with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, and our Savior: Therefore it behooves us to be armed and
stirred up to follow after all the foresaid good works, which God requires of
us.

Verse. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Reas. 4.
Because therefore Christ offered up himself for us, that he might effectually
redeem us from the bondage of sin, and purchase us to himself, as a peculiar
people, that we might follow after good works: Therefore if we would not have
that Redemption to be void as to us, we must of necessity forsake our sins,
and follow after the foresaid virtues, and newness of life.

Verse. 15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no
man despise thee. He repeats the command of attending to his Doctrine, willing
him to insist upon these things, i. e. That he sharpen his exhortations and
reproofs with Authority; which Authority he commands that no Professor
despise, and that Titus do nothing that may expose him to contempt.

CHAP. III.
HE proceeds to instruct Titus in his office, to which end he adds eight
other Precepts.

Verse. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work. Precept 1. That he command all
Christians, quietly to give respect to Civil Order, i. e. That they submit
themselves to the supreme Magistrate, and the inferior Powers or Magistrates,
that they be obedient to Civil Laws, and show themselves ready and cheerful to
every good work, for the promoting of which, Magistrates are appointed.

Verse. 2. To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all
meekness unto all men. Precept 2. Of the duties of Charity toward any our of
the Church, or within it, these duties are four. (1) That they respect the
credit and reputation of others, speaking evil of no man. (2) That they be
free from strifes and contentions. (3) That they follow after moderation and
equity, being ready (when need requires) to part from their private right. (4)
That they be gentle toward all, even the worst of men.

Verse. 3. For we our selves also were sometime foolish, disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse lusts, and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and
hating one another. He gives two Reasons why gentleness should be showed
toward some.

Reas. 1. Because we before our conversion were such, as they now are; we are
all of us by nature, upon many considerations to be blamed, yet we desired to
be treated courteously and mildly by all: Therefore let us deal accordingly
with those who are not yet converted: He sets down five diseases of our
Natures. (1) We were foolish, because all the wisdom of men is mere vanity,
so long as we know not God, for we are ignorant of the right rule, and the
true fountain, and the due end of our actions. (2) Disobedient, Because men by
nature, do nothing of those things which either God or conscience command, but
that which pleases themselves. (3) Straying, viz. from the true way which leads
to eternal life, and being deceived with errors, they go further off from God
daily. (4) Serving, with delight, diverse lusts and pleasures, which reign
together, and as it were, by turns challenge a dominion over all the
unregenerate. (5) We were destitute of the true love of God, living in malice
and envy, rejoicing in the hurt, and sorry for the good that befalls our
neighbor: hating one another, when all of us were most worthy to be hated of
God.

Verse. 4. But after that the kindness, and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared, Reas. 2. Because we, although perverse, yet at length were converted
by the Grace of God: Therefore ought we to use gentleness toward those that
are unconverted, and hope well of them, who may possibly be converted by the
same Divine Grace.

Kindness] He explains this reason, and commends the grace that was showed to
us in our conversion, and proves it by eleven Reasons.

Reas. 1. From the more remote cause, viz. the goodness and kindness of God,
which rejoices to put forth it self for our advantage, and to communicate good
to us.

Reas. 2. From the nearer cause, which is (...), the love of God, wherewith God
is affected to mankind above all other creatures.

Reas. 3. From the instrumental cause, or the manner of revealing the Gospel,
which has no less graciously shined forth upon us, and without our
procurement, than the Sun (from whence the similitude of shining forth or
appearing is fetched) rises upon us without our help.

Reas. 4. From the next cause of our conversion, which is the effectual
manifestation of God, as a Savior, made to us, who as soon as he manifests
himself to our hearts, not as our Judge to condemn us, but as our Savior, to
save us, by this manifestation of himself he draws our hearts to him, and
converts us.

Verse. 5. Not by works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost. Reas. 5. By way of removing all our works, and all merit in us,
which either went in time before our effectual calling, or which could be
foreseen and considered, as if we had done them.

Reas. 6. Expressly affirming that mercy is the cause of salvation,

Reas. 7. Making God the Author of the Sacraments, or the external means of
salvation, and also the Author of our regeneration, and so of the internal
means whereby we are led to salvation (conceive the same of other means) which
are not from our selves, but the Holy Ghost, or God the sole Author, who alone
without us instituted the layer of Baptism for a Sacrament, and the grace
signified by Baptism ( viz. the washing of us from the filth of our sins, and
the renewing of the Image of God in righteousness and holiness) he alone works
in us.

Verse. 6. Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior.
Reas. 8. From the meritorious cause of the graces of the Spirit, plentifully
shed upon us, which is Jesus Christ our Savior, both the fountain from whom,
and the chanel through whom, the grace of God is conveyed to us.

Verse. 7. That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. Reas. 9. From the nature of free
Justification, seeing we are justified not by works, but by the grace of
Christ.

Reas. 10. From the manner of entering upon life eternal, to the possession
whereof, we are admitted, not as buyers or Merchants, but as heirs appointed.

Reas. 11. From the instrumental cause, hope, or faith, which rely upon the
free promises of God (not any of our merits) and altogether exclude our works,
so that we are made heirs of life, according to the hope, which the promises
of God have given to us.

Verse. 8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, That they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain
good works; these things are good and profitable unto men.

9. But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentious, and
strivings about the Law, for they are unprofitable, and vain.

The third Precept is this, That he conjoyn with the Doctrine of faith, the
Doctrine of good works, proceeding from faith, and urge it with Authority, and
see that the faithful maintain, or be Patrons of good works, seeing life is
freely bestowed upon them: He gives two Reasons of the Precept. Reas. 1.
Because this saying concerning this Precept is a faithful saying, or worthy to
be believed, and most necessary and true, which cannot frustrate or deceive
those that obey it.

Good] Reas. 2. Because this kind of Doctrine is good and profitable unto men,
because it tends to the glory of God, the confirmation of our selves, touching
the certainty of salvation, and to the edification of others in the faith, and
the conversion of Infidels.

Foolish] Precept 4. That he restrain foolish questions, wherewith men use to
entangle themselves, and to hinder themselves from holding any thing firmly in
the known truth: Such are Genealogical questions, or Chronological, and
contentious disputations, and strivings about Law-ceremonies, or the like.

For they are] He adds the Reason, Because though those questions make a show
of wisdom, yet they are foolish and vain, and unprofitable, nothing tending to
edification in faith and holiness of life.

Verse. 10. A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition,
reject: Precept 5. Wherein the Apostle enjoins Titus to reject by
Excommunication the man that is an Heretic, or that holds contrary to sound
Doctrine, and makes a division or sect in the Church, or breaks the unity of
the Church by any error of his (when he is openly convicted before the
Presbytery, and admonished the first and second time) and neither trouble
himself and the Church, more than needs, with the disputations of such kind of
men, or spend that time which is appointed for instructing of the Chuch, in
vain disputations with these perverse men.

Verse. 11. Knowing that he that is such, is subverted and sins, being
condemned of himself. He subjoyns a Reason, because it is in vain to dispute
against one convinced of obstinacy already; for he has fallen from the truth,
and is so overthrown, that he will not endure to be edified any longer, and
rejecting the light offered in the admonishing of him, he makes it plainly
appear that he does violence to his own conscience.

Verse. 12. When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to
come unto me to Nicopolis, for I have determined there to Winter. Precept 6.
Concerning private affairs, whereby he recalls Titus from Crete, and wills him
to come to Nicopolis, where the Apostle seems not to have been when he wrote
these things (as the addition of some unskilful Scribe has set it down in the
end of the Epistle) but there he intended to Winter.

Verse. 13. Bring Zenas the Lawyer, and Apollos on their journey diligently,
that nothing be wanting unto them. Precept 7. Concerning private matters also,
That he would assist Zenas and Apollos in their journey, men very well skilled
in the Scripture, but no wise wealthy.

Verse. 14. And let ours also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses,
that they be not unfruitful. Precept 8. That he instruct not only the
faithful amongst the people, but also the Preachers of the Gospel, or those
that are of the Pastoral order, that they go before others in the communication
of their goods, and distributing according to necessity. The reason whereof is
given, lest whilst they exhort others to good works, they themselves should be
without fruit.

Verse. 15. All that are with me salute thee. Greet them that love us in the
faith. Grace be with you all. Amen. He concludes the Epistle, (1) With
commendations sent to Titus from the Brethren. (2) With salutations sent from
himself to the faithful in Crete. (3) With an Apostolical benediction, where
he comprehends not Titus only, but the Churches also, to whose use this
Epistle was written, sealing up his wish, and the truth of the whole Doctrine,
with his AMEN.

The Epistle of Paul to PHILEMON, Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
PHilemon, one of the Colossian Pastors had a servant called Onesimus, who
being guilty of theft, came to Rome, and by the special providence of God, upon
his hearing of Paul, (who preached the Gospel at Rome in bonds) he is
converted to the Faith: This Onesimus the Apostle sends back to his Master
Philemon, and earnestly with many Arguments pleads his pardon, that he might
be received into favor; And because the Holy Ghost, in the business of
Onesimus, would set forth an instance, both of his divine love, and of our duty
toward penitent sinners, though of the meanest rank amongst men; therefore for
the universal and perpetual edification of the Church, God would admit this
among the other Canonical Epistles.

THe parts of the Epistle are three: The first is a Preface accommodated to the
purpose in hand, to verse. 8. The second contains the Arguments of his request,
that Onesimus might be restored, to verse. 21. The third is the Epilogue or
Conclusion.

Verse. 1. Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto
Philemon our dearly beloved, and fellow laborer. The direction of this Epistle
has the same persons sending their salutations, as the Epistle to the
Colossians has, which together with this, seems to be written and sent by
Tychicus, and this Onesimus; whom the Apostle (now he is converted) commends
to the Colossian Church, Chap. 4.7, 8, 9.

Philemon made no doubt of Paul's Apostleship: Therefore of that the Apostle
makes no mention, but of his bonds which he accounted honorable for the
Gospel of Christ; he adjoyns his brother Timothy to himself; as a partner in
his request: First, He calls Philemon Beloved, Then, his fellow laborer, viz.
in the preaching of the Gospel, that he might make way for the reconciling of
Philemons mind.

Verse. 2. And to our beloved Apphia and Archippus our fellow-souldier, and to
the Church in thy house:

3. Grace to you, and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

He salutes Apphia the wife of Philemon, beloved in Christ, because it was her
business in common with her Husband to receive this fugitive servant; he adds
his salutations to the whole household, which Philemon governed as a Church; And
to Archippus the Pastor of the Church, and partner with Philemon, that he
might have the more assistants in his request, all which he salutes with his
Apostolical benediction.

Verse. 4. I thank my God, making mention of th^e always in my prayers. Further
he endeavors the good will of Philemon, by four Arguments in the remaining
part of the Prologue.

Argum. 1. He gives thanks for the gifts of the Holy Ghost bestowed upon
Philemon, and also prays for the increase of his gifts.

Verse. 5. Hearing of thy love and faith which thou have toward the Lord Jesus,
and toward all Saints: Argum. 2. Particularly from the commendation of his
Faith in Christ, and his love flowing therefrom, toward all men, especially
toward the Saints: which two comprehend the whole perfection of a
Christian-man, and this is the matter of his thanksgiving for Philemon.

Verse. 6. That the communication of thy Faith may become effectual by the
acknowledging of every good thing, which is in you in Christ Jesus. Argum. 3.
By way of Prayer, That his Faith might show forth its efficacy in good fruits,
that to the honor of Christ, the sincere Grace of Christ abiding in him and
his wife might be known to all, and this is the matter of his prayer for
Philemon.

Verse. 7. For we have great joy, and consolation in thy love, because the
bowels of the Saints are refreshed by thee, Brother. Argum. 4. From the
rejoicing which he had in this, that Philemon was so helpful to the necessity
of the Saints, that they all acknowledged their bowels to be refreshed by him.

The Second Part.
Verse. 8. Wherefore though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that
which is convenient; The second part of the Epistle follows, wherein the
Apostle requests that Philemon would take Onesimus his fugitive servant, into
his favor: The Arguments which he uses to this end are fourteen.

Argum. 1. By the right of an Apostle I can command, that which is thy duty:
Therefore Onesimus is to be received into favor, when I shall have showed
thee thy duty in this matter.

Verse. 9. Yet for loves sake I rather beseech thee, being such an one as Paul
the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ. Argum. 2. Though I could
command thee in this matter, yet I had rather out of love to thee, lay aside
commands, and humbly request thee: Therefore thou ought to grant what I
request touching Onesimus.

Such an one] Argum. 3. Thou ought to do that for Paul, now aged, and in
bonds for Christ, which is acceptable to him, seeing he humbly requests of
thee that which is honest, and may easily be done: Therefore thou ought to
grant what I require concerning Onesimus.

Verse. 10. I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my
bonds. Argum. 4. My request is for Onesimus thy servant, whom, while I lie in
bonds, I have set at liberty from the bonds of Satan, by the Gospel, to the
Faith of Christ, and whom I esteem no less than my own Son: Therefore receive
him.

Verse. 11. Which in time past was to thee unprofitable: but now profitable to
thee, and to me. Argum. 5. Although formerly before his conversion, Onesimus
was unprofitable to thee, yet hereafter he will prove a faithful and diligent
servant, in performing the duties of his condition: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 12. Whom I have sent again: thou therefore receive him that is mine own
bowels. Argum. 6. Thou shall refresh my bowels if thou courteously receive
Onesimus, but if otherwise, thou art discourteous toward me: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 13. Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might
have ministered unto me in the bonds of the Gospel.

14. But without thy mind would I do nothing: that thy benefit should not be
as it were of necessity, but willingly.

Argum. 7. I have so great an opinion of Onesimus his faithfulness in his
service, that I should commit my self and affairs to his fidelity, and should
make use of him, had I not rather obtain that courtesy upon thy offer, than
extort it upon any necessity: Therefore, etc.

That in thy stead] Argum. 8. Thou thy self Philemon art bound to minister unto
me in my bonds, in no wise to refuse thy servant again at my request, for thy
own proper benefit: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 15. For perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou should
receive him for ever. Argum. 9. By the providence of God, Onesimus his running
away for a time, will turn to thy advantage, by his constant abiding with thee
for the future: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 16. Not now as a Servant, but above a Servant, a Brother beloved,
specially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh, and in the
Lord? Argum. 10. Onesimus will not return to thee a servant only, but also a
faithful Brother in Christ; and therefore to be loved of thee, as well
according to the flesh, because thy household servant, as in the Lord, because a
Christian; For seeing I love him, who make no use of him, how much more ought
he to be beloved of thee, who art to receive the benefit of his fidelity:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 17. If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as my self.
Argum. 11. In this I shall try how much thou valuest my society, fellowship and
friendship? Therefore, etc.

Verse. 18. If he has wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put that on mine
account. Argum. 12. By way of answer to an Objection, The damage that thou have
sustained by his theft, whereby Onesimus is become a debtor, I Paul am ready to
answer; in testimony whereof, I will that thou set upon my account, what thou
art a loser by Onesimus, to that end I will that thou keep this Epistle written
with my own hand, as an obligation: Therefore he is to be received again.

Verse. 19. I Paul have written it with mine own hand, I will repay it. Albeit I
do not say to thee, how thou owe unto me even thine own self besides. Argum.
13. Thou owe thy self unto me, because converted by my Ministry, and art
bound to lay out thyself, and all thou have, in my service; much more to
receive a fugitive servant upon such equal terms: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 20. Yea, Brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord: refresh my
bowels in the Lord. Argum. 14. I shall receive fruit of thy Faith in the Lord,
if thou grant this to me, thou shall refresh his bowels and mine for Christ's
sake: Therefore Onesimus ought to be received into favor.

Verse. 21. Having confidence in thy obedience, I wrote unto thee, knowing that
thou will also do more than I say. The third part of the Epistle follows; being
the conclusion, wherein are four Articles.

(1) In the first the Apostle professes his hopes of obtaining pardon for
Onesimus, and of more favor than he had requested.

Verse. 22. But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I trust that through
your prayers I shall be given unto you. (2) Wherein he desires him to provide
him a lodging, that Philemon might know that the Apostle would come, to his
greater consolation, if he gratified him in the contents of this Epistle: In
the mean time he inserts two causes of his deliverance out of bonds, which are
the gifts and the grace of God, or the prayers of the Brethren.

Verse. 23. There salute thee Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus:

24. Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my fellow laborers.

(3) Wherein salutations are sent to Philemon, by those which were in Paul's
company, all which make to the scope of this Epistle, as also those which are
premised in the Preface, viz. to excite the mind of Philemon, to receive
Onesimus into favor.

Verse. 25. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. (4)
Wherein comprehending Philemon and Apphia under his Apostolical benediction,
he concludes his Epistle.

The Epistle of Paul to the HEBREWS, Analytically expounded.
THE CONTENTS.
ALthough Paul, (seeing he knew himself hated by all the Hebrews, not yet
converted, and suspected also by many of the weaker Believers, too much
addicted to the observation of Legal Rites) chose to suppress his name in the
beginning of this Epistle, that without prejudice they might the more easily
entertain the Truth: yet without controversy, he intimated his name by
messengers, to some chief and eminent Brethren in the Church, to whose hands
this Epistle was first to come, and that it was known, appears in the end of
the Epistle. But after demonstration of the same Spirit in this as in the other
of Paul's Epistles, the Authority of the Apostle Peter may satisfy us, who by
a singular providence of God, in the third Chapter of his second Epistle, to
the same scattered Hebrews, witnesses concerning the Epistle of Paul written
to the same, which was in their hands, and openly acknowledged to be Paul's,
which Epistle Peter there commends, with the rest of Paul's Epistles, as
divinely inspired by the same Spirit of Wisdom, as now brought into the Canon
of the Scripture, and unanimously with his other Epistles acknowledged and
received by the Church; we must of necessity own this for the very Epistle,
unless we will undervalue the faithfulness of the Church, and the Providence
of God, in keeping the Canon of the Scripture, and the Oracles delivered to the
Church.

The scope of the Epistle is this, To strengthen the Hebrews that were weak in
faith, and for the most part addicted to legal Rites, not sufficiently
instructed about the Excellency of Christ, and further also troubled every
where with persecutions by Infidels; and to encourage them against all fear, to
perseverance in the faith, and obedience of the Gospel.

The parts of the Epistle (as of the other Epistles of Paul) are two; The one
for the forming and confirming of their faith, to Chap. 12.

The other tends to holiness, and bringing forth fruits of faith in their lives
and conversations, Chap. 12, 13.

As to what appertains to the Doctrine of faith, he instructs the Hebrews how
great the Excellency of Christ is, in his Prophetic and Priestly Office.

As for the Excellency of Christ's Prophetical Office, he shows it to be
incomparable, and far to exceed all, both Men and Angels, Chap. 1.

In the three next Chapters, he makes a fourfold use of this Doctrine in a
fourfold Exhortation.

The first Exhortation is, Not to Apostalize from the Christian faith.

2 That they detract not from the honor of Christ, because of his sufferings
in the flesh, Chap. second.

3 That they constantly cleave to the Profession of the Christian faith, Chap.
third.

4 That they make haste by faith to enter into the rest which God has
promised, whilst they hear the voice of Christ, Chap. 4.

As to the Priestly Office of Christ, That the Jews ascribe not too much to the
Levitical Priesthood, and pertinaciously adhere to the Ceremonies thereof; He
proves Christ to be the chief Priest, more excellent than any typical high
Priest, even that true Melchizedeck; In the mean time he rebukes the ignorance
of the Hebrews, who could not comprehend the things he had to say touching the
Excellency of Christ, Chap. 5. From whence he draws an Exhortation to growth
in the knowledge and faith of the Gospel, Chap. 6.

He proceeds to demonstrate the eminency of Christ above the Levitical
Priests, as well in respect to his Person, as also his Priestly Office, Chap.
7, 8, 9. And in the beginning of the tenth.

This Doctrine he makes application of, exhorting them to go forward
confidently and patiently in the profession of the true Religion, imitating the
faithful Confessors and Martyrs, who departed in the faith, before the birth of
Christ, in the latter end of Chap. 10, and Chap. 11.

In the second part of the Epistle diverse Exhortations to Christian duties are
laid down, which also may be reckoned amongst the Uses which he makes of the
former Doctrine, Chap. 12, 13.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter he proves by nine Arguments the incomparable Excellency of
the Prophetical Office of Christ, especially because of his Deity. The last
whereof is confirmed with eight Reasons.

Verse. 1. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past
unto the Fathers by the Prophets, Arg. 1. Christ the Son of God is more
excellent than all the Prophets, by whom God spoke to the ancient Church, or
the Fathers; he has made our condition under the Gospel, better than the
condition of the Fathers under the Law: For first they were Prophets by
inspiration, not when they would, but as they were acted by the Spirit of
Christ, and spoke as the Ministers of God; but Christ is the Son of God, and
chief of the Prophets, who spoke by his own Authority no less than in his
Fathers Name. Secondly, Those Prophets were many, by whom heretofore at sundry
times, and in various ways of Revelation, by parts and degrees, God manifested
to the Church the Doctrine of salvation: But the Son is one, by whom the Father
once fully, plainly, and finally, has declared to us (who live under the
Gospel) his whole Will in the last times of the world: Therefore the excellency
of his Prophetical Office is incomparable.

Verse. 2. Has in these last days spoken to us by his Son, whom he has
appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds, Arg. 2. Christ
as he is by nature born Heir, so also by the eternal appointment of God to his
Mediatorship, and by special Covenant, he is appointed Heir, or Lord
Proprietor, of all the creatures in heaven and earth: Therefore his Excellency
is incomparable.

By whom] Arg. 3. By him having his being from Eternity, the Father made the
world, and all things in it, not as by an instrument, but as by his word, and
Wisdom: Therefore his Excellency is incomparable.

Verse. 3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his
person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high,
Arg. 4. Christ, so far as an imperfect similitude can manifest, is (...), the
brightness of his Fathers glory, or the beaming forth of his glorious nature,
shining in light inaccessible: In, and of the Father, begotten of the substance
of the Father, who, although the Father never was without him, nor can be, yet
he is distinct from the Father, and eternally undivided, by whom the Father
reveals and communicates his glory, as the Sun by its shining is made
conspicuous to us: Therefore his Excellency is incomparable.

Image] Arg. 5. Christ is the express Image or Character of the Person of the
Father, i. e. (as much as an imperfect similitude can instruct us) he is a
distinct person from the Father, resembling his Father in all things, of one
and the same form or essence, who represents the Father to the life unto us,
that we may acknowledge the Father to be such as the Son is: Therefore his
Excellency is incomparable.

Upholding] Arg. 6. Christ upholds, supports, preserves all creatures in heaven
and earth, by the Divine word of his power, or the virtue of his Deity:
Therefore his Excellency is incomparable.

Purged] Arg. 7. He has obtained, purchased the purging of our sins fully, as
he is the High Priest, God and man (receiving no assistance from any one) not
by any legal Sacrifice, but by himself once offered upon the Cross: Therefore
his Excellency is incomparable.

Sitteth] Arg. 8. After the expiation of our sins, by himself alone once made,
he sat down God-man, as King of the Church, at the right hand of the Majesty
on high, reigning in equal honor and power with God the Father, and governing
all things: Therefore his Excellency is incomparable.

Ver. 4. Being made so much better than the Angels, as he has by inheritance
obtained a more excellent name than they. Arg. 9. Christ is so much more
excellent than the Angels, by how much the name of Son is more excellent than
the name of an Angel or Messenger: But the name of the Son of God belongs to
Christ, and according to his Divinity by eternal Generation, the whole Divine
Essence being communicated to him: And further according to his Humanity, not
by Adoption, but this Name is given him by union, so that the same person which
was the Son of God to be incarnate, is now the Son of God incarnate, his
humane Nature being taken unto the unity of the second Person.

Verse. 5. For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee: And again, I will be to him a Father, and he
shall be to me a Son? This last Argument the Apostle confirms with eight
Reasons, whereof the seven first are taken out of so many places of Scripture.

Reas. 1. From Psalm. 2.7. Concerning Christ, says God the Father, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. From which place the Deity of Christ is
proved, that he after another and higher manner is a Son, than any of the
Angel^: A Son, to wit, by eternal Generation, which is confirmed out of Act.
3.33. and Romans 1.4. where this place is applied to the manifestation of the
Deity of Christ, which he had from Eternity, before he was manifested in his
Resurrection from the dead: For had not Christ been in himself a Son, he could
not be declared a Son to the world: And although in Scripture, some things are
said to be done when they are manifested: And so, This day have I begotten
thee, will be, This day have I declared thee to the world to be my only
begotten Son: Yet [ This day] ought not to signify only the time of Christ's
declaration, as a Son, but also his eternal and immutable Generation: For
Eternity is very well expressed by This day, whereby the present day is
signified, because Eternity is as one day, and always wholly present, wherein
there is nothing successive, or one after another, as in our time, but one
constant permanency. And here also he uses a word of the Pretertense, that
although thou hear of him as present, yet thou may understand his
Generation perfectly past, or eternal, as the shining of the Sun is perfect,
and yet it continually beams forth from the Sun: Therefore Christ is so much
the more excellent above Angels, by how much a Son is more excellent than a
Messenger.

And I will bee] Reas. 2. From 2 Samuel 7.19. Where in Solomon the type, God
promises the sending of Messiah, whom he would openly acknowledge for his Son,
and declare him so to the world.

Verse. 6. And again, when he brings in the first-begotten into the world,
he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him. Reas. 3. From Psalm. 97.7.
When God was, as it were bringing his Son into the world, by his incarnation
(as his firstborn, or the heir of all things, because of his native right over
all things) he communicates to him, as his Essence, so the glory which is
proper to God alone, commanding that even all the Angels should worship him:
Therefore Christ is more excellent than the Angels.

Verse. 7. And of the Angels he says, who makes his Angels spirits, and his
Ministers a flame of fire. Reas. 4. From Psalm. 104.5. God has secluded the
Angels from divine glory or worship, and has appointed them his Ministers, who
(as the winds or flames) might serve him at his beck: Therefore Christ is more
excellent than the Angels.

Verse. 8. But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever,
a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom.

9. Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy
God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

Reas. 5. From Psalm. 45.7, 8. God by the mouth of the Prophet witnesses
concerning his Son: 1. That he is God. 2. That he has an eternal Throne or
Dominion over the Elect. 3. That by the Omnipotent grace of his Spirit, he
perfects his subjects in righteousness, directing them justified by faith, in
the right way to eternal life. 4. That Christ the Son of God, as he is God, so
he was to become man, when these things were foretold. 5. That one part of
that Covenant of grace, which he entered into with his Father, was, that as
man, and the chief head of the Covenanters, his Father should be his God. 6.
That he was to be anointed with the unction of the Holy Ghost (by whom all
joy and happiness is communicated to his subjects) witho^t measure, that of his
fullness, all his fellows, the Elect of God, might partake as much as is
sufficient: Therefore Christ is more excellent than the Angels.

Verse. 10. And thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the
earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands.

11. They shall perish, but thou remainest, and they all shall wax old as does
a garment.

12. And as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed; but
thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

Reas. 6. From Psalm. 102.25, 26. (1) The Son is Jehovah, by Essence God, one
with the Father and the Holy Ghost. (2) And the Creator of all things in heaven
and earth. (3) And eternally immutable in himself, always the same: Therefore
more excellent than the Angels.

Verse. 13. But to which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit on my right
hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool? Reas. 7. From Psalm. 110. Never
to any of the Angels has the Father communicated that equality of power and
honor, and victory over all the common enemies of the Father, and of the Son,
which he has to Christ the Messiah, his Son, Mediator, and head of the
Church: Therefore Christ is more excellent than the Angels.

Verse. 14. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
them, who shall be heirs of salvation? Reas. 8. All the Angels are ministering
spirits, who are not only bound to serve Christ, but also all the Elect, or
faithful, who are designed of God, Heirs of eternal life: Therefore Christ is
so much the more excellent, by how much the Name of the Son of God is more
excellent than the name of ministering spirits.

CHAP. II.
A Double Use follows of the former Doctrine, touching the Excellency of
Christ's Person and Prophetical Office.

The first, That they depart not from the truth of the Doctrine it self, to
verse. 6.

The other is, That they detract not from the reputation of Christ, because of
his sufferings in the flesh, to the end.

Verse. 1. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which
we have heard, le^t at any time we should let them slip. The Proposition of
the first Use is this, It behooves us to hearken more attentively i. e. to
believe and obey the Doctrine of Christ, or his Gospel.

The Arguments for the proof of this Proposition are eight.

The first Argument is contained in the word, Therefore, Because already the
excellency of Christ's Prophetical Office was shown in the former Chapter:
Therefore ought we the more attentively to hearken to his Doctrine.

Le^t at any time] Arg. 2. Unless we attend diligently to his Doctrine, there
is danger that we let it slip, that the truth of it get from us, and that we
falling from it, be undone: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 2. For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience, received a just recompense of reward. This he
confirms by a comparison of Law and Gospel, wherein many other Arguments are
comprehended.

Argum. 3. If the Law promulgated by the Ministry of Angels, or Messengers
(whose service God made use of) was accounted firm, stable, authentic, divine
and inviolable, much more the Gospel published by Christ the Son, ought to be
accounted such: Therefore ought ye to obey the Doctrine of Christ the Son of
God.

And every] Argum. 4. If every transgression against the Law (which is the
Doctrine of deserved death) received a just reward, or the recompense of a
capital punishment, we cannot escape destruction, if we neglect the Gospel of
free salvation: Therefore ought we to give the more attention to the Gospel of
Christ.

Verse. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him,

4. God also bearing them witness, both with signs, and wonders, and with
diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will?

Argum. 5. Confirming the former, The Gospel was immediately published by the
Lord Jesus Christ himself, while he was upon earth, and was preached to the
Church with authority by the Apostles, who were eye and ear-witnesses of his
Doctrine; And moreover it was confirmed, with all kinds of gifts of the Spirit,
and several miracles accompanying the preaching of the Apostles, the testimony
of the divine Seal being added, as it were, from Heaven: Therefore except we
attend the more carefully to his Doctrine, we cannot escape unpunished for the
neglect of so great salvation thus confirmed unto us.

Verse. 5. For unto the Angels has he not put into subjection, the world to
come, whereof we speak. The new condition of the world under Messiah, or the
restoring of the world into the Grace of the Messiah, (whereof we spoke from
the sixth verse of the former Chapter) is not put in subjection unto Angels, but
to Christ the Son of God: Therefore if it was a wickedness not to hearken
attentively to Angels (which are servants) how much more heinous will it be to
despise the most powerful King of the restored world? The Church (as it were a
new world, to be gathered by the Gospel) or the new condition of the Creature
under Messiah, is called the World, Because all the glory which now appears in
the Ornament of the Universe, shines more gloriously, when it is converted into
our use by Christ: It is called the World to come, for the perfection of its
renovation, yet not to be perfectly so, but in the world to come; Christ
indeed has now begun to make all things new in his own, and for their sake,
but what he has begun, he will not completely perfect till the last day,
when the Creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
liberty of the Glory of the Sons of God.

The Second Part.
Verse. 6. But one in a certain place testified, saying, what is man that thou
art mindful of him; or the Son of man that thou visitest him? Confirming this
Argument he passes to the second part of the Chapter, that he may prove that
the incarnation of Christ, or his sufferings in the flesh (which was an offense
to the Hebrews) derogate nothing from the excellency of him: The Arguments
produced to this end are fourteen, whence he infers the conclusion to be
proved, in the first verse of the following Chapter, by an admonition to
consider, what an one Christ is, i. e. how excellent he is in the offices of
his Apostleship, or of his Prophetical and Priestly office, wherein he humbled
himself and suffered.

Argum. 1. From Psalm. 8.5. to this purpose, The man Christ is highly accounted
of with God, and other men are subjected because of him, if the Majesty of God,
and the Magnificence of his works, be compared with the meanness of humane
nature, or if it be considered, how great God is, and how eminent his other
works, and how mean and low man is: Therefore the excellency of Christ as man,
ought not to be lessened with us, because of the infirmities and sufferings of
the humane nature which he took.

Verse. 7. Thou made him a little lower than the Angels, thou crownedst him
with glory, and honor, and did set him ruler over the works of thy hands.
Argum. 2. From Psalm. 8.6. Although Christ in the time of his humiliation, was
made lower than the Angels, in respect to his sufferings in the flesh, yet that
humiliation was not perpetual, but for a short time, and only in part, in
respect to the humane nature that suffered: Because the price of Redemption
being paid, he was raised from the dead, exalted to the right hand of God, and
crowned with glory and honor, declared Lord and King over all the works of
God: Therefore we ought not to detract from him because of his sufferings in
the flesh.

Verse. 8. Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet. For in that
he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under
him. But now we see not yet all things put under him.

9. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the Grace of God
should taste death for every man.

Argum. 3. From Psalm. 8.7. Christ is the Lord of Angels, even as he is man;
For God has put all the works of his hands without exception, in subjection to
him, and so amongst the rest, Angels: Therefore, etc.

But now] Argum. 4. Propounded by way of Solution to an Objection; Although yet
we see not all things subjected unto Christ, in respect to his members, which
are daily opposed by very many enemies; Yet we see, (not with the eyes of
Faith only, but even the light of reason by many tokens, and are convinced by
the multitude of miracles) Christ after his humiliation below the condition of
Angels, now crowned with glory and honor, in his own person in Heaven, and
sitting at the right hand of his Father, till all his enemies be made his
footstool, and thus we see the victory of Christ begun: Therefore we must
not detract any thing from the excellency of Christ, because of his sufferings,
either in his own person, or in his members.

A little] Argum. 5. From the foretelling of his humiliation, Psalm. 8.6. From
the decree of God, and to the fulfilling the Prophecies of Christ, it behoved
him to be humbled, and suffer death, and to this end, in a sort to be made
lower than the Angels, that he might suffer death: Therefore, etc.

Taste] Argum. 6. Not unadvisedly, or compelled by necessity did Christ suffer,
but freely, or out of the gracious good will of God toward us, he tasted
death for a short time, not for himself, but for all us, his Sons, that he
might bring us to salvation* as it is expounded in the following verse:
Therefore his estimation is not to be lessened, because of his sufferings in
his assumed flesh.

Verse. 10. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their
salvation perfect through sufferings. Argum. 7. It was agreeable to the Glory
of God, who is the Author and End of all things, seeing that his justice,
mercy, wisdom, power, and the rest of his Attributes, might be manifested
chiefly by the sufferings of Christ, that he might consecrate, inaugurate,
consummate, and every ways make him meet to be Captain of our salvation, the
more conveniently by afflictions to bring many Sons, his Elect, to life and
glory, not by his Doctrine only, nor only by the example of his life, but
also by the merit of his death, undergone for the redeeming of them: Therefore
his excellency ought not to be abated because of his sufferings in the flesh.

Verse. 11. For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified are all
of one: For which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Argum. 8. The
Redeemer and the Redeemed, He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified,
not only by the decree of God, and the predictions of Scripture, but also from
Justice it self, are of one and the same Nature, of the same Natural lump,
derived from the same Adam: For the Justice and Wisdom of God required, that
in the humane Nature, which had sinned, sin should be punished: And therefore
required that the Redeemer of men, should be truly man: Therefore the
reputation of Christ the Son of God, because of his assuming the infirmities of
humane Nature, is not to be diminished.

For which] Argum. 9. Confirming the former, The Messiah would be incarnate,
that we might be his Brethren, and that he might show forth himself a
Brother unto us; And although he is the Son of God, yet he is not ashamed to
call the Redeemed, or Elect, his Brethren: Therefore the reputation of Christ
is not to be lessened because of his sufferings in humane flesh, but rather
ought we to boast in his relation to us, and to glorify him so much the more,
because of his sufferings for us.

Ver^. 12. Saying, I will declare thy name unto my Brethren, in the midst of
the Church will I sing praise unto thee. This Argument he proves by three
Testimonies of Scripture: The first is taken from Psalm. 22.22. wherein Christ
undertakes to pay the price of our Redemption, and promises to preach the
Righteousness purchased by his Obedience to his Brethren the Elect, or the
Church of the faithful, in whose Congregations, he is present by his Spirit,
even after his ascension, stirring up joy and thanksgiving in the hearts of the
faithful, by the preaching of Righteousness.

Verse. 13. And again, I will put my trust in him: and again, Behold I, and the
children which God has given me. The second Testimony is taken from Psalm.
18.3. whence Christ is proved to be man, because put in the number of the
Covenanters, depending upon God by Faith.

Again] Testimony the third, From Isa. 8.18. where Christ is brought in by the
Prophet, associating himself with Children, as his Brethren; whom God had
chosen, and given to him to be redeemed and saved, whom he presents with
himself to the Father, to be glorified.

Verse. 14. Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood; he
also himself took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil. Argum. 10. Christ out of his
love to the Elect, the Children of God, would partake of the same humane Nature
with them, that he might by his death satisfy for them, and so abolish the
power of the Devil, which he (as an exe^utioner) has by the Law against all
sinners: Therefore the reputation of Christ is not to be diminished because of
his sufferings in the flesh.

Verse. 15. And deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life
time subject to bondage. Argum. 11. Amongst the fruits and ends of Christ's
death this is one, that he might deliver his from the fear of death, both
temporal and eternal: under which fear all sinners are held all their life
long, till they see themselves freed from sin and death, upon the merit of
Christ dying for them: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 16. For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels: but he took on
him the seed of Abraham. Argum. 12. Christ by assuming the seed of Abraham, or
humane nature into the unity of his person, wherein from eternity he
subsisted, he^ advanced the humane nature, in respect to privileges* dignity
and honor, above the Nature of Angels, which he took not: Therefore the
reputation of Christ is no^ to be lessened because of his sufferings in the
flesh.

Verse. 17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
Brethren, that he might be a merciful High Priest, in things pertaining to
God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. Argum. 13. Christ ought
to be made like his Brethren the Elect, in Nature, Properties, Affections, and
all infirmities, except sin, that his Brethren might be the more certain and
assured of his faithfulness and mercy, in the exercise of his Priestly Office,
and perpetual intercession with God for them: Therefore the excellency of
Christ ought not to be diminished because of his sufferings in the flesh.

Verse. 18. For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted. Argum. 14. Confirming the former, Christ by his
suffering afflictions and temptations in the humane Nature, was fitted by his
experience of sufferings (in whom we may trust) to be able and willing to
succor us under the like trials: Therefore his reputation is not to be
diminished because of his sufferings in the flesh. And thus, as in the former
Chapter, it was demonstrated that Christ is the true Son of God, so in this
Chapter he has demonstrated him to be the son of man; The one, true God-man;
and has removed the scandal of infirmities and sufferings of Christ in the
flesh, which all the believing Hebrews did dash against.

CHAP. III.
THe excellency of the Prophetical Office and person of Christ being vindicated
in the foregoing discourse, even under all his sufferings in the flesh; He
exhorts them now to a consideration of this excellency, that they may hold fast
the profession of the Christian Faith, and not apostatize from it, to this end
producing fifteen Arguments.

Verse. 1. Wherefore holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider
the Apostle, and High Priest of our Profession Christ Jesus. The Proposition
concerning the holding fast their Profession of the Faith is contained in an
Exhortation to a serious consideration of Christ, the Apostle and High Priest
of our Profession.

Argum. 1. Ye are sanctified, and by Faith made partakers of an effectual
calling to heavenly things: Therefore you ought to hold fast the Profession of
this Faith.

Apostle] Argum. 2. Ye have Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Apostle, or
Teacher of your Faith, sent from God, and our High Priest, who has expiated
our sins by his blood; You have him, I say, the Author of this Profession:
Therefore it is to be held fast.

Verse. 2. Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was
faithful in all his house. Argum. 3. Christ in the administration of his
Apostleship, and Priesthood committed to him, is not less faithful than Moses,
who obtained testimony from God, that he was faithful in all his house:
Therefore ought ye to hold fast your Christian Profession, Because the Hebrews
ascribed too much to Moses, and could hardly be drawn away from Mosaical
Ceremonies, that they might be brought to Christ: Therefore here on set
purpose he compares Christ with Moses.

Verse. 3. For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as
he who has builded the house, has more honor than the house. Argum. 4.
Christ is so much more excellent than Moses, and the whole Church also, by how
much the builder of the house is more excellent than the house it self, or any
part of it: Moses also is but a member of that Church, and a part only of that
house: Therefore the Profession of your Faith is to be held fast.

Verse. 4. For every house is builded by some man, but he that built all things
is God. Argum. 5. Confirming the former under the same comparison, As no house,
not part of an house is built by it self, but by another man, so neither the
Church, nor Moses, who is a member of the Church, is built by himself, but owes
his building to some higher Architect: But Christ who is proved God, is the
builder of the Church, and of every member of it, and also of all things:
Therefore he is more excellent than Moses, and the Faith and Profession of his
Doctrine is to be held fast.

Verse. 5. And Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a
testimony of those things which were to be spoken after.

6. But Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house are we, if we hold
fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.

Argum. 6. Moses was faithful as a servant in another family, to testify, and
that indeed darkly, which afterward more fully and openly was to be spoken of
Christ, and his dominion: But Christ is faithful, as Son and Heir, who is over
his house, and speaks from his own authority: Therefore Christ is more
excellent than Moses, and the Profession of his Doctrine is to be held fast.

Whose house] Argum. 7. If we firmly hold fast the confidence and hope of
eternal life, procured for us by Christ, and to be communicated (in which hope
we now make our boast) we shall declare our selves to be his house, or his
true Church, in which the Lord will dwell: Therefore the Profession of our
Faith is to be held fast.

Verse. 7. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, Today if ye will hear his voice,

8. Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in
the wilderness,

9. When your Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works, forty years.

Argum. 8. From Psalm. 95.8, 9, etc. unless you hold fast the Faith of Christ,
you will disobey the Holy Ghost, who in the Scripture forbids you to harden
your hearts, when you hear the Word of God: Or, Reject not God speaking, or,
Refuse not to subject your selves to his word: Therefore the Profession of the
Christian Faith is to be held fast.

As in] Argum. 9. From Exodus 17. You ought to attend to the evil example of
your Fathers, who out of unbeleef tempted God in the desert, who in their
sight, had made proof of his power and goodness, as his works testified, for
forty years: Therefore you ought to hold fast the Profession of your Faith.

Verse. 10. Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, they do
always err in their hearts, and they have not known my ways. Argum. 10. From
Psalm. 95. Except you continue steadfast in the Faith, ye will be Heirs of the
wrath of God, denounced against an unbeleeving Nation, and you will fall under
the same condemnation with your Fathers, who affected error in their hearts,
no^ would they learn the ways of God: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 11. So I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest. Argum.
11. Our of the same Psalm, unless you continue steadfast in the Faith, ye are
in danger to be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, or from Gods rest, by his
oath being provoked to anger: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 12. Take heed Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbeleef in departing from the Living God. Argum. 12. From the application of
the forementioned example, propounded by way of Exhortation; unless every one
of you take heed to your selves diligently, of that inbred wickedness and
incredulity of heart, ye will without doubt fall from the Living God:
Therefore ye ought with all watchfulness to hold fast the Faith.

Verse. 13. But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, le^t any of
you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Argum. 13. It lies upon
every one of you, not only to take heed to your selves lest ye faint, but
also by mutual Exhortations, while ye have opportunity, to do your endeavor,
that none of you harden his heart by the deceitfulness of sin, in any
wickedness, lest a defection in the business of Religion ensue, upon a corrupt
conversation: Therefore ye ought to endeavor that all and every one of you
be steadfast in the Faith.

Verse. 14. For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of
our confidence steadfast unto the end. Argum. 14. No man is truly a partaker of
Christ for the present, who holds not fast to the end that principle by which
we are supported, i. e. Faith, by which we subsist in our spiritual life:
Therefore ought, etc.

Verse. 15. While it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, as in the provocation.

16. For some when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not all that came out
of Egypt by Moses.

17. But with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that had
sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness?

18. And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but to
them that believed not?

19. So we see that they could not enter in, because of unbeleef.

Argum. 15. Upon consideration of the circumstances of the Text in the
forecited Psalm, to this purpose; From the words of the fore-quoted Psalm,
verse. 15. we may gather, that not all but some provoked God (for some
persevered in the Faith of the Promises, verse. 16.) but they who provoked God,
were only those, who from their coming out of Egypt continued in their
unbeleef to their lives end: and they which thus provoked God, he flew them in
his wrath in the wilderness, verse. 17. And being now condemned of unbeleef, he
shut them out from his rest with an oath, verse. 18. Who, seeing from the
history we understand, they could not enter into his rest, because of
unbeleef, verse. 19. It necessarily follows, that you, as many of you (who are
exempted from the wrath of God, and exclusion from his rest) as desire to be
saved with those that believe, and would not be driven from Gods rest, with
unbeleevers that are excluded, it behooves you to hold fast the Profession of
your Faith.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. LEt us therefore fear, lest a Promise being left us of entering into
his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. Insisting upon the
exposition and application of the place cited out of Psalm. 95. he exhorts them
to hasten their entrance into the Rest of God, by Faith in Christ: By the Rest
of God, he means that spiritual and heavenly Rest, wherein we cease from sin,
and enjoy tranquillity of conscience from peace toward God, and safely dwell
under his shadow, the beginning whereof is in this life, and the perfection of
it in the life to come: We enter into this rest more and more by faith, till
at length we obtain a full refreshment at the coming of our Lord. The
Arguments of the Exhortation are Eleven.

Being left] Arg. 1. In the midst of the threatening, Psalm. 95. verse. ult. There
is a promise left to us believers of entering into Gods rest: Therefore you
ought to make haste, that by faith ye may enter into that Rest.

Let us fear] Arg. 2. Unless you make haste in the race of your faith, to enter
into the promised rest, there is danger, lest by your delay, you be shut out,
or be found excluded: For a sloathful and idle faith is justly suspected:
Therefore with fear (which whets on diligence) you ought to hasten, that you
may enter into Rest.

Verse. 2. For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them; but the
word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it. Argum. 3. Confirming both the former, seeing the same Evangelical
promise upon the same condition is preached as well to us as them, and the word
heard did not profit them, who received it not mixed with faith, but only
those that embraced it by faith: It will follow, that this promise of entering
into rest; will neither profit us, unless by faith embracing the promises, we
endeavor to enter into rest, and on the other side, it will follow, that the
promise will advantage us, if we be careful to enter in by faith: Therefore
we must endeavor to enter in.

Verse. 3. For we which have believed do enter into rest, as he said, as I
have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest; although the works
were finished from the foundation of the world.

4. For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh day, on this wife, and God
did rest the seventh day from all his works.

5. And in this place again, if they shall enter into my rest.

Arg. 4. We that believe in Christ, have an entrance into rest, opened to us
by faith: Therefore let us hasten to persevere by faith, till we obtain a full
rest.

I have sworn] Arg. 5. Confirming the former, The Lord swearing in his wrath
that unbeleevers shall be shut out of his rest, on the contrary swears that
believers shall be admitted into his rest: Therefore believing Gods Oath, let
us hasten more and more to enter into his rest.

The works] He explains the force of this Argument, verse. 10. three ways;
First, by showing that Gods rest expressed in his Oath, Psalm. 95.11. is not the
rest of the seventh day, wherein God rested from the works of Creation, because
those works being finished from the beginning of the world, verse. 3. the rest
of the seventh day was celebrated, as it appears, Genesis 2. and so that rest of
God is past, verse. 4. But in Psalm. 95.11. David makes mention of another rest;
Therefore here is not meant that first rest of God, celebrated upon the
Sabbatism of the seventh day, verse. 5.

Verse. 6. Seeing therefore it remains that some must enter therein, and they
to whom it was first preached, entered not in because of unbeleef. Secondly, He
explains the Argument by declaring the consequence, which follows from this,
that unbeleevers are excluded because of unbeleef, from entering into rest: It
remains necessarily to be gathered (says he) that some, i. e. the faithful,
enter into it: For either believers or unbeleevers shall enter into the
Kingdom of God: But unbeleevers shall not enter, but are excluded by the Oath
of God: It remains that some, i. e. the faithful enter in.

Verse. 7. Again, he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, to day, after so
long a time; as it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. Thirdly, By showing that the rest of God expressed in his Oath, Psalm.
95.11. is not that typical rest in the Land of Canaan, which he proves,
because David, Psalm. 95.7, 8. defines a certain day, To day, so long a time
after the rest of the seventh day, and after the peoples entrance into the Land
of Canaan, viz. the day of Gods patience, so long, viz. as we hear the voice
of God, so long as we are admonished not to harden our hearts, so long as God
offers to men that hear his voice, entrance into his rest, unless through
unbeleef they harden their hearts: Therefore by Gods rest, the Prophet David
does not understand the typical rest of the Land of Canaan.

Verse. 8. For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have
spoken of another day.

9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God.

Whereof he gives a reason, because if Joshua, or typical Jesus had settled
the people in Gods rest, which David promises, then David in no wise would have
spoken in the Psalm of another day afterward, but verse. 8. he speaks of it:
Therefore some rest remains to the people of God, promised by David, besides
that typical rest of the Land of Canaan.

Verse. 10. For he that is entered into this rest, he also has ceased from his
own works, as God did from his.

11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after
the same example of unbeleef.

Arg. 6. Gods rest is the ceasing from our labor, as God rested from his
works, or it is a ceasing from sin, troubles, vexing cares, and all our
miseries: Therefore let us make haste to enter by faith into that rest, lest
any of us with the rebellious Israelites be excluded from Gods rest.

Verse. 12. For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any
two-edged sword, peircing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. Arg. 7. Confirming the former, after this manner, The word of God which
calls us to his rest, with threatening of wrath except we obey, has now no
less efficacy to save believers, and to destroy the unbeleevers, than it had
long ago; let us therefore make haste, by faith to enter into that rest, lest
we perish, as heretofore the unbeleever. There are three Epithites of the
word: (1) It is quick, because it does not lose its efficacy with the Prophets
that are mortal, who preach it, but retains its perpetual force and virtue to
all ages, Zach. 1.5, 6. (2) It is powerful, because it is the Power and Arm of
God to effect whatever it says, whether for consolation, or terror. (3) More
peircing than any two-edged sword, because as a two-edged sword peirceth into
the most inward, hidden, and hardest parts of the body, so the word of God, by
the perfect manifestation of light, pierces into the most intimate secrets of
the heart, which are meant by the marrow in the bones, and into all the most
inward faculties of the soul, that it may discover the plottings of the
sensitive soul, and of the intellective, what it intends, and what it pretends,
what every one lusts after, and by what means it endeavors the attainment of
what it intends. The word of God (I say) passes through all the faculties of
the humane soul, that it may manifest to every one, if there be any
hypocrisy, or if there be any root of bitterness or unbeleef lying hid, and
that it may propose to every one according to the Rule, not only what is within
in the thought of his heart, but also with what intention he thinks and wills;
so that they who inwardly think of Apostatizing, or indulge the seeds of
Apostasy within them, they cannot avoid the force of the Divine Word, or
decline its stroke by any Arts o^ Sophistry.

Verse. 13. Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his sight: but
all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
Argum. 8. Confirming the former, God with whom we have to deal, when we have
to do with his Word, sees all things, and what infidelity lurks within us under
the vizor of an outward profession, because all things, even the inward secrets
of the heart, are naked and open in his sight, as when a beast is so divided by
the neck and marrow of the back, that all its bowels appear: Therefore ought
we to endeavor to ente^ into his rest by sincere Faith; no^ think ye to
avoid the power of his threatenings if you do otherwise.

Verse. 14. Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is passed into
the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our Profession. Argum. 9.
We have Jesus Christ the Son of God, the great High Priest, who has now
peirced the Heavens, and is entered into his Kingdom, that he may open a
passage unto us: Therefore holding fast the Profession of our Faith, let us
endeavor to enter in.

Verse. 15. For we have not an High Priest which can not be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities: but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
without sin. Argum. 10. By way of prevention of an Objection, Although the
Majesty of Christ may strike us with amazement, that we unworthy sinners
aspire not to that heavenly rest, where his holiness dwells, yet our High
Priest is merciful, and sometime felt those temptations in his flesh which we
feel, yet without sin: Therefore we may boldly press unto him, and we ought
to endeavor to enter into that rest.

Verse. 16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need. Argum. 11. God does not
sit in the Throne of Justice upon our approaches to him in Christ, but in the
Throne of Grace, that he may communicate help to us in time of need, under all
our necessities: Therefore we ought to come with boldness to the Throne of
Grace, that we may rest under the wings of the Propitiatory, which is the same
with entering into Gods Rest by Faith.

CHAP. V.
THe Excellency of Christ's Prophetical Office, and the necessity of cleaving to
him, and his Doctrine (who is the Apostle and great Prophet of our Profession)
has been spoken to: The Excellency of his Priestly Office follows. There are
two parts of the Chapter; In the first he proves Christ to be the chief and
great Priest, more excellent than any typical Priest, that he might instruct
the Hebrews to moderate their thoughts about the Levitical Priesthood, which
they too highly esteemed of to the prejudice of Christ, to verse. 11. In the
second part ^ee reproves the slothfulness of the Hebrews, that he might render
them more attentive to the following Doctrine; And he proves the Excellency of
Christ's Priesthood above the Levitical, by nine Arguments.

Verse. 1. For every High Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in
things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.

2. Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the
way, for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity.

3. And by reason hereof he ought as for the people, so also for himself to
offer for sins.

Argum. 1. The perfections which were required in the Levitical Priests, verse.
1, 2. were joined with some notes of imperfection, and with the sins of the
Priests, verse. 2, 3. Therefore Christ which was declared a Priest without sin,
in the end of the former Chapter, is more excellent than the Levitical Priests.

Among men] The Perfections of the Levitical High Priest were four. (1) The
Levitical Priest was taken from among men, and was chosen one of many. (2) Was
ordained for men, in those things which appertained to God, i. e. That in the
place and name of the people he should administer about the worship of God,
praying to him for the people, teaching the people in the name of God, and that
he should by all possible means promote the Glory of God, and the salvation of
the people. (3) He offered gifts of inanimate things, and sacrifices of
beasts, sometimes burnt-offerings, for the sins of the people, sometimes
peace offerings, for the obtaining of benefits, sometimes thank-offerings, for
benefits received, other whiles sacrifices for special sins, By all which the
virtues of Jesus Christ's Sacrifice was dimly shadowed out.

Have compassion] (4) The fourth perfection requisite in the Priestly Office,
is a sympathy and commiseration proportioned to the greatness of the peoples
misery, wherewith they ought to be touched toward sinners, whether sinning
out of ignorance, or voluntary error and deliberate counsel.

For that] There are two notes of Imperfection in the Priesthood. (1) That
they themselves were obnoxious to the same infirmities, i. e. of ignorance, and
errors, and the miseries consequent to sin.

So also] (2) This second n^^e demonstrates the former, That they are obliged
out of duty to offer Sacrifices, no less for their own sins, than the sins of
the people; This is the first Argument.

Verse. 4. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of
God as was Aaron.

5. So also, Christ glorifieth not himself to be made an High Priest, but he
that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee.

Argum. 2. As the lawful Priests were called to the honor of this office, so
Christ was not only lawfully called by the Father, as Aaron, but also further
was acknowledged and declared the only begotten Son of God, in this Priestly
office: Therefore he is much more excellent than the Levitical Priests. The
Antecedent is proved out of Psalm 2. where the Father speaking to his Son,
verse. 7. calls him his Son whom he begot, before he command him, verse. 8. to
ask of him the ends of the earth, or intercede for the salvation of men, which
are parts of the Priests office: Therefore in this Psalm, he is not only
called by the Father to his Priestly office, but also is acknowledged his Son,
and so more excellent than the Levitical Priests.

Verse. 6. As he says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedec. Argum. 3. From Psalm. 110. Christ is appointed by the
Father a Priest for ever, of whose Priesthood there is no end, according to
the order of Melchisedec the type: Therefore he is more excellent than the
Levitical High Priests.

Verse. 7. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that he feared. Argum. 4. This Argument consists
of five Branches, which may be so many Arguments. (1) Christ is so the Son of
God, that he is man also, the Son in our flesh, the infirmiti^s whereof
sometime he felt, without sin, and so is a more excellent man than the
Levitical Priests. (2) He offered up prayers and supplications, and himself to
death, for his people, and so offered a more excellent Sacrifice than the
Levitical Priests. (3) He interceded with a greater sense of our misery and
guilt, with strong crying and tears, and so in his sympathy toward us excelled
the Levitical Priests. (4) With greater confidence he pleaded our cause than
any of the typical Priests could, even then when in the pangs of death, and
sense of the Divine wrath or curse, due to our sins, his sanctified humane
nature conflicted with the terrors of death. (5) He prayed with greater
efficacy and fruit, than any typical Priest; For he was freed according to his
prayer, from fear, which the sight of an angry God put upon his sense, and holy
reason, because having paid a sufficient price for us, all cause of anger and
fear was taken away: Therefore Christ is a far more excellent Priest than the
Levitical Priests.

Verse. 8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience, by the things which
he suffered: Argum. 5. Drawn from the former, which with the removal of the
scandal of the Cross, shows also the excellency of Christ's Priesthood; Christ
was not employed in beholding of the Sacrifices slain, and himself free from
all suffering, as the Levitical Priests in the slaying of Sacrifices, but
although he was the Son of God, yet he really felt by the sufferings in his
body, and in his soul, how hard a matter it was to expiate our sins, taught by
experience, what a difficult thing it was to perform expiatory obedience, even
to the death of the Cross, for the appeasing of his Fathers wrath, and the
satisfaction of Justice: Christ is therefore far more exellent than the
Levitical Priests.

Verse. 9. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him, Argum. 6. Christ the Chief Priest was every way
complete and perfect, in whom there was not the least thing wanting, which is
requisite in a Priest; For being now sanctified, or offered up for a
Propitiatory Sacrifice to the Father, he completed the whole price of
Redemption, or what remained, he perfected in his last sufferings, of which
price no part was paid by the Levitical Priests: Therefore he is far more
excellent than those Levitical Priests.

The Author] Argum. 7. Christ having fully paid the price of our Redemption, by
his efficacious merit, became and was declared the Author, Lord, Giver, and
Finisher of eternal life to all that believe in him, and give up themselves to
his instruction: Therefore Christ is far more excellent, etc.

Verse. 10. Called of God an High Priest after the order of Melchisedec. Argum.
8. Confirming the former, Christ is called of God (whose word is effectual) a
Priest after the order of Melchisedec, which order is far more excellent than
that of Levi: Therefore Christ is the Chief Priest, far more excellent than the
Levitical Priests.

Verse. 11. Of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing
ye are dull of hearing. Argum. 9. The Doctrine of the excellency of Christ's
Priesthood (especially as it is represented in the type of Melchisedec) is
more ample and high than the Apostle can well declare to their capacity:
Therefore he is far more excellent than the Levitical Priests.

The Second Part.
The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein, from the Excellency of
Christ's Priesthood, he taxes the Hebrews with ignorance, and slowness of
understanding, in learning the mysteries of the Gospel: The Proposition
containing this reproof is this, You Hebrews are to be reproved for your
slothfulness in not apprehending the mysteries of the Gospel, such as the
Priesthood of Christ is.

Verse. 12. For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that
one teach you again, which he the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and
are become such as have need of Milk, and not of strong meat. He gives four
Reasons of his reproof* Reas. 1. Because you have need of an Elementary,
Catechetical and Childish kind of Doctrine, even now after that for the time
which you have enjoyed the light of the Gospel, you might have learned many
things, and have been able to instruct others.

Become] Reas. 2. Confirming the former, Because ye are Children and Infants
in the knowledge of the Gospel, who have need of Milk, or to be instructed in
the Principles of Doctrine, rather than of solid meat, or perfection of
Doctrine.

Verse. 13. For every one that uses Milk is unskilful in the Word of
Righteousness: For he is a Babe. Reas. 3. Proving the former, Because ye are
unskilful in the Word of Righteousness: or ye do not well understand the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ, but are ready to conjoyn the
Ceremonies of the Law, with the Faith of Christ: Therefore are ye babes, and
to be reproved for your ignorance.

Verse. 14. But strong meat belongs to them that are of full age, even those
who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.
Reas. 4. Explaining the latter part of the second Reason, Because you want the
property of those that are at full age; for men grown up delight in strong
meat, or love the Doctrine which is more perfect. (2) They delight in frequent
exercise. (3) By frequent exercise of themselves in the Doctrine of the Gospel,
they have contracted an habit of saving Doctrine, not easily changeable, and
they have their senses, or the faculties of their mind more ready to judge of
the Truth and falsehood of the Doctrine propounded, of the benefit of Truth,
and the danger of error, that they may follow that which is good, and avoid
that which is evil: Such are not you Hebrews, although for the time, since your
profession of the Faith, you might have been such: Therefore are you to be
reproved.

CHAP. VI.
FRom the former Reprehension of their slot^fulness, an Exhortation is drawn to
perseverance, and making progress in the Faith of the Gospel.

Verse. 1. Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go
on unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead
works, and of Faith toward God. The Proposition is contained in the first
words, Ye ought to persevere and make progress in the Faith of the Gospel: For
to leave Catechetical Principles (which enters those that are unskilful in the
Doctrine of Christ) is to presuppose, and grant, that they are acquainted with
those rudiments already in some measure: Therefore he that writes to them,
need not stay in these things, but (leaving Principles) persuade them to
perfection, i. e. to persevere and make progress in the Faith.

The Arguments of this Exhortation are fifteen.

Argum. 1. As the foundation of an House, so also of Religion is not to be
laid twice, but being once laid, we must proceed in raising up the building:
Therefore ought ye to persevere in the Faith of the Gospel. He reckons up six
fundamental or Catechetical Doctrines. (1) Repentance from dead works, or from
sins: This foundation comprehends the first Doctrine, touching the Law of God,
of the knowledge of sin, and the deserved condemnation following, of grief for
sin, and the desire of being freed from sin and death. (2) Faith toward God,
which contains the Doctrine of Redemption by Christ, and life obtained by him,
and of Faith in him to salvation.

Verse. 2. Of the Doctrine of Baptismes, and of laying on of hands, and of
Resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. (3) The Doctrine of
Baptisms, containing the ground of confirming faith by the Sacrament of
Baptism, and the Doctrine of Sanctification, and Affliction, or of bearing the
Cross for the defense of the Gospel, which Doctrine is signified by Baptism.
(4) The Doctrine of laying on of hands, which was anciently done in the
bestowing the gifts of the Holy Ghost for the confirmation of the Divine truth
of the Gospel, after an extraordinary manner, in the Primitive Church, now in
an ordinary manner it is done in the Ordination of the Ministers of the Church,
of whose Authority and Office, as anciently it belonged to all the Catechumeni,
so now it appertains to all the faithful to see that they be rightly ordained,
that they may the more cheerfully submit themselves in obedience to
Ecclesiastical Discipline. (5) The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead at
the last day. (6) The sixth is of the last Judgment, wherein eternal life shall
be allotted to the faithful, and eternal death to the wicked.

Verse. 3. And this will we do, if God permit. Arg. 2. To perseverance and
progress in the faith of the Gospel; I an Apostle by the grace of God, shall,
to my utmost, endeavor, that ye may persevere in the faith, so far as it
shall seem good to God to bless my labors in the Ministry: Therefore you ought
to endeavor after perseverance and progress in the faith of the Gospel.

Verse. 4. For it is impossible for those, who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

5. And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

6. If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance, seeing they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

Argum. 3. Whosoever do not persevere after such conviction of the Truth of the
Gospel, as you have here described, but start from the Principles of Faith, and
slide into that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, they cannot repent,
nor be saved: Therefore lest ye fall into this sin, ye ought to persevere,
and make progress in the Faith of the Gospel.

They, against whom this commination is bent, are described by six Marks; (1)
They are illuminated by the knowledge of the Gospel, by whose light the
miserable condition of men, and the means of Redemption by Christ, may be
opened even to the unregenerate. (2) They have tasted the Heavenly gift, which
may be by the contemplation of Christ, and heavenly things revealed* in the
Gospel, for every the lightest taste of truth, sti^s up some relish of it,
although not always solid and permanent. (3) They are made partakers of the
Holy Ghost, which may be by some gifts common both to the Regenerate and
unregenerate. (4) They have tasted the good word of God, which may be by an
historical faith of the Gospel, and an apprehension of the possibility of their
own ^alvation, which that they may actually attain, they do not prosecute. (5)
They have tasted the powers of the world to come, in some lighter joys
concerning the life to come, which may come to pass by a temporary faith* in
those that receive the word in the stony ground with joy, Mat. 13.20. not only
our of an apprehension of the possibility of their future salvation, but also
the Probability, which they may willingly with Balaam wish for, and hope for
with the foolish Virgins, though they have not renounced the world, and their
wicked lusts. (6) After all these degrees of conviction, produced by the Holy
Ghost, concerning the truth of the Christian Religion, they fall away, or with
a total, voluntary an^ malicious Apostasy (as will afterward appear) they
revolt from Christ.

Again] The punishment which he threatens to these kind of Apostates, is
this, That their Repentance, and by consequence, salvation, is impossible,
because after this sin, Repentance never follows: The Reasons whereof are two;
(1) From their malice against Christ, because by their malicious denial of the
Son of God, once crucified, they will not be saved by his death, they abhor
that way of salvation, upon which alone Repentance and salvation depends, and
indeed, as much as in them lies, they depose Christ from the Throne of his
Celestial glory, and if it were possible, would crucify him again.

Put him] (2) Another Reason is taken from the scandal given, Because they
expose Christ to ignominy, reproach, and the scoffs of Infidels, and that by a
more cruel wickedness than they who at first through ignorance, hanged Christ
upon the Cross.

Verse. 7. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes o^t upon it,
and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is d^^ssed, receives
blessing from God. Arg. 4. To perseverance: As the fruitful earth receives
blessing from God, so persevering and proceeding in the faith and obedience of
the Gospel, ye receive blessing from God: Therefore ought ye to persevere.

Verse. 8. But that which bears thorns and briars is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Arg. 5. As the earth tilled, and
often watered, which brings forth nothing but briars and thorns, is rejected,
and nigh unto cursing, and at length is to be burned: So Apostates who have
taken in the showers of the word of God, often coming upon them, and bring
forth no good fruit, but fall back, and altogether Apostatize, are Reprobates,
and being near unto cursing, shall utterly perish, as those who in respect to
conversion and salvation are desperate.

Verse. 9. But beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany salvation, though we thus speak. He comforts the believing Hebrews
against the harshness of what he had said, and the supposition of their future
Apostasy, which the Apostle might seem inwardly to surmise, had he not cleared
himself, and adds Arg. 6. Although I presupposed danger of your Apostasy, yet
we have persuaded us better concerning your faith and sincere obedience, and
perseverance, and other graces, which have a necessary connection with eternal
salvation: Therefore ye ought with so much the more courage to persevere.

Verse. 10. For God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of love,
which ye have showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the
Saints, and do minister. Arg. 7. Confirming the former, The Justice and Truth
of God, will not suffer that the saving grace of God already bestowed upon you,
and by your constant and effectual love toward the faithful, or Saints, has
been demonstrated by works, should be forgotten, but will give you grace for
grace, perseverance, and life eternal, promised to you: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 11. And we desire, that every one of you do show the same diligence, to
the full assurance of hope unto the end: Arg. 8. By endeavoring after
perseverance, ye shall gain more and more a certain persuasion of your hope:
Therefore every one of you ought to endeavor after perseverance: And here the
Exhortation to perseverance is expressly se^ down.

Verse. 12. That ye be not sloathful, but followers of them, who through faith
and patience inherit the promises. Arg. 9. By shaking off your sloathfulness,
in striving after a deeper knowledge of the Gospel, and proceeding in charity,
you ought to imitate the holy Fathers, who persevering in faith and patience,
have obtained the promised inheritance: Therefore labor ye after perseverance.

Verse. 13. For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no
greater, he swear by himself,

14. Saying, Surely, blessing, I will bless thee, and multiplying I will
multiply thee.

15. And so after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise.

Argum. 10. The promise of the blessing being made unto the faithful, in the
person of Abraham, the father of the faithful, and confirmed by the Oath of the
great God, and experienced by Abraham's special experience, persevering
patiently in faith and hope: Therefore in the faith of the promise, and hope of
the blessing, in like manner ought ye to persevere patiently. That the force of
this Argument may appear, ye ought to remember, that this promise made to
Abraham concerning the blessing, is to be understood not of the birth of Isaac
only, but of Christ which was to be born of Isaac, and of free righteousness
and life eternal to be bestowed in Christ, not only upon Abraham, but also
upon him as the father of the faithful, and upon all believers represented in
his person, i. e. upon the true heirs of that promised blessing; as the Apostle
in this place, and otherwhere takes it for granted, and specially, Gal. 3.9,
10, 13, etc. he expressly teaches.

Verse. 16. For men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation is
to them an end of all strife. Argum. 11. Taken from the former, For as men
swear by the greater, and an oath is used for confirmation, to end strife
amongst them; So the promise of Blessedness, or Righteousness, and Life freely
to be given in Christ, confirmed by the oath of the most High God to all the
faithful in Abraham, ought to be the end of controversy betwixt God and the
faithful, lest they stumble in the Faith of the Promise: Therefore ye
believing Hebrews, thus confirmed, ought boldly to persevere in the Faith.

Verse. 17. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of
Promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath. Argum. 12.
Although the bare promise of blessedness had been sufficient, yet God moreover
interposed his oath (as a pledge) that those of Isaac, Children and Heirs of
the Promise, i. e. that he might assure all the faithful, of the immutability
of his counsel, and purpose to bless them: Therefore ye faithful Hebrews ought
the more abundantly to be confirmed, and persevere in the Faith of the Gospel.

Verse. 18. That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold
upon the hope set before us. Argum. 13. To this purpose, God has sworn, to
this end, that the faithful who endeavor to persevere, might fetch
consolation, strong confidence, and solid rejoicing in God, from two immutable
things, against all fear and misery: Therefore ye faithful Hebrews, being
animated with this consolation, ought confidently to persevere. He describes
the faithful Heirs of the Promise (who endeavor to persevere) by their
property, that under the conscience of sin, and deserved anger, they fly unto
Christ, that they may obtain the hope of eternal life which is promised in him:
By the two immutable things, he means (1) The Promise of God. (2) The Oath of
God, whereby the faithful are ascertained of the third immutable thing, i. e.
of the purpose and decree of God, for their salvation.

It was impossible] He gives a Reason of that twofold immutability, because it
is impossible that God should lie, i. e. that he should not perform what he
has promised and also sworn.

Verse. 19. Which hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the veil. Argum. 14. We Believers
have a lively hope, as a safe and firm Anchor of the fluctuating soul, cast
within Heaven, which was prefigured by the veil of the Temple: Therefore ought
ye constantly press toward the Haven of salvation with confidence. The Anchor
of hope is called sure, because it safely preserves all that hope, for hope
never makes ashamed. It is called steadfast, both because it is never
altogether dissolved, and because it abides firmly fixed and founded upon a
Rock, leaning upon the omnipotency, truth, and goodness of God, and the merit
of Christ.

Verse. 20. Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made an High
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Argum. 15. Jesus Christ is
entered into Heaven for us Believers (which was prefigured by the High Priests
entering within the veil, into the Holy of Holies) the forerunner to prepare a
place for us, and to intercede for us, that we faint not in our race, being
appointed by his Father, a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec:
Therefore ye faithful Hebrews ought boldly to persevere in the Faith of the
Gospel.

CHAP. VII.
IN this Chapter he prosecutes his intended speech concerning Melchisedec, and
also the Doctrine of the Excellency of Christ.

There are two parts of the Chapter: In the first he proves the Excellency of
Christ above the Levitical Priests in respect to his person, to verse. 11. In
the second, the Excellency of Christ above them in respect of his Priestly
office, to the end. The dignity of Christ's person is propounded, partly in the
typical description of Melchisedec, partly in Arguments drawn from thence; And
all the parts of the description concerning Melchisedec are taken typically;
but concerning Christ truly and properly meant, as it appears in the end of
verse. 3. The Marks of the Excellency of the Person of Christ typically
propounded are thirteen.

Verse. 1. For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of the most High God, who
met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him: Mark 1.
As Melchisedec was a King in the type; so is Christ a King properly.

A Priest] Mark 2. As Meschisedec was typically Priest of the most High God; so
Christ is Priest of the most High God, properly, and he himself is the most
High God.

Met] Mark 3. As Melchisedec met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the
Kings, and blessed him, as a type of Christ: so Christ is he who only can
effectually bless those that believe in him.

Verse. 2. To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all: first being by
interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that also, King of Salem, which
is King of Peace. Mark 4. As Abraham acknowledged Melchisedec by his offering
of tithes (which are properly due to God) to be a Priest, and the type of
Christ that was to come; So also therein he acknowledged Christ the Priest of
God, and God represented in the type.

First] Mark 5. As Melchisedec in the type, so Christ in truth, is first King
of Righteousness, bestowing Righteousness (for that Melchisedec the King
signifies) then King of Salem, i. e. peace, or bestowing peace, which follows
Righteousness imputed by Faith.

Verse. 3. Without Father, without Mother, without descent, having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God abides
a Priest continually. Mark 6. As Melchisedec in his typical state, or in his
historical being, is without Father: So Christ as man, born of the Virgin, is
truly without Father.

Mother] Mark 7. As Melchisedec in the type, so Christ in the truth of the
thing, is without Mother.

Descent] Mark 8. As Melchisedec in his historical and typical being; So Christ
as God in the truth of the things, is without descent or genealogy, without all
Kindred, and natural or earthly consanguinity.

Nor end] Mark 9. As Melchisedec in his historical and typical state; So Christ
is truly eternal, without beginning of days, or end of life; wherefore they
seem to be over curious and bold, who dare to search after and define, even
out of the Scripture, the Genealogy of Melchisedec, which God has purposely
concealed.

Made like] That this comparison may be known to be solid, the Apostle shows,
that all the parts of this description are to be conceived typically, and in
that assimilation wherein he represented the Son of God as Priest eternal.

Verse. 4. Now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the Patriarch
Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils. Mark 10. As Abraham (although Conqueror
of so many Kings, and a Patriarch, or a most noble Prince of the Fathers) in
paying tithes of the spoils, yet he acknowledges Melchisedec superior to
himself, viz. wherein Melchisedec was a type of Christ; So he necessarily
acknowledged Christ represented in that type, much above himself.

Verse. 5. And verily they that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the office
of the Priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people according
to the Law, that is, of their Brethren, though they come out of the loins of
Abraham: The Apostle proves this a mark of Christ's excellency, from this, That
Levi upon this very account is above his Brethren, because according to the
command of God, he received tithes of his Brethren: Therefore for the same
reason Melchisedec i^ superior to Abraham, who of his own accord offering
tithes acknowledged himself inferior to Melchisedec.

Verse. 6. But he whose descent is not counted from them, received tithes of
Abraham, and blessed him that had the Promises. Mark 11. Melchisedec, who is
not reckoned amongst the stock of the Levites; did not only receive tithes of
Abraham, but also as superior, blessed Abraham, Abraham himself, I say, who in
the name of all the faithful, first received the Promises: Therefore Christ
(whose type and shadow he only was) is much more excellent than both Abraham,
and all the Levitical Priests, which sprung of him.

Verse. 7. And without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the better. He
proves this to be a mark of Excellency, from this, that it is without
controversy, that the less is blessed by the greater: which is not to be
understood of the blessing of Praise, whereby we bless God, not of the
blessing of Charity, whereby we pray for good things one to another: but of
the blessing of Power, whereby God effectually blesses his, or of Authority,
whether ordinary, whereby Pastors and Parents by office commonly; or
extraordinary, whereby the Ambassadors of God extraordinary, by special
commission, apply the blessing of God to any one by prayer: In this kind he
that blesses, as such an one, is greater than he that is blessed.

Verse. 8. And here men that die, receive tithes ^ but there he receives them,
of whom it is witnessed that he lives. Mark 12. Melchisedec, although neither
in a Physical state, nor Civil, yet in a typical and scriptural state, received
tithes, as ever living, as the Image of the immortal God: But the Levites
receive tithes, as mortal men: Therefore Christ represented by Melchisedec, who
by nature is God truly immortal, compared with the Levites, is far more
excellent than they.

Verse. 9. And as I may so say, Levi also who receives tithes, paid tithes in
Abraham:

10. For he was yet in the loins of his Father when Melchisedec met him.

Mark 13. Melchisedec as a type of Christ, and by consequence Christ himself,
the truth represented in Melchisedec, received tithes, not only of Abraham,
but also of Levi, who was in the loins of Abraham, according to the account of
Natural Generation, when Abraham offered tithes to Melchisedec, and to Christ
represented by him: Therefore the true Melchisedec, Christ, both in himself,
and compared with the Levites, is far more excellent than they: It is true that
Christ was to spring out of the seed of Abraham, when Abraham paid tithes to
Melchisedec, but he was not to spring of him, according to the account of the
eternal Priesthood of a Mediator, whereof here he speaks, nor according to
the account of his Natural Generation, nor of his person simply, but only
according to his humane Nature, the matter of his flesh, wherein although
Christ was to administer his Priesthood, yet not as mere man, as the Levites,
but as God-man, the God of Abraham, and Mediator betwixt God and Abraham, in
which respect Christ is not contained in Abraham, but is opposed in the type of
Melchisedec, both to Abraham, and all others sprung from him, as above them,
and far more excellent: Therefore the Argument strongly holds.

Verse. 11. If therefore perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood (for under
it the people received the Law) what further need was there that another Priest
should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order
of Aaron? We have spoken of the Excellency of Christ Person: The second part
of the Chapter follows, wherein the excellency of Christ's Priesthood is proved
to be above the Levitical Priesthood; and that by seventeen Arguments.

Argum. 1. The perfection or effectual consummation of the worshipers of God,
as to the expiation of sin, Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal life,
could not be obtained by the Levitical Priesthood: Therefore the Levitical
Priesthood is imperfect, nor so excellent as the Priesthood of Christ.

What further] Argum. 2. Confirming the former, If perfection could have been
obtained by the Levitical Priesthood, there was no need that another more
excellent Priest should arise, viz. Christ, after the order of Melchisedec, not
after the order of Aaron; He leaves the Assumption to us to gather, which is
this, But there was a necessity that a more excellent Priest should arise, as
it appears from Psalm 110. Therefore perfection by the Levitical Priesthood
cannot be obtained but by the Priesthood of Christ, and therefore it is more
excellent.

The people] A Reason confirming the Major Proposition. The Law was given under
this Priesthood, and the people were exercised in its Discipline, and
whatsoever force the Law, or the Legal Covenant had, all this is ascribed by
those that are zealous of the Law, that the worshipers by this Priesthood might
be perfected, but in vain: Therefore if by this Priesthood, or the Law, or by
the Legal Covenant joined with it, the worshipers might obtain perfection,
there had been no need of a more excellent Priesthood, and another Law: But
seeing that perfection by this Priesthood could not be obtained, there was
need of another more excellent.

Verse. 12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change also of the Law. Argum. 3. Proving withal that Christ should arise a
Priest after the order of Melchisedec, not denominated after the order of
Aaron, nor obnoxious to the Levitical Law: The changeableness and the changing
of the Levitical Priesthood, has drawn along with it the mutability and
change of the Levitical Law, or Legal Covenant joined with it, that another
Priesthood might succeed, and another Law, or another unchangeable Covenant:
Therefore the changeable Levitical Priesthood is not so excellent as that of
Melchisedec, or the immutable Priesthood of Christ.

Verse. 13. For he of whom these things are spoken, pertains to another
tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the Altar.

14. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Juda: of which tribe Moses
spoke nothing concerning Priesthood.

Argum. 4. Proving withal the Levitical Law was to be changed with the
Priesthood. Christ^ concerning whom these things are said in Psalm 110. belongs
to another Tribe, and that the Principal and most worthy viz. Judah (from
whence it appears that our Lord sprang) whereof none attends at the Altar, none
has any command from Moses ^o exercise the Levitical Priesthood. Therefore
Christ's Priesthood being introduced, the Levitical is to be done away, with
the Levitical Ceremonial Law, and by consequence the Priesthood of Christ,
which sprang of the Principal Tribe, is more excellent than the Levitical.

Verse. 15. And it is yet far more evident: For that after the similitude of
Melchisedec there arises another Priest. Arg. 5. From the words of Psalm 110.
proving the same that before, Christ is another Priest from the Levitical,
between whom and Melchisedec his type, there is a similitude. Therefore is
follows that the Priesthood of Christ does not hang upon the Levitical Law, and
also because it is Melchisede^ian, it is far more excellent than the Levitical
Priesthood.

Verse. 16. Who is made not after the Law of a carnal commandment, but after
the power of an endless life. Argum. 6. Christ is made a Priest, not according
to the Law, which gave weak and carnal commandments, concerning bodily
Ceremonies, as the Levitical Priests, but after the power and virtue of an
immortal or indissoluble life, whereby Christ himself lives for ever, and can
as the author of life effectually bestow eternal life: Therefore Christ's
Priesthood is more excellent than the Levitical.

Verse. 17. For he testifies, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec. He confirms this Argument from Psalm 110. wherein the Father
declares his Son a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, and by
consequence declares the virtue of Christ's Priesthood, to be sufficient unto
eternal life.

Verse. 18. For there is verily a disanulling of the Commandment going before,
for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. Argum. 7. Taken from the
foresaid Psalm, The Law or Legal Covenant (with the Ceremonial Precepts, and
the whole Levitical Priesthood, joined to that Covenant) by reason of the
weakness and unprofitableness of it, in it self, for the expiation of sins, and
the justification of men, and the bestowing of eternal life, is abolished by
the introduction of an eternal Priesthood, viz. of Christ: Therefore the
Priesthood of Christ is more excellent than the Levitical.

Verse. 19. For the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better
hope did: by the which we draw nigh unto God. Argum. 8. Confirming the former,
The Law or Legal Covenant, under the Levitical Priesthood, although it was a
Schoolmaster unto Christ, yet in it self, it made nothing perfect, it
justified, sanctified, saved none; But the Priesthood of Christ, that better
hope, or Gospel, that good prefigured and hoped for by the faithful under the
Law, being now introduced in the room of the Levitical Priesthood, or Legal
Covenant; This (I say) brings perfection to the people of God, and puts them
into good hopes of life: Therefore the Priesthood of Christ, etc.

By the which] Argum. 9. By the Priesthood of Christ (or by that hope, better
than the Law or Levitical Priesthood) we that are at a great distance from God
by nature, all of us come near unto God, to the Throne of his Grace, which was
the privilege of the Priests only, or rather of the Chief Priest, under the
Legal types: Therefore the Priesthood of Christ, etc.

Verse. 20. And in as much as not without an oath he was made Priest,

21. (For those Priests were made without an oath: but this with an oath, by
him that said unto him, the Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedec.)

Argum. 10. The Levitical Priests, without an oath, by a Law changeable at the
pleasure of God the Lawgiver, were made Priests: But Christ, as appears from
Psalm. 110. is declared a Priest for ever, by the oath of God the Father:
Therefore the Priesthood of Christ, etc.

Verse. 22. By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better Testament. Argum. 11.
Christ in his Priesthood is the Surety of a Covenant so much the more
excellent, by how much the Priesthood confirmed with an oath is more excellent,
than that which is mutable and commanded for a time: Therefore his Priesthood
is more excellent: For where there is a Priest, there is a Covenant, the Surety
whereof is a Priest, the Covenant being legal and vanishing, had for its Surety
a typical Priest, which prefigured the true Priest Christ that was to come: But
the Covenant of Grace, has Christ the true Priest for its Surety, who first of
all bound himself to give satisfaction to Divine Justice for our debt;
furthermore that as the friends of God in the Covenant of Grace we should walk
to life eternal. There are other offices of a Surety, but these suffice for the
opening of the present Argument.

Verse. 23. And they truly were many Priests, because they were not suffered to
continue by reason of death.

24. But this man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood.

Argum. 12. The Levitical Priests were many at one time, and successively
followed one another, for one alone could not undergo all things belonging to
the office, and death did hinder that any one should abide long in his office:
But Christ alone executes his Priestly Office for ever, having no Partner, or
Successor, nor wanting any to substitute in his stead: Therefore his Priesthood
is more excellent than the Levitical.

Verse. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Argum.
13. Following upon the former, Christ our Priest living for ever, and in the
perpetual odor of his Sacrifice interceding for his, is able to save and
perfect to the utmost, or every way to accomplish the sanctification and
salvation of all the faithful, or of all that come in to him; But the Levitical
Priests could not do that: Therefore his Priesthood is more excellent than the
Levitical.

Verse. 26. For such a^ High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made higher than the Heavens. Argum. 14. Christ as a
Priest, as it became our only Redeemer, has more excellent qualities of his
person, and a more excellent condition than any of the Levitical Priests:
Therefore his Priesthood is more excellent than theirs: As for the qualities of
his person, (1) He is holy, both in his nature, and in his desire, wholly
devoted to the glory of God the Father. (2) He is harmless, who does injury to
no man nor creature. (3) He is undefiled; first he is free from the pollution
or blot of all sin, both of his own and others. (4) He is separated from
sinners, i. e. No ways obnoxious to sin, or so far from sin, that he cannot
be a sinner. As to the state or condition of his person, his is higher than
the Heavens, and all creatures therein, for he is raised above the Visible
Heavens in his body, exalted to a fellowship with the Father in his Throne.

Verse. 27. Who needs not daily as those high Priests, to offer up sacrifice,
first for his own sins, and then for the peoples: for this he did once when he
offered up himself. Argum. 15. Following upon the former; Christ is not
necessitated to offer Sacrifice for his own sins, who had none, or to offer
Sacrifice often for the sins of the people, it was sufficient to offer himself
once: But it was necessary for the Levitical Priests, daily to offer, both for
their own and the peoples sins: Therefore his priesthood is more excellent than
the Levitical.

Offered up himself] Argum. 16. The Sacrifice of Christ was not of any cattle
or brute beasts, but he offered up himself, and to the offering of this
Sacrifice, there could not be any fitting and worthy Priest besides himself;
he alone offered up himself, but the Levitical Priests offered cartel, which
men could perform: Therefore Christ's Priesthood is more excellent than the
Levitical.

Verse. 28. For the Law makes men Highpriests which have infirmity, but the
word of the oath which was since the Law, makes the Son, who is consecrated
for evermore. Argum. 16. Is taken from a six-fold difference betwix^ the
Levitical or Legal Priesthood, and the Evangelical Priesthood of Christ. (1)
The constitution of the Levitical Priesthood proceeds from the Law, which may
be changed; but the constitution of the Evangelical Priesthood, or of Christ,
flows from the word of the Oath, which cannot be changed, because the Oath of
God is unchangeable. (2) The Levitical Law admits many to the Priesthood,
the Gospel only one, that is Christ. (3) The Law admits one man to succeed
another; the Gospel admits one only without a Successor, viz. Christ, the
Son of God. (4) The Levitical Law admits men to be Priests, that labor with
infirmities, i. e. obnoxious to sin, who cannot make their Sacrifice effectual
to appease God, or the blessing which they pronounce, they cannot really confer
upon those whom they bless; but the Evangelical Word has ordained Christ (the
Omnipotent Son of God) who is able in all things to make his Priesthood
effectual. (5) The Law appoints temporary Priests, who are consecrated only for
the short time of their life; but the Gospel has the only Son; who is
consecrated for ever. (6) The Levitical Law went before, nor was the Law Gods
ultimate determination touching Priests; but the Gospel, or the word of the
Oath, succeeded after the Law, as Gods ultimate determination: Therefore the
Priesthood of Christ is more excellent than the Levitical: All tends to this,
that the believing Hebrews, seeing the weakness and abolition of the Levitical
Priesthood, and the excellency of Christ's, might renounce their Legal Rites,
and more firmly cleave unto Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
HE prosecutes the same Argument: There are two parts of the Chapter: In the
first he proves the excellency of Christ's Priesthood above the Levitical, in
four Arguments, to verse. 7.

In the second he proves the New Covenant to excel the Old: Concerning the
whole Chapter he prefaceth, that in it is contained the sum of the whole
comparison betwixt the Priesthood of Christ, and the Levitical.

Verse. 1. Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum: we have
such an High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty
in the heavens. Arg. 1. Christ our High Priest is such, and of so great
dignity, that he sits King at the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty of
God the Father in the heavens, equal to the Father in power and glory; He
leaves us the other part of the Comparison, as sufficiently clear, concerning
the Levitical Priest, that he is not such an one: Therefore the Priesthood of
Christ is more excellent than the Levitical.

Verse. 2. A Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched, and not man. Arg. 2. Christ is the Minister of that Sanctuary in
the heavens, where he sits King in his Throne, and all holy things which
appertain to the worship of God, and the salvation of man, not faintly, but
effectually acting the part of a Priest in Heaven, although he is a Royal
Priest as to the dignity of his Person, and the manner of his Administration,
yet as a Minister as pertaining to his Mediatory Office: Such are not the
Levitical Priests on earth, but only Ministers: Therefore the Priesthood of
Christ is more excellent than the Levitical.

Of the true Tabernacle] Arg. 3. Christ is in heaven the Minister of that true
Tabernacle which the Lord has pitched, and not man, viz. of his body (which
Christ himself compared to a Tabernacle) and is figured by the typical
Tabernacle: which true Tabernacle of his body, the Holy Ghost miraculously
formed and prepared for him in the womb of the Virgin: And Christ now
ministering in Heaven, represents that body to the Father; and his Humanity
wherein he suffered, and offers to him continually interceding for us in the
same body. But the Levitical Priests are only Ministers of the typical
Tabernacle which man has built: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 3. For every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices;
wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. He
proves that Christ does constantly offer up the true Tabernacle of his body to
God the Father, by three Reasons:

Reas. 1. Because seeing that every Priest is ordained to offer up gifts and
sacrifices, it is necessary that Christ have somewhat to offer; But besides his
intercession, and the presenting of his sacrificed body to the Father, Christ
has nothing in Heaven which may reconcile God: Therefore the true Tabernacle
of his body is that only which Christ offers to God in the Celestial Sanctuary.

Verse. 4. For if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest, seeing that
there are Priests that offer gifts according to the Law: Reas. 2. Because if
he was on earth, he could not be a Priest by the Law, to offer, to wit,
those things which the Law prescribes to the Priests, viz. Gifts* and typical
Sacrifices: Therefore that true Tabernacle of his body only remains, which
Christ offers in his heavenly Sanctuary.

Verse. 5. Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses
was admonished of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle. For see
(says he) that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee
in the Mount. Reas. 3. Confirming the former, because Priests according to the
Law, serve on earth, only unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, for
their Ministry was bound to the Tabernacle, or the Temple of Jerusalem, and is
employed in the administration of figures and typical Ceremonies, as it appears
by the Levitical Law: Therefore Christ, seeing he cannot offer up any typical
Sacrifices by the Law, and if he was upon earth, neither could he be a
Priest by the Law, and seeing now he is in heaven, and therein exercises his
Priesthood, it is necessary that he administer about those heavenly things,
figured by those Legal shadows, to wit, the body and substance of all
Ceremonies, which he also does, representing constantly the true Tabernacle of
his body unto God, and dispensing unto us spiritual benefits procured for us,
by the offering of his body. The testimony proving the former is Exodus 25.40.
from whence under the name of a Tabernacle, God will not only have the
Tabernacle, but all things appertaining to the Levitical Priesthood, to be
representations of heavenly things, viz. Of Christ's Priesthood, and his
benefits.

Verse. 6. But now has he obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also
he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better
promises. Arg. 4. To prove the excellency of Christ's Priesthood above the
Levitical, from the excellency of the New Covenant above the Old: Because
Christ has obtained so much the more excellent Ministry above the Levitical,
by how much the Covenant whereof Christ is Mediator is more excellent, and
established upon better promises, than the Covenant was under the Levitical
Priesthood, For the Covenant under the Levitical Priesthood, as to its
external form, was a Covenant of Works, established upon Conditional promises
of external things; but the Covenant under Christ's Priesthood, is the Covenant
of Grace, freely promising Christ, with all his benefits, to Believers, or the
parties in Covenant: And it is the Office of the Priest to intercede betwixt
God and men, and to confirm the Covenants between them, by the offering of
Sacrifice, as also to endeavor that men may enjoy the Divine Promises.
Wherefore how much better the Covenants have been, by so much the Priesthood
it self is to be esteemed more excellent and worthy.

The Second Part.
Verse. 7. For if that First Covenant had been faultless, then should no place
have been sought for the Second. The second part of the Chapter follows;
wherein he confirms this Argument in the parts of it: First, he proves that
the New Covenant of the Gospel is more excellent than the old legal Covenant
which is abolished: by six Reasons.

For if] Reas. 1. Grounded upon the Proposition connexed; The former Covenant
under the Levitical Priesthood was imperfect, wherein something was wanting,
and something might be taxed, not indeed in respect to it self, but in respect
to its efficacy and virtue, and that not from any fault in the Covenant, but
because of the weakness of those that were under that Covenant: Therefore the
former Covenant was less excellent than this that is New.

Then should no place] Reas. 2. Confirming the former, Because the former
Covenant was to be done away, and the New brought into its place, which had
not been, had it not been imperfect: Therefore that former is more imperfect,
and this New one more excellent.

Verse. 8. For finding fault with them, he says, Behold the days come (says
the Lord) when I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the
house of Judah. Reas. 3. Confirming the former Reasons, Because the former
Covenant by reason of the weakness of the parties in Covenant to perform the
Law, which was the condition of the Covenant, could not make the Covenanters
faultless, or free them from the accusation of God: but a better Covenant and
more efficacious was found out by God, for Justification, Sanctification, and
Salvation: Therefore the former Covenant is less excellent than the New one.

Verse. 9. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the
day when I took them by the hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt,
because they continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the
Lord. Reas. 4. Because the New Covenant bears no similitude with that Covenant
which God made with the people in Mount Sinai, when he brought them out of
Egypt, whereof Ier. 31.31. For that, though it wanted not some obscurity in its
signification of Grace which was to be obtained in Christ, represented by the
Sacrifices, yet it had the external form of a Legal Covenant, and an express
condition of full Obedience, to be performed to all Gods commandments, as
appears by the form of it, Exodus Chap. 19. and 20. Ier. 17.23, 31, 32, etc.
But the New Covenant (as will by and by appear) is free from the condition of
works, both in respect to him that is to enter into covenant, as also in
respect to him who made the covenant.

Because they] Reas. 5. The Covenanters according to the Old Covenant, may fall
away, and have done so, and may frustrate that covenant, and have done so: But
the New Covenant, as shall appear, is of perpetual Grace, according to which
the true covenanters, or believers, have never fallen away, nor can they fall
away, because of Gods Grace, nor can they frustrate the New Covenant* because
of the fear which God puts into their hearts, that they may not depart from
him, Ier. 32.40. Therefore the New Covenant is more excellent.

I regarded] Reas. 6. The Covenanters according to the Old Covenant, abusing
the conjugal goodness of God, and committing adultery with other Gods in their
Idolatry, according to the conjugal power and dominion which God had over them,
might justly be despised, rejected and condemned by God: It is not thus with
those that are under the New Covenant: Therefore the New Covenant is more
excellent, whereof Christ is the Mediator and Surety.

Verse. 10. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their minds, and
write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to
me a People. Now he proceeds to the proof of the other part of the Argument,
viz. That the New Covenant is established upon better promises, and that by
reciting four absolute Promises, made to the Elect, or Believers.

I will put] The first promise is of Regeneration: which is nothing else but
the inscription of the Law of God, first upon the mind, consisting in the
renovation of the mind to the Image of God, after Righteousness and true
Holiness.

And I will be their God] The second promise is of perpetual communion with
God, arising from the confederation of Marriage right, whereby the people in
covenant become the possession of Gods peculiar love, and God becomes a blessed
possession to his people, and both these God promises: I will be their God
(says he) and they shall be my people, and I will account them for my people.

Verse. 11. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: For all shall know me, from the least to the
greatest. The third promise is of continual instruction and teaching by the
holy Ghost, so that they shall not fetch the knowledge of God from the decrees
and opinions of men, nor shall hang their Faith upon the authority of men's
teachings, nor shall stick in the bare speculation of those things they shall
hear preached (as it befalls the unregenerate, who live not under the New
Covenant) but by the means of teaching which are of divine institution, they
shall be all (as well the least as the greatest) instructed in, and endued
with a lively, effectual knowledge, love and observance of God; so that neither
in it self, nor in the estimation of believers, he that plants, or he that
waters shall be any thing, in comparison with God: But God only shall (...)
the teacher, who teaches efficaciously, and gives the increase.

Verse. 12. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins,
and their iniquities will I remember no more. The fourth promise is of eternal
remission of sins, whereby God for the sake of Christ's obedience, shows himself
reconciled to the faithful that are in covenant.

Verse. 13. In that he says, A New Covenant, he has made the first Old. Now
that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away. From the words of
Jeremy he infers a twofold consectary: The first is the Legal or Levitical
Covenant, because it is declared by the Prophet to be Old, (in the Epithet
New) it waxes old, and is vanished.

Now that] The other Consectary drawn from hence, in the times of Jeremiah the
Prophet, the Legal or Levitical Covenant was near its dissolution and
vanishing, and by consequence after the coming of Christ, under wh^^ all
things become new, it expired. Than which nothing could be more effectually
spoken, to move the Hebrews, that renouncing the Levitical Ceremonies, they
would consecrate themselves wholly to Christ alone.

CHAP. IX.
HE prosecutes the Comparison of the Levitical Priesthood with the Priesthood
of Christ, and further shows the excellency of the Priesthood of Christ: There
are two parts of the Chapter: In the first he proves by fifteen Arguments,
that the Priesthood of Christ is more excellent than the Levitical, to verse.
16. In the second part he removes the scandal of the Cross, or of the death of
Christ, by demonstrating the sufficiency and necessity of it, to the end.

Verse. 1. Then verily the first Covenant had also ordinances of Divine service,
and a worldly sanctuary. As to the first part, the seven first Arguments are so
many characters of the imperfection of the Levitical Priesthood, from whence
the excellency of Christ's Priesthood is commended.

Argum. 1. The first Covenant appertaining to the Levitical Priesthood, had
only shadowed rites of Justification, and an earthly Sanctuary: Therefore it
follows, that the Priesthood of Christ (which contains true Justification
according to the New Covenant, and an heavenly Sanctuary, as before was showed)
is much more excellent.

Verse. 2. For there was a Tabernacle made, the first, wherein was the
Candlestick, and the Table, and the Shewbread, which is called the Sanctuary.
He explains this Argument, First, By describing the parts of the Sanctuary,
and the sacred things in it, further he describes the typical rites of
Justification: The Tabernacle that Moses erected, had two parts: The forepart
was called the Holy, the inner part the Holy of Holies; in the forepart, was
the Candlestick, in the South part of the house set on the left hand: Against
it in the North part of the house was the Table with the Shewbread, so called,
because they were set before God; by which was signified that light and life is
vouchsafed to them which come unto God; And in this part was the Altar of
incense placed before the entrance to the inner part, whereby the offering of
prayers was signified.

Verse. 3. And after the second veil, the Tabernacle which is called the Holiest
of all. The veil that hung in the entrance of this part, is here understood to
be the first veil. The other veil which divided the forepart from the Holy of
Holies, here it is called the middle veil, and the inner house which was behind
that, is called the Holy of Holies; the forepart figured out the Church upon
earth, the hinder part figured Heaven, or the place wherein God manifests
himself to the Church Triumphant.

Verse. 4. Which had the golden Censer, and the Ark of the Covenant over-laid
round about with Gold, wherein was the golden Pot that had Manna, and Aarons Rod
that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant. In the Holy of Holies was (1) The
Golden Censer, which was used by the High Priest entering in once a year, fit to
signify the intercession of Christ, praying for us, and making our prayers
acceptable unto God. (2) There was the Ark of the Covenant, covered over with
Gold, whence God uttered his voice; a fitting type of Christ the word
incarnate, and opening the Counsel of God to us. (3) There was the pot of
Manna, conveniently signifying that hidden Manna (which God truly was in Christ
to the faithful, for their food unto eternal life.) (4) There was the Rod of
Aaron that budded, fitly signifying the effectual blessing, which Christ gives
to the labors of his Ministers. (5) The Tables of the Covenant were put into
the Ark, which taught us that the fulfilling of the Law is only to be sought
in Christ.

Verse. 5. And over it the Cherubims of glory shadowing the mercy-seat: of which
we cannot now speak particularly. There were Angels, Cherubims, with wings
toward each other, covering the Ark, between which wings God, as it were sa^e,
and gave out answers when he was enquired of; whereby the Ministry of Angels,
waiting upon CHRIST (The great mystery of godliness, dwelling in unapproachable
light) was propounded in the type. And because here is enough said of the glory
of the outward Tabernacle, or of the earthly place, the Apostle breaks off his
discourse concerning the terrene Tabernacle.

Verse. 6. Now when these things were thus ordained, the Priests went always
into the first Tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. The place has
been spoken of, in the next place he describes the shadowy rites of
Justification, and first of all those which the Priests daily exercised in the
forepart of the Tabernacle, burning incense, taking care for bread for the
furnishing of the Table, oil for the Lamp, and the rest, according to the Law.

Verse. 7. But into the second went the High Priest alone once every year, not
without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the
people. He proceeds in describing the anniversary rites, which were of this
sort. (1) The High Priest alone, without any companion. (2) Once a year, not
oftener. (3) Never without the offering the blood of a Calf, and an Hee-Goat,
in a basin. (4) This blood he offered for his own sins, great and small, and
for the sins of the people. All these outward, worldly and shadowy things, were
in no wise efficacious in themselves: For they prefigured the entering of Christ
into Heaven, by his own blood, the true Propitiatory: This is the first
Argument of the earthly imperfection in the Levitical Priesthood.

Verse. 8. The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of all,
was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing.
Argum. 2. Propounded by way of exposition of the next mystery. In the time of
the Levitical Priesthood, while it obtained a standing Tabernacle, and that
Ceremonial worship about the Sanctuary, the way to Heaven, or the true
Sanctuary, was not manifestly declared, as it is now under the Priesthood of
Christ, That which the Holy Ghost taught by excluding the Priests from the
inward Sanctuary: by admitting the High Priest once a year, the Sanctuary
remaining shut, all the year after: Therefore the Priesthood of Christ is more
excellent than the Levitical.

Verse. 9. Which was a figure for the time then present, in which were offered
both gifts and Sacrifices that could not make him that did the service perfect,
as pertaining to the conscience, Argum. 3. The rites of the foresaid expiatory,
and the other such exercises of the Levitical High Priest, were typical and
parabolical, and a mere pattern of those things which were to be performed by
Christ: Therefore the excellency of the Levitical Priesthood is no ways to be
equallized with the Priesthood of Christ.

For the time] Argum. 4. The things which were done by the High Priest, and the
Levitical Priests, served only for the time present of the Law institution,
viz. in the infancy and beginning of the Church, wherein gifts and typical
Sacrifices were offered: Therefore the Levitical Priesthood is far inferior to
the Priesthood of Christ.

Could not] Argum. 5. The gifts and sacrifices which were offered by the
Levitical Priesthood, could not sanctify the conscience of him that worshipped,
or take away the evil conscience of sins committed: Therefore the Levitical
Priesthood, etc.

Verse. 10. Which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and
carnal ordinances imposed on them until the time of reformation. Argum. 6.
Confirming the former, Those things which were offered by the Levitical Priest,
consisted only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal rites,
which did not commend a man to God, 1 Cor. 8.2. but only they did these
things, as sanctified in the flesh ceremonially, they might be accounted pure
worshipers: Therefore the Levitical Priesthood is nothing, being compared to
the Priesthood of Christ.

Until] Argum. 7. These gifts and sacrifices, and the other offices of the
Levitical Priests, were imposed as a yoke and burden, only till the time of
Reformation, i. e. till the coming of Christ, who would reform the imperfect
sacrifices and gifts of the old Priesthood, and they being abolished, he would
introduce a more perfect gift and sacrifice: Therefore the Priesthood of Christ
is more perfect, etc.

Verse. 11. But Christ being come an High Priest of good things to come, by a
greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not
of this building: Argum. 8. Christ is the High Priest, not of types, but of
spiritual good things, of Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation, which
were figured by the types: Therefore, etc.

By a greater] Argum. 9. Christ had a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not
made with hands, not of a common structure, viz. the Tabernacle of his body,
which was formed in the womb of the Virgin by the Holy Ghost, after a special
manner, without the spot of Original sin, in which Tabernacle the fullness of
the Godhead dwells: Therefore his Priesthood is far more excellent than, etc.

Verse. 12. Neither by the blood of Goats, and Calves: but by his own blood he
entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.
Argum. 10. Christ offered not the blood of Bulls or Goats, as the Levitical
Priests, but his own blood, and the same is made the Priest and the Sacrifice:
Therefore his Priesthood, etc.

Once] Argum. 11. Christ has once entered into the true holy place, i. e.
Heaven, and there abides, not often, as the Levitical Priests into the typical
holy place: Therefore his Priesthood, etc.

Eternal] Argum. 12. Christ has purchased eternal Redemption with his own
blood, which was impossible for the Levitical Priests: Therefore his Priesthood
is more excellent than, etc.

Verse. 13. For if the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the Ashes of (...)
Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh:

14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to
serve the Living God?

Shall purge] Argum. 13. Confirming the former, The blood of Christ purges the
conscience, partly as the conscience seeing full satisfaction made in the death
of Christ to divine Justice for it self, closes with its perfect discharge,
and rests therein; partly as the power of sanctifying the heart to the service
of God flows from him.

For if] He confirms this Argument* a minori, The blood of Bulls and other
types performed what they were appointed to, viz. Ecclesiastical purification
of the outward man, that he might be sanctified to the works of external
worship; how much more shall the blood of Christ the Antitype perform that,
which is signified by the types, viz. The purifying of the conscience from
sins, to the service of God? Sins are called dead works, because they deserve
death, and make sinners guilty of death.

By the Spirit] Argum. 14. In the Sacrifice of Christ, the Eternal Spirit, or
Christ as God, acted the chief parts of the Priest, and offered up himself as a
man without spot for a Sacrifice: Therefore his Priesthood is so much the more
excellent than the Levitical, as God is more excellent than man, and his holy
humanity than a beast.

Verse. 15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that
by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the
first Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. Argum. 15. Under the Old Covenant, neither Remission of sin, nor
the Inheritance of Eternal Life, was given to them that were called, but for
the sake of Christ's death, interceding under the New Covenant, to which end,
he being now the Mediator of the New Covenant, is ordained for all them that
are called: Therefore his Priesthood is more excellent than, etc.

The Second Part.
Verse. 16. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death
of the Testator. The second part of the Chapter follows, wherein to take off
the scandal of the Cross, he first proves the necessity of Christ's death, by
six Arguments, to verse. 25. Furthermore the sufficiency of his offering once
upon the Cross, he proves it by five Arguments, to the end.

Argum. 1. The New Covenant of Christ, is the New Testament of Christ:
Therefore it was necessary that the death of the Testator Christ should
intercede.

Verse. 17. For a Testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of
no strength at all while the Testator lives. Argum. 2. Confirming the former,
unless Christ had died, the Covenant or Testament had not been firm, for even
amongst men a Testament is not valid while the Testator is alive, but only
after his death: For while he lives it may be changed, but not when he is
dead: Therefore it was necessary that Christ should dye.

Verse. 18. Whereupon, neither the first Testament was dedicated without blood.
Argum. 3. As the Old Testament was not dedicated unto God, without typical
blood; so neither the New Testament can be dedicated or offered by way of
satisfaction for sinful men, without the true blood of Christ, the true
Mediator, the Antitype: Therefore it was necessary Christ should dye.

Verse. 19. For when Moses had spoken every Precept to all the people, according
to the Law, he took the blood of Calves, and of Goats, with water and Scarlet
wool, and hysop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people,

20. Saying, This is the Blood of the Testament, which God has enjoined unto
you.

He explicates and proves this Argument out of the History, Exodus 24.
concerning the dedication of the first Tabernacle by Blood, where Moses
sprinkled the Book of the Covenant, and the people, with the blood of Calves
and Goats, withal expounding the signification and use of the ceremony, that
that Blood was the Blood of the Covenant, or a symbol of the Covenant typically
made in those ceremonies, and truly to be fulfilled in the Blood of Christ.

Verse. 21. Moreover, he sprinkled with blood both the Tabernacle, and all the
Vessels of the Ministry.

22. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood; and without
shedding of blood is no remission.

Argum. 4. As under the Law all things were purged either with blood, or
washings, drawing virtue to purge from the Sacrifices, so that without typical
shedding of blood, there was no remission of sins: So in the New Covenant,
there can be no remission of sins, but by the shedding of the Blood of Christ:
Therefore the Death of Christ was necessary. The Tabernacle, and the Holy
Vessels, which were in themselves without pollution, are said to be sprinkled
with blood, because in respect to us, were we not purified by the Blood of
Christ, all things become polluted unto us: Therefore the use of the most holy
things must be sanctified to us by Christ, otherwise to the impure all things
are impure, in as much as in all things, unbeleevers pollute themselves.

Verse. 23. It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the
heavens should be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with
better Sacrifices than these. Argum. 5. If the types ought to be purged with
typical blood, heavenly things, signified by those types, ought to be
consecrated by better Sacrifices, i. e. with the Blood of the Mediator himself,
who in his Virtue comprehends all Sacrifices; and by consequence the Death of
Christ was necessary.

Verse. 24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands,
which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us. Argum. 6. Confirming the former, Christ is not
entered into the typical Holy place, made with hands, but into heaven, signified
by the holy place, that constantly appearing there, he might intercede for us:
Therefore it behoved him to offer up a more excellent Sacrifice, viz. himself,
as much as heaven exceeds the earthly Holy place; and by consequence his death
was necessary.

Verse. 25. Nor yet, that he should offer himself often, a^ the High Priest
enters into the Holy place, every year with blood of others: Now he proves
the sufficiency of the one Oblation of Christ upon the Cross, by five Arguments.

Argum. 1. Christ entered not often into the Terrestrial Sanctuary, that he
might often offer up himself, as the Levitical High Priest, (who offered not
his own, but other blood yearly) but is once entered into heaven: Therefore
that one Oblation of himself upon the Cross, was sufficient, whereby he was
admitted into heaven.

Verse. 26. For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the
world; but now once in the end of the world, has he appeared to put away sin
by the Sacrifice of himself. Argum. 2. Unless that one Oblation of Christ upon
the Cross had been sufficient, he must by often offering himself, die often
from the beginning of the world; for if an Oblation of the Body of Chirst ought
to have been often offered up for sin, it would have been necessary that the
Oblation should have begun, at what time sin began to be committed, i. e. from
the beginning of the world, and from that time that Sacrifice ought to have
been so often repeated, as new sins were committed after the Sacrifice, the
courses of Sacrifice being acted over and over, without number. But this is
absurd: Therefore his once offering up upon the Cross was sufficient.

But now once] Argum. 3. Christ in the fullness of time appeared, to that end,
that by his one Oblation of himself, he might abolish the sins of his people,
present, past, and to come; For to the obtaining and application of remission
of sins, to the mortification and abolishing of sins, of all the Redeemed or
Elect, there is virtue enough in the Death of Christ: Therefore his one
Oblation is sufficient.

Verse. 27. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
Judgment;

28. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that
look for him, shall he appear the second time, without sin, unto Salvation.

Argum. 4. As it is appointed of God that all men shall once die, and after
death come to Judgment, so it is appointed of God, that Christ should only
once offer up himself to expiate the sins of many, i. e. of his Elect, and that
he should come the second time judge both of quick and dead: Therefore his one
Oblation of himself upon the Cross is sufficient.

The second time] Argum. 5. Christ coming the second time at the Day of
Judgment, shall make it manifest to all the world, that he with one Oblation
of himself has most fully satisfied for sin, and that the imputation of sin,
and the punishment or misery, and whatever footsteps there are of sin, are
removed from himself as the Surety, and from his, for whom he stood engaged,
and that Salvation is obtained for the faithful, who expect his coming:
Therefore his once Oblation upon the Cross for our Redemption was complete. It
is said that Christ shall appear the second time, without sin, in respect to
his first coming, wherein though he was most free from the pollution of sin
inherent, yet he was not free from the sins of others, or ours, which were
imputed to him: And thereupon he became obnoxious to infirmity and misery,
till he satisfied for our sins; but at the Day of Judgment he shall appear
in glory, which will testify the total abolition of sin, and by consequence
will demonstrate that that one Oblation upon the Cross, was abundantly
sufficient to take away sin.

CHAP. X.
HE proceeds to extol the Priesthood of Christ above the Levitical. There are
two parts of the Chapter: In the first he proves, that the Sacrifice of Christ
once made, was more excellent than all the Legal Sacrifices, to ver. 19. In the
second part, he makes use of this Doctrine, by way of exhortation to boldness
and constancy in the profession of the Faith, and holiness of life, with
patience, to the end.

Verse. 1. For the Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very
image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offered year by
year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect; The Arguments for proving
the excellency of the Sacrifice of Christ above the Levitical Sacrifices, are
twelve:

Argum. 1. The Levitical Sacrifices prescribed in the ceremonial Law, only
contained the shadow of the Sacrifice of Christ, and his benefits, not a lively
representation of the things themselves, as it appears in the Mirror of the
Gospel from the things themselves, as now exhibited and considered in
themselves: Therefore they were far inferior to the Sacrifice of Christ,
represented by them.

Never] Argum. 2. Even the most excellent Levitical Sacrifices, yearly
performed by the High Priest, could not justify or sanctify those for whom,
or by whom, they were offered: Therefore they are inferior to the Sacrifice of
Christ.

Verse. 2. For then would they not have ceased to be offered; because that the
worshippers once purged, should have had no more conscience of sin. Argum. 3.
Confirming the former, the Levitical Sacrifices, by their often repetition,
argued their imperfection and weakness to justify the sinners for whom they
were offered: Therefore they were inferior to Christ's Sacrifice.

For then] A reason is given of the former; If those Sacrifices had justified
the worshippers, the frequent offering them had ceased, because the worshippers
purged from the guilt of sin, and quieted in conscience, by one Oblation, had
no need to repeat it often: But those Levitical Sacrifices ceased not to be
often offered, because the Law commanded that it should be so: Therefore those
Sacrifices did not justify their worshippers.

Verse. 3. But in those Sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins
every year. Argum. 4. Confirming the same thing, even their most principal
Sacrifices amongst them, carried along with them a repeated mention of all sins
past, which had been in vain, if by the former Sacrifices they had been
abolished: Therefore these Sacrifices were far inferior to the Sacrifice of
Christ.

Verse. 4. For it is not possible that the blood of Bulls and of Goats, should
take away sins. Argum. 5. Confirming also the second; These Sacrifices were
meaner (as of beasts) than that they could take away sin: Therefore far
inferior to the Sacrifice of Christ.

Verse. 5. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and
Offering thou would nor, but a body have thou prepared me.

6. In Burnt-offerings, and Sacrifices for sin, thou ^ast had no pleasure.

7. Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to
do thy will, O God.

8. Above, when he said, Sacrifice and Offering, and Burnt-offerings, and
Offering for sin, thou would not, neither had pleasure therein, which are
offered by the Law:

9. Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will (O God:) he takes away the
first, that he may establish the second.

He proves this Argument from Psalm. 40. Wherein Christ is introduced by the
Prophet, as to the time he was made man, and appeared in the flesh, publishing
the abolition of Legal Sacrifices by his Father, and that in their stead, his
obedience in the body was appointed, even to the Death of the Cross, in that
he says, His ears were opened; or, God had prepared him a Body; by both
phrases is signified, that the Son of God Incarnate, was formed to obedience
unto his Father. Forseeing the Legal Sacrifices not accepted, as not able to
expiate sins, he offers himself up to death, according to the Will of his
Father, according to the Prophecies, which in the volume of the books are
contained concerning him; and so he takes away the Levitical Sacrifices, that
he may establish the Sacrifice of Christ.

Verse. 10. By the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the
Body of Jesus Christ once for all. Argum. 7. By the Oblation of the Body of
Christ, according to the Will of God, we are Justified and Sanctified, which
could not be justified nor sanctified by the Legal Sacrifices: Therefore the
Sacrifice of Christ by Divine institution, is more excellent than the Levitical.

Verse. 11. And every Priest stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes
the same Sacrifices which can never take away sins.

12. But this man, after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever, sat
down on the right hand of God,

Argum. 8. The Priests offering the daily Sacrifice, daily stood, as Ministers
laboring, and offering the same Sacrifices, ineffectual to take away sin: But
Christ by one Oblation once offered, as Lord of Heaven and Earth, sat down, and
Reigns as Partner of Glory with his Father: Therefore his Sacrifice is more
excellent than the Levitical.

Verse. 13. From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.
Argum. 9. After the Sacrifice of Christ, nothing remains to be done for the
expiation of the sins of Believers, or the Elect, only the subduing of the
Devil, the World, sin dwelling in us, death, and a full subjection of the rest
of ours and Christ's enemies remains, that the Redeemed may enjoy a full
happiness, being freed from all their enemies: Therefore his Sacrifice is more
excellent than the Levitical.

Verse. 14. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. Argum. 10. Confirming the former: The Oblation of Christ once made,
has an infinite virtue, not only to satisfy for the sins of the Elect, or
Believers, who have devoted themselves in holiness unto God, but also
effectually to bestow holiness and salvation, gradually to be accomplished,
and eternally to endure, upon all those which were, are, and shall be
hereafter: Therefore his Oblation is more excellent than the Levitical, and
that being now offered up, nothing remains but the subduing of enemies, and the
application of the benefits procured by that Oblation, for the good of the
Elect.

Verse. 15. Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us: for after that he
had said before,

16. This is the Covenant that I will make with them after those days, says
the Lord; I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write
them:

17. And their sins and iniquities will I remember us more.

Argum. 11. The New Covenant founded on the Sacrifice of Christ, absolutely,
without any condition, promises to all the Elect full Sanctification, I will
put my Law, etc. and remission of sins, I will remember them no more; as the
Holy Ghost testifies, Ier. 31.31. etc. Therefore the Sacrifice of Christ, etc.

Verse. 18: Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin.
Argum. 12. That one Sacrifice of Christ obtains from God full pardon of sins to
the faithful under the New Covenant, that he neither leaves any place for the
repetition of it, nor to any other offering for sin: Therefore the Sacrifice of
Christ is more excellent than the Levitical.

The Second Part of the Chapter.
Verse. 19. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by
the Blood of Jesus, The second pa^^ follows, wherein he brings the precedent
Doctrine into use, by way of exhortation, consisting of diverse branches, That
with confidence in God, to ver. 23. promoting the work of Holiness in
themselves particularly, and in all the members of the Church in general, to
ver. 26. they patiently and confidently persevere in the Faith, unto the end.
And briefly, this whole exhortation, may be gathered into this Proposition;
Ye ought with confidence patiently to persevere in your endeavors after
holiness. The Arguments of this exhortation, which prove and enforce this
Proposition, are nineteen; whereof some alluding to types, so he lays them
down, that withal he may raise the minds of the Hebrews to the excellency of
the thing signified.

Having] Argum. 1. Ye have together with us, boldness by Faith in your
prayers, in this life, of entering into Heaven, and full possession after this
life by approaching unto God himself: Therefore ought ye with boldness to
persevere in the Faith.

By the blood] Argum. 2. By the blood or death of Jesus Christ, as by a full
price of our Redemption and Reconciliation, this privilege is procured for
you, that in all your necessities, ye may freely open your minds to God:
Therefore ought ye boldly to persevere.

Verse. 20. By a new and living way which he has consecrated for us, through
the veil, that is to say, his flesh. Argum. 3. Christ being made man, and
uniting himself with us in our common nature, has dedicated his flesh, or his
humanity, to this use, that ye with us being advantaged with this communion of
nature, by his Mediation, as by a new way, plain, safe, and living (which
quickens those that walk in it, and refreshes the weary) ye may come unto God,
as the Levitical High Priest entered by the veil into the Sanctuary: Therefore
ought ye to persevere with confidence in God.

Verse. 21. And having an High Priest over the house of God: Argum. 4. We have
Christ our High Priest, who goes before us in the way, bearing the iniquity of
the inferior Priests, lest the things which are done amiss by us, in our
imperfect services, might hinder our access to God, Therefore, etc.

Over the] Argum. 5. We have Christ, very tender toward us, over the house of
God, who has power to admit into Heaven whom he will, and of assigning a
place to them that are entered, as he please, and out of the treasury of his
grace to bestow upon them as much as can be desired: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water.

23. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering: (for he is
faithful that promised.)

Argum. 6. The privilege of a new and sincere heart is given to Believers, to
a full assurance of Faith, and a peaceable conscience in Christ, and to
holiness of life, which were signified by the Legal washings: ye therefore by
Faith apprehending your privilege with us, and applying to your selves the
virtue of Christ's blood, by Faith being assured, ye ought together with us, in
Sanctification of life, to approach nearer unto God, and to cleave unto him,
that ye may the more boldly persevere.

Faithful] Arg. 7. God who has promised all grace to them that hope in him,
that they may perseve^e to salvation, is faithful: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good
works:

25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some
is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the day
approaching.

Argum. 8. Unless ye diligently take heed, that by all ways and means which
make for your particular, or the Churches perseverance in general ( viz. by
considering one another, and exciting one another to love, and to good works,
by attending public meetings, and preserving the unity of the Church, etc.)
there is danger le^t a separation or Schism follow, and at length Apostasy from
the Faith, as experience testifies in the persons of some: Therefore, etc.

So much the more] Argum. 9. The day of judgment approaches, wherein to those
that persevere in, and apostatize from the Faith, a reward shall be given
according to their works.

Verse. 26. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, Argum. 10. Unless ye
persevere in the Faith, or if after the acknowledgement of the truth of the
Gospel, wilfully, or on set purpose ye fall back from the Gospel, (which is to
sin against the Holy Ghost) there remains no more Sacrifice for sin, nor by
consequence remission of sin, if so be ye rejecting Christ and his Sacrifice
maliciously, there is no more Sacrifice for sin left: Therefore lest ye fall
into this abyss, ye ought carefully to persevere.

Verse. 27. But a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. Argum. 11. There abides for
Apostates* who knowingly and wilfully reject Christ, and maliciously betake
themselves to the adversaries side, a fear of the dreadful judgment of God,
and of eternal fire, which shall devour all the enemies of Christ, and chiefly
Apostates: Therefore ought ye to persevere in the Faith.

Verse. 28. He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three
witnesses.

29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye shall he be thought worthy,
who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the spirit of grace?

He confirms this Argument with six Reasons. Reas. 1. Because the contemner of
Moses Law, legally convicted, was adjudged to capital punishment, without
mercy: Therefore much more is the Apostate to be destroyed.

Trodden under foot] Reas. 2. Because the Apostate is no less injurious to
Christ, as much as lies in him, than if he should draw him from his Throne,
and trample him under his feet.

Blood] Reas. 3. Because they esteem the most Holy blood of Christ (whereby
once as to the outward man, or the outward Ecclesiastical Sanctification, they
are separated from the world, and in Baptism, consecrated unto God) as the
blood of some common man.

Spirit] Reas. 4. Because they offer despite to the Holy Spirit, as if he was
a liar, who convinces them of the Deity and Divine power of Christ.

Verse. 30. For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I
will recompense, says the Lord: and again, the Lord shall judge his people.
Reas. 5. Because God professes himself the revenger of all sin, and of
injuries done to his people, Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36. and much more of so horrible a
sin against his Son, and also against the whole Church.

Verse. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God.
Reas. 6. Because Apostates have not to do with miserable mortals, but with the
Living God, i. e. him that is omnipotent, and always in readiness to revenge,
into whose hands, as into the hands of an angry Judge, it is a fearful thing to
fall: Therefore Apostates must expect nothing but the fearful judgment of God.
Withal he propounds,

Argum. 12. To perseverance in the Faith: Wilful Apostasy from the Faith is
joined with so many heinous Reproaches against Christ and the Holy Spirit:
Therefore take ye heed of Apostasy, and persevere ye constantly in the Faith.

Verse. 32. But call to remembrance the former days, in which after ye were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions:

33. Partly whilst ye were made a gazing stock, both by reproaches and
afflictions, and partly whilst ye became companions of them that were so used.

34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling
of your goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven a better and an
enduring substance.

Argum. 13. By suffering persecution for the Gospel, ye have long since given
a famous proof of your constancy in the Faith, hoping for that reward which is
laid up for you in Heaven: Therefore ought ye hereafter to persevere
constantly in the Faith. He opens this Argument, by minding them how presently
upon their receiving the Faith of Christ, being illuminated by the word and
Spirit of God, they entered into a fight of grievous afflictions, as it were,
verse. 32. Partly whilst they themselves were openly reproached by the enemies
of the Gospel, and oppressed with all kind of injustice and violence; Partly
also, whilst they out of Christian sympathy joined themselves as companions to
those that were afflicted and oppressed for the Gospels sake, verse. 33. which
he makes apparent by experience, because whilst the Apostle was in bonds for
the Gospel, the faithful Hebrews sympathized, and took the spoiling of their
goods joyfully, not respecting earthly riches in comparison to the heavenly and
eternal inheritance laid up for them in Heaven, verse. 34.

Verse. 35. Cast not away therefore your confidence which has great recompense
of reward. Argum. 14. Constant perseverance in the Faith, has a great
recompense of reward: Therefore the Profession of your Faith is not to be cast
away, but constantly to be held fast by you.

Verse. 36. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of
God, ye might receive the Promise. Argum. 15. If ye patiently persevere, ye
shall receive eternal life, which is promised unto you, otherwise not:
Therefore ye ought constantly and patiently to persevere in the Faith.

Verse. 37. For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will
not tarry. Argum. 16. Ye shall shortly have an end of your labors, and yet
want but little of the victory, yet a little while and God will set you at
liberty from all trouble (as the Prophet Habak. 2.4. gives us notice:)
Therefore ought ye constantly to persevere.

Verse. 38. Now the Just shall live by Faith, but if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. Argum. 17. The Just shall live by Faith, not by
the present possession of his hope, laying hold upon Life and Righteousness, no
other ways but by Faith: Therefore ye ought to persevere in the Faith, that
ye may obtain Righteousness and Life.

If any] Argum. 18. He that casts away his Faith, and is puffed up with carnal
confidence of his own strength, or rests upon the power of any creature, is
hateful to God, and his Saints: Therefore ought ye to persevere in the Faith.

Verse. 39. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition: but of them
that believe, to the saving of the soul. Argum. 19. I am persuaded, that we
who truly believe, are not of those reprobate Hypocrites, who in the day of
temptation fall away, to their own perdition, but of those that are elected,
whereof every one perseveres to the saving of his soul: Therefore ought ye
boldly to persevere in the Faith.

CHAP. XI.
HE proceeds to confirm his former exhortation to perseverance in the Faith,
with diverse Arguments drawn from the properties and effects of Faith,
Illustrated from the manifold experience of the Saints: The Arguments of his
Exhortation are twenty four, All which prove that Faith is to be promoted, or
that we ought to persevere in the Faith, or live by it in the midst of
afflictions.

Verse. 1. Now Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen. Argum. 1. Faith embracing the promise concerning things hoped
for, makes the things as it were present, and gives them a kind of subsistence,
so far as it applies to us, the truth and power of God promising (in whose
power the things promised are contained) and makes us as certain of the event,
as if the things promised were actually performed: Therefore we ought to live
by Faith, and persevere in it.

And the] Argum. 2. Faith laying hold upon the Word of God, is a convincing
demonstration of the truth of things past, present* and to come, which are not
seen, or appear, and are justly esteemed by us most certain, because of the
undoubted truth of the word of God: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 2. For by it the Elders obtained a good report. Argum. 3. By Faith
Believers are commended, justified, and proclaimed blessed by the Testimony of
God, as it appears by ancient examples in the Scripture: Therefore we ought to
live by Faith, and persevere in it, in the midst of afflictions.

Verse. 3. Through Faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the Word
of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.
Argum. 4. Faith satisfies it self in the word of Almighty God, concerning
making the world out of nothing, or concerning the Creation of all things which
we see, out of no apparent or pre-existent matter: Therefore we must live by
Faith, and persevere in it, although we see nothing of those things which are
promised to us in the word of God: seeing God can effect our salvation promised
to us out of things which appear not, no less by his word, than he could
create the world out of nothing.

Verse. 4. By Faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Kain,
by which he obtained witness, that he was righteous, God testifying of his
gifts: and by it he being dead, yet speaks. The properties of Faith follow,
which are illustrated by the special experience of the Saints, which he
disposes into four classes; as it were for orders sake: The first is of those
which lived before the flood, to verse. 8. The second is of those which lived
from the flood, till Israel went down into Egypt, to verse. 23. The third is of
those that lived at their coming out of Egypt, to verse. 32. The fourth is of
those that lived after, to the end.

The first in the first rank or classis is Abel, who is said by Faith to offer
a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, not only that Faith caused that he
should make choice of the best Sacrifice, which by the command of God, it was
lawful for him to offer, but especially because by Faith in the thing
signified, i. e. the MESSIAH, the immaculate Lamb of God promised, (who was to
take away the sins of the world) he fastened his eyes, and worshipped God in
Spirit, whereas Cain stuck in the naked superficial Ceremony only; And so Abel
is declared justified by Faith, God giving testimony of the excellency of his
Sacrifice which he offered: By which Faith, although dead, yet he speaks,
teaching by his example all in the Church, to believe in Christ, and to seal
their Faith with the Martyrdom of blood, if it be the will of God.

Hence Argum. 5. The faithful are declared just by Faith, their offerings are
accepted, their worship is approved of God, and posterity is edified by the
example of Believers, as is manifest by the example of Abel: Therefore ought
we to persevere in the Faith.

Verse. 5. By Faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and was
not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had
this testimony, that he pleased God.

6. But without Faith it is impossible to please him: for he that comes to
God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.

Enoch follows in the second place, who is said by Faith to be translated into
life immortal, death, or the separation of his Soul from his body, not
intervening, only a change made from mortal to immortal qualifications. He
proves that this Translation was a fruit of Faith, because Enoch pleased God,
or was approved, before the translation of him; and without faith it is
impossible to please God, the reason whereof is given, because no man comes
unto God, or is admitted into fellowship with him, unless he subscribe to the
All Sufficiency and goodness of God, by Faith, so as to apply that goodness of
God to himself, which is offered him, and come unto God, desirous of communion
with him; for it is Faith alone that divests a man of all his own worth, and
joins him to God that is merciful, and full of compassion. Hence Argum. 6. By
Faith we obtain Eternal Life, as God has testified to us in the translation
of Enoch, who had he not been endued with faith, had not pleased God, nor come
unto him, nor had been admitted into heaven: Therefore ought we to persevere
in the Faith.

Verse. 7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved
with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his house, by the which he
condemned the world, and became Heir of the Righteousness, which is by Faith.
Noah is the third, who warned of God concerning the coming of a Flood many
years after, believed, and feared, and by the Command of God prepared an Ark,
to the saving of his Family, whereby he convinced the rest of the world then
living with himself, of unbelief, and is declared the Heir of that
Righteousness which is by Faith in Christ, who was represented by the Ark:
Hence Argum. 7. By Faith we are to take heed of the anger of God, and
diligently use the appointed means to Salvation, by which diligence we
convince the world of unbelief, and slothfulness, and testify the truth of our
Faith, whereby we believe in Christ, and obtain the inheritance of
Righteousness in him, as is manifest in the experience of Noah: Therefore we
ought to persevere in the Faith.

Verse. 8. By Faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place, which
he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not
knowing whither he went.

9. By Faieh he sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country,
dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the Heirs with him of the same
Promise.

10. For he looked for a City which has foundations, whose Builder and Maker
is God.

The second Rank or Classis of Believers, which lived to the time of Isreal's
going down into Egypt, whereof the first in order is Abraham, who by Faith left
his Country, and followed God into a strange Land, leaning upon the Promise of
God for an inheritance to be given him, uncertain in the mean time where he
should sojourn, ver. 8. By Faith also he sojourned in the promised Land,
dwelling in Tabernacles, as some Pilgrim and Stranger, as Isaac and Jacob his
Posterity did, to whom the same promise of an Inheritance was made, ver. 9. For
he did not so much look at that typical Land of Canaan, as Heaven, represented
by that Land of Promise, which is like a fenced and strongly founded City,
whose Builder is God, and not man. Hence Argum. 8. By Faith we being called of
God, leave all earthly things, and content with our condition, (being according
to the Will of God) whatever it is, we sojourn in this world, under hope of a
most abiding Inheritance, to be possessed by us in heaven, as appears in the
example of Abraham: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 11. Through Faith also Sarah her self received strength to conceive
Seed, and was delivered of a Child, when she was past age, because she judged
him faithful, who had promised.

12. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as
the stars of the Sky in multitude, and as the Sand which is by the Sea shore,
innumerable.

Before he passes from what he had to say of Abraham, he mentions the Faith
of his Wife Sarah, whose Faith concurred with Abraham's, to apprehend the
promise of the numerous Offspring which should issue from him: Sarah by Faith
leaning upon the truth of the Promise of God that is faithful and Almighty,
though she was barren and aged, and above the powers of nature, she is made
fit to conceive Seed, and to bring forth Isaac, from Abraham already, in
respect to children, as it were dead; and so the Promise of God concerning his
innumerable Offspring took effect. Hence Argum. 9. By Faith we are fitted for
the performance of those things, which far exceed humane strength, and to
receive the accomplishment of Promises, incredible to carnal reason; as is
apparent by the experience of Sarah: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 13. These all died in Faith, not having received the Promises, but
having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. Argum. 10. All
these last recited, viz. Abraham with Sarah his Wife, and Isaac and Jacob,
persevered in the Faith, even till death, neither did they enjoy the good
things in this life, which God promised, only by Faith they saw the certainty
of the things promised, and persuaded of them, saluted the good promises afar
off, and stretching out, as it were, the Arms of Faith, embraced them, thinking
it enough that they should enjoy them after this life, professing themselves in
the mean time, while they lived, that they were pilgrims and strangers in the
earth: Therefore ought you to persevere in the Faith, and to live by Faith.

Verse. 14. For they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a
Country.

15. And truly if they had been mindful of that Country, from whence they came
out, they might have had opportunity to have returned:

16. But now they desire a better Country, that is an heavenly: wherefore God
is not ashamed to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a City.

He proves that while they lived upon earth, they did not obtain the promises,
by two Reasons.

Reason 1. Because professing themselves strangers in the earth, they plainly
showed that they sought a Country, ver. 14. but not an earthly country, because
they had opportunity of returning to it, if they had sought it, ver. 15.
Therefore they sought an heavenly Country promised of God.

Wherefore] Reas. 2. God is not ashamed to be called their God, whence he
gives us to understand, that he had a City prepared for them, i. e. Heaven,
and determined to raise them from the dead, that both in body and soul they
might possess that desired Country, for as their God he had prepared that City
for them, so he would be called by them, Their God, that all may understand,
that these Saints were not to be separated from the society of God, which they
sought.

Verse. 17. By Faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that
^ad received the Promises, offered up his only begotten Son,

18. Of whom it was said, that in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

19. Accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead: from
whence also he received him in a figure.

The Arguments have been handled which were drawn from the common effect of the
Faith of the Patriarchs: The Arguments follow, which are drawn from the proper
effects of the Faith of each of them; First he commends the Faith of Abraham,
that when God tried him, whether he would believe the Promises, and also
whether he would in all things obey, he forthwith offered up Isaac for a
burnt-offering; though his only Son, although Abraham had immediate promises
of multiplying his seed in this very Isaac, verse. 17. Although it was expressly
said to him, of this very Son, that the blessed seed, (in whom all Nations were
to be blessed) should come of him, verse. 18. For by Faith Abraham reasoned,
that God, who had brought forth Isaac from Parents past children, was able to
raise him also out of the Ashes. And thus he received Isaac snatched from the
jaws of death, in a similitude, as it were raised from the dead, verse. 19.

Hence Argum. 11. By Faith all impediments are conquered in temptations, which
may any ways hinder the performance of our obedience unto God, and that with
most happy success, as is manifest by the experience of Abraham: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 20. By Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.

21. By Faith Jacob when he was a dying, blessed both the Sons of Joseph, and
worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff.

The example of Jacob follows, who when he was a dying, by Faith comforted
himself and his Sons, concerning the blessings, which, according to the Promise
of God, should come upon his Nephews and their posterity, and that with so much
persuasion, that for joy he worshipped God, leaning upon his staff by reason
of the weakness of his body.

Hence Argum. 13. That by Faith they that are a dying may take comfort, and not
only comfort themselves, but also others concerning the blessings promised, as
may be seen in the example of dying Jacob: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 22. By Faith Joseph when he dyed, made mention of the departing of the
children of Israel: and gave commandment concerning his bones. Joseph is named
the last of the Patriarchs, whom neither his power, nor the abundance of good
things which he enjoyed in Egypt, could make unmindful or negligent of the
Promises of God, but being persuaded of the children of Isreal's going out of
Egypt, and of the bringing them into the Land promised to the Fathers (although
many years after) he commanded that his bones should be carried out also, in
testimony of his preferring the thing signified by the promised Land, before
all earthly things: From whence,

Argum. 14. Faith overcomes length of time, before the accomplishment of the
Promise, coming between, together with the commodities of this life, the
corruption of death and the grave, and looks for a resurrection with the
Saints, as we see in the example of Joseph dying: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 23. By Faith Moses when he was born, was hid three months of his
Parents, because they saw he was a proper child, and they not afraid of the
Kings commandment. The third rank or classis of examples follows, from the
times near the children of Isreal's departing out of Egypt, to the times of the
Judges; The first Example is of the Parents of Moses, who gathering from the
beauty of the child Moses, that God had designed him for some eminent
employment, by Faith hid him three months, all that time, not fearing the Kings
command, they preserved him alive, whom the King (he being a male-child)
commanded to be cast into the river.

Whence Argum. 15. By Faith fear is overcome, which Tyrants by their unjust
commands bring upon the faithful, as is manifest in the example of Moses
Parents: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 24. By Faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the
Son of Pharaohs Daughter,

25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season:

26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in
Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of reward.

The second Example is of Moses, the many acts of whose Faith are reckoned up,
which carry the force of many Examples and Arguments. The first act of Faith in
Moses is, that being come to years, and the use of Reason and discretion, by
Faith he refused the royal relation, and had rather be called an Hebrew, than
Pharaohs Nephew: which he did not only in word, but really, when leaving the
Kings Palace, he went forth to visit his Hebrew Brethren in affliction, nor
returned he again to the delights of the Court, verse. 24. The Apostle commends
this act upon a threefold account.

First, That he chose rather all afflictions in banishment, and to endure hard
bondage, that he might by any means be assistant to the people of God, rather
than be wanting to his duty, and enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, with
the neglect of his duty, verse. 25.

Secondly, That he accounted it greater riches to be despised with the people
of God, for their Faith in Christ that was to come, and so to bear his Cross,
or the reproaches of Christ (upon whom those injuries which are done to his
members fall as upon the head) than to be^ possessed of the treasures of Egypt
in Pharaohs Court.

Thirdly, That he supported himself with the hope of delivering the people of
God, and expectation of the free reward, which God has promised to give unto
his servants: whence it appears that what he has spoken of Moses, was the
effect of his Faith, verse. 26.

Hence Argum. 16. By Faith, Honor, and Riches, and other worldly allurements,
wherewith unwary men are catched to their perdition, become vile, and
afflictions borne for the name of Christ, and communion with the Saints, and
Christ himself, and an expectation of the reward promised to the afflicted
servants of God, is glorious, as it clearly appears in the example of Moses:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 27. By Faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King, for
he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. The second act of Moses Faith is,
that trusting in the Promise of God, he fore-shewed to Pharaoh, that against
his will, he should bring the children of Israel out of Egypt, and deliver
them from that bondage, both himself and all the people, to whom in their
departing he was Leader and Captain: This act is commended upon a twofold
account. First, That he feared not the wrath of the King, who might (had not
God withheld him) having gathered together, and armed his forces, either have
slain, or reduced a fearful and unwarlike people (upon their departure) into
more grievous bondage. Secondly, That by Faith he saw the power and
faithfulness of the invisible God, and with this supported himself in all his
straights, whence he proves this act to be an effect of Faith.

Hence Argum. 17. By Faith we believe the promised liberty of the children of
God from the Kingdom of darkness, and we conquer all fear, which the wrath,
and armed force of tyrants can bring upon those who press after the heavenly
inheritance, having our eyes always fastened upon the promised assistance of
the invisible God, as appears in the example of Moses: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 28. Through Faith he kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of blood,
lest he that destroyed the firstborn, should touch them. The third act of
Moses Faith is, that being certainly persuaded of the Promise of God, he
celebrated the Passover Feast in Egypt, and with the blood of the Paschal
Lamb, took care that the doors of all the Israelites should be sprinkled:
Promising in the name of God that they should be all delivered from the
destroying Angel, (which was that night to slay all the firstborn of the
Egyptians) whose houses soever were marked with the blood of the Paschal Lamb.

Hence Argum. 18. By Faith, we solemnize the Sacraments in the Church* and the
public worship of God; in witness of our hope of deliverance from destruction,
wherein the unbeleeving world shall be involved, as appears in the example of
Moses: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 29. By Faith they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry land, which the
Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned. The third example is of the believing
Israelites, together with Moses their Captain, who by Faith, as they durst
enter into the open jaws of the waters divided, and take a long journey through
the shadow of death, so they passed safe over the Red Sea, as upon dry ground:
But the Egyptians without the Promise of God, assaying to follow them, were
drowned. Hence Argum. 19. By Faith we undertake matters impossible to humane
reason, and pass through dangers, in which unbelievers perish, as appears in
the peoples passage through the Red Sea: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 30. By Faith the walls of Jerico fell down, after they were compassed
about seven days. The fourth example is of Joshua, and the believing
Israelites, who by Faith expecting the fall of the walls of Ierico, compassed
them seven days with the Ark of the Covenant, and Rams horns, nor were they
frustrated in their hope. Hence Argum. 20. By Faith, Believers by their
prayers, without all humane help, cast down the fenced Cities and Towers of
their enemies, and overcome them; as was proved in the example of the
Israelites, entering into the promised Land: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 31. By Faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not,
when she had received the Spies with peace. The fifth example is of the Faith
of Rahab the Harlot, and Alien, in whom God looks at her endeavor to preserve
the Spies as an effect of Faith, and passes by the lie which she told out of
humane infirmity, but does not approve it; for they who have Faith, do not do
all things of Faith: This Woman by Faith in the God of Israel, peaceably
received, and privily sent away the Israelitish Spies, and was saved from
perishing with her unbelieving Fellow-Citizens of Ierico. Hence Argum. 21. No
precedent sins can hinder, but that they who fly unto God, and the fellowship
of the true Church by Faith, are saved, and perish no^ with Infidels, as
appears by the example of Rahab the Harlot, converted to the Faith: Therefore,
etc.

Verse. 32. And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of
Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jephthae, of David also and
Samuel, and of the Prophets.

33. Who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
promises, stopped the mouths of Lions,

34. Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the Sword, out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to ^light the Armies
of the Aliens.

35. Women received their dead, raised to life again.

The fourth Rank or Classis of examples follows, viz. of the faith of those who
lived the remaining time after Joshua, some of whose names he reckons up, six
in number; and to these he adjoyns the Prophets, and other Saints, who lived
before Christ; whereof some, what were they not able to do by Faith? Others,
what were they not able to suffer? He reckons up ten sorts of their actions.
(1) Some by Faith subdued Kingdoms, as the forementioned Judges, and David
the King. (2) Others wrought righteousness, being tried in difficult matters,
as when David twice spared Saul, persecuting him in an hostile manner. (3) Some
having overcome difficulties, constantly persevered, till the special promises
made to them were performed, as David obtained the promised Kingdom by Faith.
(4) Others by Faith stopped the mouths of Lions, as Sampson, David, Daniel,
ver. 33. (5) Some by Faith quenched the violence of fire, as the three
companions of Daniel. (6) Others escaped the edge of the sword, or present
death, as Elias flying from the threatenings of Iezabel. (7) Some ou^ of
weakness were made strong, and recovered out of mortal diseases, as Hezekiah.
(8) Others waxed valiant in fight, as Sampson and David. (9) Some put to flight
the Armies of the Aliens, as Gideon, ver. 34. (10) Others received their dead
raised to life again, as the Widow of Sarepta, the Hostess of Elias, and the
Shunamite, the Hostess of Elizeus, ver. 35.

Verse. 35. -- And others were tortured, not accepting deliverance: that they
might obtain a better Resurrection, And these are the kinds of their famous
actions, wherein the Saints excelled by Faith; then follows ten sorts of
sufferings, in bearing of which with a good courage, some other servants of God
were eminent, whom he names not: But to question whether there were such, is
impious, when the Holy Ghost is the Author, who certified Paul the Penman,
concerning the truth of what he spoke, so that there remains no place for
doubting, or curious enquiring from what History he fetched those things,
seeing we know this very Narration to be beyond all exception; The first sort
of sufferings; others were racked or stretched out by their tormentors, as a
skin is stretched upon a Drum, and beaten with Clubs, till they swelled and
died, who had the offer of deliverance, if they would deny the Faith; but upon
that condition they refused deliverance, hoping for a Resurrection to a better
life.

Verse. 36. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings; yea, moreover
of bonds and imprisonment. The second sort of sufferings; others endured
mockings. (3) Others were scourged. (4) Others also were laid in bonds. (5) And
others imprisoned.

Verse. 37. They were stoned, they were ^awn asunder, were tempted, were slai^
with the sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented.

38. Of whom the world was not worthy: they wandered in deserts, and in
mountains, and in de^s and caves of the earth.

(6.) Some were sto^ed. (7) Some were sawn asunder. (8) Some were tempted,
sometimes allured with promises, other while affrighted with threatenings,
sometimes solicited with the importu^ity of friends, other whiles vexed with
Disputes and Sophistry, devised for opposing of the Faith; which kind of
torment is more cruel than death to those that are conscious to their own
weakness, and are afraid lest they should be foiled by the temptation. (9)
Some were slain with the sword. (10) Others to avoid death, wandered up and
down, having no certain dwelling place, forced to change places, because of the
Persecutors cruelty; for want of clothes, they covered their nakedness with
sheepskins and goat skins* being destitute of humane help, reduced to diverse
straights, and evil entreated by the world, where ever they came: so that they
chose to live in mountains and deserts, in caves and dens of the earth, among
wild-beasts rather than men; who that they might not seem forsaken in these
afflictions, the Apostle declares, that mankind, (which dealt so cruelly with
them) was not worthy of the company of such precious servants of God. From all
these we shall briefly draw but one Argument, which for memories sake we set
down thus.

Argum. 22. What is there which God requires of us, that we are not able to
effect by Faith? What are we not able to suffer, that God lays upon us? as
appears by the experience of the faithful Saints. Therefore Faith is to be
cherished, we ought to live by it, and to persevere in it.

Verse. 39. And these all having obtained a good report through Faith, received
not the Promise: Argum. 23. All the Saints (whereof we have spoken) by Faith
were approved of God, justified, or God gave testimony to them, that they
pleased him; although they had not that great Promise of Christ's Incarnation,
or of the seed of the woman completed (wherein all the Promises are Yea and
Amen) while they lived: Seeing therefore that they who lived in that obscurity,
persevered in all persecutions, constant in the Faith of Christ that was to
come; how much more ought we to persevere, who see that Promise completed in
the Faith of Christ now exhibited?

Verse. 40. God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect. He answers a doubt; some may question why God
deferred the coming of Christ, or why he was not manifested in the times of
the Ancient Fathers: He answers, adding Argum. 24. It seemed good to God, to
vouchsafe us this happiness, that we should see with our eyes, the fulfilling
of all the Oracles and Types; the honor of seeing Christ's day, and hearing the
Gospel, he vouchsafed this not to the Fathers, but reserved it for us:
Therefore so much the more are we obliged to persevere in the Faith of Christ,
and the constancy of our Profession, to the honor of Christ.

Without us] He opens the Counsel of God, concernning the reservation of the
honor of seeing Christ exhibited, to our times, and adds Argum. 25. God
would not have the Infant condition of the Church perfect before the exhibition
of Christ, without the more complete condition of the Church after Christ,
manifested in the Flesh; that the whole Church, as well before as after Christ
might be one perfect man in Christ; nor would God that the faithful living
under Legal types, should be otherways perfected, than by looking together
with us, to the thing signified, which is exhibited in our times: Seeing
therefore that they in the Infant condition of the Church, obtained perfect
Righteousness and Salvation, by Faith, looking with us upon the thing signified
by the Legal types, i. e. upon Christ that was to be manifested, as if he had
been manifested already, and patiently persevered through all adversities; It
will be unworthy if we persevere not constantly in the Faith of Christ, who
is exhibited.

CHAP. XII.
THe other part of the Epistle follows, wherein diverse Exhortations to
Christian duties are contained. There are three in this Chapter: The first is a
consolatory Exhortation to patience and constancy in the Faith in adversity, to
verse. 14. The second is to holy peace, verse. 14. The third is to hold fast the
Doctrine of Grace, not abusing it, to the end. The first Exhortatory
Proposition, wherein the Apostle involves himself, and other Believers, is
this, Ye ought to suffer afflictions patiently, and chiefly those, which
happen to you for the Faiths sake. The Arguments that confirm this Proposition
are eleven.

Verse. 1. Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud
of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, This
Proposition is inferred from the Precedent Catalogue of the faithful, set forth
under the similitude of contenders running in a race, we ought, casting aside
all hindrances, constantly to run the race that is set before us.

Seeing so great] Argum. 1. We have the examples of all the faithful, dead
before Christ was exhibited, who stand about us while w^e run the race, in a
copious multitude, like a thick cloud, every one giving his testimony touching
the certainty of divine promises, touching the excellency of Faith, and Gods
goodness, who will be witnesses against us, unless we go forward through
prosperity and adversity in our Christian race: Therefore we ought constantly
to go forward through all adversities.

Lay aside] That the Apostle might make the Exhortation easier, and them more
expedient for this race, he admonishes them of shunning two impediments: the
one outward, the other inward. The outward impediment is, that which is cast in
their way from external things, riches, honors, and other earthly things,
which ought not to be so much esteemed by us, but we should be ready to
renounce them, when and so far as they hinder our course in the obedience of
Faith, for then they become weights, which he commands us to cast away. The
internal impediment from inbred corruption or concupiscence dwelling in the
flesh, which naturally cleaves to us, and may most easily ensnare us unawares
unless we take heed. And we are said to cast away this sin, when we take not
care for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, neither are we so vehemently
desirous of this mortal life, but when God calls us we are prepared to lay
down this life, for so is inbred corruption cast away, that it might not
ensnare us in the trials of Faith, for otherwise by no endeavors can it be
altogether repressed, so long as we live in the flesh.

Verse. 2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the
joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the Throne of God. Argum. 2. We have Jesus Christ
the Captain of our Faith, not only for an example, but also for a chief help,
who as he is the Author, so is he the finisher of our Faith, looking upon
whom with the eyes of Faith, we shall be able to run the race: Therefore we
must constantly go forward through all adversities.

Who for] He confirms this Argument by three Reasons.

Reas. 1. Our Captain by reason of his desire of our salvation comes unto glory
by the Cross; he patiently endured the Cross, and contemned contempt, he did
not value the suffering of reproach, that he might redeem us, and return a
Conqueror to the possession of his glory, and that he might lead us the same
way after him, to the fellowship of his glory: Therefore Christ being our
Captain, we must go forward through the crosses and contempt of the world.

Verse. 3. For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Reas. 2. Such is the
excellency of Christ above us, such are his suffering^, which he suffered for
us from his most unworthy adversaries, that our sufferings, in our Christian
warfare (seriously compared with Christ's) might come to nothing: Therefore we
must eye his example, and go forward through all adversities.

Le^t in your] Reas. 3. Unless ye borrow light from Christ, courage and
strength through Faith in your race, ye are in danger in the midst of your
race to be discouraged and lost: Therefore it behooves you constantly to eye
Christ your Captain, and through Faith in him to go forward in your race.

Verse. 4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. Argum. 3.
Ye have not as yet poured forth your life and blood for Christ, as you are
bound, if so his glory required it, in conflicting against sin, whereto your
persecutors have endeavored to compel you: Therefore being ready to lay down
your life, rather than sin, go ye forward through all adversities.

Verse. 5. And ye have forgotten the Exhortation which speaks unto you as
unto children, My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint
when thou art rebuked of him. Argum. 4. Joined with a reproof, The friendly
exhortation of God in the Scripture, speaking to you as unto sons, requires of
you, that ye neither contemn the chastisement of God in the hardness of your
hearts, neither faint being chastised, by reason of the tenderness of your
hearts, (which now ye seem to do) having forgotten the divine Exhortation:
Therefore ye are to bear afflictions patiently and constantly.

Verse. 6. For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every Son
whom he receives.

7. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you, as with Sons: for what Son
is he whom the Father chasteneth not?

Argum. 5. Confirming the former; Chastisement is an effect of Divine love
toward him whom God chastises: For chastening is for the amending of him that
is chastised: Therefore you ought to bear afflictions patiently.

Scourgeth] Argum. 6. To bear afflictions patiently, is a sign of Adoption; God
acknowledges no man for his adopted Son, whom he does not exercise with sharp
afflictions, nor is any man excepted: Therefore that ye may be found with the
mark of adoption upon you, and that ye may prove your selves the Sons of God,
ye ought patiently to bear afflictions.

Verse. 8. But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then
are ye Bastards, and not Sons. Argum. 7. They that are free from chastening,
or they which do not suffer fatherly chastisement, are not the Sons of God;
they together with hypocrites may have the outward and visible Church for their
Mother, but they cannot have God for their Father: Therefore if you would not
be accounted hypocrites and bastards ye ought to bear afflictions patiently.

Verse. 9. Furthermore, we have had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us,
and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection to the
Father of Spirits, and live? Argum. 8. The Fathers of our flesh had power to
chastise us their Sons, and it was meet that we should bear their
chastisements, yea we have born them with reverence, how much more has God
the Father of our spirits power to chastise us, and we are bound to bear his
chastisements patiently?

Live] Argum. 9. We shall obtain eternal life, if we have born patiently Gods
fatherly corrections: Therefore we ought to bear them patiently.

Verse. 10. For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own
pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
Argum. 10. If we have born the chastisements of our Parents, who for a short
time in looking to our temporal good, oftentimes have for their own pleasure
unjustly chastised us, we ought much rather to suffer the chastisements of
God, who for a short time most prudently and justly chastises us for our
spiritual profit, that he may make us partakers of his holiness, or may
sanctify us to life eternal.

Verse. 11. Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby.

12. Wherefore lift up the hands, which hang down, and the feeble knees.

Argum. 11. Answering an Objection; Although for the present, in the opinion of
the flesh, no chastening may seem to be matter of joy, but only sadness? yet
afterward it will be found by those that have been exercised, proved and
subdued by it, that this Discipline did profit their composed and quiet minds,
and it will appear that it has promoted holiness or the fruit of
Righteousness: Therefore ye ought to suffer afflictions, and moreover to take
courage, and compose your selves to go on constantly in the ways of the Lord;
which is signified by the lifting up of the hands, which hang down, and feeble
knees.

Verse. 13. And make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be
turned out of the way: but let it rather be healed. Argum. 12. Unless you
patiently suffer afflictions which come upon you for the Gospels sake, and go
on stoutly in the Profession of the Faith in the ways or streigth paths of the
Lord, there is very great danger lest halting and inclining to fall away (by
reason of the afflictions, which ye suffer for the Faith) ye immediately fall
away indeed, and altogether turn a side out of the way, or renounce the Faith:
Therefore admit ye of healing by the medicines of Faith and Christian
Consolation: suffer afflictions patiently, courageously confirm your feet in
the ways of the Lord, and in his straight paths go forward.

Verse. 14. Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord: Exhort. 2. That they endeavor to follow peace with all men, with
those that are within the Church, as well as with those that are without, as
much as possible, and also that they endeavor after holiness, so that whilst
they study peace, they neglect not holiness, or by doing ill, or omitting good,
they sin not to gratify profane men.

Without which] He gives the reason why he joins the study of holiness with
peace: because without peace with men they may obtain eternal salvation, but
they cannot be saved, or see the Lord without holiness, in whose sight,
society, and fruition in Heaven, consists eternal life.

Verse. 15. Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest any
root of bitterness springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.
Exhort. 3. Lest any man fail of the Grace of God, or abuse it to profaneness,
which belongs to every one, especially to Bishops or Governors of the
Church, as the thing and words intimate, because as it is the duty of all, so
of these especially to study to purge the Church from corruptions of Doctrine,
and manners, by Exhortation to mutual duties of charity, and by Ecclesiastical
Discipline. As for corruptions of Doctrine, he commands them to look
diligently, lest any man fail of the Grace of God, or of the sound Doctrine of
Grace, or lest any man ascribe less unto Grace than is meet (and so failing of
the truth, being left behind by others, who make progress in the Faith, either
cannot or will not agree with them in the Doctrine of Grace) he fail of Grace,
and so perish.

Lest any root] The Reasons of the Exhortation are six.

Reas. 1. Belonging to the first Branch, Because failing of Grace, or the
Doctrine of Grace by Infidelity in any member of the Church, is like to a most
bitter root springing up in the Church of God (which is the Vineyard or Garden
of the Lord) whereby many in the Church may be troubled and infected.

Verse. 16. Lest there be any fornicatour, or profane person, as Esau, who for
one morsel of meat sold his birthright. As to what concerns corruptions of
manners (from which also the way is open to falling from the Faith) he
forbids, lest there be any fornicatour amongst them, that is, that they should
not suffer him, but cast out of the Church fornicatours, and profane persons,
who contemning heavenly privileges, and the good things promised to the
faithful and holy, do give up themselves to gluttony, to their bellies, and
vi^ious pleasures, like Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright:
And so he showed himself to make more of his pleasure, than his birthright,
which was a pledge of the everlasting inheritance, to be obtained by those that
believe* upon the free Promise of God, and did cherish the hope thereof in the
families of the Patriarchs.

Verse. 17. For ye know how that afterward when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of Repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears. Reas. 2. Of the Exhortation pertaining to the
second Branch, Because as it is known out of holy Writ, that Esau (when
repenting, and afterward weeping had solicited his Father, that he might by
an hereditary right obtain the blessing) was repulsed and rejected from the
blessing of the birthright, so the profane contemners of the grace and
holiness of God, ought to fear (who whilst they hear the voice of God, harden
their hearts, and do not repent when an occasion is offered) lest they be
excluded from the mercy of God, and being shut out find no place of
repentance: Therefore the Church is to be purged from such corruptions.

Verse. 18. For ye are not come unto the Mount that might be touched, and that
burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest,

19. And the sound of a Trumpet, and the voice of words, which voice they that
heard, entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more.

20. (For they could not endure that which was commanded: and if so much as a
beast touch the Mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a dart.

21. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and
quake.)

Reas. 3. To this sense, Ye are not called to the Legal Covenant, and its
terrors, to verse. 22. but to the Covenant of Grace, and to the most sweet
society of Christ and his Saints, to verse. 25. Therefore ye ought to look
diligently lest any man fail of Grace, or lest any man be profane,, i. e.
lest any man detract by his Infidelity from the Grace of God, into profane
licentiousness, which is the same with the Apostles conclusion inferred, verse.
25. See that ye refuse not him, that is, Christ that speaks, etc. The force
of the Argument is this, If now (seeing that not fear, but love, not Justice,
but Grace, not the Law, but Gospel offers it self to be your leader in your
way to Heaven) ye shall fail of Grace, or abuse it to profaneness, it shall
come to pass, that ye will be found to refuse and reject Christ speaking from
Heaven, and most gently inviting you to the communion with himself and his
Saints, which ye ought to have a care of. As for the Covenants of works, or
the Law, he sets down the terrible manner wherein the Law was delivered, of
which description there are eight Branches.

(1) In the Covenant of works, or Legal Covenant there was a Mountain that
might be touched, or earthly (whereto Heaven is opposed, or the heavenly Mount
Zion, the Throne of Grace) as if he had said, After ye believed in Christ,
ye came not unto the Mount that might not be touched, and that which is
earthly, the very sight whereof did affright, thereby the throne of Justice was
represented, wherein God sits, when he deals with the unregnerate man, that
puts confidence in his own strength, shining in the merit of his own works.

(2) In making that Covenant, the Mount burned with fire, whereby the anger of
the Judge armed, and ready to consume sinners, trusting in their merits or
works, or dealing with him from the Covenant of works.

(3) In making that Covenant, there was a whirlewind, darkness, and a tempest,
whereby was represented the perplexed condition, amazement and horror of the
mind, whereby the soul of the sinner is repressed when the Judge shows to him
out of the Law or Covenant of works, his justice and anger, according to the
condition of the violated Covenant.

(4) In giving the Law there was the sound of a Trumpet, whereby was signified
that all who are guilty of violating the Covenant of works, shall be cited, and
of necessity appear before the Tribunal of God the supreme Judge, and none
escape.

(5) In making that Covenant there was a voice of words, by which was
represented the Letter of the Law, reciting the duties we were bound to, but
not at all conferring strength for the performing of the things commanded.

(6) In making that Covenant, they who had heard the voice of words, entreated
that the word should not be spoken to them any more, whereby was signified the
intolerable weight of multiplied guilt contracted by the violation of the Law,
as also despair touching the future performance of the Law incumbent upon the
conscience, when God deals with the sinner out of the Covenant of works. That
which the Apostle here intimates, when he says, For they could not endure
that which was commanded.

(7) In making that Covenant, if so much as a beast had touched the Mountain,
it was to be stoned or thrust through with a dart, whereby was signified;
First, That the sinner is excluded from all access to God, neither is it lawful
that any sinner should approach to him, from the condition of this Covenant.
Secondly, That both the sinner, and all things that belong unto him, his Oxen
and Cattle are an abomination unto God. Thirdly, That the sinner is to perish
miserably by this Covenant, i. e. with contempt and ignominy, as with stones
and darts shot at his cursed and abominable head.

(8) In making that Covenant, so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake, and confessed his horror; whereby was also
signified that the most holy or just men could not be able to stand before
God, if they should be dealt with according to the Covenant of works, as Psalm.
143. v. 2. It is said, In thy sight shall no flesh living be justified: This
is the former part of the Argument, the sum whereof is this. God has
delivered you from the Covenant of works, and the terrors thereof.

Verse. 22. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the Living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels:

23. To the general assembly, and Church of the firstborn, which are written
in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect.

24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel.

Now follows the second part of the Argument touching the Covenant of Grace,
which God has made with all the faithful, believing in Christ; but the
condition and happiness of man, believing in Christ, and under the Covenant of
Grace; is described, as it were by its own parts.

(1) After that ye believed in Christ being set at liberty from Mount Sinai,
and from the Throne of Justice, ye came to Mount Sion, whereby was represented
the Throne of Grace, wherein God shows himself propitious to all that come unto
Christ.

(2) After that ye believed in Christ, being recalled again from exilement,
and errors in the desert of this world, ye are gathered again to your Head
Christ, and to the City of refuge, to the possession of a quiet condition in
Christ; ye being freed from anger and death, and reconciled to God, are made
free of the City of the Living God, being delivered from the terrors of a just
Judge, ye are admitted into Jerusalem, i. e. the Church of God, wherein ye
see the visions of peace, being delivered from Hell, ye are also delivered
from Levitical Ceremonies (which the inferior and terrestrial Jerusalem now,
together with its children observes,) and are admitted to the privileges of
the heavenly Jerusalem the Church of the faithful, and to the Kingdom of
Heaven.

(3) After that ye believed in Christ, being delivered from the society of
Devils, obnoxious to sin and torments, ye are admitted into the society of an
innumerable company of blessed Angels.

(4) After that ye believed in Christ, being called and separated from the
society of Reprobates, wicked and banished men, or men secluded from the
inheritance of eternal life, ye are come, and are admitted into the society of
the Catholic Church, to the general Assembly and Church of the Elect, who are
restored to the right and privileges of the firstborn, that ye may be
Priests to God, and the portion of God, select from amongst men.

(5) Ye that in times past did live amongst worldly men, whose portion is in
this life, and whose names are written in the earth, now ye are found to be of
the number of the Elect, and of those that were in times past written in
Heaven, in the book of life amongst the Elect, and those that are predestined
to the obtaining of glory and grace.

(6) Ye that were without God in the world, enemies to him (and in times past
he was your angry Judge) now being reconciled to him, he is your merciful
Judge, who absolves you, and powerfully destroies your enemies.

(7) Ye that were in times past numbered in the Catalogue of the damned, and
of those that perished; companions with the spirits of the wicked, who are now
in prison, are made by the Covenant of Grace through Christ, the Brethren of
those, which now possess Heaven, and have their spirits perfected in Heaven, i.
e. they being free from sin and misery, are plenarily justified and sanctified
in their spirits.

(8) Ye being delivered from the Covenant of works, which admitted not a
Mediator, and also from the yoke of Ceremonies, have access to Jesus the
Savior, who is the Mediator and Surety of the New Covenant, who has
undertaken that ye shall perform what the Covenant requires of you, and
doubtless* he will make it good.

(9) Ye that are without Righteousness, and Holiness, and polluted with all
manner of sins, now by virtue of the New Covenant ye are admitted to the
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, the immaculate Lamb (by which ye are
justified and sanctified, and preserved from the destroying Angel) whose blood,
although it was shed for us, and our sins, yet it does not cry against us, as
the blood of Abel cried against Cain the murderer, but it intercedes for us
with God, that he being merciful to us, would grant us all things, which were
bought by the price of his blood.

Verse. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not
who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we
turn away from him that speaks from Heaven. The exhortatory Conclusion of the
Argument follows, That under color of some excuse they refuse not to obey
Christ, speaking to them in the Gospel, and inviting them to grace and holiness.

For if] The Reason of the fourth Exhortation is this; If the Israelites,
despisers of Moses speaking on earth* have not escaped punishments, much less
shall ye escape punishments, if ye shall despise Christ speaking from Heaven:
Therefore ye ought to beware lest ye fail of this Grace, and lest ye abuse
it even to profaneness.

Verse. 26. Whose voice then shook the earth; but now he has promised, saying,
Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven. He confirms this
Reason from the power of Christ, who in times past shook the earth or Mount
Sinai with his voice, and shall also shake in the day of judgment, both Heaven
and Earth, as he has foretold by the Prophet Haggai 2.6. which shall come to
pass when the Heaven and the Earth shall be burnt with fire, and whatsoever
instability and corruptibility they have shall be abolished, that a new Heaven
and a new Earth may succeed, wherein may dwell Righteousness, that is, wherein
the Saints being made immortal, may perpetually abide.

Verse. 27. And this word, yet once more, signifies the removing of those
things that are shaken, as of those things that are made, that those things
which cannot be shaken may remain. That we may admit this sense, He expounds
the words of the Prophet, which are so to be understood, because he that is
said once to shake the Heaven and the Earth, and not oftener, is said in that
to remove those things that are unstable, and things that are made or created,
as to their mutable condition, or mutable qualities, that those things which
cannot be shaken, and are immutable may succeed, such as all things will be in
the glorious Kingdom of Christ.

Verse. 28. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us
have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence, and godly
fear. He deduces from hence the fifth Reason of the Exhortation, We have
right to the glorious Kingdom, which cannot be shaken, and is already by Faith
received by us: Therefore the Doctrine of Grace, and study of holiness is to be
held fast, or that which is the same, let us have Grace whereby we may serve
God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.

Verse. 29. For our God is a consuming fire. The sixth Reason of the
Exhortation, Against those which either do not hold fast the Grace of God, or
abuse it to profaneness. Our God is a consuming fire: Therefore let us hold
fast Grace with endeavors after holiness. Who although he profess himself the
God of the faithful, yet he will not suffer them to go unpunished* who
counterfeit the Faith which they have not, or they who with Esau abuse the
Doctrine of Grace, even to profane licentiousness.

CHAP. XIII.
THere are two parts of the Chapter. In the former part are contained seven
Exhortations, to verse. 18. In the other is the conclusion of the Epistle

Verse. 1. Let brotherly love continue. The first Exhortation is to Constancy in
Charity toward the Brethren* wherein he secretly commends them, because they
indeed hitherto had embraced and succored for Christ's sake the faithful, or
brethren joined together in Faith, and sincere Religion, and he openly
entreats them that they would go forward constantly, and undefatigably in that
same virtue, Let (says he) brotherly love continue.

Verse. 2. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby some have
entertained Angels unawares. Exhort. 2. More specially, That they practice
hospitality, and kindness toward strangers and foreigners, who want succor
and consolation.

Thereby] The Argument to obedience of the Exhortation is only one. Because
some using hospitality, have entertained Angels, when they thought they had
received men, as Abraham and Lot, Genesis 18, and 19. The force of the Argument
is, Because more good is done in this kind than any one can easily imagine: For
the Lord himself entertaineth any thing that is done in his name to poor
Believers, Prophets, or Disciples.

Verse. 3. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which
suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body. Exhort. 3. That they
be moved in affection toward the Brethren, who are in bonds, especially for
the sake of Religion, and so succor them, as if they themselves in like manner
were bound, and cast into the same prison, and lay in the same bonds with them.
Not so only, but he also exhorts them, that as members of the same mystical
body, they would in some measure be so affected with the evil of the afflicted
Brethren, as they would have others affected toward them if they were in the
same condition, Because so long as they lived, they bare about with them a
mortal body, obnoxious to the same evils: For that which happens to one, may
happen to another, and common infirmity ought to move compassion.

Verse. 4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Exhort. 4. For the maintaining of
Chastity, folded up in two Arguments confirming the Precept.

Argum. 1. To this sense, If any one has not the gift of continency, God has
prepared a remedy and a safe refuge, viz. wedlock, and has pronounced this
condition of life honorable amongst all sorts of men, and the conjugal bed
(used according to the purpose of God) to be holy and undefiled: Therefore
Chastity is to be regarded.

Whoremongers] Argum. 2. If any one neglects wedlock, which is the remedy of
incontinency, and polluteth himself, either with fornication, being a single
man, or with Adultery, being married, let him know (whosoever he is) that
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 5. Let your conversation be without Covetousness: and be content with
such things as ye have: For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee.

6. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what
man shall do unto me.

Exhort. 5. To avoid Covetousness, Lest this vice corrupt their manners. The
Reasons of the Exhortation are three.

The first is propounded under the form of a Precept. Those things that you
have, ought to suffice you, whether ye have them from any honest vocation,
they come from the Divine blessing, and with those ye ought to be contented,
and not to be troubled with the desire of having more: Therefore take heed of
Covetousness.

For he has said] Reas. 2. Out of Joshua verse. 5. In that promise which God
made to Joshua in his calling, God propounds a general consolation to all his
servants in their vocations, viz. that he will not forsake, nor leave them in
supplying them with any thing that is necessary: Therefore take heed of
Covetousness.

So that] Reas. 3. It is no less for any Believer than for David, in Psalm. 118.
verse. 6. to promise to himself with confidence, not only necessary succor as
to this present life, but also Gods help ready against all the oppositions of
wicked men, who endeavor to take away from Gods servants their very lives,
together with all their substance: Therefore Covetousness is to be avoided.

Verse. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you
the word of God: whose Faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.
Exhort. 6. To the keeping the purity of the Gospel without the leaven of Jewish
Doctrine; There are six Reasons of the Exhortation.

Faith follow] Reas. 1. Your Teachers, the Apostles, and other faithful
Ministers of Christ, have preached nothing unto you but the word of God, and
have propounded no end to themselves in their conversation, besides that which
ought to be propounded by faithful teachers, viz. the glory of God, and your
salvation: Therefore imitating their Faith, and looking to the end of their
conversation, keep ye the purity of the Gospel, or the Doctrine of Faith.

Verse. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Reas. 2.
Jesus Christ whose Doctrine is preached to you by his Ministers, is no^ diverse,
but one, remaining the same for ever and ever: Therefore keep the purity of his
Doctrine, and the unity of Faith with those your Teachers, which have preached
to you the Word of God.

Verse. 9. Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines: for it is a
good thing that the heart be esta^lished with Grace, not with meats, which
have not profited them, that have been occupied therein. Reas. 3. Propounded
under the form of a Precept: There are diverse and strange Doctrines, unknown to
the Apostles, which Christ is not the Author of; if ye have hearkened to them,
as the wind drives the chafe up and down the earth, or ships floating in the
Sea, so they shall carry you about hither and thither, that ye shall hold fast
nothing: Therefore be established in preserving the purity of the Gospel.

It is a good thing] Reas. 4. It is better (yea it is absolutely good and
saving) that ye seek the peace and establishment of your heart and conscience
in the Grace of Christ, which only his Gospel commends to you, and not in
Legal Ceremonies, nor in observation of mean, days, and the like: Wherein
Righteousness least of all consists: Therefore keep the purity of Faith without
the leaven of the Jewish Teachers.

Which have not profited] Reas. 5. Confirming the former, from the experience
of them that Judaize; Those Legal observations have profited nothing as to
Righteousness, or Salvation, them that are much conversant, and have spent
their time in them: Therefore keep the pure Faith of the Gospel from all leaven
of this sort.

Verse. 10. We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat, which serve
the Tabernacle. Reas. 6. They that serve the Jewish Tabernacle after Christ's
coming, or they that pertinaciously cleave to Levitical Ceremonies, cannot be
partakers of Christ, which is the thing signified to us by the Altar, and
Sacrifices, and other Levitical shadows, and is the true body of them all:
Therefore the Doctrine of Faith is to be preserved from the leaven of the
Jewish Doctors, who thought that the observation of these Ceremonies was to be
joined with the Gospel. To which purpose the same Apostle says, Gal. 5.2. If
you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, The reason whereof is
this, The observers of Legal Ceremonies, or they that receive shadows now
abolished, do in the prescribed distinction of meats, observation of Altars,
Feasts, Jubilies, Holy water, Priests garments, and the like Ceremonies, really
show forth that the Sun of Righteousness is not yet risen, that Christ is nor
yet come, that the Ceremonial Pedagogy is not yet abolished; but that still the
time of shadows and signs, which were instituted only to prefigure Christ,
until the time of Reformation.

Verse. 11. For the bodies of these beasts, whose blood is brought into the
Sanctuary by the High Priest for sin, are burnt without the Camp.

12. Wherefore Jesus also* that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered without the gate.

He proves that they are to be excluded from Christ, who seek righteousness,
or part of righteousness, in the shadows or works of the Law; because God has
pre-figured this in the type of the Expiatory Sacrifice; from Levit. 23.27. The
blood of the Expiatory Sacrifice was brought by the High Priest into the
Sanctuary, but the flesh was wholly burnt with fire, neither did any thing
thereof come to the Priests, as was given to them from the other Sacrifices.
The Apostle affirms that this signified, that none of those who adhere to the
Covenant of Works, could eat Christ, but were to be excluded from communion
with them, as many as do not firmly adhere to Christ, but seek even the least
part of righteousness in the Levitical shadows, or works.

Without the Camp] God signified by this; First, That Christ was to suffer
without the gates of Jerusalem, and that is plainly come to pass; for Christ
was crucified without the gate. Secondly, That true expiation was to be sought
in the blood of the Messiah, that suffered without Jerusalem, (or the place
consecrated for the Levitical worship) And the Apostle also does teach, that
Christ himself intended this, (having by his providence so disposed of every
thing, that he should suffer without the City) viz. that Christ going without
the gates to offer up himself, would by that very thing signify, that there
was no virtue of Justification or Sanctification to be sought in any legal
Rites, but only in his own blood, all those legal Rites being excluded.

Verse. 13. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp, bearing his
reproach.

14. For here have w^e no continuing City, but we seek one to come.

15. By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God continually,
that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name.

16. But to do good, and to communicate, forget not, for with such Sacrifices
God is well pleased.

From hence the sixth Exhortation is drawn to a prudent imitation of Christ,
going out of the City, and offering up himself to his Father. This imitation
consists in three things. (1) As Christ going without the City renounced the
world, that he might do his Fathers Will; so we for his sake ought to
renounce all worldly things, being ready to leave Father and Mother, family and
goods, unless we would be accounted unworthy of his fellowship. (2) As Christ
has born his Cross, going out into an opprobrious place, Golgotha, so it
behooves us to bear Christ's reproach, or our Cross, after him, that is, to
prepare our selves to suffer banishments persecutions, reproaches, and miseries
of that kind for his sake.

For not] He gives the reason of this branch, because we Believers know that
those worldly things are momentary, and that there is not an abiding place for
us on earth, but we seek a City, that heavenly inheritance, to the obtaining
of which, it becomes us to go out of the world with a ready mind, and to
renounce worldly things.

By him] The third thing, in which we ought to imitate Christ's suffering, is,
that (resting in his intercession, merit, and worthiness) we offer to God
spiritual sacrifices, and acceptable, i. e. As Christ has offered himself to
God, that by his Passion he might fulfill and abolish all Levitical types; so
we (whom he has made perfect by his alone Sacrifice, as to Justification,
and has sanctified us, as Priests consecrated to God, that legal sacrifices
being abolished, we might offer spiritual sacrifices) ought to offer up our
selves, as living Sacrifices for the serving of God; and also Sacrifices of
Praise, Prayer, and Thanksgiving, which are our first fruits, our calves, and
those spiritual sacrifices, which we ought continually to offer to God through
Christ, by whose merit we and our obedience is made acceptable unto God.

To do good] Besides the calves of our lips, he also commands us to do good,
that is, to perform all duties of charity toward all* but most especially
toward the household of Faith.

With such] He backs this part of the Exhortation with a strong reason,
because these kind of sacrifices please God, or are acceptable to him, as the
most sweet fruit of our Faith in Christ, and most evident testimony of our
sincere love toward God, and our neighbor.

Verse. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: For
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Exhort. 7. That
they perform diligently the duties which they owe to Pastors, and Governors,
receiving them reverently as the Ministers of God, loving them for Gods works
sake, which is in their hands, obeying them in all things, which they prescribe
out of the Word of God, to be believed or done in the Name of God, according
to their office, endeavoring with as great thankfulness as may be to
recompense their labors and cares.

They watch] There are four arguments of the Exhortation.

Argum. 1. The Ecclesiastical Ministers, your Leaders, watch for you, praying,
studying, disputing for you, preaching the Gospel, and exercising
Ecclesiastical Discipline amongst you for your good: Therefore obey them.

Account] Argum. 2. God requires an account of your souls from them, i^ but one
perishes by their fault: Therefore obey them, who undergo amongst you so
dangerous and hard a task.

That with joy] Argum. 3. If you obey as it becomes you, you will rejoice your
Pastors, and they will more cheerfully follow their work, but otherwise they
will indeed do their duty, but heavily, and with sorrow; and so ye that ought
to be acceptable to them, will become the cruel tormentors of your Pastors:
Therefore obey them.

For that] Argum. 4. Preventing an Objection: (if perchance any amongst them
might not care for the troubles, griefs and sorrows of their Pastors) it will
turn to your hurt, if Gods Ministers are compelled to mourn through your fault,
God will hear their groanings, and will severely vindicate the contempt of his
Ambassadors: Therefore obey them.

The Second Part.
Verse. 18. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience in all things,
willing to live honestly. The other Part of the Chapter follows, wherein is
contained the conclusion of the Epistle, whereof there are six Articles: In the
first, Because it is the duty of all fellow soldiers in the Army of the Church
Militant, to pray mutually for one another. The Apostle after his manner, about
the end of the Epistle, commends himself to the prayers of the faithful
Hebrews, whom he desires to pray, that God would bless him in all things, but
especially that he might freely and fruitfully preach the Gospel: But he
speaks of himself in the plural number, as it appears out of the words that
follow, which belong to his own person, from which it is manifest, that it was
not unknown to the faithful Hebrews, that Paul was the Writer of the Epistle,
which Peter also confirms unto us, although for the unbelieving Hebrews sake,
whom he endeavored to win, he did not prefix his name, (which was hateful to
them) before this Epistle: The reasons why Paul would have them prays from
himself are two.

We trust] Reason 1. Answering an Objection, because although my reputation is
abused by calumniatours, who are enemies of the Gospel, and cannot bear my
preaching concerning the Grace of Christ, and freedom from the Covenant of
Works, and Levitical Ceremonies, yet I am conscious to my self that I have
duly discharged my office, and of my innocent conversation, that I deserve ill
of none, But he speaks here most modestly concerning himself, lest he should
give any occasion of cavilling.

Rather] Reas. 2. Because if ye shall pray for me, it will come to pass, that
sooner than ye expect, and my prosperous condition may seem to permit, I may
be restored to your Churches, from which I am detained longer than I would,
being much hindered by diverse impediments.

Verse. 19. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to
you the sooner.

20. Now the God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,

21. Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that
which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

Artic. 2. Wherein premising the Arguments of his confidence that he should be
heard, the Apostle prays for the Hebrews, that God would fully sanctify them,
i. e. join them together, perfect, compose them as members of one body, and
make them complete in every good work to do his will. Whereby he intimates,
that we are unfit for every good work, Because, we, as members out of joint,
can neither do that which is our duty to do, nor concur with others to do or
promote any good, until God draw us near unto himself, and joins himself to us,
unless he moves our will, and incites us to will good; working in us both to
will and to do, or to perform that, which he himself commands to be done by
his preceptive will: Which the Apostle more fully explains by adding the manner
whereby God perfects them, Working (says he) in you that which is well
pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, i. e. working efficaciously in you
by his Grace, and through you, works that are pleasing to himself, and working
every good work whereby ye may please him: under which good necessarily are
contained the principles of good actions, and namely the very assent of the
will, and its co-working. And he adds through Jesus. (1) Because all those
good works are purchased for us by the desert of Christ's death. (2) They are
derived to us through him as through a chanel. (3) Those good works are
effected by him. (4) They are purged by him, and made acceptable: Therefore
glory is attributed to God and Christ for ever, Amen. He uses four Arguments
of his confidence in praying, verse. 20.

The God of Peace] Argum. 1. With relation to the peace of the Church, God is
the God of Peace: Therefore ye must confidently ask of God, that he give you
to endeavor after Peace amongst your selves, and toward God in following
after holines^.

Who has brought again] Argum. 2. God has brought again Christ from the dead:
Therefore he both can and will perfect you his sheep, and members of his body,
in every good work, for which Christ is both dead and risen.

The great Shepheard] Argum. 3. Christ is that good Shepherd, and chief Pastor
of his Sheep: Therefore it is to be expected from him, that he sanctify and
fully perfect you his Sheep.

Through the blood] Argum. 4. The everlasting Covenant is made touching the
Redemption of the sheep, i. e. touching the perfecting of their holiness and
salvation, and that is established by the blood of Christ: Therefore ye shall
be perfected in every good work by the Covenant.

Verse. 22. And I beseech you, Brethren, suffer the word of Exhortation, for I
have written a Letter unto you in few words. Artic. 3. In which he prays for
the Hebrews, that they not only take in good part whatsoever may seem sharp in
this hortatory Epistle, but also that they suffer and take well the word of
Exhortation, wherein their ordinary Pastors were more especially to bring and
apply those things to them.

For in few] The Reason of this Petition is, Because those things were more
briefly written by the Apostle, without any allay, which might mollify his
reproofs, and they want explication, larger handling, a more ample and quick
application from their ordinary Pastors.

Verse. 23. Know ye, that our Brother Timothy is set at liberty, with whom if
he come shortly, I will see you. Artic. 4. Is joyful news of the setting
Timothy at liberty, being his daily companion, which he knew was acceptable,
for whom when they had heard that he was in bonds, they grieved, and knowing
that he is at liberty, they may be refreshed. For the same end he hopes that
he with Timothy shall come unto them.

Verse. 24. Salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the Saints.
They of Italy salute you. Artic. 5. Wherein are contained salutations: For
first he sends salutation to all the Pastors, and Governors of the Churches
in Judea: As also to other Believers, that they may know he loves them all
alike. In the third place he salutes in the name of the Saints all the
believing Hebrews in Italy.

Verse. 25. Grace be with you all. Amen. Artic. 6. Wherein Paul after his
accustomed seal, 2 These. 2.17. concludes the Epistle, wishing Grace to all, i.
e. all saving gifts, or whatsoever was necessarily requisite to their
perfection, from the fountain of Gods free goodness.

As for the subscription, after the Epistle, there is no credit to be given to
it: For it is manifest out of this Chapter, verse. 23. that Timothy was absent
when this Epistle was writ: Therefore the subscription seems to be added from
some unskilful Scribe. And therefore we omit them all.

THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE HEBREWS WITH OBSERVATIONS gathered from the TEXT.

By DAVID DICKSON, Professor of Divinity in the University of Glascow.

LONDON, Printed by R. Ibbitson for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at
the Marygold in Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
BEfore the time that something of mine did pass the Press, without my
knowledge, or allowance, I did not mind to come abroad in this Learned Age,
wherein many, more able Men than I am, do keep silence; my Furniture being
fitter for my present Charge, than for more public Edification, in my
judgment; and my Employments so frequent, as my spare time is little, for
farther extent of what the Lord has bestowed upon me. But, since that time,
my just fears, from apparent grounds, that numbers of my Sermons, which were
rudely, and popularly, delivered (as thrice, or four times preaching a week,
might yield) and taken from my Mouth, as it was possible to overtake the
current of running speech; the judicious Writer making what he had overtaken,
to cohere, the best he could; and Copies going from him, to many, with numbers
of faults, and mistakings of the Transcribers; I being unable to revise (for
straightness of time) any thing which was written by them, first, or last. My
just Fears, I say, that these should Come to thy Hands, rude and faulty, as
they are, made me willing rather, when God should grant me leisure hereafter,
to draw up, in short, the points of Doctrine delivered by me in these Sermons;
that thou might have a twenty, or thirty of them, or m^e, possible, in the
bounds and price of one at large.

With this passage of Gods providence, another has concurred, to draw forth
this piece unto thy view in the mean time, which is this: When I considered,
how largely God has provided Helps, for understanding of holy Scripture, by
large Commentaries, and sweet Sermons, especially from His Church in England;
whereby increase of Knowledge is given to the Learned, and such, whose means to
buy, and leisure from their calling to read, and victory over their own
lasiness, for taking pains, does concur with their capacity, for making use of
this the Lords Liberality: I have often requested the Father of Lights, To help
such as either could not, or else would not, profit themselves by that, which
is already granted in his Bounty, by some short, and plain manner of writing;
whereby the weaker judgments might be supported, and all Excuse taken away
from the witty Sluggard, and such whose worldly Employments, and great Affairs,
have seemed sufficient Reasons, to excuse their negligence, and the small and
naughty matters of their own Salvation, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and
Evidences thereof in Scripture.

And, to this purpose, I have been very instant, with the Godly-Learned of mine
acquaintance, to take this matter in hand; and, to divide amongst them, the
hard parts of Scripture, at least, that this work might be done by the hands of
many, which could not be done by one. I found their approbation of my desire,
and inclinable willingness, to put hand to work also. But, some of them, for
the weight of their ordinary Charge, some of them for age, and infirmity of
body, some of them for their hands full of the Lords work in another sort,
could not adve^ture to be straightly engaged in the work. Where-through I was
forced either to forsake my Desires, which daily were kindl^ within me more
and more; or else, come forth with something of this kind, as might be; and
seek amongst my Readers, some to take this Matter to heart; and, to do therein,
as the Lord should enable them, by themselves, or by others.

I have made choice of this Epistle, which is a piece of hard Meat, in the
estimation both of the Apostle, the Writer thereof, ( Chap. 5, and 6.) and of
Peter, giving his judgment of it, ( 2 Pet. 1.15, 16.) That if I should attain
any part of mine intent in any measure, in so hard a place, I might encourage
others, to take in hand a more easy part of Scripture, with more hope of
success.

The Sum of each Chapter, or the Contents, do stand instead of Analysis; and,
in some places, of a Paraphrase. The Text does follow, Verse by Verse. The
Exposition of the Verse, serves for grounds of Doctrines, which Doctrines,
following upon the grounds, are joined, most part, with the Note of Collection
[THEN] Plurality of Doctrines from the ground, or from the Text where the
consequence is easy to be perceived, is distinguished by figures, according to
their numbers. Terms of Art I have eschewed, Because I would be plain to all. I
have spared all enlargement of the Doctrines, which I could spare; leaving them
as grains of Seed, to get their growth in thy mind, by Meditation, which is
necessary for such as love to make use of this sort of writing, because I would
be short. The special handling of such Passages, as the Apostle cites out of
the Old Testament, I have left to their own proper place. Quotations, for
confirmation of my Doctrines, drawn from the ground, I have spared also:
Because, I judged, If the Doctrine was pertinently collected from the ground,
the Text in hand was sufficient confirmation. And if it be not pertinently
collected, I am content that thou pass by it, and take only what is pertinent.
A Quotation could prove the Doctrine true; but not prove it pertinent; and so
not serve my purpose. Many more, and more petinent Consequences, the Learned
will find, which I have not observed: but not for the Learned, or such as are
able, and willing, to make use of larger Writings, do I intend this present.

Therefore, do not look how much thou do miss, which might have been said;
but what in the first frame of this mould could be done, in such brevity. Which
mould, I trust, the Learned shall help, if it please the Lord to stir them up,
to take this matter in hand. I have pressed, singly to point out Truth* without
Partiality; not wresting the Text, to reach a Blow to any man. And what thou
shall make of this present Piece* I am not careful, if I can obtain thereby,
that more able Men may be set on work, to do what I intend, but cannot do.

If the precious Jewel of the Scripture may be more esteemed of, and made use
of, which is more necessary for our Souls, than the Sun in the Firmament is for
our bodies; and, the greatest gift, next after our Lord Jesus down-sending
amongst us, that ever the world saw. If I may by this piece, I say, be an
Instrument, to stir up any to the love of searching the Scriptures, I have not
lost my pains, whatsoever shall become of this Book: Whereunto I have solicited
for no Patronage under Heaven, but thy Christian Good Will to my Aim; to have
our Lord the more honored, in the sound Knowledge* and right use of His
Scripture.

I am confident, that thou will easily judge with me, That the proud, and
profane Despisers of God are worthy to perish, amongst his Enemies: but
consider, and judge again; If profane Despisers of holy Scripture, who disdain
to read, or obey, what God commands therein, be not to be ranked in the same
Roll. For God draws so nigh unto us in his Word, speaking unto us, as a King
unto his Subjects, or a Master unto his Servants, that the obedience, or
disobedience which we give to His Speeches, resolves directly, and
immediately, upon God himself. For what is it else to hear* and believe, and
obey God; but, to hear, and believe, and obey His speeches? And, what is it,
not to take notice of God, to despise, and disobey God, but not to take notice
of his Speeches, not to read his Writings, and not to care for any thing that
He commands, promises, or threatens? Therefore has the Lord written the
great things of his Law unto us, even to be a Touchstone, not only to try all
men's Doctrine thereby, but also to try all men's disposition toward Himself;
and how they stand affected to His Honor, whether as Foes, or as Friends. For,
What readier way is there, to get evidence of a man destitute of the Knowledge,
Faith, Love, Fear, and the rest of the parts of the Image of God, than to find
him destitute of the Knowledge and Love of the Scripture? What surer sign of a
man, who for the present is enemy to God, and to the enlargement of His
Gracious Kingdom, than to find him traducing the perfect Law of the Lord, and
marring, to his power, the free course of the Scriptures light, which is the
Stepter of Christ's Kingdom? Again, What surer sign of a Child of Promise,
begotten of God, than to see him, with David, Psalm. 119. making more of the
Scriptures, than of a Kingdom; and pouring out all his Affections upon it, as
upon the nearest Mean whereby Gods Spirit may be conveyed into his soul, for
perfecting of Holiness; and the readiest Chariot, to carry up his Spirit, to
dwell in God, for perfecting of his happiness.

We shall find also, answerable to Gods purpose of trying men by His
Scripture, His Wisdom, giving a due meeting unto men, as they do make use of
His Scripture. Do they not read it? or do they read, and not consider it? Do
they not weigh, what is imported by it, in sense and meaning? It fares with
them, as with those to whom Christ said, Mat. 22.29. You err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God. Do they not love it? Behold their Plague, 2
These. 2.10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the Truth, that they
might be saved; for this very cause, says the Text, God shall send them strong
delusion, that they should believe a Lie, that they might be damned. Do they
not steadfastly believe, what they learn in Scripture? In Gods judgment, with
the foolish, and unstable, they are suffered to wrest the Scriptures, to their
own destruction* were they never so great wits, 2 Pet. 3.16. Do they not study,
to give obedience unto the ^^own Truth of it? He deals with them, as with
Israel, Psalm. 81.11. My people would not hearken unto my voice, and Israel
would none of me. (He counts himself rejected, because his Word was
rejected) But what follows, verse. 12? So I gave them up, unto their own
hearts lust: and they walked in their own counsels. But to such as will be
Christ's Disciples indeed, Students, seeking to grow in knowledge, belief, and
obedience of his Word? seeking to love him, and keep his sayings, he promises
(Joh. 14.26.) to send unto them. The Spirit, of Truth, the Comforter, the Holy
Ghost, to teach them all things: That is, to perfect their knowledge, more and
more, by his Spirit, to fill their hearts with joy and comfort, according to
his Truth, and to make them holy, more and more.

And why are all these styles given? Even to show, that such as will have
Christ's Spirit to work any of these, must seek him to work all of these
jointly, or not to have him for working any of them at all. Neither comfort
without truth, nor comfort without Holiness. The same is it which Wisdom
cries, Prove. 8.34, 35, 36. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily
at my Gates; waiting at the Posts of my Doors: For who so finds me, finds
life; and shall obtain favor of the Lord. But he that sins against me,
wrongeth his own Soul, all that hate me, love death.

Therefore how thou do hate Death, and love thine own Soul, how thou
stand affected toward Gods, and the fellowship of the Comforter, the holy
Spirit, the Spirit of Truth, and toward the enlargement of the Kingdom of
Christ; let thy affection toward the Scriptures, more abundant dwelling in thy
self, and for the Scriptures more free course amongst others, bear witness.

Farewell.
THE EPISTLE OF PAVL to the HEBREWS.
WHen Peter wrote his second Epistle to the scattered Hebrews, there was extant
an Epistle of Paul, to those same scattered Hebrews also, received in the
Church, for a part of Canonical Scripture, and distinguished from Paul's other
Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16. Therefore amongst other reasons, this may be one,
to make us think this Epistle must be it. For it is without reason to think,
that the Churches should be negligent in keeping such a Jewel, commended unto
them by the Authority of two chief Apostles; or lose Paul's Epistle, and keep
Peter's; which makes mention of it.

The sum of the Epistle.
BEcause the Hebrews were hardly drawn from the observation of Levitical
Ordinances, unto the simplicity of the Gospel, and in danger of making Apostasy
from the Christian Faith, by persecution, the Apostle Paul sets before their
eyes the glory of Jesus Christ, in his person, far above men and Angels; by
whose Ministry the Law was given, not only as God, Chap. 1. but also as man,
Chap. 2. and in his Office above Moses, Chap. 3. Threatening them therefore, if
they should mis-believe Christ's Doctrine, Chapter 3, 4. and above the Levitical
High Priest, Chapter 5. Threatening them again, if they should make Apostasy from
him, Chap. 6. yea above all the glory of the Levitical Ordinances, as he in
whom all those things had their accomplishment, and period of expiring, Chap.
7, 8, 9, 10. Threatening them again, if they should not persevere in the Faith
of Christ: unto which perseverance, through whatsoever difficulties, he
encourages them, by the example of the Faithful before them, Chap. 10, 11. and
by other grounds of Christian comfort, Chap. 12. That so in the fruitful
obedience of the Gospel, they might follow upon Christ, seeking for that City
that is to come, and not for their earthly Jerusalem any more, Chapter 13.

The sum of Chap. I.
IF you shall make comparison, O Hebrews, the Ministry of the Gospel shall be
found more glorious than the Ministry of the Law: For the manner of Gods
dispensing his will before Christ came, was by part and part, and subject to
his own addition: not after one settled manner, but subject to alteration, and
by the Ministry of men, the Prophets, Verse 1. But now he has declared his
last Will gloriously, by his own Son, God and Man in one person, Verse 2, 3.
who is as far above, not only the Prophets, but the Angels also, -- as the
native glory of his Person and Office, is above theirs, Verse 4. For he is of
the same substance with the Father, Verse 5. and partaker of the same worship
with him, Verse 6. The Angels but servants to him, Verse 7. He is eternal God,
and King over all, Verse 8. and in regard of his Manhead and Office, filled
with the Spirit, Verse 9. Yea he is Creator, unchangeable, and everlasting,
Verse 10, 11, 12. Joined with the Father, in the government of the world, Verse
13. The Angels but servants, both to him, and to his children, Verse 14.

The Doctrine contained in Chap. I.
Verse. 1. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past
unto the Fathers by the Prophets. ALbeit the Apostle was willing, that these
Hebrews should understand that this Epistle came unto them from him, as
appears, Chap. 10. verse. 34. yet does he not prefix his name in the body of
it, as in all his other Epistles, that by the prudent dealing of these faithful
Hebrews, as we may think, others who kept p^ejudice against his person, might
be drawn on, to take notice of his Doctrine more impartially, and know his
name, after they had tasted of the truth from him, in a fitter time. Whence we
learn, 1. That it is lawful for godly men, to dispose of the expression of
their names in their writings, as they see it expedient. 2. That it is not much
to be inquired, who is the Writer of any purpose, till we have impartially
pondered the matter written. 3. That it is not always necessary, that we
should know the name of the Writer of every part of Scripture: for the
authority thereof is not from men, but from God, the Inspirer thereof.

1. He says not simply, The Prophets spoke, but God spoke to the Fathers, by
the Prophets.] Then, 1. God was the chief Doctor of his own Church, from the
beginning. 2. And what the Prophets conveyed from God, to the Church, by
Scripture, as it is called here the speaking of God, so it is to be accounted
of still, and not as a dumb letter.

2. He says, God spoke at sundry times. By many parts, as the word imports;
now a part of his will, and then a part farther; at another time yet a part
farther. Then, the Lord was in the way only, of revealing his whole mind to his
Church, before Christ came; letting forth light, by little and little, till the
Son of Righteousness, Jesus Christ, arose, and had not told his whole will. 2.
And for this reason, the Jewish Church was bound to suspend her determination
of the unchangeableness of her Levitical service, till the Lawgiver spoke his
last word, and uttered his full mind, in the fullness of time.

3. He says, before Christ came, God spoke in diverse manners.] Not revealing
his Will after one manner; but sometime by vive voice, sometime by vision, or
dream, or inspiration, or Urim and Thummim, by signs from Heaven, by types, and
exercise of shadowing Ceremonies. Then, No reason the Jews should stick so fast
to the Ordinances of Levi, (they being ins^ituted in the time of the alterable
courses of the Churches Pedagogy) as not to give way to the abolishing of them
by the Messiah: Which to show, is a part of the Apostles main scope.

Verse. 2. Has in these last days spoken unto us, by his Son, whom he has
appointed Heir of all things: by whom also he made the worlds. 1. He says,
God who spoke to the Fathers, has spoken to us.] Then, The same God, who is
Author of the Old Testament, is also Author of the Doctrine of the New
Testament: and the Church of old, and now, is taught of the same God; that the
faith of the Elect might depend upon the Authority of God only, both then and
now; and not on men.

2. These are called the last days.] Then, The fullness of time is now come:
The Lawgiver of the Church has spoken his last Will: His mind is fully
revealed; settled course for the Faith, and service of his Church, is taken;
after which no new alteration of his constitutions is to be expected.

3. He says, God spoke to them by the Prophets, but has spoken to us by his
Son.] Then, 1. As the Son is above the servants, so is Christ above the
Prophets. And no reason, that the Jews should think so much of Moses, and the
Prophets, as for them, to mis-regard Christ's Doctrine, and stick to the
Levitical Service, under pretense of estimation of the Prophets. 2. The glory
of the Gospel is greater than the glory of the Law. 3. The glory of the
ministerial calling of Preachers of the Gospel, is by so much the greater, as
it has the Son of God first-man in the Roll thereof; as first Preacher, and
Prince of Preachers. 4. Christ's Sermons are all of them directed unto us: and
so much more highly should the Doctrine of the Gospel be esteemed of, by us.

4. In describing Christ, he says, the Son is Heir of all things: that is,
he has received a domination over all creatures, from the Father; that as He
is Lord over all, so is Christ.] Then, 1. Christ is Heir of all things in the
Church also, Lord of the Sabbath, and of all the service annexed to it, to whom
it is lawful to chop and change the Levitical Ordinances, at his pleasure. 2.
And Heir of all the Prerogatives and Promises, made to the Jews, or others;
through whom only, as the righteous owner of all things, both Jew and Gentile
must seek and keep right to what they have, or can claim: And therefore it
behoved the Hebrews to enter themselves Heirs to their privileges by Christ,
or else to be disinherited.

5. He says, God by his Son, made the worlds.] So he calls the world, for
the variety of times, and ages, and fleeces of the creatures, one succeeding
another. Then, 1. Christ is God, Creator of all things. 2. He is a distinct
person from the Father; by whom the Father made all. 3. That which the Father
does, the Son does the same; yet so, as in order of working, the Father is
first, and the Son is next; working with, and from the Father.

Verse. 3. Who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of His
Person, and upholding all things, by the Word of his Power, when He had, by
Himself, purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.
In describing Christ, he uses borrowed similitudes: for what proper word can
be found, to express so great a mystery* And what can we conceive of his
Godhead, but by resemblance? Yea, he uses more similitudes than one; for it
is but little we can conceive of him by one: and what we might misconceive by
too hard pressing of one similitude, by another is corrected; and so our
conception helped.

1. Christ the Son, is called the brightness of his Fathers Glory.] The
similitude is borrowed from the Sun beams. Then, 1. As the Father is glorious,
so is Christ his Son glorious, with the same glory* Therefore 1 Cor. 2.8. He
is called the Lord of Glory. 2. As the beams of light have their original from
the Sun, so has Christ his original of the Father, and is unseparable from
him: for as the Sun was never without its light, so neither was the Father ever
without the Son, but co-eternally with him. 3. As the Sun is not manifested,
but by its own brightness; so the inaccessible light of the Fathers Glory, is
not revealed to the creature, but by the Son.

2. Christ is called the express Image of the Fathers Person.] The similitude
is borrowed from a Signets impression, which represents all the lineaments of
the Seal.

Then, 1. The Father is one person, and the Son is one other person of the
Godhead, having his own proper subsistence distinct from the Father. 2. The Son
resembles the Father, fully, and perfectly; so that there is no perfection in
the Father, but the same is substantially in the Son: As the Father is Eternal,
Omnipotent, Omnipresent, infinite in Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Holiness, and
all other Perfections; so is the Son Omnipotent, Eternal, and all that the
Father is. 3. Whatsoever perfection we can perceive in Christ, shining in his
Manhead, or Word, or Works; the same we may conclude to be in the Father
also, whose resemblance, and express Image he is. Find we Christ good and
merciful, loving and pitiful, meek and lowly, not abhorring the most vile and
miserable, whether in soul or body, that comes unto him for relief* we may
be assured, that such a one is the Father; and no otherwise minded to such as
seek unto him through Christ.

3. Christ upholdeth all things, by the word of his power.] Then, 1. The
preservation of the Creatures, as well as their Creation, is from Christ. The
Father upholdeth all, so does the Son. 2. What he does, he does as Omnipotent
God, by his Word, without trouble or burden. As he spoke, and all was done;
So he but by his Word commands, and all stands fast. And this his Word is
nothing else, but his powerful Will, ordaining things to be, and continue; and
powerfully making them so to be, and continue, so long as he will.

4. Christ by himself purged our sins. To wit, by bearing our sins upon his
body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.4.] Then, 1. Our sins are filthiness that must be
purged. 2. The satisfactory cleansing of our sins, is not a thing to be done
by men's meritorious doings, or sufferings, but already done, and ended, by
Christ, before he ascended; and that by himself alone, all creatures being
secluded. 3. He that upholdeth all things, by the Word of his own Power; and
he that purged our sins, by his own Blood, is but one self-same Person; God
and Man is He in one Person.

5. Christ sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.] That is, when
Christ had cleansed our sins by his death, he ascended to Heaven, and
possessed himself as Man, in the fellowship of the same Glory, which as God he
had before the World was, Joh. 17.4, 5.

Then, 1. The Son is joined in the fellowship of the same Glory with the
Father, as well in his Manhead after his Resurrection, as in his Godhead before
his Incarnation. For, though the glory of Christ's Godhead was hid, for a while,
by the sufferings of his Manhead, yet was it not abolished, nor in it self
abated thereby: but the Manhead first assumed unto the unity of Person with the
Godhead, that our Ransom might be rich; and then, to the union of the same
Glory, that the Redeemer, after the Ransomes paying, might be altogether
glorious.

2. Seeing he that has cleansed our sins, is so glorious a Person, all the
means of his cleansing us, how base soever, such as were his Hunger and Thirst,
his Poverty and Weakness, his shameful and painful Death, should be glorious
in our eyes also.

3. Majesty, and Magnificence, and Grandeur, properly so called, is the Lords.
The highest excellencies of the creature, are but sparks of his Majesty, and
weak resemblances only, albeit their earthly glory often hold men's eyes so, as
they forget the Lords Greatness.

Verse. 4. Being made so much b^tter than the Angels, as he has by Inheritance
obtained a more excellent Name than they. 1. He proves Christ to be greater
than the Angels, because his Name is more excellent than theirs.] For they are
called Angels, and he Gods Son: which he is said to have by inheritance as
due to him; both as God by eternal Generation, and as Man by assumption of our
Nature in unity of one person; according to which he is not the adopted, but
natural Son of God: Filius natus, non filius factus. Then God gives not idle
titles: as God calls things, so they are, or are made to be. Christ, as God,
is called Gods Son, because by eternal Generation he is so: as Man he is
called Gods Son, because by assumption of the humane nature unto the personal
union of his Godhead, he is made so to be.

2. As far as Sonship is above servile employment, so far is Christ more
excellent than the Angels.

Verse. 5. For, unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he
shall be to me a Son. 1. He proves this point by Scripture, Psalm. 2.7. 2 Samuel 7.19. and puts them to improbation of his Doctrine by Scripture, if
they could.

Then, 1. In the Primitive Church, in matters of Religion, all Authority was
silent, and Divine Scripture spoke, and determined questioned points of Truth.
2. The Apostle counted it sufficient, to bring Scripture for his Doctrine; and
permits no impugning of it, but by Scripture.

2. Only of Christ, says God, I have begotten thee.]

Then, 1. Howsoever God has many Sons by Creation, by Office, by Grace, and
Adoption; yet, a Son by Generation, a native Son, has he none, but Christ. 2.
Christ is of the same Nature and Essence, with the Father, consubstantial with
him; because begotten of him, in himself, without beginning; the Son being
eternally in the Father, and the Father eternally in the Son, of the self-same
Nature, and Godhead.

3. This day have I begotten thee.] Being understood of Christ, according to
his Godhead, signifies the Fathers timeless, eternal, perpetual constant, and
present Generation of his Son, in himself, being understood according to his
state, in his Man-head, it signifies the Fathers bringing forth of the Son, to
the knowledge of the World, and declaring him to be the Son of God, with
power, by his Resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4. These places, it is true,
were spoken of David and Solomon, as Types of Christ, typically, in a slender
resemblance, Psalm. 2.7. and 2 Samuel 7.19. But the body of the Truth aimed at, and
signified, was Christ resembled by them, as here we see. Whence we learn,
that typical speeches in Scripture, have not their perfect meaning, neither can
be fully expounded, nor truly understood, till they be drawn to Christ, in whom
they have their accomplishment, and of whom they mean to speak, under the name
of the Types. And therefore neither could the old Church of the Jews, nor can
we get comfort in any of them, till Christ in whom all the Promises are Yea
and Amen, be found included in them.

Verse. 6. And again, when he brings in the first begotten into the world,
He says, And let all the Angels of God worship him. 1. He says, that is,
the Father says, Psalm. 97.7* Then, The Scripture which elsewhere is called the
Speech of the Holy Ghost, is also the speech of the Father.

2. He brings in his first begotten into the World.] Then,

1. The Father is the Author of Christ's Incarnation, and of his Kingdom
amongst Men, and of Divine Glory given to him in his Kingdom. 2. Christ is the
Fathers first begotten, both for the eternity of his Person, begotten without
beginning, before the world was; and for the excellency of his Person, being
more glorious than all Angels, or Men, which get the name of Children, either
by Creation, or Adoption.

3. The Father commands; Let all the Angels of God adore Him. Then, 1. The
Father communicates to Christ, as his own Nature, and Godhead, by Generation;
so also his own Glory, by commanding the creatures to adore him. 2. What the
creatures adore, they acknowledge by adoration, to be God; so God esteems. 3.
And Christ is the Angels God, because they must adore Him.

Verse. 7. And of the Angels He says, Who makes His Angels Spirits, and His
Ministers, a flame of fire. He makes his Angels Spirits etc. Psalm. 104.5,
Then, 1. God made not the Angels, to get any part of Christ's room in the
Churches worship; but to serve Christ, as lowly as any of the meanest
creatures. 2. And the Angels, indeed, are as ready to do so, and as swift and
active in their service, as the Winds, and fire-slaughts.

Verse. 8. But unto the Son He says, Thy Throne O God, is for ever and ever: a
Scepter of Righteousness, is the Scepter of thy Kingdom.

9. Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity: Therefore God, even thy
God, has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows.

1. By this place, cited out of Psalm. 45.7. It is evident, that the 45. Psalm
is a Song of the mystical Marriage of Christ and his Church: and in this
Passage a number of notable Doctrines, concerning Christ, are pointed at. 1.
He is called God; and so is fit to reconcile us to God; able and
all-sufficient, to accomplish our Salvation: a Rock, to lean unto. 2. A King
enthroned, not only over the World, but in a gracious manner, over the Church,
which he marries to himself in this Psalm: and therefore shall his Church
have Laws, and Direction, and Protection from him. 3. He has a Throne for
ever and ever; and therefore shall his Church, which is his Kingdom, endure
for ever and ever. 4. He has a Scepter, to rule with; and therefore power,
and authority, to take order with his subjects, and with his Enemies also. 5.
His Scepter, is a Scepter of Righteousness; because he cannot abuse his power,
to do wrong to any, but will do right to all; yea, and lead on his Subjects to
Righteousness of Faith, to justify them before God, and Righteousness of
Conversation, to adorn them before Men.

2. He loves Righteousness, and hates Iniquity.] And therefore, 1. His
Scepter cannot be swayed but righteously. 2. And so must his Subjects set
themselves to do, if they will please him.

3. Therefore, Christ's God has anointed him, with the Oil of Gladness, above
his Fellows. Then, 1. As Christ is God himself, so also is he Man under God,
in regard of his Man-head, and Office therein. 2. And God is his God by
Covenant: Christ as man, is confederate with God. 3. And he has Fellows in
the Covenant: that is, others of mankind, with whom he is partaker of flesh
and blood, Fellow-brethren, and Coheirs, Shares-men in all the Fathers Goods
with him. 4. He is anointed with the Oil of Gladness; furnished with the
Spirit that brings joy unto him, and all his Subjects, who get conveyed unto
them by Christ, Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. 5. He is
anointed above his Fellows. The rest of the confederate Saints are anointed
also; yet by measure, receive they the Spirit. But Christ is anointed above
them* the Spirit is not given to him by measure; but to dwell bodily, or
substantially, that we of his fullness may all receive, Grace for Grace.

4. Because he loves Righteousness, etc. Therefore he is anointed. Then, The
Righteousness of Christ, is the procuring, and meritorious cause of this joy to
him, and his Subjects, Fellows in the Covenant.

Verse. 10. And Thou Lord, in the beginning, have laid the Foundation of the
Earth: and the Heavens are the Works of thine Hands.

11. They shall perish, but Thou remainest: and they all shall wax old, as does
a Garment.

12. And as a Vesture shall Thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but
Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not fail.

1. Another Testimony of Christ, from Psalm. 102.25, 26. wherein he is expressly
called, 1. Jehovah, God in essence, the same God with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, who gives Being to the Creatures, and Performance to the Promises. 2.
Who laid the Foundation of the Earth, etc. and so Creator of Heaven and Earth.
3. And by consequence, who can create in us a right Spirit, and make us, of
naughty sinners, Sons.

2. They shall perish, wax old, and be changed, Then, The Heavens and the
Earth, now subject to corruption, shall both not continue; and yet they shall
not utterly be abolished, but changed, into an incorruptible estate, for man's
cause, Romans 8.21.

3. Christ remains, and is the same, and his years fail not. Then, 1. Christ
is eternal: and our Mediator cannot be missing, cannot dye. 2. Constant, and
immutable, and cannot change his purpose of love, to his called Ones,
whatsoever changes befall them. And this is the Rock of the Churches comfort,
when she looks to her own frailty and changeableness.

Verse. 13. But to which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit on my right
hand, until I make thine Enemies thy footstool? Psalm. 110. 1. To which of the
Angels, said he?] He asks for Scripture, to show what is due to Angels.
Then, 1. The Scripture must determine what is due to Angels, and other
Creatures; what is to be thought of them, and done to them also. 2. And no word
in Scripture does countenance the giving of the glory of the Mediator, to any
Angel.

2. The Father has said to Christ, Sit Thou on my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy Footstoot.] Then, 1. Christ's Kingdom will not want enemies.
2. Yea, his enemies shall be such, as there shall be need of divine wisdom,
and power, to overcome them. 3. God professes himself Party, against all the
enemies of Christ's Church and Kingdom. 4. God will put them at under, piece
and piece, and altogether at length. 5. Their opposition and overthrow, shall
serve to glorify Christ's Kingdom and Government: They shall be his Footstool.
6. In the mean time of this Battle, Christ in his own Person, shall continue
equal with Glory and Majesty, with the Father, beholding the Victory brought
about, and bringing it about, with the Father, unto the Soldiers comfort.

Verse. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth, to minister for
them who shall be Heirs of Salvation? The Angels are all ministering Spirits.
Then, 1. Angels are not bodies, but their substance is invisible. 2. They are,
all of them, even these that are called Archangels, the greatest of them, but
servants to Christ; and none of them must have their Masters honor: that is,
any religious worship of prayer, or invocation, made to them.

2. They are sent forth, for Service, or Ministering.] Then, Their employment is
about Gods Children, to attend us, and serve us, at Christ's direction: not to
be served by us, by any devotion.

3. Christ's Subjects are called Heirs of salvation.] Then, 1. They are Sons. 2.
And what they get, is by Heirship, by virtue of their Adoption and Sonship; not
by merit of their works. 3. And they shall surely get Salvation, as an
Heritage, never to be taken from them.

The Sum of Chap. II.
FRom the former Doctrine he infers; Seeing Christ is so glorious, let his
Gospel be steadfastly believed, Verse. 1. For if the disobedience of the Law,
given by the Ministry of Angels, was punished* Verse. 2. Far more the
disobedience of the Gospel, so gloriously confirmed, Verse. 3, 4. For Christ is
greater than the Angels, even as Man, and has all things in subjection to him,
Verse. 5. As David witnesses, speaking of elected men, with their Head, the Man
Christ, Verse. 6, 7, 8. And, albeit we see not that subjection yet fully
accomplished, Verse. 8. Yet it is begun in Christ's personal Exaltation. And, for
his short humiliation, under the estate of Angels, by suffering, we must not
stumble: For, it is both glorious to himself, and profitable for us, Verse. 9.
For, Gods glory required, that our salvation should be wrought by sufferings of
the Mediator, Ves. 10. And to this end he behoved to be partaker of our
Nature, as was foretold, Verse. 11, 12, 13. That he might take on our due
punishment; that is, Death, Verse. 14. And deliver his own from the fear
thereof, Verse. 15. And herein we have a privilege above the Angels, in that
he took on our Nature, and not theirs, Verse. 16. And by his sufferings, a
ground of so much greater comfort in him, Verse. 17, 18.

The Doctrine of Chap. II.
Verse. 1. Therefore, we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things
which we have heard* lest at any time we should let them slip. 1. THerefore,
We ought to give heed, etc.] From the Excellency of Christ's Person, be urges
the Belief of his Doctrine. Then, 1. CHRIST must be esteemed of, as becomes
the Excellency of his Person. 2. The way how CHRIST will be respected of us, is
by respecting his Doctrine. And the Excellency of his Person, should procure
our reverend receiving of his Word, and steadfast holding of it.

2. He will have us to take heed, lest we should let it slip. The word is
borrowed from rent and leaking Vessels, or sandy ground. Then, 1. The Gospel is
a precious liquor, worthy to be well kept. And we, of our selves, are as rent
Vessels, ready to let it slip, when we have heard it; or like sandy ground,
which keeps not the rain.

3. For this we ought to give the more earnest heed.] Then, The Conscience of
the worth of CHRIST, and his Gospel, and of our own unfitness to retain it,
should sharpen our vigilance, and attendance, to keep it: else we will
doubtless let it slip.

4. He says not, lest shortly; but, lest at any time.] Then, It is not
sufficient to believe the Word for a while, and for a while to remember it: but
we must gripe it so, as never to quit it by mis-regard, or misbeleef. For,
Faith, and love of the Truth, is the good memory that specially he requires
here.

Verse. 2. For, if the word spoken by Angels, was steadfast, and every
transgression, and disobedience received a just recompense of reward. 1. He
reasons from the Law spoken by Angels.] Then, The Angels were employed in
giving of the Law, they did blow the Trumpet; they, from GOD, uttered the word
to Moses.

2. The word spoken by them, was steadfast.] Then, What God delivers by the
Ministry of Messengers, is authorized, and ratified by GOD.

3. Every transgression was punished.] Then, The punishment of transgressors or
his Law, is a proof of GODS authorizing the Doctrine.

4. He calls the punishment a just Recompense.] Then, There is no evil
befalls sinners, more than they do deserve: None has cause to complain of
injustice.

Verse. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which, at
the first, began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them
that heard him. 1. How shall we escape?] The Apostle joyneth himself with them
in the Threatening. Then, So should Preachers threaten their people, as willing
to undergo the same punishment, except they flee the sin, for which they
threaten others.

2. He reasons for the punishment of the Law-breaking, to prove the
punishment of misbelieving the Gospel.] Then, 1. The not-embracing of the
Gospel, is a greater sin, than the breach of the Law. The despising of
forgiveness, is much worse than the making of the fault. 2. Examples of
Judgment upon Transgressors of the Law, are evidences of greater Judgments to
come on the misregarders of the Gospel.

3. He calls the Gospel, so great a Salvation; because of the free Offer of
Remission of sins, and eternal Life, in it. Then, The greatness of the benefit
to be gotten by the Gospel, aggravateth the sin of the misregarders of it.

4. He says not, If we reject, deny, or persecute the Gospel; but, if we
neglect.] Then, The neglect of the Doctrine of the Gospel, the careless
receiving of it, the not studying to know it, is sufficient to draw down
heavier judgments, than ever fell on the breakers of the Law; albeit a man be
not an Under-miner, or open Enemy to the Gospel.

5. He describes the Gospel, to be that Doctrine which Christ himself
preached, and his Apostles from him. Then, we are not bound to believe any
more for Gospel, than that which is made clear unto us by his Apostles word.
And the misregarding of other Doctrine, which is not conveyed so from him,
falls under the threatening.

6. He marketh the Apostles certainty, of what they have delivered unto us, in
that they were ear-witnesses of his Doctrine. Then, The more certainty the
Apostles had from Christ of their Doctrine, the surer is the groundwork of our
belief, and the greater is the contempt done to Christ in their Message, by
unbelief.

Verse. 4. God also bearing them witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and with
diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will? 1. He
says, God bare witness to the Apostles Doctrine, by signs and wonders.

Then, 1. What the Apostles have spoken from Christ, they spoke not alone, but
God with them, witnessed with them. 2. The proper use of Miracles, and
extraordinary Gifts powered out in the Apostolic times, was to testify, that
the Apostles Doctrine was Divine Truth. Those, then, must be lying wonders,
which are alleged for confirming any Doctrine beside theirs.

2. The distribution of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, was according to his own
will; not as possibly the Apostles would have carved, either to themselves, or
others, in the nature of the gift, or measure of it. Then, The Apostles were so
employed in the working of Miracles, as it was evident, even then, that not
they, but God was the worker of them, while he was seen to follow his own will
therein, and not man's carving, in distributing his gifts. And the more Gods
overruling Will was seen in the miracles then, the more confirmation have we
of that Doctrine now.

Verse. 5. For, unto the Angels has he not put in subjection the World to
come, whereof we speak. 1. He calls the World under the Kingdom of the
Messiah, The World to come: first to put a difference betwixt the estate of the
World considered as under Sin, and under the Messiah. For, as it is under sin,
it is said of it, Old things are past away, 2 Cor. 5.17. Esa. 43.19. The
creature is waxing old, and running to ruin. But under the Messiah it is said
of it, Behold, I make all things new, 2 Cor. 5.17. The creature is lifting up
its head, and waiting for the day of liberation from ^anity, and the
manifestation of the Sons of God, Romans 8.19. Then, The Kingdom of the Messiah
makes another World, in effect, of that which was of old; changing the
holding, and nature, and use of all things, to his Subject^* For, a man, ere
he come in to Christ, is Gods enemy; and to him all things in the World are
enemies, the Host and Soldiers of his dreadful Judge. But after a man is made
Christ's Subject, they turn all to be his Friends, and his Fathers servants,
working altogether for his good. That is another, and a new World indeed.

2. It is called the World to come; because, albeit this change began with the
work of Grace, before Christ came, yet it was nothing in comparison of the
World i^ come, under the Messiah. And, that which is now under the Gospel, is
little or nothing, in comparison of that glorious change of the nature and use
of all things, unto Christ's Subjects, which is to be revealed at his last
coming. Then, whatsoever thing we have hitherto found to our good, since we
knew Christ, it is but little to what shall be: our World is but to come, 1
Cor. 15.19.

3. The World is put in subjection to Christ, that he may dispose of it at his
pleasure. Then, Christ is twice Sovereign Lord of the World: once, as Creator;
again, as Mediator, in his Manhead, to make all the creatures in heaven and
earth serve, nill they, will they, to farther the work of full Redemption,
which he has undertaken.

4. He excludes the Angels from this honor. Then, In Christ's Kingdom the
Angels are in subjection to Christ, for the good of his Subjects, no less than
sheep and oxen, as the Psalm says, and not to be adored with him, as
Sovereigns over us.

Verse. 6. But one, in a certain place, testified, saying, What is man, that
thou art mindful of him? Or, the Son of man, that thou visitest him?

7. Thou made him a little lower than the Angels: Thou crownedst him with
glory and honor, and did set him over the works of thine hands.

1. Being to prove, by Scripture, his purpose, he cites neither Book, nor
Chapter, but the words which are of the eighth Psalm, and fourth Verse. Then,
The Apostle will have the Church so well acquainted with text of Scripture,
that at the hearing of the words, they might know where it is written, though
neither book nor verse were cited.

2. The Prophet looking on man, even on Christ's manhead, wherein he was
humbled, he wondereth to see man's nature so highly dignified, above all
creatures. Then* 1. The baseness of man's natural being, compared with other
more glorious creatures, makes Gods love to us above all other creatures, so
much the more wonderful. 2. Christ's Humiliation and Exaltation, were both
foreseen, and revealed by the Prophets.

Verse. 8. Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet. For, in that
he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under
him. But now we see not yet all things put under him. 1. He proves, that
Angels are in subjection to Christ, because the text of the Psalm says, All is
put in subjection: and so neither Angels, nor other creatures, are excepted.
Then, 1. For understanding of the meaning of Scripture, it is necessary to
consider, not only what it says expressly, but also what it says by
consequence of sound reason. 2. And whatsoever is rightly deduced by evidence
of sound reason of the words of Scripture, is the meaning of the Scripture, as
if it were spoken expressly.

2. H^e says, There is nothing left that is not put under Christ. Then, Not
good Angels only, but all Spirits, and all that they can do also, are subject
to Christ; and he can make them, nill they, will they, contribute to the
furtherance of his own purpose, for the good of his Subjects, and hurt of his
foes.

3. Because Christ's enemies are still troubling his Kingdom, he moves a
doubt, saying, We see not yet all things put under him. Then, 1. The troubles
of Christ's subjects, hinder the natural mind to perceive the Glory of Christ's
advancement. 2. Carnal reason, the Proctor of mis-belief, will admit no more of
divine truth, than it is capable of, by sense.

Verse. 9. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels, for
the suffering of death crowned with Glory and Honor; that he, by the Grace of
God, should taste death for every man. 1. He answers the doubt, saying, We
see Jesus crowned with glory and honor: and so a course taken for putting all
that oppose him, farther and farther under him. Then, 1. The subjection of all
things to Christ's Throne, cannot be seen, but in the exaltation of his person.
2. When we see his person exalted to such high dignity in heaven, it is easy
to see him put all under that rises up against him. 3. That which may be
taken up of Christ, partly by his word and doctrine, partly by his miraculous
works, and extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, powered out upon the Primitive
Church, partly by his ordinary and powerful working upon the souls of his own,
since that time, unto this day, humbling and comforting, changing and
reforming, men's hearts and lives: I say, these evidences of his Power, do make
a spiritual eye, in a manner, to see Jesus, the worker of these works, crowned
with glory and honor.

2. He meets another doubt, arising from the abasement of Christ in his
sufferings and death, to which he answers in the words of the Psalm: first,
that it was foretold in that same Psalm, that he was to be made, for a
little, lower than the Angels; to wit, by suffering of death. Then, 1. The
Cross of Christ is a ready stumbling block for a carnal mind: else, what needed
the removing of the scandal? 2. It is true indeed, Christ in his humiliation,
was abased under the Angels, and emptied. 3. This abasement was but a little,
and for a short time. 4. It was foretold in the Psalm that speaks of his
Exaltation. 5. If we look to the Scripture foretelling, we shall not stumble
at Christ's Humiliation.

3. He gives a farther answer, by showing the end of Christ's Suffering, to
be for our cause, in the favor of God to us, That he should, by the Grace of
God, taste Death, for every one of us.

Then, 1. Christ's suffering was not for his own deserving, but for ours; and
therefore, should be glorious in our eyes. 2. Every Believer, and Elect Soul,
has interest in that death of his: and so every man bound to love him, and
magnify him for it, and to apply the fruit of it to himself. 3. This death was
but a tasting of death, because he continued but a short time under it: for,
his short suffering was so precious, that he could not be holden by the
Sorrows of Death, but Death, for a little, was sufficient; and therefore,
should diminish no man's estimation of him. 4. It was by the Grace of God that
his Death, for a short, should stand for our Eternal: and therefore, gracious
and glorious should these his sufferings be esteemed by us.

Verse. 10. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many Sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their
Salvation perfect through sufferings. 1. Another reason of Christ's Suffering.
This way of our saving by Christ's Sufferings, made for the Glory of God, and
our good.

Then, When the reasons of Christ's Death are seen, the scandal of his Cross
cease.

2. There is a work to do here, a great many of Sons to be brought to glory.

Then, 1. All the Elect, and saved Souls, are in the rank of Children. 2.
Albeit they be few in comparison of the world, yet are they, many of them, all
together. 3. There is not one of them all, who can go to Heaven, or Salvation,
but by Christ's leading and conduct.

3. The Captain of their Salvation must be made perfect, through suffering.
Then, 1. How perfect soever Christ be in himself, yet before his suffering he
lacked one thing, which his Office toward us, required; to wit, experimental
suffering of such sorrows as his soldiers and followers are subject unto. 2.
When his sufferings were ended, he was perfectly fitted to comfort us, seeing
he found our sorrows in himself sometime.

4. He says, It became God, for whom, and by whom, are all things, that the
matter should be so brought about. Then, 1. All things are for Gods Glory at
the end: and so should the manner of our salvation be also. 2. All things are
by Gods Hand and Power brought about: and reason too, that he dispose of the
means of our salvation, as he pleases. 3. This way became God most of any: It
brought him greatest Glory, by the Shame, Sorrow, and Death, of one, to bring
Glory, and Joy, and Life, to many.

Verse. 11. For both He that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all
of one: For which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren. 1. If any
should further ask, how could he die? or, how could Justice accept him in our
stead? He answers, Because he is one of our kind, and nature. Then, 1.
There is a natural Band betwixt Christ and his Followers. They are of the same
stock, of the same natural substance. 2. Christ's natural Band with us, makes
him a direct entress to redeem us.

2. He calls Christ, him that sanctifies; and the Believers, they who are
sanctified.]

Then, 1. The Band of Nature betwixt Christ and Men, is reckoned unto those
only who are sanctified; with none other will Christ reckon Kindred. 2.
Therefore they must study to Holiness, that would claim Kindred to Christ. 3.
The sanctification which it behooves us to have, must proceed from Christ: no
holiness, until a man be in him.

3. He says, Christ is not ashamed to call the Sanctified, Brethren.] Then,
1. As Christ has dimitted himself to our Nature, so also to the styles of
consanguinity with us. 2. Christ is as kindly affectioned to his Followers, as
ever Brother was to another: he will not misken his own, albeit unworthy. 3.
That which may serve to our glory and comfort, Christ will think it no disgrace
to himself.

Verse. 12. Saying, I will declare Thy Name unto my Brethren: In the midst of
the Church will I sing praise unto Thee. He proves that he calls us
Brethren, from Psalm. 20. verse. 22. The Messiah there, takes upon him, to
preach to men, and to praise the Father. Then, 1. With our Nature, Christ took
on also the Yoke of the Exercises of Religion. 2. He joyneth with us, in the
Discharge of them. 3. He is first in the Exercise: not only because he
discharged them in his own proper person; but also because still by his Spirit,
where two, or three are gathered together in his Name, he is in the midst of
them; moving, and moderating, the Spirits of his own delectable Organs.

Verse. 13. And again, I will put my trust in him. And again, Behold, I, and the
children which God has given me. 1. The next proof is from Psalm. 18. Verse. 2.
Where Christ under the type of David, promises to believe in the Father.

Then, 1. Christ is one of the number of Believers, one of the Covenant of
Grace, confederate by Faith: and therefore, he behoved to be a man to this
end. 2. Then have we, in the sense of our unbeleef, the comfort of the
soundness and strength of Christ's believing, as well as of his other
Perfections.

2. The third proof is from Isa. 8.18. Wherein Christ, under the type of the
Prophet Isaiah, presents himself with his chosen Children, before the Father.
Then, 1. Christ is our Father also, and we his Children. 2. We are given to
him of the Father. 3. We are not presented before the Father, without our
Mediator Christ. 4. Christ, and we his little ones, joined together, and
separated from the world, are a pleasant sight, for the Father to behold.

Verse. 14. Forasmuch, then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood;
He also Himself likewise took part of the same; that through death, He might
destroy him that had the power of death; that is, the Devil. 1. He gives
further reasons of his Incarnation. And first, he behoved by death to destroy
the Devil, that had the power of death: and so behoved to be a Man, that he
might dye.

Then, 1. Sinners without Christ, are under the sentence of death, temporal and
eternal. 2. Satan has power of Death, as the Burrio has power over the Pit
and Gallows, at death to take them away to torment, who are not delivered from
his power. 3. Christ has destroyed Satan's power, and tyranny, in this point,
in behalf of all his Elect, and true Believers. 4. The way how Christ has
overcome Satan, is by his own death, ransoming his own. 5. For as death behoved
to be the way, it behoved also Christ to be a mortal man, as well as God,
that he might dye.

2. Again he says, Christ took part of flesh and blood with the Children:
that is, with the Elect given to him.] Then, 1. Love to the Elect, made the Son
of God come down, and make himself a Man also. 2. Christ in his humane Nature,
is as kindly a Man, as any of the Elect; having flesh, and blood, and bones as
well as we. His flesh and blood is not only like to ours; but is a part of
our substance; who is come of the same stock of Adam and Eve, as surely as
ours: and not made either by Creation of nothing, or by trans-substantiation of
some other things than our substance.

Verse. 15. And deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life
time subject to bondage. Another fruit of Christ's death, is the delivery of
Believers, from the bondage of the fear of death* wherein they do lie before
Belief.

Then, 1. There is a natural fear of Death, and the Devil, and Hell, rooted in
all men, always: albeit not as yet felt, yet easily wakened. 2. This fear
puts men in bondage, that they dare not meditate on Death, or Gods
Judgment, or Hell, as deserved by themselves. 3. Christ's death delivers his
Subjects from the danger of this evil, and from the bondage of this fear also.
4. None but a Child of Christ, can have solid and true courage against death:
neither is there a free man in the world, except true Christians.

Verse. 16. For verily, He took not on Him the nature of Angels, But He took
on him the seed of Abraham. He insisteth in the Doctrine of Christ's
Incarnation, because it is the ground of all our comfort; and secludeth the
Angels from such an honor, as we have thereby. The Son of God took on him the
seed of Abraham, and not the nature of Angels, says the Apostle. Then, 1.
Christ has his proper subsistence, and being in himself* before the
Incarnation, even his own Divine Nature, with personal properties existing: For
he is the Son of God, the second person of the Godhead, before he took on
our nature. 2. He chose to assume our nature, for our delivery, and not the
Angels nature, for delivery of such as were fallen of their kind. 3. The nature
that he takes on, is man's very nature; the seed of Abraham. 4. He preventeth
the personal subsistence of our nature; he assumeth the seed of Abraham. 5.
He makes an Union of our nature, with his Divine Nature. 6. The way of making
the Union, is Assumption, or Taking of our nature unto his own, whereby
remaining the same which he was before; to wit, The Son of God, he joyneth
our nature to himself; and becomes what he was not before; to wit, The Son of
Man. 7. He assumeth the seed of Abraham, that he may be known to be no other,
but the same Messiah, which was promised by the Prophets, to the Fathers. 8.
When he has assumed Man's Nature, to His own Divine Nature, He remains the
same He that He was before, still one person. So Christ Jesus is the promised
Messiah; the second person of the Godhead; very God from everlasting, and very
Man since the conception of the Virgin Mary: before his Incarnation, having
only his own Divine Nature in his person; but now since that time, having our
Nature also, personally united with his Divine Nature, so to remain, both God
and Man in one person, for our good, for ever.

Verse. 17. Wherefore, in all things, it behoved Him to be made like unto His
Brethren; that He might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in things
pertaining to God; to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

He concludes, That Christ behoved to partake both of our nature and
punishment, or misery, that we might receive the more good of Him.

1. First, He says, He behoved to be like his Brethren in all things: that
is, for substance of nature, for natural properties, for sinless infirmities,
for fellowship in temptations, and miseries, and in all things whatsoever our
good did require his making like unto us. Then, 1. They who imagine, and
worship a Christ, not like to us in all these things, wherein the Scripture
pronounces him like unto us, do mistake the true Christ, and worship a false.
2. It is very necessary that we conceive rightly of Christ's person, seeing the
Scripture does press the knowledge thereof upon us, so particularly.

2. He shows the end of his conforming himself unto us, to be, That he
might be a faithful and merciful High Priest. Then, 1. As Christ took on our
nature; so in our nature, he took on a special Office of Priesthood, to do us
good. 2. In this his Office, he is faithful, and will neglect nothing, night
nor day, that may help us. 3. In our slips, and over-sights, he will be
merciful unto us. 4. Seeing he has conformed himself to us for this end, we
may take his communion of nature, and miseries, with us, for a Pawn and pledge*
to assure us, that he will both pity and help us.

3. The extent of his Priesthood, he makes in general, to be, in all things
pertaining to God; and, in special, To make Reconciliation for the sins of the
people. Then, 1. If God have any thing to do with us, any Direction, or
Comfort* or Blessing, to bestow upon us, it must come by our High Priest,
Jesus, unto us. 2. If he command us in any thing* or be to make covenant with
us, or have controversy to debate with us, our High Priest will answer for us.
3. If we have any thing to do with God, to seek any good thing of him, or
deprecate any evil, or to offer any Offering, of Praise, or Service, Christ's
Office stretches it self to all this, to do for us. 4. In special* as our sins
daily deserve, and provoke Gods anger* so does Christ's Priesthood pacify Gods
wrath, and work Reconciliation to us.

Verse. 18. For, in that He Himself has suffered, being tempted, He is able
to succor them that are tempted. 1. He shows Christ's experience, to be both
of sufferings, and temptations; that whether of the two annoy us, we may get
comfort for either, or both, from him.

Then, 1. There are two Evils, which attend the Children of God, to annoy them;
to wit, Troubles, and Sin; or, Sin, and Misery. 2. Christ has experience,
albeit not of Sin, in his own person; yet of temptation to sin, and of
suffering of trouble.

2. He applies the Comfort, expressly to the tempted. Then, 1. Men in trouble
have need of comfort, and relief; but men under temptation to sin, much more.
2. Yea, sin, and temptation to sin is more grievous to a true Child of God,
when he sees matters rightly, than any trouble. 3. No bearing out under
trials, or standing in temptations, but by succor and help from Christ. 4.
Christ's experience of temptation, may assure us, both of his ability and
willingness, to succor such as seek relief from him, in this case.

The Sum of Chap. III.
THerefore, weigh well what a one Christ is, and prefer none before him, Verse.
1. For, he is as faithful in his Message, for changing of the typical
Priesthood, as Moses was in his Message, when he delivered it, Verse. 2. And so
much more honorable than Moses, as the Builder is over the stones builded,
Verse. 3, 4. And Moses was faithful, as a servant, in the Church, Verse. 5. But
Christ, as Son, and Lord, over the Church, to dispose of the service thereof,
at his pleasure, Verse. 6. Therefore, beware of old Isreal's hard heart, lest you
be debarred of Gods rest, Verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Beware of like unbelief: for
it is the ground of Apostasy, Verse. 12. And do your best to preserve others
from it also, Verse. 13. For, perseverance in Faith, is necessary to salvation,
Verse. 14. For, David's words do prove, that there were some, albeit not all
hearers of Gods word of old, that did provoke him, Verse. 15, 16. And, who were
these, but such as he punished? Verse. 17. And, whom punished he, but
unbeleevers? Verse. 18. So misbelief debarred them out of Gods rest of old, and
will also do the like yet, if men continue in it, Verse. 19.

The Doctrine of Chap. III.
Verse. 1. Wherefore, holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider
the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus. 1. After he had
taught them somewhat more of Christ, be exhorts them, of new, to consider of
him. Then, 1. As we get further light of Christ, we are bound to further
use-making of our light. 2. As further is revealed unto us of Christ, so must
we set our minds on work, to ponder, and weigh, what is revealed: that the
matter may sink deeper in our mind, and in our heart. 3. Except we shall
consider seriously what is spoken of Christ, we can make no profitable use of
the Doctrine: For, such high mysteries are not soon taken up; and the heart is
not soon wrought upon, so as to receive impression of his Excellency, except
after due consideration.

2. He calls Christ Jesus, the High Priest, and the Apostle of our
Profession.] The high Priesthood was the highest calling in the Jewish Church:
The Apostleship, the highest calling in the Christian Church. Christ is here
styled by both. Then, Christ has enclosed in his Office, the Perfection and
Dignities of the highest Callings, both in the Jewish and Christian Church.
Those Dignities which were divided in men, or conjoined in him; in men, by way
of Ministerial employment, under him, in Christ, by original Authority, above
all.

3. He calls the Christian Religion, our Profession, or Confession. Then, It
is the nature of Christian Religion, not to be smothered; but, to be openly
brought forth, confessed, and avowed in word and deed; to the glory of Christ,
who is the Author thereof.

4. He styles these Hebrews, to whom ^ee writes, Holy Brethren, Partakers of
the Heavenly Calling. Then, 1. Christians do not possess their prerogatives
without a warrantable title. They have a calling thereto. 2. The calling is
heavenly, because God, by his Word and Spirit, calls men to the communion of
his grace and glory, by forsaking of themselves, and things earthly, and
following Christ in an holy conversation: all is heavenly here. 3. Christians
are partakers alike of this vocation: that is, have alike warrant, and
obligation, to follow him that calls them: albeit all do not alike follow the
calling. 4. They are Brethren amongst themselves, for their adoption: albeit
some weaker, some stronger. 5. And holy is this Brotherhood: that is,
spiritual; and so, superior to civil, or natural, or earthly bands, whatsoever.

Verse. 2. Who was faithful to him that appointed Him: as also Moses was
faithful in all His House. 1. Because the Jews did too highly esteem of Moses,
in appointing of the Legal Service; and not so highly of Christ as became, in
abrogating thereof, the Apostle compares Moses and Christ, giving to Moses his
due place of a servant; and to Christ, the place due to the Master.

Then, It is no new thing, that people incline so to esteem of good men's
authority, as to forget to give Christ his own room. 2. The way to help this,
is, so to esteem of Gods Servants, Fathers, or Councils, more, or fewer, as the
estimation that men have of them, derogate nothing from the estimation due to
Christ.

2. In special, he makes all the points of Moses commendations, duly deserved
points of Christ's commendation. 1. Did Moses Office reach it self to all the
house of God, under the Law, and all the service of it? so did Christ's Office
reach to all the Church of God, and all the service of it, under the Gospel. 2.
Was Moses appointed to give out what he delivered? So was Christ appointed to
institute what he did institute, and abrogate what he did abrogate. 3. Was
Moses faithful to him who appointed him, in all the matters of Gods House,
keeping back nothing that he was directed to reveal? So is Christ faithful to
the Father, who did appoint him in like manner.

Then, like as if any man should have added or pared, chopped or changed, the
Ordinances of Gods House, under the Law, it had been an imputation, either unto
God, of not sufficient directing his Church, or unto Moses, and the Prophets,
of unfaithful discharge of their duty in the Church of the Old Testament. So is
it alike imputation to God and Christ, if any shall add or diminish, chop or
change, the ordinance of Gods Church under the New Testament.

Verse. 3. For, this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses; inasmuch
as he who has builded the House, has more honor than the House. 1. Having
equalled Christ unto Moses, be now prefers Christ to Moses.

Then, Christ is not rightly esteemed of, except he be preferred as far above
all his servants, as the Father has counted him worthy of more glory than his
servants.

2. He prefers Christ above Moses, as the Builder is above the House. Then,
as no stone in the house, nor all the house together, is comparable in honor
with the Builder of the house: So the honor and authority of no particular
member of the Church, not of the whole Catholic Church together, is comparable
to the honor and authority of Christ. Yea, as far as the builder is above the
house in honor, as far is Christ's authority above the Churches authority,
which is his house.

Verse. 4. For, every house is builded by some man: but he that built all
things, is God. He proves Christ to be the builder of the Church, because
some builder it must have, as every house has. But only God that builds all
things, is able for this work: Therefore, Christ, who builds all things, is
the builder of it.

Then, 1. Whatsoever employment a man get of God, in edifying of the Church,
yet, in proper speech, he is a part of the building, builded by another. 2.
The honor of building the Church, belongs to God alone properly. 3. The
building of the Church, is a work requiring omnipotency in the builder: For, to
make a Saint of a sinner, is as hard, as to make a man of the dust of the
earth, or of nothing.

Verse. 5. And Moses, verily, was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a
testimony of those things which were to be spoken after. Moses was faithful as
a servant.] Now, a servants part, is to do and say by direction; and not of his
own authority. Then, He is the faithfullest servant, that does least in his
own authority, and most attends unto the direction of God, bears testimony
to what. God has commanded, and teaches not for Doctrine, the Precepts of men.

Verse. 6. But Christ, as a Son over his own house, whose house are we, if we
hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope, firm unto the end.
Moses was faithful, as a Servant; but Christ, as a Son, over his own house.]

Then, as much difference betwixt Christ's authority in the Church, and men's,
how excellent soever; as betwixt the authority of the Master and the Servants.
2. Christ's authority is native over his Church, by virtue of his Sonship: by
his eternal Generation of the Father, he has this Prerogative. 3. The Church
is Christ's own House, and he may dispose of it, and of the service thereof, as
pleases him. Men, who are but servants, must change none of the Ordinances of
Gods worship in it. But Christ ^ay change the Ordinances of his own worship:
and therefore, alter the Ordinances of Levi, and appoint a more simple form of
external worship, in place thereof.

2. He expounds this House, to be the company of true Believers. Then, 1.
The Church of God, under the Law, and under the Gospel, are one Church, one
house of God in substance; and all the faithful, then and now, lively stones
of this house. 2. The Church have God dwelling, and conversing, and familiarly
manifesting himself amongst them.

3. He adds to a condition, If we hold fast the confidence, and the
rejoicing of the hope, firm unto the end. That is, If we continue steadfast in
the Faith, inwardly griping the promised glory, by hope; and outwardly avowing,
by confession, Christ's truth: whereby he neither imports the possibility of
final Apostasy of the Saints, nor yet minds he to weaken the confidence of
Believers, more than he doubts of his own perseverance, or minds to weaken
his own Faith: for he joyneth himself with them, saying, If we hold fast. But
writing to the number of the visible Church, of whom some not being sound,
might fall away, and by their example, make some weak ones, though sound,
stumble, for a time, to the dishonor of the Gospel; he puts a difference
betwixt true Believers, who do indeed persevere, and time-servers, who do not
persevere; to whom he does not grant, for the present, the Privilege of being
Gods House.

This conditional speech, then, imports, 1. That some Professors in the
visible Church, may make defection, and not persevere to the end. 2. That such
as shall make final defection hereafter, are not a part of Gods house, for the
present, howsoever they be esteemed. 3. That true Believers must take warning
from the possibility of some Professors Apostasy, to look the better to
themselves, and to take a better gripe of Christ, who is able to keep them. 4.
That true Believers both may and should hold fast their confidence unto the
end: yea, and must aim to do so, if they would persevere. 5. That true
Believers have ground and warrant, in the promises of the Gospel* both to hope
for salvation, and to rejoice, and glory in that hope, as if it were present
possession. 6. That the more a man aims at this solid confidence, and
gloriation of hope, the more evidence he gives, that he is of the true house
of God.

Verse. 7. Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, To day, if ye will hear his
voice, 1. In the words of the Psalm 95. verse. 9. he exhorts them, to beware
of hardening their hearts in unbelief. The words of the Psalm are called here,
The saying of the holy Ghost; and, of the God of Israel, 2 Samuel 23. 2, 3.

Then, 1. The authority of the Scripture is not of man, but of the Holy Ghost.
2. The Scriptures are no dumb letter, but the voice of the holy Ghost, who by
them speaks. 3. The Holy Ghost is God, the inspirer of the Prophets, that
wrote the Scripture. 4. The Holy Ghost is a distinct person of the Godhead,
from the Father, and the Son; exercising the proper actions of a person;
inspiring the Prophets, inditing the Scriptures, and speaking to the Church.

2. In the words of the Exhortation, To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts; Observe, 1. That while men have the offer of salvation, and
the word preached unto them, it is their day. 2. That by the outward hearing,
God requires the heart to be brought down, and mollified. 3. That he
requires present yielding, To day, while he calls, without delay; because
we cannot be sure how long God will spare, or continue his offer, beyond this
present. 4. He that studieth not to yield his heart to believe, and obey Gods
word sounding in his ears, hardens his heart. For, what is it else not to
harden their heart, but heartily to believe, and give obedience?

Verse. 8. Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of
temptation, in the wilderness.

9. When your Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works, forty years.

He proves the danger of this sin, in the example of their Fathers: As in the
day of provocation, when your Fathers tempted me, Exodus 17.7. whence we learn,

1. That the evil of sin is not seen, till the consequences thereof be seen,
what provocation it gives to God, and what wrath it draws down on the
sinner. 2. It is safest, to take a view of our danger, by any sin, in the
person of others, who have fallen in the like, and have been punished. 3. The
sins that our Predecessors have been given unto, we should, most carefully,
watch against. 4. That Gods Bounty, Patience, and Means of Grace, the longer
they be abused, aggravateth sin the more.

Verse. 10. Wherefore, I was grieved with that Generation, and said, They do
always err in their hearts; and they have not known My Ways. God pronounces
the Offenders guilty, and then, gives Sentence of Doom upon them, for their
guiltiness: They err in heart, says the Lord.

Then, 1. Mis-beleeving and disobeying of the Word preached, is not reckoned
with God, for simple ignorance of the mind; but for a wilful ignorance, and
erring of the heart, which is worse. For, the ignorance of the mind simply, is,
I know not, but the error of the heart, is, I will not know, I care not, I
desire not, I love not to know, nor obey. And such is the ignorance of those
who have the Means of Knowledge, and Reformation, and yet remain in their sins.
2. Such obstinate ignorance, and wilful disobedience provokes God to cast away
the Sinner, and not to deal any more with him.

Verse. 11. So I swear in My Wrath, They shall not enter into My Rest. For their
Doom, God debarreth them from His Rest: That is, from all the Comforts of His
Fellowship, and gives them Torment, in stead of Rest.

Then, 1. Obstinate Disobedients of the Voice of the Gospel, lie near hand
final off-cutting. 2. If God give over a man, to such hardness of heart, as
still to work contrary to the light of Gods Word, He has, apparently
denounced, and sworn, to condemn and seclude from Heaven, such a Soul. 3. It is
only such obstinate ones, as go on, hardening their heart against Admonitions
of the Word, that God has sworn to debar. If a man be found mourning for his
former obstinacy, the Decree is not gone forth against him.

Verse. 12. Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of you, an evil heart of
unbeleef, in departing from the Living God. 1. From the former Example, he
warns them to beware of an evil heart of unbeleef, and so to eschew Apostasy.

Then, 1. Mis-beleef is the main Root of Apostasy. As Belief draws us to an
Union with God, so misbeleef makes a Separation. 2. Mis-beleef is a special
part of the hearts wickedness, bewraying the enmity which naturally we have
against God, as much as any ill: For, Mis-beleef denies to God the Honor of
Truth, Mercy, and Goodness, and imports Blasphemies in the contrary. 3.
Mis-beleef is an ill in the heart, making the heart yet worse and worse, where
it is, and barring forth all the Remedies which might come by Faith to cure the
heart.

2. He warns to take heed, lest there be* such an heart in any of them, at
any time.

Then, 1. Mis-beleef is a subtle and deceitful sin, having colors, and
pretenses, a number, to hide it; and must be watched over, lest it deceive,
and getting strength, overcome. 2. The Watch must be constant, at all
occasions, lest this ill get advantage, when we are careless, and unattentive,
at any time. 3. Watch must be kept, as over our selves, so also over others:
lest any others mis-beleef not being marked, draw us in the same snare with
them.

3. He describes Apostasy, by Mis-beleef, and departing from the Living God.

Then, 1. Believing is a drawing near to the Living God, and staying with him.
2. The loss that Mis-beleef brings, should scare us from so fearful a sin. 3.
Departing from the true Christian Religion, is a departing from the Living God,
whatsoever the Apostate, or his Followers do conceive: for God is not, where
Truth is not.

Verse. 13. But exhort one another, daily, while it is called, To day; lest any
of you be hardened, through the deceitfulness of sin. 1. He prescribes a
Remedy, to prevent this ill: to wit, That they exhort one another, daily, while
it is called, To day. That is, Beside the public Exhortation from their
Preachers, that every one of them, mutually, confer, and stir up one another by
speeches that make for decyphring the deceitfulness of Sin, or preventing
hardness of heart, or confirming one another in the Truth of Religion, and
constant profession thereof.

Then, 1. Private Christians not only may, but should keep Christian communion
amongst themselves, and mutually exhort and stir up one another. 2. This is a
necessary mean of preserving people from Defection. 3. And a duty daily to be
discharged, while it is to day: that is, as often, and as long as God gives
present occasion, and opportunity for it; lest a scattering come.

2. The inconvenience that may follow, if this be neglected, is, Lest any of
you be hardened, through the deceitfulness of sin.

Then, 1. There is none, even the strongest of the Flock, but they have need of
this mutual help of other private Christians. 2. Neither is there any so base,
or contemptible, but the care of their standing in the Faith, and of their
safety, belongs to all. 3. Sin has many ways, and colors, whereby it may
beguile a man: and therefore, we have need of more Eyes than our own, and more
Observers. 4. If it be not timeously discovered, it will draw on hardness of
heart, so as a man will grow senseless of it, confirmed in the habit of it, and
loath to quit it.

3. In the former verse, he warns them, to beware of Apostasy in Religion:
and, in this verse, That they take course, that they be not hardened in any sin
in their conversation.

Then, The ready way to draw on Defection in Religion, is Defection from a
godly Conversation. And the way to prevent Defection in Religion, is to study
to Holiness of Conversation.

Verse. 14. For, we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of
our Confidence steadfast, unto the end.

To stir them up to Perseverance, he lays a necessity of holding fast gripe
of the Principles of Christian Religion, whereby they were persuaded to become
Christians: because only so, fellowship with Christ is gotten. The Truth
whereby they were begotten to Christian Religion, he calls, The beginning of
our Confidence: yea, and of our Spiritual Subsistence; as the word in the
Original imports.

Then, 1. The Gospel is the beginning of our Confidence; yea, and of our
Spiritual Subsistence; of our new being that we have, as Spiritual Men, in the
State of Grace. 2. The Man that renounceth the Grounds of the Gospel, and
persevereth not, was never partaker of Christ. 3. Christian Religion is not a
thing that a man may say, and unsay; keep, or quit; as Prosperity, or
Adversity; Threatenings, or Allurements, do offer: But such as must in all
Estates, upon all Hazard be avowed.

Verse. 15. Whilst it is said, To day, if ye will hear his Voice, harden not
your hearts, as in the Provocation.

16. For some, when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not all that came out
of Egypt by Moses.

Now the Apostle draws Collections from the words of the Prophet in the
Psalm, repeating the words of the Text^ which spea^ of the Provocation of the
Fathers, verse. 25. Whereupon he infers, that there were some, at least,
hearers of the Word, which provoked God; ^lbeit not all. For whose cause, David
had reason to give Advertisement to their Posterity, to beware of the like; and
the writer of the Epistle, reason to apply the same unto them, verse. 16.

Then, 1. From the Apostles handling of the Text which he has in hand, all
must Learn, not lightly to pass Scripture, but to consider both what is said
expressly in it, and what is imported by consequence. 2. Preachers practice is
justified when they consider the circumstances of a Text, and do urge duties
upon their people, or teach them Doctrine from the Text.

Verse. 17. But, with whom was He grieved forty years? Was it not with that had
sinned, whose carcasses fell in the Wilderness? He observes another thing in
his Text, upon the persons with whom God was grieved: that, first, they are
marked to have sinned, and afterward punished, Leaving to them to Gather,

That where Sin went before, the Anger of God would follow upon the Sin: and,
after the grieving of God, Judgment light upon the Sinner.

Verse. 18. And, to whom swear He, that they should not enter into His Rest,
but to them that believed not?

19. So we see, that they could not enter in, because of unbeleef.

He has yet another Observation, upon the nature of the Sin, whereby God was
provoked to swear their damnation that sinned, that is, it was unbeleef, verse.
8. And formally deduceth his Doctrine by consequence; That Misbeleef did stop
the Sinners Entry into the Rest, and made the Sinner to lie under an
impossibility of entering, verse. 19. The use of which Doctrine he presses in
the next Chapter.

Then, 1. The Apostle leaves us to gathe^* That above all other Sins,
Mis-beleef provokes God to indignation most. 2. That as long as this Sin lies
on, and gets way, it is impossible for a man to enter into Gods Rest. This
Sin alone is able to seclude him.

The Sum of Chap. IV.
HE presses the use of the former Doctrine, saying in substance, Therefore,
be feared, to be debarred from Gods Rest, Verse. 1. For we have the offer of
it, as well as they; only here are the odds, They believed not, Verse. 2. But
we who do believe, enter into a Rest, as David's words import. For there are
three Rests in the Scripture, which may be called Gods Rest. 1. Gods Rest upon
the first Sabbath. 2. The Rest of Canaan, typical. 3. The Spiritual and true
Rest of Gods People, in Christ's Kingdom, which is a deliverance, and ceasing
from Sin, and Misery. David does not mean of the Rest of the Sabbath, in his
threatening; because, albeit the Work of Creation was finished in the beginning
of the World, and that Rest come and gone; yet David speaks of another Rest
after that, in the word of Threatening, Verse. 3. That Gods Rest was past at the
founding of the World, is plain from Moses words, Verse. 4. After which Rest,
David speaks here of another Rest, Verse. 5 Wherein seeing Unbeleevers entered
not, Believers must enter, Verse. 6. Again, David means not of the Rest of
Canaan: For, after they had a long time dwelt in Canaan, David yet sets them
a Day, during which they might enter into Gods Rest, Verse. 7. For, if the Rest
of Canaan which Jesus, or Ioshuah, gave unto them, had been this true Rest,
then David would not have spoken of another Rest after that, Verse. 8. But speak
he does. Therefore, there is a Rest besides these, even that Spiritual Rest,
proper to Gods people, Verse. 9. I call this a Rest; because, when Gods People
cease to do there own works, and will, it is like Gods Rest, Verse. 10.
Therefore, let us beware to be debarred from this Rest, by Unbeleef, as they
were, Verse. 11. For Gods Word is as effectual now, as ever it was, to discover
the lurking Sins of the heart, howsoever men would cloak them, Verse. 12. And
God, with whom we have to do, sees us thoroughly, Verse. 13. But, rather,
seeing we have so great encouragement, to get entry through Jesus Christ, so
merciful and pitiful an High Priest, Verse. 14, 15. Let us be steadfast in our
faith, and come, confidently, to get Gods Grace, to help us through all
Difficulties in the way to that full Rest, Verse. 16.

The Doctrine of Chap. IV.
Verse. 1. Let us therefore fear; lest a Promise being left us, of entering into
his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. 1 In the Exhortation he
lays down this ground, That ^here is a Promise of Entry into this Rest, left
unto us.

Then, 1 The entry into Gods Rest is ^ast open to the Christian Church, and
encouragement given, by offer and promise of entry. 2 While it is to day this
promise and invitation to it, is left unto us, notwithstanding that many
bygone occasions of getting good, and doing good, be spent and away. 3 As
long as this merciful Offer and Promise is kept to the fore unto us, we should
stir up our selves to lay hold on it in time.

2. Therefore let us fear lest any of you seem to come short of it. The
similitude is borrowed from the prize of a Race. Then, 1 A Race must be run,
err we come to our full rest. 2 The constant Runner to the end, gets rest
from sin and misery, and a quiet possession of Happiness at the Races end. 3
The Apostate, and he who by misbeleef breaks off his Course, and runs not
on, as may be, comes short, and attaineth not unto it. 4 The Apostasy of
some, and possibility of Apostasy of more Professors, should not weaken any
man's Faith; but rather terrify him from misbeleef. 5 There is a right kind of
fear of perishing, to wit, such as hinders not assurance of faith; but rather
serves to guard it, and spurreth on a man to perseverance. 6 We must not only
fear, by misbeleeing to come short; but to seem, or give any appearance of
coming short.

Verse. 2. For unto us was the Gospel Preached, as well as unto them; but, the
Word preached, did not profit them, nor being mixed with Faith in them that
heard it: 1 To make the example the more to urge them, he says, The Gospel
was Preached to them whom God debarred, for misbeleef from his Rest. Then, 1
The Gospel was Preached in the Wilderness for substance of Truth, albeit not in
such fullness of Doctrine, and clearness of Truth, as now. The Preaching of it
in clearness now, must make the Mis-beleevers of it, in no less danger of
being debarred from that Rest, than the old Israelites, yea* rather in more.

2 The cause of their debarring, is, The Word was not mixed with Faith in them;
and so profited them not.] Then, 1 As a Medicinal Drink must have the true
Ingredients mixed with it; so must the Word have Faith mixed with it; joining
it self with all the parts of the Truth, closely. 2 Faith can wall with
nothing, nor be mixed with any Truth, but the Word: and the word will not
join, nor wall, nor mix, with Conceits, Opinions, Presumption, but with Faith:
that is, it will be received, not as a Conjecture, or possible Truth; but for
Divine, and infallible Truth* else it profits not. 3 Hearers of the Word may
blame their mis-beleef, if they get not profit. 4 Albeit a man get light by the
Word, and some tasting of temporary Joy, and Honor, and Riches also, by
professing or preaching of it, yet he receives not profit, except he get
entry into Gods Rest thereby: for all these turn to Conviction.

Verse. 3. For, we which have believed, do enter into Rest, As he said, As I
have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my Rest, although the werks
were finished from the foundation of the World.

Read the sum of this Chapter, verse. 2, 3, 5. for clearing of his reasoning.

He proves that Believers enter into Gods Rest; because God excludes, by his
threatening, mis-beleevers only. Then, 1 Fearful threatenings of the wicked carry
in their bosom sweetest promises to the godly and the Faithful.

2 Believers get a beginning of this rest in this world, and a possession of
it, in some degrees, by faith. Their delivery from sin and misery is begun.
Their life and peace and joy is begun.

Verse. 4 For he spoke in a certain place, of the seventh day, on this wise; And
God did rest the seventh day, from all his works.

5. And in this place again; If they shall enter into my Rest.

He compares places of Scripture, and shows the significations of Rest.

Then, 1 Words in Scripture, are taken, in sundry places, in sundry
significations. 2 Comparison of places, will both show the diverse acceptions of
any word, and the proper meaning of it in every place.

Verse. 6 Seeing therefore it remains, that some must enter therein, and they
to whom it was first Preached, entered not in, because of unbeleef. The full
sentence of the sixth verse, is this; Seeing therefore it remains, that some
must enter in; and they to whom it was first preached, entered no^ in, because
of unbeleef; It will follow by consequence, that Believers do enter in. This
latter part is not expressed in the Text, but left unto us, to gather by
consequence. Whence we learn, 1 That God allows us to draw consequences from
his Scripture. 2 Yea, traineth us on by his own example, to draw them forth by
reason. 3 Yea, he will of necessity, force us to draw consequences from his
words; or else not let us understand his meaning, by leaving something not
expressed, to be collected by us.

Verse. 7 Again, he limiteth a certain da^* saying in David, To day; after so
long a time, as it is said, To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. In that he reasons from the circumstance of t^me when David uttered
these words, he teaches us, That oftentimes there is matter of great moment
imported in the least circumstances of the scrip^^res writing; and therefore
that the circumstances of time, place, and person who speaks* and to whom,
and at what time, etc. should not be passed over, in our consideration of a
Text, but diligently be marked*

Verse. 8. For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have
spoken of another day.

9. There remains therefore rest to the people of God.

10. For he that is entered into his Rest, he also has ceased from his own
works, as God did from his.

1. This reasoning from the time of David's speaking, shows, How infallibly
th^^ were led that wrote the Scriptusre, that they could not fail in setting
down a word: nor speak one word that could cross any other word poken by any
other Prophet, before or after.

2. David taught of the Spiritual Rest in his time, and so did Moses. Then, 1.
The old Church was not straightned with earthly promises so, but that they had
heavenly and spiritual promises given them also, as signified by the earthly
and typical promises. 2. Their types had some starlight of interpretation:
and, they were taught to look through the veil of Ceremonies and Types.

3. He says, He that is entered into his Rest, cease from his own works.
Then, 1. Before a man be reconciled to God by Faith in Christ, he is working
his own works, doing his own will, and not Gods. 2. He is working without
ceasing, his own unrest, and his own torment, which he procures by working
his own will. 3. The man that thinks he is entered into Gods Rest, must be
Gods Workman, and no more work what pleases himself, but what pleases God:
ceasing from sinful works, and doing what is lawful and good, in way of
obedience unto him.

Verse. 11. Let us labor therefore, to enter into that Rest, lest any man fall,
after the same example of unbeleef. 1. In the third verse he said, The
Believers entered into Gods Rest: here be exhorts the Believer to labor to
enter into it.

Then, 1. The Rest of God is entered into by degrees. 2. They who have entered,
must study to en^er yet more, going on from Faith to Faith, and from obedience
to further obedience, and from grace to grace, till they have gone all the way
that leads unto glory.

2. He requires labor and diligence to enter in.

Then, 1. Gods rest is no rest to the flesh, but rest to the soul, as ( Mat.
11.29.) Christ promises. 2. Without care and diligence a man cannot promise to
himself to enter in: For the way is called Straight which leads unto Heaven.

3. He requires this diligence, lest a man fall, as the Israelites did. Then,
as some of the Israelites fell in a temporal mis-beleef, and drew on temporal
judgments upon themselves, as Moses and Aaron: so many Professors now also do,
even Elect. Again, as some fell in unbeleef with hardened hearts; yea, in
obstinate misbeleef, and perished in their sin: so yet amongst Professors, some
may fall into obstinate mis-beleef, and perish, except they give diligence to
make progress toward their Rest.

Verse. 12. For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharpe^ than any
two-edged sword, peircing even to the dividing asunder of Soul, and Spirit, and
of the Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
Heart. 1. Le^t any one should shift off this threatening, as expired with those
to whom it was first spoken; or cloak and dissemble their sins, and purpose of
defection, when they should see their time; he lets them know the power of
the Word, and of God their adversary.

Then, the use, extent, and nature of Gods Word, must be well studied, lest
through mistaking, or ignorance hereof, a man should mis-apply, or mis-regard
it.

2. The first property of the Word, it is Quick: that is, dies not when those
die to whom first it was directed, but endures, speaking on with that same
authority to all that hear it, in all times after.

Then, the Word is not a dead Letter, nor expired with former Ages: but the
same to us that it was before to others, fit for operation and working the work
for which it is sent, for convincing or converting the hearer always.

3. Again, It is Powerful: That is, not fit to work only, but active and
operative, in effect: actually binding the conscience to obedience, or
judgment, make the sinner what opposition he will. Yea, it falls a working
on the hearer, if he believe it, presently to clear his mind, rectify his
will, and reform his life, and to bring about his good and safety. If a man
believe it not, it falls a working also, presently to bind him guilty unto
judgment, and to augment his natural blindness, and his hearts hardness, and
to bring on some degree of the deserved punishment upon himself: albeit not of
its own nature, but by the disposition of the object whereupon it works.

Then, 1. The Word wants not the own effect, whenever it is preached, but
always helps, or hurts the hearer, as he yields to it, or rejects or
neglects it. 2. We shall do well to observe what sort of operation it has
upon us, seeing it must have some; that we may be framed to the better by it.

4. Another property of the Word: It is sharper than any two-edged sword,
because it peirceth speedily through a brazen Brow, and dissembling
countenance, and a lying mouth, and thrusts it self without suffering
resistance, into the conscience of the most obstinate, with a secret blow, and
makes him guilty within his own breast.

Then, 1. Let not Preachers think their labor l^st, when they have to do with
obstinate sinners. The stroke is given at the hearing of the Word, which will
be found uncured after. 2. Neither let dissemblers please themselves with a
fair countenance put upon the matter; as if the Word did not touch them: but
rather give glory to God in time, when they are pricked at the heart. For if
they dissemble the wound received of this Sword, the wound will prove deadly.

5. Peircing even to the dividing asunder of the Soul and the Spirit: That is,
those most secret devices and plots of the Mind, or Spirit, and those closest
affections of the Heart or Soul toward any forbidden evil, this word will
find out: yea, it can divide asunder the Soul and the Spirit, the Heart and
the Mind, and tell the man how his Soul or Heart cleaves to the sin, and how
his Mind plotteth pretenses to hide the evil of it from himself and others,
even in those sins which have not broken forth, but lie as deep in the mind as
the marrow in the bones. And it can put difference betwixt the purposes of the
heart and the thoughts, how to compass the design, and how to hide the convoy.
Or those ways how the sinner does beguile himself, and seeks to blind the
eyes of others, the Word does decypher and distinguish all these things which
self-deceiving Sophistry confounds.

Then, 1. Secret purposes fall under the Judicatory of the Word, as well as
practices accomplished. 2. Pretenses and excuses will not put off the challenge
of it. 3. Nothing remains but that we give up our selves to the Words
government, flying what it discharges, and following what it commands.

Verse. 13. Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his sight: but
all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
To clear the power of the Word, he brings in the property of God, whose word
it is, and sets up the sinners secret thought, in the sight of the
All-seeing God, with whom he has to do.

Then, 1. God is the Party with whom the hearer of the Word has to do, and
has his reckoning to make, and not the Preacher. 2. God joyneth with his Word,
and gives it that searching and discovering, and peircing virtue. 3. Gods
omniscience, and all-seeing sight, should make us look to our inward
disposition; so shall this, and other like Exhortations, and Threatenings, have
better effect and fruit in us.

Verse. 14. Seeing, then, that we have a great High Priest, that is passed into
the Heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast our Profession. 1. He
gives them a direction for entering into their rest; To hold fast their
Profession: that is, in faith and love to avow the Doctrine of Christ.

Then, He that would enter into rest, must be steadfast, in maintaining, and
avowing the true Religion of Christ. 2. He who quitteth the profession of the
Truth of Christ, takes courses to cut off himself from Gods rest. For, if we
deny Christ, he will deny us.

2. He commands, To hold fast our Profession. Then, 1. God will not be
pleased with backsliding, or coldness, or indifferency in matters of Religion,
because this is not, to hold it fast; but to take a loose hold, which is the
ready way to defection. 2. There is danger, lest our adversaries pull the Truth
from us. 3. The more danger we foresee, the more strongly must we hold the
Truth.

3. The encouragement which he gives to hold fast, is, We have Christ, a
great High Priest, etc. Then, 1. As we have need of threatening, to drive us to
enter into Gods Rest; So have we need of encouragements to draw us thereunto.
2. All our encouragement, is from the help which we shall have in Christ, and
that is sufficient. 3. Christ is always for us in his Office, albeit we do
not always feel him sensibly in us.

4. He calls Christ, A great High Priest; to put difference betwixt the
typical High Priest, and him in whom the Truth of the Priesthood is found.
Then, What the typical High Priest did in show for the people, that the great
High Priest does in substance for us: That is, reconcileth us to God perfectly,
blesses us with all blessings solidly, and intercedeth for us perpetually.

5. He affirms of Christ, that he is passed into the Heavens; to wit, in
regard of his Manhe^d, to take possession thereof in our name.

Then, 1. Christ's corporal presence is in Heaven only, and not on Earth, from
whence he is passed. 2. Christ's corporal presence in Heaven, and absence from
us in that respect, hinders not our right unto him, and spiritual having, or
possessing of him, 3. Yea, it is our encouragement, to seek entry into Heaven,
that he is there before us.

6. He calls him Jesus, the Son of God, to lead us through his humanity unto
his Godhead. Then, no rest on the Mediator, till we go to the rock of his
Godhead, where is strength, and satisfaction to faith.

Verse. 15. For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities: But was, in all points, tempted like as we are;
yet without sin. 1. Another encouragement is from the merciful and
compassionate disposition of our High Priest, whose nature, and office, and
experience, makes him, that he cannot be but touched with our infirmities,
both sinful, and sinless infirmities, of body, estate, or mind.

Then, 1. He presupposes, that the faithful are subject to infirmities, both
of sin, and misery; and by reason thereof, to discouragements, and dashing of
their spirit. 2. Christ does pity the infirmities of the faithful, their
poverty, banishment, sickness, grief* yea, their sinful passions, and
perturbations, and short coming in holy duties; he is compassionate in all
these. Therefore may our Faith gather strength from his pity, to bear these
the better; and strive against our sinfulness with the greater courage. And, in
the sense of our infirmities, we should not stand back from Christ; but go to
him the rather, as to a compassionate physician, who can, and will help us.

2. To give us assurance of his compassion, he shows us, that he was, in
all points tempted like as we are; yet without sin.

Then, 1. Christ has experience of all trials wherein any of his servants can
fall; of poverty, contempt of the world, of being forsaken by friends, of
exile, imprisonment, hunger, nakedness, watching, weariness, pain of body,
dashing of mind, heaviness of hearts, dolor, anguish, and perplexity of
Spirit; yea, of desertion to sense; yea, of the wrath and curse of God; the
feeling whereof may justly be called A descending to Hell; Christ in his own
experience knows what all such exercises are* 2. These his experiences, and
sufferings, are pawns to us of his compassion on us in such cases; so that we
may as certainly believe the compassion, as the passion.

3. He makes exception of sin, whereof he was free; but not of his being
tempted to sin.

Then, 1. Albeit our Lord was free from committing sin, yet he was not free
from being tempted to sin: and so can pity our weakness, when we are overcome
of it. 2. His being free of sin, is our comfort against sin; For, if our
Mediator had been defiled with sin, he could not have washed us: But now he
is able to justify us, and set us free of sin also.

Verse. 16. Let us, therefore, come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we
may obtain Mercy, and find Grace, to help in time of need. 1. From these
encouragements, he draws another direction, To come boldly to God in prayer,
for every thing whereof we stand in need.

Then, the Apostle allows unto the believer, 1. Certain persuasion of the
acceptance of his person: he bids him Come boldly. 2. He allows certain
persuasions of the granting of his prayers, in the matter, namely, of Grace and
Mercy, which includes the remission of sins.

2 The Throne of Grace, or the Mercy-Seat, was above the Ark, within the
Sanctuary, and represented God in Christ reconciled to his people, gracious and
merciful unto them. To this he alludeth, and by this means teaches us,

1. That the substance of that typical Mercy Seat, is to be found in Christ
under the Gospel. In him God is ever to be found on his Throne of Grace. 2.
That the Veil of the Ceremonial Sanctuary, is rent in Christ's suffering, and an
open door made unto the holiest, unto every Believer, and not for the Highest
alone, to enter in. 3. That God lays aside his terror and rigor of justice,
when his own come to him in Christ, and offers access unto the Throne of
Grace, unto them.

3. He will have us coming with boldness, to obtain mercy; including himself
with the faithful, and joining the meanest of the faithful, to whom he
writes, in the same privilege with himself. Then, 1. Free liberty to expound
all our mind to God, as the word imports, without employing the mediation of
Saint or Angel, or any beside Christ, is one of the privileges of Christian
Religion. 2. This privilege is common to the meanest of the faithful, with the
chiefest Apostles. 3. There is mercy to be had for such as come for removing
of every sin, and remedy of every misery.

4. He sets before them the hope of Grace to help in time of need.
Importing hereby, 1. That albeit for the present, possibly we be not touched
with the sense of wants, straights, and difficulties; yet we are to expect,
that time of need will come. 2. That it is good to foresee this, and make
provision in the time of grace, in this acceptable day, while God is on his
Throne of Grace. 3. That our prayers, if they get not an answer presently, yet
shall they get an answer in the time of need. When our need comes, then shall
our help come also.

The Sum of Chap. V.
I Have called Jesus, the Son of God, a great High Priest, because the
Levitical Priests are but a resemblance of him, and that in their imperfect
measure For, look what office they had, verse. 1. What properties were required
in them, verse. 2, 3. How they were called to their office, verse. 4. A fairer
calling has Christ, and to an higher Priesthood, verse. 5, 6. I called him a
compassionate High Priest, because he took on our frail nature, and had
experience of such troubles as ours, both outward, and inward, verse. 7. For,
the measure of the Mediators obedience, albeit He was the Son, required actual
and experimental suffering: else, the price had not actually been paid for us,
verse. 8. And, now being thoroughly fitted for his office by suffering, he is
become the cause of the salvation of all that follow him, verse. 9. Authorized
for that end of God, after the order of Melchisedec; which order is more
perfect than Aarons, verse. 10. Of which mystery I must speak with greater
difficulty, for your incapacity, verse. 11. For ye have need yet more to be
catechized in the rudiments of Religion, as babes, verse. 12. For, such are they
to whom easy Doctrine must be propounded, verse. 13. But harder Doctrines, are
for riper Christians, verse. 14.

The Doctrines of Chap. V.
Verse. 1. For, every High Priest taken from amongst men, is ordained for men in
things pertaining to God; that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for
sins. 1. HE sets down the properties of the High Priest, that he might
show the truth of them in Christ. First, the peoples comfort did require, that
the High Priest should be a man. So is Christ a Man, chosen out from amongst
men. The Flower of all the Flock. Therefore we may come the more homely to Him.

2. The High Priest was ordained for men; that is, was appointed to employ all
his Office for men's good. So does Christ: therefore may we expect that he
will do for us, as Mediator, what he can: and that is all that we need.

3. The Highpriests Office reached to all things pertaining to God; to
communicate Gods will unto the people, and to lay before God the peoples
Necessities. So does Christ's Office to all the business betwixt God and us, for
working in us Repentance, and Amendment; and making our persons, and service,
acceptable to God; and therefore, in nothing may we pass by Him.

4. In special, the Priest behoved to offer Gifts and Sacrifices for sin, for
removing of wrath, and obtaining of Favor: So has Christ done, and fulfilled
the type in this point also: therefore by Him must we obtain the good which
we crave, and have the evil removed which we fear.

Verse. 2. Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of
the way, for that He Himself also is compassed with infirmity. 1. He goes on
in the Comparison: The typical High Priest behoved to be compassionate on the
Sinner: So in truth is Christ, even as the misery requires, proportionally, as
the word imports.

2. He makes two sorts of Sinners, Ignorants, and Transgressors. Then,
Though there be difference of sinners, yet no sinner, that seeks to Christ,
is secluded from His Compassion.

3. Follows a difference, serving to advance Christ, above the typical
Priest. The High Priest typical, was compassed with infirmities, not only
sinless infirmities, but sinful also; and so behoved to pity others. Christ,
though not compassed with sinful infirmities, but sinless only, yet does pity
Sinners of all sorts.

Then, Look what compassion one sinner might expect of another* as much may we
expect of our sinless Savior.

Verse. 3. And by reason hereof, he ought as for the people, so also for
himself, to offer for sins. Another difference. The typical Priest had need of
Remission of his own sins, and the benefit of the true Sacrifice: But Christ,
because without sin, offered Sacrifice only for our sins, and not for His own.

Then, All the Benefit of Christ's Sacrifice, comes unto us.

Verse. 4. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of
God, as was Aaron. He proceeds in the Comparison. The typical Priest entered
by authority to his Calling, and was honored by his Calling: So entered Christ.
No man, says he, takes this honor unto himself, but He that is called as
was Aaron. Then, 1. It is an honor to be called to an Office in the House of
God. 2. The Calling is null, if it have not God for the Author, and Caller. 3.
If a man take an office, not appointed of God, or intrude himself into an
Office, without a lawful Calling, it is no kind of honor unto him.

Verse. 5. So also, Christ glorified not Himself, to be made an High Priest:
But he that said unto Him, Thou art My Son, to day have I begotten Thee. 1.
Our Lord is commended, for not glorifying himself, by intrusion in his Office.

Then, 1. Such as pretend to be Christ's Servants, must beware to intrude
themselves into any Office, and must attend, as Christ did, Gods Calling, to
Gods Employment. 2. He that usurpeth a Calling, does glorify himself, and
takes the honor that is not given him: for which he must give a Reckoning.

2. Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee, does import, by the
Apostles alleging, not only Christ's Godhead, and Declaration to be Gods Son;
but also the Declaration of him, To be High Priest in his Man-head; taken out
from amongst men. So deep are the Consequences of Scripture, when the Spirit
brings forth his own Mind from it.

Verse. 6. As he says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever, after
the Order of Melchisedec. He alleges another place, more clear.

Then, Howbeit Truth may be proved from one place, yet it is needful also, for
the ^earers cause, to allege more places, till the hearer be convinced.

Verse. 7. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up Prayers, and
Supplications, with strong Crying, and Tears, unto him that was able to save
him from Death; and was heard, in that he feared. Having proved Christ's
Office, he shows his Exercise of it, in offering for our sins a more
precious Oblation than the typical: Even himself, with Tears, to Death.

In these words, Then, Christ is pointed out unto us. 1. An High Priest, taken
from amongst men: a very true Man of our substance; Flesh, of our flesh. 2. A
Man subject to the sinless infirmities of our nature, as Grief, Fear, Mourning,
Death. 3. Having a set-time, during which he was to bear these our
infirmities, in the days of his flesh. 4. Exercising his Priestly Office in
these his days, and offering his precious Tears, and Cries, yea, his life, for
us. 5. One, who howsoever Fear was upon his holy Nature, yet knew he should
be delivered from death. 6. Who, as a man, in confidence of delivery, made
prayers to the Father. 7. Whose prayers are not refused, but accepted, and
heard on our behalf. 8. And, that these his sufferings were ended with the
days of his humiliation.

1. These Acts of Fear, and Tears, etc. are the proper Acts of his humane
nature.

Then, 1. As the Divine Nature had its own Acts proper to it self, so had the
humane Nature acts proper to it self also; and some acts were common to both
the Natures: So of Christ's acts, some are Divine, some Humane; some are both
Divine and Humane. 2. As Man, he was unable to bear our burden, or to help
himself, and therefore behoved to have the help of the Godhead. 3. Albeit he
was God in his own person, yet as Man, he behoved to take our room and place,
and pray for assistance, both as surety for us, and teacher of us: To give us
example how to behave our selves in straights.

2. He feared death, and offered Prayers and Tears, and strong cries: Because
not only death temporal presented it self before him; but, which was much
more, the curse of the Law, the Fathers wrath for sin duly deserved by us, was
set in a Cup to his head, which should have swallowed him up for ever, if he
had not, by the worthiness of his person overcome it, and turned the eternal
wrath and curse due unto us, into a temporal equivalent to himself.

Then, 1. The sense of Gods wrath, whom will it not terrify since it wrought
so on Christ? And Nature cannot choose but fear, when sense feels wrath. 2.
Felt wrath seems to threaten yet more, and worse: and therefore, beside
feeling, does breed yet further fear. 3. The curse of God due to our sins,
virtually implying the deserved pains of Hell, is more terrible than can be
told, and such as the Creature cannot choose but fear and abhor. 4. Christ's
sufferings were no fantasy, but very earnest, vehement, and terrible. 5. No
weapon, nor Buckler against wrath, but flying to God by supplication, and
crying, and tears.

3. He prayed to him that was able to save him, and was heard.

Then, 1. Albeit sense of wrath sees no out-gate; but black fears are always
before it; yet Faith looking to Gods omnipotency, sees an out-gate. 2. Christ's
prayers in our behalf, receive no repulse, but are heard. 3. Christ both died,
and was saved from death also, because it could not keep Dominion over him. So
shall we be saved from death though we die.

Verse. 8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which
he suffered. He removes the scandal of his Cross, by showing the necessity
and use thereof. Albeit he was the Son, yet he learned obedience by those
things which he suffered.

Then, 1. In the time of Christ's deepest humiliation, the union betwixt his
Godhead and Man-head was not loosed, he remained the Son of God still. 2. The
excellency of his person exempted him not from suffering, having once taken on
our debt. 3. Christ knew what suffering was, before he suffered: but he knew
not by experience till he actually suffered. 4. Christ's holy life was a part
of his obedience to the Father: but his obedience in suffering for our sins,
was obedience in an higher degree. 5. To obey God by way of action, is a common
lesson to every holy creature: but, that a sinless and holy person, should
suffer for sin, was a new lesson proper to Christ, a practick which never
passed but in Christ's person only.

Verse. 9. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him. 1. The suffering of Christ is called his
Perfection.

Then, 1. Christ though perfect in his person, yet he wanted something to make
him perfect in his Office till he suffered: for he could not satisfy the
Fathers justice till he suffered; nor yet could he have fellow-feeling from
experience, of the miseries of his members. 2. After suffering, Christ lacks
nothing that may pacify God, or comfort and save sinners.

2. The fruit follows, Being perfected, he is become the Author of salvation
to all that obey him.

Then, 1. The proper cause of our salvation is to be sought in Christ,
perfected by suffering: not in any one part of his holiness, or obedience in
doing, or any part of his suffering; but in him perfected by his obedience,
even to the death of the Cross. We may take comfort from, and make use of his
holy conception, life, and several virtues: but we must remember that his
accomplished obedience, in doing, and suffering, is our ransom, jointly
considered: and not any particular act looked on alone. 2. None should stumble
at Christ's sufferings, which perfected him in his Office, and likewise
perfected our ransom to the Father. 3. Christ felt the bitterness of his own
sufferings himself: but we got the sweet fruit thereof; even eternal life. 4.
Only they who obey Christ, can claim Title to the purchase of eternal life by
him. Now these are they who obey him, who in uprightness of heart believe in
his promises, and aim to draw strength out of him for new obedience.

Verse. 10. Called of God an High Priest, after the Order of Melchisedec. He
proves that Christ is Author of eternal salvation to his Followers, from the
nature of his Priesthood, which is eternal; not after Aarons Order, but
Melchisedec's.

Then the nature of Christ's Priesthood after Melchisedec's order, and the
Fathers authorizing him in the Office, is the evidence of our eternal salvation
to be had by him with the Fathers approbation.

Verse. 11. Of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing
ye are dull of hearing. Being to speak more of this mystery, he prepares
them, by checking their dullness, and advertising them of the difficulty of
expressing himself because of the same.

Then, 1. Even the Children of God are not free of this disease, of slowness to
conceive spiritual things aright. 2. The incapacity of Auditors will breed even
unto the best Preachers, difficulty of expressing their mind. 3. Preachers
should rebuke the dullness of people, to stir them up the more.

Verse. 12. For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that
one teach you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God; and
are become such as have need of Milk, and not of strong meat. 1. He makes
their fault the more, because by reason of time, they ought to have been
Teachers: that is, both well grounded themselves, and laboring to inform
others.

Then, 1. As we have longer time to learn, so should we make more progress in
knowledge. 2. As we are rooted in knowledge our selves, so ought we to
communicate our knowledge, and inform others.

2. He calls the Catechizing of the Ignorant, the Teaching the first
Principles of the Oracles of God; and compares it to the giving of Milk.

Then, 1. Catechizing of the rude and ignorant, is the first thing must be
done, for making sound Christians. 2. There is an order to be kept in bringing
men unto knowledge: The first principles, and fundamental Doctrines must first
be taught. 3. Nothing is to be taught for grounding men in Religion, but Gods
Oracles; that which is in Gods word only. 4. The manner of teaching the
Principles of Religion, should be easy and plain, as Milk for Children.

Verse. 13. For every one that uses Milk, is unskilful in the Word of
Righteousness. For he is a Babe. He proves them to be rude in knowledge, by
the description of one weak in knowledge, whom he calls a Babe, using Milk,
and unskilful in the Word of Righteousness: so called, because how to be
righteous is the sum of the Doctrine of it.

Then, 1. There are degrees of knowledge in Christianity: Some are weak, like
Babes; some more instructed, and of full age. 2. All knowledge in Christianity,
is to be reckoned by acquaintance with the Scripture, and skill therein: Not
by humane learning.

Verse. 14. But strong meat belongs to them that are of full age; even those
who by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good and
evil. 1. He describes the well-instructed Christian, by his meat, and
exercised senses. The meat that he is fit for, is strong meat: that is, more
profound Doctrine.

Then, 1. All the Scripture, and Doctrine from it, is either Milk, or stronger
meat; but whether this, or that, yet always it is food, fit for nourishment of
men's souls. 2. Discretion must be used by Teachers, to fit their teaching, as
their people are advanced, for Milk, or stronger meat; so as they may best be
fed.

2. For the exercise of his senses, or wits, to discern good or evil, he has
it by use, habit, and frequent acquainting himself with Scripture.

Then, 1. The use of the Scripture, and knowledge gotten thereby, is to discern
by it, what is good, what is evil; what is truth, what is error; what is
right, what is wrong. 2. Though Scripture be the Rule, yet not every one can
take it up, or make right application of the Rule, to the point in hand. 3. To
get a man's wits exercised, requires frequent use of, and acquaintance with the
Scripture. And without this haunting our mind in the Scriptures, and observing
the Lords counsel therein, a man cannot be able, albeit he were versed in
humane writs, to discern false Doctrine from true.

The Sum of Chap. VI.
THerefore, albeit you be rude, yet presupposing you are so settled in the
grounds of Faith, Repentance, Baptism, etc. that ye shall not renounce them
again, I will lead you on a little further, if God please, verse. 1, 2, 3. For,
if after clear conviction of the truth, a man voluntarily revolt, and fall
away, from the grounds of true Religion, there is neither repentance, nor
mercy, for such a man; because he, maliciously, does what he can, to put
Christ to as great a shame, as those who first crucified him, verse. 4, 5, 6.
And, as God blesses those who bring forth fruits by his manuring of them,
verse. 7. So is it justice, that he curse such as grow worse after manuring,
verse. 8. But I hope better of you, verse. 9. As the fruits of your Faith give
me warrant, verse. 10. Only that you may be more and more assured, continue
diligent, verse. 11. And follow the example of the faithful before you; in hope
of the inheritance, verse. 12. For, the promise made to Abraham, and the
faithful his children, is very sure, confirmed by an oath, verse. 13, 14. And
Abraham at last obtained it, verse. 15. For, as an oath ends strife among men,
verse. 16. So, to end our strife with God, in misbeleeving of him, he swear the
promise to Abraham, and to his seed, verse. 17. That upon so solid grounds, as
are Gods Promise, and Gods Oath, we might have comfort, who have fled to
Christ, and hope for his help, verse. 18. Which hope, is as an anchor, which
will not suffer us to be driven from Heaven, where Christ is established
Eternal Priest, after the order of Melchisedec, verse. 19, 22.

The Doctrine of Chap. VI.
Verse. 1. Therefore, leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us
go on, unto Perfection; not laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead
works, and of Faith toward God. 1. FRom the reproof of their dullness, he
draws an Exhortation, to amend their pace, and go forwards. Which teaches
us, that the conscience of our bygone slips, and sloathfulness, should be a
sharp spur, to drive us to a swifter pace; for overtaking of our Task.

2. He calls the Principles of Religion, the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ.

Then, 1. The Doctrine of Christ is the sum of Religion. He that has
learned Christ well, has learned all. 2. Nothing to be taught in Christ's
house, but his doctrine, which comes from him, and tends to him.

3. He leaves the Principles, and goes on to perfection. Then, 1. There are
two parts of Christian Doctrine: one, of the Principles of Religion, another,
of the perfection thereof. 2. The Principles must first be learned, and the
foundation laid. 3. When people have learned the Principles, their Teachers
must advance them further, toward perfection.

4. He says, he will not lay again the foundation* presupposing it is so
laid, as it needs not to be laid again. Or, if they make Apostasy after once
laying, cannot be laid the second time.

Then, The grounds of Religion must be so solidly learned, as they may well be
bettered afterward, by addition of further knowledge, but never raised again:
and must be so soundly believed, as they never be renounced again.

5. He reckons a number of fundamental points of Doctrine: and, first, of
repentance from dead works: so he calls our works before conversion.

Then, 1. It is a main point of the Catechism, to believe that all our works
before repentance, and conversion, are but dead works: that is, sins making us
liable to death. 2. If repentance be not learned from these works, the rest of
the building wants so much of the foundation.

6. In joining the Doctrine of Faith, as the next point, he gives us to
understand, That it is as necessary a ground of Religion, to teach a penitent
to believe in God, as to teach the believer to repent.

Verse. 2. Of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and, of laying on of hands, and, of
resurrection of the dead, and, of eternal judgment. 1. The Doctrine of
Baptisms, in the plural number, he makes a third fundamental Doctrine: and so
makes it necessary, That the significations of Baptism be taught, that the
people may learn to put difference betwixt outward Baptism by the Minister,
which an hypocrite may have, and the inward Baptism by the Spirit, which Christ
bestows upon his own Elect: and, that they be instructed in the nature of
this Sacrament, and the signification thereof: yea, and of the Baptism of
suffering affliction for the Gospel, whereunto the outward Sacrament of Baptism
obliges.

2. The fourth fundamental point of the Doctrine of the Catechism, he makes
the Doctrine of the laying on of hands. Now, hands were in a special manner
imposed: First, in the bestowing of spiritual and miraculous gifts, for the
confirmation of new converts in the primitive Church, Act. 8.7.18. Which
endured until the Christian Religion was sufficiently confirmed unto the world
to be divine. Next, imposition of hands was used in the ordination of
Office-bearers in the Church, both extraordinary, and ordinary, 1 Timothy 4.14 and
Chap. 5.22. Acts 6.6.

Then, in the Apostles estimation, it is necessary for grounding of people in
Religion, that they be instructed, not only how the Lord founded the Christian
Religion, and confirmed it by extraordinary gifts of the holy Spirit, in the
Primitive Church: But also what Offices, and Office-bearers he has ordained
for ordinary edification, and ruling, and maintaining of his Church, unto the
end of the world, that they may acknowledge such as are sent of God, and submit
themselves unto them.

3. The Doctrine of Resurrection of the dead, he makes the fifth point of the
Catechism: and of the last judgment, the sixth. Under which sixth, the sum of
Christian Religion may be comprised, and in this order wherein they are set
down, may be best learned, believed, and made use of.

Verse. 3. And this will we do, if God permit. By this manner of speech, if God
permit, he teaches us,

1. That a Preachers endeavor to instruct a people, can have no success,
except God make way unto him, and concur with him. 2. That he who is busied in
the most necessary part of Gods service, suppose it were in writing Scripture,
or in ordinary preaching, and writing; must do it with submission to God, to be
stopped in the midst of his work, and cut short; yea, and that in the midst of
a meditated speech, if it so please God.

Verse. 4. For, it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

5. And have tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the world to come;

6. If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance: seeing they
crucify, to themselves, the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

1. Minding to stir them up to make progress in knowledge, he sets before
them the danger of Apostasy.

Then, 1. He presupposes, except they study to make progress, they shall go
backwards: and that going backwards, tends to Apostasy: and that voluntary,
and complete Apostasy from known Truth, does harden the heart from repentance,
and cutteth off a man from mercy. 2. He accounts our natural security so
great, that there is need of most fearful threatenings, to awake us out of it.
3. That the only way to be freed from Apostasy, is to be aiming at a progress.

Next observe, 1. That he does not speak here of every sin against knowledge,
albeit indeed those be fearful and dangerous; but of Apostasy from Religion,
and the Doctrine of Christ. 2. Not of the Apostasy of Ignorants, who never were
informed in the matter of Religion, but lightly came, and lightly went away;
(albeit the shame done to Christ by them, is great and grievous:) but, of such
who after illumination, and feeling somewhat of the power of the truth, do
revolt. 3 He speaks not here of Apostasy of infirmity, for fear, in fit of a
passion, or hasty passage of ones life: But, of a voluntary, and deliberate
falling away after clear conviction of the truth, This is that sin against the
Holy Ghost which here he speaks of. 4 He does not presuppose here, that an
elect child of God, and renewed, may fall into this sin: But, that a
Professor, and some in the visible Church, may fall away and dye in this sin.
(Now, a Professor may be endued with many gifts, and yet be a temporizer, and
remain unrenewed inwardly, and so may possibly fall into this ill) And
therefore every Professor should be the more circumspect, because of the
possibility of some men's Apostasy, and the more diligent to attain to that
faith which purifieth the heart, and works by love, which fails not. 5 In
telling what is the danger of a Professors Apostasy, the Apostle minds not
to weaken any man's faith, or discourage him from progress making: But, by the
contrary, his intention is, that men strengthen themselves so much the more in
the Faith. And therefore such as have felt no more in their own estimation, but
these tastings, should be so far from discouragement, and fainting, that rather
they must look to a necessity laid upon them, to make progress in Faith, and
the fruits thereof, and to draw near to God, who can preserve them from falling
away.

But because some do trouble themselves, and other some do harden themselves in
error, by this place (as our intended brevity will suffer) let us study to
give some light to both. Compare this place with verse. 9, 10, etc. Of this
Chapter, to the end. First, in these verses, the 4, 5. and 6. he is speaking
of Professors in general, conditionally. But verse. 9, 10, etc. he is speaking
to the true Believers* amongst these Hebrews, particularly.

2. Here in these verses are glorious gifts, Illumination, and tasting of
spiritual things: There in those verses, is Faith, working by love, to the
glory of Jesus, and Weal of his Saints. 3. Here are men enrolled amongst
Christians, so holden, and esteemed, both of themselves, and others: There are
sensible souls, in the feeling of sin, and fear of wrath, and hope of mercy,
flying to Jesus as to a Refuge, and casting the Anchor of their tossed souls
within the veil, where Jesus is in Heaven. 4. Here men receiving from the holy
Ghost good things: there men receiving from him, beside these good things,
better things also. 5. Here things glorious indeed, yet not always
accompanying salvation, but in some going before saving Grace; in others,
possibly alone, without saving Grace: But there are saving Graces always
joined with Salvation. 6. Here in these verses the Apostle is not confident,
but such as have received these things here mentioned, may fall away, except
they go forward, and study to make progress. But there, in those verses, the
Apostle is persuaded, that they shall not fall away, but be saved; and
thereupon encourages them to go forwards.

From this Comparison it is clear then,

1. That there is a possibility of the Apostasy of Professors, and titular
Saints, but not of the Apostasy of renewed souls, and true Christians, true
Saints. 2. There is a ground of fear from these words, to such as are secure,
and puffed up with the conceit of their spiritual gifts, but not of those who
in fear are fled to Christ. 3. That in this place carnal confidence only is
shaken in such, who as if they had done well enough, study not to make
progress: But Faith no ways weakened in such, who still study to advance, and
make more and more progress. 4. That here fruitless light, and fruitless
feeling, is called in question; but not Faith, and laborious love, bringing out
fruits to Christ's glory, and good of his Saints.

Again, from this comparison it is evident,

That the holy Ghost is Author, both of these common spiritual gifts, and of
these special saving graces also. Of these common gifts he is Author, as
dwelling amongst Professors, and distributing good things unto all Professors
that are in the visible house of his Church. But he is Author of those saving
Graces, as dwelling in true Professors, who are his own house: bringing with
himself better things than these gifts, and salvation also unto them infallibly.

Thirdly, From this Comparison it is clear.

1. That there are some Converts, external from the world, to the Church, who
yet stick in their naturals, and are not in the sense of sin, fled unto Christ
for refuge, nor converted from Nature to saving Grace; to whom the Apostle will
not deny room in the Church, if they will study to make progress. And, 2. That
illumination, and tasting of Spiritual things, may be given as well to such,
who are not renewed in their heart, as unto sound Converts.

For, 1. The natural man may be convinced, that the Church is a blessed
Society, and join himself unto it. 2. Yea, change his outward conversation, and
cast off his pollutions which are in the world through lust, and take himself
to be ruled outwardly by Christ's Discipline, and call him, LORD, LORD. 3. And
be so blameless before men, that he may look with his Lamp like a wise Virgin,
waiting for the Wedding, and yet be a graceless fool inwardly. 4. Yea, he may
be illuminated, not only by learning the literal knowledge of the Gospel, as
men do their Philosophy, but also may be illuminated supernaturally, with
in-sight in many profound things in the Scripture. For supernatural gifts may
be in a Natural and unrenewed Man, so as he may say to CHRIST, I have
prophesied in thy Name, and yet be unrenewed in Christ's estimation. 5. He may
taste of the heavenly Gift, partly by historical believing the Truth of the
Gospel, partly by contemplation of the Truth credited. Now, historical Faith,
is a taste of that heavenly gift of Justifying, Faith; because it is a good
degree toward it? and contemplation of this Truth, brings a taste of the
thing credited; and so of the heavenly Gift revealed in the Gospel. For, the
contemplation of every Truth, brings with it; naturally, a delectation, such
as Philosophers do find in their studies. And the more eminent the Truth be,
no wonder the delectation be the greater. For, many heard Christ's gracious
Sermons, and wondered, and believed his words to be true: but Christ did not
commit himself unto them; for he knew what was in them. 6. He may be made
partaker of the Holy Ghost, and have his share of Church gifts, distributed by
the Holy Ghost; so as he can from the light which ^he Holy Ghost gives him,
answer other men's doubts, comfort the feeble minded, and edify others in their
Faith, by his speeches; yea, have the gift of expressing his brain-light, both
in conference to men, and in formal prayer to God, if he be a private man
only: and if he be in public office, may have the gift of formal preaching,
and praying in public: yea, in those days of the Apostle, might have had the
extraordinary gifts of Tongues, Prophesying, and Miracles-working. Therefore,
says Christ, Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name have cast out Devils? and in thy Name
done many wonderful works? To whom Christ will answer, I never knew you; Depart
from me, ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7.22, 23. Now, this knowledge,
convincing light, and gifts of utterance, etc. are from the Holy Ghost; or
else, how could such Apostates, as are here described, sin against the Holy
Ghost? 7. He may taste of the good Word of God: that is, find sweetness in
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and be convinced of the Goodness and Mercy of God
toward sinners, shining therein: yea, and by beholding the possibility of his
own salvation, upon this condition. If he will sell all, and buy the Pearl,
he may taste of Gods Merchandise, in the blocking for them; beside all the
false joys, and delusions, which he may get by presuming of the certainty of
his own salvation, and yet, in the mean time, as a fool, will not lay down the
price; will not renounce his earthly, and beastly affections; will not deny
himself, and his own corruptions: The care of this world, and the deceitfulness
of Riches, choking the fruits of the Word heard, as they who receive the seed
amongst thorns. Wherefore in time of persecution for the Word, he may by and
by be offended, and quit the Truth, albeit with the stony hearted hearers, in
time of prosperity, he heard the Word, and anon, with joy, received it, Mat.
13.20, 21, 22. 8. Lastly, he may taste of the power of the World to come: that
is, in contemplation of the Blessedness promised to the Saints in Heaven, be
taken with admiration of it, yea, and have a natural desire of it, as Baalam
did, when upon such a speculation, he did wish to dye the death of the
Righteous, and to have his last end as his: and yet love the wages of Iniquity
so well, as he forsook not his covetousness, for all his wish of Heaven. In a
word, It is possible, that a man impenitent, and unrenewed in his heart, may be
a glorious Professor, for his outward behavior, and have fair gifts, and yet
make Apostasy from the Truth, when he gets a fit Temptation: or else, how
should it be possible, that the Devil should make glorious Professors, and
Churchmen in all Ages, Apostates, Persecuters, Betrayers of the Truth to the
Adversary, Underminers of the Church of Christ; Except they, under all their
show, did lodge in their heart, the love of Money, and worldly Riches, more than
the love of Heaven? the love of the praise of men, rather than Gods
Approbation? the lust of their fleshly ease, and pleasure, more than the
pleasure of God? the fleshly fear of those that can kill the Body, more than of
God, Who can cast both Soul and Body into Hell? And, therefore, no wonder, if
for satisfaction of their Ambition, Avarice, Lusts, and earthly Affections,
they become ready to sell Christ and His Truth, and His Church, and their
Country, and All, when they find their Merchant, and the beloved Price offered
unto them.

4 Observe here; How glorious soever these Illuminations, and Gifts, and
Tastings seem, yet there is no further here granted, but Tastings, to such
rotten Professors. That which they get, is either only in the Brain, by
Knowledge; or, if there be any Feelings, they are but fleeting motions,
flowing from temporary grounds, which proceed not from any Spiritual life in
the man, nor from a root in himself: that is, not from the Spirit dwelling in
him. Such feelings do neither foster, nor strenghthen him, for any Spiritual
Obedience; but vanish, without changing the heart. It is true, all that the
godly get, in comparison of what he shall get, is but Tastings: Yet in
comparison of these fruitless tastings of the unsound Professors, that which
he gets, is true Eating, and Drinking, a real Feeding; holding his soul in
life; and enabling him to work the works of God; to mortify his lusts, and
serve God in his Spirit.

5. Observe, That here he does not challenge those who have felt these
tastings, for unsound, nor threaten them, if they hold on, and make progress.
Then, 1. The having of illumination, and spiritual gifts, and tastings of
heavenly things, is not to be lightly esteemed of, but accounted as steps and
degrees unto a further progress: wherefore, as it is possible for some to fall
away, so is it a piece of advancement, to encourage men to go on, that they
fall not away. 2. There is no danger in having this Illumination, or these
light tastings: But all the hazard is, to rest upon them, and not to tend
toward perfection, or, to fall away after receiving so much encouragement. 3.
And therefore, we must not rest on Illumination, or common gifts, how glorious
soever; nor tastings, and feelings, how sweet soever: but seek still into a
more near communion with Christ, and still more to mortify our lusts, and
still to abound in the fruits of love to Christ, and his Church.

Verse. 6. If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance; seeing
they crucify to themselves, the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame. 1. He says not. It is impossible they should be saved, but, that they
shall be renewed by Repentance.

Then, Apostates salvation is not impossible, but because their repentance is
impossible: and where repentance is, there is no impossibility of salvation,
but a certainty of salvation rather. For, he that gives the repentance, he
declares his purpose, to give remission also.

2. He gives a Reason why they cannot get repentance, because they
maliciously renounce Christ, and crucify him afresh unto themselves. That is,
draw on the guiltiness of his enemies who crucified him, did lie under, by
Apostasy, allowing their crucifying of him.

Then, 1 An Apostate from Christ's doctrine, does Christ as open shame as he can;
and says in effect of Christ, that his doctrine is false, and not to be
maintained. 2 An Apostate allows Judas, and the Jews for crucifying of
Christ; and accounts Christ no more worthy, than so to be dealt withal. 3.
Renouncing of Christ, makes repentance impossible: For, he is a Prince, to
give repentance unto Israel. And therefore, he who will not quit Christ, nor
his true Doctrine, is not debarred from having Repentance, nor from Salvation.

Verse. 7. For the Earth, which drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it,
and brings forth Herbs, meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing from God.

Verse. 8. But that which bears Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing; whose end is to be burned.

He gives a reason of the punishment of Apostates, from the less, to the
more, under a similitude from land-labouring, thus: As God blesses such men,
who, after pains taken on them, bring forth the fruits of good works; So does
he curse those, who after pains taken on them, do bring forth but evil works.
And if it be ^ut equity, that God curse Professors, who bring forth but evil
fruits in their life; Much more equity he should curse Apostates, who profess
open hostility against him.

The Similitude shows, 1. That men are like unmanured Land, before they be
brought within the Church: but after they are made partakers of the Gospel,
then are they like manured Land within hedges, Gods Husbandry. 2. That such as
begin to bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, God blesses, and makes more
fruitful. 3. That the means of Grace under the Gospel, are to our souls as
Rain, and laboring, and other Husbandry is to the ground.

Verse. 8. But that which bears Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing; whose end is to be burned. 2. The Similitude shows, 1. That a
man may perish, for not bringing forth the fruits of the Gospel, albeit he
fall not into the sin against the Holy Ghost. 2. That there is a great reason
why God should cast away a man, who amendeth not his life by the Gospel, as
that an Husbandman should give over laboring of a piece of evil ground. 3. And
by this means also shows, that Gods most severe judgments, have all of them
most equitable reasons. 4. That there is a necessity of bringing forth the
fruits of well-doing, if a man would be free of the curse, either of
Apostates, or of the barren land.

Verse. 9. But beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany salvation, though we thus speak. 1. He mitigateth his threatening of
them, for fear of hurting their Faith: Beloved, says he, we are persuaded
better things of you, though we thus speak. Then, 1. A Preacher may threaten
fearfully those of whom he has good hopes; yet with prudency, lest he harm
them. 2. And people threatened, must beware of weakening their own Faith,
knowing, that threatenings are not used to weaken their Faith, but to put away
security, and sloathfulness.

2. He takes his assurance of them, from such things as accompany salvation.

Then, In the fruits of Faith, there are marks and evidences of a man's
salvation to be found, which may give a charitable persuasion of their blessed
estate, to such as know them,

Verse. 10. For, God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of love
which you have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the
Saints, and do minister. 1. The reason of his good hopes of them, is their
bygone, and present fruits of love toward Christ's name, and his Saints.

Then, 1. The works of love, done for the glory of Christ, or to his Saints for
Christ's sake, from time to time, as God gives occasion, are evident marks of a
man's salvation; and more sure tokens of saving Grace given, than illumination
and tastings, spoken of before. 2. No love is to be reckoned for love, but
working love. 3. No works are right works, which flow not from love to Christ.

2. Of such works he says, that God is not unrighteous to forget them: and so
proves their salvation, because such fruits accompany salvation.

Then, 1. With the grace of laborious love toward Christ's Name, the grace of
salvation does go in company. 2. Justice does agree with grace in the reward of
well-doing, because the reward is graciously promised, and righteousness makes
promises to be performed. 3. The man that loves Christ in deed, and in truth,
has that which is most terrible in God, for the pawn of his salvation, even
his Justice.

3. These are they whom he reproved for weakness of knowledge, Chap. 5. verse.
12. whom now he commends, for their good affection, and fruits.

Then, 1. Mean knowledge, if it be sanctified, and sound, will be fruitful in
the works of love. 2. This virtue of love is no excuse for sloathful following
of the means of knowledge: we must grow in love, and grow in knowledge also.

Verse. 11. And we desire, that every one of you do show the same diligence, to
the full assurance of hope, unto the end. 1. He exhorts to continue diligent
unto the end. Then, 1. The diligent have need of Exhortation to go on. 2.
Exhortation to perseverance, imports not suspicion of falling away, but
serves to further perseverance rather. 3. No other Tearm-day is set to our
diligence, but the end. No license to slack, or give over.

2. The end of their going on in diligence, is their full assurance of hope.

Then, 1. Whatsoever measure of assurance men have, they may yet obtain a
fuller measure of it. Still we must study to grow. 2. Constant diligence in
the works of love, is the ready mean to foster and augment our assurance. 3.
Christian hope is not a conjecture, or probability, but an assurance.

Verse. 12. That ye be not sloathful; but followers of them, who through Faith
and Patience inherit the Promises. 1. He sets the Example of the Fathers
before them, to be imitated.

Then, 1. So many examples as we have in Scripture, of the godly gone before,
so many leaders and encouragers must we reckon our selves to have. 2. The
painful, and not the sloathful, are the true imitators of allowed examples. 3.
In the way to Heaven, there are many things befalling us* which make it
unlikely we shall come there: for which cause, there is need of Faith* 4. A
time must intervene, and troubles also, ere Heaven be possessed: There is,
therefore, need of Patience also.

2. They inherit the Promise, says he.

Then, 1. The most patient and painful servants of God, get not Heaven by
merit, but by inheritance. 2. They get not Heaven by merit, but by promise.
Now, the promise is of Grace.

Verse. 13. For, when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no
greater, he swear by himself;

14. Saying, surely, blessing, I will bless thee; and multiplying, I will
multiply thee.

15. And so after he had patiently endured, he obtained the Promise.

1. For many examples, he brings one of Father Abraham, from Genesis 22. verse.
16.17. and makes use of it by application.

Then, because we cannot have all examples at once before our eyes, we shall
do well, for several duties, to have some select examples singled out, for our
own more ready use.

2. He does not bring forth all Abraham's virtues, but such as made for his
purpose.

Then, when fit examples are found out, those points which most serve for our
edification, must be most in our eyes.

3. He marketh, first, the Promise made: next, the confirmation of it by an
oath: then, the fast and constant hold laid on it by Abraham: last, the fruit
of the holding fast; He obtained the promise. Then, 1. In the example of
Believers, the nature of the Promise, and how they came by it, must especially
be marked, for helping of our Faith. 2. Preachers have Paul's example here, how
to handle a Text.

4. He sets Abraham's obtaining, for a pawn of their obtaining; albeit he
knew their Faith should be weaker, in degree, than Abraham's.

Then, In making use of examples, it must be held for a ground, that the honest
and up^ight imitators, albeit weak, shall find the same success that the
stronger, gone before them, have found.

Verse. 16. For, men, verily, swear by the greater: and an oath for
confirmation, is to them an end of all strife. 1. The Apostle being about to
comment upon this oath, first, he shows the end of an oath amongst men,
verse. 16. and then, the use of the oath made to Abraham thereafter. 1. Men
swear by a greater, says he, that the authority of him by whom they swear,
may ratify the oath, one way or other. But God has not a greater: and
therefore, himself, and all his, is laid in pawn, to make his oath good. 2. He
who is the greatest, and gives authority, and weight, to all oaths among men,
must be esteemed worthy to give weight, and authority, to his own oath. This is
the force of his reasoning.

2. The end of an oath is to end controversy. Then, This similitude imports,
that as long as we are in mis-beleef, there is a controversy betwixt God and
us: we testifying that we are in suspicion of his good affection toward us,
and of his promise keeping unto us: and God is offended with us, for our wicked
thoughts entertained of him.

3. God has sworn his promise to us, to take away the controversy.

Then, 1. A man could condescend no further, to give his party satisfaction,
than God has condescended to satisfy us. 2. Except we will deny God the
honor, which we cannot deny unto an honest man, we must believe the sworn
Covenant of God, and particular Articles thereof. 3. Except we believe, the
controversy remains; yea, and is doubled, after the oath.

Verse. 17. Wherein God, willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of
Promise, the immutability of His Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath. One of the
ends of Gods swearing to Abraham, is the Confirmation of the Faithful, or the
Heirs of Promise, concerning the unchangeableness of Gods Counsel, in making
the Promise, Then, Every Believer has the same ground of certainty with
Abraham; seeing the Oath sworn to Abraham, is sworn for their Confirmation.

2. He calls Believers by Isaaks style, Heirs of the Promise.

Then, Believers are all reckoned by God, as so many Isaaks, and entitled with
Isaak, to be Heirs of Abraham with him, and Heirs of the Good promised to him,
and Heirs begotten by the force of Gods Promise, and Word, and not by the force
of nature.

And certainly, albeit the Law serve for a Preparation, yet it is the Gospel,
and the Word of Promise, which pulls in the heart of a man to God, in love,
as a reconciled Father, and converteth him. Wherefore, even because of the
Believers begetting to God, by the immortal seed of the Word of Promise, he
may be called the Heir of Promise also.

3. By the Oath God declares himself willing to show the immutability of his
Counsel, concerning the Salvation of Believers.

Then, 1. As many as believe in Jesus, and are begotten by the Promise, are
foreordained, in Gods Counsel, for Salvation. 2. The Purpose and Counsel of
God, concerning such men's Salvation, is immutable. 3. God will have Believers
knowing this His Counsel, concerning themselves, and their Salvation, and
assured of the immutability thereof. 4. He will have the sworn Promise made to
Abraham, and his Seed, serving in particular, to the Heirs of Promise, or
Believers, to make evident this His Counsel to them in particular, as well as
to Abraham, because He swear to Abraham, to show them this His Purpose.

4. By the Oath he says, God is willing more abundantly to show the
immutability of his Counsel.

Then, 1. Till the immutability of the Lords Counsel, concerning our salvation,
be laid hold upon, Faith cannot be steadfast, as the Lord would have it. 2. God
is willing, that we should look in upon his Counsel, by the eye of Faith, and
read our Names written in Heaven, in His Decree: and so be made sure. 3. The
Promise of Salvation, or of the Blessing to Believers, is of it self sufficient
enough for Assurance, albeit it were not sworn: and the Oath is added, not of
necessity; for any weakness of the truth of the Promise, but out of
super-abundant good will, to have us made sure. 4. It behooves to be most
pleasant to God, that Believers have full assurance of Faith, and overcome all
doubting, seeing he swears the Promise, only for this end.

Verse. 18. That by two immutable things, in the which it was impossible for God
to lie, we might have a strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay
hold upon the Hope set before us. Another end of the Oath, is, That with
assurance the Believer may have strong Consolation, upon solid grounds.

1. But how describes he the Believers, to whom this Comfort is allowed? We,
says he, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the Hope set before us.
That is, We, who to flee from deserved wrath, have taken our course toward
Jesus, in hope to get the Salvation offered unto us in Him. Fleeing for refuge,
a similitude, whether from nature, or from the Ordinance of Moses Law, Numb.
35.6. Gives us to understand, 1. That every true Believer, of necessity, must
be sensible of his own sins, and the deserved wrath of God pursuing him for
sin. 2. Must have this estimation of Jesus, That He is both a ready, and
sufficiently strong Refuge, to save a man from sin and wrath, when he runs
toward Him. 3. That in this sense of sin, and wrath, and good estimation of
Christ, he set his Face toward Him only: avoiding all by-waies, leading
elsewhere, than to this Refuge; and running for death and life to be found in
Him.

2. Again while he says, To lay hold upon the Hope set before us, he gives
us to understand, 1. That in Christ, our Refuge: not only is there deliverance
from pursuing Wrath, but also eternal life to be found, as it is set before us
in the Gospel. 2. That the Believer must have Hope, to obtain this Offer. 3.
And, as he is driven, by fear of the Law, unto Christ, so must he also be
drawn, and allured, by this Salvation set before him, griping undeserved Grace,
as well as fleeing deserved Wrath.

3. While he describes the Believer, after this manner, as the man to whom
all these things appertain, he teaches us,

That, Whosoever finds himself in any truth, to be such a one as here is
described, so driven, and so drawn to Christ, fleeing from Sin and Wrath, and
running on to Christ, in Him alone to be saved; may be well assured, he is a
man endued with saving Faith, One of Abraham's Children, An Heir of Promise, One
of the society of the Saints, and fellowship of the Apostles, whom the Apostle
here takes in with himself, in this Text; A Man in Gods Counsel, Fore-known,
Elected, Predestined: A Man to whom God intended both to speak and swear, in
Abraham's person, to whom God allows both strong Consolation here, and the
Possession hereafter of whatsoever is set before him, in the offer of the
Gospel.

4. The end of the Oath; That we might have strong Consolation, by two
immutable things ( that is Gods Promise, and Gods Oath) in which it is
impossible that God should lie.

Then, 1. The Consolation which God allows upon the Faithful, is strong, able
to overcome the Challenge of Sin, fear of Judgment, Death, and Hell, and
feeling or fearing of any misery whatsoever. Other consolations are but weak,
in comparison hereof, and can overcome none of these. 2. God has laid
immutable Grounds for this Consolation; His unchangeable Promise, and His
unchangeable Oath. 3. God cannot lie, nor deceive, whether He say, or swear.
4. His nature makes this impossibility of lying, and immutability in
promising, and swearing. 5. God allows this strong Consolation, to come by
Faiths resting on these two immutable things, His Promise, and Oath. So that
the less a man apprehend the grounds of his Faith to be solid, the less he
shall be comforted: and the more he apply the Promise to himself, and
apprehend the unchangeableness of the Promise and Oath of God, the more strong
shall his Consolation be.

Verse. 19. Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure, and
steadfast; and, which enters into that within the Veil.

20. Whether the Forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus: made an High Priest
for ever, after the Order of Melchisedec.

1. He has told the solidity of the ground whereupon the Believer does rest:
and now he shows the stability of the gripe which the Believer takes of
these grounds, in the similitude of the gripe which a Ships Anchor takes,
being cast on good ground. In the former Verse, by Hope, was meant the thing
hoped for, and laid hold on by Hope. In the Relative, which, in this Verse, he
understands the Hope which does lay hold. In the similitude of an Anchor cast
out of a Ship, He gives us to understand, 1 That albeit we have no^ gotten
full Possession of the Promises in this life, yet we get a gripe of them, by
Faith and Hope. 2. That Hopes gripe is not a slender imagination, but solid,
and strong, like the gripe of an Anchor. 3. That the Believer is not exempted
from some tossing of trouble, and temptations, while he is in this World; yea,
subject rather, to the same, as a Ship upon the Sea. 4. That whatsoever tossing
there be, yet all is safe: The Souls Anchor is cast within the Heaven: The Soul
is sure.

2. He gives the Anchor all good properties: It is weighty, solid, and firm:
It will not drive, nor bow, nor break, it is so sure and steadfast. Again, it is
sharp and peircing: It is entered into that within the Veil, that is, into
Heaven, represented by the Sanctuary beyond the Veil, And so the ground is
good, as well as the Anchor to hold all fast.

Verse. 20. Whither the Forerunner is for us entered; even Jesus, made an
High Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedec. 2. He commends our
Anchor-ground for this, that Christ is there, where our Anchor is cast, as our
Forerunner. In continuing the Comparison, and calling Christ our Forerunner,
he brings to mind.

1. Christ being once in the Ship of the Militant Church, tossed and tempted as
others, albeit without sin. 2. That he is now gone ashore to Heaven, where the
ship of the Church is seeking to land. 3. That his going ashore is as our
Forerunner: and so his landing is an evidence of our landing also, who are to
follow after him. 4. That his going before, is to make easy our Entry. He is
the Forerunner for us for our behoof, to prepare a place for us. 5. That our
Anchor is where Christ is, and so must be the surer, for his being there, to
hold all fast, till he draw the Ship to the shore.

2. Christ is entered into Heaven, and made an High Priest for ever.

Then, 1. CHRIST in Heaven is invested in an office for us. 2. His Office is
the High Priesthood. The Truth and Substance of the typical Priesthood. 3. His
Office is for ever: and so for the benefit of all Ages: that we now, as well
as others before us, may have the benefit of his intercession.

3. He is said to be made an High Priest after his entry in Heaven. Then,
albeit Christ was Priest for his Church from the beginning, yet was it never so
declared, as after his Ascension, when he sent down blessings sensibly upon
his Church: since which time he does so still.

The Sum of Chap. VII.
I Brake off my speech of Melchisedec (will the Apostle say) now I return to
him again, and in his Excellency, will show you Christ's Excellency, who is
Priest after his order. We have no more of him in Scripture, but what we
find, Gen* 14.19, 20. And there he is King and Priest both, verse. 1. Bearing
a mystery in his Name and Office, verse. 2. Without Father or Mother, or end of
life, as he stands in Scripture, that he might resemble Christ, verse. 3.
Acknowledged to be superior to Abraham, by his paying of tithes unto him,
verse. 4. Even as Levi for that same cause, is superior to the Brethren, verse.
5. Superior also because he blessed Abraham, verse. 6, 7. Superior to Levi
for his typical immortality, verse. 8. And for his taking tithes of Levi, in
Abraham's loins, verse. 9, 10. Yea, the Priesthood of Levi, because imperfect,
calls for a Priest of another Order, to give perfection, which is Christ,
verse. 11, 12. And so both the Priesthood, and all the Ordinances thereof, are
abolished by the Messiah, who behoved to be of another Tribe than Levi, verse.
13, 14. And of another Order also, verse. 15. Bodily shadows were in the
Priesthood of Levi, but endless Truth in Christ, verse. 16. As David's words do
prove, verse. 17. By which also it is prophesied, That Aarons Priesthood shall
be disanulled, when Christ's Priesthood is come, because it was not able to do
men's turn under the Law, as Christ's does under the Gospel, verse. 18, 19. And
God obliged not himself to make Aarons Priesthood stand, as he swear to
establish Christ's, verse. 20, 21. And so the Covenant under the Messiah, is
declared to be better than under Levi, verse. 22. Again, the Priesthood of Levi
had sundry Office-bearers, but Christ has none in his Priesthood with himself,
nor none after himself, verse. 23, 24. Therefore he is able alone to work out
our salvation thoroughly, verse. 25. For such a Priest have we need of, who
needs not offer up daily his Sacrifice: for he has offered one, and never
more, verse. 26, 27. And no wonder; for under the Law, mortal men might be
Priests; but under the Gospel, only the Son of God is Priest, and that for
evermore, verse. 28.

The Doctrine of Chap. VII.
Verse. 1. For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of the most High God, who
met Abraham, returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him. BY
saying FOR, he gives a reason why he calls Christ a Priest after the Order
of Melchisedec, because such a one was Melchisedec his Type: therefore such a
one it behoved Christ in Truth and Substance to be, as the Type imported he
should be.

1. He repeateth from Genesis 14.18, 19, 20. as much as served to resemble any
thing in Christ: but never a word touches he of Melchisedec's bringing forth
of Bread and Wine to Abraham. Therefore he did not account this any typical
action, having any resemblance of that which was to be done of Christ his
Antitype: for then should he not have failed to mark it, seeing he observes
the mystery of his Name, and place of dwelling, which is less.

2. Melchisedec, and the Church in Salem, where Melchisedec was Priest, were
not of Abraham's family. Therefore albeit God did choose Abraham's Family, as the
Race wherein he was to continue the ordinary Race of his Church, yet had he
Churches and Saints beside.

3. This meeting of Abraham, and entertaining him and his company with Bread
and Drink, being the exercise of an ordinary virtue, shows, That it is the
duty of all men, and namely of Kings, Great men, and Churchmen, to countenance
and encourage, according to their place, and power, those who hazard themselves
in Gods service, and good causes.

4. To come to a particular Comparison of the Type, and the Truth, 1. As
Melchisedec was King and Priest in his Kingdom, so is CHRIST King and Priest
in his Kingdom, both to care for the Religion and outward conversation of his
subjects, to the weal of their souls and bodies, both amongst men, and toward
God, in this life, and hereafter. 2. As Melchisedec is the blesser of Abraham
the Father of the faithful, in the type: So is Christ, in truth, the blesser of
Abraham and all the faithful, the fountain of all blessing, in whom alone every
one is blessed, who gets blessing.

Verse. 2. To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all: first being by
interpretation, King of Righteousness, and after that also, King of Salem,
which is, King of Peace. 1. To go on in the Comparison: As Melchisedec, the
Type, was honored by Abraham's paying of Tithes unto him: So is Christ to be
honored by all Abraham's children, by giving of their Substance, and worldly
Goods, what is sufficient to maintain the honor of his Kingdom amongst them.

2. Presuppose the Type were laid aside, yet this thankful meeting that Abraham
gave to the man, whose office was to bless him in the Name of the Lord, does
teach All the faithful, Abraham's true seed, a duty of Thankfulness to Gods
servants set over them, to bless them in the Name of the Lord, even to honor
them, by giving of their goods for their sufficient maintenance.

3. As Melchisedec the Type, is by interpretation, King of Righteousness: So is
Christ in truth, King of Righteousness. 1. For the personal Righteousness in
himself. 2. Because he is the Righteousness of his Subjects, made of God unto
us Righteousness by imputation. 3. Because he frames his Subjects piece and
piece, unto a righteous disposition, by sanctifying them.

4. As Melchisedec the Type is King of Salem, that is, King of Peace; So is
Christ in truth, King of Peace, to his Subjects, by reconciling them to the
Father, by giving peace of conscience within themselves, by making all the
Creatures at peace with them, and all things turn together for their good, and
by working still on their eternal welfare and blessedness, until he perfect it.

5. As Melchisedec was first King of Righteousness, and then King of Peace in
the Type; So is Christ in truth, in this Order; first, King of Righteousness to
his Subjects, to take away their sins, and to give them Righteousness. And
then, King of Peace, because he gives them his Peace, as the fruit of
Righteousness. This is the order of his Kingdom, Righteousness, and Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Verse. 3. Without Father, without Mother, without Descent; having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God, abides
a Priest continually. 1. Melchisedec, certainly was a very Man, King, and
Priest in such a City, if we consider him in his natural being: But if we
consider him in his spiritual being, as he stands in Scripture, under this
name, he has neither Father nor Mother, beginning nor end. There is no more
mention of him, what he was, or of whom he came, or of his death, but these
three verses of Genes. 14. As then he is in a typical being in Scripture; So
is Christ, in truth, in his personal being, as God, without Mother; as Man,
without Father; as God, without beginning; as God and man, without ending of
life.

2. As Melchisedec, looking how he stands in his Scriptural being, abides a
Priest continually; so that wheresoever he is named in Scripture, there he is
eve^ found a Priest also: and never a word of his laying down of the
Priesthood: Even so is Christ's Priesthood unseparable from his person: He
abides a Priest continually in real accomplishment.

3. By saying, He is made like unto the Son of GOD, he gives us to
understand, That Gods purpose was, in those particulars, so to describe him, as
he might resemble the Person, and Offices of the Son of God: And so is a Type
of Gods own appointment.

4. And if he was made a likely Type of Christ in his Office of Priesthood,
then it follows, a^ Melchisedec had neither any joined with him in his
Priesthood, nor Deputy, nor Vicar under him in it, nor Successor to his Office:
So neither has Christ any joined with him, or Substitute, or Successor to him,
in his Priesthood.

Verse. 4. Now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the Patriarch
Abraham gave the Tenths of the Spoils. To show Christ's Excellency, he draws
them to consider Melchisedec's Excellency above Abraham's: that so they might
see Christ's Excellency to be far more. The reason, in force, goes thus. 1. If
Melchisedec, the Type, be more excellent than Abraham; much more must Christ,
of whom he is a Type. 2. And if Melchisedec's greatness be not easily
perceived, except there be a due consideration of it; much more Christ's
greatness requires consideration, and is worthy of contemplation. 3. If
Abraham, by paying of Tithes, acknowledge Melchisedec's superiority; Much more
should all Abraham's Offspring acknowledge Christ's Superiority whom
Melchisedec, typically represented: by paying of what is due, for the
maintenance of his Service, and bestowing on his Ministers, who are appointed
to bless in his Name (whether it be less, or more, which they bestow) in such
a manner, as it vilify not, nor disgrace their high Employment, which Christ
has put upon them, and so dishonor him, whose Servants they are.

Verse. 5. And verily, they that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office
of the Priesthood, have a Commandment to take Tithes of the people, according
to the Law, that is, of their Brethren, though they come out of the loins of
Abraham. He proves, that in Tithes taking, Melchisedec was greater than
Abraham, who did pay Tithes; Because, for the same respect, the Levites, by
taking Tithes of their Brethren, as Priests, had a Superiority over them, for
their office sake, who otherwise were their equals.

Then. 1. The Priestly office lifted up the Levites above their Brethren, who
were sprung of Abraham, as well as they. 2. The command of taking Tithes, was
annexed to the office of the Priesthood, in token of their superiority by
office over them, who by nature were at least their equals.

Verse. 6. But he whose descent is not from them, received Tithes of Abraham,
and blessed him that had the promises.

7. And without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater.

He proves again, Melchisedec to be greater than Abraham; and so, greater
than Levi; because he blessed him: and therefore, behoved to be greater.

Then, 1. Abraham, notwithstanding he had the promises, yet got he the
blessing by Melchisedec, in type; and, from Christ, represented by him, in
truth. 2. If Melchisedec was greater, because he blessed him, as type: Then
Christ far more, who blesses in effect.

Now, there are sundry sorts of blessings. 1. There is a blessing of reverence,
and worship: So men bless God. This sort imports no greatness in the blesser,
but subjection. 2. There is a blessing of Charity: So men bless one another by
mutual prayer. This sort imports no Superiority neither. 3. There is a
blessing of authority ordinary: So do Gods Ministers bless the people, in the
Lords name. 4. A blessing of authority extraordinary: So Melchisedec blessed
Abraham, and the Prophets, and Patriarchs, such as by inspiration they were
directed to bless. And this official blessing, with authority, proves
Superiority, whether it be ordinary, or extraordinary. 5. There is a blessing
of power, of it self, effectual: So blesses Christ; and so God blesses men.

From this, 1. The Excellency of the office of Gods Ministers is evident, who
are appointed to bless the people, in Gods Name. 2. And how they should be
respected, in love, for their work sake. 3. And how they should walk worthy of
that high and holy employment, le^t their sins make them vile, and
contemptible, before the people, as in Malachies time, Mal. 2.9.

Verse. 8. And, here men that dye, receive Tithes: but there he receives them,
of whom it is witnessed, that he lives. Another point of Comparison, tending
to this end: The Levites, in their tything, were mortal men, one succeeding
another. But Melchisedec, in type of his Priesthood, and Scriptural being, and
Christ, in the truth of his Priesthood, are immortal: And therefore,
Melchisedec, as the typical Priest, and Christ, as the true Priest, are greater
than Levitical Priests, by as much as immortality is above mortality.

Then, Every Age has Christ for a Priest, living in their own time, to deal
for them, with God: And what benefit they get by him, in their own time, he
can make forth-comming unto them, even for ever.

Verse. 9. And, as I may so say, Levi, also, who receives Tithes, paid Tithes
in Abraham.

10. For he was yet in the loins of his Father, when Melchisedec met him.

Another reason to this same purpose: Levi paid Tithes to Melchisedec in
Abraham's loins: Therefore, Melchisedec is greater in his Priesthood, than the
Levitical Priests. So was Christ in Abraham's loins, will you say. I answer,
Christ was the true represented Priest, even when Melchisedec met Abraham: and
in Melchisedec's person, as type, the honor was done to Christ, in truth, and,
to his Priesthood, by Abraham. And again, Christ was in Abraham's loins, only
in regard of the matter of humane nature, not for the manner of propagation:
and, so, is exempted from the Law of natural posterity.

1. Always from this reasoning, we learn, That, as receiving Tithes, proves
superiority in office: So paying of Tithes, or maintenance in room of Tithes,
proves subjection to that office, and office-bearers, which receive the same.
And, so, maintenance of Ministers should be a matter of honoring of them; or
rather, of him that sent them, of its own proper institution; though men turn
it into a beggarly stipend, and count the more basely of the office, because of
the manner of maintenance.

2. From the reason of Levies paying of Tithes in Abraham's loins, we learn,

That there is ground in nature, for imputation of the Fathers deed, unto the
children descended of him by natural propagation: so that as justly may God
impute unto us Adams sins, as to Levi, Abraham's Tithes paying.

Verse. 11. If, therefore, perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood (for
under it the people received the Law) what further need was there, that another
Priest should rise, after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the
order of Aaron? To the end of the Chapter, he shows a necessity of the
abolishing of the Levitical Priesthood, and establishing of Christ's. One reason
is in this verse; because perfection was not to be had by the Levitical
Priesthood. By Perfection, is understood a perfect satisfaction for our sins,
and a perfect purchase of all that we have need of unto eternal life. He
proves, that such perfection could not be had by Aarons Priesthood; because,
then, there had been no need of another Priesthood after Aarons, if perfection
could have been by his Priesthood. But the Scripture shows, that there
behoved to arise a Priest after Melchisedec's order; by whom perfection was to
be gotten, Psalm 110.

1. Therefore, perfection could not be by Aarons Priesthood. From this we
learn, That under the Law, remission of sins, and eternal life, was not
obtained by virtue of any sacrifice then offered: but by the virtue of Christ's
Sacrifice, and Christ's Priesthood, represented thereby.

2. But why could not perfection be by that Priesthood? He gives a reason,
saying, For under it the people received the Law. The word imports as much,
as the people were then legalized, disciplined, after a Legal manner: that is,
the Law was still urged upon them; still they were pressed to give perfect
obedience, under pain of the curse; still God dealt in the external form of
handing them, as one not satisfied for any thing that was offered, as yet, in
their name. Therefore, perfection could not be had by that service: For it was
evident, that neither God was pacified, nor their consciences quieted, by any
thing in that Priesthood: but all were sent to the thing signified, and to the
time which was to come, in the Messia's manifestation. Then, Comparing their
time, and ours, for outward manner of handling, as they were legalized; that
is, straightly urged* by the yoke of the Law: we were evangelized; that is,
smoothly entreated, under the Gospel, God laying aside terror, entreating us
to be reconciled, and to come, and receive Grace for Grace.

Verse. 12. For, the Priesthood being changed, there is made, of necessity, a
change also of the Law. From the change of the Levitical Priesthood, he
infers, of necessity, the abolishing of the Levitical Law, and of our
obligation thereunto.

Then, 1. The Levitical Priesthood, and the Levitical Law, do stand and fall
together. 2. The Levitical Law cannot stand with any other Priesthood than
Aarons: it cannot stand with Christ's under the Gospel. 3. Christ's Priesthood,
seeing it is another than Aarons: must have another Law, other Ordinances, and
Statutes, than Aarons: a Law and Ordinances suitable unto it self. 4. To use
Levitical Ceremonies under the Gospel, is to confound the Priesthood of Aaron
and Christ.

Verse. 13. For, he of whom these things are spoken, pertains to another
tribe; of which no man gave attendance at the Altar.

14. For, it is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe
Moses spoke nothing concerning Priesthood.

15. And, it is yet far more evident: For, that after the similitude of
Melchisedec there arises another Priest.

1. He proves, that Aarons Priesthood is changed, and the Ordinance thereof;
because Psalm. 110. speaks of Christ's Priesthood, that is, f^eed from the
service of the Altar. By the Altar, he means the material Altar, commanded
in the Law: Another Altar he knows not. And Christ's Priesthood he declares
to be freed from the service of this Altar; beside which, no Law could tie it
to any other Altar.

Then, Christ's Priesthood is freed from the Altar which God commands, and all
the service thereof. And whosoever will erect another material Altar in Christ's
Priesthood, and tie his Church unto it, must look by what Law they do it.

2. From Verse. 14. we learn, That Christ's Genealogy was well known in the
Apostles times, and no controversy about it. And, it suffices us, that we
know this by the Apostles Testimony; albeit we could not lineally deduce the
same.

3. Observe how he reasons; That none of the Tribe of Juda attended the
Altar, because Moses spoke nothing of that Tribe, concerning the Priesthood.

Then, Negative Conclusions, in Matters of Faith, and duties, follow well from
the Scriptures silence. It is not warranted from Scripture; therefore I am not
bound to believe it. The Scripture does not require any such thing of me;
therefore God accounts it not service to Him to do it, is good reasoning.

4. From Verse. 15. The Apostle comparing the Proofs of his Argument, calls
this last in plain terms, Far more evident.

Then, Of Reasons drawn from Scripture, by Consequence, some will be less
evident, some more evident, and yet all be good Reasons, and prove the purpose
strongly.

Verse. 16. Who is made, not after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after
the power of an endless life. He enters into a more particular comparison of
the Levitical Priesthood, and Christ's, to show the weakness of the one, in
comparison of the other. The Levitical Priests in their Consecration, got a
commandment, for the exercise of bodily and carnal Rites, some few years of
their mortal life, without power to convey the Grace signified by those bodily
Rites. But Christ, in his Consecration, is endued with power to confer grace,
and life eternal, from Generation, to Generation, to all that seek the Benefit
of his Priesthood.

Then, we may be assured of Christ's power, to make the means which he uses
for our salvation effectual, as we may be assured of his endless life.

Verse. 17. For, He testifies, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the Order of
Melchisedec. He proves this by Scripture, because God calls him a Priest for
ever: Therefore, He has power for ever, as living for ever, to make his own
Priesthood effectual. So, The eternity of Christ's Priesthood, proves it to be
forcible, to give eternal life. For, if it did not endure in his person, it
could not give eternal life, and peoples hearts would not rest upon it, with
any ground: And so it behoved to be renounced, and another Priesthood sought.
But seeing it is not to be changed, but shall endure; Then, of necessity, it
has the thing to give us, which we are seeking: that is, eternal life.

Then, As long as Christ endures, we want not a Priest, to hear confession of
sin, to give absolution, to bless us, and give us eternal life.

Verse. 18. For, there is, verily, a disannulling of the Commandment going
before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. 1. By the same words of
establishing Christ's Priesthood, Psalm. 110. he proves, that the Levitical Law
was to be abolished, when Christ came: Because the establishing of Christ's
Priesthood, and bringing it to light, is the disanulling of the Levitical.
Then, There needs no more to declare, That the Levitical Priesthood, and Law,
is abolished, and we freed from the Ceremonies thereof, but the coming of
Christ, and His entering to his Office of Priesthood.

2. He gives a reason, of the abolishing of this Priesthood; Because it was
weak and unprofitable.

Quest. How can that be, seeing it was ordained, to strengthen the Believers,
then, and was profitable for that end?

I answer, It is called weak, and unprofitable, in regard of any power, to make
satisfaction to Gods justice for our sins, or to purchase any salvation unto
us: For, other ways, as a mean, to lead men, for that time, unto the Messiah,
who should satisfy for us, it was not weak, nor unprofitable: But, to pacify
God, and purchase salvation, as the misbeleeving Jews did use it, it was weak,
and unprofitable altogether. Again, being considered as a mean, to prefigure
Christ, it was profitable still, till Christ came; namely, for that end and
use. But when* He is come, no end, nor use, more for it, but that it should be
abolished, having served the turn whereunto it was ordained. Then, 1. Levitical
Ceremonies, whatsoever use they might have had before Christ, are weak, and
unprofitable, after His coming. 2. It is evil reasoning, to say, such Rites
and Ceremonies were used before Christ came; therefore they may be used now
also.

Verse. 19. For, the Law made nothing perfect; but the bringing in of a better
hope did: by the which we draw nigh unto God. He proves, That those Rites were
weak: Because the Law, whether Moral, or Ceremonial, could not perfect any
thing: that is, justify, sanctify, and save any man.

1. They served as a Pedagogue, to lead a man to Christ, for expiation of sin,
and purchase of salvation, but could not effectuate this, by themselves. And
this makes good the Answer, to the Question in the former Ver. Then, To seek
to be perfected, justified, and saved, by works, is to seek that by the Law,
which could never be brought to pass by it.

2. What, then, does perfect all? He answers: The bringing in of a better
Hope, perfecteth all. That is, Christ then hoped for, and looked unto, who is
that Better Thing, even the End, and the Signification, of those Legal
Ordinances, being brought in unto Believers, He does perfect all. Then, 1.
What the Believers could not get under the Law, by their outward service, they
got it by Christ, hoped for and believed into. 2. The Believers of old, rested
not on the shadows, but had the Eye of their Hope on Christ.

3. He commends this Better Hope: that is, Christ's Priesthood hoped for
under the Law; Because by it we draw nigh unto God. Now, Drawing nigh,
imports a distance before drawing nigh: and, again, Drawing nigh, was the
Priests prerogative under the Law. Then, By Nature, and without Christ, we are
Aliens from God, and far away from Him: But, by Christ, we get Liberty, to
come nigh, not only as Gods people, but as Priests through Christ, to offer
our Spiritual Oblations. The Priests Privilege of old, is common to believers
now.

Ver. 20. And, inasmuch, as not without an Oath, He was made Priest:

21. (For, those Priests were made without an Oath: but This, with an Oath, by
Him that said unto Him, The Lord swear, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest
for ever, after the Order of Melchisedec.)

22. By so much was Jesus made a Surety of a better Testament.

1. He goes on, to compare the Levitical Priesthood with Christs^ Two
Comparisons are here conjoined: First, Levitical Priests were made without an
Oath, only by way of simple Ordinance, and Direction; God leaving, room to
himself, how long he pleased to hold on the Direction; and when he pleased,
to change it. But Christ was made Priest with an Oath, that he should never be
changed. Then, 1. When God gave forth the Ceremonial Law, he reserved room to
himself, to change it: yea, gave evidence, that he was to change it: for, he
obliged the people, during his will, but not himself. 2. But, for Christ's
Priesthood, God is bound with an Oath, Never to change it: and, it leans on
his nature which cannot altar, nor repent, and upon his Oath, which cannot be
violated.

2. Another comparison, betwixt the Levitical Covenant, and the Evangelical
Covenant. As far as the Oath is above the changeable commandment, by so much
is the new Covenant better than the Covenant under the Law. Then, 1. There was
a Covenant, or Testament, whereby Believers were saved, as well under the Law,
as under the Gospel. 2. The Covenant now, though in substance of salvation, one
with the former; yet, in the manner of down-setting the Articles, and the form
of it, is better than the Covenant then, more clear, more free, more full, more
largely extended, and more firm.

3. Christ is here called Surety of this Covenant. Then, 1. Christ must see the
Covenant kept, and be good for it. 2. God has Christ to crave for our
performance of the Covenant: and we have Christ, to crave for Gods part of the
Covenant: Yea, and Christ to crave, to give us Grace, to perform that which God
requires of us in his Covenant. 3. Jesus is content to be Surety: and the
Father has consented, and ordained, and made him Surety. So, it rests only,
that we be content also, and make much of Christ, that he may do all our
work for us, and all Gods work in us.

Verse. 23. And they, truly, were many Priests; because they were not suffered
to continue, by reason of death.

24. But, this man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood.

Another Excellency of Christ's Priesthood, above the Levitical, which may be
branched out in th^se particulars following. 1. The Levitical Priests were
many, both at one time, and one after another: by reason whereof, that
Priesthood was weakened, while one part of the Office, for such a time, was in
the hands of this man; and another part, for another time, was in the hands of
that man. And, because one man could not be ready to take the Sacrifices from
all the people; therefore, several men behoved to take several parts of the
burden. But, in Christ's Priesthood, there is but one man, even himself; His
Priesthood is undivided: no man bears a part of the burden with him: He,
alone, attends all men's Sacrifices, by himself: He is at leisure, for every
man's employment, at all times, in the greatest throng of Sacrifices. Then, as
long as Christ is at leisure, no reason to employ another to carry our prayers.

2. The Levitical Priesthood, did pass from one person to another* Death made
interruption. But Christ's Priesthood cannot pass from his own person, to any
other: neither death, nor any other infirmity, can interrupt his Office. Then,
1. To make any Priest, by special Office, in the New Testament, beside Christ,
is to rent the Priesthood of Christ, and make it imperfect, like Aarons; which,
for the same reason, that it had many Priests, was weak, and imperfect, and
inferior to Christ's. 2. To make Priests, by office, in the New Testament, to
offer up any corporal Sacrifice, is to make Christ's Priesthood separable from
his own person: which is against the nature of Christ's Priesthood, which cannot
pass from one, to another: for so imports the word. 3. To make plurality of
Priests in Christ's Priesthood, Vicars, or Substitutes, or, in any respect,
partaker of the office with him, is to presuppose, that Christ is not able to
do that office alone; but is either dead, or weak, that he cannot fulfill that
office: contrary to the Text here, which says, Because he continues ever, he
has an unchangeable Priesthood: or, a Priesthood which cannot pass from one,
to another.

Verse. 25. Wherefore, he is able also to save them to the uttermost, which
come unto God by him; seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. 1.
He shows the fruit of Christ's keeping still the Priesthood, altogether in
his own person, to be, the perfect Salvation of all believers for ever: He is
able to save, to the uttermost, them that come unto God through him. Then, 1.
Whosoever communicates Christ's Priesthood, with any other beside his own
person, makes Christ not able, alone, to save to the utmost, those that come
unto God, through him. 2. From this ground also, it does follow, that Christ
not only begins the believers salvation, but perfecteth it also. He does
not work a part of a man's salvation, and leave the rest to his own merits (or
the merits of others) but perfecteth it himself, even to the uttermost. 3. And
if a man join any thing meritorious unto Christ's Priesthood, or any Mediator,
for intercession, beside him, or seeks, by his own works, to purchase
salvation, he denies Christ to be able to save him to the uttermost.

2. He describes Believers, to be those that come to God, through Christ.
Then, 1. Christ is the door, and the way, through which only access is gotten
to God. By Saints, or Angels, there is not a way to come to God, but by Christ
only.

2. They that come not through him alone to God, seclude themselves from the
sufficiency of salvation to be had in him.

3. The nature of believing, is to make a man come toward God, to get
communion with him, through Christ. 4. And none but such as come in Faith to
God, through Christ, can take comfort from his Priesthood, or look for
salvation.

3. He gives a reason, why perfect salvation is to be had for such as come to
God, through Christ: Because He lives for ever, to make intercession for
them. He says not, to offer, or cause to offer up, the sacrifice of his body
for them, But, He lives, and is not to be offered any more, and, lives, to
make intercession.

Then, 1. The sacrificing part is done, and ended: His intercession has now
the place: and, by his intercession, we get the merit of his death and
passion, applied unto us: and not by any new oblation. 2. If he brook his
life, he will not fail to intercede for us, who come unto God through him, and
not through Saint, or Angel, or any person beside: For, he lives for ever, to
make intercession for us.

Verse. 26. For, such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the Heavens. To the end
he may force the Hebrews, to forsake the Priesthood of Levi, he draws a
strong reason, from the nature of our estate under the Gospel.

Whereby he proves, not only, that the Priests of Aarons Order are
abolished, but also, every Son of Adam is excluded from the office of the
Priesthood, except Jesus Christ in his own person only. Because every Priest
that wants the properties of Jesus Christ, is unbeseeming for us under the
Gospel. A sinful man might have been a Priest under the Law, to prefigure
Christ, before he came: But, now, no sinful man may be a Priest by office, but
Christ only, in whom there is no sin. When the Sacrifice was a beast, then a
sinful man might be a Priest: But, now, when the Son of God is the Sacrifice,
and has offered up himself already, and is gone in, into the Sanctuary, with
his own blood, to make intercession; there must be no more any sacrificing till
he come out of the Sanctuary again, at the day of judgment: nor any Priest,
but he, till he have ended his intercession. For, such an High Priest became
us, who is holy, harmless, etc.

Question. But why is it unbeseeming us, under the Gospel, to have a Priest
without these properties?

I answer. The Sacrifice of the New Testament, is the unspotted Lamb of God*
Jesus Christ, holy, harmless, etc. Therefore it becomes us to have such a
Priest, who is holy, harmless, and undefiled. For, it were unseemly, that the
Priest should be worse than the Sacrifice. Next, our Priest has our sins,
original, and actual, to remove, and Heaven to open unto us: And, therefore, it
were unbeseeming, that any should be our Priest, who has not his own sins
altogether removed, nor yet has gotten entry, as yet, into Heaven himself.

1. In that he draws them, of necessity, to quit all men's Priesthood, and
betake them unto Christ, as Priest only, we learn, That our necessities being
well weighed, with the insufficiency of any beside Christ, to do our turn, we
shall be forced to quit all Priests, but Christ only: For, what Priest can
know all our needs, all our sins, all our thoughts, all our desires, all our
prayers, all our purposes, and wait on upon our business, with God, night and
day, to see that no wrath break out upon us* Who can do this; but Christ only?
What Man? What Saint? What Angel?

2. In that he reckons a number of perfections, necessary to be in a Priest,
in the time of the Gospel, all of them in Christ, and all such as we stand in
need of, we learn, That all the perfections whereof we have need in a Priest,
are all in Christ: And, the perfections which are in Christ, we have need of
them all, and should make use of them all.

3. The first property of a Priest under the Gospel, is this, He must be holy:
that is, of his own nature, holy, in his original holy.

Then, no sinful man can be a sufficient Priest in the New Testament, to do for
us, who wants holiness by Nature.

4. The next property: Our Priest must be harmless, ill-less, free from any
original guiltiness.

Then, No man, come of Adam, by natural propagation, can be a Priest for us
now, to satisfy our necessities, who have sin original in us.

5. The third property: We have need of a Priest undefiled, that is, free from
actual sin.

Then, No Priest can suffice us, who are defiled with actual sin, but Christ,
who never sinned.

6. The fourth property: A Priest meet for us, must be free from the pollution
of those amongst whom he converseth.

Then, We who are of polluted lips, and lives, and dwell among such a people,
communicating, many ways, of their guiltiness, cannot have sufficient comfort,
through any Priest, who can be infected with sin. And, he who is a man of
polluted lips, is not meet to be a Priest for us.

The fifth property: A Priest meet for us, behoved to have his residence in
Heaven, and have commandment over Heaven, to open it unto us, and give us
entry.

Then, None other, but Christ, could suffice us, on whom, by nature, the doors
of Heaven are closed. No Priest, out of Heaven, is meet for us.

Verse. 27. Who needs not daily, as those Highpriests, to offer up Sacrifice;
first, for his own sins, and then, for the peoples: For this he did once, when
he offered up himself. 1. The sixth property of a fit Priest for us: He must
have no need to offer Sacrifice for his own sins.

Then, neither Levi, nor any sinful man after him, can be a Priest ander the
New Testament, but Christ only, who never sinned, and so had never need to
offer for himself.

2. The seventh property: He must not have need to offer daily for the peoples
sins, who must be our Priest: For, if he should offer the second day, then the
first days Sacrifice should be declared unsufficient: Or, else, why offers
he again, after that which is sufficient?

Then, 1. The Priest of the New Testament, needs not to offer oftener than
once. 2. And if Christ's Sacrifice were offered oftener than once, or daily, he
could not be a fit Priest for us, nor offer a perfect Sacrifice for us; for,
the often offering, should declare the former offerings, unsufficient, and
imperfect.

3. He gives a reason, why Christ needed not to offer up oftener; Because he
has offered up himself, once, for the sins of the people.

Then, 1. Christ was both the Priest, and the Sacrifice, in his own offering.
2. Christ's Sacrifice cannot be offered up by any, but himself: another than
Christ's self, cannot offer up Christ. 3. Betwixt the coming of Christ, and the
writing of this Epistle, which was sundry years after Christ's Ascension, the
Apostle knew no offering of Christ, but that only once, upon the Cross and
yet, times out of number, was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper celebrated
before this time.

4. In that he makes that once offering, the reason of his not offering
daily, it teaches us, That the perfection of that once offered Sacrifice,
makes the repetition needless: And, whosoever makes it needful, that Christ
be offered daily, makes both Christ an imperfect Priest, and his Sacrifice
imperfect also.

Verse. 28. For, the Law makes men High Priest, which have infirmity; but, the
word of the oath, which was since the Law, makes the Son, who is consecrated
for evermore. He gives a special reason, why it beseems not us under the
Gospel, to have a sinful man for our Priest; because this is the very
difference betwixt the Law, and the Gospel.

1. The Law makes men, which have infirmities, High Priests: But, the word of
the oath, which was since the Law, makes the Son, and, none but the Son, who
is consecrated for evermore.

Then, The Scripture knows no Priest, but the Levitical Priests, of Aarons
posterity, for the time of the Law: or, else, that one Priest which was made by
an oath, for the time of the Gospel. Beside these, the Apostle acknowledges
none, nor were there any other, in his time, in the Church.

2. He makes the difference of the Law, and the Gospel, to stand amongst
other things, in the difference of Priests: so as the Gospel cannot admit such
Priests, as the Law admitted.

Then, To have Priests now, after the similitude of the Priests under the Law,
were to remove the difference which God has made betwixt the Law, and the
Gospel.

3. The differences, as the Apostle sets them down here, are, 1. The course
taken about Priests under the Law, was alterable: they were made without an
oath, the Lawgiver declaring it to be his will, to change that course, when
he saw it fit. But the course taken about the Priests of the New Testament, is
with an oath: and, so, cannot be changed.

Then, To make a Priest in the Gospel, who is not consecrated by an oath, to
abide for evermore in the office, but may be changed, and another come in, in
his place, is contrary to the institution of the Evangelical Priesthood.

The next difference, he makes this: The Law admits men, in the plural
number, a plurality of Priests: but the Gospel admits no plurality of
Priests, but the Son, only, to be Priest. Melchisedec's order in the type,
has no Priest but one in it, without a Suffragane, or substituted Priest.
Therefore, Christ, the true Melchisedec, is alone in his Priesthood, without
partner, or Deputy, or Suffragane.

Then, To make plurality of Priests in the Gospel, is to alter the order of
Melchesedes, sworn with an oath; and, to renounce the March set betwixt the Law
and the Gospel.

3. The third Difference: The Law makes men Priests, but the Evangelical Oath
makes the Son of God Priest for the Gospel.

Then, To make a man Priest now, is to mar the Son of Gods privilege, to whom
the privilege only belongs.

4. The fourth Difference: The Law makes such Priests, as have infirmity: that
is, sinful men, who cannot make the Sacrifice which they offer, effectual, to
pacify, nor the blessing which they pronounce, to come; nor the instruction
which they give, forcible to open the eyes. But the Evangelical Oath, makes
the Son, who is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God, through
him.

Then, To make a sinful and weak man, a Priest now, is to weaken the Priesthood
of the Gospel, and make it like the Law.

5. The fifth Difference: The Law makes men Priests, which have infirmities,
over whom death had power, that they could not be consecrated, but for their
short life time. But the Evangelical Oath, makes the Son, whom the sorrows of
death could not hold, and has consecrated him for evermore.

Then, As long as Christ's Consecration lasts, none must meddle with his
office.

6. The last Difference: The Law instituting Priests, was not Gods last will,
but might suffer addition: But, the Evangelical Oath, is since the Law, and
Gods last and unchangeable Will.

Therefore, To add unto it, and bring in as many Priests now, as did serve in
the Temple of old, is to provoke God to add as many plagues as are written in
Gods Book, upon themselves, and their Priests also.

The Sum of Chap. VIII.
THis is the Sum of all that I have spoken: We have no Priest now, but Christ,
who is equal in glory to his Father in Heaven, verse. 1. The offerer of his own
body, signified by the Tabernacle, verse. 2. For, every Priest must offer
something: Therefore, so must Christ, verse. 3. But, the typical Sacrifice he
could not offer, by the Law, albeit he were on earth, verse. 4. Because he is
not of the Tribe of Levi, whose proper office was to meddle with the shadows.
Therefore, he must be the offerer of the Substance; that is, of his own Body,
signified by the shadows, verse. 5. And, so, now, he has taken the office over
the Levites head, and has an office more excellent than they, and is Mediator
of a better Covenant, than the Covenant which was in their time, verse. 6. For,
if that Covenant had been perfect, another had been needless, verse. 7. But
another Covenant was needful: and God promised to make a new one, verse. 8. A
better Covenant than that old, which the people brake, verse. 9. For, in this
Covenant, God undertaketh, to make us keep our part of it, verse. 10.11. And, to
pardon, where we fail, verse. 12. Now, when God promised a New Covenant, he
declared the other to be old, and to be abolished, when the new came, verse. 13.

The Doctrine of Chap. VIII.
Verse. 1. Now, of the things which we have spoken, this is the Sum: We have
such an High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty,
in the Heavens. 1. THe Apostle, accommodating himself, to help the capacity and
memory of the Hebrews, and urging the special point of his discourse, is worthy
of imitation.

2. In saying, We have such an High Priest, who is set down on the right hand,
etc. He sets forth the glory of Christ's person, that he may commend his
Priesthood.

Then, 1. The glory of Christ's office is not seen, till the glory of his person
be seen. 2. The glory of his person is not seen, till his glorious Sovereignty,
and Government of the world be seen. 3. Yea, the glory of Christ is not rightly
seen, till his equality with the Father, in glory, be seen and acknowledged.

3. In saying, that Christ, as High Priest is set down on the right hand of the
Throne, he gives us to understand, That Christ, as in his Divine Nature, he
is undivided from the Father, in Glory, and Dominion; So, in his humane Nature,
he is exalted to the fellowship of Divine Glory, with the Father: Because of
the union of the humane Nature, with the Divine, in one person of the
Mediator: The two natures still remaining distinguished, but not divided, nor
separated, the one from the other.

4. He notes the place of this Glory, to be in the Heavens, wherein he
prefers Christ, above the Levitical Priests: for, their Priesthood is only
exercised on Earth, But Christ's, in Heaven.

And therefore when we will employ our High Priest, we have no earthly City
to seek him in, but in the Heaven, the only place and palace of his residence.

Verse. 2. A Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched, and not man. 1. For all this glory, yet Christ is still called
here a Minister, to show us,

That his high honor, hinders him not to do his office for our good.

2. He is called A Minister of the Sanctuary, or, of the holy things: for the
word will agree with both, and both tend to one purpose: for, the holy things
were all tied to the Sanctuary: and, he that was Minister of the Sanctuary,
was Minister of the holy things also, and that, in name of the Saints. Now the
Sanctuary, or the holy things which here is spoken of, is the thing signified
by the Sanctuary, and by the holy things. And so taking all the significations
of the word together, we are taught,

That Christ in his glory, is not idle, but as a faithful Agent in the heavenly
Sanctuary, taking the care of all the holy things, which his Saints and people
are commanded to present, procuring and giving forth all holy and spiritual
things from Heaven to his Saints, which their estate requires.

3. He is called, a Minister of the true Tabernacle, which God pitched, and not
man: That is, the Ministers of his own Body, miraculously formed by God; not
after the ordinary manner of other men, signified and represented by the
Typical Tabernacle.

Then, the Tabernacle and Temple under the Law, was but the shadow; and Christ's
Body was the true Tabernacle. For, 1. As the Symboles of Gods presence, was in
the typical Tabernacle; so the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in
Christ. 2. As the typical Tabernacle had enclosed in it all the holy things,
the Candlestick, Table of Shewbread, Laver, Altar, etc. So has the humanity
of Christ, or Christ the Man, all holiness and perfection; the fullness of all
good, and all holy things in him, Light, Food, Washing, and Reconciliation, and
all in himself; that out of his fullness we may all receive Grace for Grace. 3.
As the Tabernacle, in the outmost Coverings, seemed but base, yet had better
stuff within; so, our Lord, when he dwelt in the Tabernacle of his flesh
amongst us, was found in form as a man, and in the shape of a servant; but
inwardly, was full of Grace and Truth.

4. In calling Christ's Body, The true Tabernacle, which God builded, and not
man, he teaches us, To make use of Christ in truth, as the Church of old made
use of the Tabernacle in the Type, that is, in him seek God. Toward him turn
the eye of our soul, when we seem, to our selves, to be far removed to the end
of the earth; in him offer all our spiritual sacrifices; in him seek our
Washing, our Food, our Light, our Comfort; in him, as his Priests, make our
Abode, and daily Dwelling. In him let us live and breathe.

5. In so calling Christ, he appropriateth the sacrificing of his Body to
himself, in his own person, as the personal and proper act of his Priesthood:
for the offering of the which Sacrifice, once, and never after (as Heb. 7.27.
shows) he keeps still the style of the only Minister of the true
Tabernacle, as his own incommunicable Prerogative.

And therefore, whosoever presumes to offer his Body, presumes also to take
his place.

Verse. 3. For, every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices:
wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. He
proves, That Christ is the Minister of the Tabernacle of his own Body, by
offering it up; because it behoved him, seeing he is a Priest, to offer up
something, either the typical Oblations, or else his own Body represented by
them. But the typical Oblations he could not offer, according to the Law, not
being a Levite: Therefore he behooved to offer up himself, represented by the
typical Oblations.

Then, the Apostle acknowledges no Priest, but either the Levitical Priest, or
the Priest that offers up his own Body. And, whosoever pretends to have the
Office of a Priest now, usurpeth either the office of the Levite, or Christ's
Office.

Verse. 4. For, if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest; seeing that
there are Priests, which offer gifts according to the Law. 1. He proves, That
Christ cannot offer up the typical Oblations; because he cannot be a Priest on
earth, albeit he were on earth; because Priesthood on earth, is proper to the
Levites only: For, they are the only Priests, by Law, on earth, and have
prescribed to them, by Law, what they should offer.

Quest. You will ask me here, Was not Chriest a Priest when he was on earth?

I answer, Yes.

Quest. How then, says the Apostle here, If he were on earth, he should not be
a Priest?

I answer, Because, albeit he began his Priesthood upon earth, yet he could not
brook his Office of Priesthood upon earth. For, as the High Priest, who was the
Type, carried the Sacrifice, once a year, through the Court, and before the
Sanctuary killed the sacrifice, and then took the blood thereof in unto the
Holiest of all, and presented himself there before the Lord, with the blood, to
intercede for the people, and there remained, during the time of Intercession
appointed to him: So Christ, carrying his sacrifice out of the City, offered up
his Body on the Altar of his Godhead, to his Father; and by his own blood,
entered into the heavenly Sanctuary, and sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high, and there he lives for ever to intercede for us; having then
ended his sacrifice, as this Apostle proves, Chap. 7.27. and Chap. 9.25, 26.
And having no sacrifice now to offer on earth, it is with reason that the
Apostle says, If he were on earth, he should not be a Priest.

Whence we learn: 1. That Christ is not now on the earth, not in any place
thereof; and therefore if any man say to us; Lo here he is; Lo there he is, we
must not believe him: it is a false Christ he shows us, and not the true, as
Christ himself forewarneth, Mat. 24.23. 2. That it is impossible that Christ
should now be on the earth; for then should he lose his Priesthood, which is
impossible: For, if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest, says the
Apostle here. 3. That Christ's Priesthood is only discharged now in heaven,
seeing he cannot be a Priest on earth.

2. His Reason is, They are Priests which offer Gifts, according to the Law.
Then, Every Priest, who brooketh his Priesthood on earth, must offer Gifts
according to the Law, as the Apostle here reasons: And such Priests as those
Christ has abolished, having changed the Priesthood, and the Law also.

Therefore, there can be no Priest by Office on earth at all, with Gods
allowance.

Verse. 5. Who serve unto the Example and Shadow of Heavenly things: as Moses
was admonished of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle: For see (says
He) that thou make all things according to the Pattern showed unto thee in the
Mount. He describes the proper use of the Levitical Priests, to serve unto the
Example of heavenly Things. Then, 1. The Incarnation of Christ, his Death, and
the Benefits thereof, signified by Levitical Shadows, are heavenly things, in
regard of their heavenly Fruits, and Effects, and other heavenly respects, and
are with an heavenly mind to be looked upon. 2. The Ceremonies of the Law,
were not idle Rites; but, Examples and Figures of Christ and his Graces; by the
which men were led, then, as by the hand to Christ, who was to come.

2. From Exodus 25.40. he proves, they were Shadows of heavenly things; because
the Pattern in the Mount represented the heavenly things: and Moses Tabernacle
represented the Pattern in the Mount: Therefore it represented heavenly things.
And unto this Pattern was Moses tied.

Then, 1. God would not, no, not in the time of Types, suffer any device of man
to come in, for representing any thing heavenly: Much less will he now. 2.
Those which himself ordains he will have observed, and none omitted.

Verse. 6. But now has He obtained a more excellent Ministry; by how much
also He is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon
better Promises. 1. The offering of the Typical Oblations, he has made proper
to the Levites. Now, the offering of the true Sacrifices, and service belonging
thereunto, he appropriateth to Christ, and calls it, A more excellent
Ministry.

Then, 1. The offering of the thing signified by the Levitical Types, is more
excellent than all their offerings. 2. This Ministry is proper unto Christ
only, in his own person.

2. From this he prefers the Mediatorship of Christ, to the typical: The
Promises, and the Covenant now, to the Covenant then. His reasoning, is: As the
Ministry is, so is the Mediator. The Ministry is more excellent, in offering
up himself, than the shadows. Therefore, the Mediator is more excellent now,
than the typical of old.

Then, The offering of Christ's Body, which is the more excellent Ministry, is
still annexed to the Person of the Mediator only. And, whosoever intrudeth
himself in that excellent Ministry, of offering up Christ's Body, intrudeth
himself also into the Office of the Mediator.

3. In comparing the Covenant then, and now, he makes this the better,
Because the Promises are better.

Whence we learn, 1. That there was a Covenant betwixt God, and his Church, of
old, under the Law: And, so Reconciliation to be had with God then. 2. That
howsoever in substance of Grace, both the Covenants agreed, yet the form of
this Covenant under the Gospel, is better: Because the express conditions are
better, the Promises are more spiritual, and more free of straight conditions.

Verse. 7. For, if that first Covenant had been faultless, then should no place
have been sought for the second. To clear the abolishing of the Old Covenant,
he proves it, not to be faultless, Because a New Covenant was promised in
place thereof. Not that any thing was wrong in that Covenant, but because it
was imperfect, and all things needful not expressed in it clearly.

Whence we learn, 1. That the Lords proceeding with his Church has ever been
from the less perfect, to the more perfect, till Christ came. 2. That
wherever God adds, or alters, what he once did institute, by so doing,
he shows, that before his Addition, he had not expressed all his Mind, as
in the time of the Old Testament, 3. When once he has perfected his course
taken with his Church, as now he has done under the New Testament, he
alters the matter no more.

Verse. 8. For, finding fault with them, he says, Behold the days come (says
the Lord) when I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel, and the
House of Judah. 1. He proves, That there was an imperfection in the Old
Covenant, Because God found fault with the people under it.

Then, The imperfection of the Covenant of Old, was especially in default of
the parties with whom it was made; who, by their inability to fulfill it, or
behold the drift of it, made it unable to save themselves.

2. In the words of Jeremiah 31.31. the Lord promises, to make a Covenant,
afterward, with the House of Israel, and Judah.

Then, 1. The party in the New Covenant, is not all Mankind, but the Church of
the New Testament; the spiritual Israel, and Judah. 2. This Covenant was not
brought to light of old, but had its own time of manifestation. 3. Even then,
the Church was made wise of the imperfection of the Old Covenant, that they
might learn to look through the outward form of it, to a better. 4. The Hope,
and Too-look, which they had toward the New Covenant, held up their heart,
that they, without us, and our Privileges, should not be perfected.

Verse. 9. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the
day when I took them by the hand, to lead them out of the Land of Egypt,
because they continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the
Lord. 1. The Prophet distinguishes the Old Covenant, from the New, by
describing the Old, what it was, how broken and how punished. For the first,
the ten Commandments, and the rest of the Law delivered unto them, when they
came out of Egypt, was the Covenant of Old, wherein God promised, To be their
God, upon condition, That they did all that he commanded them, and, they
accepted the condition. So, albeit there was Grace here, in sundry Articles,
covenanted, yet the form of the Covenant, was like the Covenant of Works.
Compare Ier. 17.23. with Ier. 31.31, 32, 33, etc.

2. For the next: They continued not in it, through leaning to their own
strength, and seeking to establish their own Righteousness, being ignorant of
the Righteousness of God. They dealt deceitfully in the Covenant, and fell to
open Idolatry, from time, to time. So, By the Covenant of Works, no man will be
found steadfast.

3. For the punishment of it: I regarded them not. In the Hebrew, it is as
much, as, I Lorded it over them. That is, used My Husbandly and Lordly
Authority over them, and so mis-regarded them.

Whereof we have to learn, 1. That as Gods Lordship, and Husbandship, is an
Obligation of doing well to the Covenant-keeper: So is it a Declaration of his
just Freedom, and Authority, to punish the Covenant-breaker. 2. That when God
is pleased to exercise his Dominion and Authority over Covenant-breakers, the
transgressour falls in mis-regard with God: that is, As little account is
made of his life, as of one without the Covenant. 3. That to be mis-regarded of
God, is the sum of all judgment. 4. That the impotency of the people, to keep
the Old Covenant, did not exempt them from the punishment due to the breaking
of it.

4. The Lord makes their instability in the Old Covenant, the Reason of his
making of a New one. Wherein the Lords bounty is very remarkable; Who, out of
our evil, takes occasion, to do us so much more good: And, because of men's
instability in the Old Covenant, makes another Covenant, whereby he makes us
to persevere in obedience.

Verse. 10. For, this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel,
after those days, says the Lord: I will put My Laws into their mind, and
write Them in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to
Me a People. This is the better Cevenant, containing better Promises, whereof
Christ is Mediator, and Surety, unto all them that believe in Him.

Wherein consider, 1. That all the Articles are Promises; and, so, do require
in the party that will join in the Covenant, Faith, to embrace the Promises;
that the Covenant may be agreed unto on both sides: God promising, and the
needy Sinner heartily accepting. 2. That what is required in the Old Covenant,
as a Condition, is here turned into a Promise, by God, in the New. In the Old
Covenant, he required obedience to his commandments: and here he promises,
to write his Laws in our hearts. God undertaketh to do our part in us, if we
will believe in Him. 3. That the sense of Wants, and the feeling of our
Imperfections, yea, of our hearts wickedness, and carefulness, both of heart
and mind; yea, the feeling of the inlacks, or defects of Repentance and Faith,
are not just hindrances to make a soul that gladly would be reconciled with
God, in Christ, stand back, from embracing this Covenant: But, by the contrary,
the feeling of sinfulness, in mind, and heart, are Preparations, to fit us, and
set us on, to join in this Covenant, wherein God undertaketh to help, and
remedy, all these felt evils, through His Christ, by putting His Laws in our
Mind, and writing them in our Hearts. For, what is this else, but t^ illuminate
our Mind, more and more with the understanding of his will, and to frame our
hearts and affections to the obedience of the same? 4. That by the Covenant,
comfort is provided for sinners, who are humbled in the sense of their sins:
and no door opened for presumption, nor room given to profane persons to go on
their ways, blessing themselves. For, the maker of the New Covenant
presupposes two things: First, that his party renounce his own righteousness,
which he might seem able to have by the Old Covenant. Next, that he flee for
relief to God in Christ, to have the benefits promised in this New Covenant.
Which if he do, it is impossible that he can either lean to his own merits, or
live in the love of his sinful lusts. 5. That by this Covenant such an union is
made betwixt God and the Believer, that the Believer is the Lords adopted
child, and the Lord is the Believers God, all-sufficient for ever, promising
to be all to the Believer, which, to be our God, may import, and to make the
Believer all that one of his people should be.

Verse 11. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: For, all shall know me, from the least to the
greatest. 1. While he says, They shall not teach every man his neighbor, he
does not mean, that his Word, and Ordinances, and Ministry appointed by him, or
brotherly communion, for mutual edification, shall be mis-regarded, or not made
use of: But by the contrary, That he will himself be their Teacher in these his
own means: First, giving his children a greater measure of the Spirit, and a
more near communion with himself than of old. 2. Making his children so wise
unto salvation, as they shall not hang their Faith upon man's authority: but
search by all means, till they understand the mind of God, the infallible
Teacher, as he has revealed himself in his Word, 3. So clearing the Truth
which is outwardly taught unto them, by his own Instruments, after so sure and
persuasive a manner, by his Spirit inwardly, that the outward Teaching, shall
be no Teaching, in comparison of the inward concurrence; according as we hear
those Samaritans were taught, who believed indeed the woman's report, that they
might go to Christ: But when they were come to him, got so great satisfaction
from himself, that they said unto her, Now we believe, not because of thy
saying, for we have heard him our selves, and know, that this is indeed that
Christ, John 4.42. So will the Lord inwardly make his Truth powerful unto
Salvation to his own, that they may say to those that are his Instruments, Now
we believe, not because of your saying, but because we have heard him our
selves.

Then, 1. It is not Gods will, that other men's belief should be the Rule of our
belief: but that we all search to understand the Scriptures, and Gods will
revealed therein. 2. It is easy from this ground, to answer that famous
question, How know you such and such grounds of Salvation? We answer, It is an
Article of the New Covenant, They shall be all taught of God.

2. He says, They shall all know me, from the least to the greatest.

Then 1. The New Covenant admits all Ranks and Degrees of persons, and
excludes none, high nor low, that love to embrace it. 2. It may be, in sundry
points of truth, some of them be ignorant and mistaken, more than other some:
But of the saving knowledge of God in Christ, they shall all have light, in a
saving measure. 3. The greatest, as well as the meanest, in whatsoever respect
of Place or Gifts, must be Gods Disciples in the study of saving Knowledge, and
hearty obedience.

Verse. 12. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and
their iniquities will I remember no more. 1. To make us believe the former
Promises, he adds to a New Article, of the Remission of sins: because from
the Conscience of those, ordinarily do arise our doubts and difficulty of
drawing near to God.

Then, 1. The conscience of sin, must not drive us away from God: but rather
force us to run unto God more humbly: because, only to such as come unto him,
in his Christ, is remission of sin promised. 2. Whatsoever sort of sins they
be, unrighteousness, or sin, or inquity, they shall not hinder God to be
gracious to the penitent, fleeing to this Covenant for refuge.

2. In saying, For I will be merciful, 1. He makes his mercy, pardoning sin,
the reason of his bestowing the former good things: His giving of one grace,
the reason of giving another, even grace for grace. 2. He makes his mercy the
ground of all this favor, and nothing in the man's person, or works, or
worthiness of his faith. 3. The word Merciful, is in the Original, Pacified;
and does import both Gods respect to the propitiatory sacrifice of Christ,
which pacifieth him toward us; and also our duty in looking toward it, as the
price of our reconciliation.

3. In that the Lord joyneth the promise, of putting his Law in the mind, and
writing it in our heart, with the promise of remission of sins, he teaches us,
That he will have every confederate soul, that seeks the benefit of this
Covenant, to join all these benefits together, in their claim, with remission
of sin, seeking to join the illumination of their mind, renovation of their
heart, and life, at least in their desires and endeavors: and not to sever one
of them from another, but study in uprightness to have them all.

4. While he says, He will remember their sins no more, he teaches, 1. That
he will never forgive sin, nor forget it, but set it ever in his sight, till a
man enter into this Covenant with him, through Christ. 2. That when he has
forgiven sin, he forgeteth sin also: whatsoever he remitteth, he removes from
his remembrance.

Verse. 13. In that he says, A New Covenant, he has made the first Old. Now
that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away. From the name that
the Lord gives this Covenant, in calling it New, he draws two consequences:
The first, that the former Covenant by this word was declared old. Next, that
as it was declared old, it was so declared shortly after to be abolished.

Then 1. The least word that proceeds out of Gods mouth, is weighty, and
worthy of consideration. 2. Whatsoever Gods word does import, by due
consequence must be taken for Gods truth, and Gods mind, as if it were
expressed. 3. Seeing Christ is come, and the time is now of this New Covenant,
we know, that by Gods authority, the Levitical, ordinances, and whole form of
the Legal Covenant, and ceremonial forms of worship are abrogated.

The Sum of Chap. IX.
THen, That you may see this more clearly, let us take view of the typical
Ordinances, in the Old Covenant, and of their accomplishment in Christ, under
the Old Covenant, and typical Tabernacle, there were sundry shadows, verse. 1,
2. The Tabernacle divided in two rooms, and their furniture within them both,
verse, 3, 4, 5. In the outer room the Priests resorted daily, verse. 6. In the
inner room, only the High Priest, once a year, verse. 7. The close-keeping of
which room, signified, that the way to Heaven, was not to be fully clear,
during the time of those shadows, verse. 8. Nothing done then, externally, could
quiet the conscience, verse. 9. All being but temporary shadows, imposed till
Christ came, to reform all, verse. 10. But when Christ came, he gave to those
shadows, accomplishment. For, he was Priest of the true Tabernacle of his own
Body, signified by the typical Tabernacle, verse. 11. And, by his own blood,
entered into Heaven, for our Eternal Redemption, verse. 12. For, if the types
procured a Ceremonial cleansing, verse. 13. How much more shall his blood,
truly, and in effect, procure our Justification, and Sanctification? verse. 14.
And, therefore, that Remission of sins, and Eternal Life, might be given to the
faithful, both then of old, and now, he behoved, by his office, to make his
Testament, and die, verse. 15. For, so requires the nature of a Testament,
verse. 16, 17. Wherefore the typical Testament, of old, also behoved to have a
typical death, as Levit. 16. makes plain, verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. Yea, every
cleansing of the Types, and every Remission, behoved to be with blood, verse.
22. Therefore, the things represented by the types, behoved to be cleaned by
better blood, even the blood of the Messiah, verse. 23. For, Christ entered not
into the typical Sanctuary, but into Heaven it self, verse. 24. And, offered not
himself often, as the imperfect Levitical Sacrifice was offered, verse. 25. For,
then should he have often died. But his once offering, was sufficient for
ever, verse. 26. And, as God appointed men but once to die, verse. 27. So Christ
was but once offered, till the time he come to judgment, for the salvation of
the faithful, verse. 28.

The Doctrine of Chap. IX.
Verse. 1. Then, verily, the first Covenant had also Ordinances of Divine
Service, and a worldly Sanctuary. THe word [Ordinances] in the original, is
also Justifications, in the plural number: so called, because they represented
our Justification.

Whereof we learn, 1. That as other things were typed under the Law, so also
was our Justification, and the manner of obtaining the same, shadowed forth. 2.
That those things which then were called Justifications, were so called only
because they were the representations of the way of obtaining Justification:
for they did not justify. 3. That albeit Justification be only one, yet the
types therefore were many: no one of them being able to express the truth, but
in part.

2. By calling them Ordinances of Divine Service, he teaches us, That
sometime, those Ceremonies which are now abolished, were, during their own
time, parts of Gods external worship, in regard of the Commandment of God
injoyning them.

3. By calling the Sanctuary Worldly, he teaches us, To think of all the
external glory of Levitical Service, only as the earthly representation of
heavenly things: and, under all these earthly shadows, to seek in, to an
heavenly signification.

Verse. 2. For, there was a Tabernacle made, the first, wherein was the
Candlestick, and the Table, and the Shewbread, which is called the Sanctuary.

3. And after the second Veil, the Tabernacle, which is called the holiest of
all.

4. Which had the Golden Censer, and the Ark of the Covenant, overlaid round
about with Gold; wherein was the Golden Pot that had Manna, and Aarons Rod that
buded, and the Tables of the Covenant.

5. And, over it, the Cherubims of Glory, shadowing the Mercy-Seat, of which
we cannot now speak particularly.

6. Now, when these things were thus ordained, the Priests went always into
the first Tabernacle, accomplishing the Service of God.

7. But into the second, went the High Priest alone, once every year; not
without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.

He sets before our eyes, the pleasant face of Gods outward worship; that,
in the wise appointing of every thing, for place, for division of rooms, for
furniture, for ornaments, for materials, for persons, for actions, for order of
doing, we may behold the Glory, not only of the appointer of them, but also,
the glory of the Church, and of Heaven, and of Christ, and of his Saints,
represented thereby, as far above the glory of those outward things, as
heavenly, and spiritual things, are above earthly; as the particular Exposition
of the meaning of the Types, in their own proper place, will make plain, which
we cannot meddle with here, seeing the Apostle judges it, not pertinent.

Verse. 8. The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of all,
was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing. He
expounds what the High Priests going through the Veil but once a year, did
mean, saying, the Holy Ghost signified something thereby.

Then, 1. The Holy Ghost is the Author of these Ordinances of Levi, and of
matters appointed about that Old Tabernacle, as of the expressions of his own
mind to the Church: and, so, he is very God. 2. The Holy Ghost, is a distinct
person of the Godhead, exercising the proper actions of a person, subsisting
by himself, directing the Ordinances of the Church, teaching the Church, and
interpreting the meaning of the Types unto the Church. 3. The Church under the
Law was not altogether ignorant of the spiritual signification of the Levitical
Ordinances, because the Holy Ghost was then teaching them the meaning. 4. Those
Rites and Ceremonies were not so dark in themselves, as they could not be in
any sort understood: but were expressions of the mind of God, to the Church of
that time.

2. That which the Holy Ghost did signify was this, That the way unto the
holiest of all, was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was
yet standing.

Then, That the holiest of all represented Heaven, the Old Church did know.

3. He says not that the way to Heaven was closed, but not clearly manifested.

Then, They knew the way to Heaven, darkly, through the Veil of Types. 2. They
knew there was a time of clearer light coming.

4. The time of the endurance of this not clear manifestation of the way to
Heaven, is set down to be, Whilst the first Tabernacle was standing.

Then the Old Church was taught, 1. That the clear light of the way to Heaven,
was not to be revealed while those shadows, and that Tabernacle endured. 2.
That when the clear manifestation of that way should come by the Messiah; that
Tabernacle was not to stand. 3. That when God should cause that first
Tabernacle to be removed, the true light was at hand. 4. That none should
receive the clear light of the way to Heaven, but such as should renounce the
Ordinances of the first Tabernacle.

And so the Apostle, by the authority of the Holy Ghost, enforces these
Hebrews either to renounce the Levitical Ordinances, or to be deprived of the
true light of the way to Heaven now revealed.

5. While he calls this typical Tabernacle, the first Tabernacle, he
imports, 1. That Christ's Body was the next Tabernacle, 2. That the Temple is
comprehended under the name of the Tabernacle in this dispute.

Verse. 9. Which was a figure, for the time then present, in which were offered
both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service
perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience. He shows the use of the Tabernacle
and the imperfection of the service thereof, saying, The Tabernacle was a
figure for the time then present, Whereby he gives us to understand, 1. That
the Tabernacle was a type and figure of Christ. 2. That it was not appointed
for all time to come, but for that present time of the Churches Nonage. 3.
That howsoever it was an obscure Figure, yet, having some resemblance of the
thing signified, it was fit for those of that time.

2. Next, he shows the weakness of the offerings, offered in the Tabernacle,
that they could not make the man that did the service, perfect, as concerning
the conscience: That is, they could not perfectly satisfy the conscience, that
sin was forgiven, and life granted, for any worthiness of those offerings: they
could not furnish the conscience with a good answer toward God, for saving of
them who did that service, 1 Pet. 3.21. Because the conscience could not have
^ound ground of satisfaction, how Gods justice would be made quiet by those
offerings. And, that which does not satisfy Gods justice, cannot satisfy the
conscience: because the conscience is Gods Deputy, and will not be quiet, if it
be well informed, till it see God pacified.

Then, It follows from this ground, seeing those offerings could not perfect
a man in his conscience, 1. That Christ's Sacrifice, signified by them, must
perfectly satisfy Gods Justice, and the conscience also, and purge the
filthiness of it, and heal its wounds. 2. That as many as were justified before
God, and in their consciences truly quieted under the Law, behoved, of
necessity, to see through these offerings, and flee in to the offering of the
Sacrifice represented by them, as Psalm. 51.7. For, otherwise, the Apostle
testifies here, the outward offerings could not perfect them in the
conscience. 3. That when Remission of sin, and Atonement, is promised in the
Law, upon the offering of these gifts, as Levit. 14.9. and 17.11. the form of
speech is Sacramental, joining the virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ, signified
by the offering of the figurative Sacrifices unto the Believer. 4. That true
Believers, notwithstanding the many imperfections of their life, may be
perfected, as concerning their conscience, by flying to the Mediation, and
Sacrifice of Christ, which washes the conscience thoroughly.

Verse. 10. Which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and
carnal ordinances, imposed on them, (...) the time of Reformation. He gives a
reason, why those Ceremonies should not perfect the conscience; Because they
stood in meats, and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances: To wit,
if they be considered by themselves, separate from their signification, as many
of the Jews took them.

Then, There is a twofold consideration to be had, of the Levitical
Ceremonies: One, as they are joined with the significations; and, so, promises
were made of Atonement, by them in the Law. Another, as they were looked upon,
by themselves, separate from their signification, as the carnal Jews took them,
and rested on them; and, so, they could not perfect the conscience.

2. He shows their endurance, saying, They were imposed on them, until the
time of Reformation: That is, Till the time of the Gospel, that Christ came,
with clear light, to perfect matters.

Then, 1. These Ceremonies were by God imposed upon no people, but them; That
is, the Jews only. 2. Neither were they imposed on the Jews for ever, but for
a time only, until the time of Reformation. 3. Seeing the time of Reformation
by Christ is come, these Ceremonies are expired and abolished.

3. Seeing the time of the Gospel, is the time of Reformation or Correction;

Then, 1. The Shadows are fulfilled, and the Substance is come. 2. The darkness
of teaching is removed, and the time of clearness is come. 3. The price of
Redemption, promised to be laid down, is now paid. 4. The difficulty and
impossibility of bearing the yoke of Gods external worship, is removed; and
Christ's easy yoke, in place thereof, is come. In a word, whatsoever was then
wanting under the Law, of the measure of the Spirit, or the means to get the
Spirit, and fruits thereof, is now helped in the frame of the Gospel.

Verse. 11. But Christ being come an High Priest of good things to come, by a
greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not
of this building. To show the accomplishment of these things, in Christ's
Priesthood, he opposes his Excellency, to the imperfection of the Levitical
High Priests service, thus: 1. The Levitical Priest, was Priest of the Shadows
of good things: but Christ, Priest of the good things themselves; keeping the
dispensation of them proper to his own person, such as are Reconciliation,
Redemption, Righteousness and Life, etc.

2. The Levitical High Priest had a Tabernacle builded with hands, wherein he
served: but Christ served in a greater, and more perfect Tabernacle, not made
with hands: That is, in the precious Tabernacle of his own Body, wherein he
dwelt amongst us, Joh. 1.14. represented by the material Tabernacle.

3. He expounds, how the Tabernacle of Christ's Body is not made with hands,
by this, that it is not of this building: First, because it was not formed by
the art of any Bezaleel, or Aholiab, but by the Holy Ghost. 2. Albeit the
Tabernacle of his Body was like ours, in substance: yet, for the manner of his
holy Conception, he is of another building than ours? For, our Tabernacles are
builded by natural generation, of man and woman, with propagation of original
sin: But, Christ's Body, in a singular manner, even by the special operation of
the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin: And, so, without original sin.

Verse. 12. Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves: but by his own Blood he
entered in, once, into the holy place* having obtained eternal Redemption for
us. The opposition goes on: 1. The Levitical High Priest entered into the
typical holy place: But Christ entered into the holy place properly so called:
that is, into Heaven.

2. The Levitical Priest entered often into the holy place: Christ entered but
once into Heaven. Hereby the Levitical Priests entry was declared to be
imperfect, because it behoved to be repeated: But Christ's entry into Heaven, to
be perfect, because but once, not to be repeated.

3. The Levitical Priests entered by the blood of Goats and Calves: But Christ
entered by his own blood.

1. And if Christ entered but once into Heaven, after his Suffering; Then, We
must not think, that his Body is any where else, but in Heaven only, wherein
it is once only entered.

2. If the blood whereby Christ entered into Heaven, was his own blood, Then, 1.
Verily, Christ's Body was like ours, in substance, having blood in it, as ours:
and, we must not conceive otherwise of his body, than to be of the same
substance, and substantial properties with ours. 2. The blood belonged to the
same person, to whom the properties of God belongs, so often in this Epistle
attributed unto Christ. His Blood, was the blood of God, Act. 20.28. That is,
the same Jesus, was God and man, with flesh and blood, in one person.

3. The Fruit of Christ's bloody Sacrifice, he makes, The Eternal Redemption
of those for whom he offered it: And, to the typical Sacrifice, he ascribes
no redemption at all, in the comparison. Thereby giving us to understand,

1. That from the worlds beginning, to the end thereof, salvation of sinners is
by way of Christ's Redemption: That is, by his loosing them, through payment of
a price. 2. That the Redemption was manifested to have force, when after his
bloody Sacrifice he entered into Heaven. 3. That such as are once redeemed by
Christ, are Eternally Redeemed: not for a time, to fall away again: but
eternally to be saved, most certainly.

Verse. 13. For, if the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the Ashes of an
Heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh.

Verse. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the Eternal
Spirit, offered himself, without spot, to God, purge your consciences from dead
works, to serve the living God?

To prove, that eternal Redemption is the fruit of Christ's Sacrifice, he
reasons thus, If the Typical Sacrifices and Rites of old were able to work
that for which they were ordained; that is, external Sanctification: Much more
shall Christ's true Sacrifice be able to work that for which it was appointed;
that is, Eternal Remission of sins, and inward Sanctification, unto eternal
life.

Then there are two sorts of Sanctification: One, external, of the flesh, which
makes a man holy to the Church, whatsoever he be within. Another, internal, of
the conscience and inner man, which makes a man holy before God.

2. The purifying of the flesh, he makes to be by the exercise of such and
such Ordinances of Divine Service for the time.

Then External, or Church-holiness of the outward man, is procured by such and
such exercises of Divine Ordinances in the Church, as serve to make a man to be
reputed and holden for clean before men, and so to be received for a member of
the Church: as is to be seen, Numb. 19.

3. From his form of reasoning, we learn, That whatsoever liberty, and access
of coming to the Church, was made to the Jew of old, by these ceremonies of the
Law, as much and more liberty is made to the Christian, to come in to God, by
the blood of Christ.

4. In describing Christ's Sacrifice, he says, Christ, through the Eternal
Spirit offered himself, without spot to God.

Then 1. Christ is both the Sacrifice and the Priest, in one person. He offered
himself as man, through the Eternal Spirit, that is, by the virtue and power of
his own Godhead, by which he preached, before his Incarnation, to sinners, 1
Pet. 3.19. 2. His sacrifice was without spot. He was that spotless Lamb, in
whom was no sin, nor imperfection, nor defect of any thing that the sacrifice
required. 3. The virtue of the sacrifice, which made it to purchase Eternal
Redemption unto us, flows from the infinite worth of his Eternal Godhead. 4.
Albeit Christ's two natures, have their distinct respects in the actions of his
Office, yet Christ is one, and undivided in the execution of his Office.

5. The fruit and force of the sacrifice, is set down in this, that this Blood
shall purge our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God: That is,
shall both absolve a man from his foregon sin, and also enable him to serve God
for time to come.

Then, 1. Sins are but dead works, flowing from nature dead in sin; and not
only deserving, but also drawing on death upon the sinner. 2. The conscience
lies polluted with the filthiness of dead works, till the virtue of the blood
of Jesus applied, bring intimation of absolution. 3. Christ's blood does not
purge the Conscience from dead works, that a man should go wallow in them
again; but that he may serve the living God more acceptably. 4. The purging
virtue of Christ's blood, is joined with the sanctifying, and renewing of the
absolved sinner: and what God has conjoined, let no man put asunder.

Verse. 15. And for this cause, he is the Mediator of the New Testament; that by
means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions which were under the
first Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. Now, lest any man should stumble at Christ's death, he shows a
necessity thereof, in respect of his office of Mediation, and the purchase to
be made by his Redemption. The force of the reason is this, Remission of sins
could not have been given under the Law, except the Mediator had been to pay
the price of the same under the Gospel: Nor could the faithful and called ones,
either then or now, obtain eternal life for an inheritance, otherwise than by
the Mediators death: Therefore it behoved the true Mediator* by means of death,
to pay the promised price of the purchase of remission of sins and eternal
life.

Then, 1. The remission of transgressions, and the inheritance of eternal life,
are both fruits of Christ's Passion, 2. The fruits of his Passion extended
themselves unto them who were under the Old Testament, as well as unto us under
the New. 3. The way of purchase of these benefits, was by Redemption; that is
to say, by lawful purchase, such as might satisfy justice. 4. The way in
special, was by means of the Mediators death: His life was laid down, to redeem
ours: His one life, as good as all ours. 5. For this cause Christ took the
office of a Mediator unto himself, that he might have right and interest by
death, to make this purchase. 6. And therefore except he had really died, the
purchase could not have been lawfully made.

Verse. 16. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death
of the Testator. Another reason to prove the necessity of Christ's death, from
the force of the word Covenant, which signifies also a Testament. The force of
the reason is this, Christ (Jer. 31.31.) promised to make a New Covenant; and
therefore also a New Testament: and i^ to make a New Testament, then also he
promised to dye. The Articles of the Covenant also evinceth it to be a
Testament; and the promiser bound to make his word good, and so to dye: For
Jer. 31. the Lord Christ promises to reconcile his people to God, to take away
their sins, and to be their God. Justice required satisfaction of them, before
they could be reconciled: Satisfaction they could not make themselves,
therefore he who promised to make the Reconciliation with God, was bound to
make the satisfaction for them to God: and if satisfaction for them, then to
undergo the curse of the Law for them, and so to dye.

Then, 1. The New Covenant is of the nature of a Testament, and the benefits
promised therein; to wit, Remission of sins, Reconciliation, Sanctification,
and Life Eternal, are Legacies freely left unto us, by our Defunct Lord, who
was dead, and is alive to execute his own will for evermore. The Scripture is
the instrument and evidence; the Apostles, Notaries; the Sacraments, are seals;
witnesses from Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; witnesses on
earth, the Water, the Blood, and the Spirit. 2. Christ Jesus is both the maker
of the Covenant which is in Ier. 31. and the Mediator thereof also: the
Testator and Executor of that blessed Testament. 3. Christ's death was
concluded, and resolved upon, and intimated, before he came into the world.

Verse. 17. For a Testament is of force after men are dead, otherwise it is of
no strength at all whilst the Testator lives. He clears his reasoning, from
the nature of Testaments amongst men; which, not before, but after a man's
death, have force. But here it may be objected, How can this be, seeing by
virtue of the testament of Christ, benefits not a few, were bestowed upon the
Church, before his death, from the beginning of the world; not only Remission
of sins and Eternal Life, but also many graces and blessings in this life, both
bodily and spiritual? I answer, Albeit Christ's death was not accomplished in
act till of late, yet for the certainty of his death to follow, and the
unchangeableness of his mind toward his Church, before his death, he was
reckoned both with God, and the Church, for dead; and the promise of laying
down his life for his people, accepted for the time, as if it had been
performed. For which cause he is called (Rev. 13.8.) The Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world. And Christ was still represented as a slain man in all
these Sacrifices, which the Apostle points at, as meeting this doubt in the
next words which follow hereafter, Verse. 18.

Verse. 18. Whereupon neither the first Testament was dedicated without blood.
He proves the necessity of Christ's death yet farther. Under the Law his
bloodshed was represented by types of bloody Sacrifices; therefore it behoved
those types to be answered by his real bloodshed and death.

Then, 1. What the types of the Law did signify, Christ behoved to accomplish
in verity. 2. The Old Church was taught, that by virtue of the blood signified
by these types, the Covenant stood betwixt God and them.

Verse. 19. For when Moses had spoken every Precept, to all the people,
according to the Law, he took the blood of Calves, and of Goats, with Water and
Scarlet Wool, and Hyssope, and sprinkled both the book and all the people;

20. Saying, This is the blood of the Testament, which God has enjoined unto
you.

21. Moreover, he sprinkled with blood, both the Tabernacle, and all the
Vessels of the Ministry.

From Moses example, we learn, 1. That the Lords Word should be manifested to
all the people; and none of them debarred from taking knowledge thereof. 2.
That the Word must be spoken plainly, with a distinct voice, in the common
Language, and not muttered in an unknown Tongue. 3. That with the use of holy
Rites appointed of God, the Preaching of Gods Word should be joined, to show
the Institution and force of Gods Ordinances to his people.

2. In that the Book, and the People, and Instruments of Service, were all to
be sprinkled, we learn, That every thing which we touch, or meddle with, or
make use of, is unclean unto us, were it never so holy in it self, except the
Blood of Jesus make it clean unto us, and cleanse us in the using of it.

Verse. 22. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood; and without
shedding of blood is no remission. He says, Almost, because of some purging
which was done by washing; and yet even that washing also, drew the Virtue of
Ceremonial purging from the Sacrifice whereunto the washing was annexed.

2. In saying, Without shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins, he
teaches us, That wheresoever a sacrifice is offered, for obtaining remission
of sin, there shedding of blood must really be: and, where an unbloody
sacrifice is pretended to be offered, for obtaining remission, it serves not
the purpose; because, Without shedding of blood there is no remission: Either
therefore, must such as pretend to offer Christ for obtaining the remission of
sin, grant that Christ is daily murdered by them, and his blood shed anew, in
their pretended Offering, or else, that by their Offering, no new Remission is
purchased. But, the truth is, Christ's Blood is once shed, and never to be shed
again: and, that once Offering and Blood shedding is sufficient for everlasting
remission, without any new Offering of him again.

Verse. 23. It was therefore necessary, that the Patterns of things in the
Heavens, should be purified with these: but the Heavenly things themselves,
with better Sacrifices than these. Another reason of the necessity of Christ's
death, in force thus much: If things figuratively holy, behoved to be cleansed
with the Typical Blood of Beasts: Then things truly holy, behoved to be
cleansed with better blood, even the blood of the Messiah.

Hence we learn, 1. That for the significations cause, God would not have the
Tabernacle, nor any Instrument of Service about it, to ^e esteemed holy, till
blood was shed to sprinkle it: That it might be known thereby, that without the
shedding of Christ's blood, he would not accept of any thing from us as holy. 2.
That the blood of Beasts was sufficient to make representation; but better
blood, even the Blood of the Messiah, behoved to be shed, to give the truth of
the signification. For as far as Heaven is above the earthly sanctuary, and
men's souls above the vessels thereof; so far better behoved to be that blood
which made souls acceptable to God, and to get entrance into heaven, than the
blood of Levitical sacrifices was.

Verse. 24. For Christ is not entered into the Holy Places made with hands, which
are the figures of the true; but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the
presence of God for us. He clears the matter, how Christ has offered a
better Sacrifice than the Levitical, yea, and behoved to offer a better,
because he is entered into a better Sanctuary; another man, in another manner,
and to another end than the High Priest under the Law entered: The comparison
goes thus:

1. The Levitical High Priest entered into the material and artificial
Sanctuary, and a Typical sacrifice became him: But Christ entered not into that
Typical Sanctuary: Therefore a Typical Sacrifice became not him.

2. The Levitical High Priest entered bodily into the figurative Sanctuary: But
Christ did enter bodily into the true Sanctuary in Heaven it self.

3. The High Priest entered in behalf of the people, with the names of the
twelve Tribes upon his breast and shoulders: But Christ is entered in, in
behalf of us all his People, to appear for us: bearing the particular memory of
every Saint in his Memory.

The High Priest entered in to appear for a short time; and stayed not within
the Sanctuary: But Christ is entered in, to appear now all the time from his
Ascension, unto this day, and constantly still, while it is called Now.

Verse. 25. Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the High Priest
enters into the Holy Place every year, with blood of others. He proves, that
he had offered a better Sacrifice than the Levitical, because he behoved to
offer an Offering not to be repeated, as the Levitical: and so a more perfect
Offering. The comparison goes in dissimilitudes:

1. The High Priest entered in with the blood of others, But Christ entered in
with his own blood.

2. The High Priest made an Offering of other things than himself: But Christ
did offer himself.

Then the Offering of Christ, is the personal action of Christ himself. None
can, nor may offer him, but himself: For the Priest must be either better than
the Sacrifice, or as good, at least, as the Sacrifice: But none can be so good
as Christ, nor be more excellent, or better; therefore, none can offer Christ
but himself.

3. The High Priest offered his Sacrifice oftener: But Christ offered not
himself oftener than once.

Then, to imagine an Offering of Christ often, is both to give the lie to this
Text, and to make Christ's Offering by repeating of it imperfect, and like to
the Levitical, For if once offering of Christ be sufficient, often offering is
superfluous. And if often offering be needful, then that once offering was not
sufficient, and so was not perfect, which were blasphemy to say. 2. If any man
pretend to offer Christ often, it is not Christ that gives him warrant so to
do: For here it is declared, That he has no hand in offering himself often.

Verse. 26. For, then must be often have suffered since the foundation of the
world: But now once in the end of the world, has he appeared, to put away sin,
by the sacrifice of himself. He proves, That Christ cannot be often offered;
Because then ( says he) must he often have suffered. Then,

1. No Offering of Christ, without the suffering of Christ: His Passion and
Death is inseparable from his Sacrifice. If Christ were often offered, he
behoved to be often slain and put to death: But that cannot be, that he should
suffer and be slain oftener: therefore, he cannot be offered up in a sacrifice
oftener. And they who will take upon them to offer Christ again and again, take
upon them to slay him, and put him to new suffering again and again. 2. The
offering of Christ in an unbloody sacrifice, is a a vain imagination, which the
Apostle acknowledges not: For, if that were possible, then were the Apostles
words here false, and his reasoning ridiculous; which were blasphemy to say.

2. He says, He behoved to have suffered often, since the beginning of the
World; Because as often as new sins were committed, and new Remission was to be
bestowed, as often behoved he to have suffered, to expiate these sins, and to
purchase the new Remission, since the beginning of the World: But this is
impossible; Therefore his Offering often, is impossible. Then,

1. They who make it needful, to offer Christ often, make it needful, also,
that He should have taken on flesh sooner than He did, and been slain sooner
than He was, and slain as often as new sins were to be expiated, and forgiven,
from the beginning of the world. And, so, by this vain conceit they do ranverse
all the wisdom of God about Christ, and set to Him an Order, and Course of
their own, making themselves wiser than God. 2. It is by the Apostles
estimation, as vain a conceit, and as impossible to offer Christ oftener than
once, now, in the end of the world, as to have offered Him before He came in
the flesh, since the beginning of the world.

3. But, now, (says he) once in the end of the world, he has appeared, to
put away sin, by the Sacrifice of himself. Then,

1. No Sacrifice of Christ, does the Apostle acknowledge, but such as is joined
with His bodily appearance in the world for that end. Once has He appeared,
and once only has He sacrificed Himself, says the Apostle. 2. The Apostle
understood no Offering of Christ, but only one, and once to be offered, for
time fore-gone, or time to come, from the beginning of the world, unto the end
thereof. 3. This one Offering once offered, was sufficient to expiate the sins
of the saved, before it was offered: and therefore, must have force also, to
expiate the sins of the saved without repetition now, after it is once offered.
4. Whose sins Christ does take away, for those He appeared, for those He made
a Sacrifice of Himself: And, whose sins He does not put away, for those He
appeared not, He sacrificed not.

4. In calling the time of Christ's Suffering, The end of the world, he gives
us to understand, That there cannot be so much time betwixt Christ's First and
Second Coming, as was betwixt the worlds beginning, and his First Coming: But
a great deal of less time, need force: else, were not that time the end of the
world.

Verse. 27. And, as it is appointed unto men once to dye, but, after this, the
Judgment: Another Reason, to prove, That Christ neither could, nor should,
offer oftener than once, from the Common Law laid upon man, of Once dying.
Which Law, Christ having once satisfied, by dying, when he offered up himself;
there is no reason he should offer himself again, and, so dye again.

1. It is appointed (says he) for men once to dye. Then, 1. It is come by
Gods just appointment, that men should dye, since His Law is broken by men. 2.
The Common Law of Nature appoints but one death, once to be suffered. And,
though God by singularity of Miracles, make some Exceptions, yet the Common Law
stands for a rule, beyond which, no reason Christ should be tied, since his
once dying is sufficient. 3. Every man must take Death to him, and prepare
himself to obey the Appointment.

2. He says, After Death, comes Judgment. Then, 1. Every man's particular
Judgment Day, follows his departure out of this life; and general judgment,
abides all, at length. 2 The time of Grace and mercy getting, is only in this
life: nothing but Justice remains; either to absolve the Reconciled, or to
condemn the unreconciled sinner. Men's Devises, for the Relief of the Dead, are
but Delusions of the Living.

Verse. 28. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many: and unto them
that look for Him, shall He appear the second time, without sin, unto
Salvation. He applies the Common Law, of dying once, to Christ, saying,
Christ was once offered, to bear the sins of many.

Then, 1. It is as unreasonable, that Christ should offer Himself oftener than
once, as it is to exact of Him, the laying down of His life oftener than once:
for, that is to exact more than the severity of Gods Justice requires of Him.
2. Christ's Death was not for any sin in Him, but for our sins. 3. He took not
away the sins of every man in particular (for, many dye in their sins, and bear
their own judgment) but the sins of many: the sins of his own Elect People,
Mat. 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins.

2. He says, That unto them that look for him, he shall appear the second
time.

Then, 1. After that once offering of Christ, and ascending to Heaven, He is
not to be corporally present on earth again, till the Day of Judgment. The
Apostle acknowledges corporal presence no oftener. 2. To look for Christ's
corporal presence upon earth then, and not till then, is the property of true
Believers. 3. Corporal presence is joined with Appearance: the one is put here
for the other.

3. He will appear the second time, without sin.

Then, In his first coming, he was not without our sin yet lying upon him, by
imputation; as his baseness and misery declared. But the glorious manner of his
second coming, shall make evident, That he is without sin, that is, Fully
exonored, by that one Offering of the debt thereof, which he took upon him.

4. In stead of saying, That those who look for him, shall be without sin, he
says, That Christ shall appear without sin.

To teach us, 1. That the defraying the Debt of the sins of such, for whom
Christ has undertaken, lies upon Christ, and not upon the Believers, for whom
he undertook. 2. And, that if his once sacrificing himself for them, did not
expiate their sins sufficiently, then Sin should cleave unto Christ, until His
second coming. 3. That Christ's freedom from Sin shall evidence our freedom
from Sin, for whom he became Surety.

5. He will appear unto them who look for Him unto salvation.

Then, 1. The full accomplishment of the salvation of the Believers, shall not
be until Christ's second coming: Though their souls be blessed before, yet the
full blessedness of soul and body, is deferred till then. 2. As Christ's Glory
shall testify then, that His once offering freed Him of the Suretiship for our
sins: So our salvation shall testify, that His Offering was sufficient to
exonor us. 3. They that love not his coming, cannot look for salvation.

The Sum of Chap. X.
THis once offering of Christ, puts the main difference betwixt this
Sacrifice, and those offerings of the Law, which, because they were repeated,
could never perfect the worshiper, verse. 1. For, if they could have perfected
the worshiper, they should have ceased to be repeated, verse. 2. Now, cease they
did not, but were repeated, verse. 3. Because they could not take away sin,
verse. 4. Wherefore, as the Scripture does witness ( Psalm. 40.) Sacrifices of
the Law were to be abolished, and Christ His Sacrifice to come in their room,
verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. By which Sacrifice, once offered, we are for ever
sanctified, verse. 10. And, as their Sacrifice was imperfect, so was their
Priesthood also, ever repeating the same Sacrifices, which could not (because
they were repeated) abolish sin, verse. 11. But Christ has ended His
Sacrificing, in His once offering, and entered to His Glory, to subdue His
Enemies, verse. 12, 13. Having by that once offering, done all to his Followers
that was needful to perfect them, verse. 14. As the word of the New Covenant,
Ier. 31. proverb, verse. 15, 16, 17, 18. Having spoken, then, of Christ's Divine
Excellency, and of the Privileges which the Faithful have in Him; I exhort you
to make use of it: in special, seeing we have by Chris^^ blood, access unto
Heaven, verse. 19. By so perfect a Way, as is Christ's Fellowship, of our Nature,
verse. 20. And so great Moyen, by Christ, before us there, verse. 21. Let us
strengthen our Faith, for the better holding of our Justification and
Sanctification through him, verse. 22. And, let us avow our Religion constantly,
verse. 23. And help forwards one another, verse. 24. Neglecting no means,
public, nor private, for that end, as some Apostates have done, verse. 25. For,
if we make wilful Apostasy from his known Truth, no Mercy to be looked for,
verse. 26. But certain Damnation of us, as of his Enemies, verse. 27. For, if the
Despisers of the Law were damned to death, without mercy, verse. 28. What
Judgment abides those, who so abuse Jesus, his Grace, and Spirit, as wilful
Apostates do? verse. 29. For, Gods threatening in the Law, is not in vain, verse.
30. And, it is a fearful thing to fall, as a Foe, in Gods Hand, verse. 31. But,
rather, prepare you for such sufferings, as you began to feel at your
Conversion, verse. 32. Partly in your own persons, and partly by your fellowship
with Sufferers, verse. 33. Which you did joyfully bear, in hope of a Reward,
verse. 34. Therefore, retain your Confidence, verse. 35. And be patient, verse.
36. God will come, and help shortly, verse. 37. And till he come, you must live
by Faith, and not by sense: But, if you will not, you shall be rejected, verse.
38. But I and you are not of that sort that shall make Apostasy, but of the
number of true Believers, who shall persevere and be saved, verse. 39.

The Doctrine of Chap. X.
THat he may yet further show the impossibility of offering Christ oftener, he
gives the often repetition of Levitical Sacrifices, year by year, for a reason
of their imperfection and inability to perfect the worshiper: and therefore, of
necessity Christ's Sacrifice could not be repeated, except we should make it
imperfect, like the Levitical, and unable to perfect the worshiper, as the
Legal Sacrifice was.

The force of his reasoning is this: The most solemn Sacrifice offered by the
High Priest himself, Levit. 16. and lest subject to repetition of all the
Sacrifices, being offered not so often as each month, or each week, or each
day, as some Sacrifices were, but once a year only; yet, because they were
repeated, year by year, they were declared, by this means, unable ever to make
the comers thereunto perfect. Therefore, Christ's Sacrifice could not be often
offered; lest, for that same reason, it should be found imperfect also. And,
this is his drift in verse. 1.

He proves his reason to be good, thus: If they could have perfected the
commer, then they should not have been repeated, but ceased from being offered,
because they should have delivered the worshiper, perfectly, from sin: and,
having done that, the repetition was to no purpose, verse. 2. But they did not
free the worshiper from sin; for, still after offering he professed himself
guilty (for any thing these Sacrifices could do) by offering of a new offering,
verse. 3. And no wonder, because such Sacrifices were not worthy to expiate sin;
and, so, unable to take away sin: and, so also, unable to quiet the conscience.

Verse. 1. For, the Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very
Image of the things, can never, with those Sacrifices which they offered year
by year continually, make the comers thereunto, perfect. THE Old Covenant is
called the Law, because it was drawn up in a Legal form, upon conditions of
obedience to the Law: and Grace and Life in Jesus Christ to come, were set
before them in shadows, not in a clear manner, as in the Gospel.

Then, 1. In the Old Covenant, the Law was expressly urged, and Grace in the
Messiah covered, and hid, under Veils. 2. Christ, and his Grace, and the good
things which come by him, were not so hid, but they might have been seen,
albeit but darkly, being as by their shadows, represented. 3. The revealing of
Christ, and his benefits, under the Gospel, and under the Law, differ as far in
measure of light, as the shadow of a thing, and the lively image thereof, drawn
with all the lineaments. For, they saw Christ, and Righteousness, and Eternal
Life through him, as those which are in the house see the shadow of a man
coming, before he enter within the doors: but, we, with open face, behold in
the Gospel, as in a Mirror, Christ's Glory shining; Christ, in the preaching of
his word, crucified before our Eyes, as it were, and bringing with him life,
and immortality, to light.

2. He makes the repeating of the Sacrifices, a reason of their inability to
perfect the comers thereunto: That is, perfectly to satisfy for those, who
came to the Sacrifice, and to sanctify, and save them, in whose name it was
offered.

Then, 1. A Sacrifice that perfectly satisfies Gods Justice for sin, cannot be
repeated: and, a Sacrifice which has need to be repeated, has not perfectly
satisfied Gods Justice for the sinner, nor perfected the sinner, for whom it is
offered, by doing all that Justice required, to purchase Justification,
Sanctification, and Salvation, to him. 2. Whosoever will have Christ offered up
in a Sacrifice oftener than once, whether by himself, or by another, denies the
perfection of that Sacrifice on the Cross; denies, that by that one Sacrifice
purchase is made of all that, is required to perfect sinners, which is fearful
blasphemy.

Verse. 2. For then would they not have ceased to be offered, because that the
worshipers once purged, should have had no more conscience of sin. By way of
question, he asks, Would not those Sacrifices have ceased to be offered, if
they could have made the comers thereunto perfect?

Then, The Apostle esteems this Reason so clear, that any man, of sound
judgment, being asked the question, must, of necessity, grant it. For, Natures
light does teach thus much, That if a Sacrifice do all that is to be done for
the sinner, it stands there, because there is no more to do. If it pay the
full price of the sinners expiation, at once offering, what need can there be
to offer it over again? And therefore, if Christ's one Sacrifice, once offered,
perfect the comers thereunto, must it not cease to be offered any more, by
this reasoning of the Apostle? For, if he have made a perfect purchase of
whatsoever is required to perfect us, by once offering, Wisdom, and Justice
will not suffer the price of the purchase to be offered again. And if he must
be offered again, he has not perfected the purchase for us, by any Offering
going before.

2. The Apostle his Reason, why a Sacrifice which perfecteth the worshiper,
must cease to be offered, is; Because, that the worshiper once purged, should
have no more conscience of sins. By which he means not, that the purged
worshiper may do, hereafter, what he lists, and make no conscience. to sin:
nor yet, that after he is purged, and falls into a new sin, he should not
take with his guiltiness, and repent, and run again to the benefit of that
Sacrifice: But this he means, That the purging of his conscience, by virtue
of a perfect Sacrifice, is such, that he is freed from the just challenge, and
condemnatory Sentence of the conscience, for that sin wherefrom he is purged.

Quest. How is it then, will you say, that many of Gods Children are often
times troubled with the guiltiness of their Conscience, for those same sins
which they have repented and sought pardon for through Christ's sacrifice, and
found remission intimated, and peace granted?

I answer, Not for any imperfection of the sacrifice, or of their remission;
but for the weakness of their holding of the ever-flowing Virtue of that once
offered sacrifice, and the remission granted there-through.

Then, 1. He that is purged by virtue of the sacrifice of Christ, has Gods
Warrant to have a quiet and peaceable conscience. 2. And if he have a
challenge, after he is fled to this sacrifice, he may, by Gods approbation,
stop the same, by opposing the virtue of that perfect sacrifice to the
challenge.

3. The comers unto the sacrifice, to have benefit thereby, verse. 1. are here
called Worshippers, verse. 2.

Then, the Lord reckons it a part of Divine service and worship done unto
him, to come and seek the benefit of that sacrifice, whereby he is pacified,
and we ransomed.

4. To make the worshipper perfect, v. 1. is expounded, by purging them, and
delivering them from the conscience of sin, v. 2.

Then, that sacrifice which purges the conscience from sin, does also perfect
the man: Neither needs he any thing unto salvation, which such a sacrifice
does not purchase. And such is that once offered sacrifice of Christ.

Verse 3. But in those sacr^^^ces there is a remembrance again made of sins
every year. He proves, That the Levitical sacrifices took not away the
conscience of sin, because there was a yearly commemoration made of the same
sins; not only of that year, but also of former: yea, beside the commemoration
expressly done by the Priest, even in these repeated sacrifices, says he, there
was in effect, a real taking up again of those sins for which sacrifice had
been offered before: because the offering of sacrifice a new, did plainly
import, That by no preceding sacrifice was the ransom of the sinner paid. And
so in effect, the Sacrificers did profess, That for any thing which the former
sacrifice could merit, their sins remained unexpiated.

Quest. But you will ask, Were not Believers under the Law, purged from their
sins, and made clean, and white as snow? Psalm. 51.7.

I answer, Yes, indeed; but not by virtue of those Typical sacrifices, but by
virtue of the sacrifice signified by them; to wit, the sacrifice of the true
Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the World. And therefore, when
Atonement and expiation of sin is attributed to the Levitical sacrifices, as
Lev. 17.11. the form of speech is Sacramental, the property of the thing
signified being ascribed to the sign, as was marked before.

Quest. But do not we Christians make a commemoration of our sins year by year?
yea daily remembering even the sins of our youth, and deprecating the wrath
which they deserve?

I answer, It is true, we do; but not by way of offering a sacrifice, as they:
for of them it is said here, In those sacrifices there is a remembrance of sin.

Quest. What is the difference betwixt commemoration of sin, without renewd
sacrifice, and commemoration of sin, with renewed sacrifices? betwixt the Jews
commemoration of sins year by year, spoken of in this place, and the
commemoration which true Christians do make?

I answer, The Jew in his solemn Commemoration of sin, by renewed sacrifice,
did really profess two things: One, That no sacrifice formerly offered, was
sufficient to expiate his sin, or cleanse his conscience. Another, That he had
not sufficiently holden by Faith, that signified sacrifice which was to come;
but had need, through the Spectacles and Transparent of these typical
sacrifices enjoined for his help, to take a new view of that true sacrifice
which was to come; of both which, the repeated sacrifice did bear witness. But
we, by commemoration of our sins, and not sacrificing, profess, That by Christ's
sacrifice already past, Gods justice is so well satisfied, as there is no need
of new sacrifice, nor of^ner offering of that one: And therefore, that we
desire no other ransom but Christ's, which is paid already on the Cross; but
only crave, to have by Faith, a better hold of Christ, who has paid the
ransom for us, that we may find the virtue of his ransom yet more and more
in our selves.

Quest. But, what if with the commemoration of sins, year by year, and day by
day, we should pretend to join a Sacrifice, that new expiation might be made,
by offering of Christ over again, as is pretended to be done now adays?

I answer, By so doing, we should take away the Difference, which the Apostle
here puts betwixt the Levitical sacrifices and Christ, and make Christ's no
better than theirs: We should avow, That Christ's sacrifice on the Cross, done
by himself, was not a full ransom for our sins; but, that a man's offering were
able to do that which Christ's sacrifice on the Cross had not done. Finally,
with the Jew we should avow, that the true and satisfactory sacrifice, were not
as yet come; nothing heretofore being done, which were able to pacify God, or
purge the Worshippers from the Conscience of sin: For if a man think, that the
price of expiation of sin be already paid, he does but mock Gods justice, and
disgrace the Price paid, if he presume to pay the Price over again.

Verse. 4. For it is not possible, that the blood of Bulls and of Goats should
take away sins. He gives a Reason, why these Sacrifices could not pacify the
conscience, even because it is not possible, that they should take away sin.

Then, 1. The conscience can never be purged, except it see sin taken away by a
perfect sacrifice, and a ransom so worthy, as justice may be satisfied. 2. It
is impossible that Atonement was properly made by the Levitical sacrifice, but
only figuratively; because here it is said, It was impossible they could take
away sins. 3. Sin is not wiped away by any unworthy mean: for, sin being the
breach of the Law of nature, and of the written Law, Gods Majesty so glorious,
his Justice so exact, his Truth in threatening death to the offender, so
constant, no less worthy sacrifice can expiate sin, than that which is of value
to answer all these.

Verse. 5. Wherefore, when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and
offering thou would not; but a body have thou prepared me.

6. In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin, thou have had no pleasure.

He proves, by testimony of the 40 Psalm, verse. 6, 7, etc. That these
sacrifices did never, by themselves, pacify God: and therefore, were not to
endure longer than Christ should come, to fulfill what they did signify; and so
abolish them.

Then of necessity, the Old Church was not altogether ignorant of the
imperfection of their Legal service, for removing of their sins; and that the
true expiation of their sins signified by these sacrifices, was to be sought in
the Messiah.

2. Christ is brought in by the Prophet, coming into the world: that is, taking
on our nature, and manifesting himself in the flesh: because, by the Word, he
is set before the Church of that time as incarnate, removing the Levitical
Sacrifices, and offering himself in their place.

Then, the Word of God brings all Divine Truth to a present being unto Faith:
and so, by prophecy, made Christ incarnate, present unto the Faith of the
Fathers under the Law.

3. Christ's words unto the Father, are, Sacrifice and oblation thou would
not; but a body have thou prepared me: Which is in substance the same with,
Mine ear have thou opened, or, bored unto me, in the Hebrew, Psalm. 40.6. For,
if the Father open the ear of his son, by making him a wise servant for the
work of Redemption: If he bore his ear, by making him a willing and obedient
Servant, then must he also prepare a Body unto him, and bring him into the
world, by incarnation, that he may accomplish that service as became.

Then, 1. Christ's Body is of Gods preparation, and fitting made of God, so
holy, and harmless, so free of sin, as it should be fit to be joined with the
Godhead of the Son, and fit to be an expiatory Sacrifice for sin. 2. The
Sacrifice of Christ's Body, and the obedience done to God in it by him, is the
Accomplishment and Substance of these Sacrifices. 3. God was never pleased, nor
pacified by these Sacrifices, in themselves; but by Christ's Sacrifice,
signified by them. 4. God prepared a Satisfaction to himself, for us, when we
could not.

Verse. 7. Then said I, Lo, I come (in the Volume of Thy Book it is written of
Me) to do Thy Will, O God. Then said Christ, Lo, I come, to do Thy Will, O
God; That is, When the Legal Sacrifices are found and declared unable to
pacify God, Christ Then finds it the fit time to come into the world; and,
to do that which the Sacrifices did fore-signifie, but could not effectuate.

Then, 1. Christ did not think it the due time for himself to come into the
world, till it should be found, that without him, neither God could be
satisfied, nor man saved, by any other mean, but by his obedience. 2. Christ
assumed our nature, and offered himself in our room, to the Father, willingly:
ready to perform what the Fathers Will could exact of us: yea, earnestly
desired he to discharge that service for us, Blessed be His Name, for that
willingness, even for evermore. 3. Speaking as in our nature, now incarnate,
he calls the Father, his God. So Christ, as Man, has our God, for his God.

2. One of the Reasons of his Offer-making, is, In the Volume of Thy Book it is
written of Me: That is, So is it decreed, and fore-prophesied, in the
Scripture of Me, That I should satisfy Thee, O Father, and do Thy Will, for
Man.

Then, 1. Christ has a great respect to the Scripture, to have all things
fulfilled which are there spoken: though it should cost him his life, he will
have it done. 2. He desires, that before we look upon his manner of
redeeming us, we should look to the prophecies which went before of him in the
Scripture. 3. The sum of Gods Decree, and of his Scripture, which reveals his
Decree, is, That God will save Man, by Christ: or, That the Son shall be
incarnate, and do the Fathers will, for redemption of Man: that the Seed of the
Woman, shall tread down the head of the Serpent, is amongst the first Oracles
of Gods Good Will to Man,

Verse. 8. Above, when He said, Sacrifice, and Offering, and Burnt-offerings,
and Offering for sin, Thou would not, neither had thou pleasure therein,
which are offered by the Law:

9. Then said He, Lo, I come, to do Thy Will (O God.) He takes away the
first, that He may establish the second.

Now, the Apostle gathers from the words of the Psalm set down, verse. 5, 6.
that the Levitical Sacrifices are abolished, and taken away, because they could
not please God; and, from the words of the Psalm set down, verse. 7. declares,
That Christ's Sacrifice is that only which pleases God, now come in the room
of the Levitical.

Then, 1. Clear Consequences drawn from the Scripture, are sound Doctrine. 2.
Collation of places does yield both ground of good consequences, and ground of
clearness. 3. The abolishing of Levitical Sacrifices is necessary, that Christ's
Sacrifice may have the full place, and room, for pleasing of God, and saving of
us.

Verse. 10. By the which Will, we are sanctified, through the Offering of the
Body of Jesus Christ, once for all. The Apostle shows what this Will was, and
how it is accepted by the Father. The Will is, That Christ should offer up his
own Body, in a Sacrifice, once for all. If but once, Then, 1. It is not the
Fathers Will that Christ's Body should be offered oftener than once. 2. If but
once for All; Then, These All, for whom he offered, were condescended upon,
betwixt the Father, and the Mediator. God knew those whom he gave to the Son,
to be ransomed: and Christ knew those whom he bought. 3. If but once for those
All; Then, That once made a perfect Purchase for all those: The Father craved
no more for their Ransom. Another offering for them, is needless; For, if it
had been needful to offer again, once offering had not satisfied Gods Will* for
their Ransom.

2. For the Fathers Acceptance, and Fruit of it, he says, By this Will; to
wit, being obeyed, we are sanctified; that is, I and you, and the rest of our
society, Elect, are separated from the perishing world, and consecrated, as
devoted souls, unto Gods use, as holy Vessels of Honor, reconciled in due
time, regenerate, and by degrees, at length, thoroughly made free of sin, and
endued with Gods Image, in holiness.

Then, 1. Those only who are of the Apostles society, set apart for Gods use,
by Election, before time, and Regeneration in time, those sanctified Ones, are
those All, for whom Christ offered himself. 2. All those for whom Christ did
offer himself, are sanctified in Gods Decree, and in due time, by virtue of
Christ's Offering. 3. Those who are never sanctified, the Body of Christ was
never offered for them.

Verse. 11. And every Priest stands daily, ministering, and offering
oftentimes, the same Sacrifices, which can never take away sins.

12. But this Man, after He had offered one Sacrifice, for sins, for ever,
sat down, on the Right Hand of God.

That he may end the Comparison of Aarons Priesthood, and Christ's, he heapeth
together a number of the imperfections of the Levitical Priesthood, to show the
Reasons, why it must be abolished, verse. 11. And, in the verses following, unto
the 15. he lays open the perfection of Christ's Priesthood, which is to
endure for ever. Let the words of the Text be observed.

1. In the Levitical Priesthood, there is a plurality of Priests [every Priest]
importing many. But in Christ's Priesthood, not a Priest, but himself alone.
This Man* verse. 12. is opposed to their every Priest, verse. 11.

Then, To make more Priests under Christ's Priesthood, by special office to
offer up Christ, is to make the Priesthood of Christ imperfect, like that of
Levi.

2. In the Levitical Priesthood, every Priest stands as a servant, moveable
in his office. But Christ sat down, verse. 12. established with Dignity in his
Priesthood, as Master, and Lord.

3. In the Levitical Priesthood, every Priest stands daily offering,
oftentimes. But Christ, verse. 12. offered but one Sacrifice, for ever.

Then, Christ's Sacrifice never was offered, nor shall be for ever offered, but
once, say the contrary who will.

4. In the Levitical Priesthood, they offered the same Sacrifice oftentimes,
That is, Multitudes of Sacrifices, of the same kind. But Christ offered one
Sacrifice for ever, verse. 12. That is, A Sacrifice, one in number, and one in
offering; one individual Offering, one time only* offered He.

Then, no sort of plurality does Christ's Sacrifice admit* seeing it is one
only, and only once offered. The Apostle leaves no room for an unbloody
Sacrifice, beside the bloody: nor another offerer, but himself only: nor
another time, but that ONCE on the Cross.

5. In the Levitical Priesthood, many Priests, many Sacrifices, oftentimes
offered, could never take away sin: But Christ, our Priest offered one
offering, to wit, his own Body; once, and not oftener: and this suffices for
sin, for ever, verse. 12, 14.

Then, that Sacrifice which takes away sins, must do it at once, and for ever:
and that Sacrifice which does not take away sins at once, and at one offering,
shall never be able to take away sins by repetition, how often soever it be
offered.

6. From the Apostles Artifice, we learn, 1. To gather together in our mind,
in a heap, the evils and imperfections of every thing which is like to draw, or
divert us from Christ: and on the other hand, the Properties and excellencies
of Christ, that we may be tied fast unto him.

2. In special, when any Mean or Instruments, appointed of God to bring us to
Christ, is like to come in more estimation than becomes; we are taught to ride
Marches betwixt the same and Christ, that the Mean may have the Means room, and
Christ may have Gods room.

Verse. 13. From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his Footstool.
What is Christ doing now then, seeing he has no sacrifice to offer? He is
sitting at the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting till his enemies be
made his footstool: that is, his Manhead being no more on earth now subject
unto suffering, is entered into the Fellowship and Fruition of the glory of his
Godhead, to exercise his power and authority for the good of his Church, and
overthrow of his Enemies.

Then, 1. Albeit all Christ's personal sufferings are ended, yet the warfare of
the subjects of his Kingdom, endures still against enemies, such as are Satan,
and the wicked of the World, and Sin, and Death. 2. That battle is CHRIST'S, he
is adversary to all the foes of his Kingdom: They are his Enemies. 3. He is not
alone in the battle, the Father is joined with him, and set on work to subdue
his Enemies; as it is said, Psalm. 110. verse. 1, 2. whereunto this place has
reference, His enemies shall be made his footstool. 4. Albeit this victory be
not completed for a time, yet it is in working, and shall surely be brought to
pass. 5. As our Lord expects and waits on patiently till it be done, so
must we his subjects do also. 6. At length the highest of his enemies shall be
made lower than the basest of Christ's Members: They shall be made his
footstool, subdued under him, and trampled upon.

Verse. 14. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. He gives a reason why Christ now has no more offering to make,
nor no more suffering to endure: but only to behold the fruit of his
sufferings brought about by the Father, and to concur with the Father on his
Throne for that end: Because by one offering he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified: that is, by that one offering on the Cross, done and ended
before he sat down on the right hand of God, he has paid the full price for
ever, of the purchase of remission of sins, and salvation, to those that are
consecrated to GOD in holiness.

Then, 1. Whosoever will have any more offering up of Christ than that one,
once offered before his Ascension; denies that Christ by once offering, has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified 2. Howsoever you take the word
Sanctified, whether for those that are separated from the world, and dedicated
unto God in Christ, in Gods purpose and decree, comprehending all those whom
the Father has given unto Christ out of the world; that is, the elect: or
whether you take it for the renewed and sanctified in time; the offering of
Christ is not but for the sanctified; that is, for such as are consecrated and
separated out of the world, and dedicated to be vessels of honor unto God.

2. They for whom Christ has made that offering once; those, says he, he has
perfected for ever.

Then, 1. He has not made purchase of a possibility of their salvation only:
But he has perfected them in making purchase of all that they need to have,
even to their full perfection. 2. He has not purchased unto them the remission
of some sins, and left the satisfaction to be paid by themselves for other
some: but has perfected them, perfectly satisfied for them, and perfectly
expiated all their sins. 3. He has not made purchase of some graces unto them
only for a certain time, so as he will let them be taken out of his hand
afterward, and perish: but he has perfected them for ever. 4. He has not
appointed any offering for them, to be made by any other after him: but has
made one offering, Himself, for them, which satisfies for ever; so as the
Father craveth no more offering for expiating their sin for ever. For God has
set forth Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25.
that is, God makes it manifest by his Gospel, that he is pacified in Christ,
toward them that believe in his blood, that believe in him crucified.

Verse. 15. Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness unto us: For after that he
had said before;

16. This is the Covenant that I will make with them, after those days, says
the Lord* I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I
write them:

17. And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.

He proves that it is needless there should be any repetition of a sacrifice
for sin in the New Testament: because remission of sins purchased by Christ's
death, who is the Testator, is still in force continually, in Christ's Kingdom;
there being an Article of the Covenant for remission of sins, to be
consecrated. And if remission of sins be, no oblation for sin can be, verse. 8.

1. He says, that the Holy Ghost is witness unto us of this truth, That Christ
cannot be offered again.

Then, 1. We who do teach this doctrine, and deny any more offering of Christ,
as a sacrifice, have the holy Ghost testifying for us. 2. The Holy Ghost is the
author of the Scripture, and does speak unto us thereby.

2. He declares the New Covenant to be of the Holy Ghosts making, and calls
him, THE LORD. Wherein he teaches us, 1. That the Holy Ghost is a distinct
person of the Godhead, bearing witness by himself to the Church, of the Truth.
2. And one in essence with the Father and the Son, even the LORD JEHOVAH,
author of the New Covenant with the Father and the Son.

Verse. 18. Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin.
From this Article of remission of sins in the New Covenant, he concludes, No
more offering for sin but once, under this Covenant; because sin is expiated.

Quest. How then could there be remission of sin under the Law, where there was
daily offering for sin? Or, if there was remission, how could there be offering
for sin?

I answer, There is a remission granted upon surety given for satisfaction to
be made for the party remitted: and, there is a remission granted for
satisfaction already made for the party remitted. The remission that the
Fathers under the Law had, was of the first sort, upon promise of the Mediator
to come, and to satisfy. And with remission of this sort, a typical sacrifice
might stand, for signifying that the true expiatory Sacrifice was not yet paid,
but was coming to be paid. But the remission that we get under the Gospel, is
upon Satisfaction already made by the true Expiatory and Satisfactory Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, done and ended with the personal suffering. And this sort of
remission is it, whereof the Apostle here speaks, and it admits no manner
of offering for sin; neither typical offering, because Christ is come, and has
fulfilled what the typical sacrifice did signify: neither the repeating of
true Expiatory Sacrifice of Christ's Body, because then Christ behoved to suffer
daily, and dye daily, after that he has made satisfaction. And besides these
two sorts of offering, the Jewish bloody sacrifices typical, and the true
Expiatory bloody Sacrifice of Christ's Body on the Cross, the Scripture
acknowledges none. So the meaning of the Apostle in these words must be this,
Where remission of sins is already purchased, by offering of the true Expiatory
Sacrifice, as now it is, under the New Covenant, there no more offering can be
for sin any more.

Then, 1. The Apostle acknowledges no use for any sacrifice under the New
Testament, after Christ's Ascension, else his reason should not hold. 2. The
sacrifice which is offered, to wit, the body of JESUS, has already suffered
for sin, so that now the remission of those, that is, of sin and iniquity, all
sorts of the Elects sins, is obtained thereby already. 3. Not only No
Sacrifice is any more to be offered for sin under the New Covenant, but also,
No Offering, says he, bloody or unbloody, is to be offered. 4. That Church
which pretends to offer any Offering for sins of quick or dead, now under the
Gospel, professes, That no remission of sin is to be had in such a Church,
Because where there is remission of sin, there is no more offering for sin,
says the Apostle expressly.

Verse. 19. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest, by
the blood of Jesus. From the bypast Doctrine of Christ's Excellency, and Riches
of Grace, which comes unto us through him, he draws Exhortations, for
use-making of this Doctrine, in soundness of Faith, and the fruits thereof,
unto the end of the Epistle. And first, he exhorts to seek unto communion
with God in Heaven, through Christ, using the terms of the Ceremonial Law, but
mixed with words touching the excellency of the thing signified above those
Ceremonies: to show the Hebrews, that those Ceremonies had nothing in
themselves, but did serve to represent Christ, and his Benefits: And so to draw
them from those shadows, unto the truth of that, which once being signified by
them, is now manifested in Christ.

To make the Exhortation to be the better received, he sets down sundry
Privileges of the Faithful, verse. 19, 20, 21. From which he infers his
Exhortation, verse. 22. For the first Privilege, he says, We have liberty to
enter into the Holiest: That is, into Heaven.

1. In that he makes this Privilege proper to the Society of Christians,
himself and others; he teaches us, 1. That so long as men are without Christ,
they are debarred out of Heaven; no Door nor Way open, but the flaming sword of
Gods justice, to keep out every one that shall press to enter before Christ
bring them. But such, as come to Christ by Faith, Heaven is opened unto them,
and the Door cast up for them to enter in who were exiled before.

2. Next, He commends this Privilege, by calling the place, The Holiest,
the place where Gods Holiness dwells, represented by the Sanctuary, where
nothing can enter, but that which is holy. Teaching us thereby, That the
faithful are so washed from their sins, through Faith in Christ, that God will
admit them into the place of his dwelling, into his heavenly Sanctuary; by
Faith now, and fruition hereafter.

3. He commen^eth this Privilege, by calling it a Liberty. The word properly
signifies, Liberty to speak all our mind, as has been marked before. Whereby
he teaches us, 1. How we do enter into the Holiest, to wit, by prayer,
sending up our Supplications to Heaven. And, again, 2. That in our prayers to
God, we may use freedom of speech, telling him all our mind, all our griefs,
all our fears, all our desires, and even pour out our hearts before him, at
all times.

4. He commends this Privilege, by the Price of the Purchase thereof, even
the blood of Jesus. Whereby he teaches us, 1. To have this Privilege in high
estimation. 2. To make good use of it. 3. To be confident of the standing of
it: and all, because it is so dearly bought.

5. Lastly, He commends this Privilege by the Common Right which all
Believers have unto it, the Apostle, and these Hebrews, as his Brethren, and
all other of that Society. Whereby be teaches, That albeit there be great
difference in the measure of Faith, and other Graces, betwixt Christians; some
being stronger, some weaker; some as Apostles, some as these weak Hebrews, etc.
yet all are the children of one Father, all are Brethren, and all are admitted,
by prayer, to come, and enter into Heaven, freely to pour out their souls at
all times, unto God.

Verse. 20. By a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us, though
the Veil, that is to say, his flesh. This is one Privilege, That we have
liberty to enter into Heaven, follows another. There is a way made to lead us
on thereunto, which is Christ's flesh, compared to the veil of the Sanctuary,
which hid those things which were within the Sanctuary, and yet yielded an
entry through it self unto the Sanctuary. So is Christ's Flesh the Veil of his
Godhead, which did hide the glory of his Deity from the carnal beholders, who
stumbled at his baseness: and yet opened a door for the spiritual man to look
in, upon him that was invisible, while as he observed the brightness of the
glory of God, breaking through the Doctrine and works of the man Christ.

1. He makes the way to be Christ's Flesh, or Christ as incarnate, or Christ
considered according to his humanity: Because Christ's taking on our nature, is
the only mean of reconciling us unto God. No man ever came to the Father but
by him. No other Name whereby men are saved, but the Name of Jesus Christ. And
therefore as in the way a man must enter, and hold on still till he come to
the end, to the place where he would be: Even so must every man who would be
at Heaven, begin at Christ, and hold on, making progress in him still, from
Faith to Faith, from Grace to Grace, till he come to his rest.

2. This way of Christ's own making, he has devised it, and consecrated it.
He who is the Fathers wisdom, has thought it the best way to bring man to
GOD, that GOD should become Man, that the Word should be made flesh. The best
way to bring men to Heaven, that God should come down to the earth, to take on
man's nature upon him, that he might make man partaker of the Divine Nature.

3. He has consecrated and dedicated his flesh, his humane Nature, set apart
and sanctified himself to this same end, that men might make their means with
God, by him, as Man* and by the Bands of Nature with him, be helped up to the
Bands of Grace, with GOD, by coming to the man Christ, might find God in
Christ.

4. He calls it a New Way, 1. Because of the clear manifesting of the way to
Heaven under the Gospel, in comparison of the time of the Law. 2. Because a
ready, plain, and safe way, without stumbling blocks, pits or snares, dangers
or inconveniences, to such as keep themselves therein, such as new-made ways
use to be. 3. Because it waxes never old, is now established, and never to be
altered or abolished.

5. It is a Living Way, 1. Because Christ lives for ever to help them all to
Heaven who seek unto God through him only. 2. Because life is here in Christ,
as in the fountain, that he may give life to whomsoever he will; that is;
unto all that come unto him. 3. Because it gives life and refreshment to the
weary passenger, and quickneth his dead and dumpish heart, when he considers
that his Savior is a man indeed so earnest to have us saved, that he has
yoaked himself in communion of nature with us, thereby to save us. It is meat
indeed to his soul, that the Word is made flesh: It is drink indeed to
consider, that he has suffered for our sins. As Elias Chariot, so is Christ's
Man-head and sufferings. Get up here by Faith in him, and thou shall go up to
God. This way is that of Eagles wings. Lay first hold upon Jesus Christ, God
manifested in the flesh, and he will mount up with thee, and carry thee
through the wilderness to Canaan, from the natural misery and sins which thou
lie in, unto Heaven.

6. This Way leads through the Veil, to teach us, That we coming to Christ's
Man-head, must not subsist there: but by this mean seeking to God, who dwells
in him, that our Faith and Hope may be in God. We enter by the Man Christ, and
do rest on God in Christ, on the fullness of the Godhead, which dwells bodily
in Christ. This is to distinguish the Natures of Christ, and to keep the unity
of his Person rightly.

Verse. 21. And having an High Priest over the House of GOD. For our further
satisfaction, he gives us Christ over again, to make yet more use of him, to
direct, guide, and convoy us in the way, to lead us to the Father in Heaven,
through the Courts of his Dwelling, and to bring us in to him, and make us
welcome there.

1. We have Christ for a Priest to us, whose lips do always preserve knowledge,
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, who will inform our
minds, and persuade our hearts to believe and obey: who will reconcile by his
once offered sacrifice, the Believer; will intercede for the reconciled, to
keep him still in grace: will bless us, with all spiritual blessings: will take
our prayers, thanksgiving, and the spiritual sacrifice of all the good works of
our hands, and wash the pollutions from them: will offer them in our name, with
the incense and perfume of his own merits; and lead our selves in, where our
Lamps shall be furnished, and our Table filled, till we go into Heaven, and
there he will welcome us in a Mansion prepared for us.

2. He is a High Priest adorned with all Authority, and all Perfections, having
all in substance which the types did signify; who bears our names, yea our
selves on the shoulders of his power, and in the breast of his hearty love: who
bears the iniquity of the holy things, and holiness in his forehead for us.
In whom the Father is well pleased with us, and has made us acceptable, as in
his well-beloved.

3. He is over the House of God: He has authority and power to bring in whom
he pleases, and to give forth of the Treasure as much as he will: All the
Mansions in his Fathers dwelling Horse are his, and all at his disposing, to
open so as none shall shut: To him belongs to give forth the sentence of
Admission to Heaven, and to say, Come you blessed of the Father. Yea, to make
this his authority manifest, he will come again and take us unto himself, that
where he is, we may be there also.

4. We have this High Priest; that is, he is ours, because, 1. Taken out from
amongst us, one of our number, albeit not of our conditions; of our nature, but
separate from our sinful manners, holy and harmless. 2. Because he is for us,
in things appertaining to God, to employ his means and power for our behoof
toward God. 3. Because bound in all bands with us, of nature, of grace and
good will, of the Fathers gift and appointment, and his own Covenant and
special Contract with us. So that albeit an uncouth man may possible leave a
stranger in his journey alone, yet Christ cannot choose to do so to us: but for
the Bands betwixt him and us, he will never leave us, nor forsake us.

Verse. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water. From these Privileges he presses an exhortation, To draw near to
God, and prescribes the disposition required of us in our drawing near.

1. This exhortation shows, 1. That true Christians are oftentimes so
sensible of their own unworthiness, that under that sense, they are inclined of
themselves to stand afar off; and have need of encouragement and invitation to
draw near. 2. That such as are most sensible of their own unworthiness, are
most called to come forwards unto GOD: for he gives grace to the humble.

2. He lays down the Privileges in the former verses, and in this draws on
the Exhortation: To teach us, 1. That such privileges as are granted unto us
in Christ, must be received and believed as truth. 2. That we must study to
make use of our privileges, and challenge them for our own. 3. That the
weakest of true believers in Christ, may thrust in themselves at the doors of
grace, amongst the holy Apostles: For the Apostle puts the Hebrews with
himself in the exhortation, for this end.

3. For our disposition, and sitting to draw near, he requires, first, That we
have a true heart. He says not, a senseless heart, but, a true heart, that is,
such a heart, as in the matter of believing, minds no confidence but in Gods
grace, through Christ only: And in the matter of Gods service minds only
his will in its aim, and allows only that which is his will in its c^nsure.

Then an honest heart, which honestly acknowledges its own sins, and flies to
Christ's blood for sprinkling, whose aim is upright, endeavors upright, and
censure of it self upright, allowing in itself nothing but what God allows,
and displeased with that which displeases God, albeit many ways weak and
imperfect, yet has liberty to draw near unto God.

4. The next thing he requires, is full assurance of faith: That is, a settled
and full persuasion to be accepted, even through Jesus Christ.

Then albeit, the Lord will not despise the weakest measure of faith, and will
not quench the smoking flax; yet it pleases him better, yea, it is his
commandment, that men study unto the full assurance of faith: for, the more
thou restest on Gods Covenant with thee in Jesus Christ, the more thou sealest
his truth, glorifiest him, becomest the more like unto faithful Abraham, and
gettest the deeper rooting in Christ.

5. The third is, That the heart be sprinkled from an evil conscience. The
heart is sprinkled, when a sinner, sensible of sin, makes hearty application
to himself of the blood of Jesus for remission of sins: after this, hearty
application of Christ's blood, the conscience is furnished with a good answer
unto all challenges, and so is made good, a comfortable conscience, absolving
the man through faith in Jesus, whom it tormented with challenges, before it
ran to the blood of Jesus for sprinkling.

Then, whenever the conscience is evil, accuses and vexes, let the vexed
heart run to Christ's blood; and then shall it be free from an evil conscience:
for the blood of Jesus cleanses us from all sin. Let the heart be sprinkled,
and the conscience will be good.

6. The fourth thing required in him that draws near as he should, is, That
his body be washed with pure water: That is, That according to the
signification of that Legal Rite, their outward conversation be blameless and
holy; sin being so curbed within, that it reign not in their mortal body: so
foughten against within, as it break not forth in scandalous works of Darkness
in the actions of the body.

Then, 1. With a sprinkled conscience within, men must join an holy and
blameless conversation without. 2. The washing of the conversation without,
must proceed from an heart sensibly acquainted with the power of the blood of
Jesus. 3. And this outward holiness of the body must be wrought with pure
water, that is, by the Spirit of Sanctification; to distinguish the reformation
of a believer from a counterfeit, who without may look like a righteous man,
but within be as a whited Tomb full of rottenness.

Verse 23. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without wavering: (for
he is faithful that promised.) Another Exhortation, to avow the faith of
Christ; that is, the doctrine of Christ, the truth received from Christ, and
believed, and not to quit it in the time of trial, upon any condition.

1. The requiring to hold fast the confession of our Faith, or Hope, as the
word imports, teaches,

1. That a true Christian must not only hold the truth of Christ secretly; but
must confess it, profess and avow it openly, where Gods glory, and others good
requires the same. 2. That he must look for adversary powers and temptations,
to take that truth, or at least the confession of it, from him. 3. That in
these trials and essays, he must hold the faster gripe, and avow it so much the
more steadfastly, as he is tempted to quit it. 4. That when he is put to the
trial of this Confession of any point of his Faith, he is also put to the
trial of the confession of his hope, whether his hopes of the promised
salvation in Jesus, be stronger to keep him steadfast, or the terror and
allurement from men, stronger to make him quit the point of truth converted. 5.
That nothing but this hope, is able to make a man stand out in trial, if he be
hardly urged.

2. He will have the avowing of the truth of Christ, to be without wavering.

Then, 1. Men must so learn the Truth, that they need not to change again: that
is, must study to know the Truth soundly, and solidly. 2. And having learned
it, must not say and unsay; one day avow it, and another day quit it: For so
God gets not his due glory: Beholders are not edified, the man's testimony
wants weight with the adversary. But he must be invincible in the truth, who
will neither alter nor change, or diminish any thing of it, for fear or favor.

3. He gives this for a ground of constancy; For he is faithful who has
promised: That is, the promises which Jesus has made to such as constantly
believe in him, shall be surely performed, that no constant professor of his
Truth shall be ashamed.

Then, 1. Where we have a promise of any thing made unto us in Scripture, we
may be confident to obtain it, and bold to avow our hope thereof, against such
as would teach us the Doctrine of Doubting, whereunto we are, of our selves,
prone and inclined; and against such as shake the assurance of the Saints
perseverance. 2. The ground of our confidence is not in our selves, but in the
faithfulness of Jesus Christ, who has promised such graces to his children. 3.
Our bold avowing of our hope, is not a bragging of our own strength, but a
magnifying of Christ's faithfulness.

Verse. 24. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and unto good
works. He strengthens his former Exhortation, by giving of directions, to
further their obedience thereunto. And, first, for mutual up-stirring one of
another. Whereof we learn,

1. That mutual edification of Christians amongst themselves, and sharpening
one of another, is a special help to constancy in true Religion, and a
preservative against Apostasy. 2. Prudence is required hereunto, that mutually
we observe one another disposition, Gifts, Experience, Virtues, and Faults;
that we may the better fit our selves to do good each one of us unto another,
and to receive good each one of another, in our Christian conversing together.
3. A godly striving one with another, who shall be first in love, and
well-doing, is better than the ordinary strife, who shall exceed others in
vanity, and superfluity of apparel and fare.

Verse. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner
of some is, but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see the day
approaching. Another mean to this same end, is the frequenting of Christian
Assemblies and Meetings, which may further this purpose of mutual edification.
And therefore,

1. Church Assemblies must be well kept, by such as do mind to prove constant
in the true Religion. 2. Christian Meetings also of private Christians, for
mutual conference, and exhorting one of another, is not to be neglected, nor
forsaken, but to be used, for keeping unity in the Church: and not to foster
Schism, or hinder the public Assemblies.

2. He taxes the fault of some amongst them, who in Schism, or purpose of
Apostasy, withdrew themselves from all Church Assemblies, and
Christian-Meetings, and fell back again, or were in the way of falling back to
the denial of Christ openly.

Then, 1. Separation from the true Church, and Christian society of the
faithful, is a remarkable evil. 2. The Schism or Apostasy of others, should
not weaken us in following any good mean of edification, but rather stir us up
unto more diligence, lest by negligence we fall piece and piece back after
their example.

3. He makes the approaching of the day, to wit, of Gods Judgment, a special
motive to use the means diligently, and make us constant in the Faith.

Then, 1. The day of Gods Judgment should still be looked unto, as a thing
near hand, even at the doors, because it is but a very little, and our day
shall come, yea, and but a little time, till our Lord shall come to judgment.
2. The consideration of the day of judgment, is a fit mean to sharpen us unto
all good Duties, which may make our reckoning to be furthered at that day, and
to make us boldly maintain the Truth against all fear of men.

Verse. 26. For, if we sin, wilfully, after that we have received the
knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sins. Another
Motive to constancy in the Truth of Religion, taken from the fearful case of
wilful Apostates, who sinning the sin against the Holy Ghost, are secluded, for
ever, from Mercy. I say, the sin against the Holy Ghost, because we shall
find the sin here described, not to be any particular sin against the Law, but
against the Gospel: Not a sin against some point of Truth, but against Christ's
whole Doctrine: Not of infirmity, but wilfulness: Not of rashness, but of
deliberation, wittingly, and willingly: Not of ignorance, but after
Illumination, and Profession: Such as Jews turned Christians, revolting from
Christianity, back again, to their former hostility against Christ, did commit.
It is true, many who commit lesser sins, get never grace to repent: and many
who make defection, in some point of their profession, may be secluded from
mercy thereafter: but this sin here described, is a wilful rejecting of Christ,
and the Benefit of his Sacrifice, after Illumination, and Profession of the
Faith of Christ.

Then, 1. As Apostasy from the true Religion lies nearest unto this sin; so
they who desire to be freed of this sin, must be the more careful to be
constant in the profession of every point of the Truth of the Gospel. 2. If a
man reject the Benefit of that once offered Sacrifice of Christ, there is no
other Sacrifice for sin after that, nor any other mean to help him. But, if a
man seek unto Jesus Christ, and will not quit Him, whatsoever he may think of
the hainousness of his own sins, the Sacrifice which Jesus offered for sins,
remains, whereby he may be saved.

Verse. 27. But a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. Having secluded the Apostate
from Mercy, he goes on in these words, to show his miserable estate. Whereof
we gather,

1. That the wilful Apostate from the Faith of Christ, is also a wilful
Adversary to Christ, of the highest sort: Partaker of Satan's sin, and Satan's
Profession. 2. That every Apostate of this sort, is destitute of Gods Peace,
self-condemned, desperate of salvation, hopeless of Relief, without all purpose
of Repentance, or using means of help, stricken with the foresight of the
Wrath coming upon him, and made to expect it, although he should dissemble it
never so much. 3. The Apostates fear shall come upon him, judgment answerable
to his sin, the indignation and wrath of God, yea, fiery indignation, the most
terrible that can be thought upon, which he shall not escape, but it shall
devoute him, swallow him up, and feed upon his body and soul, even for ever.

2. In that he makes this the judgment of Christ's Adversaries, We learn,

That the soul which loves Christ, and cannot qui^ Him, cannot endure to think
of a separation, will not quit the true Religion, nor any known point of
Christ's Truth, and is using the means to get Gods Peace: albeit it might seem
to it self, because of the present sense of wrath, to be in the self-same
estate that is here described, yet it is ^ree, as yet, of the sin against the
Holy Ghost, and not to be reckoned amongst adversaries, but amongst the friends
and lovers of Christ, how vehemently soever Satan's suggestions bear in the
contrary.

3. In that by setting before them the fearful estate of Apostates from the
known Truth of the true Religion, he Labors to strengthen them against the
fear of persecution. Whence we learn,

That if Apostates, before they make Apostasy from the true Religion, did
foresee their own danger, as after Apostasy they are made to foresee their
own condemnation, all the terror of all the torment which man could put them
unto, and all the allurements which this world could give them, would not move
them to quit the least point of the Truth of true Religion.

Verse. 28. He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three
witnesses.

29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy,
who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the Spirit of Grace?

1. He proves the equity of their judgment, by the proportion of their
punishment who despised the Law of Moses.

Then, As sins are greater, so must the punishment be greater: and the
conscience being posed as here, cannot but subscribe to the proportion.

2. To make the sin appear the better, he points out some particular sins,
involved within this great sin. For clearing whereof, it may be asked, How can
the Apostates tread the Blood of the Son of God under foot? etc.

I answer: They cannot, indeed, by physical action: but by doing the equivalent
sin, they are accounted of God to do it, by judicial interpretation. Their
Apostasy imports, their agreeing to do Christ as much indignity, as if they
did offer Him this personal violence. Their deeds show, that they have this
base estimation of Christ, and His Blood: and no better. For, what says the
Apostate of Christ, by his deed, but, That He is not worthy to be professed,
or avowed, or followed?

And what is this in effect, but to tread Him under all these base things,
which the Apostate prefers before Him? And so is to be understood of the
Blood of Christ, and His Spirit.

Quest. But how can the Reprobate be said to be sanctified, by the Blood of the
Covenant?

I answer. There is a sanctification to the purifying of the flesh, and a
sanctification to the purifying of the conscience, from dead works, to serve
the living God, Heb. 9.13, 14.

The sanctification external to the purifying of the flesh, consists in the
man's separation from the world, and dedication unto Gods service, by Calling
and Covenant, common to all the members of the visible Church: and it is
forcible thus far, as to bring a man into credit and estimation, as a Saint,
before men, and unto the common Privileges of the Church; whereupon, as Men,
so God also, speaks unto him, and of him, as one of His People, and deals
with him, in his external dispensation, as with one of His own People. In this
sense all the Congregation of Israel, and every one of them, is called holy,
yea, Core also, and his followers, Number. 16.3. The Sanctification internal, by
renovation, consists in a man's separation from the state of Nature, to the
state of grace; from his old conditions to be a new creature indeed. By this
latter sort, a Reprobate cannot be called Sanctified, but by the former he may
be called Sanctified, and that by virtue of the Blood of the Covenant, albeit
he should not get any further good thereby: For as the Blood of CHRIST has
virtue to cleanse the conscience, and renew the soul which comes unto it
truly and spiritually: so it must have force to do that which is less; that is,
purify the flesh, and external condition of the man who comes unto it
outwardly only, as the Types did under the Law; whereupon an Hypocrite in the
Christian Church, must be accounted one of the Congregation of the Saints, as
well as an Hypocrite under the Law was so called; because CHRIST'S Blood cannot
be inferior to the Types, which were of this force, to sanctify men to the
purifying of the flesh. Or we may say more shortly: There is a sanctification
by consecration, when any thing is devoted, or dedicated unto God, and a
sanctification by inhabitation of the holy Spirit, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. Of the
former sort, the Censers of Core, Dathan, and Abiram, are called Holy. And the
reason is given, Because they offered them before the LORD, therefore they are
hallowed, Numb. 16.38. And in this sense, all the members of the visible
Church, even such as afterward do prove Apostates, are sanctified, because
they are offered, and offer themselves unto the Lord. But the inhabitation of
the holy Spirit, is proper only to the Elect, and Gods Children.

Hence learn, 1. That all the members of the visible Church, are so confederate
unto God, that it is sacrilege for them not to seek Gods honor in all things,
or to bestow themselves any other way, than for God. 2. Men are reckoned by
God, so to deal with Christ and his Blood, and Covenant, and Spirit, as they
make account thereof, as they have estimation of Christ, and his Blood, and
Spirit. 3. And their estimation is not reckoned by their words, or pretenses,
but by their deeds, as these do import, so are they judged to esteem. 4.
Because Apostasy from Christ imports as much, as He and his Doctrine are
unworthy to be avowed, or maintained; by consequence it imports also, that
Christ was not the Man he called himself: and, that all his Spirit had taught
them, was untruth: and therefore justly here does the Scripture challenge the
Apostate, of counting Christ's blood no better than the blood of a common
Malefactor, and of giving of the Lie to the holy Spirit. So fearful a thing is
it, to make defection from any known part of true Religion.

Verse. 30. For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me; I
will recompense, says the Lord. And again, The LORD shall judge his People. In
that he proves the certainty of their punishment out of Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36.
Learn,

1. That the justice and constancy of Gods Truth in general threatenings, is
sufficient to prove the certain punishment of particular sins. 2. The
punishment of Apostates of one kind, may evidence the punishment of Apostates
of another kind. For it is the Jews Apostasy to Idolatry and worshipping of
Images, which in that place the Lord does threaten.

2. He makes the knowing of God who speaks, a proof sufficient for the
certain performance of his Word.

Then, As men understand Gods Nature, so will his Word weigh with them: And
such as know him best, will stand most in awe of him, believe his Word most.

Verse. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the living God. From
this knowledge of Gods Nature, he pronounces how fearful a thing it is to
fall into the hands of an adversary to be punished.

Then, 1. It is presupposed, that such as reject the Mercy of Christ, shall not
be able to reject justice, but must fall into his Hand. 2. The eternity of God
makes his wrath terrible: For he lives for ever to avenge himself on his
foes. 3. The terror of the Lord, what torment he is able to inflict, and that
for ever, is a fit mean to make men beware to make Apostasy from Christ.

Verse. 32. But call to remembrance the former days, in which after ye were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions. For a mean to help them
constantly to go on, he directs them to make use of their former patience,
and experience of troubles for the Gospel.

Then, 1. Even they who have suffered for Christ, have need to be stirred up to
constancy, and to be terrified from Apostasy. 2. The more men have suffered
for Christ, they ought to be the bolder in the profession of his Truth, and the
more ready for new sufferings.

2. He makes the time of their first troubles to be after illumination.

Then some do enter into troubles for Religion, at their very first conversion,
and are yoked in battle against persecutors, beside other on-sets of Satan, and
their own nature.

Verse. 33. Partly whilst ye were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches and
afflictions: and partly whilst ye became companions of them which were so
used. He makes their troubles in their own persons, by reproaches and
afflictions, the first part of their fight, wherein they were a gazing-stock to
the world.

Then 1. Such as are called to suffer for Christ, are set upon a Theater, to
give proof of their faith and love to Christ before the world. 2. The blind
world wondreth at such as adventure to suffer any thing for the truth of
Christ, and think but ignominiously of Christ and his cause, and of those that
maintain the same. 3. Reproaches and taunts of the godly by the world, are
reckoned up to them for parts of their Christian cross, and their glory before
God.

2. The next part of their fight, was their partaking with such as did suffer
the like.

Then 1. It is the part of true Christians, to countenance them that confess
Christ, yea, and to join with them that suffer for him. 2. Communion with the
sufferings of others, is reckoned up for a part of our own sufferings. 3. To
suffer patiently our selves, or take a part with others in their sufferings,
will cost us a battle.

Verse. 34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the
spoiling of your goods; knowing in your selves, that ye have in heaven, a
better, and an enduring substance. He comes to particulars: and first, their
compassion toward himself in his bonds, is remembered by him.

Then, 1. Compassion with sufferers, especially when it is manifested to the
afflicted party for his comfort, makes the compassionate person a partaker
with the sufferer. 2. Such compassion should be remembered by the sufferer.
thankfully, and recompensed by seeking their eternal welfare, who have showed
them such great kindeness.

2. Another particular is, their joyful enduring the spoliation of their goods.

Then 1. When trial comes of men's faith in Christ, such as mind to be
constant, must prepare themselves to quit their goods, if GOD please so to
honor them with employment. 2. When we see we must lose our goods for Christ's
sake, or suffer any other inconveniency, we ought to do it cheerfully, and
count our gain in Christ more than our loss in the world: And if we find
trouble, to let our adversaries know as little of it as we can: namely, seeing
there is no cause of grief, if our eyes were opened, and our earthly affections
mortified.

3. Their encouragement and cause of joy, was the sensible feeling within
themselves, of the comfort of eternal Riches in Heaven, keeping for them.

Then 1. It is the assurance of our heavenly inheritance which must make us
ready to quit our earthly movables. 2. Who so gets a heart to quit any
thing on earth for Christ, shall have better in heaven than he can lose here.
3. GOD uses to give earnest of what he is to give, in sensible feeling of
spiritual Riches, to such as believe in him. 4. When men can esteem of things
heavenly, as they are; that is, enduring goods: and of things earthly, as they
are; that is, perishing movables: then shall they readily quit the earthly in
hope of the heavenly.

Verse. 35. Cast not away therefore, your confidence, which has great
recompense of reward. Now he exhorts them to go on in this ^old avowing of
Christ: For this Confidence in the Original, is such as has with it a full and
free profession of all their faith.

Then, confidence and bold avowing of the truth, is required: A plain and full
testimony must we give to Christ's truth, our confidence in profession is in
part casten, when our testimony is sparing.

2. The encouragement he gives, is, The hope of a reward.

Then, 1. Constancy in avowing of Christ, shall be well rewarded, although not
of deserving, yet of Gods grace. 2. He that quiteth his profession, renounceth
the reward promised to the constant.

Quest. But does not this exhortation import the elects unsettledness, and
uncertainty of perseverance?

I answer, Not; but only his weakness of himself, and need of such
exhortations to further his constancy. 2. The danger of dishonoring God in some
particular slip or fall, is ground sufficient for this exhortation; and this is
the most of necessity it can import. 3. Exhortation being given to the common
Body of the visible professors, teaches them properly, and not the elect
formally.

Verse. 36. For ye have need of patience; that after ye have done the will of
God, ye might receive the promise. He gives a reason, Because they have need
of patience, therefore they must not cast away their confidence.

Then 1. The reward will not be given, till a time intervene 2. And troubles
will lie on, in the mean while, to make the time seem the longer. 3. Patience
is needful, as a mean to fit us to attend. 4. Confidence of the truth must
support our patience.

2. The time of their Patience he sets, as long as God thinks good to
employ them: and after that, the reward comes.

Then 1. The time of patience is as long as God has any thing to do with us in
this world. 2. Patience must not be joined with idleness, but with active
obedience of Gods will, as he requires it. 3. After that employment is ended,
the promised reward is given.

Verse. 37. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry. He encourages them to Patience, by promise of the Lords coming to
relieve them shortly.

Then 1. The term of patience is until the Lord come to deliver. 2. The
patient attender on his coming, shall not be disappointed: For he will come,
and will not tarry beyond the due time of our necessity. 3. It should
strengthen us unto Patience, that the time is short, and the delivery certain.

Verse. 8. Now the just shall live by Faith: but if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. How shall they send in the mean time? He
answers from Habak. 2.4. The just shall live by Faith: That is, The man who
will be found righteous, must not look to present sense; but sustain his soul
with the word of Promise.

Then, 1. In the midst of troubles, and Gods felt absence, Faith will content
it self with the only promises of GOD. 2. Looking to Gods word by faith, is
able to keep a soul in life and patience.

2. He threatens the misbelieving Apostate, that chooses to draw back, and not
live by faith. The words of the Prophet are, He whose soul is lifted up in him,
is not upright. The Apostle betaketh him to the meaning; which being compared
with the Prophets words, does teach us,

1. That he who refuses to live by faith, is lifted up with the false
confidence of some other thing than God: He has some strong hold within
himself, wherein he does trust. 2. He that lifts up himself in his vain
confidence, will draw back from believing in Gods word in the time of trial. 3.
He that draws back in the time of trial, bewrays the want of this
sincerity. 4. A back-slider from the profession of the Truth, is loathsome both
to God, and to his Saints.

Verse. 39. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them
that believe, to the saving of the soul. He mitigateth the threatening, lest
he should seem to suspect them of inconstancy.

Then, 1. Such Threatenings and Exhortations as have been given here, do not
import the uncertainty of their perseverance who are threatened, but stands
with the assurance of the contrary. 2. He who threatens, should be as wary to
weaken his hearers Faith, as his own. 3. Hearers must understand, that the
right use of threatening, is, to rowse men out of security, and not to
discourage them.

2. We are not of them ( says he) who draw back unto perdition.

Then, 1. They who draw back from constant avowing of the Faith, draw near unto
perdition. He that forsakes the Cross, runs himself on the Rock of his own
destruction, which is worse. 2. The Elect are not of that kind, or sort of men,
who fall into Apostasy, unto perdition. They may fall for a time, but are not
of them that draw back, unto perdition.

3. We are of them ( says he) who believe to the salvation of the soul.

Then, 1. True Believers are of that kind, of whom all do persevere. 2.
Persevering in the Faith, is going on to Salvation.

The Sum of Chap. XI.
NOw, that you may know the better how to live by Faith, consider, that Faith
apprehends things to come, as present, and subsisting, by holding them, in
their original Fountain, which is the word of Promise, and beholding in the
Mirror of the Word, the clear certainty of things, as yet not seen to sense,
verse. 1. For, so were the Elect Beholders and Partakers of Christ before he
came, and were justified, verse. 2. And so have we certainty of the Creation of
the World of nothing, verse. 3. By it was Abels person and sacrifice accepted,
and preferred before his elder Brother, verse. 4. By it was Enoch made ready for
Heaven, verse. 5, 6. And Noah, by it, saved both in body and soul, verse. 7.
Faith made Abraham leave his Country, in hope of Heaven, verse. 8, 9, 10. By it,
Sarah, being old, got strength, above the course of Nature, to become a
fruitful Mother, verse. 11, 12. All these, unto their dying day, were contented
with the foresight of the performance of Gods Promises, and in hope thereof,
renounced the world: therefore God honors them as his confederates, verse.
13, 14, 15, 16. Faith made Abraham to offer his only Son, verse. 17, 18, 19.
Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, by Faith, at their death, comforted themselves,
and others also, in hope of the performance of Gods Truth, verse. 20, 21, 22.
The Parents of Moses overcame the fear of man by Faith, verse. 23. Moses, by
Faith, got strength to choose the Cross of Christ, before the riches and
honors, and pleasures of Egypt, verse. 24, 25, 26. Faith made him constant in
his choice, and patient, verse. 27. By Faith he got the people of Israel to be
saved, when the firstborn of Egypt were slain, verse. 28. By Faith the deep Sea
gave open way, verse. 29. High walled Towns were thrown down, verse. 30. Rachab
was saved, when others perished, verse. 31. By Faith numbers of Gods Children
did wonderful things, and received wonderful comforts, and overcame all
persecutions, verse. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. All these died in the Faith of
Christ, and were justified, albeit Christ was not yet come, verse. 39. God
having reserved the accomplishment of the Prophecies and Types in the coming
of Jesus Christ, until our time, that the Fathers might not get Salvation,
except by looking to our times, and joining with us in the Faith of Jesus, in
whom they, and we also, are perfected, verse. 40.

The Doctrine of Chap. XI.
Verse. 1. Now, Faith is the substance of things hoped for; the evidence of
things not seen. HE points out the Nature of Faith, to help them to live by
it. Then, He that would live by Faith, had need skilfully to search out the
nature thereof.

2. In describing Faith, he ascribes unto it the property of the Word which
Faith lays hold upon: For, it is the Word properly, which is the substance of
things not seen.

Then, There is such an union betwixt. Faith and the Word, that what the Word
is in force and effect, that Faith is said to be in force and effect also. As
Faith honors the Word, so God honors Faith, in giving it the like
commendation, for force, with the Word. What is the original of the being, and
existence of any thing, but this? God wills it to be, or promises it shall
come to pass, or commands that it may be. Therefore, let Faith get a hold of
the Promise, or Word, and it takes hold of the thing promised by the root
thereof. And in the hand of Faith does Truth bud out, and flourish unto the
ripe fruit of full satisfaction in performance.

3. The word Evidence, in the Original, is a term of Logic, importing, that
it is the nature of Faith, by dispensation, to convince.

Then, It were wisdom, for helping of our weak Faith, to make Syllogisms from
the Word, and to reason so convincingly against all opposition of incredulity
in us, as there might be a consent, and yielding to the Truth, extorted from us.

As for example: When we cannot take to heart the danger we are in, by
entertaining any known sin, from Romans 8.13. we may reason thus; The Scripture
says, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye. But, if I forsake not, and
mortify not this known sin in me, I live after the flesh. Therefore, if I
forsake not, and mortify not this known sin, I shall die. Again, the Scripture
says, If ye, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live. Therefore, if I, by the Spirit, mortify such and such lusts, I have Gods
promise, that I shall live. And so in other particulars.

Verse. 2. For, by it the Elders obtained a good report. He proves the nature
of Faith, to be as he has said, because the Elders were approved of God, as
blessed, in their believing, who could not otherwise be partakers of the
promised blessing in the Messiah to come, except Faith had furnished unto them
the substance and evidence of that hoped-for blessing.

Then, 1. The Fathers under the Law, were endued with justifying Faith, and
accepted of God, even as we. 2. Men, how base soever, are brought into credit
with God, and into good estimation with his Church, by Faith.

Verse. 3. Through Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word
of God: So that things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear.
Another proof, to show, that Faith is the evidence of things not seen; Because
we can have no other evidence of the Worlds Creation, but by looking thereupon
in the Word, as it were in doing before our eyes.

Then, 1. Faith must not stand whether there be Appearances, or Probabilities,
or not, of such things as are promised in the Word: or else it could not
believe the Creation, which is the making of all things of nothing. 2. The
whole works of Creation are Pawns and Evidences of the possibility, yea,
certainty of every thing promised: For, the works of Creation, stand upon no
better ground, than Gods Word. This sentence, God shall make our vile bodies,
like unto the glorious body of Christ Jesus, is as powerful to make us so, as
this sentence, Let there be Light, was powerful to create Light, when there was
none before.

Verse. 4. By Faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain;
by which he obtained witness, that he was righteous, God testifying of his
gifts: and, by it, he being dead, yet speaks. In the Catalogue of Believers,
he begins at Abel, the first persecuted man for Righteousness, and that by
Cain, professing the same worship with him. Wherein we learn,

1. That the wicked may join in the outward worship, and pure forms of
Religion, with the godly, as Cain did with Abel. 2. That Faith puts the
difference betwixt their persons and service. 3. That a man's person must first
please God, before his actions can please him: For therefore was Abels
Sacrifice accepted, because by faith his person was justified. 4. Faith makes
Abel still a speaking Doctor to the Church, directing all who love to have such
a reward, to cleave unto God, as he did: and, albeit they should dye for it, by
the hand of their persecuting and bloody Brethren, not to wonder at it.

Verse. 5. By Faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was
not found, because God had translated him. For, before his translation, he had*
this Testimony, that he pleased God. Enochs full felicity, is expressed by Gods
translating of him.

Then, if we ask where Enoch went to, we must search for him by Scriptures
warrant, only in the company of God, the Translator of him. For before he was
translated, he lived a blessed man in fellowship with God: And it is injurious
to God and Enoch both, to put him out of Gods fellowship, as not blessed, when
he is translated.

2. Enochs Translation bears witness, 1. That the blessedness of everlasting
life, with God, after death, was known in the Old Testament. 2. That the
Fathers got possession of it. 3. That this felicity could not be attained unto,
but by flitting, and removing out of this life. 4. That the body is a partner
with the Soul, of Life eternal. 5. That howsoever it be appointed, for all men
once to dye, yet God can make, when he pleases, Translation, or a Change, to
stand in room of death.

3. Before Enoch was translated, he had this testimony, That he pleased God.
Then, whosoever desires to be blessed with God, after they are removed from
this life, must first learn to please God before they depart hence.

Verse. 6. But, without Faith, it is impossible to please him. For, he that
comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. He proves, that Enochs Translation, and pleasing of God,
was by Faith; because pleasing of God cannot be without Faith. He names no
other of Gods graces in him, but Faith only; because it only, of all other
graces, strippeth a man naked of the worth of any thing in him, and sends him
to Gods mercy in the Mediator.

Then, 1. Whatsoever glorious Virtues he found in Gods children; yet it is not
by any of these that they are justified or acceptable to God, but only by
their Faith: For, it is by Faith, that it may be by Grace: And if it be by
Grace, it is not by worthiness of works. 2. In the matter of Justification, and
acceptance with God, to be justified by Faith, or accepted not without Faith,
is all one to be justified, and accepted, by virtue of nothing in a man beside
Faith: else, the Apostles reasoning were not strong. 3. Except a man have this
commended Faith in Gods Mercy, he cannot please God: Let him do else what you
can name, without this faith, it is impossible to please God.

2. He expounds, what the Faith is, of which he means: To wit, A coming to
God, All-sufficient and merciful.

Then, 1. God is Self-sufficient, and All-sufficient. 2. God is so gracious, as
none can seek unto him, by that way which he has revealed, but he will give
them that which they seek. 3. Except a man believe Gods All Sufficiency, and
merciful Bountifulness, he cannot come unto him, to seek supply of wants, or
relief from evil.

3. From these words also we may observe the nature of Faith.

1. It makes a man sensible of his indigence, and misery: else, it could not
send him a begging. 2. It makes him to acknowledge his natural alienation, and
farness from God: else, it could not set him on work, to seek God, and to come
unto him. 3. It emptieth him of the confidence in his own, and all the
creatures help: else, it could not send the man away, from all these, to God.
4. It points out God, both able and willing, to help: else, it could not
encourage, to take course for relief in him. 5. It sets a man on work to use
the appointed means to find God. 6. It certifieth a man, of Gods impartiality
toward every one that seeks to him; and makes him to hold on the way,
seeking diligently, and never to give over: And, so it brings a man to deny
himself, and to have communion with God.

Verse. 7. By Faith, Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved
with fear, prepared an Ark, to the saving of his house: by the which he
condemned the world, and became heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith. In
Noah's example, observe 1. He believes the Deluge is coming, and fears, and
prepares the Ark. Then,

1. Faith apprehends Judgments threatened in the Word, as well as Mercies in
the Promises. 2. Faith apprehending the Threatening, moves to fear. 3. That is
right Fear, which sets a man on work to prevent the danger.

2. By his diligence he condemned the world. Then,

The pains which the Godly take to eschew wrath, condemns careless beholders
of their diligence.

3. By this he became heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith, that is,
came evidently to be such. Then,

1. There is a Righteousness, which is only by Faith. 2. That Righteousness,
is Heirship to all true Believers. 3. Some special point of Faith, may bring
this heirship unto light, and give evidence of a man's Right thereunto.

Verse. 8. By Faith, Abraham, when he was called, to go out, into a place which
he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed: and he went out, not
knowing whither he went. Abraham's following of Gods calling, and leaving of his
Country, is counted a work of Faith. From Abraham's example, then let us learn,
1. That Faith in God, will cause a man quit his Country and Parents, and every
dearest thing, at Gods calling. 2. Faith counts Gods Promises better than
present possessions; and is content to quit the one for the other. 3. Yea, it
is content with a Promise, of better in general; and for the special manner of
performance, stands not to be blind. 4. Faith is willing to obey, as soon as
it sees a Warrant.

Verse. 9. By Faith, he sojourned in the land of Promise, as in a strange
Country; dwelling in Tabernacles, with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of
the same promise. Abraham's sojourning in Canaan, is counted another work of his
Faith. Wherein we learn: 1. That Faith can for a while suffer to be a stranger,
even from that whereunto it has best Right. 2. When Faith has certainty of an
heavenly inheritance, it can be content with a small portion of things earthly.
3. A man who sojourneth amongst Idolaters, should be sure of a calling
thereunto: and being amongst them, ought to behave himself as a Stranger, and
Sojourner. 4. Yes, where he has best Right on earth, he ought to have a
Pilgrims mind.

Verse. 10. For, he looked for a City which has Foundations, whose builder,
and maker, is God That which moved Abraham to behave himself as a Sojourney on
earth, was the hope of a settled during place with God, in the society of the
Saints in Heaven. Then.

1. Heaven is a settled, commodious, and safe-dwelling Place: All places here,
are but moveable Tabernacles. 2. The Fathers under the Law, looked for entry
into their eternal rest, in the Kingdom of Heaven, after the ending of their
Pilgrimage here. 3. The hope of Heaven, is able to make a man content with
Pilgrims Fare, and Lodging, here-away.

Verse. 11. Through Faith, also, Sarah her self received strength, to conceive
Seed, and was delivered of a Child when she was past age; because she judged
Him faithful, wh^ had promised. Sarah is reckoned in the Catalogue of
Believers: and her laughing, through unbeleef, is not remembered; but her
victory, over her mis-beleef, is commended. Then,

1. Even Women are made Patterns of believing, and wisely walking with God:
worthy to be imitated of Men. 2. God marketh not the defects of Faith, but the
soundness thereof, how small soever it be; what good is in His Children, and
not what sins they are cloged with.

2. When she is past age, by Faith she gets strength to conceive.

Then, 1. Faith rests on Gods Promise, albeit carnal reason seem not to
second it. 2. Faith makes us capable of benefits which otherwise we could not
receive. 3. The more hindrances that Faith has, it is the more commendable.

3. That which upheld her, was the faithfulness of God.

Then, 1. The consideration of the properties of God, who promises, is a
special help, to make us rest on the Promise which He makes. 2. He that
gives unto God the Glory of Faithfulness, shall receive, for a Reward, the
full Performance.

Verse. 12. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many
as the Stars of the Sky in multitude, and as the Sand which is by the Sea
shore, innumerable. The Promise was, of innumerable Children, as the Stars of
Heaven: And so was the Performance. Then,

Justifying Faith not only believes the great Promise of Redemption, but also
other inferior promises, which depend thereupon: the believing whereof gives
evidence of believing the main Promise of Salvation, through the Messiah. And
therefore it is, that by the Faith of such Promises, the Faithful are here
declared to be justified.

Question. How can this be, that Abraham's Seed should be so many?

I answer. 1. Because the one is as innumerable as the other: For they are
compared together, in this respect. 2. Superlative speeches are to be expounded
according to the scope, and not captiously to be wrested, beside the purpose of
the speaker, and beyond the common acceptance of the hearer. Now, the scope of
the speech, is to raise the dullness of the mind, in weighty matters, to the due
consideration of a Truth, in the due measure: which, otherwise, should have
been undervalued. This is the proper intent of the figure hyperbolick, in the
ordinary use of Rhetoric.

Verse. 13. These all died in Faith, not having received the Promises; but
having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and
confessed, that they were Strangers, and Pilgrims, on the earth. He commends
the Faith of the Patriarchs, and Sarah, that they dyed in the Faith, not having
obtained the Promises. Then,

1. Faith loses the commendation, except we persevere therein, even until
death. 2. Where we have a word of Promise made to the Church, or to our selves,
albeit we see it not performed in our time, we may go to death, in assurance,
that it shall be performed. 3. They who would dye in Faith, must live in Faith.

2. Though they received not the Promises, yet they saw them afar off, and were
fully persuaded of them, and embraced them. Then,

Albeit Faith came not unto a Possession, yet it comes unto a beholding of the
Possession coming, unto a Persuasion of the Possession, and a sort of friendly
Salutation thereof, as the word imports; such as Friends give one to another,
whilst they are drawing near to embrace one another, after a long time
separation.

3. They confessed in their life time, that they were Strangers, and Pilgrims,
on the earth. This we read only of Jacob, before Pharaoh: But the mind of one
of the Faithful, in the main matters, makes evident what is the mind of the
rest.

Then, 1. It is the part of true Believers, to profess their Faith before all,
even before Idolaters, amongst whom they live. 2. They who know Heaven, to be
their own Home, do reckon this World a strange Country.

Verse. 14. For, they that say such things, declare plainly, that they seek a
Country.

15. And, truly, if they had been mindful of that Country, from whence they
came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.

16. But now they desire a better Country; that is, an Heavenly. Wherefore God
is not ashamed to be called their God: For, He has prepared for them a City.

From their Profession, That they were Strangers, he draws Consequences,
thus: That they desired an homely Country: And if a Country, then either their
own earthly Country, or a better. Not their own earthly Country: For they might
have returned, when they pleased, Therefore, they desired a better Country. And
if a better Country, then an heavenly Country: That is, They desired even
Heaven it self for their Country.

1. This deducing of Consequences, from the Profession of the Patriarchs, That
they were Strangers. Teaches us,

1. So to read the Scriptures, as we may mark, not only what is spoken; but,
also, what is thereby imported, by consequence. 2. That, what is imported by a
speech, is a plain Declaration of the mind of the speaker; and not an obscure
Deduction, as Mockers call it. They who say they are Strangers, declare
plainly, that they seek a Country: says the Apostle. 3. Yea, that it is
lawful to proceed, drawing one Consequence after another, till we find out the
full mind: providing the Collection be evident, in the course of sound Reason,
as here it is.

2. The Apostle has proved here, that the Patriarchs sought Heaven for their
Country, because they sought a better than any on earth.

Then, 1. The Apostle knew no place for residence of departed souls, better
than the Earth, except Heaven only. If there had been any other place, such as
is feigned to be, his reasoning had not been solid. 2. The Patriarchs, after
the ending of their Pilgrimage here on earth, went home to Heaven.

3. Because they counted themselves strangers, till they came home to Heaven,
God is not ashamed to be called their God.

Then, 1. God will honor them that honor him. 2. God will avow himself to be
their portion, who for his cause do renounce the world. 3. Yea, that the Lord
may honor such as honor him, he will even abase himself to exalt them. 4.
When the Lord has so done, he thinks it no dishonor to Himself, to do any
thing that may honor his servants.

4. God did prepare them a City, which the Apostle before has called Heaven,
or the heavenly Country.

Then, Heaven was prepared for the Patriarchs, and the rest of Gods Saints,
before they had ended their pilgrimage on earth. And, to put them into Hell, or
any other place, there must be a Doctrine not from Heaven.

Verse. 17. By Faith, Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac: And he that
had received the promises, offered up his only begotten Son:

18. Of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

Another commendation of Abraham's Faith from the proof given thereof in his
trial about Isaac. Whence we learn,

1. That where the Lord gives faith, there trial must be expected: And, the
greater faith, the greater trial. 2. That faith is most commendable when it
stands strong in trial.

2. He is said to have offered up Isaac by faith.

Then, 1. There is nothing so dear, but faith in God will make a man quit it at
Gods command. 2. The Lord counts that to be done, which a man is about to do.
Isaac is counted offered, because so was he in Abraham's purpose.

3. His receiving of the promises is here in another sense than ver. 13. For
there to receive the Promises, is to receive the thing promised, or the
Promises in performance. But here it is to have the Promises first and
immediately made unto him.

Then, the meaning of forms of speech in Scripture, is to be found by
consideration of all circumstances of the place where they are spoken, and not
of some circumstances only.

4. It serves to the commendation of his faith, that he obeyed Gods command,
when it seemed to make the promise null.

Then, 1. To adhere to the promise, when by appearance of reason it is likely
not to be performed, is tried faith indeed. 2. When Reason sighteth against
Faith, it is wisdom to quit that Reason which would make us quit the Promises.
3. When Gods commandments and promises unto us, seem to cross one another, it
is wisdom for us to justify them both. All his words are truth.

Verse. 19. Accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the dead:
from whence also he received him in a figure. Abraham's looking to Gods Fidelity
and Omnipotency, made him victorious over every difficulty, and so to give
obedience to this hard commandment.

Then, 1. When we get hard commandments, we must lay our reckoning how we may
obey them, and not how we may shift them. 2. Difficulties and impossibilities,
as would appear, must be rolled over upon God. 3. Gods Omnipotency makes that
his promise cannot miss, but take effect.

2. Abraham as he expected, so he found: He expected Isaac' s resurrection from
the dead; and, in a figure, or similitude, be received Isaac back from the
dead: that is, from the jaws of death, no less unexpectedly, than from the dead.

Then, 1. The Believer shall find as much as he can expect from Gods word. 2.
If the performance be not as he does forecast, yet it shall be by a way as
comfortable and p^ofitable.

Verse. 20. By Faith, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, concerning things to come.
Isaac' s blessing of his sons, is said to be by Faith*

Then, Patriarchal benedictions were given by ordinary Faith, albeit from the
ground of extraordinary revealed truth. For faith ordinary, believes Gods
truth revealed, howsoever ordinarily or extraordinarily.

2. In that this example is propounded for ordinary imitation, in believing of
Gods ordinary revealed word, it teaches us,

That he who has the ordinary word of God, has as sure a ground to rest upon,
as if he had a particular and extraordinary revelation.

Verse. 21. By Faith, Jacob when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of
Joseph, and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff. Jacob a dying,
blesses his offspring, and worshippeth God in bodily weakness.

Then, 1. Faith can look through the cloud of Death, and behold both its own
and others felicity. 2. In the solid assurance which it has, it can worship or
glorify God for things to come, as if they were already past.

2. It is not said, that he worshipped the top of his Staff, but upon the top
of his Staff, leaning, for his weakness cause, by approaching Death: because he
would, for this foreseen blessing of God upon his posterity, testify by signs
of worship in his weak body, how he esteemed of that favor.

Then, 1. Faith will make the body, albeit it be weak, concur with the Spirit
in the Lords worship. 2. When the infirmity of the body makes it unable to
concur with the Spirit, it must be helped with a stone, as Moses prayed against
Amalek: or staff, as Jacob here; or any thing else, which may enable it to
perform the worship the better; being put under breast, or arms, or knees. 3.
Jacobs bending of his body, in so great weakness thereof, must bear witness
against the profane ease which many men nowadays take unto themselves, both
in private and public worship.

Verse. 22. By Faith, Joseph when he dyed, made mention of the departing of the
children of Israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones. Joseph also
testified his Faith in his death, concerning the delivery of Israel out of
Egypt, by direction giving for transporting his Bones, in sign of his assurance
of their going to Canaan, because God had promised so.

Then the Lords promises are sure comforts in death, whereby Faith both
sustaineth it self, and is able to encourage and strengthen others: And Faith
makes a man to keep them in memory, and to make use of them in due time.

Verse. 23. By Faith, Moses when he was born, was hid three months of his
parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they not afraid of the
Kings Commandment. How great weakness Moses parents did bewray, the history
makes evident: yet is their faith commended as victorious over the fear,
wherein their weakness did most appear.

Whence we learn, 1. That nothing is commendable, but because done in faith.
Their natural love is not mentioned, but their Faith. 2. That God so loves
faith in his children, that he commends it in the measure it has, albeit it
go not so far as it ought, and marketh what faith has, and not what it wants
of the perfection.

2. The Evidence of their Faith he makes this; That they were not afraid of
the Kings Commandment.

Then, 1, GOD allows not, that Kings commandments should be regarded when
they command impiety, and wickedness: for then should they be honored above
God, if for their commandment we should do that which he forbids. 2. Nothing
but faith in God is able to make a man overcome the fear of that, which
Potentares may do unto him: And, it is a commendable work of faith to get this
victory.

3. The beauty of the child stirred up his Parents to this work of Faith,
thinking with themselves, that it behoved to be for some special end, that God
had so fashioned the child.

Then, 1. The Lord has ways enough to excitate the faith of his own, and bring
it forth to act. 2. Where special endowments are given, there is good evidence
of special employment to follow.

Verse. 24. By Faith, Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the
Son of Pharaohs Daughter. Moses refusing the honor which he might have had in
Pharaohs Court, because it might have hindered him from the honor of one of
Gods people, is commended for a work of Faith.

Then, It is better to be a member of GODS Church, amongst GODS People, than to
be a Prince in a great Kingdom without the Church.

2. Because he would not have chosen to be the Son of Pharaohs Daughter,
therefore he refused to be called so. Then,

That which a man dare not avow himself to be, or may not lawfully choose to be,
he must refuse to be esteemed to be, he must refuse to be called such.

3. His manner of refusing this unhallowed honor, is expounded to be by
joining himself with the people of God, and so forsaking of Pharaohs Court.

Then, 1. That is the true way of refusing unlawful honor, to quit the place
whereunto the unlawful honor is annexed, and betake themselves to what they
may brook with Gods approbation, how mean soever it seem before the world. 2.
When honor and a good conscience cannot be kept together, let the honor be
quitted, and the preferment go.

4. When he was come to years he did this.

Then, 1. What one has done in his nonage, or ignorance, is not reckoned,
when after riper consideration he amendeth it. 2. The more ripely and
advisedly a good work be done, it is the more commendable.

Verse. 25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. The reason of his refusal is, the
estimation which he had of the estate of Gods people, how afflicted soever,
above the pleasures of sin.

Then, 1. He who chooses the privileges and fellowship of Gods people, must
choose their affliction also. 2. The Riches, Honor, and Pleasure which a man
enjoys with the disavowing of true Religion, and want of the society of Gods
people, which he might have, are but the pleasures of sin. 3. What pleasure a
man can have by sin, is but for a season. 4. It is better to be afflicted for a
season with Gods people, than to live with the wicked with pleasure for a
season: and it is greater misery to be in a sinful state, than in an afflicted
state.

Verse. 26. Esteeming the reproach of CHRIST greater Riches than the Treasures
of Egypt: For he had respect unto the Recompense of Reward. He commends
the work of Moses his Faith, by the motives thereunto, whereof the first was,
The high estimation of the reproach of Christ.

Then, 1. Moses and GODS People in his time, did know CHRIST, or else they
could not have born his Cross, and suffered for him. 2. Christianity is as old
as true Religion. 3. The Cross and Reproach has attended on true Religion in
all Ages. 4. What reproach men suffer for true Religion, is reckoned to be
Christ's reproach, and not theirs. 5. Reproach and Shame is the heaviest part of
the Cross; for, under it is all comprised here.

2. The next Motive was, His respect unto the Recompense of the Reward, which
also made him to esteem the Reproach his Riches.

Then, 1. There is a reward for such as suffer reproach for Christ. 2. It is
lawful, yea, needful for men to have respect unto this reward, and to draw
encouragement from it, even for their own strengthening. 3. Though the Cross
seem terrible, yet Faith can pierce through it, and behold the reward following
it. 4. When sufferings for Christ are rightly seen, they are the richest and
most glorious passage in all our life.

Verse. 27. By Faith he forsook Egypt, not feating the wrath of the King: for
he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. Another work of Faith is, his
leading of the people from their dwelling places in Egypt, to the Wilderness,
with the hazard of the wrath of Pharaoh, if he should overtake them.

Then, whatever it seem unto us now, after it is done, it was no small Faith at
that time, to undertake such a bu^^ness, to turn his back upon a fertile land,
and go with such a company, without provision, to the wilderness.

2. His Faith is commended, for not fearing the wrath of the King, Exodus 2.14.
Moses feared the wrath of Pharaoh and fled. After that, Exodus 10.29. He feared
not another Pharaoh, as terrible as the former.

Then, Where natural courage would succumb, Faith will sustain; yea, and make a
man endure (as it is spoken in the next words) where natural courage having led
him on a little, would forsake him at length.

3. The encouragement unto this work was, He saw him that is Invisible: That
is, he apprehended by Faith God more powerful than Pharaoh, and more terrible.

Then, 1. Faith opens the eyes, to see God in a spiritual manner, who by
sense or imagination carnal, cannot be conceived. 2. The beholding of the
invisible God is able to support a man's courage, against the terror of men,
and all things visible: and nothing else can do it.

Verse. 28. Through Faith he kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of blood,
lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them. Another work of his
Faith is, His keeping of the Passover: That is, the Sacrament of the Angels
passing over, and not destroying the people.

Then* 1. It is usual for Scripture, speaking of Sacraments, to give the name
of the thing signified, to the sign, because the sign is the memorial of the
thing signified. Circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis 17.13. because it is
the memorial thereof. The Paschal Supper for the like cause, is here called the
Passover, which was the work of the Angel, because it was by appointment the
memorial of it. So the Cup in the Lords Supper is called, The New Testament in
Christ's Blood: and the Bread in the same Supper is called, The broken Body of
Christ; because it is the memorial thereof. 2. It is the work of Faith to
celebrate a Sacrament rightly. 3. As Moses celebrated the Passover in
assurance that the destroying Angel should not touch the people of Israel: So
may every Believer be certified, by using the Sacrament, that the grace
promised and sealed in the Sacrament shall be bestowed.

Verse. 29. By Faith they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry Land: which the
Egyptians essaying to do, were drowned. He joyneth the Faith of the true
Israelites with the Faith of Moses, for whose sakes the rest of the incredulous
multitude got the benefit of Delivery also through the Red Sea, which was the
fruit of the Believers Faith. Whence we learn,

1. That Faith will find unexpected deliveries, and out-gates, where it might
seem altogether impossible. 2. Yea, means of destruction, by Faith may be
turned into means of preservation.

2. The fruit of Faith is evidenced by the drowning of the Egyptians, essaying
themselves to follow that way, which Faith had opened to Israel.

Then, 1. Presumption in unbeleevers, will set them on work, to go through the
same dangers which believers pass through, but without all success: For
Believers shall escape where unbeleevers shall down. 2. The benefit of Faith is
best seen, when the evil of unbeleef is seen.

Verse. 30. By Faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed
about seven days. He ascribes the down-throwing of the walls of Jericho to
Faith, making the Believers only to compass them seven days.

Then, 1. What God does for believers, is reckoned the work of Faith, because
Faith sets God on work so to say, and his power employed by faith, works
the work. 2. Faith will throw down strong Holds, and overcome seeming
impossibilities. 3. Faith must use such means as God appoints, albeit they
seem but weak. 4. It matters not how weak the means be, if faith have a promise
to prevail thereby. 5. The means must be constantly used during the time that
God appoints them to be followed.

Verse. 31. By Faith, the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not,
when she had received the Spies with peace. Rahab the Harlots faith is
commended by the fruit of her safety, when misbelievers perished.

Quest. How heard she Gods Word to beget Faith? Or how heard they of Jericho,
Gods Word, that they should be called unbelievers?

I answer, The common report of God, and his works, joined with Gods blessing,
was sufficient to beget faith in her: And the same report, albeit carried, as
other news, by common messengers, being despised, and counted unworthy to be
further enquired for, and sought after, was sufficient to make them guilty of
misbelief.

Then, 1. In this example it is evident, that faith is as acceptable in an
Heathen, and an Harlot, as in a Professor, and person of better condition. 2.
That faith can change an Heathen, or vile person, into a Saint. 3. That the
faith of women is to be observed and imitated, even as well as men's faith. 4.
That the unworthiness of the party believing, gives commendation so much the
more unto the excellency of faith.

2. No word here of her Lie, in receiving the Spies; but only of her faith and
peaceable behavior toward them.

Then, 1. Where God sees Faith, he hides his eyes, as it were, from any thing
that might deface the glory thereof. 2. He gathers up the smallest good
fruits which faith brings forth, and makes not small reckoning thereof, how
small soever they be.

Verse. 32. And, what shall I more say? For the time would fail me, to tell of
Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Iephthah; of David also, and
Samuel, and of the Prophets. Having reckoned a number, and having more to
produce, he stays his course, to teach,

1. That Prudency must moderate, and make seasonable use, of the abundance of
man's knowledge and memory. 2. That the Scripture gives us to make use of the
Faith of all that are recorded therein, albeit they be not in this Catalogue.

2. The diversity of those that are here recorded, teaches us, That albeit
there be difference: of Believers; some stronger, as David: some weaker, as the
rest; some base Bastards, as Iephthah: some of better sort, some of them
notable in holiness, and conversation; some of them tainted with notorious
falls in their lives: Yet are they all enrolled by God, in a Catalogue of
Honor, amongst his Saints.

Verse. 33. Who, through Faith, subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness,
obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions,

34. Quenched the violence of Fire, escaped the edge of the Sword; out of
weakness, were made strong; waxed valiant in Fight, and turned to flight the
Armies of the Aliens.

He reckons the works of their Faith, Whose names he suppresseth; of whom
some subdued Kingdoms, by their Faith, as Joshua, and the Judges: Some wrought
Righteousness; that is, attained unto a righteous behavior, in their
difficile Employments, as David and Samuel, in Peace and War: Some obtained
Promises, as Gideon, Barak, etc. Some quenched the violence of Fire, as the
three Children: Stopped the mouths of Lions, as Sampson, Daniel: Escaped the
Sword, as David, Elias: Of weak, were made strong, as Ezekias: Waxed valiant in
Fight, as Joshua, Sampson, David: Put to fligh^ the Aliens; as Jonathan,
Gideon, Jehosaphat: Women received their dead alive; as the widow of Saroptha,
and the Shunamitess, etc.

Whence we learn, 1. That in the old Church, under the Law, when the grounds of
believing were not so clear as now they are, excellent things are recorded to
be done by Faith, for up-stirring such as are under the light of the Gospel, to
make use of faith. 2. That neither fire, nor water, nor man, nor beast, is so
strong, but faith may make a weak man victorious over them all. 3. Yea, nothing
so terrible, or difficile, but a man, who has Gods Word to be a ground for his
faith, may adventure upon it, with assurance of prevailing. If he be called, he
may encounter with the hardest party.

Verse. 35. Women received their dead, raised to life again: and others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection.

36. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings: yea, moreover, of
bonds, and imprisonment.

37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder; were tempted, were slain with
the sword: They wandered about in sheep skins, and goats skins, being destitute,
afflicted, and tormented.

Whether the Apostle has taken these particulars from the Records extant in
that time, from the Books of Maccabees, and others, or not, it matters not
much, seeing this stands sure, that the certainty of the truth thereof, was
from Divine Inspiration, the ground of all Scriptures outgiving.

And hence we learn, 1. That as faith enableth men to do, so also to suffer. 2.
That there is no trouble in the flesh, but Gods children may fall thereinto; no
torment so cruel, no terror, nor allurement, but they may be essayed in them
by persecutors. 3. That there is no pain, nor grief, nor loss so great, but
Faith knows how to make gain of it, and to despise all, in hope of the reward.
4. That the Old Church believed the Resurrection, and comforted themselves in
Martyrdom, by the hope thereof.

Verse. 38. Of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in Deserts, and in
Mountains, and in Dens, and in Caves of the earth. In calling the World
unworthy of the company of these Children of God, Learn,

1. That one Believer is more worth in Gods estimation, than all the world
beside. 2. None despise Gods children, but worthless and despiseable souls.

2. In that he reckons the solitary and Heremitical life of Gods children,
and their apparel suitable to their dwelling, amongst their troubles,
sufferings, and persecutions, which they did not choose, (...) were driven
unto, of necessity, by the cruelty of the time, He teaches us,

1. That the Heremitical, and solitary life, and separation from amongst the
society of men, is only then commendable, when men being driven thereunto of
necessity, do bear it in a Christian manner. Otherwise, to sequestrate our
selves from the fellowship of men, to whom we owe the duties of love, so long
as we may do them any good, or so long as they will suffer us to live amongst
them, is in short, to loose from our necks, the yoke of the second Table, under
pretense to keep the first Table the better. 2. The Saints shall find peace
amongst the wild beasts, rather than amongst wicked men.

Verse. 39. And these all having obtained a good Report, through Faith, received
not the Promise. By the Promise, is meant the main and chief Promise of Christ's
Incarnation, wherein they were inferior unto us; and yet both were contented
to rest by faith, upon the Promise, with the light which they had, and obtained
a good report thereby: that is, were approved, and justified of God.

Then, The Faith of those who lived before Christ, having less clearness of the
ground, than we; and yet sufficient to support them in all troubles, and to
obtain justification before God, is a great Encouragement unto us, under the
Gospel, to believe; and a great conviction, if we believe not.

Verse. 40. God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us,
should not be made perfect. He gives a reason thereof, Because God had
appointed the accomplishment of the Promise, of sending the Messiah to be in
the last times, that they should not be perfected, that is, justified, and
saved, by any thing done in their time, but by looking to our time, and Christ
(...) satisfaction made therein: whereby they and we are perfected together.

Then, 1. Christ's coming in these last times, is a better thing than all the
glory of the Old Church, and Service, and Prerogatives thereof. 2. All the
shadows in their time, without Christ, who is the Substance of them all, in our
time, exhibited, was unable to perfect the Fathers; that is, to justify, and
save them. 3. The perfecting of the Fathers, in the Old Testament, and the
perfecting of us, in the New Testament, do meet together, in that one better
thing, Christ Jesus, by whom, they and we both, are saved: And so, they are
not perfected without us.

2. In that he leads us unto God foreseeing, and fore-providing of this,
he loses all curious questions, about this Course which God has taken, to
make the case of his Church better now, than of old.

Then, That God has thought good so to do, is sufficient, for stopping our
minds from all curious enquiring of the Lords Dispensation.

The Sum of Chap. XII.
THE use of all these Examples, is, That we hold on in the course of
Christianity, whatsoever trouble may meet us in the way, verse. 1. Looking on
Christ, for your Pattern, verse. 2. And for your Encouragement also, lest you
faint, verse. 3. For you have not suffered so much, as you must be ready to
suffer, verse. 4. And you have forgotten, that Chastisements are tokens of Gods
Favor, verse. 5. For He loves whom he chasteneth, verse. 6. And your enduring
thereof, shall prove you Sons, verse. 7. But immunity should prove you Bastards,
verse. 8. We have born out Parents correction; and why should we not now bear
Gods, verse. 9. For, they chastened us, to satisfy their own passions, but God,
for our profit, verse. 10. And, albeit Affliction be grievous now, yet the
fruits shall be sweet afterward, verse. 11. Wherefore, take your comfort, verse.
12. And courage, to go stoutly on: lest by discouragement, you fall into
Apostasy? But rather seek to recover the courage which you have lost, verse.
13. Follow Peace with all men: But Holiness also, as you would be saved, verse.
14. Beware of the unmortified Roots of sin, lest they break out in scandals,
verse. 15. Beware lest there be any filthy or profane body suffered among you,
as Esau was, verse. 16. Who sold the Blessing for a short Pleasure, and could
never recover it again, verse. 17. And to this are you obliged, because the Old
Church was not so privileged as you are, but, for their external estate, and
manner of Religion, in a great deal of more bondage, verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. But
you, by the light of the Gospel, are brought into the high Way, to have society
with Heaven, and Angels, and the Catholic Church of elect Souls, and God, the
Judge; and Christ, the Mediator, and His Benefits. So clear now is the
Doctrine, verse. 22, 23, 24. Therefore beware, lest by your Apostasy, you
reject Christ's offer, and be destroyed more fearfully than the despisers of the
Law, verse. 25. For, Christ is a terrible Lord to his Foes; His Voice shook the
earth, in giving of the Law: But He has promised to shake Heaven and Earth
once more, verse. 26. And once more imports the removing of these, and making
of a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, for the
settled and perpetual remaining of his Kingdom, verse. 27. Therefore, let us
keep a fast hold of his Grace, that we worship him with fear, verse. 28. For if
we do not so, even our God is a consuming Fire, verse. 29.

The Doctrine of Chap. XII.
Verse. 1. Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud
of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us; and let us run with patience the Race which is set before us. THat
right use may be made of all the former Examples, he exhorts to a constant
and patient persevering in the Course of Christianity.

1. The Similitude is borrowed from a Race: To teach us, To endeavor for
overtaking all the duties of the Christian man, with all the skill, and
strength, and speed we can.

2. The Original imports a Strife or Race: To advertise us, Both of our
Spiritual Adversaries, against whom we must fight still as we go on, and of
our Compartiners, who run in the Race with us: with whom we may strive in an
holy emulation, who shall go foremost in the course of pleasing God.

3. It is a Race limited, the Race set before us: To teach us, What way we
should hold on our course, not doing that which pleases us, every man running
his own way of Religion: but all running the beaten Way, the Royal Way of Gods
commandments.

4. For the Motives unto this Race, he uses the Examples rehearsed in the
former Chapter, Who compass us about as a cloud of witnesses. To teach us,

1. To hearken to the disposition of these worthy Witnesses, who are recorded
in Scripture, who can best show what is the best Christian Way, which we must
hold in our Course toward Happiness. 2. That all our behavior is marked by
Spectatours, God, Angels, and Men. 3. That albeit there were none to see us,
except our conscience, the Examples of GODS Saints in Scripture, should stand
as witnesses against us, if we run not as becomes.

5. For direction how to run, He teaches, 1. To lay aside all weights, which
do press our minds downwards, such as is the setting of our affection upon
things which are on earth, either wittingly, upon unlawful objects, or
inconsiderately, exceeding the bounds of Christian Moderation, upon things
lawful. 2. To lay aside the sin which so easily does beset us; that is, by
studying to mortify the body of our corrupt inclination, to cut off the
wood-bind growth of violent predominant and wily sins, which most frequently
get advantage of us. 3. Because we cannot end our Race, but after some
progress of time, and must meet with many impediments in the way, and troubles,
and temptations, to arm our selves with Patience.

Verse. 2. Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who, for
the joy that was set before Him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is
set down at the right Hand of the Throne of God. With Direction, he joyneth
Encouragement, by setting our Eye on Jesus, who shall both guide us in the way,
and carry us on, when our strength saileth. Then, 1.

The Christian Race-runner has Jesus before him, in the way to help him in
every thing that may befall him in his course. 2. Christ, must be looked upon,
by him who would be helped in his Race: the Eye of the Soul being drawn off of
every thing which might divert the Man, or discourage him (such as are the
multitude of Backsliders, the multitude of Mockers, the multitude of byways,
and runners therein, the multitude of fears, from our own unworthiness, and
sinfulness, and temptations on all sides) and our minds fixed on Christ, with
loving and longing looks, which may draw life and strength from him. 3. We must
look on him, as JESUS, the Deliverer from sins, and giver of Salvation; even
him who saves his people from their sins. 4. We must look upon him, as the
author and finisher of our faith; that is, as our God, who has begun his good
work in us, and will also perfect it: Who has given us grace to believe, and
will surely continue this grace with us, even to the end: lest the fears of our
Faith failing, make us to faint. 5. We must look upon him, as our pattern, and
example, who having run the race before us, has set forth himself for our
imitation; that in him we might find all whereof we stand in need.

2. How Jesus ran this race, he shows, for our example, 1. He had Joy set
before him, which he was to receive by our Salvation wrought. So have we joy
set before us also. 2. For the hope of that joy, he ran with courage: So must
we. 3. He ran with the Cross upon his back all the way, being a man acquainted
with sorrows: So must we resolve also. 4. In his griefs and sorrows, shame set
upon him from the world, and poured out contempt upon him: So must we resolve
to find it. 5. For the hope of the joy, he endured patiently, and went on,
under the Cross, and wearied not: So must we. 6. Albeit shame was the sharpest
of his griefs from the world, yet he regarded it not, but despised all
despising, and shamed shame, as unworthy to be taken notice of, in comparison
of his Design: So must we. 7. He overcame all at length: So shall we through
him also. 8. He has gotten the Joy, and the Glory, for which he ran: So shall
we with him. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. 9. He is set
down on the Right Hand of the throne of God, that is, is joined with the
Father, in the Glorious Government of Heaven and Earth, and all things therein,
for the good of all his followers: So that we need to fear nothing in our way,
seeing he has the Government of all.

Verse. 3. For, consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself: lest you be wearied, and faint in your minds. He points forth a
special part of his suffering; namely, The contradiction of sinners: willing
them to ponder this well, for their uphold.

Then, 1. Nothing more forcible to discourage a persecuted Christian, than
Contradiction. A man will suffer much, if he know it be for truth: but if the
truth for which he suffers, be called in question, and Scribes, and
Pharisees, and chief Churchmen, shall contradict him, and brangle his Faith,
in the Truth, it is more painful than a Rack-stock unto him. 2. The
consideration of our Lord Jesus, his being exercised this way, is a special
mean to guard us in such a Temptation. 3. If we be not armed against
contradiction, by certain knowledge of the Truth, and Faith in Jesus, we cannot
hold out; but upon force, weary under the Cross; and be lost, or dissolved,
like water, and fall by, as the word imports.

Verse. 4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. These
Hebrews were somewhat dashed, and discouraged, by the persecution which they
had already born, and were like to faint. Therefore, he sets them on, to
prepare for suffering to the blood, that every suffering less than that, might
be the more tolerable in their eyes.

1. He makes their Party, Sin. Then, 1. Christians must remember in their
troubles, that they are tried, whether they will choose to sin, or to suffer.
2. When they disobey their persecutors, they must not be interpreted, to be
strivers against them, so much as against sin. 3. With what color, or pretense
soever, sin be urged upon Christians, they must not yield, but resist, in a
Christian manner, and fight Christianly, against that sin whereunto they are
tempted. The more steadfastly they resist, they must prepare themselves for the
more suffering, and resolve, at length, to lay down their blood in suffering.
No yielding to sin must be, while life is in us.

2. He makes the greater sufferings which remain, a reason to make them bear
the present, the better.

Then, 1. Suffering in a man's person, is the highest degree of suffering. 2.
Resolution for the worst that can come, makes lesser troubles more
comportable. 3. Except a man prepare himself for the worst that can be done
unto him by man, for the Truth, he will faint in lesser sufferings.

Verse. 5. And ye have forgotten the Exhortation, which speaks unto you, as
unto children; My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord: nor faint,
when thou art rebuked of him. From the General Doctrine, of bearing
afflictions, Pro. 3.11, 12. He stirs them up to Christian patience, in
persecution, and every other trouble.

Then, Persecution for Righteousness, comes in the account of Chastisement;
and is appointed, amongst other ends, to amend our faults.

1. He makes these Hebrews the party to whom the Proverbs were directed; and
God the speaker thereof.

Then, 1. Whosoever be the Penmen of the Scripture, it is God who speaks in
it. 2. The Scriptures do direct their speech to every Age, and Church, and
Person, no less than to those who lived in the Church of old, when it was first
written.

2. He charge them, for their forgetting of such a kindly speech, as is the
stiling of the afflicted by the names of Sons.

Then, 1. The special point of faith, which the Lord will have fostered under
the Cross, is the faith of our Adoption; that we never mistake our Fathers
affection, nor our gracious estate by calling, for any hard dealing wherewith
possibly we may be exercised. 2. He will have us assured of our Adoption, by
Gods manner of speaking unto us, as a Father to his Children. 3. He shows us,
that the not remembering of the Word of God speaking unto us, according to our
estate, is the cause of fainting, and of mistaking.

3. The Exhortation discharges despising of the Rod, and fainting under the
Rod.

Then, 1. These are the two evils which we are inclined unto; either to harden
our selves against corrections, and count light of them, or else, to be
discouraged, and cast down by them* Both of which we must eschew. 2. Though the
Lord both strike and rebuke for sin, yet esteems he us to be Sons not the
less.

Verse. 6. For, whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth; and scourges every Son
whom he receives. He gives a reason, to confirm the afflicted, in the
certainty of their Sonship: Teaching us,

1. That neither Chastisement, yea, nor Scourging, which is the sharpest
measure of correction, is a sign of Gods hatred, but of his love rather. 2.
That Gods dealing with all his children in general, being considered, may
mitigate the case of any of them in particular.

Verse. 7. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you, as with sons: for,
what son is be, whom the father chasteneth not? From this he urges the patient
bearing of Gods chastisements, that they may know Adoption the better.

Then, though God be the afflicted persons Father, yet is he not perceived to
deal as a Father, but when the affliction is patiently born and endured.

Verse. 8. But, if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then
are ye bastards, and not sons. Albeit men desire naturally, to go free from
trouble, yet he shows, that this is not to be chosen: And to this end,
teaches;

1. That it is the common lot of all Gods children, without exception, to be
acquainted with some cross, and exercised with some correction, of one kind or
other. 2. That to be exempted from the Cross, and common handling of Gods
children, is to be put out of the roll of children. 3. That in the visible
Church, all are not freeborn children, but some are bastards: which the Church
holds possibly for children, but God reckons to be none. 4. That among
other marks, this is one of a Bastard; if God let him alone, and suffer him,
without discipline, to follow his own ways.

Verse. 9. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us,
and we gave them reverence: shall we not, much rather, be in subjection unto
the Father of Spirits, and live? From submitting to our Parents correction, he
urges to hear the Lords correction. Whence we learn,

1. That as it is a part of the Parents duty, to correct their children; so it
is a part of that reverence due to Parents, that children receive their
correction without change of affection toward their Parents. 2. That God is
the Father of Spirits, in a special manner, because they are immediately
created by him, and do not run in the material channel of fleshly descent; and,
because they have a more near resemblance unto his Divine nature. 3. That
receiving correction, is counted subjection to God; and, refusing correction,
is refusing of subjection. 4. That submission to chastisement, is the way to
life.

Verse. 10. For they, verily, for a few days, chastened us after their own
pleasure: but he, for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
He compares the chastisement of our earthly Parents, with Gods chastisement.
Whence we learn,

1. That Parents sometimes, chastise their children out of mere passion; and at
the best, have some mixture of their own humors in chastising: but God never
mixeth passion with his rod, but intends our profit therein only. 2. The
special profit intended by God in our correction, is the making of us partakers
of his holiness; partly while he drives us thereby to seek our righteousness
in himself; and partly, while he mortifieth our nature, and renews our
affections, and sanctifies us for himself.

Verse. 11. Now, no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby.

He meets the doubt of the felt grief of present affliction, by showing the
fruit which follows thereupon at after: and teaches us,

1. That it is the pain of present affliction, which makes us unwilling to
endure. 2. That we must not like children, judge of affliction by our present
sense, but by looking to the fruit which does follow, must season to our selves
the felt bitterness. 3. That the fruit of affliction is righteousness, or
sanctification, which brings peace with it. 4. That this fruit possibly will
not be found incontinent after one affliction, or two; but after we be
exercised, acquainted, and made patient in bearing the yoke.

Verse. 12. Wherefore, lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.

From these considerations, he will have them to draw comfort and courage; and
to recover themselves from their dejection of mind. Teaching us,

1. That afflictions bring discouragements with them, whereby hand and heart
fail in Gods service. 2. That discouragement must be resisted, by consideration
of God the Author, and his wise ends of afflicting of us.

Verse. 13. And make straight paths for your feet; left that which is lame, be
turned out of the way: but let it rather be healed. Under a similitude borrowed
from walking in a narrow and dangerous path, he exhorts them boldly to avow
the truth, lest their fearfulness and apparent doubtfulness, should tend at
length to defection. Then,

1. No trouble must so dash us, as to make us seek bypathes, for eschewing
thereof. 2. In a good course, we must not hault, nor walk feebly, nor
fearfully, but stoutly, and straight up, avowing what is right. 3. As a man in
a dangerous path, by haulting, may be swayed to the one side, and thrown over
the Bray: So a man that faintly maintains a good cause, may be overcome at
length, and driven from it.

The Apostles diligence and prudency, to recover these fainting Hebrews,
Teaches,

1. That we must not cast down our countenance on weak Brethren, who do not so
boldly avow the truth, as they should do: But rather ought to strengthen and
heal them, and hold their staggering faith on foot. 2. That such feeble souls
must be timeously dealt with, that they may be healed, as long as they are yet
in the way, and have not shaken hands with an evil course.

Verse. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without the which, no man
shall see the Lord. Having thus dealt with them, for strengthening them in the
Faith, and bold profession thereof, he gives them a number of wholesome
precepts, for ordering of their life and conversation.

From the Precept for following of Peace and Holiness, Learn,

1. That we must beware of all provocation of any amongst whom we live: For we
have troubles enough, albeit we make none to our selves. 2. That how wicked
soever the world be, we may follow a course of living in peace with them: and
if peace flee from us, we may, and should pursue after it, as far as is lawful.
3. The farthest we may follow peace with men, is, as it may stand with holiness
and duty toward God. 4. It is more dangerous to quit holiness, than to quit
peace: for, he that follows holiness, shall see GOD, albeit he find not
peace amongst men. But, if any man prefer men's peace before holiness, while he
gains men, he loses GOD. 5. To see GOD, that is, to enjoy GODS fellowship,
is the sum of our blessedness.

Verse. 15. Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest any
root of bitterness springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. He
gives direction here, for eschewing a fall from Grace; that is, from the
Doctrine of Grace in begun Knowledge, Faith, Love, Renovation, or any measure
thereof. Then,

1. Albeit the Elect cannot fall away fully, and finally; yet some Professors
in the visible Church, may fall away from their Profession, and what degrees of
Grace they had attained unto: for whose cause, warning must be given to all, as
a mean to keep the Elect from a fall. 2. Albeit the Elect cannot fall away
finally from Grace, yet may they fall for a time, from the purity of the
Doctrine of Grace, and from some degrees of the work of Grace, from the measure
of their first love and zeal, and at length, fall into scandalous sins.

He joyneth another point of advertisement with the former, That they beware,
lest any bitter root break forth, whereby many be defiled: that is, left any
scandalous sin break forth amongst them. Then,

1. As men do fall from any measure of the work of Grace, so does the bitter
root of unmortified sin, spring out, and grow. The ones decreasing, is the
others increasing. 2. When any scandal breaks forth in the Church, it
troubles the whole body, and polluteth them, by the contagion thereof, till it
be removed. 3. Watch must be kept diligently, by every man, ^o curb this bitter
root, preventing the out-shooting thereof.

Verse. 16. Lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for
one morsel of meat, sold his birthright. He expounds this bitter root, in
the example of fornication and prophanity, like Esaus. Then,

1. Fornication and prophanity, are the bitter roots of other evils, and able
to defile a Congregation. 2. Such as count more of the satisfaction of their
sensual lusts, than of their spiritual Prerogatives, do prove themselves
profane persons, and are justly ranked in with Esau.

Verse. 17. For ye know, how that afterward when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears. He shows Gods judgment on Esau, to terrify
all men, to hazard upon the sinful satisfaction of their own lusts, at any
time. Then,

1. Esaus judgment should be a terror to all men, to keep them from presuming
deliberately to commit that sin, which they know may cut them off from the
Blessing: because sundry times (albeit not always) God does punish presumptuous
sinners, with giving over the man to his own ways, and final impenitency. 2.
Esaus example shows, how justly they may be deprived of the Blessing annexed
to any Sacred Symbol, or gracious Mean, who do despise the mean whereby the
Blessing is conveyed. For the Birthright amongst the Patriarchs, was a pawn of
the Blessing of being an Heir of Promise: and therefore was Esau counted to
reject the Blessing, when he counted light of the Birthright. 3. His example
shows, how little sinners consider for the present, what Merchandise they are
making with Satan, when they meddle with known sins, and how they will be made
to know it afterward.

2. He says, that afterward he would have inherited the Blessing; but was
rejected. Then,

It agrees with the profane man's disposition, to desire the Blessing, and yet
despise the means whereby the Blessing is gotten: ^o satisfy his fleshly lusts
for the present, and to desire the Blessing withal afterward. But God will
neither sever the means from the Blessing, nor join the Blessing with the
satisfaction of men's lusts. Therefore, he who will have the Blessing, must use
the means to obtain the same, and renounce the satisfaction of his sinful
lusts, or else be rejected, when he thinks to get the Blessing.

3. He says, He found no place of repentance, albeit he sought the blessing
with tears: That is, he could not obtain, that his father should repent the
bestowing of the blessing beside him; nor, that God should repent his righteous
judgment on him. For, repentance here, is recalling the sentence given out.
And why? Because he, for all his tears, and untimeous seeking of his sold
blessing, repented not himself of his sin: for he continued as profane as
before, and resolved to murder his brother, as soon as he found opportunity.

Then, 1. Esau did rue his deed, but repented not his sin. It is one thing to
rue a deed done, and another thing to repent the sin in doing of the deed, and
every known sin for that sins cause. 2. Tears may follow upon ruing, as well as
on repenting: and it is possible, that the loss or harm procured by sin, may
draw forth the tear, and not the sorrow for the offending of GOD by the sin. 3.
Esau here is not brought in dealing with God for pardon of sin, and the
heavenly inheritance; but with the man who had the ministry of dispensing the
earthly blessing only.

We read then that a blessing was sought carefully from a man, with tears, and
not obtained: but we read not, that Gods Mercy and Blessing was ever sought
from himself carefully, and not obtained.

Verse* 18. For ye are not come unto the Mount that might be touched, and that
burned with fire; not unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest. Beside the
example of Esau's judgment, here is another reason to move us, who are under
the Gospel, to beware of licentiousness and prophanity; because we are
delivered from the terror of the Law, ver. 18, 19, 20, 21. and brought by the
Gospel, to the society of so holy a company, as beseems no profane man to
enjoy, verse. 22, 23, 24. The sum tends unto this, You are not under the Law,
but under Grace, Instead of saying whereof, he says, You are not come unto
Mount Sinai, but unto Mount Sion. For the LORDS manner of dealing with the
people at Mount Sinai, represented the state of men in nature, under the Law,
liable to the Curse: His manner of dealing with them at Mount Sion, represented
the state of men reconciled through Christ, and under Grace. Let us take a view
of both, as the Apostle sets them before our eyes: And first, how the state
of man unreconciled, in Nature, and under the Law, and Curse thereof, was
represented.

1. Before we come to Christ, we have to do with God, as a terrible Judge,
sitting on the Throne of his Justice, shadowed forth by Mount Sinai. 2. Our
Judge is offended with us, his wrath is kindled, ready to consume us as his
adversaries, in our transgressions, represented by the burning of the Mount. 3.
When God begins to show himself as our Judge, offended with us, we are
filled with confusion, and perplexity, and fire: represented by Blackness, and
Darkness, and Tempest.

Verse. 19. And the sound of a Trumpet, and the voice of Words: Which Voice they
that heard, entreated that the Word should not be spoken to them any more,

20. For they could not endure that which was commanded. And if so much as a
Beast touch the Mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a dart.

What further? 4. There is no flying from compearance before our Judge; Summons
and Citations go forth from him, and powerfully seize upon the conscience, to
cause it acknowledge the Judge; represented by the sound of the Trumpet. 5. The
killing Letter of the Law read out unto us, showing us our Duty, what we should
have done, and have omitted; and what we should not have done, and have
committed; without giving any strength to obey for time to come, represented by
the sound of Words. 6. By this Charge, and new exaction of the Law, an
unsupportable weight lies upon the Conscience, pressing it down to Desperation
and Death; that we would give all the world, if we had it, to be free of the
terror of the Lord, and challenge of the Conscience, upon so fearful a ditty:
represented by the peoples entreating, That the word should not be spoken to
them any more, 7. There is an impossibility to help our selves by any thing we
can do, or to do any thing better than we have done: and the seen impotency of
our cursed Nature, makes the commandment for time to come, a matter of
desperation, as well as the challenge for breaking the Law in time by gone;
represented by their inability to endure the thing which was commanded. 8. No
drawing near to God here, such terror in his Majesty, justice being only
seen, and no mercy: represented by their debarring from touching of the
Mountain. 9. Such uncleanness and vileness, as not only our selves, but our
beasts and cartel, and all that we have, is counted unclean for our cause, and
liable to the curse with us: represented by the debarring of the Beasts from
the Mount. 10. Such a loathsome abomination in the guilty, as the Judge will
not put hand on the Malefactor himself, nor employ any of his clean Angels; but
give them over to death, if they remain in that estate, to be destroyed
ignominiously; represented by stoning, or darting, where the stone or dar^
lights upon the Malefactor, but not the hand which threw it.

Verse. 21. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear
and quake. Yet further, 11. If God deal with us as Judge, and by the Rule of
the Law examine our works, were we like Moses, The meekest men under Heaven,
the least harmful and innocent in the world, richest in good works, for service
done to GOD, and to his Church; yet could we not stand before this Tribunal:
all that ever we had done, all our works, were not able to free us from the
curse of the Law, and Gods fearful wrath, for our sinfulness mixed amongst our
works; represented by Moses his confessed fear and quaking. 12. And with all
this, no place to flee unto, no place to remain in; no company, but an evil
conscience within, and matter of terror without: represented by the Wilderness,
wherein this Throne of Justice was set up. And this is the estate wherein we
are by Nature, according to the Law; from which we are delivered by Christ,
according to the Gospel, as follows.

Verse. 22. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living
GOD, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels. This is
the estate whereunto we are advanced under the Gospel, by CHRIST, which by
comparison with the former, shall be more clear, thus:

1. Before we come to CHRIST, we have to do with God, as Judge, sitting upon
his Throne, terrible. After we come to Christ, we find God upon a Throne of
Grace, reconciled unto us; resembled by Mount Sion. 2. Without Christ, we are
kept under, upon the earth, depressed in the valley, and may not touch the
Mount, to ascend: But through Christ we get access to climb up toward God, and
to advance, piece and piece, above the world, and sin, and misery, toward
Heaven: resembled by going up Mount Sion. 3. Without Christ, vagabonds,
wandering abroad in a waste Wilderness: but through Christ collected together
under a head, and brought to a place of refuge and rest, and commodious
dwelling, to the Kingdom of Heaven; resembled by the City where Mount Sion
stood. 4. Without Christ, exposed to the wrath of the living God: Through
Christ, admitted to remain, as reconciled, in the City of the living GOD. 5.
Without Christ, afraid, by the terrible sight of wrath and judgment: Through
Christ, brought into Jerusalem, the Vision of Peace, not only in this world by
faith, but in Heaven by fruition: resembled by Jerusalem. 6. Without Christ,
heirs of Hell: Through Christ, Citizens of Heaven. 7. Without Christ, exposed
to the fellowship of Devils, in sin and torments: Through Christ, admitted to
the society of innumerable Angels: resembled by the inhabitants of Jerusalem on
earth. 8. Without Christ, Angels our foes: Through Christ, our fellow-Citizens.

Verse. 23. To the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, which are
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect. Without Christ, we are scattered as sheep in the Wilderness, a
prey to all the ravenous Beasts: But through Christ, gathered together in one,
to the Society of the true Catholic Church of the Elect, under the Government
of one Head, even CHRIST. 9. Without Christ, living with the world, in the
Suburbs of Hell: Through Christ, made Members of the true Church, and Company,
which is called out of the world, by the effectual calling of his Word and
Spirit. 10. Without Christ, forlorn Children, who have deprived our selves of
our inheritance, and wasted all our Fathers benefits on vanities: Through
Christ, our fore-faulting is reduced, our inheritance redeemed, we brought back
to the Family, restored to the inheritance, dignified with the firstborn, and
made Priests to our God, as his portion from amongst men. 11. Without Christ,
living amongst them whose names are written in the earth, and whose portion is
beneath: Through Christ, our names are enrolled in Heaven, amongst those who
are written in the Book of Life, elected and predestined unto Grace and
Glory. 12. Without Christ, without God in the world, having God our Judge
against us: Through Christ, we are reconciled to God, get acces^ unto him, and
have our God, Judge of all, upon our side, to absolve us, and to plead for us
against all our foes. 13. Without Christ, we are for guiltiness, in the rank of
those who are already damned, and brethren, to those whose spirits are in
prison: But through Christ, we are brethren to those who are already saved,
whose souls and spirits are freed from sin and misery, and made perfect in
holiness and glory: having the same grounds of right to Heaven, through CHRIST,
which they have who are entered already into possession.

Verse. 24. And to JESUS, the Mediator of the NEW COVENANT, and to the blood of
sprinkling, which speaks better things than that of Abel. He goes on, 14. In
our natural estate we are under the Law, and the Covenant of Works; which
binds us to perfect Obedience, or to the Curse. When we come to Christ, we
are under the Covenant of Grace, which proclaims remission of sins unto all
who are in him. 15. Yea, now under the Gospel, coming unto Christ, we are in
better case than they who lived before Christ, because they were bound to all
the Ceremonial and Typical Ordinances of the Law under the Old Covenant: But we
are exempted from that Old Covenant, and are entered into the New, which freeth
us from that yoke which the Israelites could never bear. 16. Without Christ, we
stand alone, and none to plead for us before our Judge: But when we come to
Christ, we find him a Mediator both to deliver us from the Old Covenant, and
to take burden for us for keeping of the New Covenant. 17. Without Christ,
unrighteous and unholy: When we come to Christ, we come to be sprinkled with
his blood, for Justification, and Sanctification also, and for receiving of all
other benefits, bought by that blood.

He compares this blood with Abels, as speaking better things. For albeit, we
by our sins, have made our LORD to serve, yea, and to dye also, ye does his
blood not speak against us, as Abels did speak against Cain, and the Earth, for
drawing down of a curse on both: But speaks to GOD still, to pacify his
wrath, and to pardon us, and to our conscience, to cleanse it, and make it
quiet within us.

From this comparison of men under the Law, and under Grace, we learn,

1. That the impenitent and unrenewed man, how secure soever he ^it, yet he is
in a fearful estate, the wrath of the Judge, from his Justice Seat, being ready
to break out upon him. 2. That the wakened conscience, lying in the sense of
its own sins, and fear of the offended Judge, is much to be pitied. 3. That the
holiest man on earth, if GOD reveal unto him the terror of his Justice, he will
be shaken with fear. 4. That the only remedy against the challenge of the
Conscience, and fear of the Law and Wrath, is to have recourse to JESUS CHRIST.
5. That he who is fled, as a true penitent to JESUS CHRIST, for refuge, to be
saved, and directed and ruled by him, is a true Member of the true Catholic
Church of the Elect, whatsoever be men's estimation of him. 6. That the more
graciously we be dealt with under the Gospel, the more must we beware of
Fleshliness and Prophanity. For to this end all his speech does tend.

Verse. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for, if they escaped not,
who refused him that spoke on earth; much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him that speaks from Heaven. From these considerations, he charge
them to beware* le^t they make light account of Christ's Doctrine. The word
imports a shifting off Christ, speaking, by some excuse or pretense.

Then, 1. The way to eschew Profaneness, and Apostasy, is to embrace, and make
much of Christ's speaking unto us in his Word. 2. Whatsoever pretenses and
excuses a man use, to cloak his not-giving hearty obedience to the Doctrine of
Christ, it is but a refusing of him, and a turning away from him, make of it
what he will.

2. He urges this, by threatening more certain and heavy judgments, than upon
the despisers of Moses, who is said to speak on Earth, because he was but the
earthen vessel which carried Gods will to his people; and, by earthly Types,
and Figures, made offer of Grace unto them. But Christ, as God, by his own
Authority, casting Heaven open, in the plainness, and spirituality of the
Doctrine, is said to speak from Heaven.

Then, As much as Christ's person is more excellent than Moses, and His
Authority above his; and the Heavenly clearness of Christ's gracious Offer,
above his dark Types: As much more heavy and certain Wrath shall overtake the
despisers of his Doctrine, than the despisers of Moses Law.

3. He joyneth himself in the same danger with the people, if He should turn
away or refuse.

Then, Preachers shall do well, to lay the edge of their threatenings to their
own hearts, and to enroll themselves amongst the threatened; That bitterness
toward the people may be seen to be removed, and their own sluggishness may be
roused up; seeing they have none to prea^h unto them, but themselves.

Verse. 26. Whose voice then shook the Earth: But now He has promised, saying,
Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven. To put an edge upon
the Threatening, he shows how terrible Christ is, in shaking of the Earth, by
His Voice, at Mount Sinai; and, by the shaking of Heaven and Earth, at the Day
of Judgment.

Then, 1. The terrible quaking of the Earth, and burning of the Mount Sinai,
was pronounced by the Voice of Christ, who therefore, is declared to be the
Lord God: for so, Exodus 19. is he called. 2. His Terror, at the Day of
Judgment, may be seen in that little resemblance of Mount Sinai. 3. The
Terribleness of Christ, should make us stand in awe of His Word.

Verse. 27. And this Word, Yet once more, does signify the removing of those
things which are shaken, as of things which are made; that those things which
cannot be shaken, may remain. He commenteth upon the testimony of Haggai,
Chap. 1. 6. and from this word Once, concludes, that Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, and be changed at the power of Christ's uttering of his voice: That
these changeable Heavens and Earth being removed, he may make a new Heaven, and
a new Earth; wherein his Subjects, and his Kingdom over them, may remain for
ever settled.

Then, 1. It is a good mean to get the understanding of Gods mind in the
Scripture, to consider, and weigh the force of the words thereof, and what they
do import by due consequence. 2. No more change shall be of any thing after the
day of Judgment; because Once more, and no oftener, is Christ to shake the
same. 3. It is for the standing of Christ's Kingdom, that the creature is
moved, shaken, and chan^ed y^ed. All things made, shall be shaken: But Christ's
Kingdom, and the salvation of his subjects, shall never be shaken.

Verse. 28. Wherefore, we receiving a Kingdom, which cannot be moved, let us
have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence, and godly
fear. From the nature of this Kingdom, granted unto us in Christ, and from his
terribleness, he exhorts us to stedfastness of Faith, and humble obedience.
He says, We have received it, because we have received the Right and Title
by the Gospel, and some beginning of it.

Then, As we receive Christ in the Gospel, we receive the Kingdom of Heaven
with him, in Right and Title: yea, in begun possession, which grows by
degrees.

2. He requires of a receiver of this Kingdom, a reverent serving of God.

Then, right is given to this Kingdom, before our service be done: Not because
we have se^ved heretofore; but to oblige us to serve God hereafter.

3. He will have us to serve God acceptably, that is, pleasantly, and
cheerfully. Next, with reverence, or shamefastness, and godly fear.

Then, 1. It is not enough, that we do such works which belong to Gods
Service: but we must take heed to the manner of doing of them; that they may
be done with a ready affection, and good will. 2. Next, that they be done in the
sense of our own weakness, vileness, and unworthiness. 3. And thirdly, that
they be done with reverend regard to God, in such a godly fear, as may make us
circumspectly handle, and meddle with his Service, as the word imports.

4. That this may be the better done, let us have grace, or hold fast the grip
of Grace, whereby we may serve God, says he.

Then, he that would have strength to serve God, must study by faith, to lay
hold on Gods grace in the Gospel: and having laid hold thereon, to hold it
fast: for otherwise we can neither have heart nor hand to serve GOD. But he
that is fastened on the grace and good will of God toward him, will draw
courage and strength from this believed grace, to serve God cheerfully and
reverently.

Verse. 29. For our God is a consuming Fire. Because the holiest men, have need
of the Spurs of GODS Terror, to stir up their lazy flesh, he closes with a
Watchword of Moses, Deuter. 4.24. terrifying the people from Idolatry, or
Imagery; which he applies for making men circumspect in their manner of
worship.

Teaching us thereby, 1. That to serve Idols, and follow a false Religion; and
not to serve GOD, in reverence, and godly fear, in the true Religion, will be
both alike plagued. 2. The words do teach us, That GODS entering into Covenant,
and laying down of the feud and enmity against us, makes Him not to lay down
his awful Majesty over us. 3. And therefore, we must be so confident of His
love toward us, as we remember in the mean time, that He is a consuming Fire,
to the ungodly, and profane Professors of His Name.

The Sum of Chap. XIII.
NOw, that you may be fruitful in the Faith, I recommend to you in short,
Brotherly Love, verse. 1. Hospitality, verse. 2. Compassion, with sufferers for
the Truth, verse. 3. Chastity, verse. 4. Contentation, Verse. 5, 6. Steadfastnesse
in the Truth, which Gods Messengers have taught you, Verse. 7. For, change who
will, Christ, in Himself, and in his Doctrine, changes not, Verse. 8. Beware of
the Leven of Jewish Doctrine, such as is distinction of Meats, and others like,
Verse. 9. For, they who maintain the Leviticall Service, cannot be partakers of
Christ, with us, Verse. 10. This was prefigured in the Law, verse. 11. So was
Christ's contemptible usage, Verse. 12. And we must follow Him, and be contented
of reproach for Him, Verse. 13. For we have no place of Rest here, but look for
it hereafter, Verse. 14. Therefore let us follow the Spiritual Signification of
those Ceremonies, and sacrifice unto Him our Prayers, and Praise, and good
Works, Verse. 15.16. Obey your Ecclesiastical Governors, in their Office: for
their Charge is great; and you have need not to grieve them, Verse. 17. Pray for
me; for I shall be found an honest Man, what ever be men's speeches of me,
Verse. 18. But, pray you for me, for your own good, ver. 19. And I pray God, to
finish His begun work in you graciously, ver. 20, 21. And, because I have but
touched things briefly, in this short Epistle, take Exhortation in good season,
when your Teachers do press such Doctrine upon you, more at length, verse. 22.
It may be, that Timothy, and I, see you shortly, Verse. 23. Deliver our
Commendations, Verse. 24. And, Grace be with you all, AMEN. verse. 25.

The Doctrine of Chap. XIII.
Verse. 1. Let Brotherly love continue. FRom this first Precept, Learn, 1. That
the first Fruit of Faith which God requires, is Love, and constant love,
amongst his children. 2. That our mutual love must be sincere and kindly, as
if it were grounded on Bands of Nature.

Verse. 2. Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers: For, thereby some have
entertained Angels unawares. From this Precept, Learn, 1. That we are ready to
forget charity to strangers, especially to be hospital unto them. 2. That the
possibility of finding strangers better men than we take them to be, should
overbalance the suspicion of their slightness, and should set us on to do the
duty. 3. That if a man, intending to do good, do more than he intended to do,
it shall be imputed unto him, no less, than if he had intended the same.

Verse. 3. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which
suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body. From this, Learn, 1.
That it is no new thing for the world, to put bonds on them who seek to bring
them out of Bondage. 2. That Prisoners for Christ, are readily forgotten of
such as are at freedom. 3. Such men's bondage should be esteemed as our own,
even until God set them free. 4. That other distressed people also shall be
helped by us, if we consider what may befall our selves, before we dye.

Verse. 4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: But
Whoremongers, and Adulterers, God will judge. From this we learn, 1. That
breakers of Wedlock, and unclean persons in a single life, are both reserved
unto GODS judgment, how lightly soever men let them pass. 2. That marriage
being provided of God, for a remedy of incontinency, makes Uncleanness the
heavier sin. 3. That seeing it is GODS Doctrine, to commend Marriage for
honorable, and has pronounced it not only Lawful, but commendable in all
persons, of whatsoever Place, or Calling, and has justified it for undefiled;
to traduce this estate of life, as not holy, or not beseeming an holy man, or
an holy calling, and to forbid marriage, to persons of any calling, must be, as
it is called, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. The Doctrine of the Devil.

Verse. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousness; and be content with
such things as you have: For ^e has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. Here we are taught, 1. That the enlargement of our desires, to have more
and more worldly goods, whether we be rich or poor, is disallowed of GOD. 2.
That GOD requires Contentation with our present estate, how mean soever it be;
and counts it Covetousness, not to be contented.

2. To make us contented, he gives us Gods Promise made to Joshua, Chap. 1.5.
for our provision in necessaries. Then,

1. The Promises made to Joshua, or any other holy Man in Scripture, for
Furniture in his Calling, may be very well applied unto us, for Help and
Furniture in our Calling. 2. Faith in Gods Promise, for our Maintenance, must
both stay our fear of want in time to come, and give us contentment with that
which we have for the present. 3. A general Promise of Gods being with us, and
assisting of us, is as sufficient for all particulars whereof we stand in need,
as if they were expressed.

Verse. 6. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper; and, I will not
fear what man shall do unto me. By applying of the Promise made to Joshua, he
concludes, Warrant to apply David's gloriation, against all perils, Psalm. 118.6.

Then, 1. He that can apply one Promise to himself, may confidently apply
another also. 2. The weakest true Believer, has as good ground of confidence
in God, for every good, needful for soul, or body, as the Lords chief Prophets,
and as good Warrant to apply the Scriptures to their own use, which speak of
them. 3. He who believes in God, needs not to fear what flesh can do unto
him. 4. Faith then, does its part duly, when i^ glories in the Lord, against
all opposition.

Verse. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you
the Word of God; whose Faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.
That they may be steadfast in the Faith, he sets before them the Example of
Gods Messengers, who had instructed them in the Truth, and led a life
conformable thereunto.

Wherein he teaches us, 1. Who is worthy to be a Guide to a People, to wit,
the man who speaks the Word of God, and not his own Dreams; believes the
Truth which he teaches, and has his conversation answerable. 2. The best
respect that a Preacher can crave, or that a People can give to a Preacher,
either in his life time, or after, is to remember the Truth of God taught by
him, and to make use thereof. 3. In as far as Preachers have spoken the Word of
God, and made it the end of their conversation, People are commanded here, to
remember them, and imitate their Faith; but no further.

Verse. 8. Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. This
Sentence serves, First, To show the eternity and immurability of Jesus Christ,
in himself, and all his Properties, of Truth, and Love, and Pity, etc. Again,
It serves for a reason, of keeping fast the Doctrine taught from him by our
faithful Leaders; because JESUS CHRIST will still allow and maintain that Truth
once given out by himself, and cannot choose to change his Truth, being First
and Last like himself. And thirdly, It serves to encourage us to be constant
in the Faith; because JESUS CHRIST is unchangeably the same, in love and care
toward those who believe in him, in all ages, for their preservation and
deliverance, in all cases wherein they can fall, for his Truth: as he has
given proof in former times toward others.

Verse. 9. Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines: For it is a
good thing that the heart be established with grace; not with meats, which have
not profited them that have been occupied therein. That they may be steadfast in
the Faith, he warns them to beware, that they be not carried about with
diverse and strange Doctrines.

Then, 1. Doctrine which agrees (...) with the Word of God, uncouth and
strange Doctrine which the Apostles did not acknowledge and recommend unto us,
must be rejected. 2. There was such uncouth Doctrine beginning to creep into
the Church, even in the Apostles time. 3. Apostolic Doctrine, such as they
acquainted the Church with, must be steadfastly believed and stood unto, and not
loosly laid hold upon, lest we lie open to the wind of false Doctrine.

2. He brings i^ for example, the Doctrine of Distinction of meats, wherein
the Iewishly affected did place some holiness, and help to salvation: and yet
they who most leaned to the same, were least profited thereby.

Then, 1. To place some holiness in Distinction of meats, and to count the
observation thereof helpful to salvation, is an old error, which even in the
beginning did trouble the Church. 2. Never man got profit by leaning any thing
to the observation of Distinction of Meats. For, under the Law, distinction was
commanded, for the leading of men to some Duties signified thereby; but never
did God give way, that men should esteem of this observation, as a thing
conferring any whit to the purchase of salvation.

3. To keep out this error of leaning to Ceremonial observations, he opposes
the Doctrine of Grace, wherewith he will have the heart established, and not
with meats.

Then, 1. The ground of devising and urging of superstitious ceremonies, is the
unquietness and unstableness of men's hearts, wanting satisfaction in God and
his Ordinances; and therefore seeking to support themselves by means of their
own devising. 2. It is the Doctrine of Justification by Grace only, and
nothing of our doings, which gets true rest to our hearts, and quiet settling
to the consciences.

Verse. 10. We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
Tabernacle. Such as pertinaciously did plead for the standing of the Levitical
Service, and ceremonies thereof, he secludeth from the enjoying of Jesus
Christ, who is our Altar.

Then, such as maintain the Levitical Ceremonies, and do urge them on the
Christian Church, do cut themselves from right to Christ. 1. Because they deny,
in effect, that he is come, seeing they will have those Figures to remain,
which did serve to Prefigure his coming, and will have his Church still under
Ceremonial Pedagogie, as it was under the Law. 2. Because they join unto
Christ, their own devices; as if either JESUS were not sufficient for
salvation, or his Ordinances were not sufficient for means to attain thereunto.
3. The observation of the Distinction of meats, is a point of serving the
Tabernacle: for so does the Apostle reckon. 4. Such as will eat of JESUS, and
be partakers of him, must beware to serve the Jewish Tabernacle, by keeping on
foot, and continuing the Ceremonies, and appurtenances annexed thereunto: such
Feasts, such Iubilies, such Altars, such Sprinklings, and Holy water, such
Priests and Vestiments, etc. as Levi had.

2. He calls Christ, by the name of the Altar; because he is the thing
signified by the Altar, and by the Sacrifice, and by the rest of the Levitical
Ceremonies.

Then, 1. Those Ordinances of Levitical Service, were Figures of Christ, some
in one part, and some in another; and he is the accomplishment of them, even
the Truth of them All: The true Tabernacle, the true Priest, the true
Sacrifice, the true Altar, etc. 2. Christ's self is all the Altar that the
Christian Church has. Our Altar is he only, and nothing but he. The Apostle
knows no other.

3. In that he says, They have no right to eat, learn, 1. That Jesus is our
food, who believe in him, by whom our souls are kept alive, and maintained
every day spiritually, as the Priests were maintained by the old Altar bodily.
2. That before a man attain to eat, or draw benefit from Christ, he must have a
right unto him. There is a possession following the right, and the right
tends to the possession. 3. He who loves to have the right, must take the
course which Christ prescribes, without mixing any thing therewith.

Verse. 11. For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the
Sanctuary, by the High Priest, for sin, are burnt without the Camp. He shows,
that this was prefigured in the Law: For, Levit. 16.27. The Sin-offering was
burnt, and none of the Priests, the servants of the Tabernacle, did eat
thereof. To show,

1. That such as adhered to the Tabernacle, and Levitical Service, as needful
to their salvation (specially after Christ, the Sin-offering that was offered)
should not be partakers of him. Again, Sin-offering was offered without the
camp, to show, That such as would be partakers thereof, must forsake the Jewish
Synagogue, and come out of it toward Christ, who will not have his Church
mixed with the forms of the Jewish Church. Thirdly, the Bodies of the
Sacrifices of sin, were then taken from the use of the Priests of the
Tabernacle, when the blood was now brought into the Sanctuary: To show, that
Christ should be taken from them, who after his blood was shed, and had made
Atonement within the Sanctuary of Heaven, should not relinquish the Jewish
Tabernacle, and the shadowing Figures thereof.

Verse. 12. Wherefore, Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his
own blood, suffered without the gate. Another end of the burning of the
Sin-offering, without the Camp, he shows, first, To be the prefiguration of
the ignominious usage of Christ's Body, cast out of the City of Jerusalem. 2.
Again, Like as the Sin-offering, howbeit the body thereof was burnt without the
Camp, yet the blood of it was brought within the Sanctuary, to make a
Figurative Atonement: Even so, how basely soever men did use Christ's Body, in
casting of it without the City, yet was his Blood in high estimation with God,
made Atonement for the people; and sanctified them.

Verse. 13. Let us go forth, therefore, unto him, without the Camp; bearing his
reproach. Hence he draws an Exhortation, To be ready to renounce the world,
and to take up our Cross and follow Christ.

Wherein he teaches us, 1. That Christ's sufferings without the City,
represented the state of his mystical Body, and Kingdom, thrust forth, and
contemptibly rejected of the World. 2. That such as will be partakers of
Christ, must resolve to be so handled also, and must sequestrate their
affections from the World, and must be contented to be crucified unto the
World, with our Lord and Master Christ Jesus. 3. That what reproach is suffered
for Christ's sake, is not the man's, but Christ's reproach, for whom it is
suffered: And, so the reproach is as honorable before God, as it is
ignominious before the World.

Verse. 14. For, here we have no continuing City; but we seek one to come. He
gives a Reason of this Exhortation. Teaching,

1. That the instability of this present World, and our short and uncertain
time of pilgrimage therein, should be a motive to make us loose our affections
off it in time. 2. That the hope of a quiet, and sure, and blessed place of
rest hereafter, should be another motive to make us renounce this World with
the better will. 3. That the true Pilgrims employment in this World, is, to be
seeking how to come home to his own Country, and City, prepared for him.

Verse. 15. By him therefore, let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to GOD
continually: that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. Another
Exhortation to offer Spiritual Sacrifices. Wherein we learn.

1. That as Christ has abolished all properly called Priests, by Office; so
has he made all Christians spiritual Priests, by common duty. 2. As Christ
has offered the propitiatory Sacrifice of his own Body, once for all that are
to be saved, and has left no properly called Sacrifice, no Offering ^or sin,
no Propitiatory Offering, now to offer: So has he appointed the spiritual
Sacrifice of Thanks, to be offered by every faithful man and woman, such as is
Prayer, Praises, and Thanksgiving to God. 3. That these our Sacrifices of
Prayer, and Praise, is the spiritual service of Saints, answerable to the
Thank-offering of the first fruits, and Calves, and Bullocks; which was the
external Sacrifice of the Old Church. 4. That the Offering of these spiritual
Sacrifices, is not tied unto set hours, as the Legal; but to be done
continually. 5. That these our Sacrifices of Prayer and Praises, are not to be
offered by the mediation of Saint, or Angel, but by Jesus Christ only. 6. That
albeit they be unworthy, as from us, yet being offered by Christ's Mediation,
they shall be accepted for service, at our hands.

Verse. 16. But, to do good, and to communicate, forget not: for, with such
Sacrifice, God is well pleased. Another Exhortation, to good Works, and
Alms-deeds: Teaching us,

1. That goods works, and Alms-deeds, are appointed to be of the number of
spiritual Sacrifices, and a part of the Thank-Offerings of the Saints.

2. That because they are Sacrifices, they must not be offered to the Idol of
our own credit, and estimation, or our own private ends; but unto God, even in
obedience unto him, and for the glory of him. And, because they are a part of
the Thank-offerings of the Saints, they must not incroach upon the Sin-offering
of the Savior, the only Expiatory, the only Propitiatory, and the only
Meritorious Sacrifice.

3. That being so offered, they are well-pleasing unto God: The smell of
Christ's Sin-offering, once offered, making our Thank-offering to be sweet
smelling unto God.

Verse. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account: that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief; for, that is unprofitable for you. Another
Exhortation, to obey such as had the Rule over them; their Guides, and Leaders,
as the word imports: That is, public Office-bearers in the Church,
appointed of God, to teach, and govern them, by the Word, and Ecclesiastical
Censures.

Then, 1. The Churches of Christ are not dens of confusion, but Houses of
Order: having some to be Guides and Rulers, and some to be instructed and
guided, by the direction of Gods Word and Ordinances.

2. Even the meanest and poorest Churches, albeit no more powerful than were
the Churches of these scattered Hebrews, must be so provided.

3. The right duty of the Office-bearers in the Church, is, first, to be
guides, pointing out the way in Gods word, which the people should keep toward
Heaven. Next, to be Leaders, going before them in the example of Faith, and the
fruits thereof in their conversation. And thirdly, Rulers, by the Rod of
Discipline, ^o take order with the scandalous, and to recall Wanderers, to
encourage the obedient: for, thus much does the word import.

4. The duty of the people, is, to obey the direction of such Guides, and
Rulers, and to submit themselves unto their censures, and to maintain them in
their Office, every way; that this order may be continued, and not fall by any
want, which the people may supply.

2. The Reason which he uses to induce them, is, They watch for your souls, as
they who must give account.

Then, 1. The charge of Church-Rulers, is the heaviest of all charges, because
of souls.

2. The most assiduous and painful, setting, not of the body only, but the
spirit on work; because it is a charge, of Watching.

3. The most dangerous of all Charges, because the account of lost souls within
the Church, shall be craved at their hands, whether they have (...) that which
became them to do, to save them, or not.

4. The weightiness of their Charge, should affect their people, and move them
to concur, for their parts, as they are able, for their encouragement.

3. Another motive is, That they may do their work with joy, and not with
grief: for that is unprofitable unto you, says he.

Then, 1. Church-mens chief joy, should be their peoples obedience unto Gods
directions in their mouth: and their chief grief, if it be otherwise.

2. Whether they will get joy or grief from their people, they must do their
work, and follow their Charge.

3. The less comfortable people be unto their Leaders, their Teachers and
Rulers, the less profit shall they have by their Ministry.

Verse. 18. Pray for us: For we trust we have a good conscience, in all things,
willing to live honestly. His craving the benefit of their Prayers for him,
Teaches us,

1. That albeit the Scripture gives no warrant to seek the benefit of the
Prayer of Saints departed, or of Angels: yet it gives warrant for seeking of
the mutual concurrence in Prayer, of those that are living together, and
militant here on Earth together. 2. That the greatest Apostle has need of the
prayers of the meanest Christian, and may be helped thereby.

2. He gives a Reason, answering all the calumnies which were spread of him by
his Adversaries; that they might, with greater freedom, pray for him, as for an
honest man.

Then, 1. They who are unjustly reported of, must comfort themselves in the
Testimony of a good Conscience. 2. An honest heart may expect the better fruit
of their own prayers, and others. 3. And such as we know are sincerely set to
serve God, we may with the better courage pray for them.

3. He expounds what he calls a good Conscience; by saying, that he was
willing to live honestly.

Then, the purpose, desire, and endeavor to live honestly, is the evidence of
a good Conscience, and the ground also of the good Testimony; because such a
disposition escheweth to do evil, and is careful to do good.

Verse. 19. But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to
you the sooner. He joyneth a Reason, for their own good, to pray for him, that
the impediments of his coming unto them, being removed by their prayers, he
might come the sooner.

Then, 1. When our own good is joined with the good of such as call for our
prayers, we have the more inducements, to set us on work. 2. Many hindrances
of our good and comfort, do stand in the way, which by Prayer might be removed.

Verse. 20. Now, the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the (...) of the Everlasting
Covenant. Now, he prays for them, whom he had in the former words, requested
to pray for him.

Then, 1. Prayer is a mutual duty, and ought to be made by us, for such as we
desire to pray for us.

2. He styles God, to whom he prays, first, the God of Peace: To teach us,

That Peace proceeded from God, and is preserved by him, in his Church; and
that it does please him well, that his children should be in peace, and should
study thereunto.

3. Again, he describes God, by the great work of Christ's Resurrection wrought
by him.

Then, 1. As Christ's Resurrection is the work of his own power, John 10.18. So
also is it the work of God the Father, in this place: For, John 10.30. the
Father and Christ, in power are one.

4. The Props of his faith in prayer, are, first, the office of Jesus, who is
the Great Shepherd of the sheep.

Then, 1. Those who come under the reckoning of Christ's sheep, are the only
people, of whom he, by special Office, professes to take charge. 2. Howsoever
he employ the Ministry of men, to feed his flock under him; yet does he keep
the place and style of Arch-pastor, or Great Shepherd, to himself. 3. People,
howsoever they be furnished by Ministers, yet they have the Great Shepherd to
acknowledge and rely upon: of whose care and fidelity, for their feeding, and
preservation, they may be confident.

5. The next Prop of this Prayer, is, The power of God, who brought again from
the dead the Great Shepherd.

Then, 1. The sheep must not think to be above the Shepherd: but must resolve,
for bearing witness to the truth, to be put to death, as he was, if God please*
2. Nor need they fear to be used so, seeing he is risen again: because, he that
raised the Shepherd for the sheeps cause, can raise the sheep from death also,
for the Shepherds cause.

6. The third Prop of Confidence for obtaining this Prayer, is, The blood of
the Everlasting Covenant, through which he seeks his petition to be granted.

Then, 1. It is Christ's Blood which has ratified the Covenant, and established
our Reconciliation, to endure for ever; because the virtue of that blood is
perpetual* 2. It is through that Blood, that everything is purchased, for which
we can pray. It is the price of the purchase of Sanctification unto us, as well
as Salvation.

Verse. 21. Make you perfect, in every good work, to do his will; working in you
that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ: to whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen. That which he prays for here, is, That they
may be made perfect, in every good work, to do the will of God.

Then, 1. Only the doing of Gods will, and what he has commanded, is to be
reckoned for a good work. 2. It is not enough to be given to some sort of good
work, but we must endeavor our selves to work every sort of good work; having
a due respect unto all Gods Commandments. 3. Whatsoever measure we have
attained unto, we must not stand there, but perfection must be aimed at, which
is still before us, until we come to Heaven.

2. The way how this may be done, he shows to be, By Gods working in us that
which is well-pleasing in his sight, even through Jesus Christ.

Then, 1. It is not by any strength of our own, whereby good works are wrought,
but even by the power of God working in us graciously. 2. It is through Jesus
Christ, that this working is procured, conveyed unto us, and made acceptable
unto God.

3. He closes his prayer, with ascribing of Glory unto Jesus, for ever. Amen.

Then, 1. Christ Jesus is true God, worthy of Divine Glory, for ever. 2. The
Prayer and Praises which we offer unto God, must come from so advised a mind,
as we may seal the same with Faith, and hearty Affection, imported in AMEN.

Verse. 22 And, I beseech you, brethren, suffer the word of Exhortation: for* I
have written a Letter unto you in few words. Last of all, he exhorts them, to
take in good part, the word of Exhortation, from their ordinary Teachers; who
behoved to dilate, and urge, and inculcate these things, even at length unto
them. The reason whereof, he gives, Because he had written this letter but in
few words unto them; and might not insist in those points at large, as they had
need of, but behoved to leave this unto their Teachers.

Then, 1. There is need of Preachers, by the word of Exhortation, to dilate and
inculcate that which the Scripture has in short. 2. It is very irksome for
men, to have their sluggishness stirred up by Exhortation, and the same things
inculcated again and again: But their own profit should make them to suffer it
patiently. 3. The writing of Scripture, prejudgeth not the use of Preaching,
but (...) keep their own room, the Scripture serving for a (...) laying down of
the Grounds to be taught, and Exhortation serving to dilate and urge the truth
delivered in (...) as their case requires.

Verse. 23. Know ye; that our Brother Timothy is set (...) at liberty; with
whom, if he come shortly, I will see you. From this learn, first, That the
delivery of one Timothy out of the hands of his persecutors, should be a matter
of comfort and joy unto as many Churches as do hear of it. Secondly, Good news
should be spread abroad, and are a fit matter for Christian Epistles.

Verse. 24. Salute all them that have the rule over you* and all the Saints.
They of Italy salute you. From this learn, First, That as it is the mutual
(...) of Christians, to send forth commendations one to another: So is it a
Christian duty to carry them, not unbeseeming even an Apostle.

2. His directing of the people for to carry his commendations to their Rulers,
makes it evident, that the Apostle ordained this Epistle to be first read unto
the People. And, so was far from their minds, who will not suffer the
Scripture to come in the peoples hands.

Verse. 25. Grace be with you all* Amen. This closing of the Epistle, usual to
the Apostle, Teaches, 1. That Grace is the common good of the Church,
whereunto every Saint has interest.

2. That Grace is all that can be desired: For, if the Fountain of Gods grace
or favor run toward a man, what can the man stand in need of, which the
overrunning stream of Gods good will shall not carry unto him?

The Postscript. Written to the Hebrews, from Italy, by Timothy.
SOme inconsiderate hand has put to this Postscript, appearingly: For, this
Epistle was ordained by the Apostle, to carry the news of Timothies Liberation,
and a promise of his coming unto them, afterward possibly, as the 23 Verse of
this Chapter shows, and not to be carried by Timothy.

And again, The Apostle was bound by this Letter, to come with Timothy, if he
had been to come shortly after the writing of this Epistle.

And thirdly, Timothy was not yet come to that place where the Apostle Paul was
when this Epistle was directed: for, then had he been certain of Timothies
purpose; and behoved, if not to go with Timothy, yet to have written the reason
of so sudden a change of his purpose and written promise: or else, to have
deleted the promise of his coming out of the Epistle, by writing it over again,
or some way else.

Whence we collect, That Postscripts are not a part of the Text, nor of the
Apostles own writing; neither ought they to have such authority or credit as
the Text has, which always agrees with it self, as proceeding from the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit: To whom with the Father, and his Son, Jesus
Christ our Lord, be Glory, for ever. Amen.

The Epistle of JAMES, Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
James an Apostle, surnamed Alphaeus, from his office of Apostleship did
gravely admonish the faithful Hebrews, touching diverse Christian duties,
whereby he foresaw that the Christian Faith would be adorned, and their
salvation promoted; chiefly for this end, propounding wisely those virtues
which they seemed to have need of, and sharply reproving those vices which they
were more prone to, or of which they were guilty. Every Chapter has its number
of admonitions, as is more especially shown in their explications. All which
admonitions, although they are written for the use of the Catholic Church, yet
it appears the Apostle would have them read especially by all the dispersed
Israelites, and those that were converted to the Faith, and that were not, of
which design there are three Characters.

1. The general inscription of the Epistle, to all the twelve Tribes.

2. The common and civil form of saluting.

3. The manner of teaching, which, for the most part, is fitted for the shaking
off the stupidity of their consciences, and stirring up their repentance, if
perchance any one that erred might be recalled into the way by this Doctrine,
which thing is not obscurely signified to be intended by the Apostle in the
last verse of the last Chapter.

CHAP. I.
AFter the inscription of the Epistle, verse. 1. In this Chapter there are three
common places or admonitions: The first Admonition is touching the right
^earing afflictions, or outward temptations, to verse. 13. The second touching
the right judgment of inward temptations, to verse. 21. The third touching the
solid exercise of Religion, to the end.

Verse. 1. James a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve
Tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting. The Writer is described in the
inscription of the Epistle, James a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus
Christ, viz. in the office of Apostleship, whereby he might with authority
teach all the Tribes of Israel, and admonish them concerning their duties: he
calls himself the servant of God, to show that he serves God the Father, by
serving his Son Jesus Christ, and writes these things by the special authority
of God and Christ. Those to whom the Epistle is written are Israelites,
especially believers, cast out of the holy land, and dispersed through the
Regions; But (as to the hope of Heaven represented by the holy Land) gathered
to Jesus our Savior. He seriously commands (and as it is allowed to
Christians) bids them to rejoice, or greets them with a borrowed form of
salutation, from the common use of the Heathens, but turned into a Christian
sense.

Verse. 2. My Brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations,
Admon. 1. That they take not ill or impatiently outward afflictions and
persecutions for the Gospel, but correct this carnal judgment touching those
external exercises whereby God tried or proved their Faith and Sincerity. For
this end the Proposition is stated contrary to the judgment of the flesh, viz.
It is to be accounted matter of all joy, or the chiefest joy, when ye fall,
by the providence of God, into diverse persecutions or afflictions, whereby ye
may be proved, whether ye will even in adversity, stick close to God: He
confirms this Thesis with seven Arguments.

Verse. 3. Knowing this, that the trial of your Faith works patience, Arg. 1.
Those temptations are the trial of your Faith, the polishing of it, and
bringing it into open view: Therefore ye ought to esteem it matter of great
joy when ye fall into diverse ttmptations.

Worketh] Argum. 2. Because this exercise will bring forth patience in you,
which is of greater price than that your affliction may be compared with it:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 4. But let patience have her perfect work; that ye may be perfect and
en^ire, wanting nothing. Argum. 3. Joined with an exhortation, There is need of
diverse afflictions, and that they stay upon you ( viz. so long as God shall see
fit) that the work of patience may be perfected, and that ye that have other
endowments, may also have the gift of patience, and so the image of Christ may
be completed in you, that nothing may be wanting to you, for perfection of the
parts of holiness: Therefore ye ought to count it all joy when ye fall into
afflictions.

Verse. 5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, that gives to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. Argum. 4.
Propounded by way of answer to an objection; Wisdom is at hand, which may
effectually administer, to all that are afflicted (that ask this gift of God)
reasons both of joy and patience in these trials: Therefore we ought to
rejoice in afflictions.

Who gives] He confirms this Argument from the abundant Grace of God, who
gives to all that ask freely, abundantly, and without upbraiding their
unworthiness, or ingratitude in praying, and gives to the penitent person,
whatsoever spiritual gift is asked, as much as is sufficient to salvation.

Verse. 6. But let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering: for he that wavereth, is
like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind, and tossed. He explains the same
Argument from the praying party, requiring that he ask in Faith or confidence
grounded in the promise of God concerning giving the gift, not doubting,
whether God will grant that necessary gift promised to him. Of which confidence
required, and wavering prohibited, he gives three Reasons.

For hee] Reas. 1. Because he that wavereth, being tossed hither and thither
in his prayers, doubtful whether he shall find God true and merciful, is like
to waves of the Sea, which are by the wind driven hither and thither, and
vanish without profit.

Verse. 7. For let not that man think that he shall receive anything of the
Lord. Reas. 2. Because that wavering, which ends not in the conclusion of
Faith, makes prayers of none effect, which God does not grant.

Verse. 8. A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. Reas. 3. Because
such an unfaithful doubter or uncertain what to determine, is unstable, and
unconstant in his counsels and actions, and no less ready to depart from God,
than to remain with him, holding nothing firmly in the present business of
Religion, which is before him.

Verse. 9. Let the Brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted: He
returns to his purpose, and adds the fifth Argument, to prove, that in the
exercise of the cross, there may be matter of joy: He that through
afflictions, or the cross, is humbled by the Lord, can glory in his trials, as
in the mark of his adoption and exaltation, to the dignity of being an adopted
Son of God, and to the privileges of the Saints, which preferment does far
surp^ss the Riches of the Rich, and the Thrones of Kings: Therefore ye ought
to glory in the trials which the Cross makes.

Verse. 10. But the Rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the
grass he shall pass away.

11. For the Sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withers the
grass: and the flower thereof falls, and the grace of the fashion of it
perishes: so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways.

Argum. 6. He that is rich, and yet untouched by persecutours and afflictions,
has no matter of joy in his prosperity, but in the abasement of his mind, or
in his preparation to bear the cross, or afflictions, with others that are
afflicted.

Because] The reason is given, Because he that is not so wise, but trusts in
his riches, is vain, and shall come to nothing (as the flower of the grass
shall wither and perish) with all his counsels.

Verse. 12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is tried,
he shall receive the Crown of life which the Lord has promised to them that
love him. Argum. 7. He that patiently bears afflictions, and is found approved
in the Faith, is already blessed, and shall at length obtain the promised Crown
of eternal life, whereunto he is now prepared by the exercise of the cross:
Therefore this exercise by the cross is to be esteemed matter of joy.

Verse. 13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. Admon. 2. Touching a
right judgment of inward temptations, lest any one violate the sanctity of
God, even in their thoughts, as if God solicited any one to sin, which is a
familiar thing with the Sons of Adam, to cast the blame upon God, as the Author.

There are eight Arguments of the Admonition or Dehortation, all which prove
that temptations to evil are not to be ascribed to God.

For God] Argum. 1. God cannot be solicited or moved to sin: Therefore neither
can he solicit any other to sin, and consequently temptation to sin is not to
be ascribed to God.

Verse. 14. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own last,
and enticed. Argum. 2. Every man's proper lust is the true cause of temptation:
Therefore it is not to be ascribed to God. He proves the Antecedent, by
unfolding the method of temptation to sin in its five degrees. For, first, Man
is drawn by his depraved lust from the true good, that he may not rest quiet
in it: Furthermore, he is enticed by a false appearance of good, to follow
that which is evil.

Verse. 15. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin when
it is finished, brings forth death. Thirdly, He conceives in his will and
heart the purpose of sinning actually. Fourthly, He actually sins. And
fifthly, Sin committed, by its desert brings forth as it were, and procures
death. And so original wickedness brings forth actual sin, and by degrees
carries it on to further increase.

Verse. 16. Do not err, my beloved Brethren. Argum. 3. Ye will mistake, and
hold a false and blasphemous opinion, if ye ascribe the cause of your impulse
to sin unto God.

Verse. 17. Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning. Argum. 4. God is the fountain and author of all good, (which is in us,
or that which is given to us, either in the state of nature or grace) and of
good only; Because from him descends all good, and every gift which any ways
conduces to our perfection: Therefore we must not say that God is the cause of
evil or sin in us.

Of lights] Argum. 5. God is the Father of lights, knowledge, and
understanding, holiness, and happiness: Therefore he is not the Father of
darkness or sin.

With] God is immutable in his nature, without all variableness, either to
worse or better: From all eternity always, so like himself in all things, that
there is no foundation of changeableness of himself from himself, nor the least
shadow of motion or turning in him: Therefore it is impossible that God should
be the author of sin.

Verse. 18. Of his own will begat he us with the Word of Truth, that we should
be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. Argum. 7. God moved by his will
alone, has regenerated and converted us by the Word of the Gospel, from the
state of sin, to the image of his holiness: Therefore; etc.

That we should be] Argum. 8. The end of our regeneration is intended by God,
that we be holy, and wholly consecrated, (as the first fruits under the Law)
to his glory: Therefore we ought not to admit any blasphemous thoughts
concerning him, as if we were moved by him to evil or sin.

Verse. 16. Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, let every man be swift t^ ^ear, slow
to speak, ^low to wrath. The third Admonition is taken from the mentioning
their regeneration by the Word of Truth, That they seriously determine how they
may really show themselves religious, and truly regenerate. And this Admonition
is threefold; In the first he teaches the manner of hearing and receiving the
Word of God, whereby they might be prepared to practice, to verse. 22. Secondly.
He commands in general, that they bring the Word into practice, to verse. 29.
Thirdly, He commands in particular that they make manifest the virtue of their
religion in the holiness of speech, and in works of charity.

In the first branch of the Admonition, touching the hearing of the Word, he
requires five things. (1.) That they be ^eachable, and desirous to learn. (2)
That they do not rashly precipitate their judgment, or suddenly judge,
especially of matters of Faith. (3.) That they do not angerly receive them, who
at the first sight seem to disagree from them.

Verse. 20. For the wrath of m^n works not the righteousness of God. He gives
the reason of this part, Because the work of God, or that Righteousness which
he requires, is not promoted by our passions, or perturbations, or by our
carnal zeal and fervency.

Verse. 21. Wherefore lay apart all filth^ness, and superfluity of naughtiness,
and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls.
(4.) He requires, that in hearing the word, they cast away the sordid pleasures
of the flesh, and that natural pravity wherewith we all abound, endeavoring
repentance and mortification, lest the sowing or plantation of the Divine word
in them be hindered. (5.) That in meekness they receive the word; i. e. that
they admit the engrafted word with an humble and religious mind into their
hearts, which is engrafted, and by faith takes root in the heart, and becomes
one with it: The reason is, because the word of God so received, is able to
save their souls.

Verse. 22. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your
own souls. In the second branch of the admonition he requires in general, that
they be not only hearers of the word, but also doers; i. e. that they practice
that which the word of God commands: The reasons of which are three.

Reas. 1. Because otherwise they would deceive themselves, thinking it enough
to prove the truth of their faith, that they are hearers of the word of God,
although they endeavor not to obey it.

Verse. 23. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto
a man beholding his natural face in a glass.

24. For he beholds himself and goes his way, and streightway forgets
what manner of man he was.

Reas. 2. Confirming the former: Because it does no more profit to hear Gods
word, without endeavors to practice, than if any one should idly behold his
natural face in a glass, without any use or benefit.

Verse. 25. But whose looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues
therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man
shall be blessed in his deed. Reas. 3. Because on the contrary, he that does
these four: (1.) He that diligently looks into the word of God, studiously
inquiring into all the will of God, which is called the Law, or the Doctrine of
Liberty: Because it reaches the true means of freedom from sin and wrath, and
of serving God ingenuously, as it becomes Gods freemen, who are bound by love
and thankfulness to please God. (2.) He that perseveres continuing in the study
of the Doctrine of Holiness. (3.) He that bewareth lest he forget the things
which he has learned. (4.) He that endeavors to practice that which Gods
word commands: Truly he shall be blessed in his work, because although it is
impossible he should deserve happiness by his works, yet it shall be declared
by his works before all, that he is blessed, and in the exercise of good works,
as walking in the way to heaven, he shall certainly obtain the blessedness
promised to the Saints, and so shall be blessed in his work.

Verse. 26. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. In the third
member of the admonition he requires two things: (1.) That they which would be
Religious, and truly so accounted, let them bridle their tongues and attend,
that what they speak may be agreeable to the commands of God, and approved by
him. He gives two reasons of this condition: (1.) He that does otherwise, and
thinks himself Religious, deceives his own heart. (2.) He is an hypocrite,
whom such Religion will not profit, because the mouth speaks out of the
abundance of the heart: he is to be accounted little to regard his heart, who
does not bridle his tongue.

Verse. 27. Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, To
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world. The second thing that he requires, is, That they
manifest by the works of Charity, and an holy conversation, that they are truly
Religious, or that their profession of Christian faith is sincere and
immaculate, or that which does not disgrace the faith they profess, and that
which our God and Father approves.

As for the works of Charity, for example, he names, Compassion toward the
fatherless and needy in their affliction: For to visit, is liberally and
bountifully to succor the misery and necessity of others, under which duty he
Synecdochically comprehends the other duties toward our neighbor.

As for an holy conversation, he comprehends that under the endeavor of
preserving our selves, through the grace of God, undefiled from the world, or
from the defilements which are abroad in the world, and from the contagion of
other men's sins, so that we pollute not our selves with wickedness, nor have
fellowship with those that pollute themselves in the mire of sin.

CHAP. II.
THere are two Admonitions contained in this Chapter: The first is to shun
respect of persons, especially in Ecclesiastical matters, to ver. 14. The other
to avoid vain boastings of faith, where good works are wanting.

Verse. 1. My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of
glory, with respect of persons. The first vice which he admonishes them to
avoid, is respect of persons, which is committed, when in the same cause more
or less is attributed to any one, than is fitting, by reason of something in
his person, which nothing belongs to that cause. So they offended amongst the
Hebrews, who did magnify faith in Christ in the richer sort, but esteemed the
same faith as nothing in the poorer sort, so that the rich, though unbelievers,
were esteemed very highly; but the poor were accounted, though believers, of no
value, but contemned. He dehorts them from this vice by ten Arguments.

Argum. 1. Jesus Christ is glorious, and faith in him is equally glorious in
all: Therefore you ought to beware of respect of persons.

Verse. 2. For if there come unto your Assembly a man with a gold ring, in
goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man, in vile raiment,

3. And ye have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto
him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or
sit here under my footstool:

4. Are ye not then partial in your selves, and are become judges of evil
thoughts?

Argu. 2. This respect of persons, is condemned even by your consciences (which
he makes apparent from the example of their practice:) For rich men,
unbelievers, coming into your Churches, happily out of curiosity only, are so
publicly honored, out of mere respect to their riches, that in the mean time
your poor brethren are slighted, ver. 2, 3. He urges this testimony of their
consciences by way of interrogation.

And become] Argum. 3. They that respect persons are perverse Judges; whose
thoughts are perverse, not that it is unmeet to honor the rich, or more to
honor the rich than the poor; but that it is unmeet to honor the rich, though
wicked, for their riches sake, with contempt of the faithful and godly poor,
because they are poor: For so riches are accounted the sole cause of honoring
men, and piety is contemned without riches: Therefore respect of persons is to
be avoided.

Verse. 5. Hearken, my beloved brethren, Has not God chosen the poor of this
world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them
that love him?

6. But ye have despised the poor: Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you
before the judgement-seats?

7. Do not they blaspheme that worthy Name, by which ye are called?

Argum. 4. By this respect of persons ye dishonor the poor, whom God has
honored, by choosing them into the inheritance of his Kingdom, by adorning
them with better riches, than these worldly riches are, viz. with the riches of
Faith, and Love of God, and with promises of the inheritance of Heaven, which
are saving graces: Therefore respect of persons is to be avoided.

Do not rich men] Argum. 5. Because by the respect of persons ye are so
inconsiderate, that ye honor the public enemies of the Gospel (who are
honorable, neither in respect of Magistracy, nor in any other, except for
riches sake, but tyrannically usurp power over you, which is not given to them,
oppress you, and accuse you before Judges, and draw your bodies to the
judgement-seats, and blaspheme Christ's glorious name from whence ye are
denominated Christians) which is the highest foolishness: Therefore respect of
persons is to be avoided.

Verse. 8. If ye fulfill the royal Law according to the Scripture, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well.

9. But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of
the Law as transgressors.

Argum. 6. By preventing an Objection; Because in this respect of persons, ye
are by the Law reproved as transgressors. For it ye would pay that civil
respect which is due to every one according to his outward and civil condition,
and according to every ones merits, ye may be excused if ye would give to men
of greater fortune that which is meet, and not deprive your believing Brethren
of that which is equal, fulfilling the royal Law of God, the King of Kings, by
communicating to others a measure, according to the common rule of love, (even
as your selves may expect a just measure from others) then indeed might ye be
pardoned, verse. 8. But when ye give undue honor to rich men, but do not give
due respect to the poor that are Believers, in this you respect persons, and
are held guilty of sin, and transgressors of the Law: Therefore respect of
persons is to be avoided.

Verse. 10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point,
he is guilty of all. Argum. 7. Confirming the former, If ye indulge your
selves in this respect of persons only, contemning the poor believers, ye
shall be accounted guilty of the whole Law, although ye make show of observing
all the other Precepts, excepting only this, Because, whosoever offends in
one Precept alone, he is guilty of the violation of all, not that all concur
in one sin, but because there is a conjunction of all the commandments in one
rule of justice, and in one alone the same authority of God is violated in all;
and so the general guilt of all the Laws, or the curse of God by the violation
of one Law is drawn upon you, although the difference of the guilt and curse
remains in special degrees: Therefore respect of persons is to be avoided.

Verse. 11. For he that said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not kill.
Now, if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a
transgressor of the Law. He confirms this Argument in the example of the sixth
and seventh Commandment; whereof in the violation of either, the authority of
him that commands both is violated.

Verse. 12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of
Liberty. Argum. 8. Propounded by way of exhortation; So ought ye to speak and
do, especially toward the poor believers, as knowing that your selves are to
be judged without respect of persons, according to the Doctrine of the Gospel,
which forbids respect of persons: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 13. For he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no
mercy; and mercy rejoices against judgment. Argum. 9. Unless ye exercise
mercy, especially toward your poor and afflicted Brethren, ye shall have
judgment, it is to be feared, without mercy: Therefore avoid respect of
persons.

Rejoyceth] Argum. 10. If ye exercise mercy, especially toward your poor
afflicted Brethren, as the Gospel requires, ye have no reason to fear wrath or
judgment without mercy, but ye may by this be certified of Gods mercy,
whereupon relying, ye may rejoice against the severity of Judgment merely, as
from which ye are delivered through the mercy of God: Therefore unless ye
would renounce mercy, and make your selves obnoxious to judgment, ye ought to
avoid this respect of persons which is joined with cruelty.

The Second Part.
Verse. 14. What does it profit, my Brethren, though a man say he has Faith,
and have not works? can Faith save him? The other Admonition for avoiding the
vanity of boasting, touching a vain and idle Faith. The Proposition is
determined in the first words. That the Profession of Faith is unprofitable and
vain, which is destitute of works. He proves this by nine Arguments.

Argum. 1. Because such Faith, which is void of fruits, cannot save him that
boasts of his vain Faith: Therefore his profession is vain.

Verse. 15. If a Brother or Sister be naked, and destitute of daily food,

16. And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed, and filled:
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body,
what does it profit?

Argum. 2. Verbal profession of empty charity is vain, and unprofitable, both
to him that professes it, and to the hungry, to whom words are given in stead
of meat: Therefore also the mere Profession of Faith is vain.

Verse. 17. Even so Faith, if it has not works, is dead, being alone. Argum. 3.
Charity, which consists only in an outward profession, is dead: Therefore also
Faith which consists in an outward profession, without works, is dead, and vain.

Verse. 18. Yea a man may say, Thou have Faith, and I have works: Show me thy
Faith without thy works, and I will show thee my Faith by my works. Argum. 4.
Such a profession of Faith is apparently vain, when it shall come to the trial,
as it appears in the supposition of the Dialogue set down betwixt the true
believer, who can show his Faith by his Works, and the boasting hypocrite, who
cannot demonstrate his Faith by his life and works: Therefore that boasting of
Faith is vain and unprofitable.

Verse. 19. Thou beleevest that there is one God, thou do well: the Devils
also believe, and tremble. Argum. 5. Faith which is called Historical, whereby
we believe the Truth of the Articles of Faith, touching the unity of God, and
such like* although this be good, yet it is not sufficient to salvation, it is
not saving Faith; Because the Devils believe the Truth of the Divine Word, and
tremble: Therefore much less does the vain profession of Faith destitute of
works profit to salvation.

Verse. 20. But will thou know, O vain man, that Faith without works is dead.
Argum. 6. Propounded by way of Dialogue; He that glories and rests upon
such Faith that is without works, not knowing it to be dead, is a vain and
empty man, as a vessel, the more empty it is the more it sounds: and hence he
proceeds to the seventh Argument.

Verse. 21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works, when he had offered
Isaac his Son upon the Altar? Argum. 7. Proving that faith without works is
dead, and consequently the profession of faith, which wants works, to be
vain, from the example of Abraham, who in the foresaid matter touching the
demonstration of his faith, whether it were alive or dead, is found and
declared just by his works, and here by an interrogation he urges the
conscience of the hypocrite. Abraham the Father of the faithful is justified
before the whole world, because his faith was not dead, but alive by his works,
when he had offered Isaac his son upon the Altar, in testimony of the sincerity
of his faith; or that he by a lively faith believed in God, and pleased not
himself in the vain profession of an idle or dead faith, as many do: Therefore
faith which is without works, is dead and vain. And so James very well agrees
with ^aul: For Paul argues thus, Romans 4.2. If Abraham was justified by works,
he has whereof to glory, but not before God; therefore he is not justified
before God by works: But James argues thus, Abraham is justified by works
before men, who might say to him, Show me thy faith by thy works, or
demonstrate to me, that thy faith is not dead, but alive: From which antecedent
it does not only follow, Therefore faith without works is dead; but also, the
conclusion agreeing with Paul's conclusion, Therefore Abraham is justified
before God, not by that dead faith, and void of works, but by a lively faith,
and efficacious in works, and so the Apostles agree very well.

Verse. 22. See thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith
made perfect? He shows that this is the mind of James, by convincing the
boasting hypocrite, glorying of a dead faith; from this, that the faith of
Abraham, together with the profession of faith, had works joined with it, so
that his faith is declared to be perfected by works, and not found vain or dead.

Verse. 23. And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God,
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the friend of
God. From hence also he infers an exposition of that Scripture which Paul cites
in the matter of Justification by faith, and so he fully demonstrates his
consent with Paul, Seeing that Abraham's faith is perfectly declared by his
works, or the fruits thereof, then it is declared plainly, that the Scripture
has spoken true, He believed, etc. And so when it is said, that faith was
imputed to Abraham for righteousness, it is manifest, that it is to be
understood of faith not dead, but lively and operative by works: And James here
shows, that this exposition of the Scripture, is the fulfilling, and the full
sense of it: He says, that Abraham was called the friend of God, that we may
understand, that sincere reconciliation with God is wrought by faith, and true
friendship is demonstrated by the manifestation of faith in works of obedience.

Verse. 24. Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith
only? The conclusion follows from these premises, against the boasting of
hypocrites, touching their vain faith, that all pro^^ssing faith before men,
are justified by their works, and not only by the profession of their faith,
or by a dead and vain faith, which you hypocrites boast of.

Verse. 25. Likewise also, was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she
had received the Messengers, and had sent them out another way? Argum. 8. Rahab
the Harlot was justified (before Israel; viz. that she truly believed in God,
and was truly converted) by works, when she had received the Messengers of
Israel, and dismissed them safe: Therefore vain is the profession of an idle
faith. That James takes Justification for no other than as we have said, does
appear from this, that he calls Rahab an Harlot, or prostitute to filthy lusts:
Therefore how impossible was it for her to be justified by works before God,
but only by true faith, which shows it self to be true by works.

Verse. 26. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works
is dead also. Argum. 9. Even as an animate body, if it does not breathe, it is
dead; so faith, if it does not produce works, it is dead: Therefore vain is the
boasting of such an idle faith, wherein hypocrites please themselves.

CHAP. III.
THis Chapter contains two Admonitions: The first for governing of the tongue,
to verse. 13. The other concerning wisdom, which asswages the evils of the
tongue, and avoids strifes and contentions, to the end.

Verse. 1. My brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive
greater condemnation. As for the first Admonition, he commands them to bridle
the tongue; namely, from invective and rigid rehearsals of other men's vices or
infirmities. Be not (says he) many masters; i. e. arrogate not to your selves
the authority of mastership over others, and too much liberty of carping at
things (as many do) but bridle your tongues. He confirms the admonition by ten
Arguments.

Knowing] Argum. 1. Because that unjust censurers should suffer heavier
judgment from God the revenger of injuries: Therefore the tongue is to be
bridled, lest ye suffer an heavier judgment.

Verse. 2. For in many things we offend all. If any man offend not in word, the
same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body. Argum. 2. Seeing
that we are all liable to many failings, it becomes us to deal more diligently
with the infirmities of others, not to arrogate the authority of judging
without a calling, or to show our selves unjust in judging.

If any man] Argum. 3. If any man know how to govern his tongue, he has this
to manifest a perfect, or sincere man, who can moderate all his actions; and on
the contrary* he that cannot moderately rule his tongue, but in all things
carps at the carriages of other men, has the sign of an hypocrite: Therefore
the tongue is to be bridled.

Verse. 3. Behold, we put bits in the horses mouths, that they may obey us, and
we turn about their whole body.

4. Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are driven of
fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small helm, whithersoever
the governor lists.

5. Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasts great things: Behold
how great a matter a little fire kindles.

6. And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: So is the tongue amongst our
members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of
nature, and it is set on fire of hell.

Argum. 4. Confirming the former: Even as if thou guidest the bridle, thou also
rulest the horse; and if thou rulest the stern of the ship, thou do also the
ship: even so, if thou have rightly governed thy tongue, thou will also rule
thy whole body, and thy outward actions, although those instruments are small,
and the tongue is a small member: Therefore, etc.

Boasts] Argum. 5. The tongue carries it self highly, and boasts it self
gloriously, that it can on both sides perform much good in speaking the truth,
in constancy, taciturnity, courtesy, and such like; and also much evil, in
lies, reproaches, calumnies, and such like: Therefore it ought to be governed
with great care.

A fire] Argum. 6. Because as a small fire can kindle and devour much matter;
so the tongue, unless it be appeased and bridled, can stir up a world of evils,
and create infinite sins; and seeing it is a small part of the body, it can
involve and defile all the other members, and the whole body with wickednesses,
and set on fire with its wickedness, the wheel or course of all natural
faculties: Therefore it is diligently to be governed.

Of bell] Argum. 7. There is some affinity of an evil tongue with Hell and the
Devil, whom the tongue is ready to serve, and from him to send the flame of
lies, calumnies and brawlings, to burn the whole world: Therefore there is need
of great diligence in ruling the tongue.

Verse. 7. For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and things
in the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of man kind.

8. But the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.

Argum. 8. There is no kind of beasts, but may be tamed by humane reason or
art, and experience teaches us, that some of all kinds are tamed, ver* 7. but
the tongue no humane reason or art can tame; because it is in its own nature an
unquiet and an unruly evil, full of deadly poison, whereby it brings, and is
ready to bring deadly mischiefs unto others: Therefore ye must diligently
endeavor to bridle the tongue by Gods supernatural grace.

Verse. 9. Therewith bless we God, even the Father: and therewith curse we men,
which are made after the similitude of God.

10. Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing: my brethren, these
things ought not so to be.

Argum. 9. The tongue is mutable, deceitful, crafty, one while pretending it
self to very good, blessing God; another while openly putting forth its nature
expressly, by cursing men, and God obliquely, to whose similitude men are made:
from the same mouth, sometimes sending forth blessing, sometimes cursing, ver.
9. But this is absurd and monstrous, which is in no wise to be suffered ver.
10. Therefore ye must necessarily endeavor the ruling of the tongue.

Verse. 11. Does a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter?

12. Can the fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries? either a vine figs? so
can no fountain both yield salt water and fresh.

Argum. 10. Confirming the former, by a fourfold similitude of a fountain, a
fig tree, a vine, and the sea. And he argues from this which is impossible
according to nature, to an absurdity in manners: As it is not naturally that
from the same channel of the fountain sweet and bitter water should flow, or a
fig tree should bring forth grapes, and a vine figs, or the same sea should
both yield salt and sweet water: so reason does not suffer us to believe, that
it is the tongue of a regenerated man, which although sometimes it blesses, yet
being unbridled, it is carried otherwise to cursing; for a bad tree does not
bear good fruits: Therefore it becomes the Regenerate to follow the simplicity
of holiness in speech, and to endeavor to bridle their tongues.

The second part.
Verse. 13. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge amongst you? let him
show out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom. The other
Admonition, wherein he exhorts to wisdom, joined with meekness, which remedies
the evils and emulations of the tongue. The proposition is propounded in this
verse: If any man will show himself a prudent Christian, he ought to show it in
works of innocence and meekness: The Arguments are six.

Verse. 14. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not,
and lie not against the truth. Argum. 1. If any man laying aside his meekness,
cherishes contrary vices in his heart, emulation and contention, there is no
matter of glorying, but rather of shame: Therefore ye ought to study the
wisdom of meekness.

Lye] Argum. 2. They that lay aside meekness, and cherish in their hearts
envying and strife, are liars against the truth, i. e. they falsely boast
themselves to be wise, or to be Christians, who indeed show themselves to be
wicked: Therefore ye must study wisdom joined with meekness.

Verse. 15. This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
devilish. Argum. 3. The wisdom of contention, envying, revenging of private
injuries, is not that which descends from Heaven, from God, but is earthly,
sensual and devilish, having its original from corrupt nature and the Devil:
Therefore ye ought to study the wisdom of meekness.

Verse. 16. For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil
work. Argum. 4. Confirming the former; where there is not wisdom with meekness,
but envy and contention, there tumults, seditions, and every wickedness reigns:
Therefore we ought to endeavor after wisdom with meekness.

Verse. 17. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, and then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy. Argum. 5. From the eight
proprieties of that heavenly wisdom which is joined with meekness, that wisdom
which joined with meek: (1.) Is pure and chaste, i. e. holding fast truth and
holiness, lest it be any ways polluted. (2.) Peaceable, and avoiding
contentions. (3.) Endeavoring after equity. (4.) Easily giving place to right
reason. (5.) Full of mercy toward those that err and sin. (6.) Full of good
fruits, omitting nothing of those things which become a good and pious man.
(7.) Not enquiring suspiciously into the blemishes of other men. 8. Without
hypocrisy, wherein chiefly carnal wisdom is delighted: Therefore we ought to
endeavor after wisdom joined with meekness.

Verse. 18. And the fruit of righteousness is s^wn in peace of them that make
peace. Argum. 6. They that endeavor after this wisdom joined with meekness, do
the whilst endeavor to make peace, or to be peaceable themselves: (1.) They
are in peace. (2.) They work righteousness, or increase their holiness. (3.)
They sow to themselves for time to come, and for life eternal, that they may
reap the fruit of righteousness in due time: Therefore ye ought to endeavor
for this wisdom.

CHAP. IV.
THis Chapter contains three Admonitions: The first is for the curing the
disease of carnal lusts, to ver. 11. The second is for the avoiding of the
hurting or diminishing the fame of our brethren, to verse. 13. The third is for
the correcting the contempt of Divine Providence, in executing businesses, and
purposes.

Verse. 1. From whence come wars and fightings among you? ^ome they not hence,
even of your lusts, that war in your members? As for the first, The Arguments
of Dehortation from carnal lusts are nine, whereof the six fornier show the
evil, the three latter contain the remedies.

Argum. 1. Out of your lusts, which fight inwardly in your members, as it were,
amongst themselves, and war against the salvation of soul and body, arise
brawlings, contentions, wars amongst men, such lusts are covetousness,
ambition, fleshly lusts, and such like. Therefore ye ought to beware of them.

Verse. 2. Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot
obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not. Agum. 2. Lusts
weary you with unprofitable labors, vex your minds, drive you into many
dangers of life, and draw you from God and lawful means, by which ye might get
something: Therefore ye ought to beware of those.

Verse. 3. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it
upon your lusts. Argum. 3. If at any time ye use lawful and approved means; as
for example, in praying to God, your lusts obtrude themselves as the end of
your prayers, and defile them, and all other means, depriving you of all fruit:
Therefore ye must have a care of them.

Verse. 4. Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of
the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the
world, is the enemy of God. Argum. 4. Lusts stirring up the love of this world
in you, draw your souls into spiritual adultery, and make you adulterers and
adulteresses, who are-consecrated to God in spiritual marriage: Therefore
beware of them.

Whosoever] Argum. 5. Carnal lusts that are inward, whilst they draw you into
the love and friendship of this world, they bring you into hatred and enmity
with God: For whosoever thinks to please himself, or has determined to
ingratiate himself with worldly men, by conforming himself to their manners, he
makes war against God, and fights in the Camp of his adversaries: Therefore you
must beware of them.

Verse. 5. Do ye think that the Scripture says in vain, The spirit that
dwells in us lusts to envy? Argum. 6. Confirming the former: The spirit of
the old man (from whence all carnal lusts are stirred up) which by nature
dwells in us, by its natural violence, or by the impulse of the Devil, is
carried into envy and hatred, both of God and our neighbor, as the Scripture
does not in vain teach in many places, speaking of the corrupt nature of man:
Therefore it follows, that the friends of the world, serving the lusts of the
flesh, are enemies to God, and those carnal lusts also take their rice from the
wicked spirit.

Verse. 6. But he gives more grace, wherefore he says, God resists the
proud, but gives grace unto the humble. Argum. 7. Now God ( viz. after ye were
born again, and converted to the faith of Christ) gives more grace than that ye
should be seduced into envy or hatred of God and your neighbor, by the old
spirit dwelling in you, which he proves from the Scripture, teaching, that as
God resists, and is an adversary to the irregenerate, proud, and those that
are acted by the old spirit, so also he gives grace and help to the regenerate
that repent, and are humble, that they may restrain their carnal lusts:
Therefore ye ought to shun carnal lusts. This is the first remedy against
fleshly lusts.

Verse. 7. Submit your selves therefore to God: resist the Devil, and he will
flee from you. Argum. 8. Propounded by way of Exhortation: If as it becomes the
regenerate, ye embrace the friendship of God, and subject your selves in
humility to be ruled by him, resisting the Devil, who leads on the troop of
^leshly lusts, warring against your souls, it will come to pass, that the
Devil, the Captain of lusts, will be put to flight, and so the lusts fighting
under him will be scattered: Therefore fleshly lusts are to be restrained by
us. This is another remedy.

Verse. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to y^^: Cleanse your hands,
ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double minded. Argum. 9. Propounded by
way of Exhortation: If ye have repented and come unto God (as it becomes
believers) imploring his help, God will draw nigh to you, and will help you in
this fight against your lusts, and in all other necessities: Therefore ye ought
to use this remedy against Carnal lusts, which is the third remedy.

Purifie] He prosecutes this Argument, especially by exhorting them to
acknowledge themselves sinners, and to endeavor after the purity of their
hands or actions: and acknowledging themselves to be hypocrites by nature, may
endeavor after purity of heart.

Verse. 9. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be turned to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness. He further prosecu^es, more especially the
Exhortation to repentance, by prescribing the external exercises of repentance,
fasting, weeping, and the rest, which may demonstrate unfeigned repentance, and
really mortify fleshly lusts.

Verse. 10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you
up. Lastly, That they rest not in external exercises, he in^ulcates the
Exhortation to humility, adding the promise of a gracious Exaltation, wherein
they shall have victory over all their enemies, and moreover, glory and triumph.

The second Part.
Verse. 11. Speak not evil one of another, brethren: he that speaks evil of
his brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges the
law: but if thou judge the Law, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a judge.
The special Exhortation touching restraining the lust of detracting from the
reputation of the brethren, follows. There are five arguments of the
Dehortation.

Speaks ill] Argum. 1. Whosoever defames his brother, judges him and condemns
him, because he does it as if he was a Judge: Therefore ye ought not to detract
from the fame of your brethren.

Condemneth] Argum. 2. He which detracts from the reputation of his brother,
and judges or condemns him, he also detracts from the Law, and judges or
condemns the Law. The reason is, because the Law forbids and condemns rash
judging and evil reports: but the backbiter on the contrary, in the very act
whilst he diminishes the fame of other men, he allows that practice as if it
were good, and so speaks, and so does contrary to the Law, and pronounces the
Law neither good, nor worthy to be obeyed by any.

A doer] Argum. 3. Because he that slanders his brother, is not an obedient
doer of the Law, but a violator and condemnor of the Law, as it appears before:
Therefore ye ought not to defame your brother.

Verse. 12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy: Who art
thou that judge another? Argum. 4. It belongs to God alone to exercise the
parts of a Judge: Therefore what man is he that invades the office of God the
Judge?

One] Argum. 5. God alone, as he is able to save, if the slanderer shall
repent; so also he is able to destroy, unless by repenting of this and other
sins, he obey the Admonitions of God: Therefore ye ought not to indulge this
sin.

The third part.
Verse. 13. Go to now, ye that say, To day or tomorrow we will go into such a
City, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain. The third
Admonition, especially to buyers, touching the correcting of their sloathful
neglect of Divine Providence in undertaking businesses: He convinces them of
this sin, from the words mimically propounded. The Arguments of the Exhortation
are six.

Argum. 1. It is contained in form of citation to Gods Tribunal, Go to, etc. As
if he should say, this profane and wicked manner of deliberation, which does
not acknowledge the Providence of God, can neither bear the trial of God, nor
men judging aright: For as if you were Lords of your lives, and of your
strength, and success of your labors, so ye speak, ye dare not defend this
carriage before God: Therefore ye are held guilty of profaneness, for these
forms of speaking used by you.

Verse. 14. Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow: for what is your
life? it is even a vapor, that appears for a little time, and then vanishes
away. Argum. 2. Ye foolishly determine touching the time to come, when we are
all ignorant what will be to morrow: Therefore here you are accused of
profaneness.

For what] Argum. 3. Ye forget your mortality, and the frailty of your life,
which is like a vapor, appearing for a little time, by and by cast down by the
wind, it vanishes away: Therefore here ye are deservedly accused of
profaneness.

Verse. 15. For that ye ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall live and do
this or that. Argum. 4. Ye consider not that ye ought to depend upon the Divine
will, which is the fountain, rule, and measure of all things. In which argument
he prescribes also the remedy against this evil; viz. that we do not always
seriously acknowledge only the commanding or revealed will of God (which
prescribes to us what, and how we ought to act:) But also the secret will of
God, governing and efficaciously working in us, and by us, what, and how much,
and as long as it seems good to him: To which will we ought to submit our
actions, and the success of them, and our life it self, always considering in
our hearts, that we can do nothing without the efficacious will of God: and
that we accustom our selves to such like forms, ( If God will, If life, and
other things necessary to action be vouchsafed) as to the glory of God, it is
sufficient: For the Apostle does not intend the Religion of outward words, as
if forms might never be omitted, but requires continual acknowledgement of
Divine Providence in the heart, and such an outward profession in words, which
may distinguish us from profane men.

Verse. 16. But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is evil.
Argum. 5. Ye that are admonished, defend this profane manner of speaking, as
if ye rejoiced in your vain boasting, by which ye openly publish the wicked
stupidity of the heart.

Verse. 17. Therefore to him that knows to do good; and does it not, to him it
is sin. Argum. 6. By preventing an objection, If ye know that all your
businesses is committed to Divine Providence, and yet do not only contrary,
but do not acknowledge Gods Providence in the holy forms of speaking, as to
outward expression, do not ye, by how much the more ye know your duty, bring
upon your selves so much the more heavy guilt and punishment?

CHAP. V.
THis Chapter contains five Admonitions: The first is directed to rich men,
touching the wrath of God that hangs over them, to ver. 7. The other Admonition
is of poor men to patience, to ver. 11. The third Admonition is of all, that
they do not rashly swear, to ver. 13. The fourth is to the afflicted and sick,
to ver. 19 The last is to all, that they recall those that err into the way,
ver. 19, 20.

Verse. 1. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall
come upon you. The first Admonition is to rich men, abusing their riches,
wherein he excites them to a serious consideration of their condition, and
expounds to them nine causes of mourning and weeping: (1.) Because many
miseries hang over you, and shortly will come upon you.

Verse. 2. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moath-eaten. (2.) Ye are
wretchedly covetous, who have neither the fruit nor the use of riches your
selves, nor bestow them upon others, but ye had rather your riches should be
corrupted in your hands, than bestow any of them for the use of the poor.

Garments] (3.) Now Gods vengeance has begun, as a leprosy, to consume your
idol Mammon, as it appears by its corruption by moths and rust, which, as
Sergeants sent from God, have now invaded your unprofitable riches.

Verse. 3. Your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh, as it were fire: ye have heaped
treasure together for the last days. (4.) Now the rust, moths, and putrefaction
are ready to witness against you, which shall suffice in the day of Judgment
to convince and condemn you touching the abuse of your riches.

Shall eat] (5.) These witnesses shall be turned into tortures after the last
Judgment, when ye shall be burned in hell, wherein your unhappy souls and
bodies, shall be eaten up by torments, as by fire.

Treasure] (6.) When ye think that you have heaped up your treasures against
old age, and the use of your posterity, ye have heaped up treasures of wrath
for the last day, when Gods vengeance is to be revealed against all the
unrighteous.

Verse. 4. Behold the hire of the laborers, which have reaped down your fields,
which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: And the cries of them which have
reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabba^^h. (7.) Ye have cruelly
defrauded laborers of their hire, the voice of whose injuries ascends to God
the Judge, who has the hosts of Heaven and earth prepared to revenge, and will
deal with you for your deserts.

Verse. 5. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: you have
nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. (8.) Ye are luxurious
gluttons, securely indulging your selves in pleasures, as if every day was a
festival, or a day of slaughter, in which beasts used to be slain for feasting.

Verse. 6. Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he does not resist you.
(9.) Because ye have injustly and cruelly advised to condemn and slay the
innocent and impotent, who could not resist you: Therefore ye have just cause
to weep and howl over your miseries, which shall suddenly come upon you.

Verse. 7. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: behold,
the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. Admonit. 2. To the
godly that are oppressed, that they patiently suffer the injuries of wicked
rich men. The Arguments of the Exhortation are eight.

Vnto] Argum. 1. The coming of the Lord shall be the end of afflictions, taking
vengeance on the adversaries, and comforting the afflicted. Therefore be ye
patient.

The husbandman] Argum. 2. The husbandman patiently upon the hope of harvest,
or the precious fruits of the earth, bears a long time betwixt sowing and
reaping, betwixt the early rain, which falls after the seed is sown, and the
latter rain, which falls about the time of harvest: Therefore it becomes you
to suffer patiently until the Lords coming, under the hope of the fruits of
patience, or of deliverance which will come from Heaven.

Verse. 8. Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord
draws nigh. Argum. 3. The Lords coming is near for the deliverance of every
one out of his tabernacle: and the time is short to the last judgment, if it
be compared either with the time past, or with life eternal which is to come:
Therefore your hearts are to be established, and by faith to be confirmed to
patient expectation.

Verse. 9. Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned:
behold the judge stands before the door. Argum. 4. Propounded by way of
Exhortation, ye ought patiently to suffer injuries, even from them that are
within the Church, without murmuring one against another: Therefore much more
must ye bear injuries patiently that are brought upon you by wicked rich men.

Lest] He confirms this Argument: Because otherwise it is to be feared, lest ye
your selves, being guilty of this fault, be condemned by God the Judge, who
stands before the door, ready to judge, if you grudge one against another.

Verse. 10. Take, my brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the
Lord, for an example of suffering afflictions, and of patience. Argum. 5. Even
the Prophets, the Ambassadors of God to the Church, did patiently endure
injuries from the wicked: Therefore it becomes you also to suffer patiently.

Verse. 11. Behold we count them happy, which endure: Ye have heard of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very
pitiful, and of tender mercy. Argum. 6. We pronounce you blessed that bear
injuries patiently: Therefore be ye also patient.

Iob] Argum. 7. As Job did not only patiently suffer afflictions from his
enemies, but also the great injuries of his friends, and at length he found a
joyful issue of all his sufferings: So ye, if ye suffer injuries patiently, may
expect a joyful end.

Abounds] Argum. 8. Confirming the former, God is very merciful toward the
afflicted, especially those that are injustly vexed by men, and is ready to
pardon for his mercy sake, notwithstanding he is moved with their afflictions:
Therefore ought ye patiently to suffer afflictions.

Verse. 12. But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
neither by the earth, neither by any other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and
your nay, nay, lest ye fall into condemnation. Admonit. 3. Is not to swear
rashly, of which vice especially, and above all, he commands them to beware,
because it is especially forbidden in the Decalogue: And it seems to have been
too familiar with the Hebrews; and lest they should delude themselves by
circumstances, he forbids them to swear by creatures, which are either in
heaven or earth. He subjoyns three reasons.

Let your speech] Reas. 1. Because a true affirmation and a negation in daily
speech is sufficient, if ye use any thing more, unless ye have a care, ye will
fin.

Any] Reas. 2. Because otherwise ye will fall into the judgment and
condemnation of God, as he has threatened in the Law.

Verse. 13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing
Psalms. Admonit. 4. Is concerning the manner of carrying themselves in
prosperity and adversity, but especially sickness; whereof there are four
branches: (1.) Touching those that are sick in mind, by reason of any
affliction, that they may pray unto God; i. e. in God they may have ease from
their trouble. (2.) Touching them that are cheerful in mind, lest they being
drowned in security forget God, but that they change their cheerfulness of
mind into praising of God, and thanksgiving unto him: i. e. that they by some
spiritual exercise cherish their cheerfulness, lest their joyfulness degenerate
into fleshly lasciviousness.

Verse. 14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church,
and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord.
(3.) Touching the sick in body, that before they fly to Physicians, they would
turn themselves to God, and call for the Ministers of the Church, who may stir
up repentance, faith and comfort in them: Furthermore, that the Elders pray to
God for the sick person. Thirdly, That if any one amongst the Elders, of what
order soever, has the gift of healing (which flourished in the Church in the
Apostles times) let him in the name and authority of the Lord Jesus Christ (who
gave this gift) use it, and by the example of Christ's Disciples (who Mark 6.13.
having received power from Christ, anointed many sick persons with oil, and
healed them) let him anoint him that is sick; concerning the restoring of whose
health, the Holy Ghost has certified him. For it is certain, that the Elders
which were endued with the gift of healing, did not anoint any that were sick,
but those only concerning restoring of whose health they were certified by the
Holy Ghost.

Verse. 15. And the prayer of faith, shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. He
shows, that there will follow a double effect upon this unction and prayer:
(1.) If he that has prayed for the gift of miraculous healing, believing by
special revelation touching the success, this prayer coming from such a faith,
will save the sick from a bodily disease: For the Lord says, he will restore
health to him, and will raise him up. The other effect is this, If any special
sins have drawn the disease to the sick person, God being entreated by the
sick, and the Elders, will forgive them.

Verse. 16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that
ye may be healed: The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails
much. (4.) Concerning the giving assistance to one another in the wounds and
burdens of conscience, that whether admonished by the brethren of their sins,
or tormented within by the burden of sin, they would confess their sins one to
another, and pray one for another, mutually succouring one another both by
counsel and prayer to God, that they might be healed. There are four reasons of
the branch.

That ye may be healed] Reas. 1. Because so the wounds of conscience, and
errors of life might be healed, with which, as with diseases, they were sick.

Much] Reas. 2. Because the frequent prayer of a righteous man, or true
believer, stirred up by faith and love, avails much, as a special means
sanctified by God for the obtaining of things necessary for us.

Verse. 17. Elias was a man subject to like passions, as we are, and he prayed
earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by the space
of three years and six months.

18. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and earth brought forth her
fruit.

Reas. 3. Confirming the former; because the praying of Elias was efficacious,
not therefore because it was free from infirmities and passions, whereto other
believers are obnoxious; for he also was subject to like passions: But because
he prayed fervently in faith, according to the will of God revealed to him,
that the Heavens might be shut and opened: Therefore if ye shall earnestly pray
one for another, he says, your prayers shall prevail.

Verse. 19. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him:

20. Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his
way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

Reas. 4. Because, if they admonish one another, and confess their sins one to
another, and be instant in prayers to God one for another, and become
instruments of God for the converting of any wandering sinner; Then they should
be for the future instruments of saving the souls of their neighbors from
death (to which he that erres hastens) and also instruments for the future of
covering and hiding the multitude of sins of an erring brother: who unless he
had repented, his sins should be produced at the Judgment of God for
condemnation and death; which now are, after the admonition of the wandering
person, and the repentance of him that is admonished, covered.

The first Epistle general of PETER, Analytically expounded.
THE CONTENTS.
THe scope of the Epistle is to confirm (in the faith of Christ) the Hebrews
dispersed amongst the Gentiles, and converted to the Faith, and to stir them up
to perseverance and progress in faith and holiness of life, according to the
vocation of every one, as it appears from the end and intention of the Epistle.
Chap. 5. ver. 12. For which end thanks being given to God for their conversion,
he exhorts them in general, to an holy conversation, and to exercise mutual
charity, in the first Chapter, and in the former part of the second.
Furthermore, he descends in particular to duties of subjects toward
Magistrates, servants toward Masters: to mutual duties of husbands and wives,
and brethren in Christ, as well amongst themselves, as toward their
persecutors, in the remaining part of the second Chapter, and in the third and
fourth Chapter. He prosecutes the same doctrine in the fifth Chapter, by
instructing Elders in the Church, and younger men, and men of what rank soever,
in their duties.

CHAP. I.
THere are two parts of the Chapter, besides the inscription of the Epistle. In
the first, by way of thanksgiving for their conversion to the faith, he
commends the truth of the Doctrine of the Gospel, or the grace and the
excellency of the condition, whereunto by faith they were arrived, that so he
might confirm them in the faith, to Ver. 13. In the second, from the mentioning
of spiritual benefits bestowed upon the believing Hebrews, he draws an
Exhortation to the study of piety in general, and brotherly love in particular.

Verse. 1. Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,

2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace be multiplied.

In the first place, Peter, the Penman of the Epistle, in the inscription is
described from the Office of his Apostleship, that he might give authority to
this Epistle; Moreover, the Hebrews to whom he writ, are described, first, from
their outward low condition, that they were strangers scattered through the
Regions here mentioned, not excluding the rest that lived otherwhere. The
second, from the inward, spiritual, and excellent state, viz. that they were
elected, foreknown, sanctified, partakers of the obedience and sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ: For to be elected through Sanctification of the
Spirit to the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus, is to be elected,
that we by way of Sanctification might come to a full participation of the
fruits of Christ's obedience, and sprinkling of his blood, or the imputed
righteousness of Christ made obedient to his Father for us, unto the death of
the Cross: And so there are set down four causes of the excellent condition of
the believing Hebrews, or our spiritual state: (1.) The election of God he
Father, comprehending both the eternal election, wherein God from eternity
would have them before others separated, for the obtaining salvation in Christ:
and that temporal, wherein God by an efficacious calling, actually separated
them from others. (2.) The other cause is, the foreknowledge of God, by which
he means the act of Divine predilection, or eternal love, whereby he determined
in himself, or willed out of his mere love, to do good to all his sheep, and
namely, to them. (3.) The Sanctification of the Spirit, by which he means the
whole progress of the spiritual change of our state, from the beginning of our
conversion, even unto perfect holiness and glory. (4.) The obedience of Christ,
and the sprinkling of his blood, whereby is meant both the active and passive
righteousness of Christ (as some distinguish) yea, the whole work of
redemption, together with his application to their Justification and
Reconciliation unto God: which causes of Salvation are illustrated by naming
the three Divine Persons, to which distinctly indeed, but without division or
separation of persons, those causes in their order are ascribed, whereby we may
very easily perceive the distinction, grace, virtue, and the order of their
working: For foreknowledge and election is ascribed to God the Father, as to
the Fountain of our felicity: To Christ, Reconciliation, as M^diator meriting
and purchasing that felicity; and to the Holy Ghost, as an Executor applying
that to us: And so the causes of our Righteousness and Salvation, the original
obtaining and application, are wholly placed in the alone good pleasure of one
God, electing us out of his mere favor: From whence our efficacious calling
flows, and true Sanctification, as a certain fruit of our election: But the
only means whereby the virtue and efficacy of our election to Sanctification
and Salvation is derived to us, is, the mediation of Christ, or our
reconciliation made in him. In the benediction, or salutatory prayer, he wishes
for increase and multiplication of the effects of Divine favor toward them in
all things which may complete their Sanctification and Salvation.

Verse. 3. Blessed be God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according
to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. The first part of the Chapter
follows; wherein, that he may confirm them in the faith and grace of Christ
wherein they stood, he thanks God as the Father of Jesus Christ, for spiritual
benefits in Christ bestowed upon them in this state of grace. The reasons of
his thanksgiving, and also of the confirmation of their faith are sixteen; all
which prove, that they ought to give thanks to God, and be confirmed in faith.

Vs] Reas. 1. God has no less regenerated you than the rest of the Saints;
yea, no lest than the Apostles themselves: Therefore ye ought to bless God, and
to be strengthened in faith.

The Father] Reas. 2. He has regenerated, as the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; i. e. he has by Regeneration put you into the society of the
Covenant of Christ, and has received you into the fellowship of Christ's
Sonship by adoption: Therefore, etc.

Out of his abundant] Reas. 3. He has out of his abundant mercy regenerated
you; i. e. not induced by any deserts, nor hindered by any of your unworthiness
or ill deservings, has given unto you the benefit of Regeneration: Therefore
ye ought to bless God, and to be strengthened in faith.

Unto Hope] Reas. 4. God has regenerated you unto a certain lively hope of
eternal life, which shows it self in the works of spiritual life: Therefore,
etc.

By] Reas. 5. God has solidly founded the lively certainty of your hope upon
Christ's Resurrection from the dead, which is both the cause and pledge of your
resurrection from the dead: Therefore ye ought, etc.

Verse. 4. To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for you. Reas. 6. God has regenerated you unto life
eternal, which freely he bestowed upon you, by the will and testament of your
Father, as an inheritance gotten by none of your merits, and which is not
earthly, but heavenly, incorruptible, undefiled, immarcessible, excelling all
worldly possessions, and even that condition of life which Adam had in his
innocence: as that which is incident to no change, and whereunto nothing is
wanting as to its full perfection: Therefore ye ought to bless God, and to be
strengthened in faith.

Verse. 5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready
to be revealed in the last time. Reas. 7. God has bestowed perseverance upon
the regenerate, and has established the gift, keeping you to salvation, as
with an armed Garrison, and supporting your faith, lest ye fail from the way of
salvation, and that by his most firm decree, whereby he has both prepared that
salvation for you, and also appointed a certain time for the communicating of
it; viz. the day of judgment: Therefore ye ought to bless God, and to be
strengthened in faith.

Verse. 6. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need be) ye
are in heaviness through manifold temptations:

7. That the trial of your faith, being much more precious, than of gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

Reas. 8. The condition of the faith and grace of Christ wherein ye stand, is
solid matter of your rejoicing and triumph.

Now if] Reas. 9. The grace in which ye stand, administreth to you joy, even
when ye are tossed with manifold afflictions and sorrows, it gives you solid
arguments of consolation: Such as these four: (1.) The shortness of your
afflictions. (2.) Intermission of your afflictions. (3.) And the necessity of
them, For ye are now in heaviness for a short time if need be. (4.)
Profitableness of afflictions, which is for the trial and purifying of your
faith, that it may be more pure, as gold tried, unto your praise, honor and
glory, wherewith Christ will adorn all you holy ones, that are of an approved
faith, at his coming: Therefore ye ought, etc.

Verse. 8. Whom having not seen, ye love: in whom, though now ye see him not,
yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Reas. 10.
The grace wherein ye stand, lifts up your minds above sense, to a spiritual
contemplation, and most sweet love of Christ: Therefore.

In whom] Reas. 11. Although ye have neither seen Christ at any time, nor now
see him, yet the faith wherein you stand, causes you to rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, which excells all that our words can utter, or
capacity can comprehend; and whereof if ye now glory, ye afterward shall never
be ashamed: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.
Reas. 12. Confirming the former: By the faith in which you stand, even in this
life ye receive the fruit, reward and end of your faith in this life; viz. the
inchoate and begun felicity of your souls in the midst of your bodily
afflictions: Therefore ye ought, etc.

Verse. 10. Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you. Reas. 13.
From the testimony of the Prophets: This grace in which you stand, is the very
same salvation whereof all the Prophets in times past have prophesied to come
in these our times: Therefore ye ought, etc.

Verse. 11. Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which
was in them, did signify, when it testified before hand the sufferings of
Christ, and the glory that should follow. He confirms the certainty of this
testimony from th^se four: (1.) That the Prophets have not only foretold
concerning this salvation which was to come; but have also diligently enquired
into this grace and salvation, and searched after it, that they might foretell
it unto us. (2.) That they did not only enquire, touching the grace of the
Gospel that is revealed; but also concerning the point of time wherein it
should be revealed. (3.) That they did not depend upon uncertain conjectures in
this search, but took counsel of Christ's Spirit, the foreknower and foreteller
of all things (which was present with them after an extraordinary manner.) (4.)
Because the Doctrine of salvation was the same both in our and the Prophets
times, and is briefly comprehended in the humiliation and sufferings of Christ,
and in his exaltation or glory following in the effects of Christ's sufferings:
Therefore ye ought upon this account to bless God, and to be strengthened in
your holy faith.

Verse. 12. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us
they did minister the things which are now reported unto you, by them that have
preached the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, which
things the Angels desire to look into. The same testimony is propounded in the
answer of the Spirit, which answer brings in,

Reas. 14. From the prerogative of believers after Christ was offered, above
the condition of the Prophets, unto whom it was revealed, That although they
should receive the fruit of their faith with us, yet they should not see the
fulfilling and end of their prophecies, but we who were born after Christ was
offered, by whom the prophecies were for this end uttered, that we comparing
the prediction with the accomplishment might be confirmed in faith: Therefore
ye ought to bless God, and be strengthened in faith.

By them] Reas. 15. Those things which the Prophets did prophecy by the Spirit
of Christ speaking in them, the Apostles have told to you by the Holy Ghost
sent from heaven: Therefore ye may be certain, that this is the true grace
wherein you stand, and therefore ye ought to bless God, etc.

Angels] Reas. 16. So great is the excellency of faith and grace in which ye
stand, that the heavenly Angels themselves desire to look into it; partly, that
they may further enquire into it, partly that having looked into it, they may
more delight themselves in admiring the glory of God in the grace bestowed upon
the faithful: Therefore ye ought to be confirmed in faith, and to bless God.
But here he alludes to the type of the two Cherubims, who standing upon the Ark
of the Covenant, did turn their faces toward the cover thereof, as if they
desired to look into it: whereby, besides other things, were signified, that
the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God, and Man's Redemption, was
worthy the contemplation of the very Angels themselves, and their greatest
admiration.

The second part of the Chapter.
Verse. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the
end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus
Christ: The other part of the Chapter follows, wherein from the mention of
spiritual benefits, and demonstration of the truth of grace wherein they stood,
he deduces an Exhortation to the study of piety, and to go forward in the grace
of God. There are three branches of the Exhortation: (1.) That as they who are
either taking a journey, or go about some work, that they may be the more ready
therein, they gird up their loins, so let them gird up the loins of their
mind; i. e. refrain, and restrain their minds from all lust, whereby they may
be hindered from a ready and free serving God. (2.) That they be sober, not
only avoiding intemperance of meat and drink; but also all immoderate use of
delightful things. (3.) That they firmly and constantly hope and expect that
grace, which is now revealed, and shall be further fully revealed at the coming
of Christ. In which Exhortation is comprehended the whole course of faith and
holiness. There are thirteen Arguments of the Exhortation, all which prove that
we ought to go forward in holiness, and faith of the Doctrine of grace*

Wherefore] Argum. 1. From the connection of the Exhortation with the preceding
doctrine, expressed in the word wherefore, the first Argument is drawn, Ye
ought to be excited and stirred up to all endeavor after piety, upon the
consideration of the grace in which ye stand, and of spiritual benefits
bestowed upon you by the faith of Christ: Therefore ye ought to proceed, with a
constant profession, in piety and the grace wherein you stand.

Shall be revealed] Argum. 2. The grace now manifested, and which at length
shall fully be manifested at the approaching coming of Christ, ought to excite
you to follow after holiness, and retaining the grace of God: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 14. As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to the
former lusts, in your ignorance: Argum. 3. By the right of adoption, as
obedient sons, ye are bound to follow after piety, and the profession of grace:
Therefore, etc.

Do not fashion] Argum. 4. Seeing it cannot consist with the obedience of
children, that ye fashion your selves to the former lusts, which ruled in you
before conversion.

Verse. 15. But as he which has called you (...) holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation;

16. Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Argum. 5. Ye ought to answer your holy vocation in all kind of holy
conversation. Go forward therefore, etc.

As] Argum. 6. Confirming the former: There ought to be some similitude betwixt
you and the Holy God, who has called you: Therefore ought ye to labor after
this conformity. He confirms this Argument from the testimony of Scripture,
Lev. 11.44. Mat. 5.17.

Verse. 17. And if you call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in
fear. Argum. 7. God is the Judge of every man's works, and more severely
requires holiness from those that draw nigh to him, and call him their Father:
Therefore ye ought to pass the time of your sojourning here in this life, in
the fear of God.

Verse. 18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition
from your fathers; Argum. 8. Ye are redeemed from all manner of vain
conversation in Legal purifications, separated from the thing signified, and
placed in humane traditions, which are of no value, although it may be
commended to you by the example of your Fathers, and by tradition: Therefore
unless ye would frustrate your redemption, ye ought to endeavor after true
piety, and renounce a vain conversation.

Redeemed] Argum. 9. By redemption ye are the hired servants of God, that ye
may no longer live according to your own will, or the world, or the Devil, but
according to the will of him that redeemed you: Therefore ye ought to live in
the faith and obedience of Christ.

Verse. 19. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish,
and without spot, Argum. 10. The blood of Christ the Son of God dying,
represented by the typical Lamb, is of so much excellency, that it far exceeds
the most precious things in this world: Therefore ye ought to stand in the
grace of Christ, and endeavor after holiness, unless ye will vilify this
price.

Verse. 20. Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but
was manifest in the last times for you, Argum. 11. Although Christ from
eternity was foreordained to the work of Redemption, yet he was not manifested
until the last times, and that especially for your sakes, who were even as the
lost sheep of Israel: Therefore ye are chiefly bound to glorify God by your
holiness.

Verse. 21. Who by him do believe in God that raised him up from the dead, and
gave him glory that your faith and hope might be in God. Argum. 12. Christ was
not only manifested for your good that are believers, but also by Christ, or
the merit and operation of Christ, that same faith whereby ye believe in God is
obtained and produced in you: Therefore it is meet, that ye should live to God
in holiness.

Has raised] God by raising Christ the Redeemer from the dead, and by
glorifying him with that glory which he had with God from all eternity, has
demonstrated unto you, and to all the world, that Christ is truly the Son of
God, or truly God; that your faith whereby ye believe in Christ, might be found
to be faith in God: and so the solidness of your faith might appear to you for
your greater comfort and glory: Therefore ye faithful Hebrews, who live after
Christ is risen, are so much the more bound to follow after faith and holiness,
that ye may please God.

Verse. 22. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the
Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren: see that ye love one another with
a pure heart fervently, The Second Exhortation more especially to brotherly
love. There are three branches of this Exhortation: Branch (1.) That they love
fervently, not coldly, not remisly, as if they were ready upon small cause to
hate. (2.) That they love with a pure heart, endeavoring the good of one
another, not only aiming at private advantage. (3.) That without hypocrisy,
they follow after brotherly love, loving not only in word and tongue, but
showing love in deed, without dissimulation, without deceit.

Souls] There are three Arguments of the Exhortation: Argum. 1. It is to be
presupposed, that ye being justified by faith, in desire, in purpose, and an
inchoate endeavor, through the virtue of the Holy Spirit, have purified your
souls to the sincere love of the brethren: Therefore ye ought exceedingly to
love one another.

Verse. 23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by
the word of God which lives and abides for ever. Argum. 2. This brotherhood
of believers is more excellent than that which is after the flesh, in as much
as it does not rise from natural generation, but from spiritual regeneration,
which requires a more firm, mutual, and excellent love: Therefore ye ought to
love one another fervently.

Word] Argum. 3. Confirming the former: This fraternity of believers, as it
has its rise from an incorruptible principle, so it will never perish. The
word of God which is the seed of our regeneration, is not corruptible, like the
seed of natural generation: Therefore ye ought exceedingly and carefully to
love one another.

Verse. 24. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man, as the flower
of grass: The grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away. He confirms
both parts of the comparison, from the testimony of Scripture: And, first, he
proves the corruptibility of natural seed, from Isa. 40.6. which declares the
glory of all flesh, and consequently all relation of fraternity founded in
flesh, to be corruptible.

Verse. 25. But the word of the Lord endures for ever: And this is the word,
which by the Gospel is preached unto you. He proves, that the seed of
Regeneration is incorruptible, from the testimony of the same Prophet Isaiah;
because the Word of the Lord abides for ever. But he affirms, that this is
spoken touching the word of the Gospel, as the matter stands, because the
preaching of the truth concerning salvation by Christ, vouchsafed to believers,
is operative for the bringing of believers to life eternal: Therefore it is
incorruptible.

CHAP. II.
HE proceeds in his Exhortation to duties of Piety and Holiness. This Chapter
contains four Exhortations.

Verse. 1. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, and evil speakings. The first Exhortation is to love and desire of
the Divine Word, which he had of late commended. There are two branches of the
Exhortation: The first, touching the shunning and laying aside the vices that
are familiar to corrupt nature, which may either extinguish or diminish the
desire of the Divine Word. Of this sort, he recites five: The first whereof is
malice, whereby any one purposely damnifies another. 2. Guile, whereby any one
cunningly deceives his neighbor to his hurt. 3. Hypocrisies, or lies in fact,
when one shows that good will in his countenance, which he has not in his
mind. 4. Envies, whereby we are grieved at the good of others. 5. Evil
speakings, whereby the fame of our neigbour is injured.

Verse. 2. As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby. The second branch of the Exhortation, is, That they desirously
receive the ^ound Doctrine of the Gospel, as sincere milk. The Arguments of the
Exhortation are eleven:

Argum. 1. As the mothers milk is fit and natural nutriment for the infant; so
the Doctrine of the Gospel is meet for nourishing those that are spiritually
regenerated: Therefore we ought to desire and receive it.

Thereby] Argum. 2. As infants grow up by milk, so believers by the Doctrine of
the Gospel, and by the larger knowledge of the Divine Word, grow up; i. e. make
further progress in newness of life* Therefore ye ought to desire the Word of
God.

Milk] Argum. 3. The word is, as it were, spiritual, rational, sincere, pure
milk, and free from all error, which can deceive no man, most convenient for
the feeding of the soul: Therefore the Word of God is to be desired by you.

Verse. 3. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. Argum. 4. The Word
of God contains nothing besides the goodness of God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, toward believers, whose sweetness they that have tasted, cannot but
desire it: Therefore if ye have tasted that God is good, the Word of God is to
be desired by you.

Verse. 4. To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but
chosen of God and precious, Argum. 5. Receiving the wholesome Doctrine of the
Gospel, as sincere milk, ye come nearer every day to Christ, and obtaining a
more straight and holy communion with him: Therefore ye ought to desire the
Word of the Gospel, and greedily drink it in. He illustrates this Argument by
diverse similitudes, and superaddes therein other Arguments by way of
Exhortation.

Stone] Argum. 6. Confirming the former, Christ will yield himself a firm and
lively foundation of salvation, very precious, and of great esteem with God
(who admits no other foundation of salvation) to you that drink in the milk of
truth, and to you that come to Christ according to the Word of God, although
Reprobates contemn and reject him: Therefore the milk of Evangelical truth is
to be drunk in and desired by you.

Verse. 5. Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
Argum. 7. Ye drawing nigh according to the Word of the Gospel, shall not find
Christ only a solid foundation, but ye your selves also, by the virtue of
Christ, more and more built up in him, into one mystical body with other
believers, that ye may be a spiritual Temple, wherein God may dwell: Therefore
ye ought to desire the milk of the Word.

Priesthood] Argum. 8. Coming to Christ according to the Word of the Gospel, ye
are not only consecrated and dedicated to God, as his Temple; but also ye
obtain an holy Priesthood, that ye may offer up better Sacrifices than those
typical; viz. the fruit of spiritual obedience, which will please God, and be
grateful and acceptable to him by the intercession of Christ; and so ye may
obtain a greater glory, than the typical Temple, considered in it self, had:
Therefore ye ought to desire the Evangelical milk of the Word.

Verse. 6. Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a
chief corner stone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him shall not be
confounded* He confirms these Arguments by diverse testimonies of Scripture^ and
applies those testimonies to the present use, for the quickening the endeavors
of the Hebrews after the Doctrine of the Gospel.

The first testimony, Isa. 28.16. proving the sixth Argument severally: (1.)
That Christ is laid by God in the foundation of the Church, for a corner stone,
which both adorns, and holds the Edifice together, which is full of honor and
excellency, elect and precious in Gods account, and was first to be manifested
in Sion; or the Church of the Jews, that from Sion might go forth the Law, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And that he should become a solid
foundation to those that believe: he proves from this, that they which believe
in him, shall not be confounded.

Verse. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, he is precious; but unto them which
be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the
head of the corner,

8. And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them which stumble
at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed.

He confirms the last branch of the sixth Argument; viz. That they ought not to
be moved at the scandal given by wicked men, who have rejected Christ; partly,
because it is sufficient that Christ is precious to Believers; partly, because
unbelievers cannot take away the honor of Christ, which is given by the
Father: Upon this account he cites the second testimony of Scripture, from
Psalm. 118.22, etc. From whence is proved, (1.) That Christ must be rejected of
those who had rule in the Church. (2.) That their endeavors should be vain.
(3.) It should come to pass, that they who would not believe in Christ, or they
who would stumble against this stone, should be ruinated and perish. And here
he cites the third testimony of Scripture, from Isa. 8.14. (4.) That none will
renounce Christ but Reprobates, whom God has appointed through and for their
own obstinate incredulity, to deserved destruction. And here is comprehended
the eighth ho^tatory Argument, to the promoting of Evangelical Doctrine, and to
the sucking in the milk of truth concerning Christ. Because unbelief of the
Word of Truth concerning Christ, is a sign of reprobate and lost men, or of
those designed to destruction: Therefore except ye would be accounted
cast-aways, desire earnestly the word of the Gospel.

Verse. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called
you out of darkness, into his mavelous light: Argum. 9. The honor of the
Hebrew Nation, which God gave to your Fathers, Exodus 19. and elsewhere, is
preserved in you Hebrews who believe in Christ: Therefore you are bound to
desire earnestly, and receive the Doctrine of Faith. But they are called a
Royal Priesthood, because they are partakers of Christ's Kingdom and Priesthood;
yea, constituted Kings and Priests by Christ. They are called a Chosen
Generation, because God adopted them before other people himself. An Holy
Nation, because God consecrated them to himself in purity of life. A Peculiar
people, because God had redeemed and chosen them to himself, for a treasure and
inheritance.

Has called] Argum. 10. God has called you out of the darkness of sin,
misery, and unbelief, to the knowledge of the Gospel of truth, and
participation of the glorious light of that truth, that the wisdom, goodness,
justice, and other virtues of God, might shine in you, as in an image:
Therefore it becomes you to desire and suck in the milk of Evangelical
Doctrine.

Verse. 10. Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God:
which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy. Argum. 11.
Confirming the former, the gathering in of the rejected Hebrew Nation, and the
Reconciliation prophesied of by Hosea, Chap* 2. verse. 23. began to be fulfilled
in you, believing Hebrews, and indeed out of Gods mere grace to you: Therefore
ye are bound diligently to obey the foresaid Exhortation.

Verse. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. The second Exhortation, to
holiness is twofold: (1.) That they abstain from all lusts of the flesh, or of
corrupt nature, whether they show forth themselves in soul or body. (2.) That
they carry themselves honestly, i. e. holily, innocently, and justly before men.

Pilgrims] The reasons of the Exhortation are five; which prove, that they
ought to abstain from fleshly lusts.

Reas. 1. Ye are Strangers or Pilgrims, not only because ye are banished from
your Country; but also, because the sons of God, wheresoever they live, are
strangers: Therefore ye ought to abstain from fleshly lusts.

War] Reas. 2. Ye cannot obey the lusts of the flesh, but to your own hurt;
for, the lusts of the corrupt old man, are opposite to eternal salvation, and
war against the saving of your souls: Therefore ye ought to abstain from them.

Verse. 12. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas
they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they
shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. Reas. 3. Unless ye obey
the Exhortation, ye will give occasion to the unbelieving enemies of the
Gospel, as to evil doers, who took all occasion of speaking evil of you:
Therefore ye ought to obey the Exhortation.

Good works] Reas. 4. It is not sufficient, that by your innocence ye take away
from your enemies the occasion of evil speaking, but they are also to be
convinced by your good works, and their mouths to be stopped, that they may
not speak evil of you, when they most desire it: Therefore ye ought to obey
this Exhortation.

Glorifie] Reas. 5. This will be a fit and proper means for the conversion of
unbeliever* and for their giving glory to God, when it shall please him, by his
grace to visit them, and to draw them to believe in Christ: Therefore ye ought
to obey the Exhortation.

Verse. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme, The third Exhortation (drawn especially
from the former) is of obedience to the Magistrate, which he calls an humane
Ordinance; because, although all power in general is the Ordinance of God, yet
the particular manner of Government, rather by a Monarchy, than any other way,
or by Aristocrary or Democracy, or any other Government mixed of these, is not
determined by God, but it is left to be determined by every Commonwealth; which
when it is determined, it is called the Ordinance of man, which is ratified by
God, or his Ordinance: For although in Ecclesiasticals and Spirituals, Christ
alone has the Dominion and Authoritive power* and retains it to himself, nor
does he suffer any Dominion, but a mere Ministration subordinate to himself in
his spiritual Kingdom; yet he has in Civils constituted a subordinate
Dominion, and called men Gods, although not absolutely: Therefore whatsoever
the form of Government be, wherein a Kingdom or Commonwealth shall agree, here
the Apostle commands the believing Hebrews to yield themselves subjects, both
to the King, as Supreme, and to Governors, who are sent of him.

For the Lords sake] The reasons of the Exhortation are five: 1. The Lord
requires this subjection; viz. so far as they do not command any thing against
the Lord: For God has given the power of ruling to men, for, and not against
himself: Therefore be ye subject.

Verse. 14. Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the
pun^shment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For] Reas.
2. The end of an Ordinance is for the repressing of the wicked, and preserving
and cherishing the good: Therefore for this end ye ought to be subject.

Verse. 15: For so is the will of God, that with well-doing, ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men, Reas. 3. God will by subjection of
believers given to Magistrates, silence (as with a muzzle) brutish men, who
unreasonably rage against the people of God, as if they were enemies to
Magistrates: Therefore be ye subject.

Verse. 16. As free, and not using your liberty for a clo^k of maliciousness,
but as the servants of God. Reas. 4. Preventing an objection: God does not
permit any man to use Christian liberty for a cloak to his maliciousness, or
rebellion, as if Christian liberty exempted any one from the duty (...) Civil
subjection; but being freed from sin, ye freely serve the promoting of the
justice of God, whereof the Magistrate is a Minister: Therefore ye ought to be
subject to Magistrates, and to observe civil order.

Verse. 17. Honor all men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King.
Reas. 5. These four Christian duties are conjoined: (1.) To despise no man, but
to esteem all according to the station wherein God has placed them. (2.)
Intimately to love those which are of the household of faith. (3.) To (...) God.
(4.) To give the honor and obedience (...) is due, to the Magistrate, so that
he which has not performed the latter of these duties, is not to be thought to
have performed the other sincerely: Therefore be ye subject to the Magistrate.

Verse. 18. Servants, be ye subject to your masters with all fear, not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward, The fourth Exhortation is to
Christian Servants, That they not only reverence their Masters that are more
mild and courteous, but also those that are severe and froward.

Verse. 19. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering wrongfully. There are twelve Arguments of the Exhortation,
which prove, that servants ought to bear the wrongs that are inflicted upon
them by their Masters.

Argum. 1. This is a grace, or the glorious work of Gods special grace working
in man above the strength of nature, if any one by that account that he may
please God, does patiently suffer injuries done to him: Therefore Servants
ought to suffer wrongs from their Masters.

Verse. 20. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye
shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God. Argum. 2. Confirming the former, from
the contrary: Because it is no glory, but a common thing for Malefactors to
suffer for their evil deeds; but to suffer wrongs for well-doing, is the
glorious work of grace, accepted and approved of God: Therefore servants must
suffer injuries, etc.

Verse. 21. For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps: Argum. 3. Ye are
called to bear the Cross, and to suffer injuries for the glory of God:
Therefore suffer ye, etc.

Christ] Argum. 4. Christ has suffered for us, from his enemies, far more
grievous evils: Therefore ye are bound, for the glory of God, to bear patiently
the wrongs that are inflicted upon you by your Masters.

Leaving] Argum. 5. Christ in his sufferings has left us an example of
suffering injuries; and he will, that all believers should be conformable unto
him, and imitate his example: Therefore ye ought to suffer injuries inflicted
upon you by your Masters.

Verse. 22. Who did not sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. Argum. 6.
Confirming the former: Christ was altogether without sin; but ye servants,
although ye are free from blame, for which ye are afflicted by your Masters,
yet ye are not free from all sin, from all guile in your lips: Therefore ye are
bound the more patiently to suffer injuries inflicted by men.

Verse. 23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously. Argum. 7.
Christ contained himself from all requital of injuries, and did not revile
those that reviled, and violently used him: Therefore ye servants ought to
bridle your minds, not returning evil for evil, and injuries from your Masters
must be endured.

Committed] Argum. 8. If ye bear injuries by the example of Christ, ye have
committed your cause to a just Judge, God will revenge the injuries inflicted
upon you: Therefore suffer ye, etc.

Verse. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we
being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye^ were
healed. Argum. 9. Seeing that Christ hanging on the Cross, has really born and
suffered the guilt and punishment of our sins in his own body, ye ought not to
suspect, that God (whilst he afflicts you by the hands of unjust Masters)
does as an angry Judge, require vengeance of your former sins: Therefore being
certified, as touching the expiation of your sins, ye ought to be^^ the
exercises of afflictions with a more patient mind.

To sin] Argum. 10. For this end Christ has taken away the guilt and
punishments of our sins, that the mortification of sin in us, and true
righteousness covenanted for by his death, may be promoted by all means, and
consequently abstaining from revenge, ye follow after patience: Therefore
injuries are to be born by you, etc.

Whose] Argum. 11. There is comfort and healing prepared for you in the stripes
and wounds of Christ against all spiritual sickness of the mind, and all
wounds of the body, which either your unjust Masters have inflicted, or shall
inflict upon you his faithful servants; which he confirms in the words of Isa.
53. Therefore ye must patiently suffer injuries from your Masters.

Verse. 25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. Argum. 12. Now ye ought to lead another
kind of life than you did in times past: For heretofore ye did go astray as
sheep, in ignorance and sinfulness, to your own destruction: now being gathered
to the Bishop and Shepherd of your souls Jesus Christ, ye ought to follow your
Captain, and commit your selves, and all yours, (and especially your souls) to
his care and custody: Therefore ye servants ought patiently to bear the
injuries done to you by your Masters.

CHAP. III.
THe Chapter contains two parts: The first concerning duties of the wife and
husband: The other of common virtues, which belong to all sorts of men.

Verse. 1. Likewise ye wives be in subjection to your own husbands: that if any
obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of
the wives: The first part of the Chapter: Wherein first of all he gives
precepts to wives of their duties toward their husbands, although they were
unbelievers.

Precept 1. That they be subject to their own husbands, and obey them, not
obstinately refusing their Government.

Likewise] The Reasons of the Precept are three:

Reas. 1. Because in like manner, from the obligation of the Law, wives are
bound to subjection to their husbands, as servants are bound to subject
themselves to their Masters, although not in the same degree of subjection, or
subject to the same duties.

That also] Reas 2. Because unbelieving husbands may by the holy conversation
of their believing wives, be prepared to attend to the word of faith, and may
be so far won to embrace the faith of Christ, that before they hear the word,
they may love it, for the effects thereof which they observe in their wives.

Verse. 2. While they behold your chast^ conversation coupled with fear. Reas.
3. Confirming the former: Because the pure and chaste conversation of believing
wives, might move their unbelieving husbands to the consideration of the
excellency of Christianity, whereby the professors thereof were instituted to
purity and fear.

Verse. 3. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of plai^ing the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel: Precept. 2.
Concerning the adorning of wives, that they be not over curious in the outward
adorning of the body, indulging themselves too much in the affectation of two
much ^ea^ness and superfluous trimming.

Verse. 4. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price. Precept. 3. Propounded by way of Antithesis: That
they adorn the inward man; that is, the soul (begun already to be renewed) by
the ornament of virtues; namely, of a meek and quiet spirit, which will make
them carry themselves modestly in all things.

Who is] The Reasons of the Precept are five:

Reas. 1. Because this adorning is incorruptible, in respect of the immortal
soul, and in respect of unperishable virtue.

In the sight] Reas. 2. Because this adorning is precious in the sight of God,
gra^eful and acceptable in his eyes, whereof it behooves women to have a regard,
rather than of the sight of vain men, that look upon them.

Verse. 5. For after this manner in the old time, the holy women also who
trusted in God adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands.
Reas. 3. From the example of holy women in the Old Testament, whose praise is
in the Scripture, not for the external adorning of the body, but for faith in
God, and subjection paid to their husbands.

Verse. 6. Even as Sarai obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord, whose daughters ye
are as long as you do well, and are not afraid with any amazement. Reas. 4.
From the example of Sarah, who meekly obeyed Abraham, and acknowledged him to
be her Lord.

Whose] Reas. 5. Because if they would express the piety and m^de^ty of Sarah
in her manners, and would not suffer themselves by any worldly fear, to be
drawn from the pu^su^e of Piety, they should declare themselves to be the
daughters of this holy Matron.

Verse. 7. Likewise ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving
honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of
the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered. On the other side, he
commands husbands to dwell with their wives; that is, that they indulge them
courteously, and treat them according to knowledge, and (as it becomes wise
men) wisely rule their wives.

Likewise] There are four Reasons of the Precept:

Reas. 1. Because in like manner, by the obligation of the Divine Law, husbands
are bound to perform mutual offices to their wives, as wives are to their
husbands.

To the weaker] Reas. 2. Because prudence requires, that the female sex should
be so much the more respected, because it is the weaker, and otherwise may
suspect it self contemned by the man.

Heirs] Reas. 3. Because wives are not only partakers of the honor and
earthly goods, which belong to their husbands, but are also coheirs of saving
grace with their believing husbands.

Lest] Reas. 4. Because otherwise, brawlings and strifes would arise, whereby
public and private prayers of the husband, as well as of the wife, might be
hindered and disturbed.

The second part.
Verse. 8. Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another,
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, The second part of the Chapter
follows, wherein he exhorts to the study of holiness (although it be joined
with the Cross) or to the common duties of holiness, and to virtues which
belong to men, of what condition soever; and he reckons six, whereof the first
is, Concord, without which the whole life is disquieted with perpetual troubles
and brawlings. The second is, Sympathy, which makes us affected (as it becomes
us) both with the troubles and happinesses of our neighbors, grieving with
those that grieve, and rejoicing with those that rejoice. The third is,
Brotherly love, whereby we closely embrace Christians as brethren in the Lord.
The fourth is, Mercy, whereby we succor the poor and strangers, or banished
men. The fifth is, Gentleness, whereby we yield our selves affable and
courteous toward others for the public good and edification of others.

Verse. 9. Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise
blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a
blessing. The sixth is, Patience, whereby we patiently bear injuries received
from others, whether by word or deed, yea, whereby we repay good turns for bad.

The Arguments of the Exhortation to follow after these virtues, especially
patience, are seventeen; All which prove, that we must follow after these
virtues, although we therefore suffer afflictions.

That ye] Argum. 1. Because we are called to this condition by God, that by
perseverance in well doing, and by patient bearing evils, we may attain eternal
life, vouchsafed to us, by an hereditary right: Therefore we ought to follow
after these virtues, and especially patience.

Verse. 10. For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his
tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile:

11. Let him eschew evil, and do good, let him seek peace and ensue it.

12. For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open
unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil.

Argum. 2. From the testimony of Scripture out of Psalm. 34.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
verses; where the next way to happiness is taught, that the children of God
follow after good works, and abstain from impatience, and all kind of evil
deeds; and that on this side being compassed about with the hope of Divine
blessing; and on the other, with the fear of Divine wrath, they go forward in
the courses of holiness: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after these virtues,
and chiefly patience.

Verse. 13. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good? Argum. 3. Because this course is best, whereby they following
after these virtues, may be freed from many inconveniences, which the wicked
take occasion to bring upon them; for he is like to a Monster that will harm
the Innocent, and those that follow after goodness: Therefore ye ought to
endeavor after all these virtues, and especially patience.

Verse. 14. But and if ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be
not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled: Argum. 4. Because if whilst
ye follow after these virtues, ye suffer evils for Righteousness sake, yet
ye remain blessed in Gods account, howsoever your condition may seem miserable
in this world: Therefore ye ought to follow after these virtues.

Verse. 15. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear: Argum. 5. Ye Christians ought not to be deterred
from the following after these virtues by the threatenings and the terror of
the wicked, nay, not so much as be troubled in mind, but on the contrary, ye
ought to sanctify God in your hearts, i. e. so much to value the terror and
the good will of God, the commands, threatenings, promises, power, help,
comforts, issues and deliverances of God, which he both can, and will perform,
to set at naught and undervalue whatsoever men can do against you.

Be ready] Argum. 6. It is so far unbecoming you to be deterred from the
following after virtue by the fear of men, that on the contrary, confiding in
the goodness and omnipotency of God, ye ought to be ready to sanctify God in
open confession of the Christian Faith, not being ashamed to produce the word
of God, as the ground and foundation of your Faith, as often as a reason of
your Faith is required of you, so that the answer which is required may tend to
the glory or sanctification of his name. Yet he commands that this confession
be uttered with meekness toward men, and fear or reverence toward God, lest
the Truth of God by any means should be polluted by our passions.

Verse. 16. Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of
evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in
Christ. Argum. 7. In following after these virtues ye will have a good
conscience, which in every condition can inwardly give you a good testimony:
Therefore ought ye to follow after these virtues.

They may be ashamed] Argum. 8. By the following after these virtues, ye will
stop the mouths of the enemies of the Gospel, who lie in wait to defame you,
and speak ill of you, as of evil doers.

Verse. 17. For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well
doing, than for evil doing. Argum. 9. For it is far better that ye following
after these virtues, should be afflicted for well doing, if the will of God be
so, than for doing evil; For from hence ar^s^s praise and commendation, from
the other judgment and disgrace: Therefore ye ought to follow these virtues.

Ve^s. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, (that he might bring us to God) being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit. Argum. 10. Christ has once suffered for the expiating
of sins: Therefore ye Believers being exempted from the punishment of sins,
are obliged, if God will so have it, to suffer troubles for the following of
these virtues.

Iust] Argum. 11. Christ being just and innocent, has suffered for us being
unjust. Therefore we being believers who are not altogether innocent, are
bound for righteousness sake, not to refuse the suffering of what God will have
us suffer.

That he might bring us] Argum. 12. Christ the just one has suffered, that he
might confirm us being justified, and suffering afflictions, to himself, and
bring us to God: Therefore believers are bound to follow him in the pursuit of
virtue and patience of afflictions for weldoing.

Quickened] Argum. 13. Seeing that the issue of Christ's sufferings was happy,
(because although he is dead by reason of the infirmity of our flesh, yet he
rose from the dead by the virtue and power of his Spirit or Deity) ye believers
suffering afflictions for Christ and his righteousness, without doubt, shall
also obtain a joyful issue out of your sufferings, and death it self:
Therefore ye ought to follow after these virtues, although for that cause ye
be afflicted.

Verse. 19. By which also, he went and preached unto the Spirits in prison,

20. Which sometimes were disobedient, when once the long suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing, wherein few, that
is, eight souls, were saved by water.

21. The like figure whereunto, even baptism, does also now save us, (not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Argum. 14. The spirits or souls of those unbeleeving and disobedient men, are
now in prison, or hell, to which Christ by his spirit in times past, by Noah
the preacher of righteousness, came and preached repentance and following after
righteousness, because in times past, to wit, in the time of Noah, they were
disobedient, abusing Gods long suffering toward them, whilst the Ark was
preparing: Therefore it is expedient for you Hebrews, to obey this exhortation
to the study of virtue, lest ye be involved in the same punishment.

Few.] Argum. 15. As those few souls which were in the Ark, were saved in the
deluge of waters by the Ark: So all believers being baptized, are preserved,
that they perish not in any afflictions, by baptism, which answers to the Type
of the Ark: Therefore ye that follow after righteousness, ought to fear
nothing, although ye suffer for righteousness sake.

Not the filth of the flesh] He explains this argument, showing, that he does
not understand the outward baptism, which consists in the washing away of the
filth of the body, but the inward baptism, which consists in the washing away
of sins, or the filthiness of the soul, the sign and proper effect whereof, is,
the engagement of a good conscience toward God, or that confidence, which a
good conscience (purged by Faith) has toward God, by and through the
resurrection of Christ. He also adds,

Argum. 16. Now ye are endued with that confidence, which a good conscience,
purged by Faith, has toward God, by and through the resurrection of Christ:
Therefore there is no cause, that for the following after the Scriptures ye
should fear afflictions. He adds, by the resurrection of Christ, partly,
because in Christ's resurrection was declared* the sentence of God* absolving us
in Christ from sin and death: partly, because Christ being raised from the
dead, has powerfully perfected those things, in and for believers, which by
his death he merited and obtained for them.

Verse. 22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels,
and Authorities, and Powers, being made subject unto him. Argum. 17. Confirming
the former, and also the exhortation to the following after virtue, although
for that cause afflictions were born. Christ the Author of our salvation is
lifted up into Heaven, to the highest glory of ruling over all things, and
obtain supreme and everlasting power over all Creatures, not any of the Angels
excepted: Therefore ye Believers ought strongly to prosecute the study of
virtue against all dangers and terrors, being assured of your salvation,
because you have such a Savior in Heaven.

CHAP. IV.
HE here prosecutes the same Argument which he handled in the former Chapter.
There are two parts of the Chapter, in the first are contained Exhortations to
holiness, to verse. 12. The other is consolatory against persecutions, to the
end. The exhortations to holiness, are six, The first is more general, to verse.
7. the rest more especial.

Verse. 1. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your
selves likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in the flesh
has ceased from sin; The Arguments to holiness in general are seven, which,
that they may be the better conceived, we must maintain, that Christ hanging
on the Cross has after four manner of ways acted in our behalf: First, That
he judicially representing us, and bearing our person, did bear the guilt of
our sins, and punishment due to them. 2. That he being a Surety for us, did
take upon himself the mortifying or crucifying of our old man by the virtue of
his crucifixion. 3. He set forth himself an efficacious example to us, whereto
we might conform our selves in the denying our selves, and renouncing all
things, which might hinder us in our progress toward Heaven. 4. As a Surety,
Advocate, Patron, Father, Husband, Head, and common person he did bind us
with many bonds, to deaden us to sin, and to use all means whereby that might
be effected: These presupposed, the following Arguments more strongly bind.

Argum. 2. Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, and publicly acted in our
behalf after those foresaid ways: Therefore ye believing Hebrews ought to arm
your selves with this meditation of Faith against all temptations, that ye may
dye to the lusts of the corrupt flesh.

Who has suffered] Argum. 2. Confirming the former, from the judicial uniting
of Believers with Christ in his death: In whose suffering in the flesh
believers are judged to have suffered in the flesh: Therefore as they which
have suffered in the flesh, or are dead, have ceased from sin, for which they
have suffered, and are justified as well from sin, as from the punishment of
sin, wherein they are already dead: so you believing Hebrews, whom I account as
having judicially suffered in the flesh, or as dead, ought to cease from sin,
and no further have any thing to do with it.

Verse. 2. That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to
the lusts of men, but to the will of God. Argum. 3. The judicial freedom of
Believers from sin, purchased by the death of Christ, is for this end, that so
long as we live in this mortal life, we might not spend our time in following
fleshly lusts, according to the will of men, but fulfilling the will of God:
Therefore ye ought to labor that ye may be conformable to the will of God.

Verse. 3. For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will
of the Gentiles, when ye walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of Wine,
revellings, banquettings, and abominable Idolatries: Argum. 4. Ye have sinned
enough, and too much against God in the time past of your life, when ye did
follow in ignorance and unbeleef the vices which did reign amongst the
Gentiles, against the first and second Table: Now the time of Gospel light
requires another carriage: Therefore ye ought to follow after holiness.

Verse. 4. Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to the same
excess of riot, speaking evil of you:

5. Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.

Argum. 5. By preventing an objection, Although unbeleevers may be offended at
your abstaining from former vices, and may blaspheme your Religion, for which
they shall be punished in the day of judgment; yet it behooves not you
therefore to be moved, because if God does not in this life, yet he will in
the day of judgment require an account of such reproaches: Therefore ye ought
to go forward in the study of holiness.

Verse. 6. For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are
dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live
according to God in the Spirit. Argum. 6. Serving to remove the stumbling block
laid by unbeleevers, who did blaspheme and condemn Christians for the
dissimilitude of their courses to their own: To the faithful that are already
dead, or not long since, or in former ages, the Gospel has been preached, for
this same end, as to the promoting of holiness, and with the same success, as
to the judgment of worldly men; and lastly with the same hope of fruit or
benefit, to wit, that they being condemned of men, and chastised of God,
according to the flesh, or outward man, should obtain spiritual life in their
souls or inward man, yea and life eternal with God: Therefore it is meet that
ye believing Hebrews do not refuse to embrace the like manner and condition of
life, but in the same condition, that ye follow after holiness.

Verse. 7. But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and
watch unto prayer, Argum. 7. The last judgment is at hand, which will put an
end to the conveniences and inconveniences of this life: Therefore nothing
regarding either, ye ought to follow after holiness.

Be ye therefore] From these Arguments, and chiefly the last, he infers an
exhortation to holiness, and especially to six Christian Virtues.

Unto Prayer] The first special Exhortation is to diligent prayer, and for this
end let them be sober, and vigilant, that they may be the more fit to pray,
observing every occasion of praying, and that in all their affairs, they so
carry themselves, that they be not rendered unfit for prayer.

Verse. 8. And above all things have fervent charity among your selves; for
charity shall cover the multitude of sins. Exhort. 2. The second special
Exhortation is Charity, which he requires them chiefly to follow after above
all things, with singular care, and that their charity be fervent and earnest.

Charity] He renders a special reason of this, because Charity prevents, and
in preventing covers anger, brawlings, reproaches, contentions and hatred, lest
they be stirred up amongst men, and break forth and spread abroad, it does
repress the breaking forth of these evils, and remit, and cover them; and
therefore in the first place ye ought to follow after it.

Verse. 9. Use hospitality one to another without grudgings. Exhort. 3. To
hospitality, which he commands that it be not forced, but voluntary, For that
good turn which is done with murmuring, is destitute of charity.

Verse. 10. As every man has received the Gift, even so minister the same one
to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God. Exhort. 4. To a
mutual communication of all the gifts of God; There are two reasons of the
Exhortation included, 1. Because gifts are of grace, and are given by God for
the common use.

As good] 2. Because he which has the gift, is not Master of it, but a
Steward.

Verse. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives: that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom be praise and dominion
for ever and ever. Amen. Exhort. 5. The fifth more special Exhortation, That
he which speaks the word of God (either out of special duty, as a Pastor or
Teacher, or out of common duty, as other Christians in their mutual
edification) speak it with that reverence and Faith, which becomes the word of
God, i. e. that speaking, he show forth the sense of the divine word rightly
conceived by Faith, with that reverence which the Truth of God requires, lest
the name of God be taken in vain.

Ministreth] Exhort. 6. That he which ministers unto the necessities of
others, either by his assistance, or goods, let him perform that readily and
cheerfully according to the ability God has given him. The Reasons of the
Exhortation are two.

That in all] Reas. 1. That glory may be given to God, both from our work, and
the manner of doing it.

Through Iesus] Reas. 2. That glory may be given to God through Christ, by
whose grace and virtue alone the duty is performed.

To whom] He shuts up these Exhortations, with giving glory to God, whereunto
he is moved by the consideration of the excellency of God.

The Second Part.
Verse. 12. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is
to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you. The other part of
the Chapter follows, wherein he encourages Believers against persecutions, and
exhorts them not to be offended or troubled with persecutions, as a new thing.
The Arguments of the Exhortation are thirteen, all which prove that
persecutions for the profession of the Gospel are not to be feared.

Tryal] Argum. 1. Persecution will not hurt you, but will try and purge you, as
fire tries and purges gold and silver: Therefore ye ought not to fear
afflictions.

Verse. 13. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings;
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding
joy. Argum. 2. Ye ought rather to be glad and rejoice in afflictions for the
Gospel sake: Therefore persecution is not to be feared.

That] Argum. 3. Confirming the former, whilst ye suffer persecutions, ye are
made partakers of the afflictions appointed for the members of Christ, and are
made conformable to him, who has suffered the like things for the confession
of Truth: Therefore ye ought not to fear persecution.

Ye may be glad] Argum. 4. Because ye shall have the communion of glory and
joy with Christ at his coming: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 14. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the
Spirit of Glory, and of God rests upon you: on their part he is evil spoken
of, but on your part he is glorified. Argum. 5. They that are but reproached
for the name of Christ, have both the means and the sign of his blessedness,
much more they which suffer greater things: Therefore ye ought not to fear
persecutions.

Because] Argum. 6. The bearing of the Cross of Christ, is a sign of Christ's
glorious Spirit resting upon you, that shall never depart from you: Therefore
ye ought not to fear persecution.

For your part] Argum. 7. Confirming the former, Although the Spirit of God, by
those that persecute you, may be blasphemed, yet it is glorified by the
faithful that s^f^er afflictions: Therefore ye ought not to fear pers^c^tion.

Verse. 15. But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an
evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters.

16. Yet if a man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God on this behalf.

Argum. 8. Although all affliction, and namely for evil deeds, is not glorious,
yet when any one is evilly entreated, not for his own desert (but for Christ's
sake, or because he is a Christian) the affliction is glorious, neither does
it become the afflicted to be so troubled, as if he were ashamed of the name of
Christ, but is rather obliged to glorify God, who by a certain degree of
Martyrdom, has honored him: Therefore ye ought not to fear persecution.

Verse. 17. For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God:
and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of those that obey not the
Gospel of God? Argum. 9. The judgment that God will bring upon the sins of
men, is begun in the Church, as in Gods family toward his own household; whose
sin God chastises and crucifies by the Cross of Christ: Therefore ye ought
not to fear persecution*

What shall] Argum. 10. The afflictions which the faithful suffer, will argue
that Infidels and Persecutors will at length be most severely punished:
Therefore ye ought not to fear persecution.

Verse. 18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinner appear? Argum. 11. Clearing the former Argument; Seeing that the
condition of the faithful is so tedious, that they cannot be saved without
great difficulty, and by afflictions, without doubt the condition of the wicked
will be intolerable: Therefore ye ought neither to backslide from the Faith,
lest ye perish, nor fear persecutions, because they shall be brought to naught.

Verse. 19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
the keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.
From hence he infers an Exhortation, which he confirms together with two
other Arguments.

Argum. 12. They that are evil entreated for Christ's sake, are not properly
afflicted by the will of man, but by the will of God, who has determined to
perfect his work in those that are his, through afflictions: Therefore ye
ought not to fear persecutions.

A faithful] Argum. 13. They that suffer any thing in the flesh for Christ, and
they which have resolved to persevere in holiness, doing that which is good,
may be certain and sure of the salvation of their souls, both because God is
omnipotent, and because he is faithful to perform all things which he has
promised to them that are his: Therefore ye ought not to fear persecution.

CHAP. V.
THere remains three Exhortations, with the conclusion; The first to the
Elders; The second to those that are young; The third is common to all.

Verse. 1. The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that
shall be revealed.

2. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof,
not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind:

Exhort. 1. To Elders in the first place generally; That they execute their
office in feeding the flock committed to them. The reasons of the Exhortation
premised from the person exhorting, are four.

I pray] Reas. 1. Because the Apostle prays, and submissively desires that
from them.

Also an Elder] Reas. 2. Because he exhorts them as being an Elder himself.

A Witness] Reas. 3. Because he was a Witness of the sufferings of Christ,
which Christ suffered in the execucion of his office, and a partaker of the
sufferings for Christ with other Martyrs.

Of the glory] Reas. 4. Because by Faith he was partaker of the glory
hereafter to be communicated to true and sincere Pastors at the coming of
Christ.

Feed] The exhortation it self prescribing in special the manner of feeding the
flock, in four duties.

Oversight] (1.) That they diligently attend the oversight of the flocks, not
doing it lightly and negligently.

(2.) That they do their duty, not by constraint, but of a willing mind. (3.)
That they do their duty, not for the sake of filthy lucre, but with a ready and
free mind.

Verse. 3. Neither as being Lords over Gods heritage; but being ensamples to the
flock. (4.) That without usurpation of Dominion over the Church, they go before
the Church in Doctrine and ensample in all virtues.

Verse. 4. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown
of glory that fades not away. He subjoyns to this Exhortation three other
Reasons.

Chief] Reas. 1. Because Jesus Christ, as the chief Shepherd, shall at length
appear, who will require an account from the Ministers, subjected to him, of
the administration of their office.

Ye shall receive] Reas. 2. Because he will give to his Pastors a Crown of
glory for their reward.

That fades not] Reas. 3. Because it is a flourishing Crown, which they shall
receive, that will never fade away, nor perish.

Verse. 5. Likewise ye younger, submit your selves unto the Elder: yea, all of
you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resists
the proud, and gives grace to the humble. The second Exhortation is to the
flock or people, who are intimated by the name of youngers; because as
ordinarily Elders for the most part were chosen out of those that were aged, so
the greatest part of the flock did consist of youngers.

Subject] The branches of the Exhortation are three. First, To special
subjection toward Elders, that as God has enjoined the Elders, and Episcopal
jurisdiction, so he had enjoined the flock subjection, whether youngers, that
they obey the Elders, doing their duty, and commanding right and just things in
the name of God.

And all] Branch 2. Is to mutual subjection, that they submit to one another,
viz. to the performing mutually the most humble duties of charity. For example,
to the mutual receiving private admonitions, and mutually bearing with one
another Infirmities.

Submitting] Branch 3. That they endeavor after submission of mind, or
Christian humility, without which they cannot duly submit to the Pastors, or
to one another; The reasons of the Exhortation are seven.

Cloathed] Reas. 1. Because humility or submission is a special ornament.

God] Reas. 2. Because God resists the proud.

To the humble] Reas. 3. Because God gives grace to the humble.

Verse. 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time, Reas. 4. Because that submission which is mutually
requisite, does not respect men, so much as God, who commands it.

Mighty] Reas. 5. Because the strength and power of God ought to move you to
subjection.

That you] Reas. 6. Because God in due time will exalt the lowly and humble to
glory.

Verse. 7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you. Reas. 7. By
preventing an Objection. Because ye ought not to be moved, by those
inconveniences which might dissuade you from this submission of mind, but the
care about the event of your obedience, which ye ought to yield to this
command, and moreover all your solicitousness for the things of this life, ye
ought to cast upon God.

For] The reason of this is given, Because God takes special care for the
concernments of his servants, and those things which may befall your walking in
obedience to him, lest any damage acrew to you, or any necessary good be
wanting.

Verse. 8. Be sober, be vigilant: because your adversary the Devil, as a roaring
Lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour. The third general Exhortation
or command to all is, that they do not indulge the security of the flesh, but
that being composed to watchfulness in all sobriety, they persevere against
every temptation in the grace which they have received.

The Reasons of the Exhortation to this Christian warfare are nine.

Adversary] Reas. 1. Because ye have to do with an adversary.

The Devil] Reas. 2. Because ye have to do with the Devil, the worst of
enemies.

As a Lion] Reas. 3. Because the Devil cruelly, as a roaring Lion gapes after
his prey.

Walks about] Reas. 4. Because as a Fox walking up and down, he looks about,
and takes all occasions to mischief you, that he may oppress and devour you
unawares.

Verse. 9. Whom resist steadfast in the Faith, knowing, that the same afflictions
are accomplished in you Brethren that are in the world. Reas. 5. Because ye
must not think of flying from your adversary, but of resisting him only, and
that by a steadfast Faith.

As those] Reas. 7. Because ye alone do not strive in this conflict of
afflictions against the Devil, but ye have all the faithful Brethren your
fellow soldiers in the Church militant, and suffering together with you, whose
condition ye ought not to disdain, or to wish for the enjoyment of any better
condition than theirs.

Verse. 10. But the God of all Grace, who has called us into his eternal glory
by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you. Reas. 8. Because ye shall have me your
Apostle, together with your selves striving in prayers, that ye may constantly
go forwards in the way wherein ye are. But he prays for these four things in
their behalf. 1. That God would perfect that work of grace he has begun,
being not yet perfect. 2. That he would establish that which is right. 3. That
he would strengthen that which is weak. 4. That he would settle or cause the
building to cleave firmly unto Christ. The Arguments of his confidence are two.
Argum. 1. The alsufficiency of grace in God. 2. The calling of the faithful to
eternal glory through Christ.

A while] In the mean while he limits his prayer, that God would perform those
things to them after they had been afflicted a while, and so he adds the ninth
Reason, the Exhortation to the Christian warfare: Because the time of your
conflict will not be long, but short, and afflictions will not be intolerable,
but light in comparison to glory.

Verse. 11. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. He concludes
this and the rest of the Exhortations with a famous Doxology, ascribing the
glory of all grace and strength to God, whereby he perfects the work of grace.

Verse. 12. By Silvanus a faithful Brother (...) you (as I suppose) I have
written briefly, exhorting and testifying, that this is the true grace of God
wherein ye stand. The conclusion of the Epistle, whereof are three Articles.

The first Article contains three things: First, the name and commendation of
the messenger from his fidelity. 2. The commendation of the Epistle from its
brevity. 3. The scope and sum of the whole Epistle, viz. to confirm the
Hebrews in the Doctrine of the Gospel, or the Grace of Christ which they did
profess, and that they might be encouraged to a constant perseverance in Faith
and Obedience.

Verse. 13. The Church that is at Babylon elected together with you, saluteth
you, and so does Marcus my Son. Artic. 2. Contains the salutation sent from the
Church at Babylon, and Mark the Evangelist (who by reason of the similitude of
his Faith and conversation, is called the Son of Peter, as Timothy of Paul) to
the rest of the Hebrews, partakers of the same grace and election in Christ.
Here we understand Babylon properly so called, which was in Chaldaea, where
after the seventy years of captivity were past, many Jews remained not
returning home, and wherein they had Synagogues, as in other Cities, for whose
sake Peter upon his agreement with Paul, as an Apostle of the Hebrews went into
Babylon, where the company of the Jews was greater: from whence he wrote this
Epistle to those that are dispersed.

Verse. 14. Greet ye one another with a kiss of Charity: peace be with you all
that are in Christ Jesus. Amen. Artic. 3. Contains (1.) The salutation given by
the Apostle, wherein he commands the faithful to salute one another without
dissimulation with a kiss of Charity. (2.) His Apostolical wish, wherein, under
the name of Peace, he earnestly wishes, desires, applies, and seals salvation
to all the faithful, and all things which belong to holiness and happiness.

The second Epistle general of PETER, Analytically expounded.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Apostle being now nigh unto death, seals up this last testimony of his
will in this Epistle (as it appears in the first Chapter, 12, 13. verse. etc.)
for the use of all the faithful wheresoever, and chiefly the Hebrews, whose
Teacher he was. There are three principal parts of the Epistle, according to
the number of the Chapters. In the first he exhorts them to persevere in true
Faith and Christian Piety, Chap. 1. In the second he d^h^rts them from
attending to false Prophets, which he foretells will arise in the Church,
Chap. 2. In the third he seriously admonishes them to beware of those profane
Scoffers, who account the coming of Christ to judgment, as a Fable, in Chapter
3.

CHAP. I.
THere are three parts of the Chapter. In the first there is the Exordium of
the Epistle, to verse. 5. In the second an exhortation to proficiency in Faith
and Holiness, to verse. 19. In the third he digresses in the commendation of
prophetical Scripture, to the end.

Verse. 1. Simon Peter, a Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that
have obtained like precious Faith with us, through the Righteousness of God and
our Savior Jesus Christ, The inscription of the Epistle contains three things.
(1.) The description of the Writer, from his common name Simon, and from his
Surname Peter, given him by Christ, together with his office in the Church,
Servant, and from his special office, An Apostle of Jesus Christ, whence he
had authority to write. (2.) The description of the faithful to whom it is
written from the excellency of Faith, which was bestowed upon them: The
excellency whereof is propounded by way of distinction from historical Faith.
1. That it is precious. 2. That it is proper to the Elect, not hypocritical. 3.
That it is equally precious with the Faith of the Apostles; he does not compare
the degree and quantity, but the quality and nature of the gift, because it was
given by the same Holy Spirit for the same merits of Christ, and to the same
good purposes, viz. the apprehending of Christ and his benefits. 4. That it
flows from Gods Righteousness or Faithfulness, faithfully performing the free
promises made to our Fathers, and is derived to us together with all other
benefits through the Righteousness of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Verse. 2. Grace and Peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God,
and of Jesus our Lord, The third thing in the inscription of the Epistle is a
salutation, wherein is his prayer and confirmation of it; In his prayer he
wishes to all the faithful Hebrews a fuller manifestation, multiplication, and
increase of all saving gifts of the Holy Ghost, and multiplication of peace, or
of all benefits which conduce to the promoting and perfecting of their present
and future felicity, and that by the increase of saving Faith, or
acknowledgement of God and Christ, as they are revealed in the Gospel.

Verse. 3. According as his divine power has given unto us all things that
pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called
us to glory and virtue, He confirms the hope of his desires, viz. that God
will multiply grace and peace toward them by Faith, in five Arguments.

Divine Power] Argum. 1. The power or effectual grace working powerfully, has
bestowed upon you all expedients, which belong to holiness or grace, to life or
peace, by the knowledge or Faith of him both in respect of the right to, as
also the admission of you into the profession: Therefore God will increase and
multiply those gifts, until ye obtain perfection of life and holiness: For
there is the like reason for the beginning and progress, as touching the favor
of God.

Has called] Argum. 2. God has called you to virtue or Grace, and to Glory or
Peace: Therefore he will perfect those things in you to which he has called
you.

Verse. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises; that
by these you might be partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust. Argum. 3. Confirming the former,
God has given you the promises of the Gospel, which as they are very great
(because of the greatest things, viz. of Righteousness and eternal life) So
also they are precious, and mainly necessary to you for the obtaining of life:
Therefore he will perform those promises, by multiplying even unto perfection
those things which he has promised.

That by these] Argum. 4. For this end he has given both the promises, and
beginnings of these things promised to you, that ye might be partakers of the
Divine Nature; not as to the essence, but as to the virtues and perfections,
which represent the Nature of God in heavenly wisdom, holiness and happiness,
as in a lively Image: Therefore he will multiply to you grace and peace, that
he may attain his end in perfecting of you.

Having escaped] Argum. 5. Now you have escaped from the Kingdom of death, and
the Covenant of sin, being freed from destruction, wherein the world lies
through lust or concupiscenc^^ Therefore the same gracious good pleasure of God
(...) multiply to you grace, which is opposed to sin, and peace, which is
opposed to destruction.

Verse. 5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your Faith, Virtue;
and to Virtue, Knowledge; After the Preface he exhorts them to a serious
endeavor of growing in Faith and Godliness, reckoning up by degrees the chief
Christian virtues; whereof the first is Faith, which opens unto us the first
entrance to God, to this is adjoined virtue, or following after Righteousness
in general, because without Faith it is dead and ineffectual. Prudence or
Knowledge follows, which consists in a fuller knowledge of heavenly mysteries,
and the application of them to practice.

Verse. 6. And to Knowledge, Temperance, and to Temperance, Patience; and to
Patience, Godliness: After this he requires Temperance, whereby every one
keeps himself from those enticements, whereby he might be taken off from his
duty. He would have Patience or Fortitude (which consists in bearing
adversity, and not in ceasing from our duty, for the evils which pursue us)
annexed to Temperance, and these virtues are four, which are commonly called
Cardinals, to these he would have three other joined. (1.) Godliness, which
chiefly consists in the very worship of God.

Verse. 7. And to Godliness, Brotherly Kindness; and to Brotherly Kindness,
Charity: The other virtue which he would have added, is [(...)] Brotherly
love, whereby we embrace our Brethren, or the household of Faith. The last
virtue is Charity, or common love, which is to be extended to all men, even to
enemies.

Verse. 8. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you, that ye
shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Arguments of the Exhortation are fourteen, all which prove, that
we ought to endeavor after these virtues jointly.

Argum. 1. If you have obeyed the Exhortation, endeavoring both to have these
virtues, and to abou^d in them, ye will prove that your Faith, or the
knowledge of Christ in you, is not idle, or unfruitful, but efficacious, which
makes you ready to every good work: Therefore ye ought to obey.

Verse. 9. But he that lacks these things, is blind, and cannot see far off,
and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. Argum. 2. If ye were
destitute of these virtues, you will declare that you see nothing afar off,
but that you are only intent upon the things of this world, but blind in
divine and spiritual things, and unthankful toward God, by whom ye confess
your former sins are pardoned: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after these
virtues.

Verse. 10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your calling
and election sure: for if you do these things, ye shall never fall. Argum. 3.
With the Exhortation repeated. By endeavoring after these virtues, ye will
prove your selves to be effectually called and elected, and will solidly
confirm your selves in this persuasion: Therefore follow after these virtues.

For these] Argum. 4. If you follow after these virtues, ye shall be preserved
from Apostasy, or falling back, neither will ye yield to temptations:
Therefore ye ought to follow after these.

Verse. 11. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Argum. 5. So a more
abundant entrance into the eternal Kingdom of Christ shall be administered unto
you, i. e. happiness, and that life eternal shall more largely open and unfold
it self to you, that ye may more freely and abundantly pierce into the inward
parts of his Kingdom, and enjoy the sense of that life in a more abundant
measure: Therefore follow after these virtues.

Verse. 12. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance
of these things, though ye know them, and be stablished in the present Truth.
Argum. 6. Preventing an Objection; Although ye are established in the present
Truth: yet I being an Apostle, have now thought, out of a desire of your
proficiency, it necessary to exhort you, which ye should in no wise reject:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 13. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir
you up, by putting you in remembrance: Argum. 7. Justice it self, by reason of
my Apostolical office, requires that I excite you to holiness, by exhortations
and admonitions of this sort, so long as I live: Therefore be ye obedient.

Verse. 14. Knowing, that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, even as our
Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. Argum. 8. As the Lord has foretold, I
expect after a short time to end my life by a glorious Martyrdom: Therefore,
as it lies upon me to exhort you to these virtues, so it lies upon you to
hearken to my Exhortation.

Verse. 15. Moreover, I will endeavor, that you may be able after my decease,
to have these things always in remembrance. Argum. 9. This Exhortation which I
have written to you, will be profitable to mind you of your duties, even after
my death: Therefore hearken you to my admonitions.

Verse. 16. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made
known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eyewitnesses of his Majesty. Argum. 10. Those things which I have taught you
as touching Christ's incarnation, or his first coming to execute the office of a
Redeemer, and as touching his divine nature, power, sufficiency, and efficacy
to save the people of God, are not fables artificially feigned, which may be
despised, or negligently without use and benefit past by: but they are serious
and certain things: Therefore ye ought to hearken to these my admonitions.

But as those] Argum. 11. Ye have been taught by us Apostles, both eye and
ear-witnesses of the Truth of Christ already demonstrated, so that the
certainty of this Gospel was so much as were possible to be concerning things
done and past. For we Apostles have perceived by our senses the Majesty of
Christ to be so great, that we cannot choose but at the sight be rap^ up in an
ecstasy, as it is in the history, Matthew 17. conconcerning Christ's
transfiguration: Therefore obey my Exhortations.

Verse. 17. For he received from God the Father, honor and glory, when there
came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased. Argum. 12. Christ, in whose Faith and Obedience we
exhort you to persevere, has by the audible voice of his Father speaking from
Heaven, received a glorious testimony from the excellent glory of the Father,
that he is the Son of God, wherein, as in a Mediator and Surety for his
redeemed people, God is well pleased, satisfying himself abundantly in his
Mediation and purchase: Therefore obey ye diligently this Exhortation.

Verse. 18. And this voice which came from Heaven, we heard, when we were with
him in the holy Mount, Argum. 13. Those things are so holy, which appertain to
the Kingdom of Christ, that the place it self wherein those things were
declared (which are preached by us) was after a manner made holy, viz. Because
of Gods extraordinary voice, and the divine glory of Christ there manifested:
Therefore with greater reverence ye ought to hearken to our Exhortations.

Verse. 19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, us unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: Argum. 14. The Doctrine concerning
Christ, in whose Faith and Obedience we exhort you to persevere, is confirmed
by the testimony of Scripture, or a most firm prophetical word: Therefore ye
ought studiously to obey my Exhortations. He stays upon this Exhortation,
confirming the certainty of prophetical Scripture, by seven Reasons.

More sure] Reas. 1. Because compared with other ways of revelation it is a
most firm medium without and above exceptions, whereto other means of
revelation, no less clear and true, are obnoxious: But this reason most
especially did prevail with the Hebrews, who examined visions and revelations
made to the Apostles by the Scripture of the Old Testament. For the divine
authority of the old Scripture was confirmed in their minds some ages before.

Of Prophecie] Reas. 2. That the testimony of foreseeing future Truth, has
more evidence in it self of divine operation, than the testimony of him, who
testifies that which he has seen or heard being present. For no man could
foresee this Truth, but a Prophet, every Believer could see the Truth fulfilled.

Which] Reas. 3. Because the word of Prophecy is worthy to be attended to by
Believers, into the sense whereof they might enquire, to which truth and
authority they might subject their consciences, and which they might apply to
the ends and uses whereunto it serves.

As] Reas. 4. Because ye should abide in darkness, unless ye attended to the
Scriptures, which are in themselves, and in the faithful, as light that shines
in a dark place, to direct in all things what, and how to be done.

Until] Reas. 5. Because the Sun of Righteousness, Jesus Christ, will appear at
length to those that religiously attend to the Scripture, viz. in the glory of
the life to come, he will bring with him the perf^ct day, which shall never
have night, and the light of the holy Ghost, as a morning star shall arise in
their hearts, now manifesting one Article of Faith, and confirming it as with a
seal in the inward senses, at another time confirming another Article, and so
by degrees will illuminate the faithful attenders to the Scripture, which
illumination of the Spirit, because it cannot be perfected in this life, and
because the day of Christ's full presence (our Sun) will not be, but in the life
to come: Therefore ye ought in all things, in the whole course of your lives,
to attend to the Scripture.

Verse. 20. Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any
private interpretation. Reas. 6. Because we must firmly hold, for a Principle
of Faith, and for a thing first of all to be believed, that the Scriptures are
not of humane invention, but of divine revelation, not derived from the mind of
the Writer, sense or explication, but out of the mind, sense, and explication
of God, which therefore is not from the explication which men whether few or
many invent, but from the explication, whereof the Spirit of God it self is the
Author.

Verse. 21. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Reas. 7. Confirming the
former. Because in the Scriptures there are Prophecies, which cannot be set
forth by the will of man, or from the humane sense or affection of the Prophet:
but of necessity those holy men spoke by the instinct of the Holy Ghost, who
have left to us the divine Oracles sealed in their Writings: Therefore it is
mere that the Holy Ghost should be interpreter of their words by other places
of his Scripture, and that the faithful should attend to the Scriptures, and
compare them with themselves, that they may understand the mind of the Holy
Ghost.

CHAP. II.
THat they may the better obey the former Exhortations, he admonishes them,
that they have a care of false teachers which will arise in the Church, and
were now risen; He also describes and reproves their manners and vices, from
whence, as from certain marks, they may be known and taken heed of.

Verse. 1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies* even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction. The marks of false Teachers, which also contain the reasons,
why they ought to be taken heed of, are nine: Not that they are all to be seen
in some one Heretic, but that some of them may be seen in other Heretics.

But there were] Note 1. Such as in times past the false Prophets were amongst
the people of God, such shall be the false Teachers in the Church, viz.
Egregious hypocrites, counterfeiting themselves to be true Prophets,
insinuating themselves into the favor of the people.

Bring in] Note 2. They will craftily bring in damnable heresies, and although
not expressly, yet by consequence, or in very deed they will deny Christ (at
leastwise in some Article of Faith) i. e. they will be the betrayers of Christ.

The Lord] He amplifies the crime four ways. 1. From this, that they will
deny the Lord or Master that bought them, which is spoken in the language of
the Visible Church, wherein they were. That they would both boast that they
were redeemed, and also the Church esteemed them so: which also in a judicial
sense is true; whereby whosoever confesses with his mouth Christ to be his
Redeemer, and in the mean time denies him in deed, being judged out of his own
mouth, is said to deny the Lord that bought him; Because as to the merit of the
crime, it is as much as if he was really bought, if he suppose and profess
himself bought, and yet denies him that bought him.

Bring] 2. He amplifies the crime from this, that by these heresies they
deservedly bring upon themselves swift destruction.

Verse. 2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of: 3. He amplifies the crime from this,
that they will seduce and draw many Disciples with them into destruction.

By reason of whom] 4. From this, that they themselves and their followers will
both blaspheme the way of truth, or the sound Doctrine of the Gospel, and give
occasion to others to speak contumeliously of it.

Verse. 3. And through covetousness, shall they with feigned words make
Merchandise of you, whose judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and their
damnation slumbreth not. Note] 3. Is covetousness, which is the root of all
evil, and for the most part the companion and Mother of all heresies.

Feigned] Note 4. Is a false and feigned speech artificially composed to
seduce, covering and drawing into errors with a counterfeiting eloquence.

Shall make Merchandise] Note 5. The selling of souls and filthy Merchandise
whereby Heretics will be solicitous to promote their profit, nothing regarding
the loss of souls.

Whose] He apprehends the crime from the damnation and destruction which will
swiftly follow them, as it was prepared in times past.

Verse. 4. For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to
Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto
judgment: He proves that punishment will follow, by a threefold Example. 1.
Of the lapsed Angels, which if God did not spare, but thrust them down from the
light of the highest Heaven, to the darksome lower places, and detains them
bound with his powerful hand in misery to be kept unto the last punishment of
eternal damnation: certainly God will not spare those false Teachers.

Verse. 5. And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a
Preacher of Righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly:
Example 2. Of the old world, which if it all justly perished (except those
seven, and Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, wholly for whose sake God chiefly
saved the rest) by the deluge brought upon the world of wicked men: certainly
those false Teachers shall also perish.

Verse. 6. And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into Ashes, condemned
them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should
live ungodly:

7. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked:

8. (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed
his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.)

Example 3. If God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah for an example to th^se that
after should live ungodly, and delivered just Lot vexed and tormented with
seeing and hearing, both the deeds and sayings of the ungodly wicked. Will not
God (preserving his servants) punish wicked Teachers* who still,
(notwithstanding the Gospel is now clearly manifested) play the wantons?

Verse. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished: He confirms the
force of this Argument from the wisdom and power of God, whereby God can both,
viz. deliver the godly as well out of temptations and afflictions, as reserve
the wicked to the day of the last judgment, to be punished with eternal
judgment.

Verse. 10. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleanness, and despise government, presumptuous are they, self-willed, they
are not afraid to speak evil of dignities: The sixth Node of Heretics is a
luxurious and libidino^s life, from which he gathers that the foresaid
examples of Gods justice, justly threaten to them eternal destruction, chiefly,
because they follow the flesh, or corrupt nature as their Captain, and proceed
on in impurity, passing the course of their life in filthy (...), indulging the
pleasures of the flesh.

Government] Note 7. Is the contempt of government, or lawful authority, which
they would have taken out of the world, that there might be none to punish
their vices. He describes and amplifies this vice with six Reasons.

Despise] Reas. 1. That it is not the naked disobedience of unlawful commands
of a mistaking governor, but contempt of the Magistrate doing his duty,
contempt of the very power and ordinance of God.

Presumptuous] Reas. 2. That it is presumptuousness joined with contempt.

And self] Reas. 3. That it is boldness in contempt joined with complacency in
that sin.

To speak ill] Reas. 4. That it is boldness in contempt breaking forth into
cursing, reproaches, evil speakings, which they cast upon Magistracy.

Verse. 11. Whereas Angels which are greater in power and might, bring not
railing accusation against them before the Lord. Reas. 5. That seeing they are
vile fellows, they dare speak evil of Magistrates, which Angels that are more
excellent than Magistrates, dare not speak ill of them: For although Angels are
sometimes used to punish Princes, yet they always endeavor to maintain the
estimation of Principalities, Magistrates, and Powers, against whom some
Heretics proceed.

Verse. 12. But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed,
speak evil of the things that they understand not, and shall utterly perish in
their own corruption, Reas. 6. That heretics are like to brute beasts in this;
For as beasts, 1. Are irrational: 2. They are driven by force, and not by
counsel: 3. They being taken perish: So those Heretics who cannot bear
Magistracy amongst men, or in the Church, but speak evil of this Ordinance. 1.
Being void of judgment, they are ignorant of Gods Ordinance. 2. They are
carried by a wicked inclination to blaspheme or to disgrace that which they do
not understand. 3. As brute beasts they bring destruction to themselves, and
perish by their own corruptness.

Verse. 13. And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count
it pleasure to riot in the day time: Spots they are and blemishes, sporting
themselves with their own deceivings, while they feast with you:

14. Having eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling
unstable souls, an heart they have exercised with covetous practices: cursed
children:

He repeats the commination of their deserved condemnation, and adds the Eighth
Note in three demonstrations of their impudence. The first is in open luxury,
because in the day time, neither fearing the light of the Gospel, nor the Sun,
they discover their minds to be given to luxury, delighting themselves in
banquettings. The second demonstration of their impudence, in open
^incontinency, which they will not in the least endeavor to hide, but betray
in their eyes, the adulteries of their heart, and will show forth their
impudence in their lust, and so they will not only pollute themselves, but
will also deceive and ensnare their unstable souls destitute of solid and
saving Faith. The third impudence consists in covetousness, the arts and
methods whereof they will so meditate, and have their hearts so exercised with
a vicious habit: Briefly comprehending these vices he calls those wicked men
accursed.

Verse. 15. Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following
the way of Balaam the Son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness,

16. But was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb Ass speaking with man's voice,
forbad the madness of the Prophet.

He compares the impudent covetousness of these men, to the covetousness of
Balaam, whose History he briefly repeats out of Number. 22. who for the desire of
reward, erred from the way, which he professed to follow, and at length gave
himself to open impiety: wherein he became so stupid, that he was deservedly
reprehended and chastised by his Ass; which likewise false Teachers, teaching
false things, for filthy lucre sake, deserve.

Verse. 17. These are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a
tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved forever. Note 9. Is vain
speaking, joined with pride and hypocrisy, in respect whereof he compares
them to fountains wanting water, and to clouds tossed and dissipated by a
tempest, that they do not afford the Rain they seemed to promise; such are
false Teachers, who ought to be shining Stars, and the light of the world, and
yet have nothing but darkness, and the blackness of errors: Wherefore the
Apostle pronounces them condemned to eternal darkness in Hell.

Verse. 18. For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean
escaped from them who live in error. He shows their vain speaking in three
things. (1.) In their swelling style of teaching, and puft-up kind of speech,
wherein with lofty words they dazzle the eyes of the simple, and lead the unwary
into admiration: which kind of speaking is very much covered with dark
circumstances. (2.) In this, that their doctrine might patronize the carnal
concupiscences of men, as if there were no need to oppose them; and so they
allure some with the lusts of the flesh, who before were convinced of their
errors, wherein they lived whilst they were amongst worldly men, i. e. without
the Church, they had renounced their society, and truly or resolvedly escaped
from them (which may be, by the power of the natural light of conscience) and
had betook themselves to the fellowship of the Christian Church, which also
they might do without spiritual regeneration.

Verse. 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in
bondage. (3.) In the dissimilitude betwixt themselves and their promises. For
they promised liberty to others, when they drew them into bondage of sin, and
they themselves were the servants of corruption, both as to their practice, and
the principles of their doctrine. For there is no other Christian liberty, than
that which brings those that are freed from sin, and the servile yoke of the
Covenant of works, to the free obedience of Righteousness.

For] He proves these Libertines with their Disciples to be the most abject
and miserable slaves to sin, by four reasons.

Overcome] Reas. 1. Because they are vanquished and overcome by sin: to whose
servitude they yield themselves, being allured by the deceiveableness of false
doctrine: Therefore they are truly slaves.

Verse. 20. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through
the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.
Reas. 2. Because they and their Disciples by Apostasy from an holy
conversation, fall into a worse condition, than that was, wherein they lived,
before they gave their names to Christ. For after they renounced in Baptism the
pollutions of the world, and through the knowledge of Christ whatsoever,
betaking themselves into the bosom of some Church of Christ, have escaped
them, if afterward they be entangled again in those pollutions, and have
yielded to them, their last end is worse than their beginning.

Verse. 21. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them. Reas. 3. Proving the former, because they
knowingly and willingly run as fugitives to the tents of their adversaries,
from the known way of Righteousness, and from the holy commandment once
delivered unto them; which sin is much more grievous, and the servitude harder,
than if they had never known the way of Righteousness; for their condition
would be better in ignorance than in Apostasy.

Verse. 22. But it is happened unto them according to the true Proverb, The Dog
is turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the mire. Reas. 4. Making for removing of the scandal, which might arise
from their Apostasy; because by their Apostasy they show that they never were
of the true Sheep of Christ, but in Baptism, and a visible sanctity of life,
wherein they sometimes vaunted themselves to be Saints, they show themselves to
have been Sows and Dogs, and to have always been so, without spiritual and
internal renovation of their nature; And therefore no wonder if it happen unto
them according to the true Proverb, As the Dog, though purged by vomiting, yet
he licks up again that which he has vomited; and the Sow, though washed, yet
she returns to her wallowing in the mire: So Apostates, though they may
profess repentance from their sins, and Faith in Christ, and obedience of his
commands, yet, if occasion serves, they turn to their former manners.

CHAP. III.
HE passes on to another Admonition, concerning their bewaring of scoffers,
who denied the coming of Christ, whose blasphemy he reproves, to verse. 11. In
the second he shows the use and fruit of his Doctrine, chiefly touching the
coming of Christ, to the end.

Verse. 1. This second Epistle (beloved) I now write unto you, in both which I
stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance:

2. That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy
Prophets; and of the commandment of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior:

That he may make a way for those things that follow, he propounds the scope
of both Epistles, viz. by admonitions to stir up the minds of the truly
faithful to constancy in Faith, and Obedience to the Doctrine of the Gospel,
which they had learned out of the Scripture of the Prophets, and the teaching
of the Apostles.

Verse. 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers,
walking after their own lusts, That they might beware of Atheists and mockers
at piety, he describes such sort of Monsters four ways. First, From the
Antecedent prediction of the Holy Ghost, warning thee of the coming, and
frequency of those wicked scoffers about the end of the world, as capital
enemies of the Gospel, who in the times of the Gospel would make a laughing
stock at all piety: Secondly, From their vicious life, that they will lead a
life according to their lusts.

Verse. 4. And saying, where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers
fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
Creation. Thirdly, From their blasphemous speeches, that they will also dare
impudently to deny the Lords coming to judgment, and openly accuse Gods
promises of falsitie. Fourthly, From their pertinacious defense of their
blasphemy, that they would dare to dispute against the Lord* coming, as if he
would not come at all, but that the world should endure for ever: Therefore
because many ages being past, the Judge does not as yet come, and because all
things remain in our times, as they did from the beginning of the Creation,
they make their carnal sense the measure of their Faith, and cast the Word of
God behind their backs.

Verse. 5. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the Word of God the
Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing out of the water, and in the water,
He reproves these blasphemous Dogs in five Arguments.

Argum. 1. Because they scornfully reject the knowledge offered them out of
Gods word, and are willingly ignorant, that by the word of God the world was
created; for if they should acknowledge the Creation to be by the word of God,
they ought also to acknowledge an end of the world, foretold in the word of God.

The Earth] Argum. 2. They are willingly ignorant of, and shut their eyes
against that constant miracle of the earth rising out of the water, and
consisting by the water, by which it is made solid, so that it crumble not to
dust when the whole earth by its own nature being the lowest element, should
sinck and be covered and drowned in the waters. In which miracle we may
perceive that nature is governed and established by the will of God alone, that
it may so continue, or otherwise as it shall please God.

Verse. 6. Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water,
perished. Argum. 3. That the earth contrary to nature appears out of the
waters, and that all things do remain always in the same state, is evident out
of the history of the deluge, whereby the former order being changed, the world
or mankind, that then was, is perished in those overflowing waters: Therefore
it is not incredible, but that the world passing on shall suffer the change
which the word of God has foretold.

Verse. 7. But the Heavens and the Earth which are now, by the same word are
kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition
of ungodly men. Argum. 4. The Heavens, which now are, and the Earth which now
is, are by the same word, and his efficacious will, reserved unto the fire of
the last judgment, when the wicked, and especially the scoffers at the coming
of Christ, shall be condemned, and perish.

Verse. 8. But (Beloved) be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. He takes away
an Objection, The wicked might say, why does he defer his coming? The answer
is threefold. First, Although the Lord seems to defer his coming, yet his
deferring ought not to be an offense to any, because this delay ought not to be
estimated by our sense, but out of Gods eternity, to whom that space of time,
which seems to us to be very long, is but as one day, and with whom one day and
a thousand years do not differ as to the proportion of measure.

Verse. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, (as some men count
slackness) but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. Answ. 2. This delaying does not
proceed from slackness, as some Judge, but from the patience of God toward us,
to wit, the Elect, whereas many as yet are not converted, and whereof God will
have none perish, but all (in his time) to come to repentance, which cannot be
unless the coming of Christ should be deferred to a season. For if God should
anticipate the time of judgment, decreed by himself, some of them, which he
has chosen to salvation from eternity, should perish.

Verse. 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the
which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up. Answ. 3. And Argum. 5. Reproving scoffers from the manner of Christ's
coming, which is described in three things, (1.) It shall be unawares to men,
as thieves use to come, at such a time when they know they are least expected*
(2.) It shall be with the greatest change of the whole universe: (3.) With the
disanulling of all things, wherein the Atheists sought their felicity in the
world, for the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, the elements shall
melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works therein shall be burnt
up: so that all ought to be sollicitous in preparing themselves, rather than to
enquire curiously about the manner or time of his coming, or to complain of his
slackness.

The Second Part.
Verse. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation, and godliness, The second
part of the Chapter follows, wherein he draws this Doctrine into use by an
Exhortation to follow after godliness, and to perseverance in it: The Arguments
of the Exhortation are eight,

Argum. 1. By requiring a testimony from their consciences: All these visible
works, especially, which are in the earth, are to be dissolved: Therefore we
ought to follow after holiness.

Verse. 12. Looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein
the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat. Argum. 2. Because so it becomes you, who expect with hope, and
hasten with desire to meet the Lord at his coming, i. e. it behooves you, hoping
for the coming of Christ, to labor patiently in your vocation, and to
endeavor after holiness.

Wherein] Argum. 3. Because the coming of the Lord to judgment will be so
terrible, that the Heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat.

Verse. 13. Nevertheless, we, according to his promise, look for new Heavens,
and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

14. Wherefore (Beloved) seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that
ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.

Argum. 4. Because according to the promises of God, Isa 65.17. and 66.22. we
expect new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein the just alone shall dwell:
Therefore we ought to endeavor after holiness, and righteousness, who have
this hope. He calls both the Heavens and the Earth the habitation of the just,
because the world shall be the Possession, Palace, and Kingdom of the Elect,
who shall accompany Christ wheresoever he shall go.

Be diligent] He adds Argum. 5. With a repetition of his Exhortation to
holiness, Being diligent, that being without spot and blameless, ye may be
found of Christ in peace, i. e. being reconciled to God, and be accounted the
friends of Christ, by him, when he shall come to judgment.

Verse. 15. And account that the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation, even
as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, has
written unto you. Argum. 6. With preventing an Objection, ye ought to be so
far from being overcome with weariness, because Christ seems to defer his
coming, that on the contrary ye ought to account it a sign of salvation given
to all of you, that this is not delay, but rather the forbearance of the Lord,
and slowness to wrath.

Even as] Argum. 7. Paul in his Epistle written to you Hebrews, (according to
the abundant measure of wisdom given to him) diligently exhorts you to follow
after holiness and patience under the hope of Christ's coming, as in many
places, so especially in the end of Chap. 10.36. verse. Therefore ought ye to
follow after holiness and patience.

Verse. 16: As also in all his Epistles speaking in them of these things, in
which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own
destruction. He takes occasion from the mention he made of the Epistle of
Paul to the Hebrews, of commending the rest of Paul's Epistles for Canonical,
and to take away the offense upon the difficulty of some places in his
Epistles, from this, that neither the sayings of Paul, nor any other Scriptures
are wrested, unless by those that are unlearned and unstable, or perverse men,
and that to the destruction of them that pervert them.

Verse. 17. Ye therefore (Beloved) seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness.

18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: to him be glory both now and for ever. Amen.

Argum. 8. Propounded by way of Exhortation, to shake off the idleness of the
flesh. Being fore-admonished concerning the errors of false Teachers, by which
they seduce their Disciples from the way of Truth and Holiness, ye ought so
much the more, not only to beware lest ye fall from your own stedfastness (
i. e. from the Faith and Obedience of the Doctrine of Christ, wherein with a
steadfast purpose of mind ye now stand) but also ye ought to endeavor after
further progress, and growth in grace, holiness, and in the knowledge or Faith
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

To him be glory] He shuts up the Epistle with a famous doxology, wherein he
acknowledges Christ to be the true God; For glory is only due to God: Also he
propounds Christ who is to be glorified, both now, whilst we are in the
warfare of the world, and also in the world to come, which he calls the day of
eternity, because that whole eternity is one day. Glory be unto him. Amen.

The first Epistle of JOHN, Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
THere are three Epistles of John the Apostle (who writ both the Gospel and the
Revelation) ex^ant* The scope of this, which is the first, is to teach by what
means we may have communion with God, and how we may be certain of that
communion, to a full consolation both in life and death: To which end he
propounds the sum of the Doctrine of the Gospel, Chap. 1. He shows the use
of this Doctrine in diverse Exhortations to follow after Holiness, to love the
Brethren, to hate the world, and constancy in the Faith, Chap. 2. He
prosecutes the Exhortation to the following after Righteousness, and brotherly
love. Chap. 3.

In like manner, after the Exhortation to beware of seducers, he goes on in an
Exhortation to the loving of the Brethren, Chap. 4. Lastly, That they which
believe may know themselves to have life, and knowing it, they may more and
more believe in Jesus Christ, he gathers together many Notes of Believers, and
Arguments to believe, Chap. 5.

The Method of this Epistle is very artificial, for the Christian mysteries,
and rules of Faith are lincked together as with a chain. For always from the
end of the preceding Doctrine, there arises a following Discourse.

CHAP. I.
In this Chapter he propounds the sum of the Doctrine of the Gospel preached
by himself, and the rest of the Apostles. There are two parts of the Chapter.
In the first he confirms the excellency of his preaching, and shows the object
of Saving Faith, to verse. 6. In the other he lays down the notes of a true
Believer, to whom the Grace of the Gospel preached truly belongs, to the end.

Verse. 1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled, of the word of life, He confirms the excellency of the Gospel which
he preached, by eight reasons.

Of the word] Reas. 1. Is contained in the last words of this verse, viz. That
his Gospel treats of the most excellent object, viz. the word of life, i. e. of
Jesus Christ the Son of God, who is called (...), the Word, that we may
conceive the distinction of the person of the Son from the Father, and the
order of their working, seeing that it is the Word of some one, viz. the word
of the Father: And that he may teach the spiritual and immanent manner of the
Sons Generation, and that his subsistence is inseparable from the Father, and
that we may behold especially his office, which is to manifest God, and the
counsel of God concerning our salvation. Furthermore he is called the word of
Life: (1.) Because he has life in himself, and he himself is life. (2.)
Because he has purchased life for us, and has showed it to us; and Lastly,
Because he applies that to us, and brings it about, that we may live an
eternal life.

That which was] Reas. 2. Of the excellency of his preaching, that it is the
ancient Truth preached, viz. that which was from the beginning; partly inasmuch
as there was never any other ground of salvation besides this in Christ alone,
who is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; partly because Christ
preached by the Apostle, did subsist, as to his Divinity, before his
incarnation, from the beginning of the world, the same SON of GOD, and
MEDIATOR of our salvation, and was in the beginning of the world, when created
things did not as yet subsist, but began to be, or who is the same from
eternity to eternity: Therefore the subject of our Gospel is most excellent.

Which we have seen] Reas. 3. Because the Truth preached is certain, and
experienced by the Apostles, because they by the infallible testimony of their
senses, being eye and ear-witnesses, had observed that Christ himself in his
own time was manifested in the flesh, or incarnate. Partly by hearing with
their ears day by day the Doctrine of Christ, which was published by an holy
and audible voice: partly by seeing with their eyes, both the ordinary and
miraculous works, his sufferings in the flesh, and glorification in his
transfiguration, and his Resurrection from the dead, and by most clearly
perceiving them, after a most deep inquisition into the truth of the thing:
Lastly, partly by feeling with their hands, or handling his flesh, or his
assumed humane nature. From whence the certainty of their testimony concerning
Christ offered, is so manifest, that it cannot be doubtful: Therefore most
excellent is the truth that is preached by us.

Verse. 2. (For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness,
and show unto you that eternal life which was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us.) Reas. 4. By a Parenthesis confirming the former; we have
known concerning Christ, (1.) That he is life it self, the true Jehovah, who
is essentially life in himself, and causally in respect of us: For he is the
Author of our life, not only natural, but also spiritual and eternal, the
Author of light and illumination, the Author of grace and every pious or
commendable motion: (2.) That he is by divine inspiration manifested to be
such, and revealed to us, and by that revelation seen and acknowledged by us to
be that life: (3.) Whom we have seen and acknowledge to be the life revealed,
him we testify to be life, and preach him to you, viz. to be both God
eternal, and the Procuror, Giver and Preserver of eternal life, to be
communicated unto us. (4.) We have known the Son of God, the second distinct
person of the Trinity, which was from eternity with the Father, and from the
making of the world, did plead our cause with the Father, and is now revealed
unto us after his incarnation by divine Revelation: Therefore this our
preaching of Truth and Life is both most excellent, and most certain.

Verse. 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ. Reas. 5. Through the Truth preached by us
Apostles, eye and ear-witnesses, believers are made partakers with us of the
same felicity, and the same good things: Therefore the Truth preached by us is
most excellent.

And our fellowship] Reas. 6. They who are united in the Faith of the Truth
preached by us, shall also be united with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ,
by virtue of the Holy Ghost: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 4. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. Reas.
7. The sum of our preaching which is written to you, has this end, that ye
being made certain of your election and glorification, may have a true and
spiritual joy, and that your joy may remain and be perfected: Therefore it is
deservedly to be accounted the most excellent.

Verse. 5. This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. Reas. 8. The
sum of our preaching is, that God is light, or a most present and perfect
remedy against the evils of ignorance, errors, falsehood, vices and miseries,
which are in us: and that God in himself is most free from these evils, so that
it is impossible for those that come unto him to be deceived, not to be
illuminated and directed, not to be delivered from sins and misery, and not to
obtain eternal life: Therefore it is necessary that my preaching and the rest
of the Apostles should be excellent.

Verse. 6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, and do not the Truth. The other part of the Chapter follows, wherein
he propounds partly negatively, and partly affirmatively, the notes or signs
of him that is a true Believer, who shall be partaker of the good things
promised in the Gospel. And the Notes are five.

Note 1. Is negatively propounded, with his confirmation. He that is a true
believer does not walk in darkness, is not given ever to sin, leading his life
according to the lusts of the flesh: Because if any one profess himself to have
communion with God (who is light and holiness,) and in (...) mean time walks
in the darkness of his sins, he is an hypocrite and a liar, seeing that he
does not that which is right, but that which he professes with his mouth, he
denies in his works.

Verse. 7. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin. Note 2. Is propounded affirmatively, He that walks in the light,
or he that follows after holiness, that he may be conformable to God (who is
light and perfect holiness) he is a true believer, having communion truly with
God and the Saints, to whom the fruit also of Christ's death to the remission of
sins does wholly belong.

Verse. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us. Note 3. Is negative. He that is a true Believer is not so
just in his own eyes, that he denies that he cannot sin, either in word, or
deed, or that he has not sinned after Justification, or that he (as if he
could not want the daily intercession of Christ, and the daily applying of his
merit for the delivering of his conscience from new guilt) is not touched with
the sense of sin* so that he must forthwith fly unto Christ as his Redeemer.
For whosoever either in word or deed does really so deny that he has sin in
him for the present, deceives himself, and is an hypocrite, in whom there is no
sincerity.

Verse. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Note 4. He that is a true
Believer, is so affected with the sense of his sins, that he acknowledges
them before God, and does confess from his soul that he deserves eternal
death, and that his guilt can no otherwise be expiated, but by the merit of the
blood of the Son of God, and that he cannot be sanctified, but by the divine
virtue of the Spirit of Christ, or be free from the pollution of sin.

Faithful] The Apostle promises to him that does so confess his sins, that
upon the faithfulness and righteousness of God, he shall be absolved, and
purged from the guilt of sin, or sanctified from the stain of it: For God is
faithful, who has promised these things, and God is just, who has taken
satisfaction from Christ the Surety, he does not exact the debt from him, for
whom Christ has satisfied; but on the other side, he bestows all the good
things upon him that believes, which Christ has purchased for his salvation.

Verse. 10. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us. Note 5. Is negative. He that is a true Believer, does
neither deny, nor extenuate his sins past, as if either with that Pharisee he
had performed all the commands of God from his youth; or as if there was no
original sin, or as if it was not at all worthy of death: Neither is he
impenitent, as if the sins which he had committed were light and venial, which
need not the expiation of the blood of Christ, or as if there were not so much
corruption in his nature, but that by his free will he might confide in his
own strength, to dispose himself for grace, and merit it, or at leastwise be
able to obtain it. For he that either so, or by any other means, directly or
indirectly denies that he has not sinned, and consequently denies that he is
not, nor has not been so guilty of death, that he needed such an expiation as
the death of the Son of God is, he is a blasphemer against God (accusing him
of a lie, who has in his word condemned all as sinners, and guilty of death,
and has affirmed that there is no remission of sins, but by the blood of his
Son) neither is the Word of God received by Faith at any time in his heart, i.
e. neither has he believed the Doctrine of the Law, not yet of the Gospel.

CHAP. II.
THe rest of the whole Epistle enforces the use of the former Doctrine, to
which end five Exhortations are propounded. The first to verse. 9. The second to
verse. 15. The third to verse. 18. The fourth to verse. 29. The fifth to verse the
last.

Verse. 1. My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not.
And if any man sin* we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: The first Exhortation is to the following after holiness, that they
sin not; The Reasons of the Exhortation (besides a friendly compellation) are
eleven.

Reas. 1. Because this is the end and use of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
the Apostles writing. These things write I unto you, that ye sin not, says
he: Therefore follow ye holiness.

And if] Reas. 2. If ye follow after holiness, the sins which perhaps ye
shall fall into, shall be taken away through the intercession of Christ Jesus
our Advocate and Lord: Therefore endeavor after holiness. When he names one
Advocate, he excludes all others, for otherwise Christ was not simply our
Advocate, but one of our Advocates.

The Righteous] Reas. 3. Confirming the former; Christ our Advocate is
righteous, i. e. not only meet to intercede for sinners by reason of the
Righteousness of his person, but also righteous in his office, who requires
nothing of the Father in our behalf, but what is justly due to him interceding
for us, from the covenant and merit of his death. Also he is Righteous, that
he might cover us with his imputed Righteousness. And lastly, he is
righteous, who upon the Covenant of Redemption promotes us in the following
after Righteousness, and raises us up again, when we fall, and at length
perfectly makes us righteous or holy: Therefore believers ought both to
endeavor after holiness, and if at any time they fall into sin, to hope for
the virtue of Christ's intercession.

Verse. 2. And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world. Reas. 4. Confirming the second reason.
The death and expiatory Sacrifice of Christ, was offered, not only for us,
viz. elected out of the Jews, and converted to the Faith of Christ, but also
for the sins of all the elect, or redeemed in the world: Therefore ye ought to
beware of the evil of sin, which cannot be expiated, unless by the death of
Christ, but if ye sin, ye may confidently expect the virtue both of the rich
expiation, and intercession of Christ.

Verse. 3. And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments.
Reas. 5. By endeavoring sincerely to keep the commandments of God, as by a
sure sign ye may know the truth of your Faith, or that ye truly believe in
God, and love him sincerely: Therefore follow ye after holiness, or sin not.

Verse. 4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him. Reas. 6. He that professes that he knows
God, i. e. that he believes in him, and loves him, and does not follow after
holiness (for according to the style of the Gospel, to endeavor sincerely
after holiness, is to keep the commandments) is an hypocrite, in whom there is
no sincerity, or truth of Faith: Therefore endeavor after holiness.

Verse. 5. But who so keeps his word, in him, verily is the love of God
perfected; hereby know we that we are in him. Reas. 7. He that endeavors
after holiness, proves the sincerity of his love toward God, which love is
perfected or manifested to be sincere from an endeavor of keeping the word of
God, and obeying it: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after holiness.

Hereby) Reas. 8. He that endeavors after holiness, or not to sin, or to keep
the word of God, has an evidence of his communion with God, and knows that he
dwells in Christ by Faith: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 6. He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk, even
as he walked. Reas. 9. Confirming the former, whosoever professes that he
has communion with Christ, ought to endeavor after holiness, or to imitate
Christ in his life and conversation: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after
holiness.

Verse. 7. Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old
commandment, which ye had from the beginning, the old commandment is the
word which ye have heard from the beginning. Reas. 10. I require no new duty
from you, when I urge you to follow after holiness, or the observance of Gods
commandments, but I repeat an old commandment, which ye have not only heard
from the beginning, from Christ and his Ministers, but ye have had it also
commended to you out of the Law and Prophets: Therefore endeavor after
holiness.

Verse. 8. Again, a new Commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in
him, and in you, because the darkness is past, and the true light now shines.
Reas. 11. This Commandment is not old in the oldness of the letter, as in
times past it was, so long as you lived irregenerate under the Covenant of
works, when the Law did command, and conferred no strength to perform, but it
is now in the newness of Spirit: To the performing whereof Christ will
administer new grace to you: Therefore ye ought to follow after holiness.

Which] What the New Covenant is, he expounds in the next words, affirming
that the command is new, both in respect of Christ, who quickens the
Commandment, and in respect of themselves, who were now by regeneration made
new Creatures, i. e. to whom grace was administered, and was furthermore to be
administered to obedience.

Because the darkness] The reason is given to this sense, Because ye are not
under the Law, but under Grace; ye are not in a state of irregeneration, but
are renewed. For the darkness of the Legal Covenant, and the state of
irregeneration, are passed away, and now Christ, who brings life and grace with
him, and is the true light, is risen as the Sun of Righteousness, upon you that
believe, and has both communicated the light, and also the heat of life to
you: Therefore the commandment is new to you, that ye ought to be encouraged
to follow after holiness with more alacrity.

Verse. 9. He that says he is in the light, and hates his Brother, is in
darkness, even until now. The second Exhortation drawing the former to the love
of the Brethren: The Arguments of the Exhortation are ten; besides those two
which are next recited, and may also be referred hither.

Argum. 1. Whosoever professes himself to be in the light, or regenerate, and
hates his Brother, he lies yet unregenerated in the darkness of ignorance and
sin: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after brotherly love.

Verse. 10. He that loves his Brother, abides in the light, and there is none
occasion of stumbling in him. Argum. 2. He that loves his Brother, remains in
the light, and perseveres in the way of truth, in part possessing the lot and
condition of the Saints: Therefore ye ought to follow after, etc.

And none occasion of stumbling] Argum. 3. He that loves his Brother, does
neither stumble himself in the way of holiness (always seeing whither he
goes, viz. to God by Faith in the way of obedience) nor is he an occasion of
stumbling to others, whereby they may either be drawn into sin, or hardened in
it: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after brotherly love.

Verse. 11. But he that hates his Brother, is in darkness, and walks in
darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded
his eyes. Argum. 4. He that hates his Brother, he wholly lies and perseveres
in sin, and swarving from the right way, which leads to salvation, he is
carried to a precepice, not knowing whither he goes, because his mind is
darkened with sin: Therefore ye must follow after brotherly love.

Verse. 12. I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven
you for his names sake. Argum. 5. O faithful Children, both Gods and mine, your
sins are freely forgiven you, for Christ's name sake, i. e. for the merit of
Christ which is preached to you, and is through Faith apprehended by you:
Therefore this Exhortation which I have written, being to holiness, and
brotherly love, ye are bound to obey it.

Verse. 13. I write unto you, Fathers, because ye have known him that is from
the beginning; I write unto you young men, because ye have overcome the wicked
one: I write unto you little children, because ye have known the Father.
Argum. 6. From the faithful of every age and order without exception is
required the following after holiness and brotherly love: by name from the
Fathers, who are therefore bound to obey, because ye are admitted to the
knowledge of the ancient of days, or the eternal Son of God, knowledge of whom
has made you more blessed, than all that knowledge of things you have gained
from the use and experience of many years: Therefore ye ought to follow after,
etc.

Young men] Argum. 7. Because as all, so young men are bound to obey, because
victory is granted to them against the Devil, in Christ, in whom also strength
is administered for their daily conquering, which victory exceeds all warlike
praises.

Little Children] Argum. 8. Because as all, so are the faithful little children
bound to obey these Exhortations, because, although they are not so skilful in
worldly matters, God has manifested himself to them, a Father in Christ, and
has given them to acknowledge God, their Father: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 14. I have written unto you, Fathers, because ye have known him, that
is from the beginning. I have written unto you, young men, because ye are
strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked
one. Father] Argum. 9. Enforcing the sixth Argument, Because, as all, so in the
first place; The faithful Fathers are bound to obey the Exhortation, because it
is given to them rather than to others, to know the Eternal Son of God, which
benefit ought again and again to come into their consideration.

Young men] Argum. 10. Reinforcing the seventh Argument, because as all, so
also the faithful young men (...) to obey the Exhortation, seeing that God in
Christ has first of all endued them from above with spiritual strength, which
is far more excellent than natural; Secondly, And has put his word into their
minds by the Spirit, that by Faith it might always abide in them: Thirdly, And
has also given them, that through Christ they may overcome the Devil, also
these Arguments make much to the following Exhortation.

Verse. 15. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Exhort. 3. To beware
of the love of the world, and of those things that are in it. By world he
understands the condition of unregenerate men, wherein they please themselves,
and think themselves happy. By those things which are in the world, he
understands the enticements or the good things thereof, wherewith unregenerate
men are taken, such are pleasures, riches, honors. To love, is to prize, to
affect. The Arguments of the Exhortation are four.

If any man] Argum. 1. The love of the world binds the heart to worldly
things, and excludes the love of God, or of the Father, for the heart cannot
be carried out to contrary desires, or serve contrary Masters: Therefore have
a care ye love not the world.

Verse. 16. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. Argum.
2. Confirming the former, The studies of worldly men, whereunto men are carried
with a full carreere, are such as the lust of the flesh, or sensual pleasures,
of gluttony, or uncleanness; The lust of the eyes, or covetousness inordinately
affecting matters of profit, and the pride of life, or an excessive desire of
honors; Those desires (says he) are not of God, but from the corruptions of
unregenerate men: Therefore have a care* etc.

Verse. 17. And the world passes away, and the lust thereof, but he that does
the will of God abides for ever. Argum. 3. The condition of worldly men, and
those things which seem to be pleasant in this condition, are various, and
will by and by pass away: Therefore they are not to be loved.

But hee] Argum. 4. He that renounces his perverse will, and the will of
wicked men, and endeavors to do the will of God, shall live for ever:
Therefore ye ought to beware of the love of the world. And these Arguments
conduce much to those things that follow.

Verse. 18. Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that
Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know
that it is the last time. Exhort. 4. That they beware of seducers, and do not
depart from the true Faith, but that they continue constant in the Faith and
Obedience of the Truth.

Little Children] The Reasons of the Exhortation are fifteen.

Reas. 1. That as little children, ye have need to take heed: Therefore ye
are bound to beware.

Time] Reas. 2. Now it is the time wherein there is danger, by reason of
seducers, viz. it is the last hour, and the last time of the world, wherein the
Devil chiefly rages, knowing that his time is short, and wherein all ought both
to watch and prepare themselves for the judgment which will come at the second
coming of Christ: Therefore, etc.

And as] Reas. 3. Confirming the former, according to the premonition by the
Apostles and Christ concerning that famous Antichrist which should come, many
fore-running Antichrists have come already, who under the pretense of Teachers
seduce men from Christ, and are the adversaries of Christ: Therefore it is the
last time, wherein ye are in danger of seducers, of whom ye ought diligently
to have a care.

Verse. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been
of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they
might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. Reas. 4. Apostates
departing from the external communion of those that are truly faithful, are not
of the number of those that truly believe: Therefore ye ought to beware of
Apostasy and Seducers.

For if they had been of us] Reas. 5. Confirming the former, they that are of
the number of those that are truly faithful and elect, continue in the society
of the true Church, and in the communion of the Apostolical doctrine: And so
they declare themselves to be true Believers: but those that fall away, they
(so far as we look upon the counsel of God) depart from the doctrine of the
Apostles, for this end, that their hypocrisy might be manifested, and that
they might be declared not to be of the number of those that are truly
Faithful: Therefore, if ye would be esteemed either by God or men, true
Believers, or not of the number of hypocrites; ye ought to beware of Apostasy
or seducers.

Verse. 20. But ye have an unction from the holy One, and ye know all things.
Reas. 6. Ye are furnished with necessary gifts, and the aid of the Holy Ghost,
that ye might know all saving opinions, and so might shun the seduction of
Apostates: Therefore ye ought to beware.

Verse. 21. I have not written unto you, because ye know not the Truth: but
because you know it, and that no lie is of the Truth. Reas. 7. Answering an
objection, I do not accuse you of ignorance by admonishing, or writing to you,
but therefore I exhort you to constancy, that I may know that you have known
the Truth, and are delighted in it: Therefore ye ought to hearken to my
exhortation.

And that no lie] Reas. 8. Ye being admonished of the Truth, may easily
discern a lie, which viz. being examined by the rule of Truth, does in no wise
agree with it: Therefore ye ought to hearken to my exhortation, for this end,
that ye may examine and reject that which is false.

Verse. 22. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ, he is
Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. Reas. 9. Those that seduce men
from the true Doctrine of the Gospel are the greatest liars amongst men (as the
interrogation intimates) because they in some way or other deny Jesus to be the
Christ, for they do not acknowledge such a Christ, as the Father offers to us
in the Gospel: For they openly or secretly invade either his person, or his
natures, or the proprieties of his natures, or his offices, or his virtue, or
his efficacy, or grace, or truth, or his glory: Therefore ye ought to beware
of seducers.

He is] Reas. 10. All seducers, who draw hearers from Christ in any one
Article, are Antichrists, both denying the Father and the Son; and so
overthrowing the true Religion, and the foundations of Religion with their
lies, because there is no true God out of Christ: For in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead: Therefore ye ought to beware of seducers.

Verse. 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father. He
confirms this reason, from the inseparableness of the Father from the Son, that
no man can have the Father for his God, who any way denies the Son, because God
has given himself to be enjoyed wholly by us in Christ, and he is sought for
in vain elsewhere, or by any other way, than wherein he has manifested
himself to us in Christ, who, as the image of the Father represents and offers
to us whatsoever is necessary or profitable to be known of the Father to
salvation; and on the other side, whosoever give due honor to Christ, as to
the Son of God, acknowledging him, such as he has manifested himself in the
Scriptures, does also acknowledge the Father, and esteem him for their God.

Verse. 14. Let that therefore abide in you, which you have heard from the
beginning, if that which you have heard from the beginning shall remain in you,
ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. Reas. 11. The truly
ancient and only Truth of God always constant to it self, is this, which I
exhort you to hold, which viz. ye have heard from the beginning of the Gospel,
not only preached Christ, but also promised, and declared by the Prophets in
the Scriptures: Therefore ye ought to retain that Truth: and here he openly
brings forth what he aimed at, or the Exhortation.

If it shall remain in you] Reas. 12. If ye have retained the Doctrine
delivered to you by Christ, and his Apostles, according to the Scriptures; ye
shall remain in the society and friendship of God, the Son, and the Father:
Therefore ye ought to beware of seducers.

Verse. 25. And this is the promise that he has promised us, eternal life.

26. These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you.

Reas. 13. God upon this condition has promised us life eternal, if we retain
steadfastly the Doctrine of Christ: Therefore ye ought steadfastly to continue
in the Faith and obedience of Christ's Doctrine, and beware of seducers, who do
their endeavor to withdraw you from the Truth: And here again the Apostle
professes openly his aim in these Arguments.

Verse. 27. But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you:
and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you
of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in him. Reas. 14. That ye may be kept from seducers, ye are
fortified with manifold defenses: For first, as for external doctrine, ye have
received from Christ an unction, or the holy Spirit, who inwardly teaches you,
and confirm^ you in the Truth of the Doctrine of Christ, every one in his
measure. Secondly, That Spirit remains in you, who are faithful, and is not
taken away from believers. Thirdly, Ye have no need of any man, that may teach
you any thing besides that which the Spirit of Christ has taught in the
Scripture, and has confirmed in your hearts, ye have only need of
Exhortation, that ye abide in Christ, as the Spirit or Unction speaking in the
Scriptures, and that which is in the Scriptures, confirming in your hearts, and
further instructing you out of the Scriptures, does teach you in all things
necessary to salvation: which Spirit is Truth, i. e. the very truth of the
Scripture, Which is truth, A confirmation, and not a lie, but a refuter, and
hater of lies: Therefore ye ought steadfastly to abide in Christ (as the Spirit
according to the truth of Scripture has taught you) and to beware of seducers.

Verse. 28. And now, Little Children, abide in him, that when he shall appear,
we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. Reas.
15. Whosoever they be that do not persevere in the Faith of Christ, neither
abide in communion with him; furthermore, whatsoever they are in the esteem of
men, they shall with shame depart from the judgment fear of Christ. But on the
contrary, those that persevere in the Faith, shall confidently stand before
him: Therefore ye ought steadfastly to abide in the Faith of Christ, and beware
of seducers.

Verse. 29. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that does
righteousness is born of him. Exhort. 5. Which he will prosecute in the former
part of the following Chapter, viz. that they endeavor after Righteousness, or
that they follow after holiness. The Arguments of the Exhortation are fifteen.

Argum. 1. Confirmed from the testimony of their conscience: He that
endeavors after Righteousness, is born of God (who is righteous) and has the
testimony of his Adoption and Regeneration: Therefore endeavor after
Righteousness.

CHAP. III.
THe parts of the Chapter are two: In the first he prosecutes the remaining
Arguments of the Exhortation, to verse. 11. In the second he adjoyns another
Exhortation to the love of the Brethren, to the end.

Verse. 1. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God: Therefore the world knows us not, because
it knew him not. Argum. 2. God has out of his mere and free love adorned you
that believe, with the honor of Adoption amongst his Sons: Therefore ye are
bound to requite your Father with following after Righteousness.

Knew not] Argum. 3. By answering an Objection. That the worlds not
acknowledging you for the Sons of God, should be no hinderance to you in the
following after Righteousness, seeing that this contempt is common to you, with
God your Father, whom also the world contemns, but it ought rather to stir you
up, to union and conformity with God in the following after Righteousness:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what
we shall be: but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like
him: For we shall see him as he is. Argum. 4. By preventing another
Objection, That your glory does not as yet appear, ought not to be any
hinderance to you in the following after Righteousness, it is enough, that we
know, that the right of the Sons of God is already given to us, and that we
shall come into the possession, when Christ shall be manifested, and we shall
be like him in glory and happiness, and we shall enjoy the beatifical vision
of him for ever: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after Righteousness

Verse. 3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as
he is pure. Argum. 5. Whosoever has a lively hope of conformity with Christ
in glory, purifies himself, that he may be made conformable unto Christ in
this life, in his endeavors after purity and righteousness: Therefore ye
ought to follow after righteousness.

Verse. 4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the Law: for sin is the
transgression of the Law. Argum. 6. Whosoever does not follow after
Righteousness, but gives himself to sin, he also transgresses the Law,
because sin is nothing else but the transgression of the Law, which if any one
does, he proclaims war with God: Therefore ye ought ^o follow after
Righteousness.

Verse. 5. And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in
him is no sin. Argum. 7. For this end Christ was manifested, that he might
purge and take away the guilt of sin from his (which he confirms from this,
that Christ had no sin in himself for which he could satisfy) whence it comes
to pass, that he which gives himself to sin, in that he sets himself contrary
to Christ, and does vilify the price of Redemption: Therefore, unless ye
would appear contrary to Christ, ye ought to follow after Righteousness.

Verse. 6. Whosoever abides in him, sins not: whosoever sins, has not
seen him, neither known him. Argum. 8. It is the property of every Believer, or
every one that abides in Christ, not to follow after sin, but to endeavor
after Righteousness: Therefore ye ought to follow after Righteousness.

Whosoever] Argum. 9. Whosoever either applies himself to, or indulges any sin,
pretends falsely to the Faith, or knowledge of Christ, which cannot be without
endeavors after newness of l^fe: Therefore ye ought to follow after
Righteousness.

Verse. 7. Little Children, Let no man deceive you: he that does Righteousness,
is righteous, even as he is righteous. Argum. 10. Whosoever does not so follow
after Righteousness, that in his works and actions he ^estifies his endeavors
after newness of life deceives himself, or suffers himself to be deceived. For
men persuade themselves in vain, that they have Righteousness in their hearts,
whilst open iniquity possesses their feet, hands, tongue, and eyes: Therefore
ye ought to follow after Righteousness.

He that doth] He confirms this Argument, by describing him that is
righteous, or justified by Faith, from his inseparable propriety, viz. his
practice of Righteousness, and conformity with God, which the justified person
endeavors after, that he may manifest his Righteousness by his works: No man
is justified, who does not endeavor to be conformable to the righteous God,
or does not paractise Righteousness in work: Therefore whosoever thinks
otherwise, deceives himself.

Verse. 8. He that commits sin, is of the Devil: For the Devil sins from
the beginning: for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil. Argum. 11. Whosoever gives up himself to sin,
is a child of the Devil, in his practices resembling his Father: He confirms
this from the antiquity of the Devil in sinning, who sinned presently after the
creation, and from that time has been the author of sinning to men: Therefore
follow after Righteousness, unless you would be accounted the children of the
Devil.

For this] Argum. 12. For this end Christ is manifested, that he might destroy
the works of the Devil, i. e. destroy the dominion of sin in his, and abolish
the indwelling of sin by degrees through sanctification. From hence it comes to
pass, that he who gives himself to sin, builds up that which Christ was
manifested to destroy: Therefore ye ought to follow after, etc.

Verse. 9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin; for his seed remains
in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. Argum. 13. Although he
that is regenerate may be overtaken by sin, yet he cannot give up himself to
sin, because of the nature of Regeneration, or because of the seed of God
remaining in him (that is, because Gods Word, and the Spirit, or lively Grace
of God in Regeneration, is communicated in the number of those gifts, of which
God does not repent) by virtue whereof the regenerate is continually withdrawn
from sin, and is carried on to follow after Righteousness; neither can he sin,
or indulge himself in sin: Therefore ye ought to follow after Righteousness,
if you would prove your selves born of God.

He cannot] Argum. 14. He that is regenerate cannot sin, because he is born
of God, who will not forsake him, that is born of him, but so governs and moves
the heart of him that is born of him, that he steadfastly wars against sin,
following the guidance of the Spirit: Therefore ought ye to follow after
Righteousness, if you will prove your selves born of God.

Verse. 10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil: whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves
not his Brother. Argum. 14. In this the regenerate and the unregenerate, the
Sons of God, and the Sons of the Devil, differ, that those who are of God,
follow after Righteousness; but those, who do not follow after Righteousness,
and namely, the love of the Brethren, are not of God, but of the Devil:
Therefore ye ought to follow after Righteousness, and especially brotherly
love.

The Second Part.
Verse. 11. For this is the message which ye heard from the beginning, that we
should love one another. From hence he proceeds to the other Exhortation, viz.
the love of Brethren. The Arguments of the Exhortation are fifteen.

Argum. 1. The Precept concerning the love of the Brethren is given to you by
Christ, from the beginning of your calling: Therefore love your brethren.

Verse. 12. Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his Brother: and
wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his Brothers
righteous. Argum. 2. The faithful ought to be unlike to Cain, the Son of the
Devil, and murderer of his Brother: Therefore, etc.

Wherefore] Argum. 3. Confirming and illustrating the former; those that do not
love their brethren, but hate them, shall be found to hate the Grace of God in
them; and in this to be like Cain, who out of envy persecuted with hatred the
Image of God in his Brother: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after brotherly
love.

Verse. 13. Marvail not my Brethren, if the world hate you. Argum. 4. By
preventing and retorting an Objection. That charity amongst Brethren ought by
no means to wax cold, because they see themselves hated by the world, but on
the contrary, they ought so much the more vehemently to love one another:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 14. We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love
the Brethren: He that loves not his Brother, abides in death. Argum. 5. W^e
are more assured by our love of the Brethren, or the love of the Image of God
in them, as by a certain sign, that we our selves are regenerated and
translated from death to life.

He that does not] Argum. 6. He that loves not his Brother, remains
unregenerate, in the state of sin and death: Therefore that ye may prove your
selves regenerate, love your Brethren.

Verse. 15. Whosoever hates his Brother, is a Murderer, and ye know that no
Murderer has eternal life abiding in him. Argum. 7. Confirming the former;
He that does not love his Brother, hates him, and therefore he is a
murderer, and consequently he has neither the beginnings of eternal life in
himself, neither right to eternal life, but remains obnoxious to eternal death:
Therefore ye ought to love the Brethren, unless ye will be accounted such.

Verse. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life
for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren. Argum. 8. Christ
exceedingly loved us, when he laid down his own life for us: Therefore we
imitating his example, ought to love one another.

Wee] Argum. 9. We owe this gratitude to Christ, who has laid down his life
for us, and our Brethren, that we be ready to pour out our lives for the good
of the Church, or our Brethren: Therefore so much the rather ought we
sincerely to affect them, and perform the inferior duties of love toward them.

Verse. 17. But whose has this worlds good, and sees his Brother has need,
and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him? Argum. 10. Confirming the former; They who do not so love their
brethren, as to communicate of their substance to those that want, being moved
to it out of bowels of mercy, are Hypocrites, and far from that love, which is
ready to lay down its life for the brethren.

Verse. 18. My little children, Let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but
in deed, and in truth. Hence is inferred the Exhortation it self; that they
testify their mutual love in deed, and in truth, and not in words, and in
tongue only.

Verse. 19. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him. Argum. 11. By love of the brethren, as by the fruit of
sincere Faith, we know that we are sincere, or truly faithful, and born of
God: Therefore we ought to love the brethren.

Before him] Argum. 12. By love we shall confirm our confidence with God, and
shall from this effect of Faith help conscience in the conflict of Faith, to
the giving of us a testimony of our absolution and justification by Faith:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 20. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and
knows all things.

21. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God.

He confirms this Argument by comparing of a watchful and an evil conscience,
in this verse, in the effects of condemnation; with a good conscience, in the
following verse, in the effect of absolution: as when an evil conscience
condemns him, that is altogether void of brotherly love, the sentence of
condemnation is ratified by God the supreme and omniscient Judge, until they
fly unto Christ; so on the other side, when a good conscience (which howsoever
it accuse us of imperfection) does not condemn us, as if we were altogether
destitute of this fruit of persevering in brotherly love, we retain a
confidence of going to God, as our Father in Christ: Therefore by following
after brotherly love, we shall assure our hearts before him, as it is, verse.
19.

Verse. 22. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. Argum. 13.
Conscience of brotherly love gives confidence of obtaining those good things,
which we ask of God according to his will; because we can reason from our
endeavor of keeping and doing Gods Commandments (which are pleasing to him)
that we are of the number of those that are true believers, who through Faith
in Christ, are in favor with God, and whose prayers God does not reject, as
he does the prayers of Hypocrites, and wicked men: Therefore ye ought to
follow after brotherly love.

Verse. 23. And this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the name of
his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment. Argum.
14. Confirming the former, and answering an objection, Lest any man should
abuse the things spoken before to defend the merits of works, or justification
by works. The Commandment concerning brotherly love, is consequently included
in the precept of saving Faith, which is to be placed upon Christ. For when
God commands Faith in Christ, which works by love, he also commands that we
should love one another: Therefore if any man have respect to the Precept
concerning Faith in the Son of God, it is necessary also that he have respect
to the command touching mutual love, and that he obey it: Therefore ye ought
to follow after brotherly love.

Verse. 24. And he that keeps his Commandments dwells in him, and be in
him; and hereby we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has
given us. Argum. 15. In whom there is an endeavor to obey the commands of God,
and namely the precept touching Faith in Christ (which works efficaciously by
brotherly love, he has communion with God, and knows that he has communion
with him by the free presence of the Holy Ghost; which spiritual presence he
may know by its effects, viz. from a desire in him to obey Gods command,
concerning lively Faith in Christ working by love: Therefore ye ought to
follow after brotherly love.

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chapter the Apostle is wholly in establishing their Faith, and in
stirring up their love toward the brethren. The Chapter contains two parts: In
the first he exhorts to try the spirits, that they may beware of Impostors, to
verse. 7. In the other he again provokes them to brotherly love, to the end.

Verse. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they
are of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. The
occasion of mentioning the Spirit of God, in the last verse of the former
Chapter, he exhorts them to believe no spirit or doctrine coming from any
spirit, before they have examined and proved whether it be of God. The
Arguments of the Exhortation are six.

Argum. 1. Many false Prophets or Heretics are risen, and are now gone out
openly into the world: Therefore ye ought not to believe any doctrine, unless
it be first examined.

Verse. 2. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; every spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. Argum. 2. Ye have a rule ready,
whereby, as by a touchstone, ye may examine every spirit, or the doctrine of
any spirit, whether it be of God. This is the first part of the Rule,
whatsoever spirit does seriously and truly confess the person of Christ,
according to the divinity wherein it did exist from eternity, and according to
the humanity, which he truly assumed in his incarnation; and does also
seriously acknowledge him to be the Christ, according to all his offices, and
attributes to him alone the whole glory of a perfect Savior, this spirit, or
this doctrine is of God.

Verse. 3. And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus is come in the flesh,
is not of God: and this is that spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard
that it should come, and even now already is it in the world. This other part
of the Rule is negative, Whatsoever spirit, or whatsoever doctrine does not
really and firmly confess Jesus Christ after that manner, viz. as is
abovesaid, but does diminish any thing from his person, or from his offices,
or his virtue, or efficacy, for the beginning, or most fully perfecting
salvation for us; he is not of God; but it is the spirit of Antichrist, which
spirit is now already in the world, although it has not as yet so prevailed,
that it can erect a Throne to it self, openly in the Church: Therefore seeing
ye have this Rule, ye ought not to admit any doctrine, unless it be examined.

Verse. 4. Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome them: because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. Argum. 3. Your
victory, as touching seducers, is as certainly ready, as if it was already
gained: Therefore trial being made, ye need not fear to contend with them.

Of God] He confirms this Argument by three Reasons from God.

Reas. 1. Ye are elected and regenerated by God: Therefore ye shall certainly
overcome seducers.

In you] Reas. 2. Ye have the Spirit of God dwelling in you, whereby ye may
discern, and beware of impostors: Therefore ye shall certainly overcome them.

Greater] Reas. 3. The Spirit of God dwelling in you is more powerful than the
Devil, that spirit, the seducer that is in the world, or in wicked deceivers:
Therefore ye shall certainly overcome them.

Verse. 5. They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the
world hears them. Argum. 4. By answering an objection, ye ought not to be
troubled, that the lying world hearkens to the lies of seducers; for those
seducers are of the world, and teach lies, which are pleasing to the world, but
on the contrary, ye ought the more diligently to beware of, and shun seducers,
by how much the more the world is addicted to them: Therefore ye ought to try
the spirits, whether they be of God, and not admit any doctrine without
examination.

Verse. 6. We are of God: he that knows God, hears us, he that is not of
God, hears not us: hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the spirit of
error. Argum. 5. By preventing an objection, Seeing that we Apostles and
sincere teachers have our doctrine and effectual calling from God, both to the
Faith of Christ, and to the preaching of Faith; it is sufficient that Gods
elect, or those that are taught by him should hear our doctrine, although
perhaps the number of them may be but small: Therefore hear us, and trial
being made, reject the spirit of error.

He that is not of God] Argum. 6. It is the property of a man not renewed, who
has not as yet any communion with God, not to adhere to our Apostolical
doctrine, but to believe seducers. And this is the sign, whereby any one may be
discerned, whether he be lead by the spirit of error, or of truth; For he
that has not hearkened to the doctrine of the Apostles, is lead by a spirit of
error, but if he shun errors, and has constantly adhered to the Apostles
doctrine, he is lead by the spirit of truth: Therefore ye ought to prove and
discern the Spirits, that ye may beware of seducers.

The Second Part.
Verse. 7. Beloved, let us love one another; for love is of God: and every one
that loves, is born of God* and knows God, The other part of the Chapter
follows, wherein he exhorts to brotherly love. The Arguments of the
Exhortation are twenty.

Argum. 1. Love toward the brethren is from God, viz. as a special gift which
is given only to the elect: Therefore ought ye to endeavor after it.

Everyone] Argum. 2. Confirming the former; He that is endued with love
toward brethren, as brethren, is of the number of the regenerate: Therefore
ye ought to endeavor after love.

Knoweth] Argum. 3. He that exercises love, knows God, i. e. believes in
him, and loves him: Therefore ye ought to love the brethren.

Verse. 8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love. Argum. 4. He
that is altogether without love toward the brethren, does neither believe God,
nor love him. The reason of this is, because God is love; All love as to his
essence, altogether lovely in himself, and in his Image every way altogether
loving us, and the author or efficient of all love in all his children: so he
that is void of love, cannot know God: Therefore ye ought to endeavor after
love.

Verse. 9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world; that we might live through him.
Argum. 5. Confirming the preceding Reason, God has so loved us, who are now
his people, that he has sent his only begotten Son, that we being freed
from death by his sufferings, might obtain eternal life: Therefore we ought to
love his adopted Sons, or our Brethren.

Verse. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

Argum. 6. Confirming and illustrating the former, God has freely loved us,
unworthy, and undeserving, and also enemies, who have not only not merited his
love, but have, no, not first desired it, but God has first loved us, and that
most exceedingly, by sending his Son, who offered up himself a sacrifice for
the expiating of our sins, and for the obtaining all the gifts, which are
necessary for the preparing of us to the possession of eternal life. From
whence it follows, that we ought to exercise brotherly love one toward
another. Verse. 11.

Verse. 12. No man has seen God at any time, if we love one another, God
dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us. Argum. 7. Although God is
invisible, who could never with corporeal senses be seen of any in his
essence, yet if we love one another, we have communion with him, and he
dwells in us: Therefore we ought to follow after love.

Perfected] Argum. 8. From our love of Brethren, our love is perfected toward
God, or demonstrated to be sincere; such God accepts and approves: Therefore,
etc.

Verse. 13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
has given us of his Spirit. Argum. 9. We have not only communion with God,
but we are also brought to a certain knowledge and persuasion, as touching our
communion with God, and mutual inhabitation, from this, that God has given his
Spirit, or the spirit of love to us, from which spirit he himself cannot be
separated: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 14. And we have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to
be the Savior of the world. Argum. 10. From the experience of the Apostles,
to this sense; Although no man has seen God at any time, yet we Apostles have
seen the effect of the greatest love in him, viz. that the Father has sent his
Son to be the Savior of the world, or all his elect children, dispersed
throughout the whole world, neither can we conceal from men so much good, but
out of the love which is in us toward the elect Brethren, we testify boldly
concerning that love of God toward men: Therefore all the faithful ought to do
the same, every one according to his measure.

Verse. 15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells
in him, and he in God. Argum. 11. Inferred from the former, and confirming it;
because, not only the Apostles, but also whoever he be, who out of love to
God, and the Brethren, shall confess both in word and deed, the excellency and
virtue of Jesus Christ the Son of God, as we do; he has communion with God,
as well as we: Therefore ye ought to follow after brotherly love.

Verse. 16 And we have known and believed the love that God has to us; God is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. Argum.
12. Also from the experience of the Apostles, to this sense; We Apostles, being
persuaded by experience and faith, as touching Gods love to us, are constrained
both to bear him witness (that he is love it self, both in himself, and
toward others) and to love him and his children: Therefore all the faithful,
who believe, and have experienced the same, ought to do likewise.

God is love] Argum. 13. Seeing that God is love it self, whosoever constantly
abides in the Faith of divine love toward him, and in the endeavor both of
exercising love toward God and the Brethren, has constant communion with God,
and God with him: Therefore that this communion may remain firm, ye ought to
follow after brotherly love.

Ve^s. 17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the
day of judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world. Argum. 14. Both
that love of God toward us, which is to be believed, and that love of God
which is to be exercised toward God and the Brethren, is known to be perfect
and sincere, and is urged to be fulfilled by us, for this end, that we may
stand without fear before God in the day of judgment: and as now thinking of
that day, we may have boldness, as if we were now standing at Gods tribunal:
Therefore we ought to follow aft^r brotherly love.

As hee] Argum. 15. Giving a reason of the former; from the love of God found
in us, we firmly gather, that we in this life are beloved of God, and are
made conformable to God in this world, who is love: And therefore we may be
persuaded, as by a certain sign, that we are of the number of those, to whom
there is no condemnation in the life to come: Therefore ye ought to follow
after brotherly love.

Verse. 18. There is no fear in love, but perfect love ca^^eth out fear, because
fear has torment; he that fears, is not made perfect in love. Argum. 16.
Confirming the former. The love of God apprehended by faith, and kindling love
in us toward God and the Brethren, does so confirm us in a sure belief
touching our salvation, that we do not fear wrath and judgment: and by how
much the persuasion of Gods love toward us does the more ardently excite in us
the endeavor of loving God and our neighbor; so much the more strongly the
fear of condemnation is cast out, at leastwise that which is joined with
torment.

Feareth] Argum. 17. As a conclusion deducted from the former Argument;
whosoever is tormented with the fear of condemnation, is not strongly enough
confirmed in the belief of Gods love, and the exercise of love toward God and
the brethren, but wan^^ further en^rease, and exhortations, that he may
proceed in love to a fuller certainty: Therefore all that perceive in
themselves this imperfection, ought to endeavor after the love of the
Brethren, from ^he persuasion of Gods love toward them.

Verse. 19. We love him, because he first loved us. Argum. 18. The love
whereby we love God, is not the cause of the love whereby God loves us, but an
after effect: Therefore let us endeavor from the persuasion of Gods love
toward us, more and more to love God, and by how much the more vehemently we
endeavor to love God in himself, and offering himself in his children to be
loved by us, we shall be so much the more confirmed of his love toward us:
Therefore ye ought to follow after love.

Verse. 20. If any man say, I love God, and ^^teth his Brother, he is a liar.
For he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen? Argum. 19. The boasting of love toward God is vain,
where there is not love to the Brethren, because Gods grace does not work the
love of God, without love of the Brethren: Therefore, etc.

For hee] He confirms this Argument by this Reason; Because we are more moved
to love by sight, than by hearing: he that loves not his Brother whom he
has seen, and the Image of God in him, he cannot love God, whom he has not
seen: Therefore the boasting of love toward God is vain, where love of the
Brethren is wanting.

Verse. 21. And this commandment have we from him, that he who loves God,
loves his brother also. Argum. 20. The same authority of God has conjoined
the command of both, requiring of all that love God, that they love their
Brethren also: Therefore ye ought to love the Brethren.

CHAP. V.
THe principal scope of the whole Epistle, and especially of this Chapter, is
propounded, verse. 13. viz. that those who believe in Christ, may know that they
have eternal life, and that knowing they have life, they may more and more
believe in Christ. Of the Chapter there be two parts: In the first he
describes the marks of those that are true believers, or born again, who have
right to eternal life, with an inchoate possession thereof, to verse. 6. In the
second he propounds the Arguments to move us to believe in Christ.

Verse. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God: and
every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him.
The marks of those that are true believers, or born again, and live sincerely,
are six.

Note 1. He that is truly faithful, or begotten of God, believes seriously
that Jesus is the promised Christ, viz. the Redeemer of the world; for
whosoever solidly receives this truth, and applies it to himself, acknowledges
it in his heart (as the Scripture requires) is born of God.

And every one] Note 2. He so loves God, that he loves the Brethren, or those
that are begotten of him.

Verse. 2. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love
God, and keep his commandments. Note 3. Those that are truly faithful, do so
love the Brethren, that they also love God, and out of love to God, they
endeavor to keep his commandments.

Verse. 3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his
Commandments are not grievous. Note 4. Explicating the former; They that are
truly faithful, demonstrate the sincerity of their love, in endeavoring to
observe Gods Commandments out of love to him, so that his commandments, how
much soever they be hard and unpleasant to the flesh, yet they are not
grievous, but such as they desire most willingly to perform.

Verse. 4. For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the world, and this is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith. Note 5. Giving the reason of
the former; They that are truly faithful, or born again, do overcome the world,
that is, they overcome whatsoever opposes it self to the Spirit of God, viz.
deceits, inticements, and the terrors of the world, and all hindrances, which
may draw them from obedience to Gods commandments; so that their conflicts be
daily, yet they do not yield, but are sure to triumph, as conquerors, as often
as their enemies oppose them.

And this] Note 6. Explicating the former; They that are truly faithful, do not
lean to their own strength in warring against the world, but on Christ by
Faith, who has overcome the world in their behalf, and does administer
strength to them for the overcoming the world, which is the most certain,
excellent, and complete way to conquer.

Verse. 5. Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that
Jesus is the Son of God? The reason of the victory got over the world by Faith,
is, because it is impossible, that any one should overcome the world, unless it
be he, that (despairing of himself) by Faith leans on the sole truth and
strength of Jesus Christ, as of the omnipotent Son of God, who has not only
overcome the world for his, but does also make all his conquerors.

The Second Part.
Verse. 6. This is ^ee that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by
water only, but by water and blood: and it is the Spirit that bears witness,
because the spirit is truth. The other part of the Chapter follows, wherein he
proves that we ought to believe in Christ, as in the Son of God. The Arguments
are fourteen.

Argum. 1. Because Jesus Christ is he, who when he came, brought with him the
solid substance of Legal Ceremonies, as to that which chiefly belongs to the
abolishing of sin. For he came with water, or with that holiness in himself,
and virtue for the sanctifying his, which was signified by water, and washings,
in the old Law, to be in the Messiah that was to come, when he came. And he
came with blood, or with a full expiation of their sins, by the propitiatory
Sacrifice of his blood offered on the Cross, for the taking away of the sins of
his people.

Not by water] He confirms that, because Christ came not with one propriety of
a Mediator, which is the Sanctity of his Person, and virtue of sanctifying
his, signified by water, or legal washings; but he comes also with another
propriety, which is expiation, and full reconciliation, signified by the
sprinkling of blood, or by the slaying of beasts. The admirable symbol of
which conjunction was the flowing of water and blood out of his side on the
cross, as our Apostle has diligently observed in his Gospel, Chap. 19.34. That
we may all know, that whom Christ justifies, he also sanctifies; and on the
contrary, those whom he sanctifies, the same he also justifies: Therefore ye
ought to believe in Christ.

The Spirit] Argum. 2. The spirit witnesses the same, i. e. the manifestation
of the spirit in diverse gifts poured forth upon Christ's Disciples, witnesses
that Christ is the Son of God, and by its dictate makes this firm in the hearts
of those that are faithful: Therefore ye ought to believe in Christ.

Truth] He confirms this Argument, that the Spirit in these operations is
true, and far from all deceit, because it commends nothing to us besides the
Word of God, or Truth it self.

Verse. 7. For there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. Arg. 3. Because as the three
persons of the Godhead, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost are one in
essence, so they also consent together in witnessing to confirm this one thing,
That Jesus Christ is the Son of God. For the Father witnesses of him: (1)
Pronouncing with an audible voice, both in Christ's Baptism and Transfiguration,
that he was his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased. (2) In the works
which he gave to Christ to finish, Job 5.16.36. Furthermore the word bears
record of Christ, that is, Christ (wherein he is God) bears record of himself,
being incarnate, that he is the Son of God: partly affirming that very often
with a lively voice, partly making it manifest in his whole doctrine, that he
is the same which came out of his Fathers bosom, and laid open his counsel
touching man's salvation; He that comes from above; he that comes from
Heaven, is above all, Ioh. 4.31. (3) The Holy Ghost bears record, that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, partly by his descending upon him in his Baptism,
partly by his descending upon his Apostles and Disciples in the day of
Pentecost, partly by inspiring the doctrine of Christ into the Penmen of the
Scripture, and by commending it to the world, that it might teach men, and
persuade and confirm them touching that truth, as truly divine: By which he
may gather a Church, and lead it into all truth to eternal life, These three
are said to bear record in Heaven; (1) Because they immediately bear witness
from Heaven, as from their Throne. (2) Because the Majesty of these witnesses
chiefly shines in Heaven. (3) Because this testimony is not heard, observed,
acknowledged, unless by souls lifted up to Heaven. (Lastly) Because this
testimony for the most part is perfected in Heaven, although it should never
be received on earth: Therefore ye ought to believe in Christ for his
testimonies sake.

Verse. 8. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and the
Water, and the Blood: and these three agree in one. Argum. 4. Because three
witnesses in earth consent together, to prove that Christ is the Son of God,
viz. the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, which are called witnesses in
earth; (1) Because this testimony is mediate, and is produced out of the works
which are to be seen in the earth. (2) Because uttering of this testimony is
written in men that are in the earth, and is acknowledged by the Visible
Church. (Lastly) Because this testimony does not only sound in the Church, but
also utters its voice amongst the men of the world, and is heard of them to
their conviction: For (1) The Spirit or manifestation of the Spirit partly in
miraculous gifts (which are shed abroad in the Church) even to the amazement of
the world for many years after Christ's ascension: Partly in ordinary gifts,
which as yet flourish in the Church, and suffice both to testify, that Christ
(who is preached amongst us) is God; and to draw an acknowledgement from them,
who are without the Church, that God is in us who believe in Christ, 1 Cor. 14.
Furthermore, the operation of the Spirit in the hearts of the faithful does so
quicken the words of Christ, and by them does so instruct, comfort, and confirm
the elect, that it leaves no doubt as touching the Divinity of Christ.

As for Water, which is the virtue of Christ, sanctifiing his, it so expressly
speaks of Christ, that those also, who are without the Church, seeing the light
of good works in Christians, are forced to glorify our Father, and the Father
of Christ, who is in Heaven; so that also being even perceived in women, it
brought their unbeleeving husbands to God, who at the first did not acknowledge
the Word of God, 1 Pet. 3.1.

Lastly, As for Blood, which is the price of redemption, and the virtue of
Christ expiating sins, and reconciling men to God, that blood speaks better
things, than the blood of Abel, so that it makes the consciences of the
faithful quiet and peaceable, and opens a way to the Throne of God, and so
confirms their hearts against the world, and all things which are evil in it,
that they may be bold and able to resound even with their own blood, this
testimony to those enemies that hear them, in the midst of torments with joy,
Rev. 12.11. Therefore we ought to believe in Christ as the Son of God.

Verse. 9. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: For
this is the witness of God which he has testified of his Son. Argum. 5. For
the sake of the testimonies of faithful and true men we believe their
assertions: Therefore for the sake of the testimony of God, which is greater,
testifying of his Son, we ought to believe in Christ as the Son of God.

Verse. 10. He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself;
he that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the
record that God gave of his Son. Argum. 6 He that believes in Christ, as the
Son of God, is so much rectified, that he rests in the witness of the Spirit
in^ardly confirming this truth of the Divine Word. Therefore, etc.

He that believes not] Argum. 7. He that does not believe in christ, as the
Son of God, does really accuse God of a lie, because he rejects the testimony
concerning his Son, as if it were false: Therefore we must believe in Christ
as the Son of God.

Verse. 11. And this is the record, that God has given to us eternal life, and
this life is in his Son. Argum. 8. Those that believe in the Son, have right to
eternal life, which is in the Son, as in the Fountain, Procurer, Giver, and
Conserver, given to them by grace, and confirmed by the constancy of Gods
testimony: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life. Argum. 9. He that truly embraces the Son by Faith, has also
eternal life, not only as to the right of it, but also to (...) inchoate
possession; and he that has not the Son by Faith, or seeks life in another,
rather than in him, is destitute and shut out from all spiritual life:
Therefore, etc.

Verse. 13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the
Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe on the Name of the Son of God. Argum. 10. For this end all these things
are written to the faithful from the Holy Ghost, by the Apostle the Penman,
that they might be certain that they have eternal life already, and might more
and more believe in the name of the Son of God: Therefore ye must believe in
Christ.

Verse. 14. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us. Argum. 11. He that believes in
Christ, has confidence in his approaches to God in prayer, and that he shall
have Gods favorable ear in every petition, which is put up according to the
will of God: Therefore, etc.

Verse. 15. And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know
that we have the p^titions that we desired of him. Argum. 12. Explicating and
unfolding the former; He that believes in Christ, by knowing that God will be
propitious to him in his lawful or well-ordered petitions, he may also be
certain that the petitions which he has offered according to the Promises of
God, are already granted by him, before they be finished; and so he may be
assured of the success of his prayers: Therefore for this cause ye ought to
believe in Christ.

Verse. 16. If any man see his Brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he
shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There
is a si^ unto death, I do not say that he shall pray for it. Argum. 13. He
that believes in Christ, not only praying for himself, but also out of love
for his sinning brethren, shall be heard, to whom, through the merit of sin,
declining to destruction and perdition, God will, if he be but asked by a
faithful man, restore him to life: Therefore, etc.

Not unto death] He excepts in case of the sin of the Holy Ghost, When a
Professor of the Faith, or a Brother, as to the external communion of the
Church, falls into open Apostasy from the Faith of Christ, and maintains cruel
ha^red against the Gospel, and those that are faithful, against the light of
conscience illuminated once by the Holy Ghost; he commands not to pray for him
that commits this sin, when it may be discerned. It is called a sin unto
death, because eternal death follows that sin, and he that falls into it,
remains in it without repentance, until he is thrust down into Hell.

Verse. 17. All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not unto death. He
explains what he had said, that although all transgression of the Law is sin,
wherefore it deserves the wages of death, yet death follows not all sin;
because all kind of sin is remitted, except this sin, which is called blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, which was never remitted to any, nor never shall.

Verse. 18. We know, that whosoever is born of God, sins not: but he that
is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not.
Argum. 14. He that is regenerate, or truly believes in the Son of God, is kept
that he sin not this sin, yea, nor does he lie always entangled in any sin,
but by the grace of God, and virtue of Gods seed remaining in him, keeps
himself, lest the Devil touch him to death with his sin: Therefore ye must
believe in Christ.

Verse. 19. And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in
wickedness. He applies this Argument by way of assumption from the
proposition, to their comfort, and the comfort of the faithful, to which he
writes, and confirms it by five Reasons, viz. that the faithful whereunto he
writes are kept together with himself, and shall be preserved in Faith and
Obedience of the Gospel.

We know] Reas. 1. We are certainly persuaded of our regeneration: Therefore
we are persuaded that we shall not sin that unpardonable sin, neither shall
be in bondage to it, but shall be freed from the Devil, fully through Christ.

The World] Reas. 2. Those that are of the world, are only in the power of
that malicious Devil, that he may throw them headlong out of one wickedness
into another: Therefore we who are translated out of the world into the
Kingdom of God, are not in the power of that malicious one, but shall be
preserved as the freemen of God.

Verse. 20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.
Reas. 3. We are certain of the coming of Christ our Redeemer into the world,
who has enlightened our minds with his grace, and has given us true Faith in
God: Therefore we shall not sin unto death, but shall be preserved.

And wee] Reas. 4. We have communion with God and Christ, wherein we are, and
dwell by Faith: Therefore we shall be untouched by that sin.

This is] Reas. 5. Christ is the very true God, and Life eternal, who in
himself is Life, and the fountain of life, to be communicated to the faithful,
and also the Procurer, Giver and Preserver of it: Therefore we are certainly
persuaded of our perseverance and eternal salvation.

Verse. 21. Little children, keep your selves from Idols. Amen. For the
conclusion of the Epistle he proposes a short admonition, that they have a
care, and keep themselves from Idols, in the plural number, and that from all
sorts of Idols, which after any manner might thrust themselves into the place
of truth, or of the true God, to draw them from believing of the true Doctrine,
or from the true worship, or obedience of God, under any pretense whatsoever:
and that so much the more, because these Idols may be obtruded upon the
faithful by the Devil and his Ministers, and by all possible cunning: Therefore
he the more diligently commands them to watch, and to keep themselves from
them, lest they should be in any wise polluted by them, but by name, that they
beware of Images, wherein Antichrist will glory, and by these deceive the world.

The second Epistle of JOHN, Analytically expounded.
The Contents.
AS Luke writ the Book of the Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles to a certain
noble Theophilus, for the use of all the faithful; So John wrote this familiar
Epistle to one Noble and Holy Matrone, and her children, not only that he
might appropriate the Doctrine (which he had commended in his former Epistle
to the universal Church of the faithful, to this private family) but also that
he might teach the Pastors, how they ought to teach publicly, and from house
to house, from the Apostles example, Act. 20* 20. The parts of the Epistle are
three; the Preface, containing the direction of the Epistle, and Salutation, to
verse. 4. An Exhortation to perseverance in the obedience of the Gospel, or a
constant exercise of Faith working by love, to verse. 12. The third is the
conclusion.

Verse. 1. THe Elder unto the Elect Lady and her Children, whom I love in the
Truth: and not I only, but also all they that have known the Truth: The
direction of the Epistle shows, who, to whom, and with what mind he wrote
this Epistle. The writer is John the Apostle, who makes no doubt of his
authority in this family, content with the title of the ordinary and common
ministry; he calls himself an Elder, by which name he being now very
ancient, he also notes his age, to the end that his admonition, who could not
live long by reason of his age, might be the more deeply fixed in them. The
person whereunto it is chiefly writ, is the Elect Lady. To signify civil and
due honor, he calls her Lady, acknowledging her more happy spiritual
condition in the Lord. He calls her Elect, because in that this Matron had
(from the sincerity of her Faith) declared her self to be elect, a far more
excellent commendation, than that she was accounted a Lady in a civil
condition by men; Her children are adjoined, because they were partakers with
their Mother of the Grace of God, in the knowledge of Christ.

As for the mind of the Writer toward those, to whom he writ, he professes
both his love and sincerity of it, and also testifies concerning the love of
all other believers, that embraced the truth of the Gospel, and had heard of
this family.

Verse. 2. For the Truths sake which dwells in us, and shall be with us for
ever. That he might manifest his sincere love, he affirms, that the cause of
it is the common Faith of the Truth of the Gospel, wherein he was confident
that this Lady would persevere, and her children with her, and the rest of the
faithful would enjoy the virtue and fruit of the truth of the Gospel for ever:
Therefore the whole Preface is intended for the confirmation of the Faith of
this pious family. (1) Because she is an Elect Matrone, (2) Because her
children are faithful, (3) Because they are beloved of the Apostle, (4) Because
they are beloved of all the Faithful, (5) Because they are beloved rather for
the Truth, than the nobility of their stock, (6) Because the Truth of the
Gospel in them, both as to the faith and the fruits of it, would remain, and
endure in them for ever.

Verse. 3. Grace be with you, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from the
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in Truth and Love. In the salutation,
or Apostolical blessing (wherein is not contained a bare wish, but also a
certain applying of that wished good) he confirms them (1) Concerning the
Grace or good will of God toward them, whereby he freely makes us acceptable
to him, and bestows upon us all things that may repair Gods Image in us. (2)
Further concerning the Mercy of God, which if it be distinguished from Grace,
signifies the taking away our sins and miseries. (3) Concerning the Peace of
God, which comprehends reconciliation, peace of conscience, and all the degrees
both of inchoate and perfect felicity: And because a blessing is expected in
vain, unless from the true fountain, he brings them to God the Father (from
whom the whole divine essence is communicated to the Son, and the Holy Ghost)
and to Christ the Mediator (the second Person of the Godhead incarnate,
invested with the office of salvation for us) whom he calls the Son of the
Father in Truth and Love: (1) Because he is full of Truth and Grace, together
with his Father, of the same nature or essence, because he is his most true
and beloved Son, Ioh. 1.14. (2) Because the mind of the Father is no other, nor
his will no other toward us, than he is, The same purpose of both is firm
concerning us, and the same love toward us. (3) Because he reveals the truth
of the Fathers counsel and purpose to us, and the love wherewith he loves us,
he brings it forth, and derives it, or communicates it to us, and shows
himself every way to be the Son of the Father, both in truth of Doctrine, and
effectual love toward us resembling his express Image.

Verse. 4. I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children walking in the Truth,
as we have received a commandment from the Father. Here follows the body of
the Epistle, wherein he exhorts this Matrone with her children to persevere in
the obedience of the Gospel, i. e. in Faith working by love toward God and the
Brethren. The Arguments of the Exhortation are nine. The first is premised in
this verse, wherein he confesses his joy, that this family hitherto had
continued in the obedience of the Gospel; he confirms them as to what was
past, and also stirs them up to persevere for the future. Your constancy in the
obedience of the Gospel, will administer to me and all the faithful (who hear
of you) abundant matter of spiritual joy, and consequently of thanksgiving to
God: Therefore persevere in the Faith.

Verse. 5. And now I beseech thee, Lady, not as though I wrote a new
Commandment unto thee: but that which we had from the beginning, that we
love one another. From hence he infers an Exhortation chiefly to the Matrone
or Mother of the Family, under whose tuition the children were, together with
the second Argument. The commandment for the demonstration of the efficacy of
your Faith in the love of the Brethren has nothing new in it, besides that
which ye have learned by the gift of God from the beginning of your vocation,
and have accustomed your selves to, viz. that from the Faith and love of Jesus
Christ, ye also love the Christian brotherhood: Therefore go forward in the
obedience of Faith working by love.

Verse. 6. And this is love, that we walk after his Commandments; this is the
Commandment, that as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk in it.
Argum. 3. There is no other true love, either of our neighbor, or of God,
besides that which consists in a constant endeavor of keeping all Gods
Commandments, and walking or going forward in that obedience: Therefore; or
thus: The command, or the sum of the Doctrine delivered to us in the Gospel,
is, that we should keep faith and a good conscience, that we should believe
in Jesus Christ, and love our neighbor: Therefore persevere ye in the
obedience of faith, or this commandment.

Verse. 7. For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, This is a deceiver, and an Antichrist.
A^gum. 4. There is danger, lest ye be deceived, by reason of the multitude of
seducers that are gone out into the world, and impudently boast of themselves:
Therefore ye ought the more diligently to endeavor after perseverance. But
he calls seducers, not only those who openly oppose the person of Christ, his
offices and power, but also those who did not confess Christ, nor ascribe all
glory unto him, which the Spirit of God in holy Scripture teaches us to ascribe
unto him. For whosoever he was, he is so far forth Antichrist, as he does
neither confess nor acknowledge Christ, such as he has shown forth himself to
us in his holy Doctrine.

Verse. 8. Look to your selves, that we lose not those things which we have
wrought, but that we receive a full reward. Argum. 5. Unless ye constantly
persevere in the true Faith of the Gospel, or the obedience to it, ye will
lose all the fruit of that Faith which ye have hitherto professed, and
afflictions also, which ye have suffered, and the works which ye formerly
performed; because by your drawing back ye will manifest, that your Faith was
never sincere, but a vain profession without truth: Therefore ye ought to
endeavor through perseverance to receive a full and plentiful reward, promised
to all those that faithfully cleave unto God.

Verse. 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ,
has not God: He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both the
Father and the Son. Argum. 6. Whosoever transgresses the Doctrine of Christ,
and does not constantly abide in it, i. e. he that either teaches, or receives
a contrary Doctrine, or does not abide in the obedience of Christ's Doctrine,
has no communion with God, but is without God in the world.

He that abideth] Arg. 7. He that remains constantly in the Faith of, and
obedience to Christ's Doctrine, has and will have communion with God and
Christ, and for his reward he has the Father and the Son by the Spirit
dwelling in himself.

Verse. 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him
not into your house, neither bid him God speed. Argum. 8. Propounded by way of
Commandment; Ye ought earnestly to endeavor after perseverance in the Faith,
that whosoever has been discovered to be a seducer of men from the Doctrine
of Christ, or teaches another Doctrine than that Christ has taught, must not
be entertained, yea, not so much as courteously saluted, so that any respect
be, or seem to be given to his error, or to him for his errors sake, but
rather by all means to be so handled, that it may be understood both by him, a
false Prophet, and by All) that the error which he teaches is detested.

Verse. 11. For he that bideth him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.
He gives the reason of this Argument, or Commandment, because he that does
the least matter in favor of a seducer, whereby it can be gathered, that his
error is any way liked by him that salutes, or entertains him, he is partaker
of his evil deeds.

Verse. 12. Having many things to write unto you, I would not write with Paper
and Ink, but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy
may be full. The conclusion remains, wherein are two Articles: In the first
he excuses his brevity, hoping to come to this family, and being present, to
instruct and confirm it more fully in the doctrine of Faith, that all the
faithful in it might out of a larger and more fruitful instruction receive more
fully of spiritual joy.

Verse. 13. The children of thy Elect Sister greet thee, Amen. In the second
Article he salutes this Matrone from the children of her Sister, who was also
faithful, and showed the signs of her Election: Amen, sealing up the Doctrine
of the whole Epistle.

The third Epistle of JOHN, Analytically expounded.
THE CONTENTS.
GAius to whom the Apostle writes, was a Jew by Country, a Christian by
Religion, a man rich, and very liberal to the Saints, in favor with the Church
where he lived, and esteem with his Minister ambitious Diotrephes, as is
gathered out of this very Epistle. From hence the Apostle exhorts him to
entertain freely those Ministers of the Gospel, who brought these, as it were,
letters of commendation to him, and when they departed, to vouchsafe them all
things belonging to their journey. The parts of the Epistle are three: In the
first is the Preface, to verse. 3. In the second is the stirring up of Gaius, to
persevere in the exercise of his charity and liberality toward the Saints, to
verse. 13. In the third is the conclusion.

Verse. 1. THe Elder unto the well beloved Gaius, whom I love in the Truth:

2. Beloved, I wish above all things, that thou may prosper and be in
health, even as thy soul prospers.

In the direction of the Epistle, from himself to Gaius, he declares his
respects toward him, in the repetition of a friendly compellation: 2. In his
special profession of sincere love toward him: 3. In praying for him, that God
would continue a prosperous condition unto him, chiefly, that he would
preserve him in that prosperity of mind, which he had hitherto shown in the
exercise of Faith and Love.

Verse. 3. For I rejoy^ed greatly when the Brethren came, and testified of the
Truth that is in thee, even as thou walk in the Truth. The second part of
the Epistle follows, wherein he exhorts him to persevere in the demonstration
of his love to the Saints, and namely to some of the servants of God, who
brought this Epistle to him. There are eleven Arguments to prove that Gaius
ought to go forward in the duties of Charity.

Argum. 1. From the former demonstration of his sincere Faith working by love.
Thou have obtained a very commendable testimony of thy sincerity, from the
Brethren, which came from thee, who have had experience of thy liberality, and
has given me cause both of rejoicing on thy behalf, and giving thanks to God,
and thee also: Therefore it is thy duty to proceed in the duties of Charity.

Verse. 4. I have no greater joy, than to hear that my children walk in Truth.
Argum. 2. Confirming and explaining the former. No greater joy can betide me,
than that my Disciples, which I have begotten to God through the Gospel, do
daily proceed in the exercises of Faith and Love.

Verse. 5. Beloved, Thou do faithfully, whatsoever thou do to the Brethren,
and to strangers. Argum. 3. The works of Mercy and Charity, which thou
exercisest toward the holy servants of God, and strangers, demonstrate thee to
be truly Faithful: Therefore proceed in them.

Verse. 6. Which have born witness of thy Charity before the Church, whom if
thou bring forward on their journey after a godly sort, thou shall do well:
Argum. 4. The Brethren, which bring these letters to thee, have born witness
openly of thy Charity in the public assembly of the Church: Therefore go
forward both to deserve well of them and others.

Thou shall do well] Argum. 5. If now thou shall receive those that come unto
thee, as thou have before, and furnish them when they depart from thee, both
with all things necessary for their journey, and accompany them somewhat in
their way to another place, as it becomes thee, and is a thing befitting thee
to accompany the Ministers of God, thou shall do an excellent office, and* work
that becomes thy piety toward God: Therefore see that thou do it.

Verse. 7. Because that for his names sake they went forth, taking nothing of
the Gentiles. Argum 6. To preach the name of God, or the Gospel of Christ (who
is God) they went forth of their own accord, taking nothing of the Gentiles,
nor of those that were converted, nor of those that were not, lest they should
give occasion to any, of saying that they preached the Gospel to the Gentiles
for advantage: Therefore deal thou more liberally with these.

Verse. 8. We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be
fellow-helpers to the Truth. Argum. 7. All that favor the preaching of the
Gospel, are bound to promote the endeavors of men, as far as they are able,
that they may share in the work of the Gospel, by sustaining, or some way
assisting the preachers of it: Therefore be thou not wanting herein.

Verse. 9. I wrote unto the Church, but Diotrephes, who loves to have the
pre-eminence among them, receives us not. For this end I have written to the
Church, wherein thou wast, that by the public charges they might have
provision necessary for their journey, but I am afraid of the success, because
that ambitious Diotrephes, who endeavors to have the pre-eminence over all the
rest of his fellows, may undervalue both me and my Letters of commendation.

Verse. 10. Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his deeds which he does,
prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith, neither
does he himself receive the brethren, and forbids them that would, and
casts them out of the Church. The Apostle advises him, that he will deal
with this ambitious lover of pre-eminence before the Church, when he comes,
and gives five reasons of his purpose.

Reas. 1. Because Diotrephes did many evil deeds.

2. Because he did prate against the Apostles with malicious words, and namely
against John, whom he knew to be an enemy to ambition, and humane Episcopacy,
creeping into the Church, through the ambition and devices of these kind of men.

3. Because he did neither entertain, nor did bestow any kind of respect upon
the true Christians that held fast the Doctrine of the Apostles in all things.

4. Because by his tyrannical injunctions and constitutions threatening
excommunication, and casting out of the Church, he prohibits (who entertained
and received those Preachers with all Christian offices that were (...) by the
Apostles) if they did contrary to his commands.

5. Because he did imperiously excommunicate those that transgressed his
commands, and did entertain this kind of Brethren.

Verse. 11. Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good. He
that does good is of God; but he that does evil, has not seen God. Argum. 9.
Thou ought not to follow the evil carriage of thy Pastor Diotrephes, or obey
his wicked commands, because this would be evil, and contrary to true Faith,
and love toward God; but thou ought to follow that only which is good, and
agreeable to sound Doctrine: Therefore go on in exercising the duties of love.

He that does good] Argum. 10. Confirming the formee; he that endeavors to
do good, is born of God; but he that does evil, is void of the true and saving
knowledge of God, or faith in him: Therefore go thou on to do good, that thou
may approve thy self to be of God.

Verse. 12. Demetrius has good report of all men, and of the Truth it self: yea
and we also bear record, and ye know that our record is true. Argum. 11. Thou
ought rather to imitate Demetrius his kindness toward the Saints, and poor
strangers, of whom, all and the very truth of the thing, showing it self in
deeds, gives testimony, and I my self, who am not wont to affirm, unless it be
those things which are true, and I know by experience, do give testimony of his
praise: Therefore imitate him, and go on in the duties of Charity.

Verse. 13. I had many things to write, but I will not with Ink and Pen write
unto thee.

14. But I trust I shall shortly see thee, and we shall speak face to face.

The conclusion remains, wherein are two Articles. In the first he excuses the
shortness of his Epistle, hoping to see and talk face to face with him.

Verse. 15. Peace be to thee. Our Friends salute thee. Greet the friends by
name. In the second Article. 1. He salutes Gaius, by wishing peace to him, i.
e. the blessing of God in all things. 2. He does hearty commendations to Gaius
from his friends, viz. the Saints, who were his true friends. 3. He wills him
to salute in his name particularly, and by name all his friends, i. e. who
loved him.

The Epistle of JUDE the Apostle Analytically Expounded.
THE CONTENTS.
CErtain masters of Heresies arose, who abused the grace of God, to the liberty
of the flesh, and under the pretense of the Gospel, let loose the reigns to all
manner of wickedness, and plainly mocked at the holy conversation of true
Believers, as of simple Idiots, which were ignorant of true Christian liberty.
Against these pestilent inventions God stirred up Peter the Apostle, and this
Jude, who is here, and Act. 1. called the Brother of James the less, called
Alpheus: He was the Kinsman of our Lord, Mat. 13.55. who is named Lebbeus and
Thaddeus, Mat. 10.3. This our Apostle exhorts the Faithful, to whom he writes,
that they would constantly stand up for the defense of the Doctrine of the
Gospel against false Teachers, of whom Peter had warned them, 2 Pet. 2.
handling the very same Argument* There are three parts of this Epistle: A
Preface, verse. 1, 2. An Exhortation to contend for the true Faith against
Impostors, to verse. 24. The Conclusion, in the two last verses.

Verse. 1. JUde the servant of Jesus Christ, and Brother of James, to them that
are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called:
The Preface contains an inscription, and salutation; The inscription shows the
direction of this Epistle, from whom, and to whom it was written. The writer of
this Epistle is (1) described from his name; (2) from his Apostolical office,
under the name of a servant (in which title he more glories, than in the
natural relation which was betwixt him and Christ the Lord.) (3) From the
distinction of himself, from Judas the Traitor, from whom, not only in his
disposition, but also in his name, he desired to be differenced.

Those to whom he writes, are described from four properties of the Elect. (1)
They are in God the Father* i. e. reconciled by Christ, they have communion, or
an holy fellowship with God. (2) They are sanctified by the special operation
and inhabitation of the Holy Ghost. (3) Preserved by the gift of perseverance
from Christ the Redeemer, who suffers none of his to be taken out of his hand.
(4) Called, not only with an outward call, but with an inward and effectual
calling.

Verse. 2. Mercy unto you, and Peace, and love be multiplied. In his salutation,
by Apostolical authority, he does not only*, wish, but applies to the
confirmation of their Fait^, (1) The Mercy of God, which heal^ all our evils,
viz. our sin and misery. (2) Peace, which comprehends the parts of our
Reconciliation and felicity. (3) And Love, which, as the spring of all good
things, comprehends grace, and all those effects, which conduce to our
sanctification, and the completing of our salvation. He desires that all
these may be multiplied in respect to the degrees of increase and
manifestation, in other various effects, such as the glory of God and their
salvation should require.

Verse. 3. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye
should earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once delivered unto the
Saints. The body and substance of the Epistle follows, wherein he propounds
the cause and scope of his writing, which he further prosecutes. Two Reasons
of his writing he sets down: (1) His earnest desire, not only in respect to
his office in preaching the Gospel, wheresoever occasion was offered; but also
of writing concerning the common Salvation of the Elect, obtained by Christ,
and by degrees is to be perfected, which is the sum of the Gospel. (2) The
second Reason: The necessities of the Church, being in danger by seducers,
which urged him to write this Epistle. These things being premised, he
propounds the scope of the Epistle, which is, that they would by all means
endeavor to preserve the Apostolical doctrine to themselves and posterity,
from the corruption of seducers. Sound Doctrine he calls the Faith, viz. to
be believed, because it contains all things necessary to be believed unto
salvation. Once delivered to the Saints, he says* Because with one consent
all the Apostles fully and perfectly delivered the same Truth, according to the
Scriptures written before, concerning salvation to be obtained by Faith in
Christ; that they might have an immutable rule for obtaining eternal life, and
without addition or diminution to be observed to the coming of the Lord. For
this Faith, he wills them to contend, because the Flesh, the Devil, and the
World, and the servants of Satan which are in it, will never cease to oppose
this Truth, so that of necessity it lies upon all true Believers to maintain an
irreconcilable war with these.

Verse. 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old
ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. The
Arguments of his Exhortation are nine, whereof most of them are taken from the
sins and punishments of seducers.

Argum. 1. Which proves that the Apostolical Faith is to be diligently
preserved from the corruptions of seducers, which was once committed to the
Church. Because the danger was great, by reason of seducers, who had privily
crept in, as adversaries to this Doctrine: Whom he so describes, that each
part of the description might serve to this end. For (1) The manner of
insinuating their error to the Brethren was latent and private; for before
they could be well observed, by indirect ways and means, they closely
instilled their errors into the minds of some. (2) Not without the divine
decree were they permitted to follow their own devices, for the sifting and
winnowing of the Church. For in the holy and eternal Counsel of God they were
reprobated, and destined, that through their sins they should come to this
condemnation, no less c^rtainly, than if their names were written in a book.
(3) They were ungodly, touched with no sense and reverence of the Divine
Majesty, either to serve him, or believe in him. (4) The Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, or the Doctrine of Grace (which is set forth in the Gospel, to
this very end, that men denying all ungodliness might live holily:) they
directly perverted to a quite contrary end, and turned it into an occasion of
all lasciviousness, and carnal delights. (5) Indeed, in their doctrine and
deeds, they denied our only Lord and Master, and our God Jesus Christ, whom
he calls the only Lord God, not excluding the Father, and the Holy Ghost, but
creatures, and feigned Deities: Therefore against these seducers, the purity of
the Faith is to be preserved.

Verse. 5. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this,
how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the Land of Egypt, afterward
destroyed them that believed not. Argum. 2. God destroyed the unbeleeving
Apostate Israelites in the wilderness, after they were brought out of Egypt:
Therefore warned by their examples, ye ought to beware, lest seduced, ye
perish with others.

Verse. 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. Arg. 3. God has condemned the Apostate Angels
(cast out of Heaven) to eternal destruction, by an irreversible decree:
Therefore the faithful should beware of Apostasy, lest they also perish.

Verse. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, in like manner
giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire: Arg. 4. God
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, after they had given
themselves over to fornication and filthy lusts (with which these Impostors
polluted themselves) and for an example to those that should come after, cast
them into eternal fire; You must beware therefore of these Impostors, which may
draw you into the like sins and punishments.

Verse. 8. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Arg. 5. Because these Impostors are as
vessels, fitted to destruction, whom God in like manner will destroy: the
reason whereof he gives from nine or more sins which reigned in them: From
which their fruits, as so many marks, they showed forth themselves to be
openly known and discerned. (1) The first vice of these Libertines was; That
deluded with dreams they defiled the flesh, that is to say, they securely gave
themselves over to lust, and other heinous sins* by their diabolical
enchantments they were bewitched in their minds and consciences, as if they had
been taken with a dream. (2) The second vice was; They were adversaries to
Civil Government, not enduring any kind of Magistracy or Dominion, but heaped
up reproaches and evil speakings upon those honorable Ordinances of God, even
as at this day we see in the carriage of the fanatic Anabaptists.

Verse. 9. Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he
disputed about the body of Moses, du^st not bring against him a railing
accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. He amplifies this vice, from
Michael the Archangel his disputing with Satan about the body of Moses, that
his sepulcher might not be known to the Israelites, who would superstitiously
have worshipped his relics being dead, whose words they despised while he was
alive. He durst not, or could not by reason of his sanctity, cast such
reproaches upon Satan, as those Heretics did upon Magistracy: It was enough
for the Archangel to say, The Lord rebuke thee, or restrain thy purposes. From
whence the Apostle fetched this history, they vainly inquire, who acknowledge
the Scriptures to be of divine inspiration.

Verse. 10. But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what
they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.
(3) The third vice; That seeing they were ignorant of divine ordinances,
Christian duties, and of all spiritual things, not only void, but incapable,
yet impudently they dare to belch out their blasphemies against those things.
(4) The fourth vice, they are taxed with, is, That those things which naturally
they know, as sensitive animals, in them they deport themselves below the very
beasts, and prompt themselves to all lust and intemperance.

Verse. 11. We unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gain saying
of Core. (5) The fifth vice; That when the curse of God is denounced against
them, their hatred to their brethren is as great as that of Cain, who slew his
brother* (6) The sixth vice, is Covetousness, like that of Balaam, who as he
made sale of his tongue, so they for filthy lucre adulterated and corrupted the
Doctrine of Christ. (7) The seventh vice, is, Sedition, (like that of Core)
whereby they oppose themselves to the true Ministers of the Gospel, and by
their tumults disturb the peace of the Church, who shall perish in their
sedition, as Core did.

Verse. 12. These are spots in your feasts of Charity, when they feast with you,
feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water, carried about
of winds: trees whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by
the roots. (8) The eighth vice was Glutt^ny, whereby they corrupted both
themselves and others by their evil examples, in their Christian feasts, which
were designed for the increase of love amongst them, but by such like Epicures
were turned into feedings of Swine: whilst they cast off the fear of God, and
attended to nothing but gluttony and intemperance: feeding their own flesh, but
not the souls of their Auditors. (9) The ninth vice, or rather an heap of
vices, is shadowed under diverse similitudes, that they were most unfit for the
work of the Ministry, and indeed reprobate to every good work: for as empty
clouds carried about with every wind, that saving doctrine which they seemed to
promise, yielded no dew or showers any where, but frustrated the earnest
expectation of their hearers; and although they bear the show of good fruit,
and boast themselves to be such, yet they are but autumn, and fruit-spoiling
trees, because if they promise any fruit, yet they bring it to no ripeness or
maturity: Much rather may they be called unfruitful, in as much as they bring
forth no wholesome fruit, neither in themselves, nor their followers: And as
trees cut down, withered, and rooted up, they leave no hopes of bringing forth
any fruit, so they continue in their wickedness, dead by nature, and by their
further wickedness contract judicial hardness of heart, as if dead the second
time, and now given up to a reprobate sense, all hope is gone of their
repentance and amendment.

Verse. 13. Raging waves of the Sea, foming out their own shame, wandering Stars,
to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. Lastly, Such they are
that cannot leave off to be wicked, but like waters of the boiling Sea,
always they discover their filthiness; nor are they more constant in their
doctrine, than wandering Stars in their motion. Against whom he denounces the
most palpable and deep infernal darkness, as the just meed of their wickedness.

Verse. 14. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying,
Behold, the Lord comes, with ten thousand of his Saints,

15. To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among
them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all
their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

Arg. 6. Whereby he proves, that we should beware of seducers, etc. Because
Enoch the seventh inclusively from Adam, by a spirit of prophecy foretold of
the sins of these Impostors, and their condemnation in the day of judgment:
when Christ shall bring along with him myriads of Saints and Angels to execute
judgment upon all the ungodly, and especially will punish those who have
stubbornly used their tongues against God, and his most holy Truth. Concerning
the prophecy of Enoch, whether it was written before, or no, or how the
Apostle came to know the Truth of it, we say the same as before, that the
Spirit of God, which spoke in Enoch, dictated the same to the Apostle, even
that which by Enoch he had foretold long before; both what and how much he
should commit to writing, the same was prescribed to the Apostle.

Verse. 16. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts, and
their mouth speaks great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration
because of advantage. That a conclusion may be drawn, touching the destruction
of these seducers, according to the prophecy of Enoch, and that by consequence
they are to be avoided, by way of assumption, he shows these seducers to be
such, as Enoch had described them, to be destroyed, from four marks.

(1) The first mark: They were murmurers, and complainers, never content with
their condition, no ways satisfied concerning the righteous ordinations of God
in Church or Commonwealth, impatient of any restraint, they carp'd at every
thing, and discommended all things.

(2) They appointed to themselves a rule, neither from divine Laws in divine or
Ecclesiastical things, nor from humane Laws in humane or civil Affairs, but
only their own wills and pleasures.

(3) Though they were the vilest slaves to their own lusts, yet that they might
maintain some esteem, where there was none to control their insolency, they
spoke high swelling words, in a lofty style, ordered to create admiration with
the people.

(4) On the other side, if there were any that they feared, or from whom they
hoped for any gain, those they unworthily flattered, highly esteemed them,
admired them, cried them up, they nothing regarding whether they were worthy or
unworthy.

Verse. 17. But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ:

18. How that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who
should walk after their own ungodly lusts.

Arg. 7. We must beware of seducers, because the rest of the Apostles foretold
that such Sons of Belial should arise in the Church, as Enoch had foretold.

Verse. 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit. That a conclusion may be drawn for the avoiding the forementioned
seducers, he affirms that the^ with whom they had to do were Impostors, and
that by two marks. The first mark, That they separated themselves from the true
Church of Christ, and from the sound doctrine of the Apostles, not out of any
necessity, or from any divine warrant, but only upon their own pleasure, that
they might not abide under the Lords yoke, or his discipline. The second mark,
They were Natural, having not the Spirit, Because they being void of
Regenerating Grace, only savoured and followed the things to which Nature
leads, or natural Reason not divinely illuminated; therefore they were
destitute of the Spirit, or of the Grace of God sanctifying; It remains that
sense and the flesh should reign in full power, and would force them to all
pollutions both of body and soul.

Verse. 20. But ye, Beloved, building up your selves on your most holy Faith,
praying in the Holy Ghost, Arg. 8. Proving perseverance in the Faith,
propounded by way of precept against the contrivances of these seducers:
Because the Holy Ghost has prescribed the means by which both they may
persevere, as also they that have fallen back may be recovered. And he
propounds a Reason, whereby they may slight the devices of Satan, viz. (1) If
they would lay their foundation upon the most holy Doctrine of the Apostles,
which has no mixture of humane inventions, and would not depart any thing at
all from it. (2) If they would daily take care to carry on the superstructure,
and would strive unto perfection in the knowledge and belief of the Truth
revealed in the Word of God. (3) If they were diligent in their prayers, out of
a sense of their necessities, following the guidance of the Holy Spirit, which
helps the infirmities of the Saints, and shows them for what, and how they must
pray according to the will of God.

Verse. 21. Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. (4) If they endeavored to love their
brethren and neighbors out of a sense of the love of God toward them. (5) If
they would set the coming of the Lord before their eyes. (6) If they
apprehended eternal life. (7) If against their own unworthiness they adhered to
the mercy of Christ, who is so to be our Judge, that he will take the Gospel,
and the free benefit of our Redemption (procured by himself) for his rule. From
this it follows, that we ought to persevere in the Faith.

Verse. 22. And of some have compassion, making a difference:

23. And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire: bating even the
garment spotted by the flesh.

Arg. 9. Is propounded by way of precept, because a reason is given of God to
the Church, whereby not only they may persevere, but they may reduce into the
way those that wandered out, and raise up those that were fallen: To wit, if
they would handle every one according to his condition, i. e. putting a
difference between those that err; mercy and compassion was to be used toward
those that were tractable and meek; but if any one was stubborn, and more
securely shall indulge himself in his sin, with fear, and a more severe
castigation, they should endeavor to preserve him to wit, by excommunication,
if otherwise he could not be amended. There are two Reasons given of this.

Reas. 1. Under a fit similitude, for where we see any one in danger to be
burnt with fire, we stick not to snatch him out by force: So are they to be
cured, who repent not, unless they be sharply handled, who are to be rescued
from hell and destruction even by the severest censures.

Reas. 2. By an allusion to a Legal type, Levit. 15. Because where there is
danger of infection and contagion, as in obstinate offenders, and such as lead
the way to others, their society is to be avoided, and we must depart from
such Libertines, given up to the pollution of the flesh. As in times past under
the Law there was a separation from Lepers, and those that were pestilentially
infected, which is the consequence of excommunication.

Verse. 24. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present
you faultless before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy, The third
part of the Epistle remains, to wit, the conclusion, in which he shows, that
all the praise of their perseverance is to be given unto God, lest any man
should ascribe too much to the power of man, whose diligence in the use of
means, as to the premises, is so much urged. These five following Reasons show,
that the praise of not perseverance is wholly to be attributed unto Christ.

Is able] Reas. 1. Because the power of preserving believers, wholly abides in
him, that in this life they might not fall or faint in the course of holiness.

To present] Reas. 2. Because there is power in him to present all his in the
day of judgment unblameable in the sight of God, with exceeding joy.

Verse. 25. To the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion
and power, now and ever. Amen. Reas. 3. Because he is the only wise God, that
by his own ways and means he may accomplish this whole business.

Saviour] Reas. 4. Because he is our Savior, by his merit, office, and
efficacy, it is necessary he should accomplish what he has undertaken.

Glory] Reas. 5. Because in every one of his works he wills the
manifestation of his glory. So that chiefly in this business he will have the
glory of his Majesty appear, his infinite power to be seen, and his supreme
authority over all men and things, to be eminently discovered and acknowledged,
both now and for ever. Therefore you that are true believers shall persevere,
and all the glory of your salvation shall be given unto God, to whom of right
it belongs, and shall be ascribed for ever. Amen.

THE END.
A Catalogue of Books printed for Francis Eglesfield.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are to be sold by Francis Eglesfield,
at the Sign of the Marygold in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Books of Divinity.
PIous and learned Annotations on the Bible, with a large and useful Analysis,
in folio. By the learned John Diodate. The Body of Divinity, it being the sum
and substance of Christian Religion, Catechistically propounded and explained,
by way of Question and Answer, By Bishop Usher. The Holy Court in five Tomes,
written in French by Nicholas Causine, and translated into English by Sir
Thomas Hawkins, and others. The Works of that learned and pious Gentleman Sir
Richard Baker, Knight, are these, viz.
1 Meditations and Disquisitions on the Lords Prayer, in 4o. 2 Meditations and
Disquisitions on the first Psalm, in 4o. 3 Meditations and Disquisitions on the
seven penitential Psalms, in 4o. 4 Meditations and Disquisitions on the seven
Consolitory Psalms, in 4o. 5 Ca^o Variegatus, or Cato's Moral disticks
translated and paraphrased with Variations of Expressings in English verse, in
4o. 6 Motives to Prayer, in 12. 7 The Apology for Laymens writing of Divinity,
together with the fall of Lucifer, in 12. 8 Meditations and Disquisitions on
the Creed, a very useful book for these times, in 12. 9 Soliloquies for the
Soul, in 12. A learned Commentary on the first Psalm. in 4o. Both by Finneus
Fletcher.
The Purple Island, being poetical Miscellanies, in 4o. Both by Finneus
Fletcher. Joy in Tribulation, being a Consolation for afflicted Consciences, by
the same Author, in 12. Five Sermons preached on several Occasions at the Court
before the Kings Majesty, By that Reverend and Learned Divine D. Preston, in
4o. Riches of Mercy to men in misery, very fit for these times of Atheism and
Apostasy, by the same Dr. Preston, and approved of by Dr. Sibbs, in 4o. His
Remains, containing three excellent Treatises, namely, Judas Repentance, the
Saints spiritual Strength, and St. Paul's Conversion, by the same Author, in 4o.
A Commentary on the Divine Revelation of St. John, by David Parreus, in folio.
Doomsday, or a Treatise of the Resurrection of the Body, delivered in 22
Sermons on the 1 Corinthians 15.16. by the Judicious Divine Dr. Day, in 4o.
Light from Heaven, in 4. By Dr. Sibbs. Lidas Conversion, or the Riches of
Mercy, in 12. by Dr. Sibbs. The Works of that Eloquent Divine Dr. Playford,
containing these fourteen Sermons.
1 The Mean in Mourning, on Luke 23.28. 2 The Pathway to perfection* on
Philip. 3.14. 3 The Hearts Delight, on Psalm 37.4. 4 The Power of Prayers, on
Mat. 7.7. 5 The Sick-mans Couch, on Psalm. 6.6. 6 Gods Blessing is enough, on
Matthew 4.4. 7 Glory weighs down the Cross, on 2 Corinthians. 4.17. 8 God be with
you, on Romans 8.31. 9 Christ's Wounds our Health. on John 20.27. 10 Say well, do
well, on Mat. 5.10. 11 The Kings Crown, on Psalm 132.18. 12 Good Ground, on
Luke 8.15. 13 Felicity of the Faithful, on Psalm 32.6. 14 Difference between
the Law and Gospel, on 2 Corinthians 3.18. in one Vol. in 8.
The burthening and unburthening of a laden Conscience, By Mr. Richard Kilby,
in 12. Milk for the younger, Meat for the stronger, the substance of Divinity,
and a Pill to purge out Popery, by way of Chatechising, by Mr. Mico late of
Exeter, in 8. A Catechism, comprehending the Commandments, Lords Prayer, and
the Creed, By Mr. Nicholes of Plymouth, in 8. Corpus Christi, together with the
Demonstration of Antichrist, by John Gurney, in 12. Gods Summons to a General
Repentance, by Adam Harsnet, in 12. The usefulness and excellency of Christ, in
a learned piece on the Canticles, by Christoph. Iellinger, in 8. Divine
Emblems, and Hieroglyphics, by Francis Quarles, reprinted, and many errors
amended, which formerly escaped the Press, in 8. The Doctrine of the Bible, in
8. An Exposition on the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, by David Dixson, in 8.
The Garden of Spiritual Flowers, in 12. The Excellency of a gracious Spirit, in
8. By Jeremiah Buroughs. Moses his Self-denial, in 8. By Jeremiah Buroughs.
The Saints Inheritance, and the Worldlings portion, in 8. By Jeremiah
Buroughs. Most excellent Notes on the whole Book of Psalms, by George Ab^t,
and lately published by Richard Vines, in 4. The Souls Possession of Christ, by
Thomas Hooker of New England, in 12. The Saints dignity and duty, together with
the danger of ignorance and hardness, by Thomas Hooker, in 4. A Treatise of
Liberty and Necessity, wherein Predestination, Election, Free Will, Grace,
Merits, Reprobation, etc. is decided and cleared, by Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury,
in 12. The Covenant of Grace, discovering the great worth of a sinners
Reconciliation to God, by I. Cotton of New England: The second Edition, much
larger than the former, printed by an exact Copy left by the Author, in 8.
Gospel-Conversation, discovering first, whether any gracious conditions or
qualifications are wro^ght in the soul before Faith in Christ; secondly, how
the assurance of a man's salvation is to be evidenced; thirdly, the manner of
the Souls closing with Christ, by I. Cotton of New England, in 8. Wol^hii
Compendium Theologiae, in 12. A Brief of the Bibles History, by Ephraim Enock,
in 12. Resolutions and Decisions of diverse practical cases of Conscience, in
continual use amongst men, very necessary for their information and direction
in these evil times, by Bishop Hall. Spare Minutes or Meditations, by Arthur
Warwick, in 12. Deaths Deliverance, and Elias fiery Chariot, in two Sermons, by
Alexander Gross, in 8. The Power of Christian Magistrates in sacred things, by
L. Du Mouline History Reader in Oxford, in 8. Munition against Man's Mi^ery, by
R. Smith, in 8. The High Court of Justice, a Sermon preached before the Judges
at Leicester, by Anthony Scattergood, in 12. None but Christ, by Mr. Clement
Cotton, the Author of the Great Concordance, in 12. The Way to Heaven
discovered, and the stumbling blocks removed, by R. Purnel, in 8. Satan at
Noon, or John Pordage discovered, in his Wiles and Devices, and laid open
before the Commissioners of Berks, by Christop. Fowler Minister of Reading,
first and second part. The Psalms of David most excellently translated into
meeter, and to be sung in the most usual tunes, by Will. Barton, in 12. The
Mortified Christian, showing the Nature, Signs, Necessity and Difficulty of
true Mortification, with a discovery of Sincerity, by Christopher Love, in 8. A
Glimse, discovering the sweet Incomes of Christ to a spiritual heart, by Robert
Dingley, in 8. A most excellent Treatise of eighteen Attributes of God, plainly
unfolded and applied, in 4. Also the Parable of the Wedding Supper, together,
with a discourse of the payment of Tithes, by Thomas Larkham, Master of Arts,
sometimes of Trinity College in Cambridge, in 8. Three Treatises, the first,
The Young Man's Memento, showing how why when
we must remember God The second, Now if Ever. The third, The danger of being
almost a Christian, by John Chishull Minister of Tiverton in Devon, in 12.
Apologetical Letter, to a person of quality, by Bishop Hall, in 4. Decapla in
Psalm^s, five Commentarios ex december legibus, antiquis patribus Rab. Historicis
and poetis, a Iohanne Viccars Angl. in folio. A Discourse of the Hierarchy of
the blessed Angels, their Names, Orders and Offices, with the fall of Lucifer
and his Angels, by T. Heywood, in folio. Natures Goodnight, being a Sermon
preached at the Funeral of Mris. Mary Forbs, in Devon, in 4. All the Sermons
which are in print of Mr. John Bond, late of the Savoy deceased, in 4. Singing
of Psalms the duty of Christians, under the New Testament, or a Vindication of
that Ordinance, in five Sermons, on Ephesians 5.19. wherein are asserted, that
we must sing, what we must sing, how we must sing, and why we must sing,
the second Edition, with many Additions, by Thomas Ford Minister of the Gospel
at Exon, in 12. Novum Testamentum Domini nostri Jesus Christi, Interpret
Theodoro Beza, in 12. More exactly corrected and printed for the use of Grammar
schools in a larger letter than formerly, by R. D.
Books of Morality.
A most compendious and easy way for the keeping of Merchants Accounts, after
the Italian manner, by Ioh. Carpenter, Merchant, in folio. E^^ans Tacticks, or
the Art of Embattailing an Army most exquisitely set forth in many brass
plates. Animadversions of War, or the Military Magazine of the truest Rules,
the most refined Discipline, and choice Experiments that these late English and
Swedish wa^s have produced, with diverse new inventions both of Fortifications
and Stratagems; also sundry Collections taken out of the most approved Authors,
either in Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, Dutch or English, by Rob.
Ward, Gentleman and Commander, in folio. The works of that famous
Mathematician, Mr. Ed. Gunter, sometime Professor of Astronomy in Gresham
College in London, reprinted and corrected with additions by Samuel Foster,
late Professor of the same College, together with his Sector and Canons or
Table, in this fourth Edition much enlarged, in 4. Decimal Arithmetic, showing
the use of Napiers Bones, by William Barton, in 12. The Handmaid to
Arithmetic, being an easy way to attain Arithmetic speedily, also it
reduces all foreign Coins, both of Brass, Silver, and Gold, to our English
money; also the weights and measures to our English, it also makes known what
Commodities every Country affords, by Nicholas Hunt, in 8. The use of the
Quadrant, fitted for daily practice, by Samuel Foster, late Professor of
Astronomy, in 4. The Art of Dialling, by Sam. Foster. Formulae Oratoriae in
usum scholarum concin^atae cum pra^i and usu earundem in Epistolis, Th^matibus,
Declamationibus conterendis, accessit d^x po^ticus cum suis al^quo^
po^matiolis, Edit Novissima Authoris lima expolitis, per Ioh. Clark, in 12.
Select and choice phrases Latin and English, at first briefly collected for the
use and benefit of young scholars, by John Clark, and since recognized and made
more useful by William Du Guard, Master of Merchant-Tailors School in London, in
12. Also Phrasologiae Puerills, sive Sermones, or select Latin and English
Phrases, methodically digested by way of common place, and alphabetically, for
the more easy (...) is desired, very useful for young Latinists, to prevent
Barbarism, and bald Latin making, and to initiate them in speaking and writing
elegantly in both languages. The third Edition, very much enlarged by the same
Author John Clark, B. D. and sometimes Master of a Free School in Lincoln, in
8. C. Salustii Crispi Catilina seu Bellum Catilinarium, in 24. Lucii Annaei
Flori rerum Romanorum libri quatuor. Ex museo Io. Isaci Poniani, in 24. The Map
of England, with the pictures of all the Kings since the Conquest, cut in a
Copper plate, it being the most exactest Map that has been done, by William
Holler. The Needles Excellency, a most excellent Book for Ladies and
Gentlewomen to draw all sort of works by; cut in brass Plates, in 4. Johannes
Possellii Syntaxis Graeca utilissimis exemplis Illustrata, una cum regulis
ejusdem de accentibus and Varen^ii de iisdem tractatu, in 80. Esopes Fables in
verse illustrated with Emblems, or Pictures, and also grammatically translated
into prose, with apt Morals, and printed according to the order of the Latin
Copy, together, with the History of his life, from the best Greek Copies, very
useful for all, but especially for young Scholars, in 12. Rhetoricae Compendium
Ang. Lat. per Thom. Hor^, Master of Eaten College, in 8. School Probation, in
8. Rhetorices Elementa, in 8. Vestibulum Linguae Latinae rerum and ^inguarum
fundamenta exhibens. The Rudiments of the Latin Tongue, all four by Willian Du
Guard, Master of Merchant-Taylors School in London, in 8. (...) Lexicon, in 8.
(...) translated into English, in 4. Symb^la (...) in tribus Classibus, Authore
Nicbo. Reus^ero ^^orino I.C. Plat. Caes. in 12. The Sc^^s design discovered,
relating their dangerous attempts lately practiced against England, with the
sad consequences of the same, by a noble person, in 4. Speculations on the
excrements of Urin, with the distinctions, causes, colors, and contents
thereof, with other symptoms observed in Nature, by Henry Hamand, in 8. The
whole Trial of Lieutenant Colonel Io. Lilbourn, by an extraordinary Commission
of Oyer and Terminer at the Guild Hall of London, truly set forth, with his
manner of pleading, in a brass plate, in 4. The Commonwealths friend, showing
an exact and speedy way to Justice and Right, for the preventing and
determining tedious Law-sutes, by John March of Grayes Inn, in 8. The duty of
Constables, Overseers for the poor, and Surveyers of Highways, by John Layer,
Counselor at Law, in 8. A faithful Register of the transactions in Parliament,
in the third and fourth years of the Reign of King Charles, containing several
Speeches, Cases, Arguments of Law, and the grand Mysteries of the Kingdom then
in agitation, by Thomas Fuller, in folio. A Collection of Speeches in
Parliament, by Sir Edward Dearing, in 4. A discourse of proper Sacrifice by Sir
Ed. Dearing, in 4. Monuments in the Saxon Tongue, written seven hundred years
since, proving that the Old and New Testament, Lords Prayer, and the Creed,
were then used in the Mother tongue, in 4. History of Heliodorus, translated
into English, in 4. History of Bees, showing their admirable Nature and
Properties, their Generation and Colonies, their Government, Loyalty, Art,
Industry, Enemies, Wars, Magnanimity, etc. By Char^es (...) of Magdalen
College, in 4. King James Proverbs, in 16. A Manuel of Controversies, by
Osiander, in 8. The height of Eloquence translated out of the Greek, by John
Hall Esquire. Herocles on the golden Verses of Pythagoras, teaching a virtuous
and godly life, by John Hall, Esquire. in 8. Letters of Mounsieur de Balzac,
the first, second, third, and fourth parts, translated into English by Sir
Richard Baker, Knight, and others, collected into one Volume, in 8. Theater of
Complements, and Art of Eloquence, stored with variety of Love-songs, Sonnets,
Letters, and Amorous Dialogues, in 12. Choice Poems, relating Songs, Sonnets,
Epigrams, Carrols, Posies, Dialogues, with variety of other Mirth, together
with his noble Numbers, or his pious pieces, by Robert Herick, Esquire. All the
works of John Tailor the famous Water-Poet, collected in one Vol. in fol. Also
Wit and Mirth, by John Tailor, in 8. Arcadia Plays in 4. Antiquary Plays in
4. Antigony Plays in 4. Challenge for Beauty Plays in 4. Coronation Plays in
4. Chabot Plays in 4. Discontented Colonel Plays in 4. Humerous Courtier
Plays in 4. Hide Park Plays in 4. Lady of Pleasure Plays in 4. Mad world my
Master^ Plays in 4. Noble Stranger Plays in 4. Phoenix Plays in 4. Richard
the third Plays in 4. Seven Champions Plays in 4. Wollastin Plays in 4.
Woman will have her Will Plays in 4.

