A BRIEF EXPLICATION Of the other fifty Psalms, From Ps. 50. to Ps. 100.

BY DAVID DICKSON, Professor of Divinity in the College of Edinburgh.

Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, that
he may dwell in thy Courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy Temple.

Psalm. 65. 4. Imprimatur, July 16. 1653. EDMUND CALAMY.

London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange. 1653.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The EARL of EGLINGTON, Mercy and Peace through Jesus
Christ.
My right Noble Lord,
THE reason of my sending forth of this piece, under your Lordships name, is,
that by this means I may pay home before I die, the old debt which I owe to
your Lordship, and to the whole noble family, for countenancing and encouraging
me openly in my Ministry, all the while I was in Irwin near your Lordship,
full twenty years.

And the reason why I do confess my debt now, and go about to discharge some
part of it, at this time of your Lordships restraint in England, is, because
when I call to mind the time of my restraint about some thirty years ago,
(when the High Commission Court of Prelates procured my confinement within a
little village in the North beyond Aberdein, in regard I could not give them
satisfaction by receiving the yoke of some Popish ceremonies, imposed then upon
the Ministry,) I cannot forget how comfortable your Lordship was to me then,
and what pains and travel you endured summer and winter without wearying,
until they who at that time had power to loose me from my confinement, being
made sensible, some of them of the iniquity, and all of them of the
inexpediencie of keeping me in bonds, I was restored to the free and full use
of my Ministry. Wherefore I do esteem it a part of due gratitude, to do what
in me lies, to be comfortable to your Lordship in this your present condition;
and do heartily pray to God that your exercise and trouble, may prove a means
of your happiness. It is true indeed, that happiness without this means were
to be wished, if so it were Gods pleasure; but unto God only (in whose hands
alone it is to make men blessed, and in whose friendship and favor through
Christ only men are really blessed) it does belong, as to choose the man to
whom, so also to choose the means whereby, and the manner how he will
communicate the right and possession of true blessedness. If happiness were
at men's wish and carving, no man would choose God for his chief good, nor Gods
way to bring his felicity about; for the multitude of men do say, Psalm. 4. 6.
Who will show us any good?

The good which God does show unto them, and the way how by reconciliation with
himself, and walking humbly and uprightly before him, they may have God to be
their rich reward, is not the thing they love to have; but corn and wine and
oil, and whatsoever may best please their fleshly fancy, is their desire. And
of this the Lord does complain, Psalm. 81. 11. My people, says he, would not
hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me. And what was it which they
did prefer unto God? they loved to have their own will in this world,
whatsoever should befall them after death; they loved rather to have their own
earthly desires satisfied, then to have the friendship of God: and their choice
was given unto them to their own destruction. So (says the Lord) I gave them
over to their own hearts lust, and they walked in the counsel of their own
heart. Few, when they look upon the course which the world does run after,
yea very few do prefer the fellowship of God reconciled to them in Christ,
before riches, honor, and sensual pleasure: For, Who will show us any good? is
that which many do say, Psala 4. 6. bu^ Lord, lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us, is the petition of the few opposed to the multitude; and
even those few godly would wish to go to heaven with ease, and to be free from
trouble in their journey, if it were the Lords will, as we may see in the
prayer of Iabez, 1 Chronicles. 4. 10. Who called on the God of Israel saying, Oh
that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand
might be with me, and that thou would keep me from evil, that it may not
grieve me. But our loving and wise God, who knows perfectly what is fittest
for every man, does cross and correct those natural desires of his children.
And howsoever he will now and then possibly grant the prayer of Iabez, to some
of his people, yet he has appointed this to be the ordinary road-way to
heaven, which the Apostle points forth to us, Acts 14. 22. We must through
much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God,

And this course of carrying of Gods children through many afflictions, does no
ways hinder their happiness; for how many soever their crosses be, yet this
holds always fast, Psalm. 65. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and
causest to approach unto thee. If therefore by plurality of chastisements, the
Lord shall draw, and drive them to seek remission of sins and reconciliation
with himself, and the renewed sense thereof through Christ, and shall by the
rod hedge them within the way of walking with him in a friendly communion: they
lose nothing except their lusts, and do gain eternal blessedness. And
certain^y there is so much relics of natural corruption, so strong
inclinations unto sin, so many actual outbreakings, and gross
transgressions to be found in the most precious Saints, that there is no wonder
the Lord should visit their trespasses with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes; but all the wonder is, that he will not take his loving kindness
utterly from them. There is also so great need of loosing their affections from
what seems love-worthy in this world; so great need of raising the hearts of
the heirs of Salvation unto the seeking of a Kingdom, which cannot be shaken,
and of a crown uncorruptible; as all reason does call for the mixture of
troubles with earthly comforts, lest the sweetness of temporary vanities
should prove unto them poysonable. Moreover, the experience of the Saints set
down in Scripture, and especially in the Psalms, does make it manifest, that
by the variety of outward and inward troubles the faith of Gods children has
been tried, and trained to farther strength. Their love, hope, and patience,
and all other spiritual graces in them have been so fostered and augmented, as
they have been made joyfully and thankfully to subscribe this truth, Psalm. 94.
12. Blessed it the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of
thy Law. This is the language of the Lords present dispensation toward his
people, and the lesson which his Providence does recommend to us all, that we
may learn it to our good: whereunto if this piece shall contribute any thing
for the edifying of those who shall be pleased to read it; and in special, if
it shall be acceptable to your Lordship, this shall do much more then
recompense the labor of

Your Lordships obliged servant in the Gospel, DAVID DICKSON.

The Epistle to the READER.
Christian Reader.
THe acceptance which the former fifty Psalme^ have found, does give me
encouragement suf^ient to offer these other fifty to thy view also, and to give
thee the last fifty so soon a^ the Lord ^all enable me: I am still sparing of
thy time, and do strive to point forth, not all the ^octrines which may be
deduced from the words; but so many only a^ being joined together and compared
with the ^xt, may give unto thee both the sense and the use thereof. It is not
possible to express grave purposes suffieiently without (...) volume, nor to
open mysteries in few words unto thy sati^tion, who c^st not choose but wish to
have more of the purpose, whereof thou lov^ ^o hear much, and find but a
little of it ^inted at. No sort of writing, except that of the Scripture, has
all perfections; but this a^ ^ge thou have by this mould, thou shall not r^d
long till thou meet with matter worthy of thy meditation; and whenever thou
meetest with a word spoken in seas^n, or fit for thy condition, thou m^t close
thy reading for the time, without losing any long discourse, and feed upon what
thou have found till it be digested, and then return when thou will, and seek
for as much as may be another morsel. For the reading of many div^rse
doctrines, without some interlaced meditation is like eating of ^rrow without
bread, and cannot but ^loy thee for the time, or give thee a sur^eit of
wholesome food; which evil if it be^al thee, may be helped for after-time by
short ejaculations of a word of prayer whilst thou art reading, according as
the purpose calls thee (...) seek the Lords blessing unto that which thou
read, whose presence that thou may find comfortable, is the prayer of

Thy servant in the Gospel, DAVID DICKSON.

The mistakes in the printing which have escaped the Prsse in the former piece,
and may possi^ly also escape it hereafter, I pray thee excuse; because I am a^
such a distance, as I (...) neither timously prevent the, nor mark them as
Errata that (...) might correct them.

A BRIEF EXPOSITION Upon the other fifty Psalms.
PSALM. LI. To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David, when Natha^* the Prophet
came unto him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.
THE Psalmist in the sad sense of his guiltiness, prays for remission of
sin, with an eye to the Lords large mercy, ver. 1, 2. and follows his
petition with a deep and hearty confession of his sinfulnsse, ver. 3. 4, 5, 6.
He prays the second time for remission of sin, with an eye toward the blood
of the ^essiah, ver 7. and follows it with another petition for comfort to
his afflicted spirit, ver. 8. He prays for remission of sins the third time,
ver. 9. and follows it with another petition for renewed comfort of the holy
Spirit, and for removal of selt wrath, with a promise of making use thereof, to
the ^fication of Gods people, ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. He prays for remission of
(...) fourth time, and namely of that particular sin, wherewith for the
present his conscience was most troubled, ver. 14. and he follows it with
another petition, for enabling of him for a more spiritual and sincere manner
of serving God hereafter, renouncing all confidence in the external ceremonies
of the Law, ver. 15, 16, 17. And l^st of all, he prays for mercy to the
Church, ver. 18, 19.

From the Ins^ription, Learn, 1. How soon the most mortified lust may be
kindled and break forth like fire in the embers, when it meets with powder;
how frail the strongest of the Saints are in themselves, when they are tempted
to sin; and what need he who stands has to take heed lest he fall: for the
holy Prophet, the sweet singer of Israel is here foully defiled by his going in
to Bathsheba. 2. How fast asleep in sin, even the most watchful watchman may
fall, and that he cannot at all awake of himself, till God of his grace (who in
love pursues fugitives) by some means of his own choosing, stir up his
conscience, as here is evidenced in the case of the Psalmist, who did lie still
in his sin secure, till Nathan the Prophet came unto him. 3. How faithful
Ministers ought to be in their proper cha^ges, reproving sin, even in
greatest personages, when God does call them unto it: and how acceptable their
rep^oof should be to the honest heart, as Nathan the Prophet, David's Seer, his
coming unto David, and rebuking him after the open knowledge of his sin; and
David's acceptance of this office at his hands; and the honorable mention made
of his sidelity here do teach us. 4. How little a true penitent does stand to
shame himself, when his sin has dishonored God, and he sees that the
confession of it may glorisie God; and how far the Penmen of holy Scripture do
differ in this point from the writers of humane histories, as David in the
Inscription of this Psalm gives proof.

Ver. 1. HAve mercy upon me, O God, according t^ thy loving kindness:
according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

In this first affectionate prayer for remission of sins, Learn, 1. As the
conscience, till it be awakened by God, cannot apprehend how displeasant sin is
to God; how it meriteth wrath; (...) how unsupportable a burden it is to the
sinner, when he is chaged with it: So after it is wakened, it can see no refuge
till it consider that mercy may be had in God, and then the more it is pressed
by the Law, or fear of wrath, the more it seeks after Gods mercy, as here we
see; Have mercy on m^, O God. 2. The consideration of the Lords loving
kindness, and readiness to forgive the sinner that comes unto him, should
keep the sinner, (how grievous soever his offense has been) from running away
from him, yea should give him hope to meet with mercy, whatsoever may be his
demerits: Have mercy, O God on me, according to thy loving kindness. 3. Sin is
a debt obliging a man to a penalty which he cannot pay, but must be forgiven,
otherwise he perishes, as blot out my transgressions does import. 4. All
doubts arising from the multitude of sins forgiven before, and from the abuse
of many mercies already received, and from the deep deservings of most heinous
sins, are solved, when Gods loving kindness, and the multitude of the mercies
of God are opposed to these doubts and fears, and are put in the balance over
against them; according to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of
thy mereies, blot out my transg^essions. 5. When a Saint now justified does any
thing against the Law of God, his sin is so far from being extenuated or made
less, as by the contrary it is multiplied so much the more, and found to have
in it a plurality of sins, when it is rightly considered; blot out (says he)
my transgressions, in the plural number. 6. Sin, as it binds a man over to
punishment, till he be forgiven; so it defiles a man, and puts an abominable
deformity on him, which his illuminate conscience cannot look upon, without
loathing, till it be by pardon and purging washed away; wash me and cleanse me
from mine iniquity and my sin. 7. The pollution of sin goes through the whole
powers of the soul and body, which have been serviceable to it; through mind,
will, affections, senses bodily, and all, and nothing can quiet the soul here,
except it find pardoning mercy, and sanctifying mercy, going after all the
soul footsteps of sin, and doing away the filthiness thereof, wash me
thoroughly, and cleanse me.

Ver. 3. For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.

4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and ^e this evil in thy sight, that
thou might be justisied when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge.

5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my mother conceive me.

6. Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part
thou shall make me to know wisdom.

Here he makes confession of his sin and sinfulness, and aggravateth his
guiltiness, from the very root of original sin, and subscribeth whatsoever
God has spoken of man's sinful nature, and deserved punishment in the Scripture
approving himself for the sincerity of his confession unto God. Whence learn,
1. Whosoever would have mercy and pardon of his sin from God, must acknowledge
his sin and debt, and must take part with God, and with justice against
himself, because the Psalmist here gives this for a reason of his hope of
pardon, for I acknowledge my transgression. 2. Albeit God has pardoned sin to
a penitent soul, and albeit his Ministers have made declaration of the pardon
to him, yet the conscience will not pronounce the sentence of absolution, but
still present the sin as unpardoned, till God make it quiet by his immediate
intimation: for David after that Nathan had told him from the Lord, that his
iniquity was pardoned, still finds the conscience pursuing for the guilt, my
sin is ever before me. 3. The dividing of the grant of pardon from the
effectual intimation thereof unto the conscience, is done in Gods wisdom and
mercy toward his child for good: for here it ripeneth repentance, and
brings forth this deep confession, I acknowledge mine iniquity, and my sin
is ever before me. 4. It is most suitable for true repentance, to pitch upon
some particular sin, in the vileness whereof the evil of other sins may be
taken up and lamented against thee have I done this evil; he means the
particular whereof Nathan charged him in the matter of Uriah. 5. The material
injury and hurt of a sinful action may resolve upon a creature, but the formal
obliquity of the action resolves upon the law or command of God, and upon his
sovereigne authority which gave the law; against thee, thee have I sinned. 6.
If the injury done to the creature, could be severed from the offense done to
God, the conscience would not be so much troubled for the first as for the last
(...) if the injury done to God against so many obligations, be compared with
the injury done to the creature; the injury done to God is so high as it
comprehends all the challenge which the creature could make for its part, and
leaves nothing to the creature to say besides: Therefore says he, against
thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, 7. Albeit no
man should challenge for a wrong done by one man to another, and in particular
for a wrong done to a subject by a Prince or Ruler, yet will the Lord challenge
for it, and bring the man to an account for it, against thee, thee only have I
sinned. 8 How closely soever the circumstances of a sinful action be conveyed,
that men should not see the vileness thereof, yet before God all the matter is
plain: I have done this evil in thy sight, says he. 9. The conscience
rightly wakened in the sense of sin, cannot but justify what God has spoken
in his Word of man's sinfulness, and of the merit of sin, and of whatsoever God
has done, or shall do in the punishing of sin: for David makes this deep
confession of sin against himself, that God may be justified when he speaks,
and clear when he is judged. 10. Although presumptuous man will not stand to
examine, judge, and pass sentence upon God, and his words, and his works, yet
shall no m^n be able to bear a blot upon God; but every conscience when awake,
shall be found to blame the man, and to justify God in all his words and
proceedings, as David is forced to blame himself here, that God may be
justified when he speaks, and clear when he is judged. 11. As original sin is
common to all men by natural propagation from their parents, so is it not
abolished out of the most holy in this life, and as it is found to utter it
self by actual transgressions, in the children of God, so must the evil
thereof be acknowledged by them, and that not to extenuate, but to aggravate
their sin thereby, as David shows here, saying, Behold, I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. 12. No confession of sin, nor
any other part of Gods worship gives ease to the mind, or is acceptable to
God, except it be done in sincerity and truth, and when it is done in spirit
and truth, it is acceptable to God, and gives ear to the conscience; Behold,
(says David after his deep confession) thou desire truth in the inward
parts. 13. The last operation of Gods grace in us, is worthy to be observed,
acknowledged, and made use of, as an evidence that God has some work in us,
wherein he takes pl^asure, Behold (says Da^id to God) thou desire or
delightest in truth in the inward parts. 14. When a man has sound some spark
of grace in himself, he may expect to find yet more grace from God, as David
after this observation of grace given unto him, to make a sincere confession of
his sin, does expect that God shall effectually teach him more wisdom, or wise
behavior in his sight. In the hidden part thou will make me to know wisdom;
that is, thou will make my conscience judge yet more impartially of my native
sinfulness, and wilt teach me to walk more circumspectly before thee, in the
sense of my sinfulness.

Ver. 7. Purge me with bysope, and I shall be clean: wash me and I shall be
whiter then snow.

8. Make me to hear joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have broken
may rejoice.

He prays for remission of sin the second time, with an eye to the blood of
the Messiah Christ, and joyneth with it, a petition for comfort to his
afflicted spirit. Whence learn, 1. No less loathsome then leprosy is the
sight of sin, when it is looked upon as unpardoned; and nothing less then the
blood of Christ signified by the blood of the clean bird slain to cleanse the
leper, can purge a man of it, for David does look unto the manner of cleansing
the leper, as it is set down, Levit. 14. Where two birds were taken, and one of
them slain, and the living bird being dipped with bysope in the blood of the
slain bird, was let fly away, to signify the leprous sinners deliverance
from perdition by the blood of that cleanly bird Jesus Christ: purge me with
bysope, says he. 2. Whatsoever application has been made to a man of Christ's
blood in justification of his person, it does not hinder, but rather does open
a way unto the renewed acts of application thereof, according as new sins do
draw on new guiltiness: for here justified David prays to be yet again
purged with bysope. 3. Renewed acts of remission of sin granted, by new
application of the virtue of Christ's blood, cleanse^h the conscience of the
guilt of sin, and clears the man before Gods justice, purge me with bysope,
and I shall be clean, says he. 4. Howsoever remission of the guilt for Christ's
sake, be inseparable from the imputation of righteousness for Christ's sake,
yet may these two be distinguished, and distinctly looked upon for the
believers comfort; for here David looking on the removing of the guiltiness of
sin by Christ's death, says, purge me with bysope, and I shall be clean: and
looking upon the imputation of Christ's righteousness, or obedience even unto
^he death, he says, Wash me and I shall be whiter then sno^ Now that these two
branches of this mercy are distinguishable, may appear from this, that as to be
freed from eternal torment is one benefit, put case a man were annihilated in
his loosing from it; and to be not only freed from eternal torment, but also
made blessed by the gift of eternal life, is another and a greater benefit: So
removing the guilt of sin, in relation to the removing of punishment is one
thing, and the assignation of Christ's righteousness in relation to eternal
life is another thing; and these two benefits both of them are purchased by
Christ's perfect obedience unto the death, and are holden forth, Levit. 14. for
after the delivery of the leper from death (figured and symbolized by the
letting go of the living bird, dipped in the blood of the slain bird) the
clothing of the leper with righteousness, is figured and symbolized by the
washing of the man, and putting clean clothes upon him. Now it is not the man's
personal sanctification inherent, (which in every man is joined with much
pollution) that makes him clean, but the imputation of Christ's righteousness;
This makes him whiter then snow. 5. As we must not neglect the Ordinances of
God, but must use them carefully for obedience unto God, and for strengthening
of our faith, so we must not rest upon them, but seek in unto the
signification, substance, and end of them, which is Christ; as here David
seeks perfect pardon by Christ's blood, perfect purging and cleansing through
him under the terms of purging with bysope and washing. 6. The grief and
torment which follows sin, and is felt by a wounded spirit, even in the
children of God, in the time of their repentance, is greater then ever the
pleasure of sin was to them, as David shows here, who speaks of his
vexation, and wounded spirit, as of the painfullest trouble which can fall upon
the body: for by the bones which thou have broken, he means the chastisement
of his spirit, inflicted of God. 7. Nothing can heal this wound of the spirit,
save the hand that made it; nothing but Gods lively application of his word of
Grace and pardon to the guilty s^nner can do it; so: David will not rest with
what Nathan had spoken, till God speak the same effectually unto him; make me
to hear joy and gladness. 8. As there is no sorrow so deep, as the sense of Gods
displeasure, so there is no joy so refreshing as the inward consolation of Gods
Spirit; for David's broken bones will rejoice, if God will speak peace to his
soul: make ^e to hear joy and gladness, that the ones which thou have broken,
may rejoice.

Ver. 9. Hide thy face from my sint, and blo out all mine iniquities.

10. Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.

11. Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free
spirit.

13. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

He prays for remission of sin the third time, ver. 9. And joyneth therewith
a petition for rectifying his sad condition; first by renovation of that grace
which was decayed, and as it were lost in his sense, ver. 10. Secondly, by
preventing his deserved and feared separation from God, and from communion with
his Spirit, ver. 11. Thirdly, by repairing and restoring of his some-time
gracious condition, and settling him therein by the Spirit of adoption, ver. 12.
And then he promises to make good use thereof for the comfort and edi^ication
of other sinners, ver. 13. Whence learn, 1. Sin is soon committed, and
guiltiness and inisery soon drawn on, but not soon and easily removed; many
a cry to God may be uttered in the sense of felt displeasure of God, and fear
of more and more evil following on it, before the soul find freedom from it;
as this frequently repeated petition for pardon, and these expressions here set
down do make evide^. 2. Earnestness of affection makes often repetition not
to be babbling, and when that which most presses us, is most pressed, and
insisted upon by us in our prayer, it is no vain repetition or idle
multiplication of words, as here is to be seen. 3. Sin seen in its own shape,
is a loathsome sight to God, and horrible to the sinner; which loathsome sight
nothing can remove, save the Lords voluntary forgiving of it, and his not
setting it before his own face, to be pursued in severe justice, Hide thy face
from my sins. 4. As one sin does waken up the conscience of many other sins, so
nothing can quiet the conscience about that one sin, except both it and all
other sins be forgiven, therefore says he, ^lot out all mine iniquities. 5. A
^ncere penitent is no less desirous of renovation and sanctification then he
is of forgiveness of sin; for with blot out all mi^ iniquities, he joyneth
create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me. 6. Albeit sin
against the conscience in a renewed man, defiles it thoroughly, and desaceth
the work of the holy Spirit, opens the flood-gate of natural corruption, to
the pollution of the whole frame of a holy heart; opens the way unto, and
strengthens the work of an evil and deluding spirit; yet no principle of grace
in the renewed man is able to remove this evil; but the removing and remedying
of it must be by the immediate work of Gods own omnipotent hand. This work is
no less then creation, therefore says he, Create in mo a clean heart, and
renew a right spirit within me; that is, it is not in my power to clear my
conscience, and my polluted heart, or to set my perverted spirit in a right
frame again, but thy creating and renewing power, which borrows nothing from
the creature, must do it: create in mo imports this. 7. Albeit a renewed soul
cannot be utterly cast off from God, nor be berest utterly of saving grace once
bestowed on him; yet if he grieve the Lords Spirit by presumptuous sinning, his
assurance of standing in Gods favor may be mightily brangled, and he put in
(...) of losing the possession of what is behind of the saving work of Gods
Spirit in him, especially when he considers that his provocation does deserve
no less at Gods hand; Therefore says he, Cast me not away from thy presence*
and take not away thy holy Spirit from me. 8. Nothing is so terrible to a
renewed soul which has been sometime sensible of Gods favor, and sure of the
presence of his Spirit, as to be shut out from Gods favor, and severed from
the communion of his Spirit, as this prayer testi^ieth, Cast me not away, etc.
9 As a believer may come to assurance of his own salvation, and when he keeps
a good conscience, may swee^y rejoice therein; so when he sees that the
pleasure of sin has marred this joy unto him, he cannot rest nor be quiet till
he recover the assurance he had, and his wonted joy be joined therewith,
restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. 10. The godly by their fall, should
learn sensibly to acknowledge their own weakness, and their need of the
supporting strength of Gods Spirit, and to account the hands of Gods Spirit,
keeping them in order, and in Gods obedience, to be their only freedom.
Therefore David after prayer to have the joy of Gods salvation restored unto
him, (...) lost he should lose it again if he were left to himself, does (...)
another prayer, Up^ me with thy free Spirit. 11. As the end of seeking merry to
our selves, should be this, that we may be (...) to be instruments of
glorifying God, and saving of others: so the sensible feeling of mercy which is
sought after, does greatly encourage a man to the work: Then will I teach
transgressors thy ways. Then, that is, when the joy of Gods salvation is
restored to me, and I confirmed somewhat in the grace of God. 12. As the way
which God keeps in manifesting his justice against transgressors, and his
mercy to self-condemned sinners flying to him in Christ, is not known by nature
to sinners, so long as they go on in their evil course, or before they be
effectually taught to know both; so none is so ^it to teach and persuade them
of this mystery, as they who by frequent experience are acquainted with the
ways of God: Then will I teach transgesso^rs thy ways. 13. The communicating
the knowledge and experience of Gods justice and mercy, according to every man's
place and calling, is a good means of converting of others who know no such
thing: I will teach others thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee.

Ver. 14. Deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O God, thou God of my salvation:
and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

He prays the fourth time for remission of sin, and namely of that fearful
and bloody transgression in the matter of Ur^, which now did most trouble his
conscience Whence learn, 1. As the conscience does pass upon particulars in
the midst of confused challenges for multitudes of sins: so does it press some
particulars more eagerly then other some, according as it is set on work: as
here the guiltiness in the matter of Baths^ and Uriah presses David* deliver
me from blood-guiltinesse. 2. Though sin seem pleasant at the beginning, yet
at length it is found a devouring enemy, from which none can deliver a soul
save God alone: Deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O God. 3 Upon the general
grounds of the Covenant of Grace made with us for salvation through Christ,
must a soul seek to have particular mercies; Deliver me, thou God of my
salvation 4. The righteousness of God, which stands in the remission of sin,
and imputation of Christ's obedience unto us, through faith according to Gods
promise, is the matter of our joy and song of praise to God: which song, a soul
being in thraldom by self guiltiness can hardly sing, but after the
intimation of pardon will sing (...) cheerfully: Deliver me from
blood-guiltinesse; then shall my tongue sing aloud of thy righteousness.

Ver. 15. O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

16. For thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not
in burnt-offering.

17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise.

He pursues this fourth petition for remission of sin, with (...) request for
enlarging of his heart, and furnishing him with m^te: and ability for praising
of God; Wherein he sincerely renounceth all confidence in external ceremonies
of the Law, o^ in any thing else which he could perform. Whence learn, 1.
Howsoever proud spirits think that they can do any thing they please in Gods
service, yet a humbled soul under exercise knows that it is God that gives
both to will and to do of his good pleasure; such a man knows that the habit
of grace is a gift, and the bringing forth of the habit to exercise, is another
gift, he knows that when one has gotten grace, to will to praise God; he
must have grace to put this will to act effectually: This the Psalmist does
acknowledge and (prays, open thou my lips, and my tongue shall show forth thy
praise. 3. Whatsoever holy ordinances and outward services God does prescribe
to his Church, they are not required for satisfaction of his justice, nor are
they the maine thing he is pleased with, but they are means only to lead men
to himself in Christ, in whom only justice finds satisfaction, and man
finds strength to go about the worship, that so God himself may have all the
praise of our services: Therefore David gives it for a reason of his former
petition, for thou desire not, (or thou have not pleasure in) sacrifice. 4.
That which God aims at, we should most intend; and what he is well pleased
with, we should most endew^; Thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it.
5. The main in^nt of the sacrifices under the Law was, that a man in the sense
of his sin and deserved judgment, and inability to satisfy for his faul^,
should come and empty himself before God, and (...) him to that only one
propitiatory sacrifice, represented in (...) external sacrifices: The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; that is, the right way of sacrificing,
is that a man's spirit be emptied of its own self-confidence when it comes to
offer unto God the external sacrifices, which otherwise God regards not. 6.
The man who most renounceth his own works, worth, or merits, and despises all
his own doings, as a broken earthen vessel is most acceptable in his approaches
to Gods free grace in the Mediator: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise; and that not for any worth in the matter of contrition, but
because by contrition is expelled all conceit of self-worth, and so the man is
most fit for receiving grace and free pardon from God.

Ver. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of
Jerusalem.

19. Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with
burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering: then shall they offer bullocks upon
thine Altar.

In the last verse David prays for the Lords people; that what breach had
been made in the walls of Gods protection about them, by his sins and theirs,
might be repaired; and God more holily and heartily worshipped, both by himself
and by them in time coming. Whence learn, 1. As every true member of the Church
should bear in heart the condition of the body, and put it up to God,
whatsoever be the man's own private condition; so in special he that has by his
sins provoked God to with ^aw his prote^ion from the incorporation wherein he
is, should most earnestly interce^e for the good of the body, as David does
here: do good in thy good plea^ure unto Sion, build thou the walls of
Jerusalem. 2. The rich grace of God, his free love and unchangeable good will
to his people is the cause of all the welfare of the Church: do good in thy
good pleasure unto Sion. 3. Whosoever have been most instrumental in the
building of Gods Church, must some way be emptied of the glory of this work*
that it may be all ascribed unto God alone, who is the only builder of his own
Church; as David here emptieth himself of this honor, and ascribes it to God,
saying, Build thou up the walls of Jerusalem. 4. When God pours ou^ upon his
people his Spirit of g^ce and supplication, and ot^ proper effects of his good
will to them, then, and not till then, are they fit to do him service
acceptably: do good in thy good pleasure to Sion; then shall thou be pleased
with the sacrifices, etc. 5* No sacrifice is acceptable to God, save the
sacrifices of righteousness; Now the sacrifices of righteousness are first,
the propiriatory sacrifice of Christ, whereunto every believer must have
respect, as offered in his Name when he comes to God; and next the sacrifices
of thankfulness and new obedience off^ed up by virtue of Christ's sacrifice, to
be accepted: The first sort of sacrifice was represented most specially by
burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering; and the other sort by peace offerings
and other oblations: Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of
righteousness, with burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering, then shall they
offer bull^ upon thine Altar.

PSALM. LII. To the chief Musician, Maschil. A Psalm of David: when Doeg the
Edomite came and told Saul* and said unto him, David is come to the house of
Abimclech.
THe scope of the Psalmist is, to show that Doeg his enemy had no reason to
glory in the favor of the Court, purchased by his false and cruel calumnies
against him and the Lords Priests* which he proves by four reasons: First,
because Gods kindness could not be taken away by Doegs cruel calumnies, v. 1.
Secondly, because God should ^oot our Doeg out of the world for his wicked
calumnies, ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. Thirdly, because Doeg should be made a
laughing stock and matter of derision to the godly, ver. 6. 7. Fourthly,
because man his malice, David should be blessed as a believer in God, and a
true worshipper of him, ver. 8. Whereupon he concludes with praise to God,
ver. 9.

From the Inscription, Learn, 1. It is no new policy of wicked men, to seek to
be great in Court, and in the favor of Princes, by maligning the godly, and
fostering the displeasure of Princes against them, for D^eg of old did climb
in Court this way. 2. Such practices are most suitable to false brethren: for
this Doeg is an Edomite of the posterity of Es^. 3. When the w^ked come to be
in power and credit with Kings, for their very enmity against Gods people, it
is a narrow trial, and a sore tentation to the godly, as here in David's case
with Doeg is to be seIn. 4. In this case there is nothing so needful as to go
to God for direction and consolation; for so David did, and came back with a
Maschil, or P^alme for instruction to himself and others. 5. It is no advantage
to a claw back Calu^niator, to pretend that he told nothing but truth, and said
no more then what he saw: for it is true, that David came to the house of
Abimelech, but the telling of this to Saul, imported much mischief upon the
matter, even all the evil which fell forth, and all this is laid on Doeg
presupposing he had said no more then is expressed here, that is, that he told
Saul, David is come to the house of Abimelech.

Ver. 1. Why boast est thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness
of God endures continually.

David charge Doeg with the vanity of his gloriation, that he was now made so
mighty a man, for his ill service done against the Lords servants, and re^uteth
his folly, because he would not take the kindness of God from the godly so
easily as he might steal their good estimation from them among men. Whence
learn, 1. Prosperity and success following upon a wicked cour^, does hide the
sin and mischief which is in it from the sin^, as we see here, how the favor
which foolish Doeg found a^ Court for his calumniating David and the Lords
Priests, did puss^ him up. 2. There is small reason for a wicked man to glory
in his wickedness, whatsoever profit or preferment it does bring unto him, for
after examination he will not be able to give a reason of his vain boasting;
Why boastest thou thy self of thy mischief, O thou mighty man? 3. Albeit the
wicked do think that God forgets his simple and silly servants, yet it is
not so; and albeit the Lord does alter the exercise of the godly, and changes
their prosperity into adversity, yet he changes not his affection to them,
this remains fast for ever, whatsoever seem to the carnal spectator, of the
Lords dealing with his people; The goodness of God endures continually. 2. So
long as Gods unchangeable kindness endures, the wicked have no cause to
insult over the godly, nor have the godly cause to faint or be discouraged; for
this goodness of God David does oppose, both to Doegs boasting, and to his own
tentation; The ^indnesse of the Lord endures for ever.

Ver. 2. Thy tongue devises mischiefs: like a sharp r^sour working deceitfully.

3. Thou love evil more then good and lying rather then to speak
righteousness. Selah.

4. Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.

The next Argument of refuting Doegs folly, is, because this cruel calumny
should bring Gods vengeance on Doeg, and root him out from all felicity; and
here he first sets down his ditty in these three verses, before he sets down
his doom, ver. 5. Whence learn, 1. The tongue when it is abused, is a world of
wickedness, setting the world on fire, as it self is set on fire from hell by
Satan: for whatsoever mischief the devil can suggest, or a wicked heart can
devise, the tongue will serve to vent it; therefore is the tongue charged with
devising of mischief: Thy tongue devises mischief. 2. The smooth convey of a
wicked device does not hide the mischief of it from Gods sight, nor extenuate
the man's fault, but rather does help on the mischief more cunningly and
powerfully: like a sharp rasour working de^itfully. 3. When a man speaks no
more of a tale of his neighbor, but what may serve to the man's hurt and
prejudice, and keeps up the relation of that part of the tale which might
clear the man's innocence, or might give a right construction of his doing,
albeit that part of the tale told be true, if all the rest of the tale had been
told with it, yet being told alone as if it were the full history, it is evil,
it is false lying. It is a murdering and devouring speech, and full of deceit;
and does argue the Speaker such a one as Doeg was, in the particular at least,
to whom David says; Thou love evil more then good, and lying rather then to
speak righteousness; Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.
4. The more wit, deliberation and affection is in a sin: the heavier is the
guilt, and challenge for it more just. Doegs devising mischief, Doegs choosing
evil, and not good; choosing lying, and not righteousness; loving these evil
and all-devouring words, makes his ditty most fearful.

5. God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and
pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the
living. ^ah.

Now follows his doom; Whence learn, 1. As any wicked man is instrumental for
bringing temporal destruction on the godly, so is he instrumental in drawing
everlasting destruction upon himself from Gods hand, God shall likewise destroy
thee for ever. 2. He that seeks to settle himself, to enlarge himself, to
root himself in the earth, and to prolong his standing in the world, by wrong
means, and in special, by hurting the godly, and their good name and cause,
shall find the event quite contrary to his desire, design and expectation, as
Doeg did, whose doom was destruction, for his evil offices done at Court
against David and the Lords Ministers God shall take thee away and pluck thee
out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living.

Ver. 6. The righteous also shall see and fear, and shall laugh at him.

7. Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in the
abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.

The third Argument of ref^tation of Doegs vain-boasting, is, that his wisdom
should be seen to be ridiculous folly; and his b^asting to be the matter of his
shame and disgrace. Whence learn, 1. The notable enemies of Gods children and
servants may expect to be notably punished, and that they who did see their
sin, shall see also Gods vengeance on them: The righteous shall see it. 2. As
the godly are the only wise observers of Gods work, and dispensation of his
mercy and justice: so also are they the only persons that do make spiritual
advantage thereby: The righteous shall see it and fear. 3. As the good of
godliness is seen and felt by the godly in their own experience of Gods
blessing upon themselves, so is it seen and observed also in the contrary evils
which befall the ungodly; Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength,
(say they) but trusted in the abundance of his ri^hes, and strengthened himself
in his wickedness.

Ver. 8. But I am like a green Olive Tree in the house of God, I trust in the
mercy of God for ever and ever.

The fourth Argument for refutation of Doegs foolish boasting, is because, I,
says David, shall flourish in Gods favor, in despite of Doeg; Whence learn,
1. Whatsoever may befall (...) godly by the malice of their enemies, it shall
not hinder their felicity, when their enemies are running to their own
destruction, it shall be well with the godly, they may be persuaded of it, for
the Psalmists example does encourage to it: But I am like a green Olive Tree. 2
As the Olive Tree, being planted in a fertile ground, draws in moisture,
whereby it is nourished and grows up: so does the believer, being planted in
the Church, draw spirit and life trom God by the holy ordinances, whereby he
grows up: I am like a green Olive Tree in the house of God. 3. The wisdom of
the godly, and the ground of their true blessedness is this, they make fast
work of their everlasting felicity by says in God, and this makes them like
green Olives all the days of their life; for I trust in the mercy of God for
ever and ever, is given here for a reason of his happy growing in the house of
God.

Ver. 9. I will praise thee for ever, because thou have done it: and I will
wait on thy Name, for it is good before thy Saints.

He closes the Psalm comfort^bly, with resoluti^n to praise God, and to depend
upon him. Whence learn, 1. Victory over tentations obtained by says, i^ very
glori^us, for says does make a man as sure of what is to come, as if it were
perfected, and fills him with praise for the certain hope of the performance
of Promises; I will prais^ thee for ever (says David.) because thou have done
it. 2. ^ith being soli^ly fixed, brings forth hope and quiet expectation of
what is promised, I will wait o^ thy Name. 3. As the Christian patience of one
of the Saints, is a matter of g^od example, and great encouragement unto all
the rest that behold it: ^o the consideration of the good which may redound to
others, who shall be witnesses of our patient atten^ing upon God, should sti^e
us up to this duty of patient hope in God, I will wait on thee, for it is good
before thy Saints.

PSALM. LIII. To the chief Musician upon Mahalath Maschil. A Psalm of David.
AS in the fourte^nth Psalm, so here David comfort himself, and the rest of
the godly in their sad sufferings which they felt from godless men lying in
the miserable condition of nature, ver. 1, 2, 3. The grounds of comfort are
three; the first, because God was engaged in the sufferings of his own, and
would plead their controversy against the wicked, ver. 4. The next, because
Gods judgments were to come on all the persecutors of the godly, v^r. 5. and
the third, because there is hope of full salvation of the godly in Christ, ver.
6. Comparing this Psalm with Psalmer 14. wherein. the enmity of the wicked
against the godly, and the comfort of the godly in that case, in this place are
the same which are set down there; We learn, That as the godly may fall oftener
then once, in one case, under one and the same tentation, some sort of hard
exercise and grief: so may they, and should they make use of the same comforts,
and bring to memory the same doctrines for that end, as the Church is taught to
do, Psalm 14. and here in this Psalm.

Ver. 1. THe fool has said in his heart, There is no God; corrupt are they,
and have done abominable iniquity; there is none that does good.

2. God looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were
any that did understand, that did seek God.

3. Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether become filthy: there is
none that does good, no not one.

From the description of the miserable condition, wherein the world and every
unrenewed man within the Church visible ^o lie; Learn, 1. All unrenewed persons
are fools before God, how wise soever they may seem to men 2 All unrenewed men
are inwardly in their affections and resolutions Atheists in effect, and such
as do not regard God in any thing; whatsoever they may seem to themselves or
others outwardly, They say in their heart, There is no God. 3. All unren^wed
men are altogether rotten in their principles and motives of their actions:
They are corrupt. 4. The actions of the unrenewed will be found abomination
before God, and will prove them to be corrupt: They have done abominable
iniquity. 5. Among all unrenewed men, whether without or within the visible
Church, not so much as one man shall be found to have done so much as one good
action, which can stand for good in Gods account: There is none that does good.
6. The truth of this doctrine is put to trial and proo^ by God himself, and
sentence is pronounced of all men's natural averseness from God, and impotency
to do good. God looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, to see if
there we^e any that did good, and he found none. 7. As it is impossible they
can do any good, or be wise who seek not God; so the proof and trial of this
naughtiness of all men, so long as they lie in nature unrenewed, is found by
their not understanding; not seeking of God; The Lord looked to see if there
were any that did understand, that did, seck God. 8. Every man by nature is a
Revolter from God, and from the state wherein once God made man, Every one of
them is gone back. 9. There is nothing clean or unpolluted in soul or body of
the unrenewed man; but the longer he lives in nature, the viler is he: They
are altogether become filthy. 10. Seeing all men by nature are concluded under
sin, without exception, And there is none that does good, no not one; It is no
wonder, that the image of God appearing in his children, be ill entertained by
natural men, and that Gods children expect no good fruits from such ill trees,
as all men are by nature, for this doctrine is delivered to quiet the hearts of
the godly, when they are molested by the men of this world. 11. It should yield
comfort to the godly, to behold the miserable condition wherein all men are by
nature, and themselves called forth of this miserable estate, and converted;
for this doctrine offers ground for the comparison and consolation.

Ver. 4. Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge* who eat up my people as
they eat bread; they have not called upon God.

The first direct Argument for the comforting of the godly under their
persecution by the wicked among whom they live, is, that God conside eth their
case, and will plead their cause, When^ learn, 1. The Lord observes every
point of enmity which the world ^ieth agninst his People; he takes their case
to heart, and will plead their cause, and this is a solid ground of comfort to
his People in all their sufferings; H^ the workers of iniquity no knowledge?
that ca^ up, etc. 2. Grounds of di^ between the unrenewed, and the renewed or
(...), (...) in this opposition of the one sort (...) the other are the; First,
the unrenewed, all of them are ca^ workers of iniquity; but they that aree
reconciled, howsoev^ they are not (...) sin, yet they are not counted by God to
be workers of iniquity. Again, the Lord does own the regene^ and call them
(...) own People, but does disclaim the other, as in ^t not his people, but his
enemies. And lastly, the un^generate do (...) call upon God, to wit, in
earnest, or in (...), but the ^ate by the oppos^ion made are presupposed h^ to
call on God, and to depend upon him in truth. 3. (...) does more evidence the
blindness and beastly be^ of the conscience of sinners, then the pe^ecuting of
the Saints; (...) will not (...) the un^dly to ^ve a godless life themselves,
except they m^igne and most unreasonably oppose Piety in (...) there is; Have the
workers of iniquity no knowledge? that they (...) up my People as they eat
bread. 4. To vex, be^ down, and destroy the godly, is as great a pleasure to
the wicked, as to (...) their meat; They (...) up my People as they eat bread.

Ver. 5. There were they in great fear, where (...) fear was; for God has
scattered the bones of him that encamped against thee: thou have put them to
shame, because God has despised them.

The next ground of comfort to the godly against persecution, is, because Gods
judgments shall overtake the troublers of God; People, when they do least
fear it. Whence learn, 1. As persecution does cauterise the conscience, and
makes it sen^clesse of sin* so also does it make the Persecutors fearlesse of
judgment, when they do eat up the People of God as b^ without fea^e; For
there, faith he, no fear was. 2. The (...) secure a sinner is, and in special
a Persecutor of Gods People, the more terrible shall his wakening be, when Gods
judgment comes on him; There were they in great fear where no fear was. 3.
The enemies of Gods Church make it their study and main work, to overthrow the
godly, and to compass them as it were by way of laying siege about them, that
they escape not; They encamp against thee, says the Psalmist, speaking as it
were to every one of Gods People. 4. Wra^h pursues the Persecutor, both living
and dead, and cease not to follow him so long as there is any thing of him
capable of punishment; for God not only ^iseth the (...), and destroys the
enemy, and consumes his flesh, but also he has seattered the b^es of him
that en^ampeth against the^. 5. When the^ is nothing left of the P^ (...)
unpunished in the world, the wrath of God pursues his name and memo^ial; and
the wrong done to the innocent, is the Persecutors great^ (...) Thou have put
them to some. 6 As true h^ur, and the ^ring of ^pect from men upon any, is the
gift of God, who honors them that honor him; so deserved s^ and (...) for
^n committed, when it is po^ed out, as the effect of God^ justice makes them
who (...) him to be lig^ly esteemed; Thou have put them to s^, because God has
(...) them.

Ver. 6. O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! when God
brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
shall be glad.

The last ground of comfort to the persecuted godly, is the hope of complete
^ion to the Church of God, and of every true member thereof in Christ. Whence
learn. 1. There is no ^lid consolation against persecution, or any other
grievance, save in the salvation which is to be ^ad in Christ; He is the S^iour
and salvation of Israel. 2. As Christ's coming ^o accomplish salvation by p^t
and part, in his own order and time, is most certainly to be bel^ved and hoped
for: so is it most earnestly to be wished, longed after, and prayed for: as the
example of the Lords People here (longing for his coming to ^ion, in his
incarnation and mani^ion of his grace; and then in the spreading forth of his
grace and salvation out of Sion to G^ntiles and Jewe^ does teach us; O the the
salvation of (...) were come out of Sion. 3. As the captivity of Gods People d^
remain in any degree and measure, which may make (...) coming to be so much the
more de^eable, and to be the object of wishes, and matter of Prayer; so shall
every sort and degree of captivity at last be removed from Gods People, till
Redemption be completely fulfilled; God shall bring back the captivity of his
People. 4. As of all People, whoever had the name of Gods People, the miseries
and captivities of the Israelites, because of their provocation against God,
have been the most conspicuous and signal: So of all the People on the earth,
and of all the Nations which have been honored with the title of Gods People,
the deliverance of Israel from captivity shall be most eminently and
conspicuously comfortable; for when God shall bring back the captivity of his
People, then Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

PSALM. LIVE. To the chief Musician on Neginoth Maschil. A Psalm of David, when
the Ziphims came and said to Saul, Does not David hide himself with us?
DAvid being betrayed by the Ziphims; First, does make his Prayer to God for
delivery, ver. 1, 2. Secondly, he strengthens his faith by some reasons, ver.
3 Thirdly, he is confident of his own delivery, and of Gods judgment on the
Ziphims, whereunto he subscribes, ver. 4, 5. And last of all, he promises
praise to God for his own assured deliverance, ver. 6, 7.

From the Inscription; Learn, 1. Particular straits and particular deliveries
should be particularly remarked, as David here remembereth the danger he was in
by the treachery of the Ziphims. 2. Mighty men will find readily more friends
in an evil cause, then the godly do find in a good cause: As Saul has the
Ziphims to offer their service to his cruelty, when David was in straits. 3.
The wicked are very hearty to do an ill turn, and glad to find occasion of it:
Doth-not David, (say they) hide himself with us? as if this had been good and
blessed news.

Ver. 1. SAve me, O God, by thy Name, and judge me by thy strength.

2. Hear my Prayer, O God, give ear to the words of my mouth.

From David's Prayer; Learn, 1. The godly can never be so surprised with
trouble, but they should fly to God for delivery, as David does here; and it
is a rare virtue not to forget this relief in depth of distress. 2. When men
believe that God is all-sufficient and answerable to what is spoken of him,
they have great encouragement to go to him in diffi^ulty, Save me by thy Name,
says David: Gods name gave him ground to pray and hope for deliverance. 3.
Albeit no man should rashly call God to give judgment, yet in a good cause,
against a strong Party, an upright man may call for and expect assistance from
God; Judge me by thy strongth, says he. 4. In servent prayer, the very voice
has use, as with the supplicant to express his earnestness, and his faith in
God, and to sti^ him up, and hold him fixed to his supplication; so with God
also has it use in regard it is an express invocation of him, and a sign of
dependence upon him, and of expectation of a good answer from him; Hear my
Prayer, O God, give care unto the words of my mouth.

Ver. 3. For strangers are risen up against me; and oppressors seek after my
soul, they have not set God before them. Selah.

The reasons supporting his says in his Prayer, ^e taken from the unkindnesse,
unnatu^alnesse and cruelty not only of his Contrymen, but also of his father
in law, and of his old acquaintance, slippery Courtiers, who sometime professed
friendship. Whence learn, 1. No strangers are more strange then they who cast
off the bands of civility and nature, wherein they were bound: false
Contrymen, false brethren, false friends, false alliance, are those of whom
men may expect le^st in their need, for David finds such men to be his
greatest enemies; Strangers are risen up against me, says he. 2. When they who
should protect a man, do him most wrong, God will hear the p^ints put up
against such men: oppressors seek after my soul or ^e. 3. When the fear of God
is laid aside, there is nothing to be expected of the godless man but the
worst of evils which he is able to do, there is no aw band to restrain him,
for they have not set God before them. 4. The less hope there be of man's
mercy, the more hope is of Gods help, the more unkind and cruel men be, who
should be friends, the more may the Lords kindness and comfort be expected for
supply of inlacks, as here the d^ist of David's argument holds forth.

Ver. 4. Behold, God is mine helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.

5. He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them off in thy truth.

In the third place he is assured of help to himself, and to his friends and of
vengeance to his enemies. Whence learn, 1. Fervent (...) has readily a swift
answer, and sometimes wonderfully twist, even before a man have ended speech,
as here David finds in experience Behold (says he) God is my helper, 2. The
sight of faith is very clear, and piercing through all clouds, when God holds
forth the light of his Spirit unto it, it can demonstrate God present in an
instant, ready to help in greatest straits: Behold, God is my help. 3. There
is more joy in Gods felt presence, then grief, in felt trouble; for, Behold,
God is my helper, is more comfort then his friends unkindnesse, and strangers
malice was grievous. 4. Such as do comfort and help a man in time of his
tentation, are not only helpers unto him in the matter of his temporal life,
but also instruments to save his soul, which by tentations is like to be drawn
into sin, and so to destraction; for David says of such men, they uphold my
soul. 5. Such as take part with the persecuted Saints, God will take part with
them: The Lord is with them that uphold my soul. 6. As God is a friend to the
friends of his distressed children, so is he a s^ to their (...) and their foes
shall smart for their enmity in due time: He shall reward evil to my enemies.
7. The doom of the wicked enemies of Gods children, is set down in Gods word,
his truth is the wicked man's terror, and the godly (...) strength: Cut them off
in thy truth. 8. Albeit we may not without cl^ warrant pray against particular
persons, yet we may subscribe to Gods Word set down in Scripture against his
obstinate enemies, and our enemies for his cause: Cut them off in thy truth.

Ver. 6. I will freely sacrifice unto thee, I (...) praise thy Name (O LORD)
for it is good

7. For he has delivered me out of all trouble; and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies.

In the last place he promises praise to God for the certaily he had of his
deliverance, whereof he was no less assured, the^ if he had seen it with his
eyes. Whence learn^. Promised and hoped for deliverance is able to affect the
(...), as a mercy present and already past, as here it does David: I will
sacrifice to thee, and praise thee. 2. Readiness of heart to glorify God, and
liberty of spirit, with occasion granted to praise him for a benefit, is
another (...) benefit superadded, and greatly to be esteemed of, as David does
account of it: I will freely sacrifice unto thee and praise thy Name, for it is
good; tha^ ^s, not only is thy name good, but to have a heart sincerely to
(...) ^hee, and liberty to express thy praise before others is (...). Then is
an action good, when it is done, because it is a good ^on, and is not gone
about for by-ends; I will praise his name for it is good, says he. 4. In one
experience of one delivery man (...) foresight of full delvery out of every evil
or trouble wherein he can fall, as here David speaks of hopes for full
delivery, he has delivered me out of all troubles. 5. The same light of Gods
Word, made lively by Gods Spirit, is able to show a man, both the destruction
of his wicked enemies, and his own deliverance from them; and as a man may
rejoice in Gods mercy toward himself, so also may he rejoice in Gods justice
against his enemies, provided he be free of private revenge: mine eye has
scene thy judgments upon mine enemies.

PSALM. I. V. To the chief Musician on Neginoth, Maschil. A Psalm of David.
THis Psalm contains this doctrine, That albeit Christ and his followers may
be in great straits by the (...) of their pretended friends, yet through Gods
favor they shall be delivered, as David felt in experience. The use of which
Doctrine is subjoyned in the end of the Psalm, which well agreeeth with the
Psalmists condition in the time of Absaloms and Achitophels conspiracy.

The parts of the Psalm we may make these three. In the ^st is set down his
sorrowful supplication to ver. 16. In the next, his comforting of himself in
the Lord his deliverer, to ver 22. In the third, the use of this experience, in
the two last verses.

In his supplication he prays in the first place for a gracious hearing,
because of the calumnies and cruelty of his enemies, ver. 1, 2, 3. In the next
place he sets down his pitiful condition of mind, ver 4, 5. making him to
wish to be fair from the company of these conspirators, which were combined
against him, ver. 6, 7, 8. In the third place, he prays to God to confound
their counsels, because the whole City was in an uproare against him, seeking
how to execute their mischievous plot, ver. 9, 10, 11. In the fourth place h^
condescends upon a more particular reason of his prayer for confounding their
counsels, because the plotter of the conspiracy had been most intimate in his
familiarity, and deep upon his counsel, ver. 12, 13, 14. Whereupon in the last
place by way of prayer he prophesies of the curse of God to come upon them,
ver. 15.

In the second part of the Psalm he comfort himself in God; First, by his
resolution constantly to depend upon God, and hopefully to pray, ver. 16, ^7.
Seondly, by his former experiences of deliverances granted to him before, ver.
18. Thirdly, because he was assured God should take order with his enemies for
their treacherous breach of Covenant, and pla^ing of their malicious designs
with fair pretenses, and deep dissimulation, ver. 19, 20, 21.

In the third part of the Psalm are the uses of this experience, ver. 22, 23.

Ver. 1. GIve ear to my prayer, O God, and hide not thy self from my
supplication.

2. Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise.

3. Because of the voice of the enemies, because of the oppression of the
wicked: for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me.

From his address unto God for relief in this, as in his other sad conditions;
Learn, 1. Many grievances are the godly subject unto, but in none of them all
is there any ease for them, till they go to God and lay out their case before
him: Give care to my prayer, O God. 2. As it is ease of heart to supplicants to
have any sign of the acceptance of their supplication; So not to find access
in prayer does add much weight to their trouble. hide not (says he) thy self
from my supplication. 3. When a sad heart is fixed on God, and finds what to
say to him, it may expect that its words shall not be misregarded of God, but
punctually taken knowledge of: attend unto me, and hear me. 4. Though a child
of God were never so stout-hearted naturally, yet when God exercises his
spirit with trouble, he shall be made to weep before God as a child, and must
not be ashamed to be thus humbled before him: I mourn in my complaint, (says
he) and make a noise. 5. A mourning supplicant shall neither (...) his prayers
nor his tears, for I mourn, is brought for a reason of his hope, that God
shall attend and hear him. 6. When the godly fall into persecution and trouble
from men, their lives, their estate, and their good name, readily come
altogether to be in danger at once; as it befell David when the conspirators
made head against him, they traduced his former government, as if he had been a
wicked man, and sought to bear him down, and to have his life; because of the
voice of the enemy, there is their railing; because of the oppression of the
wicked, there is their violence robbing him of his estate; they cast iniquity
upon me, there are their slanderous traducings of him, and charging him with
faults falsely; In wrath they hate me, there is their cruel seeking to kill
him.

Ver. 4. My heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are
fallen upon me.

5. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and borrour has overwhelmed
me.

In this pitiful condition of mind; Learn, 1. It is not a thing inconsistent
with godliness to be much moved with fear in time of danger; natural
affections are not taken away in conversion, but sanctified and moderated: My
heart is sore pained within me. 2. Natural wit, and courage are not sufficient
to bear a man out in a great stresse, for they will fail him, and if a man have
not stronger supporters then his natural parts, he is undone, for here the
terrors of death are fallen upon me, and borrour has overwhelmed me. 3. The
godly have an advantage above all natural men: for when natural strength and
courage does fail them, they have nothing behind, but the godly have faith in
God, to open a fountain of fresh supply of wisdom, courage and strength to
them, when parts natural do sail them; for David being now emptied of natural
furniture, has wisdom and strength to go to God, and hope of heart to be
helped by him.

Ver. 6. And I said, O that I had wings like a Dove; for then would I flee
away, and be at rest.

7. Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. Selah.

8. I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.

Where is he wished to have been out of the reach and society of such wicked
enemies; Learn 1. When a man may escape a present hazard of (...), with a good
conscience, he may lawfully fly and eschew the danger, as David here wished he
could have escaped; O if I had wings, then would I fly away. 2. A godly man
may be in such peril as it seems to him he cannot without a miracle be
delivered, as David saw no way to escape the conspiracy, (...) this way: O
that I had the wings of a Dove; and yet God may so dispose, as he may be
delivered in an ordinary way, as here David was. 3. It is better to be in the
Wilderness in some cases, then to be in the company of the wicked: Lo, I would
wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. 4. The way to eschew the fury
of a sudden insurrection of a tumultuous multitude, is not to come forth and
appease them with words, but to decline their present fury by going out of the
way, if God offer occasion: I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and
tempest.

Ver. 9. Destroy, O LORD, and divide their tongues: for I have seen violence
and strife in the city.

10. Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof: mischief also and
sorrow are in the midst of it.

11. Wickedness is in the midst thereof, deceit and guile depart not from her
streets.

In the third place he prays to confound the counsel of the enemies because
they had put the whole City in a confusion, and set the citizens upon a course
of (...) and violence. Whence learn, 1. A visible Church may at some time be in
so sinful a condition, as a godly man shall not know what to do, or to whom he
may have (...) where to hide him; as here the condition of the holy City, the
City of Jerusalem is described. 2 The prayers of the godly are more able to
disappoint the plots of cruel enemies, then all humane policy: Destroy, O Lord,
and divide their tongues. 3. The believer should make use of such courses as
God has taken before for disappointing wicked enterprises, for supporting of
his faith in his need, as here David makes use of Gods dissolving the
conspiracy of Cora^, Dathan and Abiram, and of the proud enterprise of the
wicked in building Babel; Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues. 4. A man
should be very sure, that such as he does pray against, and complains of unto
God, are in a wicked condition, and upon a mischievous course; for David gives
for a reason of his imprecation, that he had seen violence and strife in the
city. The Rulers of the city diligently watching for his (...) to do mischief;
day and night going about the walls, mischief, so^row, wickedness, (...) in
the midst of it, and openly (...) in the streets.

Ver. 12. For it was not an enemy that reproached me, then I could have borne
it; neither was it he that bated me that did magnify himself against me, then
I would have hid my self from him.

13. But it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.

14. We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in
company.

In (...) place he condescendeth upon a more special (...) of his (...)
Achitophel and other like (...), ((...)) had (...) abused their trust and
familiarity which they had with him, whose ingratitude ^ieved him (...) then
the (...); Whence learn, 1. It is (...) thing for (...) to (...) as (...) their
(...) to become (...) specially in a good cause; this does David's experience
make evident. 2. The worst that a professed enemy can do against the godly in a
good cause, is more tolerable then treachery against us, or the forsaking of us
by a professed friend; for that imports a reproach in the Party forsaken, as
having an evil (...), or being unworthy to be assisted; It was not an enemy
that reproached me, then I could have borne it. 3. The injuries of a respected
enemy, are not so (...) ^ble before they (...) done, nor so piercing when they
are done, as the injuries of one whom a man suspecteth not, or as the injuries
done to us by a professed and trusted friend; Neither was it he that hated me,
then I could have hid my self from him. 4. The disappointing of us by a friend
in a good cause, much more the open opposition, and most of all the treachery
of a trusted friend against us in a good cause, does carry with it a vilifying
and despising of our person and cause; and imports our ill deserving at their
hand, our ill carriage in the cause, and our deserving to be forsaken, and
says in effect, that the false friend or traitor has reason to be avenged on
us, and to oppose us in that cause; and what can be heavier to a godly
persecuted person? for this is a very exalting of the Traitor against us:
Neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself against me. 5.
Amongst many friendly neighbors, it has been the custom of godly and wise men
to choose out some to be their most intimate friends, whom they would use most
familiarly and freely, whose counsel they would take, and most readily follow;
It was thou, O man, mine equal, my guide, and my acquaintance. 6. To find a
godly and wise man, with whom we may be free in all cases of mind or
conscience, wherein we may fall, to whom we may freely open our mind, and be
strengthened by him in the service of God, it is a notable refreshment, and
part of happiness and contentment: We took sweet counsel together, and walked
unto the house of God in company. 7. A godly and wise man may be deceived in
his choice by the close carriage of an hypocrite, who because he has no sound
principles of steadfastness in a good cause, may both disappoint his friend,
and deceive himself also, and so do that which he did not at first intend to
do. This disappointment to the godly is a very heavy affliction: But it was
thou, a man, mine equal, my guide.

Ver. 15. Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for
wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.

From his Prophetical imprecation against his enemies, such as Achitophel was
to David, and Judas to Christ, and such like, together with their followers and
accomplices; Learn, 1. Swift destruction is the reward of the enemies of Gods
servants, and specially of treacherous Apostates from a good cause, as
Achitophel's and Iudaas's latter end gave example: Let death seize upon them,
and let them go down quick into hell. 2. Such as give entertainment and lodging
to wickedness, shall have hell for their lodging, where wickedness lodges;
for here it is given for a reason why the wicked shall go down to hell, Because
wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them. 3. What the Lord has
revealed to be his righteous decree, the godly may warrantably subscribe unto
it; Let death seize on them, etc.

Ver. 16. As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord shall save me.

17. Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray and cry aloud, and he shall
hear my voice.

In the second part of the Psalm, he comfort himself in his resolution,
constantly to depend on God, and his confidence to find access in worship.
Whence learn, 1. The right use of Gods judgments on the wicked, for their
wickedness is to draw near to God, to worship him and depend upon him, as
David here resolved; As for me, I will call upon God. 2. A man may be sure to
be saved in drawing near to the Lord whatsoever shall befall the wicked, I will
call on God, and the Lord shall save me. 3. He who resolves to live upon Gods
good will and furniture, and hops to be saved at last, must resolve also to
be constant, servent and importunate in his daily worship and attendance on
God; Evening and morning will I pray and cry aloud. 4. As it is needful upon
all occasions to watch unto Prayer, and to entertain a frame of Spirit fit for
supplication: so is it fit for giving of our selves more specially and fully to
this work, to have (albeit not fixed canoni^k hours,) yet set times every day,
at or about which we may follow religious worship, such as are morning, evening
and noon, or any other time most fitting for the work; all circumstances being
compared, as here David's resolution and example does teach us.

Ver. 18. He has delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against
me: for there were many with me.

His next encouragement is taken from the experiences of former deliveries
given to him by God. Whence learn, 1. Then do we make good use of experiences,
when we stir up our selves, thereby to believe the more for them in God, and to
call on him in all conditions, as David here gives this, He has delivered my
soul, as a reason of his former resolution. 2. In the midst of war the Lord can
keep a man as safe as in the time of peace, and in extreme perils preserve him
from danger; He has deliverd my soul in peace from the battle that ^as against
me. 3 He that depends upon God in the time of trouble, albeit he had an host
against him, yet has he more with him when God is with him, then can be
against him: He has delivered my soul, for there are many with me.

Ver. 19. God shall hear and afflict them, even he that abides of old* Selah:
because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God.

20. He has put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him: he has
broken his Covenant.

21. The words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his
heart: his words were softer then oil, yet were they drawn swords.

His third encouragement is taken from assurance, that God should punish his
enemies for their godless security, b^each of Covenant, and deep di^mulation.
Whence learn, 1. Upon the complaint of the opp^ servants of God, not only a^e
they delivered them^lves, but also their enemies are punished; God shall ^ear
and afflict the. 2. Gods eternity and immutability is a sufficient gro^d of the
mani^station of his mercy to his own people, and (...) against their enemies
from generation to generation; God shall hear me, and afflict them, even he the
abides of old. S^h 3. The more gently the Lord: deals with the wicked in not
ex^cising them with so many cresses, outward and inward, as he does his own,
the more godless are they, the more se^ a^e they; and the more godless and
secure they are, the more certain is their vexation coming; He will afflict
them sore, because they have no changes; therefore they fear not God. This is
one reason of the Lords pursuing the wicked. 4. Whoever he be that makes a
breach in the peace between himself and others, shall have God for his P^ty,
who shall not fail to afflict the Peace-breaker, he shall afflict them, and
namely the chief Ring leaders; Who have put forth their hands against such as
be at peace with them: and this is another reason of the Lords punishing of the
enemies of his People. 5. The Lord will make a quarrel, and pursue for the
breach of Covenant in special, because this is a most solemn confirmation of
peace, and wherein God has specially interest to s^e it performed, or the
breach of it punished; He has broken his Covenant; and this is the third
reason of Gods punishing false brethren, pretended friends to Gods people, but
in effect most pernicious foes. 6. The bosome-enemies of the Church, and
underminers of the Lords people, and of his work in their hands, do make
fairest pretenses; when their vilest plots are in hand, then they are at Hail
Master, and at offering of kisses, when they are about to be^ay; The words of
his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his heart: his words were
softer then oil, yet were they drawn swords: and this vile dissimulation is
the fourth reason of the Lords avenging the persecution of false brethren.

Ver. 22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall
never suffer the righteous to be moved.

23. But thou, O God, shall bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody
and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; but I will trust in thee.

The use of this experience he sets forth; first, by giving counsel to the
oppressed, to cast their burden upon the Lord, when they are over-burdened, and
by making promises for encouraging them thereto. Secondly, by giving assurance
of the perdition of the treacherous enemies of the Church. Thirdly, by setting
forth his own resolution to keep confidence in God. Whence learn, 1. The use of
the experience which godly persons have had, of comfort in, and deliverie out
of trouble, is the encouragement of us to take the same course, which the godly
followed before us in seeking our relief in God only; Cast thy burden on the
Lord. 2. Whos^ever do roll over themselves upon God in their weighty troubles,
shall never sink under them; Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain
thee. 3. Though the godly be troubled and tossed, yet because they continue to
seek God, and to walk in the way of righteousness, they shall never be driven
from their anchor-hold, they shall not be loosed at the root, their building
shall be found still in its own place, upon the rock; He shall never suffer the
righteous to be moved. 4. As on the one hand the Lord shall hold up the
believer, how low soever he shall be brought, that he perish not; so shall the
Lord still bring down the wicked to perdition, how high soever, how fixed
soever his stare appear, believe this who will: God will not suffer the
righteous to be moved, but thou, O God, shall bring them down into the pit of
destruction. 5. Treacherous and cruel adversaries of the Lords people shall be
cut off, before they accomplish their bloody plots, they shall never die full
of days, but wrath shall take them away, when they would least; Bl^y and
de^itful men shall not live half their days. 6. Wherher such as do trouble the
godly live longer or shorter, they will breed exercise to the godly, so long as
they live; and the only ^st that godly hearts can have against all the trouble
they feel or fear from their en^mies, or other ways, is to stay themselves on
the Lord; for so resolves the Psalmist, But I will trust in the, says he, and
so closes.

PSALM. LVI. To the (...), ^im, (...) of David, when the (...) him in G^
DAvid flying from Saul to the country of the Philistines, (as w^ (...), 1 S^.
(...). 13.) is apprehended, he praveth to God, and is delivered. There are two
parts of the Psalm^ In the (...) part the^ are three conflicts of David's says
with his trouble and ^ation, and three victories. The first conflict is in
prayer, laying forth his enemies carriage against him, ver. 1, 2. And his ^st
victory by says, ver. 3, 4. The second conslict is in his complaint he makes
against his enemies, ver. 5, 6. And his second victory by faith, ver. 7. His
third conflict is by laying forth his mournful condition before God, with hope
to be regarded, ver. 8. And his third and greatest victory by faith, ver. 9,
10, 11. In the latter part of the Psalm is David's obligation, thankfully to
acknowledge his merciful delivery, with a petition for grace to persevere in
the course of obedience, under Gods protection, ver. 12, 13.

From the Inscription; Learn, 1. When once Gods children are entered on their
trials, they meet with new and unexpected difficulties, as David here flying
from one enemy, falls in the hands of another enemy. 2. These means of safety
which Gods children do devise themselves, readily prove snares; David flying
out of the holy land, does fall in the hands of his adversaries: The
Philistines take him in Gath.

Ver. 1. BE merciful unto me, O God, for man would swallow me up, he fighting
daily oppresses me.

2. Mine enemies would daily swallow me up; for they be many that fight against
me, O thou most High.

His first wrestling in prayer is with the check of his conscience, whether for
his daily ^ns, or in particular for casting himself in so apparent danger, as
to have ventured without probable security had, to seek shelter among the
enemies of the people of God, whose blood he himself had shed abundantly; for
this (...) or other sins he beggeth mercy, and lays out before God, the
pressing tentation from Saul and his Country men's cruelty, which d^ave him to
this p^or shift. Whence learn, 1. There is no fence for challenges of
conscience for bygone sins meeting with trouble drawn on by ou^ folly, but
flying to the mercy and rich grace and pity of God, as David does here: Be
merciful to m^, O God. 2. When all men and means do fail us, and we see none
but w^lves and lions re^dy to devour us, there is hope of help in Gods mercy;
Be merciful to me, O God, for man would swallow (...) up. 3. Continued
tentations and renewed dangers, do over-set the strength of a f^ail man, till
he go to God to have relief from the tentation, or new strength; He fighting
daily oppresses me. 4. Whatsoever inconveniences the godly do fall into by
flying from persecution, they are all charged justly upon the Persecutor, and
the chief Authors of their ^ouble: He fighting daily oppresses m^; ^aith David
of Saul, who d^ave him to these straits. 5. Bloody persecutors follow hard
after the chase of Gods servants, without intermission, as dogs o^ lions do
their prey, with as great desire to have their blood, as hungry beasts have
after their food; Mine enemies would daily swallow m^ up. 6. One ringleader in
the persecution of the godly, will ^inde a multitude to run with him; Many are
they the fight against me. 7. There is one above all, who can and will take
order with all the enemies of his people, who only can ca^ their hearts, when
they do complain of their foes: Many are they that fight against me, O thou
most High.

Ver. 3. What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.

4. In God I will praise his word, in God I have put my trust, I will not fear
what flesh can do unto me.

Here faith gets the victory, by setting Gods Word against all difficulties,
within or without him, whereupon he desi^th what man can do unto him. Whence
learn, 1. Albeit the godly be not so stout in their trials, as not to feel
their own infirmity, or not to be afraid, yet they are kept from fainting in
their fear, by faith in God; What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. 2.
Albeit faith does not always put forth it self, yet when fear does assault
most, then faith in God does most evidently manifest its force; for then
especially by directing of the man's eye toward God, it setleth a troubled
mind, strengthens weak courage, and ^elieveth the ^ppressed he^rt; What time
I am afraid, I will trust in the^. 3. The experience of the sweet fruit of
faith endeareth the Lord ^o a soul, and strengthens a man to the employing of
faith come what can come, as Da^ids affectionate resolution here teaches us:
What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. 4. ^aith grows valian^ in fight;
albeit it begin like a coward, and stagger in the first conflict, yet it
grows stout, incontinent, and pulls its adversa^ies under ^oot; In God I have
put my trust, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. 5. When faith
prevails, fear cease, and all opposition of enemies is de^pised; I will not
^ear what flesh can do unto me. 6. The best hold that faith can have of God, is
to take him by his Word, however his dispensation seem to be, this will give
satisfaction at length, for, In God I will praise his Word, is as much as,
albeit he withhold comfort and deliverance from me, that I cannot find what I
would, yet let me have his Word, and I will give him the glory of all his
attributes.

Ver. 5. Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for
evil.

6. They gather themselves together: they hide themselves, they mark my steps
when they wait for my soul.

His second conflict is with the malice of his crafty and cruel enemies: of
whom he complains that they misconstrued his actions, words and deeds, as
smelling only of t^eason and rebellion, whether he stayed in the country, or
^led out of it, and whatsoever expressions ^ell from him at any time for his
own clearing, all was wrested to another meaning. 2. They devised each of them
how to b^ing mischief upon him. 3. What they could not make out severally, they
sought to ripen by consulting one with another. 4. They covered all their plots
with fair pretenses, and dissembled their intentio^s. 5. They observed
narrowly every one of his steps, to make out something against him by their
observations, for which it might seem justice to kill him. 6. They thought to
double out their course, by more and more iniquity against him, for which he
prays the Lord to execute justice against them Whence lea^n, 1. Le^ the godly
say or do whatsoever they can, how justly, how innocently soever they carry
themselves, yet their adversari^s will pu^ another ^ace upon their words and
deeds, then what is right; E^ry day they wrest my words. 2. The (...) of Gods
people do spend their wits in devising some h^me or other against them; All
their thoughts are against me for ^il. 3. What the wicked cannot make out
against the godly by themselves severally, they labor to make out by mutual
counsel and concurrence; They gather themsel^s together. 4 Though the wicked
^veal themselves one to another in their pl^ts and designs against the godly,
yet before others they use to put (...) v^ile over their malice, and some fai^e
pretense what they mind to do; They hide themsel^es. 5. ^he wicked take
occasion of forging their (...) from observation of some passage of the
carriage of the godly, that they may make them odious, and cut them off* They
mark my steps, they wait for my soul.

Ver. 7. Shall they escape by iniqui^y? in thine anger cast down the people, O
God?

The second victory of faith, is in his f^ht of the punishment of his enemies
(...), (...) they f^ared no such thing. When^ learn, (...). Sinn^s see no way
to hide the mischief of their actions, save by ^ing more mischief, and in
special by colou^ing their (...) with calumni^ against the persons whom they
inju^e, and by p^etending law for what they do; They think ^o es^pe by
iniquity. 2. Howsoever the wicked may by their (...) p^etences deceive their
own eyes, and others like themselves, and so escape man's punishment, yet shall
they not eschew the vengea^e of God, but rather be so much the more liable unto
it, as they d^ multiply iniquity, to hide i^iquity; Shall the es^ape b^ their
iniquity* cast them down. 3 Neither high place, nor in (...) o^ people
following wicked men in an evil course against Gods se^vants, shall save them
from the wrath of God* I^ t^ine ang^r cast d^wn the people, O ^od.

Ver. 8. Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my tears into thy ^ottle: are
they not in thy book?

The third Conflict, wh^ (...) lay^th ou^ his (...) condition before (...) hope
to (...) p^y (...) l^rn, 1. When says h^th g^tten victo^y* (...) will find
n^w assaults: though (...) ove^om a ten^ation, the I (...) will make he^d a
gain; though faith overcame one (...) another wi^ ente^ the lists, and set ^n,
as conflict (...) conflict her^ m^keth evident. 2. Many a tear may the g^ly
sh^d before their trial be ended, when once it is begun, and many un^uth paths
may they (...), who are forced to fly the cruelty of (...), before they sin^e
r^st; multitude of wandering^ had David, and large measure of tears shed he,
before he was delive^ed. 3. The looking back upon many and long continued
troubles, being lai^ together in a heap, or put in order one after another, do
muster terribly, and make a great assault against (...) man's faith and
patience, as he^e the multitude of David's wande^ings and (...) did show
th^mselves together before him. 4. God has so great comp^ssion on his servants
in trouble, that he does (...) ^ven the st^ps of (...) wande^ing and pilgrim
(...)* ^d do^ number all their teare^, and keep the count thereof, as it were
in a registe^, and the^fore every (...) of G^, when they l^k upon their
sufferings, should look up ^n God al^o, taking as particular notice of their
(...), a^ (...) themselves ^n do: Thou t^llest my wanderings, put thou (...)
^to ^y ^ottle, are (...) no^ in thy book*

Ver. 9. Wh^ I ^ry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know,
for God is for me

10. In God will I praise his word: in the Lord will I praise his word.

11. In God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.

The third and complete victory of faith. Now he is confident to ^ut all his
enemies by prayer, and t^ (...) all (...) by faith in Gods W^d. Wh^nce learn,
1. (...) fo^th our c^s and (...) G^d in p^ye, is a way t^ g^ (...) satisfactory
delivery by faith, before the bo^ly (...) d^ ^me; When I cry unto thee, then
shall mine enemi^ turn back. 2. ^aith g^eth upon solid grounds* and is not a
fallible (...): but a sure knowledge; This I know* says he. 3 A ^ciled m^n
praying to God in a goo^ cause, for victo^y ov^ his (...), may be a slu^ that
God will own his quarrel^ and give him the victory; This I know, because God is
for me. 4. The special att^ibute of God, wherewith faith does meet, and whereby
it attaineth un^o rest and contentment in God, is his truth and fid^lity in his
promi^s: In God I will praise his W^d; albeit there be no appearance of
pe^ormance, Gods Word is sure enough to ^ix upon. 5. The grounds of (...) a^e
the more sweet and satisfactory, the more they be examined and looked upon, and
compared with their effect^; for David is not content once to say, In God I
will praise his Word; but with comfort and confiden^e renews the (...) of
Gods Word, and the benefit he has by it; I will not be afraid what man can do
unto me. 6. As it is necessary for our justifi^tion to believe in God; so is it
necessary for our (...) to ^bserve that we have believed; for then may we
promi^e to ou^ selves all the blessedness which b^longs to the believer: In God
I have put my trust, I will not be af^aid; f^r when we thus r^solutely do set
to ou^ ^eal to G^ds truth, (...)* and (...) our believing: then he (...) his
seal^ to (...), in com^ting and relieving us.

Ver. 12. Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praise unto thee.

13. For the have delivered m^ soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my f^t
^om ^lling? that I may walk before God in the light of the li^ing.

In the latter part of the Psalm, having now obtained delivery in his spirit
by faith, he obliges himself to thankfulness, wishing to be preserved and
enabled of God for that end. Whence learn, 1. As God pu^ the duty of glorifying
him upon the supplicant, when he promises delivery to him: so may the
supplicant put the obligation of glorifying God upon himself, when he is
praying for delivery out of his trouble, as David gives us to understand he
did, while he says, Thy vows are upon me. 2. An honest heart is no l^e
de^rous to perform the duty of praise to God alter delivery, then he was ready
to make his vow and promise before his delivery, yea the conscience of the
twofold obligation, is a burden upon his spirit, till he go about the payment
of his twi^ due d^bt; Thy (...) are upon me, O God I will render praise^ to
thee. 3. As deep dangers do serve to discover our weakness, and our need of
Gods help: so a well-seen danger makes clear the greatness of the delivery;
and the greatness of the delivery deciphers the wisdom, power and goodness of
God to us, and of our obligation unto him; I will render praises unto thee, for
thou have delivered my soul from death. 4. The right use of bypast dangers and
deliveries, is to prepare for new dangers and difficulties, (for when one
danger is past, all perils are n^ past,) and to ^enounce our own wisdom and
strength as insufficient to preserve us from ruin either of soul or body, and
to give up our selves to Gods guiding and presrvation, and to depend upon God,
and steadfastly to hope to be directed and preserved by him, all this is
imported in David's words; Thou have delivered my soul from death, will thou not
preserve my feet from falling? 5. The end of our desires to have deliveries and
ben^its from God, should be, that we may spend our life, and the gifts bestowed
upon us sincerely in the service of God, for the edification of his people;
Will thou not preserve my feet from falling? that I may walk before God in the
light of the living.

PSALM. LVII. To the chief Musician Al-taschith, Michtam of David, when he fled
from Saul in the ^ve.
THis Psalm of David, as many other his Psalms, does represent the condition
of his spirit, both in the time of his trouble, and after the delivery: what
was his exercise in the Cave, and what was his condition after he was delivered
out of that danger, whereof we read, 1 Samuel 24. There are two parts of the
Psalm, the first contains his prayer for deliverance, which is pressed by
six arguments, all serving to strengthen his faith; the first, because he
trusted in God, ver. 1. The second, because he resolved to insist in prayer
till he were heard, ver. 2. The third, because he hoped certainly to find
notable delivery from this extraordinary danger, ver. 3. The fourth, because
his enemies were beastly cruel, ver. 4. The fifth, because this mercy might
contribute much to the glorifying of God, ver. 5. The sixth is, from the low
condition whereunto his spirit is brought, by their crafty and cruel pursuit of
him, ver. 6. In the rest of the Psalm is his thanksgiving, consisting of five
parts; The first is the acknowlegement of the mercy and delivery granted, ver.
6. The next is his fixed re^olution to praise God for it, ver. 7. The third is
the upsti^ring of tongue and hand, and the whole man to praise God, ver. 8. The
fourth is a promise to transmit the knowledge of Gods mercy unto other Nations,
ver. 9. The fifth is the acknowledgement of the glory of this mercy, with a
wish that it might be more and more seen and acknowledged by giving new
experience of it, ver. 10, 11.

From the Inscription, Learn, The godly may be involved in a deadly danger (as
David was when he ^led from Saul in the Cave) and yet not perish. Now he was as
a man ready to be buried quick; for the Cave was as a g^ave, and the army o^
Saul at the mouth of the Cave, was as the gravestone; let then the army of
Saul know only that he is there, and keep him in, and he is gone; yet God
blinded them, brought David out, and so delivered him.

Ver. 1. BE merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts
in thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these
calamities be overpast.

From his prayer for deliverance, and first argument taken from his trusting in
God, (...), 1. The only refuge of a man in trouble, is the mercy of the Lord;
be it sin, be it misery, be it peril or pressing evil; in mercy only is the
relief of one and all sad conditions: and in this case must a soul double its
petition in the Lords bosom; Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me. 2.
As it is not trouble simply which makes prayer to be fervent, but solid faith
pressed with trouble, which doubleth petitions unto God: so where faith in
trouble flies unto God, it cannot but speed; ^e merciful, O God, for I trust
in thee. The (...) o^ the reason is, the Lord cannot forsake the soul which
has committed it self to him. 3. The Lord offe^eth relief and protection in
Christ to miserable sinners, in as warm a manner as the similitude of a hen
gathering her chickens, or the type of the stretching of the wings of the
Cherubims about the Mercy-seat could express; and says does creep no less
wa^y in unto this offer in time of straits, then this similitude does impor^;
yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge. 4. The use of Gods
protection and warm love, is best known in time of trouble, and faith also is
best set on work, to make use of Gods love and protection in time of troubles:
In the s^a ^ow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until th^se calamities be
overpast.

ver. 2. I will cry unto God most High: unto God that performs all things for
me.

From the second argument which he uses for strengthening his faith; Learn. 1.
Faith in God and invocation of his name, are g^s inseparable; and resolution to
persevere in believing is unseparable from resolution to persevere in praying
unto God: and he that finds in his heart such resolutions, may also be
confident to speed in his requests made to God: for the Psalmist, as he did
resolve to believe in the former verse: so here he adds, I will cry unto God:
and hereby expects that God shall be merciful (...) him. 2. It is needful
for the supplicant in his st^aits, to keep in his fight the Lords Supremacy and
Omnipotency, for incomaging himself in hope to speed; I will cry to God most
High, says he 3. The consideration of the Lords constant going on in the
perfecting of the work of grace, which once he begins graciously in us or
for us, does serve much to strengthen our faith in prayer: I will cry to God
who performs all things for me.

Ver. 3. He shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him that
would swallow me up. Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his truth.

From the third argument and prop of his prayer, taken from his hope to be
helped; Learn, 1. Albeit faith be no help on earth, yet it looks for help in
heaven; and if ordinary means do fail, it assures it self of Gods working
wonders, for perfecting of his promises; He shall send from heaven, and save
me. 2. The godly man's making God his refuge, is a matter of m^king to the
wicked; which mocking God will certa^nly refute, by making the godly find the
fruit of their flying to him; he will s^e me from the reproach of him that
would swallow me up. 3. The mercy and truth of God, whereupon faith does six it
self, do remove all impediments, and s^ on w^k all the m^ans of the salvation
of the beleev^, and that ^tually: God shall send forth his mercy and his truth.

Ver. 4. My soul is among lions, and I li^ even among them that are set on
fire: even the sons of men: whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their
tongue a sharp sword

From the fourth reason of his prayer taken from the beastly cruely of his
enemies; Learn, 1. The condition of the people of the Lord in this world may be
o^-times like sheep in pe^l of their lives, compassed about with ^nous beasts;
My soul is among ^ions. 2. Yet, they may be so desolate, as having no
assistance from without themselves to fly or fight, they shall be forced like
d^rned birds, chased by the hawke; or like bound sheep, to clap close down to
the ground: I lie, says he, among them. 3. The desolate condition of the
godly, does not move their persecu^s to pity: deadly malice is most ready then
to break forth, and to devour; I lie even among them that are set on fire. 4.
G^acelesse men destitute of the ^e of God, are sit enough instruments for the
persecution of Gods children, and his (...) servants; if they be no more, but
yet in nature, even the children of men. 5. The slanders, mockings, lies,
calumnies, reproaches and aspersions cast upon the godly by godless men, are
no little part of their cruel persecution, of cutting and piercing the Lords
people very deeply: whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a
sharp sword.

Ver. 5. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above all
the earth.

From the fifth reason of his pe^ition; Learn, 1. When the godly are born down,
and the wicked do ca^y all matters before them, the glory of the Lord is
obscured and eclipsed in some sort among men, therefore says he; Be thou
exalted, O God. 2. In what measure Gods children are helped by him, and his
enemies are born down; in that measure is be gloriously manifested to be the
ruler of heaven and earth; Be thou exalted abo^ the heavens, and t^y glory
above all the earth. 3. However the wicked do obscure the glory of the Lord,
and how little evidence soever Gods children do see of his appearing for their
relief, yet they ought to glorify him in their heart, and not only believe
his sovereigne power, able to set all things in order; but also to profess
their hope, that he shall manifest himself from heaven, to be Lord over all his
enemies and adversary powers of the world; Be thou exalted above the heavens,
and thy glory abo^ all the earth.

Ver. 6. They have prepared a net for my steps, my soul is bowed down: they
have dug a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are fallen themselves.
Selah.

From the last reason of his! supplication, Learn, 1. Great slight and subtilty
do the wicked use to overtake the godly in some sna^e, one or other; They have
prepared a net for my steps. 2. The godly man's strength will soon ^ail him in
time of straits if the Lord do not give supply; yea, the Lord for the clearer
manifestation of his glory, both before the godly and before the wicked also,
does suffer his children to come to so low a condition of spirit, that they are
ready to succumbe, if he do not help; My soul (...) bowed down. 3. When the
enemies are at the highest of their plots, and the godly at the lowest step of
their humiliation, then is the Lords time to turn the chase, and to fall upon
his enemies, and that often times by that same very means whereby they were about
to make all fast for their own power, and the oppression of the godly; They
have dug a pit before me, in the midst whereof they are fallen themselves.
And this last sentence is the first part of his thanksgiving, in acknowledging
the Lords wonderful mercy and justice, in changing up-side down the seals of
his low condition, and the enemies lofty persecution on a sudden.

Ver. 7. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
praise,

In the rest of the Psalm he prosecureth his thanksgiving, and this is the
second put of it, wherein he professes his fixed purpo^e to praise the Lord
for his delivery: Whence learn, 1. Renewed sense of Gods favor, and fresh
experience of his mercy toward his children, and of his justice against his
and their enemies, does much refresh, quiet, and settle the hearts of his
people, and confirm their faith; My heart is fixed. 2. It is a part of our
thanksgiving unto God, to acknowledge the fruit of his gracious working for us,
felt upon our spirits, whenever our hearts are cheared up by him, after any
sad exercise My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed. 3. As it is needful
to labor on the heart, that it may be fitted and prepared, fixed and bended
for Gods worship: so in special, for the work of praise, whereunto naturally we
are most dull and indisposed; then shall the work go on more cheerfully: My
heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise.

Ver. 8. Awake up, my glory: awake, psaltery and harp; I my self will awake
early.

From the third part of this thanksgiving, wherein he stirs up himself by all
means within and without himself, to set forth his sense of Gods mercy, and of
Gods glory in bestowing of it; Learn, 1. A well-imployed tongue for praising of
God, and edifying others, is indeed a man's commendation, and glory above other
creatures: Therefore David directing his speech toward his tongue, after the
manner of Orators affectionate speaking, says, Awake, my glory. 2. Albeit the
abolition of the Ceremonial Law has taken away the room, which musical
instruments once had in the stately, public, instituted worship of God in the
congregation, yet neither is the natural private use thereof taken away, nor
the signification of that typical ordinance to be forgotten, to wit, that we of
our selves a^ dull and unapt to holy things and that the Lords praises are
above our power to reach unto them or express them: and that we should stir up
all the faculties of our soul unto this holy service, as David here insinuatech
to be the moral signification thereof; for after he has said, Awake, Psaltery
and Harp, he subjoyneth, I my self will awake. 3. As he who in earnest is
wakened up to glorify and praise God, will find himself short in abilities to
discharge this work of praise: so will he find the choicest time of the day,
when the body is best refreshed, most deservedly bestowed upon this exercise: I
my self will awake early.

Ver. 9. I will praise thee, O LORD, among the People; I will sing unto thee
among the nations.

From the fourth part of his thanksgiving, wherein he promises to let all the
world know the mercy bestowed upon him; Learn, 1. The Spirit of God, who
indicted this Scripture, made his Penman know, that the Gentiles should have
the use of his Psalms, I will praise thee amongst the People. 2 David was a
type of Christ in sufferings, exercises spiritual, and in receiving of
deliveries; for this promise is fulfilled in Christ, and this undertaking is
applied unto Christ, Rom 15. 9. 3. Then do we seriously mind the praise of
God, when according to our place we labor to make others also know God, as we
know him: I will praise thee among the People.

Ver. 10. For thy mercy is great unto the Heavens, and thy truth unto the
clouds.

11. Be thou exalted, O God, above the Heavens: let thy glory be above all the
earth.

From the last part of his thanksgiving, wherein he confesses that the
excellency of the glory of God does transcend his reach and capacity, and that
he can follow it no further then by wishing the Lord to glorify himself;
Learn, 1. The matter of the joy of the Saints, and of their sweettst Songs, is
the goodness of God, which appointed and promised such and such mercies unto
them: and the faithfulness of God, which does bring to pass his gracious
purpose and promises made unto them; For thy mercy is great, and thy truth,
says he. 2. There is no possibility of taking up the greatness of Gods mercy
and truth, they reach so far as our sight cannot overtake them; Thy mercy is
great unto the Heavens, where mortal eyes cannot come to see what is there: And
thy truth unto the clouds, through which man's eye cannot pierce. 3. Seeing the
Lords glory is greater then heaven or earth can contain, and God himself only
can manifest his own glory; it is our part when we have said all we can, for
glorifying of God, to pray him to glorify himself, and to make it appear to
all that his glory is greater then heaven or earth can comprehend; Be thou
exalted above the Heavens, and let thy glory be above all the earth.

PSALM. LVIII. To the chief Musician Al-^, Michtam of David.
THE Psalmist being opp essed by the calumnies of the Courtiers ^t King Saul,
and by the Sen^tors of the Courts of Justice, who should have provided against
the oppression of the subjects, charge them in the first part of this Psalm,
as must guilty of injustice done to him, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. In the second
part, he prays against them, that God would execute judgment upon them, ver.
6, 7, 8. And in the third part, he pronounces the sentence of their deserved
destruction, ver. 9, 10, 11. From this experience of the Propher, we may see
what strong Parties, and hard opposition the godly may meet with in the defense
of a good cause, and how necessary it is in such trials to exercise our faith,
and to exalt God above all opposite powers, that we may be borne out, and get
consolation and victory in the Lord.

Ver. 1. DO ye indeed speak righteousness, O Congregation? do ye judge
uprightly, Oye sons of men.

2. Yes, in heart you work wickedness: you weigh the violence of your hands in
the earth.

3. The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be
borne, speaking lies.

4. Their poison is like the poison of a serpent, they are like the deaf Adder,
that stops her ear.

5. Which will not hearken to the voice of Charmers, charm never so wisely.

In the first part he ch^rgeth the Council and Senate, or Congregation of the
Judges; first, for not giving out righteous decrees or sentences, ver. 1.
Secondly, for their resolved, violent, oppressing decrees, ver. 2. Thirdly, for
their inveterate wickedness, and falsehood from the womb, ver. 3. Fourthly,
for their incorrigible wickedness, which they will not for any admonition or
advertisement amend, ver. 4, 5. Whence learn, 1. There is a Congregation of
Rulers, whose office it is to administer justice to the people; who presuppose
they be the supreme Court in authority and place, above the body of the people;
yet are they subject to Gods challenge, which he does send unto them by the
hand of his messengers, when they do wrong, as here we see; Do ye indeed speak
righteousness, O Congregation? 2. When the just cause of the righteous comes
before the Judge, whosoever be pursuer, were he as great a Party as King Saul
pursuing David, the Judge should defend the righteous and absolve him, without
fearing man's face: and if he do not, he shall be called to a reckoning for it
before God: Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men? 3. The Lord locketh to the
affections, purposes and conclusions of a man's he^tt, and what ill turn a man
is resolved to do, for that is a done work before God: and the man is so much
the more guilty, as his sin is deliberate: (...), in heart you work
wickedness. 4. A wicked Judge does not stand to give out a decree for as much
opp^ession as he is able to put in execution: You weigh the violence of your
hands in the earth; and when he is thus oppressing men, he will labor to seem
to make his decree no less agreeable to the law, then the equal scales of the
Merchants balance do in a just weight answer one to another; You weigh the
violence of your hands. 5. An unrenewed man is a born stranger to God, to good
men, and all goodness; The wicked are estranged from the womb. 6. Men^ wicked
actions do prove the wickedness of nature, or men's original sin does augment
the ditty and condemnation of unrenewed men for their actual sins: They are
estranged from the womb, is made here a part of their challenge. 7. Error,
falsehood and lies are kindly sins to men, they break out early, and continue
long, and do draw on guiltiness the longer, the more; They go astray as soon as
they be borne, speaking lies. 8. There is as great natural enmity in the wicked
against the godly, as there is in serpents against mankind, and they are as
ready to vent their deadly hatred against them, as serpents are to spue forth
their deadly venom: Their poison is like the poison of a serpent. 9. That
which fills up the measure of the sins of the wicked is this, they are
obdured in their sins, they are incorrigible, and will not receive instruction,
admonition or correction from the Word of God: They are like the deaf Adder
that stops her ear. 10. Albeit holy Scripture uses to compare the best
things in some points unto the worst things, for clearing the purpose in hand
by a similitude, yet does it not therefore justify the wicked thing, by
borrowing a similitude from it, as here the admonition and reproof of sinners
is compared to charming of an Adder, and yet for that comparison the damnable
sin of charming is not the less damnable; nor is the duty of reproof and
admonition of sinners the worse, or less laud^ble for the comparison, for it
is a challenge: They are like the deaf Adder that stops her ear, which will
not hearken unto the charmer, charming never so wis^ly.

Ver. 6. Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth: break out the great teeth of
the young lions, O LORD.

7. Let them melt away as waters which run continually: When he bends his
bow to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.

8. As a snaile which melts, let every one of them pass away: like the
untimely birth of a woman that they may not see the Sun.

In the second part of the Psalm he makes imprecation against them, by
special warrant of the Spirit of God, who endited this Psalm unto him, that
judgment might be executed against them unto destruction. Whence learn, 1. The
Lord shall in due time disable the wicked from doing the harm they intend to
do against Gods people; for this prayer is a prophecy and promise to the
Churches comfort: Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth. 2. Were the wicked
never so potent and resolute to execute their cruelty, God shall break their
power in pieces: Break out the great teeth of the young Lions, O Lord. 3. When
once God enters in judgment with the enemies of his people, he shall bring
upon them a constant daily consumption and wasting of their power and abilities
till they be abolished: Let them melt away like water that runs continn^lly. 4.
The chief plots of the wicked shall miscar^y in the very point of their putting
them in execution: When he bends his bow to shoot his arrows, let them be
as cut in pie^es. 5. How strong soever the foundation of the enterprises of the
wicked against the godly seem to themselves to be, yet the event shall prove
them to be weak, seeble and effectlesse devices: As a snaile which melts let
them pass away, at the untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the
Sun.

Ver. 9. Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as
with a whirlwinde, both living and in his wrath.

10. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked.

11. So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous:
Verily he is a God that judges in the earth.

In the last part of the Psalm he pronounces the sentence of dese^ved
destruction upon the wicked and unrighteous Potentates, oppressors of the
godly, as an answer from God to the (...) imprecation against them, and that
for the consolation of the godly, and clea^ing of Gods justice among men.
Whence learn, 1 Howsoever the ungodly do hope to make themselves good cheer by
their works of iniquity, and do rejoice a while in their ^opes, yet before they
find any ripe satisfaction by their ill deeds, suddenly are they destroyed,
and as it were swallowed up quick, and taken away by the fierce wrath of God
against them: Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as
with a whirlewinde, both living and in his wrath. 2. It is lawful for the godly
to rejoice in Gods justice against the obstinate enemies of his people:
provided their joy be indeed in Gods justice, not in the destruction of the
creature; but in the manifestation of Gods just avenging hand: The righteous
shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance. 3. The punishment of the wicked
should reach the Lo^ds people to be more holy in all their ways, for this is
one of the ends of Gods punishing the wicked in their sight; The righteous
shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. 4. When the Lord executes
judgment against the wicked, then men who knew not what to think of Gods
providence, when they saw the godly oppressed, and the wicked high in power
shall come to a ^ight judging of matters: So that a man s^all say, Verily there
is a reward for the righteous. 5. No man serves God for naught, in following
the course of friendship with G^d, and walking in obedience unto him, fruit
certainly will be found. Verily there is a reward for the righteous, 6. Albeit
the Lord does not set down his Court for executing (...) ^o soon as men would,
yet he fails not to show himself Ru^ of the affairs of m^n; and a right^ous
Judge, as to relieve the opp^d, so also to take order with oppressors: Verily
he is (...) God that judges in the earth.

PSALM. LIX. (...) the chief Musi^n Al (...), (...) of David: when Saul sent,
and (...) watch't the house to kill him.
DAvid in present (...) of his life by Saul, (who having Da^ inclos^d within
(...) City and within his own house, t^ht surely to have killed him, as we
read, 1 Samuel 19. 11.) he p^ayeth to God for deliv^rance, ver. 1, 2. and for a
^eason of his praye^, make^h a ^mplaint against his enemies, ver. 3, 4. In the
next place, ^e prays the second time for delivery to himself, and judgment
against his enemies, ver. 5. and complains of them the second time, ver. 6,
7. In the third place, he decl^eth his confidence to be delivered, ver. 8, 9,
10. In the fourth place, he makes imprecation against his enemies for their
wickedness, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And in the last place, he promi^eth
thanks to God for his delivery, whereof he was assu^ed before it came, ver. 16,
17.

From the Inscription, Learn, 1. No common bands of nature or civil relations
can secure the godly from the pe^secution of the wicked; for Saul, David's
father in law sends to kill David. 2. Gods children cannot be in so great
straits, nor the diligence of the wicked be so great to overtake the godly in a
strait, but God can deliver a supplicant; They watched the house to kill him,
yet he escaped and did write this Psalm: by what means he escaped he does not
tell here, for he att^ibuteth the delivery to God, from whom he did seek it by
prayer.

Ver. 1. DEliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise
up against. me.

2. Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men.

From his prayer; Learn, 1. Whatsoever means God shall offer for escaping out
of a trouble, Prayer is our best weapon against our enemies, and the best of
all means, and ^st of all to be used for a delivery; Deliver me from mine
enemies. 2. Time of trouble and difficulty does put believers to make use of
the Covenant of grace, and of Gods friendship and power for their deliverance;
O my God, defend me from them that rise up against me. 3. When wicked, and
powerful, and blood-thirsty men do turn Persecutors of the godly, no power but
divine can be looked unto for a relief; Deliver me from the workers of
iniquity, and save me from bloody men.

Ver. 3. For ^o, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered against
me, not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord.

4. They run and prepare themselves without my fault: awake to help me, and
behold.

From his complaint against his enemies, and reason of his prayer; Learn, 1.
Desperate-like dangers arising from the power and craftiness of enemies, must
not discourage the godly, but sharpen their prayer to God, with whom is power
and wisdom to deliver them: For ^o, they lie in wait for my soul. 2. It is no
new thing, to see them who are in greatest power, to be the chief in the
persecution of Gods children; The mighty are gathered together against me. 3. A
good conscience, especially in the particular for which a man is pursued,
gives greatest comfort in the time of trouble; Not for my transgression, nor
my sin, O Lord. 4. Albeit the Persecutors of the godly cannot find a fault in
them, for which they may pursue them. yet will they devise some challenge, and
make a great business to accomplish their design; They run and prepare
themselves, not for my fault. 5. The Lord will let the plot go on, and the
danger of the godly grow, as if he minded not to take notice of it, that he may
first put his children to prayer, and then appear in the fit time: Awake to
help me, and behold.

Ver. 5. Thou therefore, O LORD God of hosts, the God of Israel, awake to
visit all the heathen: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors. Selah.

6. They return at evening, they make a noise like a dog, and go round about
the City.

7. Behold, they belch out with their mouth, swords are in their lips: for who,
say they, does hear?

From his repeated prayer and complaint presented the second time; Learn, 1.
In time of straits we should set our eyes most upon those styles of God, which
most serve to strengthen our faith, especially such as hold forth his power and
good will to employ his power for us; Thou therefore, O Lord God of hosts, the
God of Israel, awake. 2. Counterfeit Professors, and professed Pagans are all
one before God in effect, and the counterfeit Professor will be as ready an
instrument to persecute the godly as a professed enemy; for so is Saul and his
followers named here; Awake to visit all the Heathen. 3 Although the Lord bear
with the wicked a while, he will at last take order with hypocrites, and
obstinately malicious transgressors; Awake to visit all the Heathen, be not
merciful to any wicked transgressor. 4. From the time that Persecutors have
once resolved cruelty, they cease not to pursue their purpose, but like bloody
dogs they run to and fro till they catch their prey; they are busy all the
day, and set watches in the night to hurt the man they would have; They return
at evening, they make a noise like a dog, and go round about the City. 5.
Resolved obstinacy in sin takes away all remorse of conscience, all fear of
God, and shame before men, and makes men openly avow their wickedness; yea
and their cruel hearts will vent their bloody purpose, when they think they are
sure to accomplish their design; Behold, they bel^h out with their mouth,
swords are in their lips; for who (say they) does hear?

Ver. 8. But thou, O LORD, shall laugh at them: thou shall have all the heathen
in derision.

9. Because of his strength will I wait upon thee: for God is my defense.

10. The God of my mercy shall prevent me: God shall let me see my desire upon
mine enemies.

In the third place, he declare^h his considence to be delivered, and does make
sweet use of his says for keeping up his heart under his trouble. Whence
learn, 1. The first f^it of an humble Prayer, is a spiritual delivery of a man's
oppressed spirit, granted to him by faith and ass^ance of an outgate, as here,
and many times elsewhere appears. 2. When faith sees God to be a friend, it
scorneth all opposition of whatsoever enemies, few or many, all is one to the
clear-sighted believer; But thou, O Lord, shall laugh at them, thou shall have
all the heathen in derision. 3. How weak soever the believer find himself, and
how powerful soever he perceive his enemy to be, it is all one to him he has
no more to do, but to put faith on work, and to wait till God work; because of
his (that is, the enemies) strength, I will wait upon thee, says he to the
Lord, for God is my defense 4 When faith gets up the head, it sees its own
deliverance, and the overthrow of the enemy, both at once in the proper cause
there (...), to wit, the fountain of overrunning mercy, engaged unto it by
Covenant; The God of my mercy. There is the (...) of ^rlasting mercy, whereof
God is called God, because he is the believers God for ever, and therefore the
God of all mercy, consolation and salvation to the believer; He (says he)
shall prevent me; that is, he shall give manifest deliverance before I succumb:
it shall come soon^ then I could set it a time. Then, for his enemies, he
says, God shall let me see upon mine enemies; to wit, what I could lawfully
desire, or what should satisfy me.

Ver. 11. Slay them not, lest my people forget: Scatter them by thy power, and
bring them down, O Lord, our shield.

12. For the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips, let them even
be taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they speak.

13. Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and let them
know that God rules in Jacob unto the ends of the earth. Selah.

14. And at evening let them return, and let them make a noise like a dog, and
go round about the City.

15. Let them wander up and down for meat: and grudge if they be not satisfied.

In the fourth place, he prays to God to glorify himself in the manner and
measure of his just judgment on his obstinate enemies; which in effect is a
Prophecy of the punishment of Persecutors of the righteous, and of the wrath to
come upon the enemies of Christ, of whom David in his trouble and unjust
sufferings was a type. Whence learn, 1. Sometime the Lord will delay the
cutting off of wicked enemies of his people, for a curse to them, and a benefit
to his people: Slay them not, left my people forget. 2. The Lords people are
subject to forget the Lords doing for them, and punishing of their enemies,
except the Lord did renew the evidence of his care he has of them, by often
renewed, or long continued judgment on their enemies, whose misery is made
more to them, by lingering judgments in the sight of men, then if they were cut
off more suddenly; Slay them not, left my people forget; 3. In praying against
our wicked enemies that persecute us, we must take heed that we be found
pleading, not our own particular revenge, but the common cause of the Church,
and the Lords quarrel; Slay them not, left my people forget; scatter and bring
them down, O Lord, our shield. It is the good of the Lords people, and the
glorifying of God which is in his eyes. 4. Albeit the Lord do not at first cut
off the troublers of his Church, but do suffer them to live for the exercise of
his people; yet it is mercy worthy to be prayed for, if God disable them, and
break their power, that they prevail not over the righteous; Scatter them by
thy power, and bring them down, O Lord, our shield. 5. Albeit the Persecutors
do not accomplish their purpose against the righteous; yet their pride, their
brags, their lies, their slanders, their curses against the godly, are a
sufficient ditty for damnation, and wrath to come upon them; For the sin of
their mouth, and the words of their lips, let them even be taken in their
pride, and for cursing and lying which they speak. 6. After the keeping alive
of the wicked for a time, to the increasing of their misery, at length utter
destruction comes upon them; Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they
may not be. 7. By the judgments of God upon the adversaries of his people, the
knowledge of his sovereignty over, and Kingly care for his Church is made more
known to the world, the increase of which glory of the Lord should be the scope
of the prayers of the Saints against their foes; And let them know that God
rules in Jacob unto the ends of the earth. 8. It is suitable to Gods justice,
and no strange thing to see such as have been messengers, servants, officers of
persecuting powers, or searchers out of the godly, as beagles or blood hounds,
to be made beggars, vagabonds, and miserable spectacles of Gods wrath before
they die, roving to and from like hungry and masterlesse dogs; At evening let
them return, and let them make a noise like a dog, and go round about the City;
let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied.

Ver. 16. But I will sing of thy power; yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy in
the morning; for thou have been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble.

17. Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing; for God is my defense, and the God
of my mercy.

In the last place, he promises thanksgiving for the mercy whith he felt in
the day of his trouble, and sixeth his faith on God, as his merciful Protector,
and only strength, whereon he was to lean in every condition where in he could
fall. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever mischief fall upon the wicked, the Lords
children whom they malign, shall have reason to rejoice and to praise God for
supporting them in their trials, and delivering of them out of toubles: But I
will sing of thy power. 2. When the godly do compare the Lords putting
difference between them and the rest of the wicked world, pitying them and
pardoning their sins, when he justly pursues the sins of others, they cannot
but rejoice and proclaim Gods mercy with earnest affection; Yea, I will sing
aloud of thy mercy in the morning. 3. The shining light of one late experience
of Gods care of a man, serves to bring to remembrance, and to illuminate the
whole course of Gods by past care, and kindness to him, and to raise a song of
joy and praise to God for altogether; For thou hist been my refuge and defense
in the day of trouble. 4. What God has been unto us (being looked on rightly)
may serve to certify us, what God is unto us, and what he shall be to us, and
what we may expect of him: For from, thou have been my defense and my refuge,
he infers hope of joyful experience of the same mercy for time to come; Unto
thee, O my strength, will I sing. 5 When a man is sure of God engaged to him by
good will and Covenant, and proof given for letting out to him protection and
mercy, as his soul needs, he cannot choose but have a heart full of joy, and
a mouth full of joyful praises unto God: Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing,
for God is my defense, and the God of my mercy.

PSALM. LX. To the chief Musician upon Shushan-Eduth Michtam of David, to teach.
When he strove with Aram Naharaim, and with Aram Zobah, when Ioab returned, and
smote of Edom in the valley of salt, twelve thousand
THis Psalm is a prayer for the victory of Israel over their enemies indicted
unto the Prophet when Israel was fighting with the Syrians and Edomites. It may
be divided into three parts; in the first whereof the Psalmist prays for help
more largely, v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 In the second part David is made confident of
the victory, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. In the third part he repeateth his prayer
more briefly, and his confidence of having the victory, ver. 11, 12.

From the Inscription; Learn, 1. The children of God must not think it
strange, to be put to wrestling, striving and fighting for a promised Kingdom,
before they be settled in possession, as David was; yea, the Church of Christ
must resolve for such like exercises; for this Psalm is given to the public
Ministers of the Church for use in all ages. 2. The Church must make use of her
prayers, as well when she is furnished with a regular army, as when she wants
bodily arms, as David teaches the Church here. 3. There is hope of victory,
when God by prayer is more relied upon, then the army in the fields; for with
the Psalm the mention of the victory of the Lords host is set down, and the
slaughter of the enemy recorded; That Ioab smote of Edom twelve thousand.

Ver. 1. O God, thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us, thou have been
displeased, O turn thy self to us again.

Of the larger prayer there are three branches; the first is for reconciliation
with God, ver. 1. The second for reparation of the decayed state of the
Kingdom, ver. 2, 3. The third for delivery and victory in the conflict with the
enemy, ver. 4, 5.

In the first branch of his prayer he acknowledges bygone judgments, as the
fruit of Gods displeasure, and of the peoples provocation of God to wrath, and
so he prays that God would turn again and be reconciled to his people. Whence
learn, 1. Terrible evils may befall the Lords people, or the visible Church,
when they by their sin do provoke him to wrath, as was seen in the time of
the Judges, and in Saul's time; O God thou have cast us off, thou have scattered
us. 2. When God does plague a whole Kingdom, or the body of the visible
Church, it is not a matter of simple exercise or trial (as when he brings
trouble on some of his dear servants, in the time of their upright carriage,)
but it is for their sins, and provocation of the eyes of his glory; Thou have
been displeased. 3. Such as would have plagues removed, must acknowledge their
sin, and seek to be reconciled with God, and in this way may they expect to
find favor; O turn thy self to us again. 4. Whatsoever sins the vi^ble Church
and incorporation of Professors have done against God, or whatsoever injuries
they have done against the godly, in assisting of persecuting powers against
them; yet the godly must not only not separate from them, but also be ready to
receive them into favor, be reconciled with them, forgive their former
injuries, join in Church and Camp-fellowship with them being reconciled, share
with them by compassion in calamities, intercede with God for them, as for
themselves, as being all of one incorporation, as David, the type of Christ's
moderate and merciful governing, and a pattern to all the godly, did forgive
those that persecuted him, fought against him under King Saul, and stood
longest out against him, when Saul was dead, for David here does say with, and
for the people; O God, thou have scattered us: O turn thy self again to us.

Ver. 2. Thou have made the earth to tremble, thou have broken it: heal the
breaches thereof, for it shakes.

3. Thou have showed thy people hard things: thou have made us to drink the
wine of astonishment.

When Saul did reign, all things went wrong, the wicked abounded, and vile men
were exalted, and God plagued the land; therefore in the second branch of his
prayer, he praye^h for restoration of the dejected state of the Kingdom: the
calamities whereof he lays forth, both before and after the petition. Whence
learn, 1. When people will not stand in awe of God, and fear him, he will
strike them with the fear of his wrath, and sense of sore judgments; Thou have
made the earth to tremble. 2. War, and in special civil and intestine war,
is most able to ruin a Kingdom, and like an earthquake to make ruptures and
breaches in it, to the renting of it in pieces: Thou have made the earth to
tremble, thou have broken it. 3. It is a Christian and royal virtue, to seek
the union of the subjects among themselves, and to remove divisions of the
Kingdom, without the removing whereof the State can never be settled: But it is
a divine power to work this union effectually: therefore does he pray to God
for it: Heal the breaches thereof, for it shakes. 4. When people will not see
nor take knowledge of their sins against God, and their obliged duties to him,
he will let them see sad spectacles of bloody wars, foreign and intestine:
Thou have shew^d thy people hard things. 5. When people have besotted
themselves in their sin, and have not believed what God has threatened against
them, no wonder they know not what hand to turn them unto, and be stricken with
astonishment in the execution of his judgments, which when they fall upon a
people, either suddenly or more heavily then they could have expected, they put
men's minds in a confusion, as if they were drunk; for sudden, sore and lasting
judgments confound the thoughts of secure sinners, so as they can make little
use of the Word of God, or of their wit, or any other means of relief, more
then a drunken man overcharged with wine; Thou have made us to drink the wine
of astonishment.

Ver. 4. Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee: that it may be
displayed, because of the truth. Selah.

5. That thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right hand, and hear me.

In the third branch of his prayer, he seeks delivery and victory over the
enemy, and that because God had begun to give some hope of changing the face of
affairs, by raising a banner in David's hand for the Lords cause and people;
Whence learn, 1. When the godly are oppressed, the truth of Religion, and of
Gods promises do lie at under, like a fallen Standard; and when God raises up
instruments of their protection and comfort, as here he did in bringing David
to the Kingdom, it is like the lifting up of an Ensign in the hand of a
valiant standard bearer; Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee. 2. It
is for the godlies cause that mercy is shown to a whole land, Thou have given a
banner to them that fear thee. 3. When the godly get up their head, all their
endeavor, according to the utmost of their power, should be to advance true
Religion and the practice of it: Thou have given a banner, that it may be
displayed, because of the truth. 4. As nothing is respected by God in a land so
much as his Elect that fear him: so nothing can encourage us to seek and hope
for me^cy to a land, so much as the Lords love to them that fear him in it:
that thy beloved may be delivered, save. 5. When God has begun to appear for
his Church, then in special should we follow a begun blessing with prayer, that
God would work out the benefit; Thou have given a banner to them that fear
thee, that thy beloved may be delivered, save. 6. Whatsoever difficulties
appear in the way of the Churches delivery, we must oppose the omnipotency of
God to them all, and sustain our faith in prayer by looking to his love toward
his Church, and power to do for her; That thy beloved may be delivered, save
with thy right hand, and hear me.

Ver. 6. God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice: I will divide
Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.

7. Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head; Judah is my Law -- giver.

In the second part of the Psalm is set down David's confidence to have the
victory over his enemies, and to have his Kingdom both settled at home, ver. 6,
7. and enlarged abroad, ver. 8, 9, 10.

By David's prayer, the word of promise that he should be established King, is
made lively unto him, whereupon he is comforted, and made confident of the
accomplishment thereof in all points; Whence learn, 1. As faith helps up
prayer, so by prayer faith is settled and strengthened, as here is evidenced. 2.
The word of promise is a more sure evidence then begun possession, for David
was not so sure of the Kingdom now, because he had begun to reign, as because
God had spoken. 3. Then is the Word of God rested on, and rejoiced in, when it
is received (...) his Word, when his holiness is taken as a pawn for
perform^nce; God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice. 4. Whatsoever
rests unperfected, of what is promised to us by God, shall be fully put in
our possession, as David here assures himself, to exercise the supreme
government in those parts of his Kingdom, on the one, or other side of Jordan,
which yet were not brought unto subjection, or settled under him; I will divide
Sh^hem, and mete out the valley of Succoth, etc. 5. Whatsoever strength or
increase of number the Kingdom of Israel was to have from the plurality of
Tribes, and their strength, yet the union of the sons of Abraham, and
stability of the Kingdom of Israel, consisted in their joint subjection to the
Lawgiver, and government of Judah, out of which Tribe Christ came, who is the
true Lawgiver and King of Israel, toward whom the Church of old was to direct
their eye, through their typical governors, Judah is my Law giver.

Ver. 8. Moab is my Washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia
triumph thou because of me.

9. Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?

10. Wilt not thou, O God, which had cast us off? and thou, O God, which
did not go out with our armies?

Here he is assured by the Lords word, not only of the establishment of his
Kingdom at home, but also of the enlarging of it abroad, by the subduing of
such as had been enemies to Israel before. Whence learn, 1. When the Lord does
unite his people under the government of Judah, and gives them grace to take
the true Ruler of the Tribe of Judah for their Lawgiver, then shall the
enemies of Israel be brought low, and either used contemptibly, as they did
sometimes use the Lords people, or else shall profess themselves happy in
their subjection to the King of Israel; for after that David, as the type of
Christ, had endited a Song to the Church, wherein they should acknowledge Judah
their Lawgiver, then he as the type of Christ, does give them to sing this
also; Moab is my washpot, that is, Moab shall serve me in the basest service I
shall put them unto; Over Edom will I cast out my shoe, that is, I shall subdue
them, and trample them under my feet as I pass through them; Philistia triumpb
thou, because of me; that is, instead of thy triumphing over my people; thou
shall be made to profess thy joy, to be under my government. 2. The believer
when he promises to himself great things, must neither be senseless of the
difficulties of opposition which he is to meet with, nor of his own inability
to overcome difficulties, but being sensible of both must look to God for
assistance, and furniture to overcome; for when David considered the strength
of the senced royal Cities of the enemy, he says, Who will bring me into the
strong city? Who will lead me in^o Edom? Wilt not thou O God? 3. It is Gods
absence from, or gracious presence with a people, which makes the success of
the wars of his people against their enemies worse or better, and their bad
success in former time, or bypast judgments on them; for sin must be so
far from marring the confidence of a people turning home to God, and seeking
to find help from him, that on the contrary, the judgments inflicted upon
them in their impenitency, serving for confirmation of the threatenings of Gods
Word, and evidence of his justice, must be made arguments of confirmation of
faith in Gods promises, of merciful assistance, when they are turned toward
God; for so reasons David, Who will bring me into Edom? Wilt not thou, O God,
which had cast us off, and thou, O God, which did not go out with our
armies?

Ver. 11. Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

12. Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall pull down our
enemies.

In the last part he briefly resumeth his prayer, and confidence to be heard;
Whence learn, 1. The certainty of hope should not make us the more slack, but
rather the more earnest and servent in prayer, for after this professed
assurance, David insisteth in prayer; Give us help from trouble. 2. Seeing God
only is the strength and furniture of his people, and he cannot endure that
they should rely upon any means, which they may and must use, but upon himself
only; Therefore the less confidence we put in the creature, the more may we
be confident of help from God; Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help
of man. 3. A self-denying and humbled believer may go with courage and hope of
success to the use of the means, and may encounter with whatsoever opposition
of enemies; Through God we shall do valiantly. 4. The praise of valor and
gallant^y of victorious soldiers must not be parted betwixt God and the
victour: but whatsoever God does in us, or by us, must be no less wholly
ascribed unto God, then if he had done all the work without us; for both the
valor of the instrument, and the victory are the works of the Lord, the
motions of body and soul of the victor are the work and upstirring of God
within him, and the operation and effects wrought by the instrument, are the
works of God, without the victor; for he it is that shall tread down our
enemies.

PSALM. LXI. To the chief Musician upon Neginah, A Psalm of Devid.
DAvid now in his exile makes his address to God in (...) sad condition, ver.
1, 2, 3. And is comforted in the Lord, and persuaded of his present and future
happiness, ver. 4, 5. And of the perpetuity of the Kingdom of Christ,
represented by him, to the comfort of all Christ's subjects in all ages, ver. 6,
7, 8.

Ver. 1. HEar my cry, O God: attend unto my prayer.

2. From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is
overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher then I.

3. For thou have been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy.

(...) In his sad supplicication he prays for a comfortable receiving of his
request, and for a comfortable rest of his soul on God himself through Christ,
hoping to be heard, because he was resolved to look toward God, and to continue
praying, whatsoever condition of spirit he should be in, and in whatsoever part
he should be; and also because he had experience of Gods help in his straits in
former times; Whence learn, 1. The best expedient for a sad soul, is to run to
God by prayer for comfort, and to insist earnestly, albeit God should seem not
to attend; Hear my cry, O God, attend unto my prayer. 3 When the godly are
driven from their country, and fellowship with the Saints, and from exercise
of the public ordinances, no wonder they fall in perplexity of spirit, for
David forced to flee to the ends of the land, finds his heart overwhelmed
within him. 4. It is exile indeed to be secluded from the liberty of public
ordinances, and it is our home, to be where God is publicly worshipped, for
David counts himself cast out unto the ends of the earth; when he is debarred
from the Temple of the Lord. 5. Albeit a man were never so far banished from
the free society of the Church, and communion with Gods people in ordinances,
yet he is still within cry unto God: from the ends of the earth will I cry unto
thee. 6. There is a rock of refuge for safety and comfort to the exiled and
perplexed Saint, which is able to supply all wants, and to sweeten all sorrows,
and this is the Rock of Gods felt friendship in Christ from heaven, represented
by the visible rock of Sion, where the Tabernacle and mercy-seat was situate,
the appointed trusting place, where God did receive the prayers of his people,
and did answer them from heaven; when David could not come to the typical mount
o^ rock, he prays to have access to the thing signified: lead me to the Rock
that is higher then I 7. Sensible and comfortable communion with ^od, is a
mystery spiritual, which man's wisdom o^ power cannot discover, nor bring unto
him: but God himself must reveal, and must renew the revealing of himself to a
soul in trouble, and must make a man's soul to apply it selt to him powerfully,
else a man cannot feel this comfortable fellowship with God, more then a blind
man can sinde out what is removed from him or a weak child can go not being
led, or a man can reach up to a steep high place, not being lifted up unto it;
Therefore must the Lord himself draw us near to himself, and lift us up to
himself: lead me to the rock that is higher then I. 8. This spiritual felt
communion with God is able to put a man far from the reach of any enemy,
(...) does make a soul quietly to rest it self from fear of trouble, how great
soever the external danger can be, ^s David many times felt by experience: for
thou have been a shelter unto me, and a strong tower from the enemy. 9. A
believers resolution for depending on God, and praying to him in hardest
conditions, and his present use making of former experiences, as they do serve
much for strengthening of his faith in prayer: so they are the nearest means
that can be for coming by a renewed sensible comfort, as he^ we see: for David
resolves, from the end, of the earth I will cry and prays, lead me to the
rock, and says, Thou have been a strong tower to me, and so comfort does
follow quickly after this preparation, as the next verse does show.

Ver. 4. I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the covert of
thy wings. Selah.

5. For thou, O God, have heard my vows: thou have given me the heritage of
those that fear thy Name.

Here he is comforted in his exile, and made to be at home in his spirit, by
reason of the present sense of Gods favor to him, and of his confirmed hope of
the performances of the promises made unto him; Whence learn, 1. The Lord can
give such satisfaction to a sad heart in the time of its trouble, that the
trouble may turn to be no trouble, even while it lies on still, as here is to
be seen in David's comfort, who speaks as if he were restored, while he is yet
in exile. 2. Spiritual consolations in temporal troubles, do both give
satisfaction to a soul for the present, and for time to come, for everlasting
happiness; I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever: his hope is, that not only
he shall be restored to the fellowship of the Saints, at the Tabernacle in
Jerusalem, but also that he shall be in Gods company, in heaven, represeted by
the Tabernacle, and that for ever 3. True consolation stands not in earthly
things, but in things heavenly, and things having nearest relation thereto for
David's comfort was no^ so much that he should be brought to the Kingdom, as
that he should be brought to the Tabernacle, and to heaven by that means; I
will abide in thy Tabernacle. 4. Sincerity sets no term-day to Gods service,
or to the seeking of communion with him: I will abide in thy Tabernacle for
ever. 5. The ground of all spiritual consolations is in the mercy and grace of
God offered to us in Christ, represented by the wings of the Cherubims
stretched out over the mercy-seat; There faith finds a rest and solid ground,
able to furnish comfort abundantly; I will trust in the covert of thy wings. 6
Access to God in prayer, and approbation of the conscience and the sincere
pouring forth of the heart, mel^ing with present felt sense o^ Gods love, do
strengthening early the assurance of everlasting communion with God; for thou,
O God, have heard my vow. 7. As spiritual comfort in time of trouble granted
to a believe, is indeed the earnest of everlasting life, so should they to whom
soever the earnest is given, make reckoning that by this earnest the
inheritance is confirmed unto them by way of possession begun; thou have given
me the heritage of those that fear thy Name. 8. The inheritance of the chief of
Gods servants, and of the meane^ and weakest of them, is one; the right of
every believer is alik^ good, albeit the hold laid upon the right by all, is
not ali^ strong, and what the strongest of the godly do believe for their own
consolation and salvation, the weakest may believe the same to belong to every
believer that fears God, as David does here; Thou have given me the heritage
of those that fear thy Name.

Ver. 6. Thou will prolong the Kingslife: and his ^ares as many generations.

7. He shall abide before God for ever: O prepare mercy and truth, which may
preserve him.

8. So will I sing praise unto thy Name for ever, that I may daily perform my
vows.

In the third place, he prophesies not simply of the stability of the Kingdom
in his own person and posterity, bu^ under the type namely he speaks of the
perpetuity of the Kingdom of Christ, the true King of Israel, for which end he
prays that mercy and truth may be forthcoming to the subjects (...) Christ,
that his Kingdom may be prolonged, and so David in his ^e, and all the Saints
in their time, may joyfully praise God continually. Whence, learn 1. It is not
unusual with (...), together with present consolation, and the light of (...)
^tion In Christ, to reveal also and give assurance of great things concerning
Christ's Kingdom, as here and elsewhere in (...) Scripture is to be seen: Thou will prolong the Kings life, and his years, as many generations. 2. The glory
o^ Christ, and perpetuity of his Kingdom is every subject, good and comfort
for this is comfort to David, that Christ shall live for eve^, that he shall
abide before God for ever. 3. The Kingdom of Christ and government of his
subjects; in his Church shall be allowed of God, and be protected ^f God, (...)
blessed of God for ever however it be opposed by men in the world: he shall
abide before God for ever. 4. The perpetuity of Christ's Kingdom, and
preservation of the subjects in this life, till they be possessed of heaven, is
by the merciful remedying the misery, and removing of the sin which they are
subject unto, and by performing of what he has promised and prepared through
Christ to bestow upon them; O prepare mercy and truth, which (...) preserve
him. 5. The best retreat that can be made after wrestling and victory over
troubles, is prayer and praises as here David after his exercise prays, O
prepare mercy and truth; and then says unto thee will I sing. 6 As the main
matter of our vows is the moral duty of rejoicing in God, and hearty praising
of him: so ^wed experience of Gods mercy and truth toward has people in
Christ, is the main matter of our joy in him and praise unto him; O prepare
mercy and truth, etc. so will I sing praise unto thy Name, that I may daily
perform my vows.

PSALM. LXII. To the chief Musician, to Ieduthun. A Psalm of David.
THis Psalm is the issue of a sore conflict, and inward combat, which David
felt from the strong opposition of his irreconcilable adversaries, and from
the lasting troubles which he sustain by their persecution and by his friends
for saking of him, whereby he was put hard to it what to think or what to do:
at length faith in God gives him victory, and makes him first to break forth
in avowing of his faith, and hope in God, ver. 1. 2. Next, to insult over his
enemies as dead men, because of their sinful course, ver. 3, 4. Thirdly, to
strengthen himself in his faith and hope, ver. 5, 6, 7. Fourthly, to exhort
all men to trust in God, and to depend on him, for reasons set down, ver. 8, 9.
And not to trust in oppression and robbery, for reasons set down. ver. 10, 11,
12.

Ver. 1. TRuly my soul waits upon God: from him comes my salvation.

2. He on'y is my rock and my salvation: he is my defense, I shall not be
greatly moved.

From this abrupt beginning of the Psalm, declaring that he has had a sore
disputation and wrestling with tentations within him, and out of which this is
the first coming forth; Learn, 1. Albeit strong faith be put to a conflict,
when trouble and tentations do set on, yet when it looks on God and his
promises, it gets the victory, and puts the soul to a submissive attendance
on God, and a quiet hope of complete deliverance: Truly my soul waits upon
God: from him comes my salvation. 2. Then is faith well tried, and approved,
when being stripped of all supporters except God, it does content it self with
him alone, as all-sufficient, he only is my rock and my salvation. 3. Faith
finds as many answers in Gods sufficiency, as temptations can make objections
against it: he is my rock and my salvation: he is my defense. 4. As a man
resolves to believe and follow the course of sound faith, so he may assure
himself of establishment and victory over all temptations, notwithstanding his
own weakness: I shall not greatly be moved, does David conclude from his
resolution to rest on God.

Ver. 3. How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all
of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.

4. They only consult to cast him down from his excellency, they delight in
lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.

In the second place, he insulteth over his enemies, and lays before them the
danger of their wicked ways. W^ence learn, 1. So soon as a man has fastened
himself on God, he may reckon with all adversary powers, and insult over them;
for the seeing of Gods help discovers to the Believer the vanity of all
opposition; how long will ye imagine mischief against a man? 2. As the godly
when they fall under persecution, may lie long under it, and must resolve
patience all the while on the one hand; so on the other hand, persecutors are
unreasonably carried on in the course of persecution, like madmen, who cannot
give over the pursuit, albeit they see God against themselves, and with the
godly whom they pursue; how long will ye imagine mischief against a man? 3.
Persecutors shall not have their will against the godly, but by their
persecution shall draw upon themselves complete sudden and irrecoverable
destruction: ye shall be slain all of you, as a bowing wall, and a tottering
fence; that is, you shall perish suddenly, as when a bowing wall and tottering
fence rusheth to the ground in a moment. 4. As the standing fast in the faith
and service of God in a good cause, is the excellency of the Believer; so is it
the eyesore of his adversaries, which they of all things can least endure in
the godly, and therefore do bend all their wit and forces most unto, to break
them off their holy carriage and course; They only consult to cast him down
from his excellency. 5. Not truth and light, but darkness, error, falsehood and
deceit, is the pleasure of the wicked; They delight in lies. 6. When the wicked
do mind their worst against the godly, then will they speak fairest words unto
them, to see whether by falsehood or force they can prevail most, to draw them
off their good course: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly.

Ver. 5. My soul, wait thou only upon God: for my expectation is from him

6. He only is my rock and my salvation: he is my defense, I shall not be
moved.

7. In God is m^ salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and my refuge
is in God.

In the third place, he strengthens his faith and his hope, that he may be
able to endure trouble till the sin of the wicked be ripe, and their judgment
be executed; Whence learn, 1. Our resolution patiently to keep silence, in
waiting on God, and our putting o^ resolution to practice, do differ: our
practicing is so short of our resolution, that we had need to be stirred up,
and to sti^re u^ our selves to our duty. And as Satan is still moving new
pertu^bations; so have we need of, and must study to have new confirmations; My
soul, wait thou only upon God 2. They that do expect their help from ^od, must
not expect help from any other art, no not when they shall use all means lawful
for th^it delivery, but the success must be without haste making, patiently
waited for from God alone; Wait thou only on God, for my ^xpectation is from
him. 3 The grounds of confidence are able to abide new as^aults, and must be
brought forth and averred, so o^t as they a^e opposed: for he eunto the new
stirrings of the same tentations, he opposes this over gain: He only it my
rock: he is my defense and my salvation. And wh^eas he said before I shall not
greatly be moved; n^w he says more confidently: I shall not be moved: an^ yet
more, he riumphs in the Lord: he is my salvation and glory; which he speaks
in regard of hope to have all good which he ne^ed. And lastly in regard or
supply in whatsoever wants, and delive^y from all evil: he says, He is the
rock of my strength and my refuge is in God: and so his faith does set^e it
(...) and tentations are overcome.

Ver. 8. Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your heart before him:
God is a refuge for us. Selah.

9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to
be laid in the balance, they ar^ altogether lighter then vanity.

In the fourth place, he exhorts all men to place confidence upon God, partly
because God is able to give deliverance, as a place of refuge; and partly
because men whether great or small, few or many, cannot but deceive, and
disappoint the man that trusts in them. Whence learn, 1. The duty of the
comforted and victorious believers, is to communi are the fruit of their
experience, for st^gthening their brethren, and edification of others, as their
calling permits them, as David does here: Trust in him at all times, ye
people. 2. Whatsoever condition, how hard soever, we fall into, the grace of
God, and grounds of confidence in God must not be lost, but always made use
of; Trust in him at all times. 3. As a guil^y conscience, h^avy trouble,
misbeliefe and suspicion of Gods good will, do lock up the heart in sorrow: so
any measure of faith in God, going to him by prayer, does ease the heart and
lays the burden of grief down before the Lord; ye people, pour out your
heart before him: God is a refuge to us. 5. The way to place our confidence in
God, is to lift our confidence off all creatures, and in special off men of
superior or inferior ranks: and the way to lift our confidence off the
creature, is to con^der the inability of men to help us, except God make them
do it; and that without God they are nothing worth to us: men of low degree are
vanity. 6. Whosoever do trust on men higher or lower, are su^e to be deceived
of their expectation, and of whatsoever man's help can promise: and if we will
not be deceived, the voice of God, and experience of his Saints may give us
certainty of the truth of the doctrine; for out of experience David says,
Surely r^en of low degree are vanity, etc. 7. Carnal confidence is not only
unable to help a man, when he has most need, but also brings damage unto
him, and makes him to find God in his jealousie^ an adversary and just Judge
to plague and to curse him; and so if the matter be well weighed,
creature-help, and creature-comfort, when it is relied upon, is worse then no
help; Being laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.

Ver. 10. Trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery: if riches
increase, set not your heart upon them.

11. God has spoken once; twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto
God.

12 Also unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy: for thou renderest to every man
according to his work.

The other part of the exhortation does forbid to trust in oppression* or
riches, or power, or greatness of place, because God disposes of all things
is he pleases, showing mercy to such as do trust in him, and rendering to
every man according to his work, Whence learn. 1. There a^e many more idols
then one to draw away a man's heart from God so* when trusting in men of high
degree and low degree is cast down, then oppression, robbery, riches stand up,
and take Gods room in the heart, as here we see. 2. It is more hard to divert a
man from confidence in himself, and what is in his own power, then to draw him
from confidence in men of bighe^ or lower degree. Therefore after c^sting down
of carnal confidence in men, high or low; he (...) confidence in whatsoever a
man is able to do by himself, as might, and riches, and (...) of high plac^:
Trust not in oppression; if riches increase etc. 3. Wh^soever is confiden^, by
his own strength and might to (...) his business against any man, and to do
his adversa^y two wrongs for one, shall find^ himself to have disobeyed G^d,
and to ^ve been pron^ i^ a matter of nothing: Trust not in oppression, become
not vain in robbery. 4. It may stand with godliness and trusting in God, to be
rich; but not to h^ve our heart set upon riches, either to gather or keep them,
either to rejoice in them, or to be proud because of them; If riches increase,
set not thy heart thereon. 5. N^hing is able to settle man's confidence in God,
and to keep his heart from id^ls, or carnal confidence in creatures, or to bear
in upon others this two fold duty, save the powerful imp^ession of the (...)
Word of God; therefore says he, God has spoken once. 6. Albeit one testimony
of Scripture for a ground o^ faith, or ^ule of life, rightly considered be
abundantly sufficient, to settle our faith in that point, and to warrant our
obedience; yet God will inculc^ that truth oftener, and have us to receive it
oftener, and more firmly; and as it is the Lords kindness to us, and care of us
to cause his once ^poken Word, to be oftne repeated unto us, oftener cleared,
and confirmed unto us by repeated experimental evidence of the certainty
thereof: so it is our duty, to receive it more and more heartily, so often as it
is repeated and inculcated, and to meditate and consider o^ it* and to take a
deeper and a deeper impression of it: God has spoken once, twice have I heard
it. 7. The proprity of authority and power to do all and everything, is the
Lords only: and as (...) the power of the creature, it is but lent, and
derived to it, at Gods pleasure. The creature can neither hurt us, nor help it
self or us, but as God is pleased to use it as an instrument; Twice have I
heard this, that power belongs to God. 8. To induce a soul to trust in God
only, it is necessary, that ^t so look to his power. as it also look to his
mercy, and lay hold on both; faith ^ath nee^ of b^th, as of two wings, to carry
it up to God above all vain enticements, and terrors, and tentations, and as
props whereon to settle and fix it self jointly; Also unto thee O lord,
belongs mercy. 10. As the man that puts his trust in God, and studieth to
obey his Word, shall find Gods mercy to pardon his transgression, and Gods
power to sustain him in all his difficulties, and to pe^orm all the promises
made to his servants: so the man that trusts not in God, but in himself, or in
some creature without him el^ thinking to work his own happiness by his own
ways, shall find the fruit of his wicked course, according as God has
forewarned: For thou renderest to every man according to his works.

PSALM. LXIII. A Psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah.
WE have in this Psalm David's exercise in his banishment, when he was hiding
himself from Saul in the wilderness of Judah; wherein is set down his lingering
and prayer, after the benefit of the public ordinances, ver. 1, 2. And the
fruits of a gracious and comfortable answer given to his prayer, in number
four. The first, is a resolution to follow spiritual duties, and in special to
praise God, ver. 3. and to be a constant supplicant depending on God, ver. 4.
and to take his contentment in God, and in his praises, ver. 5, 6. and joyfully
to trust in Gods mercy, ver. 7. The second fruit is the acknowledgement of Gods
power, sustaining him in his adherence unto God, practiced by him for time
past, and pu^posed for time to come, ver. 8. The third fruit, is confidence of
the destruction of his enemies, ver. 9, 10. The fourth, is assurance that he
shall receive the Kingdom promised unto him, to the confusion of all such as
did slander him as a traitor.

From the Inscription; Learn, 1. Such of Gods children as dwell most st^tely
and commodiously among their neighbors, may be driven sometimes to hide
themselves in a wilderness, as David was. 2. Banishment from among friends
cannot banish a man from God, but may serve rather to drive him toward God. 3.
Troubles are grievous when they are present, but may prove a matter of a joyful
song, when called to remembrance: A Psalm of David, when he was in the
wilderness of Judah.

Ver. 1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is.

2. To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in thy sanctuary.

From his prayer; Learn, 1. The Lord is the only ease of a distressed mind,
and there is no speedier relief then to go to God in prayer, as the Psalmist
did, saying, O God. 2. When we would speak unto God to purpose, we should
fasten our hold on the Covenant; O God, thou art my God. 3. Troubles will
sharpen a man in the use of the means, and rouse him out of nasty security;
Early will I seek thee. 4. It is good to fasten duties on our selves by
resolution, and to strengthen our resolution by showing it to the Lord; Early
will I seek thee. 5. A lively soul will be no less de^rous of spiritual
comfort from God, then the b^dy for natural food after long fasting; My soul
thirsts for thee. 6 Spiritual affections, when they are strong, will (...) ^e
b^dy with impressions answerable thereto; My flesh longs after thee. 7. It is
a barren place to a godly soul, where the publik^ exercises of Religion cannot
be h^: for this cause mainly did God c^ll the wilderness, A dry and ^hirsty
land, where no water is. 8. (...) the power and glory of God is no wh^e so
clearly seen* as in public ordinances, therefore should t^ ordinances be
loved, sought after, and haunted, that we may find communion with God in them;
My soul thirsts to see thy power and thy glory. 9. The more good a man has
found in the public exerci^s of Religion, the more will he esteem of them, and
in ^cial when he is deprived of them; My soul thirsts to see thy power and
glory: so as I have seen thee in thy sanctuary.

Ver. 3. Because thy loving kindness is better the^ life: my li^s shall ^raise
thee.

4. Thus will I bless thee while I live: I will lift up ^ine hands in thy Name.

5. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and (...): and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips.

6. When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches.

7. Because thou have been my help; therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice.

Here the Lord gives to his servant a gracious answer, and (...) is condition
in the wilderness, m^king him no less glad then eve^ he was in the public
exerci^e of Religion, by granting him the comfort of his holy Spirit, ^s the
fruits of the answer of his prayer do make manifest. The first wh^eof is shown
in sundry holy resolutions, to prais^ the kindness of God, to bless God, and to
call on his Name in all conditions, to take contentment in God, and to trust in
him. Whence learn, 1. When a man, who loves the public ordinances is debarrrd
from them, and makes use of private exercises of Religion, God can and will
supply unto him what he wants, and be a little sanctuary unto him, as here
appears. 2. The felt kindness of God, and shedding abroad of his love in the
heart of a believer, is joy unspeakable and glorious, able to supply all wants
unto him, and to sweeten all troubles unto him, and to give him more comfort,
then what is most comfortable in this world, yea, to make life it self without
the feeling, or hope of feeling ^his love to be little with to him; Thy long
kindness is better then life. 3. Rich experiences of the felt love of God in
the use of the means, deserve to be brought forth to the praise of God, when
it may glorify him; Because thy loving kindness is better then life, my lips
shall praise thee. 4. One proof of Gods loving kindness toward us, is reason
abundant for us to bless God for ever thereafter, and to acknowledge him the
fountain of blessings, even to our selves, whatseever change of dispensations
we shall meet with; Thus will I bless thee while I live 5. As our assurance of
Gods love unto us, and of hi^ purp^e to bless us, does serve to prepare us for
straits and difficulties hereafter: so also for praying to God with confidence
to be helped, in whatsoever change of condition we may fall into afterward;
Thus will I bless thee while I live, I will lift up my hands in thy Name; to
wit, as a man engaged to depend upon thee, to call upon thee as my need
requires, and a man particularly encouraged by thee, and confirmed by
experience from thy former helping of me, that I shall have a good answer from
thee, who have manifested thy self unto me by Word and works. 6. The spiritual
life of the soul has its own food, as well as the bodily life of nature: and
the life of the godly is not so barren, so sad and uncomfortable as the world
does believe: They have their hid Manna, and the water of life, solid and
satisfactory consolations, and joy in the holy Spirit, wherewith strangers do
not intermeddle, of which joys the sweetest morsels of delicate banquets are
but shadows; My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness. 7. Such
as do hunger and thirst after communion with God in Christ, and do resolve to
spend their life in Gods service, may promise to themselves that they shall
feel sweet satisfaction in this course, and with David say, My soul shall be
sati^fied as with marrow. 8. Spiritual joys are not like carnal joys, which
end in sadness, but they resolve in glorifying, and do make the very outward
man partaker of the benefit; therefore does the Psalm^st add: And my mouth
shall praise thee with joyful lips. 9. The way to find refreshment spiritual,
is beside public ordinances, to give our selves to spiritual exercises in
secret, at such times as our necessities civil and natural may best spa^e, and
then and there to recall to mind what we have heard, seen or felt of Gods Word
or working, and to keep up our thoughts upon this holy subject, by prayer,
soliloquie and meditation, as David shows to us the example: When I remember
thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches. 10. As one
experience should call another to remembrance, so the calling of experiences to
our memory should oblige and encourage us in all conditions, joyfully to make
use by faith, of Gods standing offer of grace to us in Christ, shadowed forth
by the wings of the cherubims stretched out always over the mercy-seat;
Because thou have been my helper, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice; for here, and here only is the remedy of all sin and misery.

Ver. 8. My soul follows hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth me.

From the second fruit of the gracious answer given to David's prayer, that is,
from his giving the glory of the acts of grace which he did unto God the
furnisher thereof; Learn, 1. The Lord uses to exercise the souls of his own
children with sense of desertion, and withdrawing of his presence one way or
other. This is presupposed in David's following after the Lord, when he felt him
retiring himself, as it were. 2. A believer in God cannot endure a thought of
separation from God, nor forbear to seek after God, when he misseth his
presence, but will use all means to recover the sense of his presence which he
has felt before; My soul follows hard after thee. 3. It is our wisdom to
reflect upon, and acknowledge the grace of God in us, and upon the acts of our
says and love toward God, for our own strengthening, as David does here,
saying, My soul follows hard after thee. 4. Although the exercise of gracious
habits be our acts, yet the enabling of us to bring these acts forth, is the
Lords work, who gives us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure; and
as it is our duty to acknowledge this, so is it the fruit of our feelings of
Gods help to profess it; My soul follows hard after thee, but by what power,
strength and furniture does he this? Thy right hand upholdeth me.

9. But those that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of
the earth.

10. They shall fall by the sword: they shall be a portion for foxes.

The third fruit of the answer of his prayer, is assurance given that his
enemies shall be destroyed, for it is revealed to him, that Saul should be
slain by the sword; he knew by revelation that his carcass should lie in the
fields, a prey for foxes and wild beasts. Whence learn, 1. The deadly and
unreconcileable enemies of Gods people, hating them for a good cause, do draw
destruction on themselves; Those that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go
down to the lower parts of the earth. 2. It is agreeable with Gods justice,
that bloody enemies of Gods people be punished by their bloody enemies; God can
stir up the wicked against the wicked, to avenge the wrongs done to his
children: They shall fall by the sword, they shall be a portion for the foxes.
3. The Lord, to ease the hearts of his oppressed children, does sometimes
before hand make them foresee the destruction of their adversaries, whether by
teaching them in an ordinary way to apply the general sentences of the
Scripture unto them, or in a more special way revealing his mind, as he sees
fit, as here: They shall fall by the sword, etc.

11. But the King shall rejoice in God: every one that swears by him shall
glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.

The last fruit of his prayer, is assurance that he shall be King, and that all
the godly shall be comforted by this means, and that his righteousness shall
be cleared against all the calumnies of the wicked. Whence learn, 1. Howsoever
it may go hard with the righteous, and their enemies may prosper for a time,
yet their lot shall be changed to the better at length: and when he^ enemies
are born down, their head shall be lifted up, and whatsoeve^ is p^omised unto
them, they may be as sure of it as if they had p^ssion of it, yea they may
style themselves by the title which Gods lord has given unto them, as David
does in his particular, calling him el^ King, now when he was a bani^ed man in
the wilderness of Judah. The King shall rejoice, says he. 2. The true ground
of a believers joy, is not the gift he receives from God, how great soever it
may be, but the good will of the giver, even God himself The King shall rejoice
in God. 3 Every true worshipper of ^od, (whose property is t^uly to fear the
true God, and the cogni^ance of whose sin^y is his on cienc^ king of an oath
shall have matter o^ glo^iation, after while p^nt suffering in time of trial:
Every one that swears ^y him^ all glory. 4. The borndown righteousness of
h^dly, a^o their cause, by the lies, slanders and calum^ies o^ the wicked,
shall be brought to light in due time, and the wicked m^e ash med of their
lies; The mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.

PSALM. LXIV. To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
THis Psalm has two parts: In the former is David's heavy complaint unto God
against his deadly enemies, laid forth before God in sundry particular
evidences of their malice, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And in the latter part is the
Lords comfortable answer unto him, by giving him assurance of Gods judgment
coming on them, to their own and others astonishment, and to the comfort of the
godly, ver 7. 8, 9, 10.

Ver. 1. Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of
the enemy.

2. Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked: from the insurrection of the
workers of iniquity.

In his prayer he requesteth first in general, for delivery of his life from
the secret plotting and oftenpractising of his enemies against him Whence
learn, 1. Present danger is able to force out cries to God, and such earnest
prayers poured out in extreme necessity, shall not want an answer; ^eare my
voice, O God, in my prayer. 2. The danger cannot be so great, wherein help may
not be had from God; he is so near to a supplicant, so powerful, and so ready
to save the man who has made God ^is e^ge; Preserve my life from fear of the
enemy. 3 God can so overrule and outwit the devices of our enemies, that they
shall either not light upon the mean whereby they might overtake us, or shall
make them miss of their intent in case their device be probable; Hide me from
the secret counsel of the wicked. 4. What the wicked cannot do against the
righteous by craft, they will pursue with open violence, but God, as he is
wiser in counsel and able to be fool them, so is he st^onger in power, and able
to break them: Hide me from their insurrection. 5. That we may have the greater
confidence to be delivered from our enemies, we had need to be sure we are in a
good cause, and that our adversaries have a wrong cause: Hide me from the
workers of iniquity.

Ver. 3. Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot
their arrows, even bitter words:

4. That they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at
him, and fear not.

5. They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they commune of laying snares
privily, they say, Who shall see them?

6. They search out iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search: both the
inward thought of every one of them, and the heart is deep.

Here he complains of his enemies, and lays forth several degrees of their
desperate wickedness before God, as so many arguments to strengthen his says,
and hope for delivery from them. Whence learn, 1. The benefit of a good cause,
and of a good conscience appea^eth b^st in a strait, when nothing can help a
man against his enemies, save God alone, as here appears in David's case. 2.
Calumnies and slanders against the godly are very cruel weapons: for not only
hurt they the estimation of their good cause, and personal good behavior, but
also do stir up all men to take their lives. They whet their tongue as a
sword, and bend bend their bows to shoot their arrows, bitter words. 3. There
is no fear against a privy slander, a man is wounded ere he is aware, and no
man's innocence or integrity of life can be a guard against the shot of a
calumniators tongue, they shoot in secret at the perfect, suddenly do they
shoot at him. 4. Because only God can heal the wound of a slander, and sustain
the man in the conscience of his good cause and carriage, till he clear him,
the righteous must content himself to refer the matter to God, as David does
here. 5. G^dlesse men are dangerous enemies, for they fear not God, and so have
no powerful restraint within them from doing any mischief, and the more they
sin, they take the greater boldness to sin more; they encourage themselves
in an evil atter 6. The wit and wickedness which is within themselves, will
not suffice their devilish intention, therefore they seek all help they can
find from without; They commune of laying snares privily 7. They seek how they
may overtake the man's person, after they have killed his good name and cause
with calumnies and bitter aspersions. Yea Satan so blinds them, that they
neither look to God the avenger of such plots and practices, nor do they
consider that God sees them, and they think their pretenses before men are so
thick (...) covering, that no man can see through them; They say, Who shall see
them? 8. If there has been any slander of the upright man's misdemeanour in any
former time, which for the falsehood of it is evanished, they make search after
it, to waken it up again: and if there be any possibility to devise new
inventions, with any probability, they go about it busily, yea they search hell
it self* to find out how to bring a mischief upon the upright; They search out
iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search. 9. Last of all, their
wickedness is unsearchable, the uncontrolled bent of their wicked wit and will
assisted with what Satan can suggest, furnish and stir up, all is employed,
and it is hard to say whether their wit or will be most wicked, and do draw
nearest to hell; but it is sure to say of both, Both the thoughts of every one
of them, and the heart is deep.

Ver. 7. But God shall shoot at them: with an arrow suddenly shall they be
wounded.

8. So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see
them, shall flee away.

9. And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God; for they shall
wisely consider of his doing.

10 The righteous shall be glad in the LORD and shall trust in him; and all the
upright in heart shall glory.

In the latter part of the Psalm is set down his prayer and confidence of
justice to be executed against his enemies, and mercy to be shown to him, and
to all the godly. Whence learn, 1. The godly want not a friend to avenge their
quarrel: God will shoot against wicked archers, and not miss the mark, ^ut God
shall shoot at them; with an arrow shall they ^e wounded. 2. Where desperate
malice is seen, there sudden mischief may be foreseen, that it shall light upon
the malicious: sudde^ly shall they be wounded. 3. The wicked adversaries of
Gods people are destroyers of themselves, by their opposition unto them; for as
they thought to do unto Gods children, God does to them; So they shall make
their own tongue fall upon themselves. 4. Sometimes God will make the wicked
spectacles of his judgment to the affrightment of all that knew them, and do
see their plague; All that see them shall flee away. 5. The judgment of the
wicked should be all men's lesson, and all sorts of people shall learn by their
plagues to know Gods justice and terror; And all men shall fear and declare
the works of God. 6. Not every spectator of Gods work gives glory to God, but
they only, who compare his Word with his works, and through the veil of means
and instruments do look to God the righteous Judge of the world; They shall
declare the work of God, for they shall consider wisely of his doing. 7. When
woe and wrack does come upon the wicked, then does joy and comfort come to the
godly, not so much for the damage of the wicked, as for the manifestation of
the glory of God: The righteous shall be glad in the Lord. 8 As the Lords
mercies do confirm the faith of the righteous, so also do the works of his
justice; They shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust i^ him. 9. The
delivery of one of the godly, is a pledge of the like delivery to ^ll in the
like case: and as one so all and every one of the righteous and upright in
heart shall triumph at length over all enemies, and make their boast of God:
All the upright in heart shall glory.

PSALM. LXV. To the chief Musician. A Psalm and Song of David.
THis Psalm is all of Gods praises. The Proposition, that he is to be praised,
is set down, ver. 1. The reasons of his praise unto the end, are nine. The
first whereof is, because he hear h prayer, ver. 2. The second, because he
mercifully pardons sins, ver. 3. The third, because of his gracious purpose,
and powerful prosecution of the decree of election of his own redeemed on^s,
ver 4. The fourth, because of his defending of his Church in all places, ver.
5. The fifth, is from his strength manifested in the framing and settling of the
mountains, ver. 6. The sixth, from his wise and powerful overruling of all
unruly and raging creatures, ver. 7. The seventh, is from his preventing of
troubles, which are coming to his Church, by terrifying all Nations at the
beholding of the tokens of his displeasure against the enemies of his people,
ver. 8. The eighth argument is taken from the joyful peace, granted sometime to
his people, ver. 8. The ninth Argument of Gods praise, is from the rich plenty
of all necessary food from year to year, which God provideth for maintenance of
man and beast, and specially of his people Israel in their land, ver. 9, 10,
11, 12, 13.

Ver. 1. PRaise waits for thee, O God, in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow
be performed.

From the Proposition, concerning his purpose to spend this Psalm only in
praising of God; Learn, 1. Although prayer and praises do always agree well,
yet some time may call for praises, and for the work of praise only, and may
take up the whole man for a time, as here. 2. How mournful a condition soever
the Lords people may be in, yet God is preparing thereby matter for his own
glory; Praise waits for thee. And whatsoever matter of praise be seen, or
whatsoever measure of praise be given unto God by his people, more is due to
him, and more is making ready for him; Praise waits for thee. 3. Although the
rest of the world be senseless of Gods benefits, yet his Church must set about
the work of his praises, and shall be enabled to give him praise; Praise
waits for thee, O God, in Sion. 4. As it is the duty of every man, who does
seek deliverance from trouble, or any other benefit from God, to oblige
himself, to praise God for it: so it is the Lords manner to gain to himself
praise by granting prayers, and to purchase the performance of praises promised
unto him; Unto thee shall the vow be performed.

Ver. 2. O thou that hear prayer! unto thee shall all flesh come.

From the first reason of the Lords praise; Learn, 1. The hearing and granting
of prayer is the Lords property, and his usual practice, and his pleasure, and
his nature, and his glory; O thou that hear prayer! 2. The readiness of the
Lord to hear prayer, does open the door of access to all sorts of people, who
are sensible of their own frailty and necessities, and do know his readiness
to relieve them, Gentiles as well as Jews shall come unto him; O thou that
hear prayer! all flesh shall come unto thee.

Ver. 3. Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou shall
purge them away.

From the second reason of the Lords praise; Learn, 1. Sin is a sore adversary,
and many times prevails over us, and draws on troubles on us, which makes us
know the ill of it better, then we knew before the committing of it; Iniquities
prevail against me. 2. Whatsoever be the sins of the people we live amongst,
let us make special account of our own guiltiness in the point of confession,
as David does here, when he says, Iniquities prevail against me. 3. Our sins
should be looked upon, not to chase us from God, but to humble us, and drive us
to seek pardon and purgation from the Lord, whose free grace only can take sins
away; Iniquity prevails over me: as for our transgressions, thou shall purge
them away. 4. The holy Prophets and Pen men of Scripture have no grounds of
hope for pardon of sin, save those which are common to the meanest of Gods
people; for David in his confession comes in by himself alone aggravating his
own sins most; Iniquities prevail against me, says he. But in the hope of
pardon, he joyneth with the rest of Gods people, saying, As for our
transgressions, thou shall purge them away.

Ver. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto
thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness
of* thy house, even of thy holy Temple.

From the third reason of the Lords praise; Learn, 1. God has made election
of some out of the rest of mankind, on whom he does effectually bestow
blessedness; Blessed is the man whom thou choosest. 2. All those whom God does
effectually call, and reconcile to himself, and draws into communion and
society with himself, are elected and blessed persons; Blessed is the man whom
thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee. 3. It is the free good will
of God, which puts the difference among men, and makes some to be partakers
of blessedness, and not other some; Blessed is the man whom thou choosest. 4.
The power and glory of the work of conversion, reconciliation, and drawing near
to God, for communion with him, of so many as are converted, is the Lords power
and glory, no less then election is his free choice and glory; Blessed is the
man whom thou choosest, and whom, thou causest to approach unto thee. 5. The
man elected, effectually called, reconciled and drawn in society with God, is a
true member of his Church, a constant member thereof in this life, and one who
shall be a member of the Church triumphant* in the life to come, and so
effectually blessed; He shall dwell in thy Courts, says the text in the
original. 6. Whatsoever is sufficient for begetting and entertaining the life
of grace, and of true blessedness in Gods elect, is to be found by the means
of public ordinances in the Church of God; We shall be satisfied with the
goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple. 7. Whosoever do find in
themselves the proper effects or consequents of election, in special, a
powerful drawing of them to the Covenant with God, and unto a nearer and nearer
approaching unto God, in the way of obedience unto the public ordinances of
his house, may be assured of their election, of their effectual calling, of the
blessedness, and of their interest in all the goodness of Gods house to their
full contentment, for after the general doctrine, he applies, We shall be
satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple.

Ver. 5. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our
salvation, who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that are afar off upon the sea.

The fourth reason of the Lords praise is taken from the defending of his
Church in all ages and places: and saving of his people by giving terrible
answers to their prayers against their enemies, for the performance of his own
word, and confirmation of the faith of his own people, in whatsoever part of
the earth, unto the end of the world. Whence learn, 1. As the love of God to
his people does not exempt them from the molestation of enemies, because the
Lord will have the faith of his people by this means exercised, and them put to
pray unto him, and complain of the injuries done unto them; so his love to them
will not suffer their prayers to want an answer in their troubles, to the
amozement of their adversaries; By terrible things will thou answer us. 2. In
the Lords relieving of his people, and destroying their enemies, he will have
the work looked upon as the performance of his Word, wherein he has promised
to be a friend to the friends of his people, and a foe to their foes; By
terrible things in righteousness, will thou answer us. 3. The reason of
particular deliveries of Gods people from their enemies, is, because these
deliveries are appendices of the Covenant of grace, established for giving to
them everlasting life; Thou will answer us O God of our salvation. 4. What the
Lord has promised and done to his Church of old, is a sufficient ground of
confidence to the people of God, in all times and places, to expect and find
the like mercy, unto that which they of old did expect and find; O God of our
salvation, the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are
afar off, upon the sea: that is, thy people, whether dwelling in the Continent,
or in Isles; or sailing on the sea.

Ver. 6. Which by his strength sets fast the mountains, being girded with
power.

The fifth reason of the Lords praise is, from his strong power, whereby he is
able to do all things, as appears by his framing and settling the mountains;
Whence learn, 1. The power of God manifested in the work of Creation, is a prop
to the says of his people to believe the promises, and a pledge of the
performance thereof unto them; By his strength he sets fast the mountains.
2. Whatsoever great work the Lord has done, he is able and ready to do a
greater work, if need, be for his people; He is girded with power.

Ver. 8. Which stillest the noise of the seas: the noise of their waves, and
the tumult of the people.

From the sixth reason taken from his wise and powerful overruling all
commotions of unruly creatures of whatsoever sort; Learn, 1. There is nothing
so turbulent and raging, and reasonlesse in the whole world, which God does not
rule and bridle, and make quiet as he pleases: He stilleth the noise of the
seas, the noise of their waters. 2. As the commotions of people, their
seditions, their insurrections and conspiracies against Gods people, within and
without the visible Church, are no l^sse rageing and reasonlesse then are the
commotions of the sea: so God has the ruling of them, as well as of the seas,
and by his stilling the noise of the seas, the noise of the waters thereof, he
gives an evidence of his power and purpose to bridle the sury and rage of
reasonlesse men, who threaten trouble and destruction to his people; He
stilleth their waves, and the tumult of the people.

Ver. 8. They also that dwell in the uttermost parts, are afraid at thy tokens:
thou make the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.

From the seventh reason of Gods praise, taken from the affright ing of all the
world by his judgments against the enemies of his people, lest they should
attempt the like; Learn, 1. As the Lord can still the tumults of the people,
when they rage most; so he can by his terror prevent their commotions against
his Church, by showing them his terrible judgments executed on others, which
are the tokens of the power of his displeasure against all who shall dare to be
adversaries to his people; They also that dwell in the uttermost parts, are
afraid at thy tokens.

The eight reason of Gods praise is, from the joyful tranquillity and peace,
which he when he pleases, gives to his people, after he has settled their
enemies rage and power against them* Whence learn, As the Lord does sometime
exercise his people, with trouble and persecution from their enemies; so also
he can, and does give them some breathing times, some comfortable seasons, as
it were fair days from morning to evening; yea sundry ^ull fair days, one
after another, so that his people are made to rejoice before him from day to
day; Thou make the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.

Ver. 9. Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it
with the river of God which is full of water: thou preparest them corn, when
thou have so provided for it.

10. Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou setlest the furrows
thereof: thou make it soft with showers, thou blessest the springing thereof.

11. Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness.

12. They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness: and the little hills
rejoice on every side.

13. The pastures are clothed with ^ocks; the valleys also are covered over
with corn; they shout for joy, they also ring.

The ninth reason of the Lords praise is, from his plentiful furnishing of food
yearly for man and beast, but in special for his making the promised land
fruitful unto his people Israel, when he shall give them rest from their
enemies, and peace therein, after their being exercised with troubles. What may
be prophetical, in this whole Psalm, as touching the Israelites, we will not
here enquire; nor how far the Prophet did look beyond his own and Solomon's
time, when he said, Praise waits for thee in Sion, etc. Only, Hence learn
general doctrines, 1. The Lords blessing of the ground, and making it fruitful,
is his coming as it were to visit it; Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it*
2. Gods providence is then best seen* when particular parts are looked upon one
after another; Thou waterest it, thou enrichest it, tho^ ^parest them corn,
etc. 3. The sending of timely rain, and plent^ of it, and after that abundance
of victual, should not be slightly passed over, but well and carefully marked;
for the husbandry is all the Lords: Thou preparest them corn, when thou have so
provided for it. 4. Second causes, and the natural course of conveying benefits
unto us, are not rightly seen, except when God, the first and prime cause, is
seen to be nearest unto the actual disposing of them for producing the effect:
Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly, etc. Thou ^ssest the springing
thereof. 5. From the one end of the year to the other God has continual work
about the bringing forth of the ^ruits of the ground, and glo^iously does
perfect it once a year; Thou crownest the year by thy goodness. 6. Every one
of the footsteps of Gods providence, for the p^ovision of his peoples food,,
has its own blessing^, as appears in the profitable use of the straw and
stubble and chafe, and multiplication of the seed; Thy paths drop fatness. 7.
The Lord has a care to provide food, not only for man, but also (...) beasts;
and not only for ^ame beasts, which are most useful for man, but also for wild
beasts in the wilderness, making his rain to fall on all parts of the ground:
They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness, and the little hills rejoice on
every side. 8. Albeit temporal benefits be inferior to spiritual, yet because
unto Gods children they be appendices of the spiritual, they are worthy to be
taken notice of, and that God should be praised for them; as here the Paslmist
shows, praising God for spiritual blessings, in the beginning of the Psalm;
and here in the end, for temporal benefits. 9. The plurality of Gods creatures,
and the comparison of Gods benefits set before our eyes, are the scale, music
book, and noted lessons of the harmony and melody which we ought to have in our
hearts, in praising him: yea these benefits do begin and take up the song in
their own kind, that we may follow them in our kind; The pastures are clothed
with flocks, the valleys also are covered over with corn, they shout for joy,
they also sing.

PSALM. LVI. To the chief Musician, A song or Psalm.
THis Psalm being all of praises, may be divided into three parts In the first,
the Psalmist exhorts all the earth to praise God, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. and that
because of the works which God did of old for his people, ver. 5, 6. and
because he is able to do the like when he pleases, ver. 7. In the second part,
he exhorts the Church of Israel living with him in that age, to praise God for
the late experience of Gods goodness toward them, in the delivery granted to
them out of their late trials, troubles, and sore vevations, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. In the third place, the Prophet expresses his own purpose of thankfulness
unto God for the large experience which he had in particular of Gods mercies to
himself, from ver. 13. to the end.

Ver. 1. MAke a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands.

2. Sing forth the honor of his Name: make his praise glorious.

From this urgent exhortation to praise God; Learn, 1. As the duty of praise is
most necessary, and most spiritual: so are we more dull, and indisposed
thereto, then to any other exercise spiritual, and had need to be stirred up
thereunto; therefore says he, Make a noise, sing forth, etc 2. The Prophets of
old had it revealed unto them, that the Gentiles should be brought to the
knowledge of God, and made to worship him; as, Make a joyful noise unto God,
all ye lands, imports. 3. The praise of the Lord is a task for all the world
to be employed about, and a duty whereunto all are bound, seeing they all do
see his works, and all do hold what they have of him; but specially those that
hear of him by his Word to whom most specially the Word does speak; Make a
joyful noise all ye lands. 4. Men ought to go about the work of praising God so
cheerfully so wisely and so avowedly, as they who do hear his praise spoken of,
may understand his Majesty, magnificence, goodness, power, and mercy: Make a
noise unto God, sing forth the honor of his Name; make his praise glorious.

Ver. 3. Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works? through the
greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.

4. All the earth shall worship thee; and shall sing unto thee, they shall sing
to thy Name. Selab.

Here the Psalmist, as the Lords penman, does furnish matter and words of
praising God unto the hearers, and prophesies that the fullness of the
Gentiles shall concur in his worship, and take part in the song of his
praise; Whence learn, 1. Because we can do nothing of our selves in this work
of the Lords praise, God must furnish to us matter and words; Say unto God, How
terrible, etc. 2. As the work of the praise of God should be done in love and
confidence, and sincerity, and in his own strength: so may it be directed to
him immediately, and that without flattery; (otherwise then men are praised)
for praise properly is due to God only, and no man can speak of him, except in
his own audience; Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works? 3. The
works of the Lord, every one of them being rightly studied, are able to
affright us, by discovering the incomparable, dreadful, and omnipotent Majesty
of the worker thereof; How terrible art thou in thy works? 4. When the Lord is
pleased to let forth his judgments on his adversaries, and to let them see
what he can do, none of them dare stand out against him; but if they be not
converted, yet will they be forced to feign submission unto him; Through the
greatness of thy power shall thy enemies submit themselves to them? 5. Over
and above what is already accomplished of this prophecy concerning the
conversion of the Gentiles, a higher measure is yet to be expected in the
bringing in of that number of them, which the Scripture calls the fullness of
the Gentiles; and the making all the Kingdoms of the earth to become the
Lords, and his Son Christ's; for this word in a greater measure then yet is
come to pass, must be fulfilled; All the earth shall worship thee, they shall
sing unto thee; they shall sing unto thy Name: Which word does import the
revealing of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ unto them, and their joyful
acceptance of the Gospel, and glorifying of God for it. 6. As it is the Lords
glory to have many praising him: so should it be the joy of all that love him,
now to foresee the success of Christ's Kingdom, as well as it was of old, when
it was the Churches song; All the earth shall worship thee.

Ver. 5. Come let us see the works of God: he is terrible in his doing toward
the children of men.

6. He turned the sea into dry land: they went through the flood on foot, there
did we rejoice in him.

7. He rules by his power for ever, his eyes behold the nations: let not the
rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.

He points out in special the Lords works, already wrought for his people;
Whence learn, 1. Albeit the Lord does work for the delivery of the Church, and
his own glory, yet men are so careless, to observe his works, that they can
neither make use thereof for their own profit, nor for Gods praise; so that
there is much need to stir up our dullness, to observe them and make right
use thereof; Come and see the works of God. 2. Whosoever do observe the works
of God, which he has wrought for his people, they shall be forced to fear and
admire his wonderful Acts for them, and his respect unto them; He is terrible
in his doing toward the children of men. 3. The work of redemption of his
Church out of Egypt, is a work one for all worthy to be made use of to the end
of the world; and sufficient to show, that if need be, God will invert the
course of nature for the good of his people, and for their delivery out of
difficulties; He turned the sea into dry land. 4. As the Lord will work wonders
for the delivery of his people out of misery: so will he work wonders for
performing of promises to them, and for bringing them to the possession of what
he has given them right unto; for the drying of the river Jordan, that his
people might go in to possess the promised land, was a pawn and evidence of
this his purpose for all time coming; They went through the flood on foot. 5.
As all the people of God are one body, and that which is done in one age to one
generation does concern all and every one to make use of it in their
generation: so every one in after-ages should reckon themselves one body with
the Lords people in former ages, and make use of Gods dealing with them, as if
they had been present then with them, as here the Church in the Psalmists time
joyneth it self with the Church in Ioshuahs time, rejoicing in God with them,
at their entering into Canaan; There did we rejoice in him, say they. 6.
Whatsoever the Lord has done for his people in any time bypast, he is able
and ready to do the like for his people in any time to come; He rules by his
pouer for ever, and for this cause his former Acts, are perpetual evidences and
pledges of like Acts to be done hereafter, as need is. 7. Nothing is done in
any place, which the Lord is not witness unto; no plot or motion against his
people, which he sees not: His eyes behold the Nations. 8. Albeit there will
be from time to time a generation, who will not submit themselves to this
sovereign Ruler, but will stand out against him, and malign his Church, yet
shall they not long prosper, nor have cause of gloriation in their rebellion;
Let not the rebellious exalt themselves.

ver. 8. O bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be
heard.

9. Which holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved.

10. For thou, O God, have proved us: thou have tried us, as silver is tried.

11. Thou broughtest us into the net; thou layedst affliction upon our loins.

12. Thou have caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire, and
through water: but thou, broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

In the second part of the Psalm, the Psalmist exhorts the Church in his time,
to praise God for preserving them from extirpation in the time of their fiery
trial, and sore affliction under the tyranny and oppression of their enemies.
Whence learn, 1. The Lords people in every age, besides all the reasons they
have to praise God for his former works, want not their own particular reasons
for his care, providence, and kindness to themselves in their own time to
stir up one another to bless his Majesty; O bless our God, ye people. 2. It
is the Churches proper privilege, and her glory, above all other
incorporations and societies beside, to have special interest in God, as her
own; O bless our God. 3. It is not sufficient that the Lords people
acknowledge inwardly the mercies of God to themselves; but it is their duty in
an orderly way to bring others on to the knowledge of God, and to show to
others how praiseworthy he is: make the voice of his praise to be heard. 4.
Albeit the Lord takes many things away from his people, when he is pleased to
exercise them, yet he keeps life in their soul; some sweet communion of spirit
between himself and them: and does not suffer all his people to be extirpate,
and rooted out from the earth; Which boldeth our soul in life. 5. It is great
mercy to be kept from desperate courses in the time of sad calamities, and to
be supported under burdens, that we sink not; and to be prevented from denying
of God, or of his truth in time of persecution: He suffers not our feet to be
moved. 6. One end of the troubles of the Church, among others is, the trial of
the graces of his people, and purging them from their corruptions: for which
cause the Lord uses to bring on one trouble after another, as metal is put in
the fire oftener then once; For thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried
(...), as silver is tried. 7. When God does bring his Church into trial, there
is no escaping; we must look for affliction, and not dream of declining it by
our own wit or skill; Thou broughtest us into the net, thou layedst affliction
upon our ^ines. 8. It is wisdom and justice and goodness in God, to make his
people know some time, whether his service or men's service be most easy; Thou
have caused men to ride over our heads. 9. When Gods service and men's service
are compared, the service of men is a beastly bondage in comparison: for the
enemies of the Church will abuse Gods people like beasts, when they fall under
their power; Thou have made men ride over our heads. 10. There is no sort of
affliction, nor extremity of affliction, from which the godly may secure
themselves, after the time of their entering into their trials, till Gods time
come, wherein their trial is to end; We went through fire, and through waters.
11. After troubles and trials, the Lord gives ever an event, and a gracious
delivery to his own, which brings as much comfort with it, as their trial
had grief in it; But thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

Ver. 13. I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings: I will pay thee my
vowe^.

14. Whichmy lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble.

15. I will offer unto thee burnt-sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of
rams: I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.

In the third and last part of the Psalm, the Psalmist shows forth his
thankfulness for the favors showed to himself in particular: and first, he
promises to acknowledge his obligation to God in the place of public worship,
as the Lord had required in the ceremonial law, ver. 13, 14, 15. Secondly, he
declares his particular experience of Gods mercy, testifying his hearing of
his prayer by his acceptance of it, ver. 18, 19. And last of all, he blesses
the Lord for the gracious answer of his prayer, ver. 20.

From the promise, which he makes of public acknowledgement of the mercy
according to the prescript of the Lords appointment; Learn, 1. In common
favors and deliveries granted to the visible Church, each true member have
their own special mercies bestowed upon them, beside the common: for which in
particular, and for the common mercies also, they ought publicly to be
thankful, as the Psalmist is here, saying, I will go into thy house with
burnt-offerings. 2. As it is a token of lively faith in desperate troubles to
trust in God, and to hope for his deliverance, and to promise him praise before
the delivery come: so is it a token of an upright heart, to be as willing to
perform promises after the benefit received, as it was ready to make promises,
before the benefit received; I will pay thee my vows which my lips have
uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble. 3. As our persons and
best service are polluted, except they be cleansed by the sacrifice of Christ:
so in our approaches unto God we should acknowledge the sinfulness of our
persons and performances, and the need we stand in of Christ's mediation, and
the riches of grace bestowed upon us through him, who perfumeth our persons,
and prayers, and praises, as was shadowed forth in the ceremonies of the law;
for this was the Prophets meaning, when he said, I will offer unto thee
burnt-sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of rams: I will offer bullucks
with goats, which were appointed in the law to be offered, partly for sin, and
partly by way of thanksgiving.

Ver. 16. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has
done for my soul.

17. I cried unto him with my mouth: and he was extolled with my tongue.

From his declaration of his lately felt experience of Gods mercy to him;
Learn, 1. A spiritual man, as he will not neglect outward rites of commanded
public worship: so will he not rest on them, but will go about the real
glorifying of God before others, as the Psalmist does here; Come and hear what
the Lord has done for my soul. 2. The true disciples of Gods grace, who can
best discern of Gods works, and of the experience of others, and who will be
most ready to praise God with us, are those that fear God; Come and hear, all
ye that fear God; I will declare what he has done for my soul. 3. It is no
less needful for the glorifying of God, and edification of others, to make the
way of our coming by a benefit manifest to others, that it was by the use of
holy ordinances, then to make mention of the benefit it self; I cried unto
him, says he; that is, I was instant in prayer for the benefit. 4. There are
cases wherein the uttering of words in prayer, do serve much, not only for our
own up-stirring, and fixing of our minds, and for others edification; but also
concerns Gods glory, on whom we profess dependence, and in whom we
acknowledge power and goodness to dwell; And he was extolled with my tongue.

Ver. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart: the Lord will not hear me.

19. But verily God has heard me: he has attended to the voice of my prayer.

From the clearing of his sincerity in prayer; Learn, 1. Sincerl^y of heart
should be joined with the supplication of the mouth, and with self
examination, that we may be sure we pray sincerely: for, If I regard iniquity
in my heart, imports so much in the Psalmists practice. 2. He is an upright man
in Gods account, who does not entertain affection to any known sin, but does
oppose it sincerely in Gods sight; for this the Psalmist brings for the proof
of his sincerity, that he did not regard sin in his heart. 3. Those only are
the s^nners, whose prayer God will not hear; who live in the love of known
sins, and pray for having satisfaction to their corrupt lusts. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. 4. The lawful prayer of the
upright heart, shall be granted in substance, and it may be just a^ it was
desired; which as it is no small mercy, so should it be well marked, as the
return of our prayer; But verily God has heard me, he has attended to the
voice of my supplication.

Ver. 20. Blessed be God, which has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy
from me.

Her closes with thanksgiving for this particular experience, as an evidence
of the running of the fountain of Gods mercy toward him. Whence learn, 1. As it
is no small mercy, that our prayers are not rejected of God; albeit he should
delay to answer us for a long time; so when he delayeth not to answer us, the
mercy is the greater, and ought to be acknowledged in both respects Blessed be
God, which has not turned away my prayer. 2. The gracious answer of an upright
supplication, evidenceth ready access prepared yet mo^e for the supplicant, to
the fountain o^ Gods mercy; and this is yet more mercy: He has not turned away
my prayer, nor his mercy from me.

PSALM. LXVII. To the chief Mufician on Neginoth. A Ps^lm or song.
THis Psalm is a prophetical prayer for a blessing upon the Church of the ewes,
for the good of the Gentiles, and enlarging of the Kingdom of Christ among
them. The petition is propounded, ver. 1, 2 In the next place, is an
acclamation with the Gentiles, glorifying of God at their in-bringing, now
foreseen that it should come most certainly, ver. 3, 4. In the third place, the
Church of the Jews do applaud the second time the conversion of the Gentiles,
and their praising of God, promising to themselves that by that means the
increase of Gods blessing on them shall follow, and the enlarging of the
Kingdom of God; through all the world, ver. 5, 6, 7.

Ver. 1. GOD be merciful unto us, and bless u^ and cause his face to shine
upon us. Sela^

2. That thy way may be known upon earth, thy s^ving health among all nations.

This is the blessing which the Lord commanded the children of Aaron to
pronounce upon the people of Israel, Numb. 6. 22, 23. which here the people do
turn into a prayer, for the drawing in ^f the Gentiles unto Gods service.
Whence learn, 1. It is safe turning of Gods offers, promises, and forms of
blessing of his people into prayers; we are sure so to pray according to Gods
will, as the Church does here. 2. It is the duty of every citizen of the
Church, as lively members of that body, to pray for the blessing of God upon
all his people; God be merciful unto us, and cause his face to shine upon us.
3. Then are the Lords people blessed, when God does make them instrumental to
enlarge his Kingdom, and to propagate the true Religion, that is, the doctrine
of man's salvation, and Gods service: and this should be the aim we should shoot
at* in seeking any blessing to his people, That the Lord may be known upon
earth, thy saving health among all the nations 4. The world is ignorant of true
Religion, till God by his own instruments reveal it; and no way of Religion
will please God, nor profit men, save Gods way only, wherein he will have men
to walk in the course of faith and obedience, and wherein he reveals how he
will deal with us, and how we must behave our selves toward him; Therefore say
they, That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations.

Ver. 3. Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.

4. O let the nations be glad, and sing for joy: for thou shall judge the
people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Selab.

The Psalmist foreseeth by the revelation of Gods Spirit, that the Gentiles
shall be converted, and shall rejoice in God, and praise him, and therefore
will have the Church of the Jews to welcome them, and to join in acclamation
of praise to God with them, because of Christ's reigning among them, and ruling
them by his most holy laws. Whence learn. 1. The manifestation of Gods freely
gifted salvation in Christ, and the revealing of his manner of dealing with
people, and how he will have people deal with him, and one with another, is a
matter of unspeak^ble praise to God, and joy to men, to whom this grace is
revealed, that thy saving health may be known among all nations: let the people
praise thee, O God. 2. True converts unto Christ, besides the joy they have of
their own salvation, have also daily new accession of joy at the conversion of
others, as they come in and ought to bless and praise God heartily with them,
when they behold their conversion; Let all the people praise thee: do they say
twice, and hereafter also the third time. 3. The conversion of the Gentiles was
not a thing only wished for by the Church of the Jews, but also prophesied of
unto them clearly: O let the nations be glad, and sing for joy: for thou shall
judge the people righteously, etc. 4. The Spirit which did endite the Psalms,
did not degrade the promised Messiah, Jesus Christ from his Godhead, for his
future incarnation; but speaks of him, and to him, as God blessed for ever;
that is, the true God, to the Jewish Church before his coming: and true God, to
the converted Gentiles after his coming in the flesh, one with the Father and
holy Spirit; for six times in this Psalm he is called God, and acknowledged
here to be the fountain of mercy, and blessing to men, and of manifested
reconciliation with men; and the object of all divine honor and praise, and
God the Lord, and Lawgiver of the converted Gentiles; Thou shall judge the
people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. 5. The doctrine and
discipline of Christ, whereby he judges and governs his Church, is most holy
and righteous, and in as far as particular Churches and Christians submit
themselves to his Laws, Doctrine, and Government, they are his true subjects,
and shall find the fruit of his governing and judging; For these shall he
judge righteously, unto these shall he do the part of a Governor, even on
earth; He shall govern the nations upon earth.

Ver. 5. Let the people praise thee, O God, let a^ the people praise thee.

6. Then shall the earth yield her increase, and God, even our own God shall
bless us.

7. God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.

In the last place, the Jewish Church gives a second acclamation to the
incoming of the Gentiles, and do promise to themselves by that means Gods
blessing more abundantly upon themselves, as now being one body with the
Gentiles, in the same Covenant of grace with them. Whence learn, 1. As the
conversion of the Gentiles was esteemed by the Jews, a matter worthy to be
oftener presented to God, and prayed for, and earnestly pursued by all that
loved God; so was it foreseen to be a matter of growing and lasting joy to
men, and growing and lasting praise to God, and to Christ, who is God, the
Converter of them, and the Governor and Teacher of them effectually, to know
his Name and salvation; Let all the people praise thee, O God, let all the
people praise thee. 2. The Spirit of God gave the Church of the Jews to
understand, that the conversion of the Gentiles, especially the conversion of
the fullness of the Gentiles, (which here is prayed for, when he says, Let all
the people praise thee) was to be a means or a mercy antecedent unto, or nearly
joined with the bringing in and blessing of the Jewish Church, and possibly in
their own land; Then shall the earth yield her increase, and God even our own
God shall bless us: for by the earth he means the promised land of Canaan,
which has been, and is accursed, during the time of their ejection out of it.
3. When God shall be gracious to the Jews, after the conversion and bringing
in of the Gentiles, and shall renew the Covenant with them in Christ, it shall
fare the better with true Religion, and with the Christian Churches among the
Gentiles; it shall be to them as a resurrection from the dead, in regard both
of the purity of Doctrine and Worship, and of the multiplication of persons
converted unto Christ in all places; God shall bless us (says he then,) and
what more? And all the ends of the earth shall fear him.

PSALM. LXVIII. To the chief Musician. A Psalm or song of David.
THis Psalm is very suitable to that time, when David having gotten the victory
over his enemies round about, did assemble all Israel, and carried the A^k of
God, now returned from the land of the Philistines, triumphantly out of the
house of Obed-Edom, into the City of David, as a type of Christ's ascension
after the work of Redemption in the world. In which P^lm after the manner that
Moses prayed unto God, or to Christ who was to be incarnate, when the Ark did
march; David prays here first against the Lords enemies, ver. 1, 2. And then
for the Lords people, ver. 3. In the next place, he exhorts all the Lords
people to praise God, ver. 4. and gives twelve or thirteen reasons for it;
First, because of his mercy to the desolate and afflicted, ver. 5, 6. Secondly,
because of his wonderfulnesse and terriblenesse in delivering of his people out
of bondage, as appeared in his bringing of his people out of Egypt, and through
the wilderness, ver. 7, 8. Thirdly, because of his fatherly care to entertain
his redeemed people; as did appear in his nourishing of his Church in Canaan,
ver. 9, 10. Fourthly, because of the victories which he gives usually to his
people, when their enemies do invade them, ver. 11, 12. Fifthly, because of the
delivery which he will give to his people out of their most sad calamities, as
he has oftentimes given proof, ver. 13, 14. Sixthly, because his Church is the
most glorious Kingdom in the world, being compared therewith, ver. 15, 16.
Seventhly, because Christ the King of the Church, has all the Angels at his
command to serve him: and having ended the work of Redemption, was to ascend
gloriously, for sending down gifts to his Church, and ruling of it, ver. 17,
18. Eighthly, because of Gods bounty to his people, in daily renewed mercies,
till he perfect the work of their salvation. ver. 19, 20. Ninethly, because of
his avenging of himself upon all his enemies, ver. 21. Tenthly, because God
has undertaken to work over again in effect, as need shall require, what he
has done in bringing his people out of Egypt, and in giving them victory over
the Canaanites, ver. 22, 23. whereof the experience of his power, already
manifested for Israel, was a proof and pledge sufficient, ver. 24, 25, 26, 27.
Eleventhly, because it was decreed by God, to establish his Church, and to make
her strong, by making Kings to become converts, ver. 28, 29. and that partly by
treading down some of her enemies, ver. 30. and partly by making others, even
some of her greatest enemies, to seek reconciliation with God, even her God.
ver. 31. Twelfthly, he exhorts to praise God, because of his omnipotent
power, in conversion of Kingdoms, ready to be let forth for the defense of his
people, ver. 31, 32, 33, 34. and ready to overthrow their enemier, and all for
the strengthening of his Church: for all which he exhorteeh all to bless the
Lord, ver. 35.

Ver. 1. LEt God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate
him, flee before him.

2. As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melts before the
fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.

3. But let the righteous be glad: let them rejoice before God; yea let them
exceedingly rejoice.

In David's prayer against his enemies, and for Gods people* Learn, 1. Such
prayers as the Spirit has endited unto the Saints, in Scripture, it is lawful
and expedient for strengthening of our faith, to use the same or the like words
in the like case; for David prays here, as Moses prayed at the marching of
the Ark, Numb. 10. 35. Let God arise, etc. 2. As the Ark was amongst the
Israelites, so is Christ amongst his people: and what ground of confidence the
Church had, because of that pledge of Gods presence at the Ark; we have the
same, and a more sure ground of confidence in Christ's incarnation, represented
thereby; that upon every appearance of his beginning to stir against the
enemies of his work, we may say, Let God arise. 3. The enemy; of the Church
are the enemies of God, and esteemed haters of him, because they are haters of
his people; with whom, albeit the Lord does be^r for a while, yet will he take
order, when he pleases; it will not cost him much labor: on^y, Let God arise
and let his enemies b^ scattered 4. Although all the enemies of God make head
against his people, yet will they not prevail, when God appears, they will
turn back; Let them also that hate him, flee before him. 5. Whatsoever strength
of forces or number the enemies of Gods people have in appearance, it is
nothing before God, but like smoke before the wind, and wax before the fire;
As smoke is driven away ^s wax melts before the fire: so let the wicked,
perish at the presence of God. 6. Albeit the Lord exercise his people with
affliction, and with grief for a while, yet he allows unto them comfort and
joy, whatsoever become of their enemies: But let the righteou^ be glad. 7. The
only true matter of the Saints joy is God himself, and his manifested
presence; and he will not be pleased, except his children lift up their hearts,
and comfort themselves in him above and against all grief and sense of
whatsoever enemies opposition; Let them rejoice before God, yea let them
exceedingly rejoice.

Ver. 4. Sing unto God, sing praises to his Name: extol him that rides upon
the heavens, by his Name JAH, and rejoice before him.

From his exhortation of the Church to praise God with the joyful voice of
singing; Learn. 1. Vocal singing of praises unto God, is a moral duty, and a
part of his holy worship, frequently called for in Scripture; Sing unto God,
sing praises to his Name. 2. Our thoughts of God should not be base, but high
and heavenly, lifting his Name up above the most glorious creatures; all they
bei^ but his servants* as he pleases to make use of them: Extol him that
rides upon the heavens. 3. The Lord is only and properly wo^thy of praise*
because he only has his being of himself, and gives be^ to all things, which
are beside himself; His Name is JAH. 4. The Lords praises are his peoples
advantage* and the true matter of their confidence and joy; Sing praises to
him, and rejoice before him.

Ver. 5. A Father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the widows is God in his
holy habitation.

6. God sets the solitary in families: he brings out those that are bound
with chains; but the rebellious dwell in a dry land.

From the first r^on of the exhortation to praise God; Learn, 1. The Lords
highness above the heavens does not hinder him from taking notice of the
lowest of his poor people; yea the most helpless and desolate among men, are
the first objects of his warmest love; A Father of the fatherless, and a Judge
of the widows is God. 2. Albeit the Lord be infinite and incomprehensible by
any place, yet has he appointed a trusting place where his people shall find
him by his own ordinance, to wit, the assembly of his Saints, his holy Temple,
shadowing forth Christ to be incarnate, who now is in heaven, now is incarnate,
and sitting at the right hand of God, in whom dwells the Godhead, here, here is
God to be found: God in his holy habitation. 3. It is the Lords nature,
pleasure, and ordinary practice, to make up the wants, and to change to the
better the disconsolate condition of his own humbled and emptied children; God
sets the solitary in families. 4. The souls that are most sensible of bonds
and bondage, do lie nearest the seeking of the fruit of his redemption; yea,
none in bonds have made or shall make use of God the Redeemer, but his bonds
and ^etters hindering him from freedom of Gods service, and from attaining of
felicity, have been and shall be loosed off him: he brings out those which
are bound in chains. 5. Such as will not be ruled by his Word, according as
they are disloyal rebels to him, so shall they be dealt with as rebels; that
is, they shall neither have Gods blessing joined with any benefit which they
seem to possess, nor any spiritual comfort in their afflictions, when their
calamity comes upon them: but the rebellious dwell in a dry land.

Ver. 7. O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou did
march through the wilderness. Selah.

8. The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God, even
Sinai it self was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel.

From the second reason of praising God, Learn, 1. It is expedient for our
up-stirring unto thankfulness, to cast our eye upon some particulars wherein
the Lords goodness to us, and our obligation to his love, may appear, as here
the P^almist does lead us by the hand unto the Lords particular work of
redemption of Israel out of Egypt. 2. That one work of the Churches delivery
out of Egypt, representing the redemption of his people from the misery of sin,
and Satan's bondage, (...) a sufficient proof for ever of the Lords love, care
power, and faithfulness, to deliver his own out of all their misery; which the
Church, and every member thereof should always make use of unto the end of the
world, whether we look upon that work in the type singly, or as it is a
representation or pawn of the spiritual delivery of his people, this work
should we often look upon, and still hold it up unto God; O God, when thou
wentest forth before thy people, when thou didde^ march through the
wilderness. 3. In the wo^ke of the Lord it is needful not only to look upon
that which may foster says in God, and love toward him, but also to set before
us, what may serve to keep our hearts in fear and awe of his dreadful Majesty;
The earth shook, the heavens dropped at the presence of God, even Sinai it self
was moved at the presence of God, even the God of Israel.

Ver. 9. Thou. O God, did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did confirm
thine inheritance, when it was weary.

10. Thy Congregation has dwelt therein: thou, O God, have prepared of thy
goodness for the poor.

From the third reason of Gods praise: Learn, 1. The ordinary sustaining of
Gods people bodily and spiritually in the possession of any benefit temporal or
spiritual given unto them, should be observed, as well as the bestowing of any
benefit in an extraordinary way, as here the ordinary sustaining of Israel in
Canaan, is made a part of the song of praise, no less then their miraculous
delivery out of Egypt; Thou, O Lord, did send a plentiful rain whereby thou
did confirm thine inheritance, when it was we^ry. 2. The people who are in
Covenant with God externally, are the Lords own peculiar, more nearly and
properly then any other society in the world; therefore Israel here is called
by the Prophet speaking to God, Thy Congregation. 3. It is for the Churches
cause, that the land wherein his people dwells, is blessed at any time by
God; Thy Congregation has dwelt in it. 4. The blessing bestowed upon the
Church or the place wherein they dwell, is not given for any goodness in his
people, but for the goodness, grace and good will of God to them; Thou, O God,
have prepared of thy goodness for the poor.

Ver. 11. The Lord gave the word: great was the company of those that published
it.

12. Kings of armies did flee apace: and she that ^rried at home divided the
spoil.

From the fourth reason of praise; Learn, 1. The Lord will sometime exercise
his Church with wars, afflictions and trials, when he does not intend to
punish them, but to give them the victory over their enemies, and that for his
own glory, as in Ioshuahs time and David's, whereunto the text does relate. The
matter of joyful news, or the word of the Churches victory over her ^oes,
whenever it is, proceeds from the Lord, who furnishes matter for, and words,
and utterance of joy to his people, and praise to himself: The Lord gave the
word. 2. When God will glorify himself by comforting his Church, he shall not
want Heralds of his praise; Great was the company of those that published it.
3. Were the enemies of the Church never so powerful, and Gods people never so
far^e inferior unto their enemies in power, yet shall the enemy not be able to
stand, when God begins to fight for his people: Kings of armies did flee apacc.
4. It is easy for the Lord to make them a prey to the weakest of his people,
who do set themselves to make havoc of the Church, yea and to enrich his
people with the spoil of such adversaries: She that tarried at home, divided
the spoil.

Ver. 13. Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a
Dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.

14. When the Almighty scattered Kings in it, it was white as snow in Salmon.

From the fifth reason of praise; Learn, 1. As the Lord sometimes does
beautify his people with victories and wealth: so also at other times for just
reasons, he will darken all their outward glory, and make them look as blacked
scullions in the kitchen; Though ye have lien among the pots, etc. 2. The Lord
after the trial and hard exercises of his people for a time, will give them so
glorious an event and delivery, as shall take off all the ignominy of their
former affliction, and make up all their losses, yea he will cause their
formerly deforming affl^ions, to serve for washing-balls of soap, to make them
so much more beautiful; Though ye have lien among the pots, ye shall be as the
wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. 3.
Experiences of mercies shown to the Lords people, are pawns and evidences of
like mercies in time to come, as here, When the Almighty scattered Kings in the
land, it was made white, is made a proof of the Promise made, ver. 13. 4. As a
dark, duskie mountain, whereupon grows no green thing, but black h^th, is
made white, when covered with snow: so is a disgraced, shamed, impoverished,
inslaved land made glorious again by a merciful manner of delivery manifesting
the Lords kind respects unto it; When the Almighty scattered Kings in Judea,
it was made white as snow in Salmon.

Ver. 15. The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan, an high hill as the hill of
Bashan.

16. Why leap ye, ye high hills? this is the hill which God desires to dwell
in: yea, the LORD will dwell in it for ever.

From the sixth reason of praise; Learn, 1. The Kingdoms of this world,
especially some of them of more eminent sort, do seem very rich and glorious in
comparison of the outward appearance of the Kingdom of Christ in his Church,
as the great, high, and fruitful hill of Bashan seemed to be more glorious then
the hill of Sion; yet all things being compared, in special the spiritual
privileges of the one with the tempor^l privileges of the other, the Church
of God will outreach the most glorious Kingdom on the earth: The hill of God is
as the hill of Bashan, an high hill as the hill of Bashan. 2. Although the
Kingdoms of the world rejoice in their Prerogatives, and despise the Kingdom
of Christ in his Church, yet have they no cause to exalt themselves: Why leap
ye, ye high hills? 3. This one privilege of the Church, that it is the place
of Gods residence, wherein he will manifest himself familiarly and comfortably
to his own, may oversway all the excellency of all the Kingdoms of the world;
no Kingdom which has not Gods Church in it, can say the like; This is the hill
which God desires to dwell in; yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever.

Ver. 17. ^he chariots of God are twenty thousand, even th^usands of Angels:
the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place.

Ver. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou
have received gifts for men: yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God
might dwell among them.

From the seventh reason of praise, Learn, 1. No Kingdom has such defense, so
potent and so numerous armies to fight their battles as the Church has; The
chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels. 2. The defense
of Angels is made fast to his Church, and their power made sure to be for her,
because God is in his Church, even the Lord whom all Angels do serve and attend
upon, is in his Church, as at his giving of the law upon Mount Sinai did
appear; The Lord is among them, as in Sinai. 3. The Lord is no less terrible
against his foes in Sion, then in Sinai; and whatsoever terror the Lord did
show to his Church in Sinai against the violaters of his law, he will manifest
it for the comfort and defense of his people, who heartily embrace his Gospel:
The Lord is among them, to wit, these chariots and Angels, as in Sinai, so in
the holy place. 4. The Ark was not more gloriously conveyed from the house of
O^ed-edom unto the city of David, then God, that is, Christ, who is God, who
descended to assume humane nature, that he might therein perfect the work of
Redemption, did gloriously ascend into heaven, after the price of Redemption
was paid by him; Thou have ascended on high, Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10. 5. The praises
of God, and joy of the Church are perfected in Christ; no satisfaction in the
shadows, till Christ the substance be looked unto; therefore here the Lords
Spirit led his people to look through the shadow of the ascending of the Ark
toward the city of David, unto the ascending of God incarnate (represented by
the Ark) into heaven: Thou have ascended on high. 6. Christ did not enter into
his glory without a battle going before, and that with strong and many enemies:
and in his fighting he carried the victory, and after his victory he did
triumph, first in the Cross, and then in his Ascension, over sin, Satan, the
world, hell, grave and all: He led captivity captive. 7. Christ as Mediator
and King of his Church, was fully furnished with all things needful, for
gathering his Church, for edifying, governing and perfecting of it: Thou have
received gifts for men; even those gifts which the Apostle speaks of, for the
gathering and edifying of the body of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 11, 13. 8. The gifts
which Christ has received and given forth, are not for the Jews only, or
Gentiles only; for the poor only, or rich only; but for men indefinitely: Thou
have received gifts for men. 9 As he has received gifts for bringing on to
life those that are reconciled: so also to conquer, subdue and bring in rebels,
and to reconcile enemies: Thou have received gifts for men, yea and for the
rebellious also. 10. The end of Christ's Ascension, and receiving and sending
down gifts among men, is to gather and preserve, and establish unto God a
Church in the world, wherein he may make himself manifest, and dwell and rule
in the midst of his enemies: Thou have received gifts for men, that the Lord
might dwell among them. 11. Yea what^oever gifts are bestowed upon unregenerate
men within the visible Church or without it, which may any way be serviceable
to the Church, they are all bestowed on them in favor of the Church, that God
may dwell in his visible Church, which by those gifts is edified; Thou have
received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also, tha^ the Lord God might
dwell among them.

Ver. 19. Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God
of our salvation. Selah.

20. He that is our God, is the God of salvation: and unto GOD the Lord belong
the issues from death.

From the eighth reason of praise; Learn, 1. Where the Lord will be merciful,
he will be merciful, and not weary in doing good to his people in a current
course of bounty; the observation whereof should stir up our hearts to
thankfulness: Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits. 2. The
favors and benefits which God does bestow upon his people, do come in greater
number and measure unto them, then they are able to acknowledge, make use of,
or be thankful for, and so in a sort do burden the spirits of the truly godly:
Blessed b^ God, who daily loadeth us with benefits. 3. As all benefits do flow
unto Gods children from the covenanted kindness of God for giving unto them
eternal salvation; so should all benefits confirm their faith in the Covenant,
and lead them to the hope of receiving after all other benefits, salvation
also; Blessed be the lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of
our salvation. 4. Albeit the Covenant of salvation be sure and solid in it
self, yet are we slow to believe it, and weak in our laying hold of it; and
have need to have the stamp and impression of it set deep upon our hearts, as
here the Psalmist teaches the Church by inculcating this point: He that is our
God, is the God of salvation. 5. Temporal things which men do idolize, may
serve a man in this life; but at death, in death, and after death he can have
no good by them; It is God only who can deliver from death, and give an issue
out of it: Unto God the Lord belong the issues of death. 6. Let a man be once
settled in the faith of his salvation, then he shall be comforted against all
the troubles and dangers wherein he can fall, yea even against death it self;
if he can say, He that is our God, is the God of salvation, he may also say
with confidence and application to himself, and comfort, Unto God the Lord
belong the issues from death.

Ver. 21. But God will wound the head of his enemies: and the hairy scalp of
such a one as goes on still in his trespasses.

From the ninth reason of Gods praise; Learn, 1. How great soever be the
majesty of God, and the riches of bounty and grace offered in Christ, yet will
men be found even within the visible Church, who will wickedly refuse his
grace, and oppose his Kingdom, but all to their own shame and damage; But God
shall wou^d the head of his enemies. 2. The character of Gods irreconcilable
enemies is, that they cease not to follow the course of sin: He goes on still
in his trespasses. 3. Though God spare his enemies long, and suffer them to
grow old in the course of enmity against him, yet shall shameful, sudden and
irrecoverable judgments overtake them in their old days; But God shall wound
the hoary scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses.

Ver. 22. The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people
again from the depth^ of the sea.

23. That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue
of thy dogs in the same.

From the tenth reason of praise, wherein the Prophet promises in the Lo^ds
Name, that God shall work over again such works of delivery to his people, and
such works* of victory over their enemies, as he had wrought before; Learn, 1.
The Lords Word is certainly sufficient for performance of his promises, and
ground of comfort and confidence, and thanksgiving and praise to God even
before the work be wrought; The Lord said, I will bring again, etc. 3. As the
Lord will have the memory of former dangers and delive^ies of his Church kept
in remembrance for his own glory: so will he have former dangers for his
peoples good to be looked upon as advertisements of what straits his Church may
be cast into, and his former merciful deliveries looked upon as pledges and
pawns of the promises of like mercies in time to come, as need shall require: I
will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people again from the depths of
the sea, does import thus much. 3. As the Lord will give as great deliverances
to his Church, when they are in straits as ever he did before* so will he give
as terrible blows to his adversaries as ever he did, according as the Churches
need or good shall require; I will bring again from Bashan, etc. that thy foot
may be dipped in the blood of thy enemies. 4. Albeit neither the Lord nor his
people do delight in bloodshed, yet will he let his people and all men see, in
the bloodshed of their enemies, how terrible he is in justice, especially
against the enemies of his Church, and how dear his people are to him, and that
rather then they should be overthrown, he will destroy Nations for their
safety; and give unto his people in their own defense against their oppressors,
notable victories; So that thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine
enemies. 5 When the Lord thinks it fit, not to make his own people instrumental
in their own delivery, then can he yoke the enemies among themselves, or raise
up pro^ane dogs like themselves to avenge the quarrel of the Lords people upon
their enemies: That the tongue of thy dogs may be dipped in the ^ame; that is,
in the blood of thine enemies.

Ver. 24. They have (...) thy goings. O God, even the goings of my God, my
King, in the sanctuary.

25. The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after;
amongst them were the damos^ls playing with timbrels.

To confirm what is promised, he brings forth old experiences acknowledged
by the enemies, registered in the Word of the Lord, and read in the Temple.
Whence learn, 1. The Lord uses to work so evidently for his people, and
against his enemies, that both his people and their enemies are made witnesses,
and are forced to acknowledge the Lords work; They have seen thy goings, O God.
2. It is the glory of a people, when God so works, as he is seen to be their
God, their leader, their defender, and all as in Covenant with them: They have
seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, says he. 3. That Gods
honor may be seen, man's honor should be laid down at his feet; and put case a
man were the greatest King, yet is it greater glory and matter of contentment
to have God for his King, then to be a King without God; They have seen thy
goings, O my God, my King, (says David, now settled in the Kingdom.) 4. The
most clear, sure and profitable sight of the Lord work and ways, is to be had
in the use of public ordinances, where his Name, Nature, Covenant and course
he keeps with all men, together with the causes, use and ends of his works
are to be seen; They have seen the goings of my God in the sanctuary. 5. Where
all the people receive a benefit, it becomes all the people publicly and
solemnly, and with their best expression of affection, as God does appoint, to
praise God, and in his worship to see that all things may be done orderly, as
Israel did, when they came through the red sea, and at other times as the Lord
gave occasion: The singers went before, the players on instruments followed
after, amongst them, in the middle-ward, the Damo^ playing with timbrels. 6.
All the powers of our soul^ and bodies should concur each of them in their
own order with the best harmony of knowledge, affections and expressions, which
can be attained unto, for setting forth the Lords praises, and our obligation
to him for his goodness of his people, and so should (...) ^rch on all the
days of our pilgrimage and warfare, till we come to the promised rest: for
this did the external ceremonies used under the pedagogie of the Law, teach.
Which ceremonies although they be abolished now, yet the sub^ and intended
duties pointed at in them, being moral, do sti^ remain; The fingers went
before, players on instruments follwed after, etc.

Ver. 26. Bless ye God in the Congregations: even the Lord from the fountain
of Israel.

27. There is little Benjamin with their Ruler, the Princes of Judah, and their
Council, the Princes of Zebulun, and the Princes of Naphtali.

As the Psalmist did clear the doctrine of Gods dealing for his Church, and
against their enemies by experiences of ol^ so he points here at experience
later, as was to be seen by all, at the glorious triumphing of Israel over all
their enemies, when they were now assembled in their several tribes, the least
as well as the greatest, the most remote tribes, as well as those that were
nearest hand; all of them conveying the Ark of God unto the City of David,
which was the type of Christ, God incarnate, ascending after his victories into
heaven. Whence learn, 1. The mercies of God to his people, in special the great
work of Redemption, and victory over all enemies obtained by Christ in favor
of his people, are abundant matter and cause to praise God, and to bless him
in all the assemblies of the Church; for here it is a commanded duty: Bless ye
God in the Congregations. 2. Whatsoever be the part of others in discharging of
this duty, it is expected most at the hands of every kindly Israelite, who draw
their original from the fountain of Israel, whether they be of the natural
stock of Jacob, descended of him, as water out of a fountain, or have their
descent of the same Spirit of regeneration with him: Bless ye God, even the
Lord from the fountain of Israel. 3. Examples and practices of Gods children at
any time, are the encouragements of his people at all time^ thereafter: There
is little Benjamin with their Rulers, etc. set forth here for example. 4. The
Piety of Governors, and their precedencie before, or joining with others in the
Lords service, is more honorable unto them then their places of dignity, or
their gifts of wisdom and power: There were the Princes of Judah. with their
Council, the Princes of Zebulun, and the Princes of Naphtali. 5. In the
exercise of Gods worship, and in privileges spiritual, the Lord does join the
smallest with the greatest, the lowest with the highest, that the lo^ (...) ^n
their exaltation, and the highest in their hum^ (...) ^s little Benjamin with
Judah, the people with their (...) ^d Rulers.

Ver. 28. Thy God has commanded thy strength: ^rengthen, O God, that which
thou have wrought for us.

29. Because of thy temple at Jerusalem, shall kings. bring presents unto thee.

From the eleventh reason of Gods praise; Learn, 1. Not in Kings, or Rulers, or
any thing else, but in the Lord and from the Lord, is the strength of his
Church, which she may expect always to be furnished with by virtue of the
Covenant; Thy God has commanded thy strength, says David to the Church. 2. As
the Lord has dec^eed to establish his Church: so has he means and
instruments in every age and place prepared for this pu^pose, and has given
out order by actual providence; which is always going about the work in all
ages; Thy God has com^anded thy stren^th. 3. The Lords decree and the order
given forth to accomplish it, consists well with the Churches using of all
lawful means to further that end, and in spe^ial should be joined with
thankful acknowledging of what ^he Lord has begun to do, or done already for
it, and with earnest prayer for accomplishing of what is to be further done: so
teaches David's example and prayer here: Strengthen, O God, that which thou
have wrought for us. 4. The Lords known presence in his Chuch, maintaining and
blessing of his public Ordinances, shall move kings at last to do homage to
God incarnate; that is, to Christ represented by his dwelling in the Temple of
Jerusalem: Because of thy temple at Jerusalem, shall kings bring presents unto
thee.

Ver. 30. Rebuke the company of spearmen, the ^ltitude of the bulls, with the
calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of silver:
scatter thou the people that delight in war.

31. Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall s^n stretch out her hands
unto God.

How this shall come to pass, he shows; to wit, partly by breaking the power
of some of them, when they make opposition; partly by powerful conversion of
other some. Whence learn, 1. It is not against the precept of love, to pray
against public enemies of the Church, when private spleen is not the motive,
but zeal to the glory of God; Rebuke the company of spearmen. 2. The leaders of
armies, parties, and factions against Gods Church and cause, and the followers
of such leaders, are all of them a company of beasts; Rebuke the multitude of
the bulls, with the calves of the people. 3. God is adversary to all who do
oppose his people, and his cause in their hand, and can as easily repulse them
really, and overturn them, as reprove them verbally: Rebuko the spearmen, etc.
4. The end of the Churches prayer against her enemies, is, that God may be
glorified, and people at least brought to outward obedience unto God, which may
be a means to real conversion in Gods time; Rebuke them, etc. till every one of
them submit themselves, with pieces of silver; that is, till they offer to
contribute to Gods service 5. The punishing of some of Gods enemies, may be a
means to move others to offer obedience, and submit to God, when people that
delight in war are scattered; For Princes shall come out of Egypt. 6. God
will draw into subjection unto himself, some of his most open and inveterate
enemies; Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her
hands unto thee.

Ver. 32. Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth: O sing praises unto the
Lord. Selah.

33. To him that rides upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old: lo, he
does send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.

34. A^cribe ye strength unto God: his excellency is over Israel, and his
strength is in the clouds.

35. O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places: the God of Israel is he
that gives strength anll power unto his people: blessed be God.

From the l^st reason of praising of God, taken from his Almighty power, in
conversion of Kingdoms of Gentiles, ready to be put forth for the preservation
of his Church gathered, and for the overthrow of his enemies. Learn, 1. The ti^
shall come, when the kingdoms of the earth shall turn Christians in
profession, in a greater measure then yet has been seen, for, Sing unto God,
ye kingdoms of the earth: is not a simple telling of their duty, but a
prophecy of their joyful joining in the worship of God; and that they shall
have cause of joy within themselves to praise him; O sing praises to the Lord.
2. True Converts will renounce Idols and false gods, and reverently worship the
omnipotent Creato^ and Governor of heaven, the eternal God: Sing praises to
God that rides upon the heaven of heavens, that were of old. 3. As the
glorious government of heaven does show the Lords power; so the thunder also
does show his power and terror, the consideration whereof is needful to dispose
our stupid minds to praise him; Lo, he does send forth his voice, even a
mighty voice. 4. The right use of Gods great, and sensible, and daily seen
works, is to make us to glorify the power of God, who is able to work
whatsoever he pleases; Ascribe strength unto the Lord. 5. The Lords glory in
his Church is more excellent then all that is to be seen in the works of
Creation: His excellency is over Israel. 6. The true worshipper must study the
power and all other properties of God, both by what he hears in the society of
the Church, and by what he sees in his visible works; as well daily transient
works; such as the clouds are, as constantly enduring works, such as the
heavens are: His excel^ency is over Israel, and his strength is in the clouds.
And surely it is no small power, which does bear up such weight of mountains
of snow, and seas of water, and does make them sail as it were, and flee with
wings in the air, which God does dissolve by sittle and little, as we daily
behold. 7. Wheresoever God shows his presence, whether in heaven, or in his
Church, in any place of the earth, there and from thence does he show himself a
d^eadful God to such as fear him not; O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy
places. 8. Albeit there were no man to hear us glorify God, or no man to take
his praise of our hand, we should acknowledge his greatness in our heart, and
before himself, who will take true worship of our hand; for David here turns
his speech to God in the end of the Psalm, saying to him, O God, thou art
terrible out of thy holy places. 9. The Lord has an everlasting interest in
the people of ^srael, and they in him, for the elections cause; and every true
Israelite has an everlasting interest in God, he is the God of Israel. 10.
What the Lord has, is forthcoming to his peoples furniture, as they have
need: The God of Israel is be that gives strength and power to his pe^le. 11.
It is reason that at all the several remembrances of Gods mercy to us, we
should acknowledge his blessedness, and his blessing of us, and this is all we
can do, and that also can we not do, except he strengthen and enable us for
praise; for, blessed be God, says the Prophet, for this very reason, after he
has spoken of his giving power to his people.

PSALM. LXIX To the chief musician upon Shoshannim. A Psalm of David.
DAvid, as a type of Christ, earnestly deals with God for a delivery from his
perplexed condition, and from the malice of his adversaries; and does find a
comfortable event. There are three parts of the Psalm. In the first, is his
prayer, six times presented, and strengthened with new reasons, to ver. 22. In
the second part of the Psalm, is his imprecation of ten plagues against his
enemies, with some reasons added for the justice of the inflicting the plagues,
mentioned to ver. 29. In the third part, are four evidences of his victory,
from ver. 29. to the end. In all which, whatsoever is proper to the type, is to
be referred to the type only; and whatsoever is fit also to be applied unto
Christ the Antitype, must be referred to him only, in that sense which is
suitable to his Majesty.

His prayer at first, is propounded in few words; Save me: the reasons are
four. The first, from the danger he was in, ver. 1, 2. The next from his long
and patient waiting for an answer to his prayer, ver 3. The third from the
multitude, and malice, and iniquity of his enemies, ver. 4. The fourth is by
way of attestation of God, that he was innocent of that whereof he was charged
by his enemies, joined in with his humble acknowledging of whatsover other sins
justice could charge upon him in any other respect, ver. 5.

Ver. 1. SAve me, O God; for the waters are come in unto my soul.

2. I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into deep
waters, where the floods overflow me.

His first Petition is to be saved, and the first reason of it is, because of
the danger he was in; Whence learn, 1. A child of God may in his own sense be
very near to perishing, and yet must not in the most desperate condition cease
to pray, nor cease to hope for delivery prayed for: Save me, O God. 2. With
danger of bodily death, a child of God may have in his spirit a sore conflict
with the sense of wrath, like to swallow up his soul, as deep waters do a
drowning man; The waters are come in unto my soul. 3, The condition of a soul
exercised with the sense of wrath, threateneth no less then perdition,
certain, inevitable, without any event, and endless; whereof the bodily danger
of a drowning man is but a shadow: I sink in deep mire, where there is no
standing: I am come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me.

Ver. 3. I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while I
wait for my God.

The second reason of the first Petition is, because he had long and patiently
waited on God. Whence learn, 1. Faith in hard exigences does not give over for
appearances of perdition, knowing that what is impossible to man's appearance,
is not impossible to God; for David, as a believer, and a type of Christ,
prays still for all this, although he find no delivery: I am weary of my
crying. 2. Prayer put up in faith to God, keeps in life, and is like a man's
drawing breath in the water when the head is lifted up above the floods; for
here, although the floods overflowed the Psalmist, yet he is able to show this
to God, and to cry till he be weary of crying. 3. For exercising of faith, and
making patience to have the perfect work, it is no strange thing for God to
delay relief unto an earnest supplicant, till he be like to give over, till his
case seem desperate, and his relief hopeless; Mine eyes fail, while I wait
for my God. 4. Though the flesh of the regenerate man be weak, yet the spirit
is ready, and will never give over calling on God, depending on him, holding
fast the Covenant, and the hope of deliverance; for it will make this a new
ground of speech unto God, that it is no^ able to speak any thing, and a new
ground of laying hold on God, and hoping for help from him, because its hope is
failing, as here: I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried; mine eyes fail,
while I wait for my God.

Ver. 4. They that hate me without a cause, are more then the hairs of my head:
they that would destroy (...), being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then
I restored that which I took not away.

The third reason of the first Petition is, because his enemies were many,
mighty, and malicious. Whence learn, 1. Holiness, and integri^y cannot ward off
the en^ of a wicked world: for the enemies of David, who was a well-deserving
man, and Christ (whose type he was) much more beneficial to men, had foes
innu^ble; They that hate me without cause, are more then the haire^ of my head.
1. Albei^ many do aggravate their own grief foolishly, when they suffer hurt
of them whom they did not injure or provoke; yet the conscience of harmlesnesse
toward such as wish harm to them, is a great suppo^ (...) confidence, when they
(...) ^uriously dealt with; They hate me without a cause. 3. It is no st^nge
m^tter to see truly godly men to be out of credit and affection with men who
a^e in power and authority in the world; They that would destroy me, being mine
enemies wrongfully are mighty. 4. He that is most just, may be troubled and
hated without a cause, and may be deal^ with as a thief, being verily an honest
man; Then I restored that which I took not away.

Ver. 5. O God, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee.

The fourth reason of the first Petition is, because God was witness to his
disposition and carriage. Whence learn, When we are condemned of men unjustly,
we have God to appeal unto; and although there may be sins upon us in our
private reckoning with God, yet being free of what men do lay to our charge, we
may appeal to God in the controversy betwixt our enemies and us, and when we
have acknowledged what sins are in reckoning twixt God and us, our
supplication to God shall not be cast back for our sins; for this is the force
of the Psalmists reasoning, for the strengthening of his own faith in prayer,
saying, O God, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee;
that is, whether I be so foolish and injurious to my persecutors, as they say,
or not, thou Lord know; and whatsoever other sins may be imputed unto me
upon any other score, I refuse not to reckon for them, but I am free, thou
know, of what I am charged with: and this is applicable also in some sort
unto Christ, who was most free of what men did lay to his charge, although in
another reckoning all the iniquities of the elect were charged upon him by
imputation, according to his transaction with the Father about our debt.

Ver. 6. Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord GOD of hosts, be ashamed for
my sake: let not those that seek thee, be confounded for my sake, O God of
Israel.

The second Petition is, that the godly may not be hurt by his manner of
exercise, which he strengthens by four reasons; Frst, because his sufferings
were for Gods cause, ver. 7. Secondly, because he was cast off by his friends,
ver. 8. Thirdly, because he did take Gods honor deeply to heart, ver. 9.
Fourthly, because his holy and religious carriage was mocked: and both by high
and low, by honorable and base rascals he was opposed and persecu^ed, ver. 10,
11, 12.

From the second Petition learn, 1. The property of the godly is to seek
communion with God, and patiently to attend his answer for the time, manner,
and measure of it; for they a^e here described, They that wait on thee, O Lord,
those that seek thee. 2. When one of Gods children is persecuted for
righteousness, all the rest are waiting to see the event, and it c^nnot choose
but be a great dash to them, to see the righteous lie under, or a good cause to
lie long oppressed; which inconvenience we should request the Lord to prevent;
Let not them that wait on thee, be ashamed; let not those thet seek thee, be
ashamed. 3. It is a kindly mark and property of a godly person to be a lover
of the good of all Gods children, and to be careful that no cause or occasion
of stumbling be furnished unto them by him; Let them not be ashamed for my
sake; let them not be confounded for my sake. 4. Faith sets its eyes in prayer
upon those titles of God, which do serve most for its purpose; as here the
Psalmist has to do with enemies, O Lord God of Hosts, will do his turn against
them; he is praying for the good of Gods children, and, O God of Israel,
speaks to that point.

Ver. 7. Because for thy sake I have borne reproach: shame has covered my face.

The first reason of the second Petition is, because his sufferings were for
Gods cause. When^ learn, 1. Though suffering for Gods cause in maintenance of
his truth, be a glorious sort of suffering, wherein a man may go unto God
confidently; yet it may be accompanied with shame from men of this world, and
the godly for a time may be so delayed in the point of relief, that they know
not what to say to their scorners; but may be forced to hang the head for a
while; For thy cause I have borne reproach. 2. He that suffers shame for Gods
cause, shall neither have cause at length to be ashamed of his suffering, nor
shall any other have cause ^o be ashamed for him; Let them not be confounded
for my sake because for thy sake I have borne reproach.

Ver. 8. I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an al^n unto my mothers
children.

The second reason of the ^econd Petition is, because his friends had (...) him
off; Whence learn, 1. In affliction for Gods cause friends will more readily
for^ake a suffere: then in his affliction for a civil cause; I am become a
stranger to my brethren* 2. The power of Religion in the godly, is stronger
then the bonds of blood with their kinsmen, and it will make them cleave to
God, when their kindred do cast them off: I am an alien unto my mothers
children.

Ver. 9. For the zeal of thine house has eaten me up: and the reproaches of
them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me.

The thi^d reason of the second Petition is, because he was deeply affected
with the dishonor done to God. Whence learn, 1. It is not enough to love God,
and his ordinces, and kingdom^ ^and his peoples good; but it is required also
that we be zealous here: The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. 2. Spiritual
affections and passions will no less affect and trouble the body, then natural
^ffections and passion^; The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. 3. Inju^ies
done t^ God and Religion, and to the godly, should affect us no less nearly,
and be laid to heart, then injuries personally concerning us: The reproaches of
them that reproached thee, have fallen upon me.

Ver. 10. When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my
reproach.

11. I made sackcloth also my garment: and I became a proverb to them.

12. They that sit in the gate, speak against me, and I was a song to the
drunkards.

The fourth reason of the second Petition is, because he was greatly mocked of
all sorts for his holy carriage. Whence learn, 1. True zeal is ruled with
knowledge, joined with humility in the man's self, and tempered with the love to
men, even toward persecutors; such was David's zeal: but Christ's zeal was
perfectly such. I wept and chastened my so^le. 2. Fasting in earnest is not so
much the abstinence from meat, as it is the afflicting the soul; When I
chastened my soul with fasting. 3. The godly behavior of the righteous, is
subject to horrible misconstruction yet must they not desist from duties for
all this, Fasting was to my reproach I made sackcloth also my garment, and I
became a proverb to them. 4. I^ is a sore affliction to the godly, to be
condemned by Magist^ates an^ Judges, and yet the truly religious, even Christ
and his followers were, and are subject to this exercise; They that sit in the
gate (or in the Courts of Justice, which were erected at the entry of the parts
of Cities) do speak against me. 5. Righteousness and truth is not the worse by
it^ being condemned by civil Judges; God will not disclaim his own cause for
that, but will hear such complaints as this is, in this case: they that sit in
the gate, speak against me. 6. When Magistrates do discountenance true
Religion, then it becomes a matte^ of derision to rascals, and to every base
villain without controlment, and a table talk to every^ tipler; I was a song of
the drunkards. 7. The shame of the Cross is more grievous then the rest of the
trouble of it: This is the fourth time that the shame of the Cross is
presented unto God, in these sour last verses; I was a song of the drunkards:
after complaining of his being reproached, and being made a proverb.

Ver. 13. But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O LORD, in an acceptable time:
O God, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.

This is the third petition for deliverance, or for granting his prayer, or the
third time he presen^eth it; whereunto he adds reasons taken from the time of
presenting of it, and multitude of Gods mercy and truth of his promises or
Covenant of salvation. Whence learn, 1. The best way to (...) out the
persecution of the mighty, and the mockage of the b^se multitude, is to be
frequent in prayer to God for our part; But as for me, my prayer is unto thee,
O Lord. 2. So long as God does offer a gracious ear to supplicants, a man may
be confident that petitions of grace shall have ready access and answer; my
prayer is unto thee in an acceptable time. 3. The largeness of Gods mercy is a
sufficient encouragement for the afflicted to come and take the benefit
thereof; In the multitude of thy mercies hear thou me. 4. When besides the
mercifulness of God, we have also his Covenant and promise of salvation, we
may upon these two pillars lean and roll over, and rest our faith: hear me in
the truth of thy salvation.

Ver. 14. Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be delivered
from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

15. Let not the water-floods overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up,
and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

The fourth petition for delivery, or fourth time he presents it, whereunto
he adds reasons taken from the danger he was in. Whence learn, 1. Faith uses
to correct the expressions of sense; and as faith does gather strength, a man's
condition grows clearer; It was the expression of sense, ver. 2 I sink in
deep mire, and here the fear is something lessened, because faith is something
more cleared; deliver me out of the mire, let me not sink. 2. The man who
loves truth better then worldly prosperity, and makes the Lord his refuge,
shall not faint under persecution, but shall be borne through all troubles, and
be delivered; let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep
waters. 3. Faith in God gives hope to be helped, and is half a delivery,
before the full delivery come; for the Psalmist is now with his head above the
water, and not so feared as when he began the Psalm; for here he says, Let
not the water floods overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up. 4. As
the sense of danger sharpens prayer, so the greatness of it is a ground of
hope, that the evil which is feared shall not prevail over us; for albeit the
Lord suffer the danger to be great, yet will he not leave us in a case
desperate: let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

Ver. 16. Hear me, O LORD, for thy loving kindness is good: turn unto me
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

17. And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: hear me
speedily.

The fifth petition for delivery, or fifth time he presents it, whereunto he
adds reasons taken from the multitude of Gods mercies, conscience of his
uprightness, and greatness of his trouble. Whence learn, 1. Albeit God should
give no answer for a time, faith will still press for an answer, for it
knows it has to do with the hearer of prayer: hear me, said he before, and
hear over again, Hear me, O LORD. 2. Faith sees what is in Gods heart,
whatsoever it does find or miss in his hand, it fastens on love, and draws
hope and life from that: hear me, for thy loving kindness is good. 3. Though a
believing soul find it self deserted of God in some respects; yet while it
holds fast on his merciful nature, it may be sure to meet with a change of
dispensation more comfortable; turn unto me according to the multitude of thy
tender mercies. 4. When a believer is persecuted by man for righteousness, and
friends and familiars do turn their backs upon him; it is not strange that God
for the man's trial, should seem to hide his countenance from him also, which
exercise the believer counts more heavy then all the rest, and can be
content to want all the creatures kindness, so he may find the Lords
kindness; for he cannot endure long to want Gods presence: Hide not thy face
from thy servant. 5. The conscience of endeavor to serve God, gives hope of
comfort in time of trouble, and that so much the sooner, that the trouble be
great, and perdition apparently near; Hide not thy face from try servant, for I
am in trouble: hear me speedily. 6. An upright servant, albeit he be troubled
for Gods cause, and do miss comfort from God, yet will he not change his
Master, nor despair of his favor; Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I
am in trouble. 7. It is no limitation of God, to press his hasting to help,
when trouble presses us so sore as we seem near to perish: if he speedily
prevent not: hear me speedily.

Ver. 18. Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: deliver me because of mine
enemies.

19. Thou have known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor: mine
adversaries are all before thee.

20. Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness: and I looked
for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found
none.

21. They gave me alse gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar
to drink.

In the sixth petition, or sixth time he prays for obtaining delivery:
whereunto he adds reasons taken from the inhumanity, and cruelty of his
enemies, and desertion of his friends, and want of comfort from all men. Whence
learn, 1. As straits do serve to drive the godly more and more neer-hand to
God: so do they serve to prepare men for renewed sense of communion with God,
or for Gods sensible drawing more neer-hand to them; draw near unto my soul,
says he. 2. A new manifestation of Gods love to a soul, is present relief and
delivery, whatsoever be the trouble; draw near to my soul, and redeem me. 3. In
the delivery of Gods children from the hand of persecutors, the Lord does look
not only to the necessity of his children, but also to the insolent pride of
the enemies, in case they should prevail; deliver me, because of mine enemies.
4. The consideration of Gods being witness to all the sufferings of the
Saints, is a ground of patience under trouble, and of hope to be deliv^red;
Thou have known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor: mine adversaries
are all before thee. 5 Before a believer once entered in sufferings, and put
upon his trialls, be delivered, he shall be made very sensible of the weight of
^rouble, specially of reproaches, and of his own weakness to bear the burden
of the cross alone; Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of
heaviness. 6. As a persecuted Saint may possibly be deprived of all common
comfort, pity and help from men; so the less their comfort be on earth, they
may look for the more and readier comfort from God; I looked for some to take
pity, and there was non^; and for comforters, but I found none. 7. As the
wicked are ready to add affliction to affliction unto the godly: so must the
godly ever look for it: yea, they must not think it strange to find the means
of natural life, and ordi^ary refreshments of the body, made bitter to them by
persecution: They gave me gall for my meat; that is, they made my natural
refreshments tastelesse, yea and bitter to me: they gave me ca^se of grief,
instead of comforting me 8. As all the sufferings of the Saints are but
shadows of the sufferings of Christ: so are they all mitigated and sanctified
in the sufferings of Christ, upon whom all the suffering^ mentioned in this
Psalm, were foretold that they should fall, for expiation of the sin, and
sanctifying the crosses of all his followers; In my thirst they gave me vinegar
to drink, was a Prophecy of Christ's suffering on the Cross.

Ver. 22. Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should
have been for their welfare, let it become a trap.

23. Let their eyes be darkend that they see not: and make their loins
continually to shake.

24. Pour out thine indignatian upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold
of them,

25. Let their habitation be desolate, and let none dwell in their tents.

This is the second part of the Psalm, wherein the Prophet, as a type of
Christ, by way of imprecation against his malicious enemies prophesies of the
vengeance of God against all obstinate adversaries, and malicious persecutors
of him, whether in his own person, or in his members; and denounces ten
plagues, or effects of Gods wrath to come upon them for their wickedness. The
first whereof is this, God shall curse all the comforts of this life unto the
obstinate adversaries of Christ, and of his followers: all these comforts shall
serve to harden their hearts in sin, and lengthen their life therein, till
they fill up the measure of their iniquities; Let their table become a snare
before them. The second plague, all the means appointed for men's conversion
and salvation shall turn for the aggravating of their sin and just
damnation: and as all things work together for the good of those that love God,
so shall all things work for the woe and wrack of Gods enemies; That which
should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap. The third plague,
they shall not perceive the true intent of Gods work, nor consider the day of
their visitation; Let their e^es be darkened, that they see not. The fourth
plague, there shall be no peace to the wicked, but as even in laughter their
heart shall be sorrowful; so also their conscience for fear shall never dare to
abide the light of the Lords Word, to be examined by it; and even in their
greatest prosperity they shall have perpetual secret fear, smother it as they
will: make their loins continually to shake. The fifth plague, the threatened
wrath of God shall be fully executed against them, and never depart from them
when it is once poured out; Pour out thy indignation on them, and let thy
wrathful anger take hold of them. The sixth plague is, the curse of God shall
be on their houses and posterity, and the place they have dwelt in shall be
abhorred: Let their habitation be desolate, and let none dwell in their tents.

Ver. 26. For they persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they talk to the
grief of those whom thou have wounded.

He gives a reason of those fearful imprecations on Christ's adversaries,
because they are cruel in their persecution of him, and of the godly, even in
the time of their affliction otherwise sent by God. Whence learn, 1. It
consists well with the love of God to his children, (even his only begotten
Son Jesus Christ not being excepted) to exercise them with sad calamities,
for bringing to pass the work of man's Redemption by Christ, and for perfecting
of the sanctification and salvation of the redeemed by Christ; of all of whom
now and then it may be said to God, Thou have smitten him, and they are those
whom thou have wounded. 2. Whatsoever may be the reason of the Lords smiting
and wounding his own children, yet their wicked enemies have no just reason to
malign them, or to trouble them, and therefore their troubling of Gods
children is persecution; They persecute him whom thou have smitten. 3. The very
talking and venting of ill speeches, to the prejudice of Christ's cause and
truth, and true holiness in his Saints, especially when they are under
sufferings and afflictions whatsoever, is a high provocation of Gods wrath:
They talk to the grief of those whom thou have wounded. 4. The persecution of
Gods children for righteousness, is a sufficient ditty for all the forenamed
damnation in the preceding verses; this is the reason of the justice of the
imprecation: For they persecute him whom thou have smitten. 5. The Church
without breach of duty to men, may sing and rejoice in these fearful
imprecations against the malicious enemies of Christ and his Church; first, as
lovers of God more then of men: secondly, as followers, not of their own
quarrel, but of the controversy of the Lord of hosts, whose soldiers they
are against all his enemies whatsoever: thirdly, as subscribers to the justice
of God, who will not suffer malicious cruelty to be unpunished: and fourthly,
as rejoycers in Gods love to his people, who ownes the wrongs done to his
Church and servants therein, as done to himself, and will be avenged upon their
adversaries, and having decreed doom against the adversaries of his Church,
will have his children to be ministers under the great Judge, to pronounce the
sentence against his and their enemies; and as it were, to give out order for
execution of the sentence, saying, Let their table, let their e^s, let their
habitation be so and so disposed of.

Ver. 27. Add iniquity unto their iniquity, and let them not come into thy
righteousness.

28. Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with
the righteous.

The seventh plague of the enemies of Christ and his Church, is this: howsoever
igno^ant Zelots, some of them may find mercy; ye^ malicious persecutors of
truth and piety grow worse and worse, and being entered in the course of
persecution, cannot go off, but do draw deeper and deeper in guiltiness, and
that in Gods righteous judgment, punishing sin by sin: Add iniquity unto
their iniquity. The eigth plague is, they are given over to a reprobate sense,
so as they cannot lay their own sins to heart, and so cannot see the necessity
of the remission of sin, nor put a price upon the purchase of Justification
unto sinners by Christ the Redeemer, nor be found among the persons justified
by faith in him: Let them not come into thy righteousness. The ninth plague is
this: albeit the enemies of Christ and his people may pretend to be among the
number of his friends, and to have their names written in great letters, in the
Catalogue of the visible Church; yet God shall disclaim them one day as none of
his, and thrust them from him as workers of iniquity: Let them be blotted out
of the book of the living. The tenth plague is this: as the visible Church has
an open book, wherein all within the external Covenant are written, as Saints
by calling, and Covenantets with God for life and salvation, out of which book
God dashes out the names of his wicked enemies: so God has a secret book and
roll as it were, wherein he enrolleth all the regenerate, all the justified; and
among the names of this sort, or among the names of the true members of the
invisible Church of the regenerate, none of the names of Christ's malicious
enemies shall be written; Let them not be written with the righteous.

Ver. 29. But I am poor and sorrowful: let thy salvation (O God) set me up on
high.

The third and last part of the Psalm, wherein is set down the glorious event
of this sad exercise in four evidences of victory of his says over this
assault. The first whereof is in his confident prayer, not only to be
delivered, but also to be exalted, ver. 29. The second evidence is, in his
hearty promise of thanksgiving, ver. 30, 31. The third evidence is, in a
prophecy of the fruit of this exercise, which the believers shall have by it,
ver. 32, 33. The fourth is a thanksgiving for mercies foreseen, which shall
come to the Church, and in special to the Church of Israel, ver. 34, 35, 36.
All which, in as far as they concern David the type, are but little in
comparison of Christ the Antitype. From the first evidence of the victory of
his faith, appearing in his confident prayer; Learn, 1. It is no strange thing
to see poverty of spirit and sad afflictions joined, the one to help and season
the other; But I Am poor and sorrowful. 2. There is as sure ground of hope of
an event out of every trouble wherein the children of God can fall, as there is
ground of hope of the overturning of the most settled worldly prosperity of
their enemies; for the forenamed curses shall come on the enemies of the
godly, but the child of God in the mean time may expect salvation, and to be
set on high, which he confidently prays for; But I am poor and sorrowful, let
thy salvation, O God, set me up. 3. The conscience of humiliation under Gods
hand, is a great evidence of delivery out of whatsoever trouble, if a man in a
righteous cause be emptied of selfconceit and carnal confidence, and brought
down to poverty of spirit, and affected with the sense of sins and misery
following upon it, and withal go to God in this condition, he may be sure to be
helped, the poor in spirit are freed from the curse; But I am poor and
sorrowful, says the Psalmist here, let thy salvation set me up on high. 4 The
man afflicted and persecuted for righteousness, humbled in himself, and drawn
to God for relief, shall not only be delivered, but also shall be as much
exalted after his delivery, as ever he was cast down; Let thy salvation, O God,
set me up on high. 5. The kindly sufferer of righteousness, will have no
deliverance, but such as God will allow him, as God shall bring unto him: and
as he does not look for delivery another way, so he does look for a glorious
delivery this way; Let thy salvation, O God, set me up on high.

Ver. 30. I will praise the Name of God with a song, and will magnify him with
thanksgiving

31. This also shall please the Lord better then an ox or bullock that has
horns and hoofes.

From the second evidence of his victory of faith in his promised thanksgiving;
Learn, 1. When the Lord comforts the heart of a sufferer for his cause, he can
make him glad before the delivery come, by giving him the assurance that it
shall come, and can engage his heart to solemn thanksgiving in the midst of
trouble; for poverty of spirit will esteem the far soresight of delivery at
last, as a rich mercy, and matter of a song; I will praise the Name of God with
a song. 2. The Lord in the delivering of his children out of their troubles,
will give evidence of his greatness, as well as of his goodness: of his
power, as well as of his mercy to them, that he may have the more glory and
thanks for his work: I will magnify him with thanksgiving. 3. Moral worship
offered in Spirit and truth, in the meanest degree of sincerity, is more
acceptable to God, then the most pompous ceremonial service, which can be done
to him without Spirit and truth; This also shall please the Lord better then an
ox and bullock, that has bornes and hooses; that is, which is perfect and
wants nothing in the external part of commanded service. 4. That which we
know shall be most acceptable to God, we ought to study and follow that most,
that we may walk before God unto all well-pleasing, in special to praise him in
affliction, and to praise him from a contrite spirit: This also shall please
the Lord better then, etc.

Ver. 32. The humble shall see this and be glad: and your hearts shall live
that seek God.

33. For the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners.

From the third evidence of the victory of his faith, in the prophecy of the
fruits of his sufferings, mainly as he was a type of Christ, who here is most
intended; Learn, 1. The exercise of the Saints, set down in Scripture, and
namely the exercise of David, and of Christ represented by him, was foretold,
that it should be of great use to the Church of God in aftertimes, as now we
see it in effect: The humble shall see this and be glad. 2. The humble soul is
most capable of divine knowledge and comfort; The humble shall see this. 3. The
escape of our Lord Jesus out of his sufferings for us, and the escape of his
afflicted children out of their sufferings through faith in him, is a matter of
instruction, comfort and joy to every humbled believer: The humble shall see
this and be glad. 4. As such who are pure in spirit and truly humbled, do live
upon Gods alms, and are daily at his doors for relief of their necessities;
and for communion with his gracious goodness: so shall they thrive well in
this trade; Your heart shall live that seek God. 5. The Lord children have a
life beyond the children of men* which is able to quicken them in their deepest
troubles, and to make them blessed in their delivery out of troubles; a life
moral and spiritual, whereby their conscience is comforted; Your heart shall
live that seek God. 6. The right way for the godly afflicted to have the
benefit of the troubles and events which Christ and his followers have had
experience of, is to comfort themselves in hope of the like event and success
in seeking God as they did: The humble shall see this and be glad, and your
heart shall live that seek God. 7. As the Lords poor men are much in prayer, so
shall they be rich in good answers; For the Lord hears the poor. 8. Whoever
in defense of any point of Gods truth are put to trouble, either in body or
mind, by men, or Satan, or both* they are all sufferers for God; they are all
prisoners, who howsoever they be misregarded by men, shall be of much price in
Gods eyes: He despises not his prisoners.

Ver. 34. Let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that
moves therein.

35. For God will save Sion, and will build the Cities of Judah, that they may
dwell there, and have it in possession.

36. The seed also of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love his
Name shall dwell therein.

From the last evidence of the victory of faith, set down in a prophetical
thanksgiving for the foreseen mercies which were to come to the Church by
Christ's procurement, and specially to the Jews; Learn, 1. Large sense of
troubles makes way for large observation, and sense answerable of mercies; The
evil of deepest afflictions the Lord can recompense with highest consolation,
as the beginning and ending of this Psalm gives evidence. 2. The soul that
sees the mercy of God toward it self, does see also the mercy of God upon the
same grounds to all others, his people in Sion, his Church in every place and
time; and he sees the benefits of Christ's sufferings to be matter of praise
unto God, able to fill the whole world; and he sees his own insufficiency for
the praising of God also, and that all the creatures are all few enough, when
they all concur in this Song; Let the heaven and the earth praise him, and
the seas and every thing that moves therein. 3. Whatsoever condition of Gods
people can be represented by the various condition, motion, settlement or
commotion of heaven, earth and seas, and things therein, cannot but furnish
matter of joyful praise to God, and come up to contribute to Gods praises; Let
the heaven and earth, the seas and every thing that moves therein, praise him.
4. Every delivery of every believer, and above all the delivery of Christ as
man from his expi^tory sufferings, is earnests and pledges of the delivery of
the Church militant out of all its troubles; For God will save Sion, says the
Psalmist, being now delivered out of his trouble. 5. As the Lord will ever
maintain his Church, his Sion and his Judah; so has he a purpose to give a
special evidence of this his care among the Jews, how far soever they may at
some times be from all appearance of his respect to them; for in the promise he
keeps in expressly the Name of Judah: He will build the Cities of Judah. 6.
What outward testimonies of Gods respect to the Jews for Christ's sake shall be
given unto them, after the destruction of their Cities, here presupposed, we
must leave it to God, to be in due time by his own works interpreted, and to be
made out according to what here is said; That the Cities of Judah shall be
builded, that they may dwell there and have it, (to wit, the promised land,) in
possession, the seed also of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love
his Name shall dwell therein. Only let us observe, that the duty of the true
Citizens of the Church is, to transmit true Religion to their posterity, and
that this is the best and only way to transmit also the blessing of God, and
the constant possession thereof unto them: The seed also of his servants shall
inherit it, and they that love his Name, etc.

PSALM. LXX. To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance.
THis Psalm is almost one in words with the latter end of Psalm 40. wherein
David being in present danger of his life by his enemies, prays first, for
speedy delivery, ver. 1. next, for shameful disappointment to his enemies, ver.
2, 3. and thirdly, for a comfortable life to all the godly, ver. 4. from which
condition albeit he himself was very far for the present, yet he professes
he does rely on God by faith, and prays for a timous delivery, ver. 5.

From the Inscription; Learn, 1. Our most notable dangers and deliveries should
most carefully be observed and remembered, and made use of; This is a Psalm to
bring to remembrance. 2. What hard condition we have been in before, we may
fall into the like again; and the same gracious means we have used before, in
seeking our relief of God, we should use again; and what words of prayer we
have used before, we may use again, without any either needless affectation of
other words, or superstitious tying of our selves to the same words, as the
example of David teaches us, when we compare the end of the 40. Psalm with
this Psalm.

Ver. 1. MAke haste, O God, to deliver me: make haste, to help me, O LORD.

From the first petition; Learn, 1. Though death or danger of it were never so
near, God can come quickly and prevent it; and prayer is a swift messenger,
which in the twinkling of an eye can go and return with an answer from heaven,
as this abrupt beginning of his prayer does teach us; O Lord, to deliver me.
These words, make haste; are not expressed in the Original; for the haste was
so great as he could not express it, till he drew his breath. 2. As we have
need of help, God will make haste unto our help; Make haste to help me, O LORD.

Ver. 2. Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them
be turned backward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt.

3. Let them be turned back for a reward of their shame that say, Aha, aha.

From the second petition; Learn, 1. The more that the enemies of Gods people
do promise to themselves certainly to destroy such of the Saints as they do
pitch upon when their plot shall be ripe and fixed, when God does disappoint
them they are the more confounded and ashamed; Let them be ashamed and
confounded, who seek after my soul, or my life. 2. All the enemies of Gods
children, shall at last think shame of their injuries done to them, and evils
which they have wished unto them, to wit, when they shall know whose children
they are, and what interest God has in them, then at last shall they flee, and
hide themselves for shame; Let them he turned backward, and put to confusion,
that desire my hurt. 3. The damage of the godly is the delight of the wicked;
and an enemy to the godly, is he that laughs and scorns at the misery of the
godly; They say, when they see them in trouble, Aha, aha. 4. Albeit what shame
the wicked do put upon the godly for righteousness, or for their sufferings
for righteousness, is not the shame of the godly, but the shame of the enemies,
who do what they can to expose the godly to shame, yet shall the enemies have
shame yet more for their pains, and the terrible wrath of God shall chase them
out of Gods presence; Let them be turned back for a reward of their shame, that
say, Aha, aha.

Ver. 4. Let all those that seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee: and let
such as love thy salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified.

From the third petition; Learn, 1. Whatsoever be our own hard condition at any
time, we should seek the welfare and prosperity of the rest of Gods children,
and it is the property of each of the godly in their trouble, to wish all the
rest to be partakers of the blessedness which their own soul does seek after,
but not to be like to them in trouble or bonds; Let all those that seek thee,
rejoice and be glad in thee. 2. If one of the godly be delivered out of his
troubles, all the rest, who did pray for the delivery should rejoice in God
also, as for a benefit given to themselves; Let all those that seek thee,
rejoice and be glad in thee. 3. The godly do not desire deliverance to
themselves or their fellows except in Gods way, in a cleanly and holy way: and
the more of God is seen in the delivery of his servants, the more are they glad
in the Lord; They are those that love Gods salvation. 4. It is a most suitable
service for the Saints, to be always praising God; Let those that love thy
salvation, say continually, The Lord be magnified.

Ver. 5. But I am poor and needy, make haste unto me, O God: Thou art my help
and my deliverer, O LORD make no tarrying.

From the fifth petition; Learn, 1. Albeit we be not in such a condition, as we
wish all the godly were in, yet let us lay out that condition before a pitiful
God, and submit our selves to him in the condition wherein we are; But I am
poor and needy, 2. The sense of a hard condition, is a preparation and a ground
of hope to be brought out of it to a better; I am poor and needy, make haste
unto me, O God. 3. Whatsoever dispensation we shall meet with, we should hold
fast the claim of faith, and of our interest in God; Thou art my help, and my
deliverer. 4. Having settled our dependence upon God, we may without being
mistaken of God, speak all our desires to him; and having done so, should leave
our supplication and case at his feet with confidence: O Lord, make no tarrying.

PSALM. LXXI.
THis Psalm is a Prayer of David in his old age, requesting for delivery from
the conspiracy of Absalom, wherein he wrestleth with the Lord by servent
supplication (...) in seven petitions, all tending to this purpose, that he may
delivered, to ver. 14. and from ver. 14. to the end, we have his confidence to
be delivered, set forth in four evidences thereof. Absalom here is not named,
nor is the particular case set down, otherwise then in general expressions,
that so it may serve the better for the larger use of the Church of God, and of
the particular members thereof, in their afflictions.

Ver. 1. IN thee, O LORD, do I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion.

The first petition is general, wherein he professes his confidence in God,
and prays that he be not put to confusion. Whence learn, 1. As long as a
child of God does live in the world, he must look for new afflictions, as here
the experience of the Psalmist, tossed in his old age, does warn us. 2. Look
how many new troubles do befall Gods servants, so many new messengers are sent
of God to call them to him; so many new errands are furnished unto them; so
many new petitions are put in their mouth; and so many pressing necessities are
sent to make them earnest in their supplication, and frugal in making use of
their interest in God by faith, as here and elsewhere does appear. 3. He that
comes to God must believe in him, and fasten his faith on God, and avow it,
how weak soever he find it to be; In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust. 4.
Albeit such as believe in God, may have many tentations to mistrust God, and
great fears that they shall be disappointed of their hopes, and for a time may
seem to be disappointed and put to confusion, yet it shall not be for ever; if
they do not take shame unto them by distrust, they shall never have cause to be
ashamed; Let me never be put to confusion.

Ver. 2. Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline
thine ear unto me and save me.

The second petition is more special, for safety and delivery from his enemies.
Whence learn, 1. The righteousness of God is a pawn unto the godly, that
their lawful petitions shall be granted, and specially when they seek delivery
from their ungodly adversaries; Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me
to escape. 2. When the Lord gives a heart to a believer to pray, he will also
grant him audience, and a good answer; Incline thine ear unto me and save me.

Ver. 3. Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: thou
have given commandment to save me, for thou art my rock, and my fortress.

The third petition is, that the Lord would show himself to him in effect, what
he has engaged himself to be unto believers according to the Covenant. Whence
learn, 1 What the Lord is to his people by Covenant, he will be to them the
same effectually and in deed, as their need shall require; and as they shall
employ him; Be thou my strong habitation. 2. The goodness of God covenanted to
his people, is not for one good turn, but for every good which they need; not
for one day, but for daily use making, and constant enjoying of it; Be thou my
strong habitation, where ^to continually I may resort. 3. As the Lord has all
means, all second causes, all creatures at his command, being Lord of hosts,
to execute whatever he does give order for to be done; so has he really set
his active providence on work, to accomplish what he has covenanted to every
believer; Thou have given commandment to save me, for thou art my rock and
fortress: he gives his believing in God, who is his rock, as a reason of his
saying, that God was about to save him.

Ver. 4. Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand
of the unrighteous and cruel man.

5. For thou art my hope, O Lord God: thou art my trust from my youth.

6. By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me out
of my mothers bowels, my praise shall be continually of thee.

The fourth petition for delivery is strengthened by reason, taken from the
wickedness of the enemy, ver. 4. from his own confidence in God, ver. 5: and
from his long experience o^ Gods kindness unto him in time past, ver. 6.
Whence learn, 1. It is a great advantage to be a Confederate with God, when we
have to deal with his enemies and ours in any debate; Deliver me, O my God,
(says he) out of the hand of the wicked. 2. The integrity of the believer in a
good cause, and the iniquity of their adversaries in their ill cause, are good
tokens of the believers victory over them; Deliver me out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man. 3. Confidence in God, avowed against all tentations
in Gods presence, and specially when it is of long standing, is so strong an
argument of being heard in a lawful petition, that it may persuade the believer
he shall speed; Deliver me, for thou art my hope, O Lord God, thou art my trust
from my youth. 4. True thankfulness will not pass by common benefits, and
true faith will read special love in common and ordinary favors, and make use
thereof amon^ other experiences for strengthening of faith; By thee have I been
holden up from the womb, thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels. 5.
The forming of us in the belly, and the common benefit of birth and bringing
forth quick into the world, is a smothered wonder, and so glorious a work of
God, that he deserves perpetual praise from us for that one work; Thou art he
that cook me out of my mothers belly.

Ver. 7. I am as a wonder unto many, but thou art my strong refuge.

8. Let my mouth he filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all the day.

The fifth petition is strengthened with reasons taken from his hard condition,
and from the opportunity of Gods having glory by his delivery out of it. Whence
learn, 1. The exercise of the Lords children is sometimes so strange to the
beholder, as the world does wonder at them; I am as a wonder unto many. 2.
Knowledge of Gods Word and ways, and faith in his Name makes a believer not
think strange, whatsoever fiery trial come upon him, but to rest on Gods will
whatsoever befall him; I am as a wonder unto many, but thou art my strong
refuge: For faith does not judge of it self, as the world judges, but as God
has judged and spoken of it in his Word. 3. The more strange the exercise of
the godly be, the more glorious is the Lords upholding of them in it, and
delivering of them out of i^, and for the hope of the glory which shall redound
to God by such exercises, the hardship should be the more patiently born, and
the delivery sought and expected more confidently, that it shall come when it
may be most for Gods praise; I am a wonder unto many, let my mouth be filled
with thy praise, and with thy honor all the day.

Ver. 9. Cast me not off in the time of old age, forsake me not when my
strength fails:

10. For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul,
take counsel together:

11. Saying, God has forsaken him, persecute and take him, for there is none
to deliver him.

The sixth petition is strengthened with reasons taken from his own old age and
weakness, and from his enemies malice. Whence learn, 1. Such as have been the
Lords servants in their youth, may be sure to find God a good and kind Master
to them in their old age; Cast me not off in the time of old age. 2.
Infirmities in Gods children shall not move loathing and casting off, but
pitying and cherishing of them, that they may be supported in their weakness;
Forsake me not when my strength fails. 3. The world conceives that God does
cast off his children, when he does bring them under any sad calamity, and by
this means do think that they have not to do with Gods children, when they
persecute his dearest servants; yea, and they encourage themselves to persecute
them the more that God does afflict them; Mine enemies speak against me, and
they that lay wait for my soul take counsel together: saying, God has forsaken
him, persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him. 4. The
misconstructions of the world, their plots and conspiracies against the godly,
their evil speeches of them, their resolved cruelty to undo them, are so many
arguments of good hope that God shall deliver them; Forsake me not, for mine
enemies speak against me, etc.

Ver. 12. O God, be not far from me: O my God, make haste for my help.

13. Let them be confounded and consumed, that are adversaries to my soul: let
them be covered with reproach and dishonor, that seek my hurt.

The seventh Petition for delivery and disappointing of his enemies, is
strengthened with reasons taken from the Covenant between God and him, and from
the glory which God shall have by shaming his enemies. Whence learn, 1. When
tentations are most, dangers are greatest, and the assault is strongest, then
does the believer draw nearest unto God, and hold him most closely; O God, be
not far from me, etc. 2. Relying upon, and avowing of the Covenant between
God and the soul of a Believer, is able to bear the greatest stresse, whereunto
tentations and troubles can drive him; O my God, make haste for my help. 3. God
for the glory of his justice against the wicked, and the glory of his grace to
his own, shall pour confusion, consumption, reproach, and dishonor upon
persecutors of righteousness, and adversaries of his suffering servants; Let
them be confounded and consumed, that are adversaries to my soul: let them be
covered with reproach and dishonor, that seek my hurt.

Ver. 14. But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more.

15. My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, and thy salvation all the
day: for I know not the numbers thereof.

16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only.

In the latter part of the Psalm, is the Psalmists confidence to be delivered,
set forth in four evidences thereof. The first is his resolution to persevere
in hope to be helped, and in praising of God, and relying only on the Lords
power and righteousness, and not on his own strength. Whence learn, 1. He that
is resolved to persevere in hope, may be sure of a gracious event out of his
trouble: But I will hope continually. 2. Resolute hope comfort, enlarges,
and stirs up the heart unto more and more praising and thanksgiving; I will
hope continually, and I will yet praise thee more and more. 3. The matter of
the continual praise of God, is partly his righteousness, whereby he keeps
his promise, not only according, but also above condition, and gives also
remission of sins, which did deserve wrath, and partly his deliverances, which
he gives to his children, out of danger of body and soul; My mouth shall show
forth thy righteousness, and thy salvation all the day; for I know not the
numbers thereof. 5. Because in troubles a man's own strength will fail him, and
fail him also in commanded duties, therefore the believer must renounce
confidence in his own ability in both cases, and lean to the furniture of God;
I will go in the strength of the Lord God. 6. Because the conscience of sins
and sinfulness still does stare the Believer in the face, and all to discourage
him; the Believer must renounce all confidence in his own holiness, and rely
upon the imputed righteousness of Christ only, which is called the
righteousness of God by says, being witnessed unto both by the Law and
Prophets, Romans 3. 21. I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine
only; for in the point of justification, and absolving of us from sin, this
righteousesse of God only has place.

Ve^. 17. O God, thou have taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I
declared thy wonderou^ works.

18. Now also when I am old and gray headed, O God, forsake me not: until I
have showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that
is to come.

The second evidence of the Prophets confidence to be delivered, is the
experience of Gods kindness for time past, making him with comfortable
assurance of being heard to pray for the continuance of that same kindness for
time to come. Whence learn, 1. We are all of us ignorant of God and his ways,
till he teach us by his Word, and by his Spirit, and by his giving to us
experimental knowledge thereof; O God, thou have taught me from my youth. 2.
The conscience of sincere endeavor to make use of Gods gifts to us for the
glory of God, and edification of others, according to our place; is very sweet
and comfortable in the day of trouble, and gives much encouragement in
approaching to God; Hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. 3. He that
has had long experience of Gods mercy to himself, and thankfully does
acknowledge the same; may assure himself that the course of Gods kindness to
him shall not be broken off: O God, thou have taught me from my youth, now also
when I am ol^ and gray headed, forsake me not, O Lord. 4. It is a noble design
for a man who has received gifts, whereby he may glorify God and edify his
people, to destinate all the days he has to live, to serve his own
generation, and the posterity, in the communicating to them what he knows of
the Lords allsufficiency, and not to love to live in this world, except for
this end; Forsake me not until I have showed thy strength to this generation,
and thy power to every one that is to come.

Ver. 19. Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, who have done great
things: O God, who is like unto thee?

20. Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again,
and shall bring me up again from the depths of the earth.

21. Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side.

The third evidence of his confidence to be delivered, is his looking to the
unsearchable fountain of Gods wisdom, faithfulness, and omnipotency, and his
expecting from this wellspring, that as large consolation shall come forth to
him, as he has had a large measure of troubles. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the
effects of Gods wisdom, faithfulness, and omnipotency, be near unto us, and
do fall under our sense in his daily operations, yet the fountain thereof,
which is Gods own perfect on, is unsearchable, incomprehensible, and
incomparably great; Thy righteousness, O God, is very high, who have done
great things: O God, who is like unto thee? 2. That which we see of the Lords
works, may lead us up to know what is not seen in relation to difficulties, and
power of men, and to see what he is able to do; and when we see the invisible
God, we cannot choose but admire his Majesty, and exalt him as Sovereign over
all, and then, and not till then that we give him the honor of omnipotency and
faithfulness, can the heart rest and be quiet: Thy righteousness, O God, is
very high, who have done great things: who is like to thee? 3. He tha
acknowledges Gods justice and wisdom in his troubles, may look to see Gods
power and grace no less evident in his delivery and consolation: and he who in
trouble has seen his own infirmity, emptiness, and death, may look to see
Gods power and life in raising of him out of the grave of his trouble; Thou
which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall
bring me up again from the depths of the earth. 4 As trouble humbles and
abaseth a man before the world: so the Lords delivering of him, and showing his
respect to him, honors the man again, and exalts him before men; Thou
shall increase my greatness. 5. As no trouble does come alone, but multitudes
of troubles joined together, when the Lord will humble and try a man; so no
comfort comes single or alone, when the Lord will change the man's exercise,
but a multitude of comforts joined together; Thou will comfort me on every
side. 6. Losses are made lighter, and comforts weightier, when God is seen and
acknowledged in them: Thou which have showed me sore troubles, (it is but a
view of trouble what we have felt when troubles are seen to come from Gods
hand,) thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side.

Ver. 22. I will also praise thee with the Psaltery, even thy truth, O my God:
unto thee will I sing with the Harp, O thou holy One of Israel.

23. My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee: and my soul, which
thou have redeemed.

24. My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they
are confounded; for they are brought unto shame that seek my hurt.

The fourth and last evidence of his confidence, is his promise of joyful
thanksgiving, by way of a begun song, and that for the foresight of his own
delivery, and of his enemies overthrow. Whence learn, 1. Faith is so satisfied
with Gods promise, that it can praise heartily for what is promised, before it
find performance: I will praise thee with the Psaltery, even thy truth. 2. It
is our interest in the Covenant, which makes us to have interest in particular
promises; I will praise thy truth, O my God. 3. A soul sensible of Gods
kindness, and sure by faith of the performance of his faithful promises,
cannot satisfy it self in praising of God, it has so high estimation of his
fidelity, power, and love: Therefore after he has said, I will praise thee, he
adds, unto thee will I sing with the Harp. 4. How hardly soever a soul has
been exercised with troubles for a while, so soon as it sees by faith the
Lords prepared event; It will justify all the passages of Gods providence, as
just, and wise, and good, and in a word, as holy in all respects. To thee will
I sing, O holy One of Israel. 5. Singing with our voice unto the Lord, is a
part of moral worship, as well as prayer with the voice, when his honor, and
our upstirring, and others edifying calls for it; My lips shall greatly
rejoice when I sing unto thee. 6. As the work of praising God requires
sincerity, earnestness, and cheerfulness; so the work thus done, becomes not
only honorable to God, but also refreshful to the worshipper; My lips shall
greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee, 7. Dangers and distresses, how grievous
soever they be for the time, yet do they furnish matter of praise to God, and
joy to the party troubled afterward when the delivery comes: My lips shall
rejoice, and my so^'e which thou have redeemed. 8. Beside, singing of Psalms
unto God, speaking of his praise in all companies, and upon all occasions, is a
part of our bounden duty of thankfulness, for making his word good to us in
the overthrow of our enemies, and delivering of us: My tongue also shall talk
of thy righteousness all the day long. 9. The overthrow of the enemies of the
godly is as certain to come, as if we saw it with our eyes already come to
pass. The same Word of God, the same light and persuasion of spirit,
manifests the delivery of the godly, and the destruction of their enemies:
For they are confounded, for they are brought to shame, that seek my hurt.

PSALM. LXXII. A Psalm for Solomon.
IN this Psalm under the shadow of King Solomon's reign, Christ's gracious
government is praised; and first, the Church is taught to pray for a blessing
on King David and his sons government, including Christ's, ver. 1. Next, the
answer is given by the spirit of the Lord in a prophecy of the blessedness of
the Reign, and Kingdom of Christ the Son of David, from ver. 2. to ver. 18.
Thirdly, the use hereof is ^et down in thanksgiving unto God, ver. 18, 19. and
herein is the accomplishment of all the desires of David, obtained by this
satisfactory answer, ver. 20.

From the inscription and prayer; Learn, A King may command within his kingdom
many things, but he cannot command a blessing on his own government; he must
make suit for this to God: He may leave a kingdom to his child; but because a
kingdom is nothing without Gods blessing, he must pray for this blessing, and
seek the assistance of the prayers of the Church for this intent: and this duty
Kings may crave of the Church, and Gods people should not refuse it; A Psalm
for Solomon.

Ver. 1. GIve the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the
kings son.

From the prayer of the Church; Learn, 1* Gifts from God are necessary to fit a
man for an office; and it is not every gift, which does make fit for a
particular office, but such gifts specially as are for the discharge of the
place a man has, and those must be asked from, and granted by God, and by this
means sanctified; Give the King thy judgments, O God. 2. Nothing is more
conducible to make a Kings government prosperous and blessed, then equity and
justice, according to the revealed will of God; Give the King thy judgments,
and thy righteousness to the Kings son.

Ver. 2. He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with
judgment.

3. The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by
rightoousnesse.

4. He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the
needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.

5. They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and Moon endure, throughout all
generations.

6. He shall come down like rain upon the mowen grass: as showers that water
the earth.

7. In his days shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace so l^ng
as the Moon endures.

8. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river, unto the
ends of the ^arth.

9. They that dwell in the wil^ernesse shall bow before him, and his enemies
shall lick the d^st.

10. The kings of Tarshish and of the Is^es shall bring presents: the kings of
Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.

11. Yea, all kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall serve him.

12. For he shall deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also, and him that
has no helper.

13. He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall ^ve the souls of the needy.

14. He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence, and precious shall
their blood be in his sight.

15. And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba, prayer
also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be praised.

16. There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the
mountains; the fruit thereon shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the city
shall flourish like grass of the earth.

17. His Name shall endure for ever: his Name shall be continued as long as the
Sun: and men shall be blessed in him, all nations shall call him blessed.

The Propheti^al answer given here to the Churches prayer, promises above
twenty benefits of Christ's government* all of them tending to the glory of the
King, and good of the subjects; the shadow whereof was to be seen in David, and
Solomon's reign, ^oyned with many imperfections; but the real accomplishment is
only in Christ. The first is, Christ's subjects shall have good rules how to
carry themselves in all duties, how to behave themselves righteously, and how
to be made righteous, by his direction and conduct; He shall judge thy people
with righteousness. The second benefit or commendation is, Christ will see the
nec^ssities of his subjects, his humble ones, his afflicted ones, to be
supplied most discreetly, and the wrongs done unto them repaired; He shall
judge thy poor with judgment, ver. 3. The third benefit is, Christ is not to
take away civil Governors, nor Potentates places, nor the several orders and
ranks of greatness of superior and inferior powers, Rulers and Judges; all
these are to be fixed rather by him, for the good of the people: The superior
as mountains, and the inferior as little hills, shall stand in their place for
him. The fourth benefit is, Christ shall make such Magistrates as do embrace
him, for their Lord and Governor, a blessing to the people under them; for by
their righteous government the people shall live quier and safe in Gods service
under them: The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little
hills; but how shall the mountains and little hills do this? By
righteousness, ver. 4 The fifth benefit is, albeit Christ do suffer his
subjects to be brought low in the sense of their own weakness, and in danger
of being swallowed up by their persecutors, yet shall he take their
controversy to his cognition, and deliver his people out of the hands of their
adversaries: He shall judge the poor of the people: he shall save the children
of the needy; he shall break in pieces the oppressors, ver. 5. The sixth
benefit, Christ the true King of Israel, shall never want a kingdom, he shall
never want subjects, but shall always have a Church of such as shall worship
and fear him, and do homage unto him, so long as the world does stand, amidst
all changes and revolutions that can come: They shall fear thee as long as the
Sun and Moon endure, throughout all generations. ver. 6. The seventh benefit,
whatsoever sad condition his people shall be in, how far soever spoiled of
their lust^e and glory in the world, or in any other respects whatsoever, they
shall be made as a mowen down meadow possibly; yet Christ by his Word, Spirit,
and effectual blessing shall revive and recover them: as grass cut down being
watered by rain, is made to grow again: He shall come down like rain upon the
mowen grass, as showers that water the earth, ver. 7. The eight benefit, all
the true subjects of Christ are justified persons, and devoted in their hearts
to righteousness, in the obedience of Gods will, and such as do endeavor to
abound in the fruits of righteousness: The righteous shall flourish in his
days. The ninth benefit, Christ's justified subjects and students of holiness,
shall have peace with God, peace abounding and passing all understanding,
lasting peace, without end, in all revolution of conditions, The righteous s^al
flourish, and have abundant peace, so long as the world endures. v. 1. The
tenth benefit of Christ's government, is the enlargement of the Church, and
number of his subjects, according to the length and breadth of Gods promises
made to his people Israel, whether Israel in the letter, or in the Spirit: He
shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of
the earth, ver. 9. The eleventh benefit of Christ's government is more special;
whomsoever he pleases to make subjects unto himself, how wild and savage
soever they be, yea how great enemies soever they have been to his Kingdom, he
shall tame them, bring them in subjection to himself, and to most humble
submission unto his commands: They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow
before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust, ver. 10. The twelfth benefit
is yet more special; The Kings and Rulers of the Gentiles shall find it a
blessing to themselves, and to their dominions, to be under Christ's government,
and shall effectually contribute their riches, power, and authority, to advance
the Kingdom of Christ, their sovereign Lord and protector: The kings of
Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring presents: the kings of Sheba and Seba
shall offer gifts, ver 11. The thirteenth benefit. of Christ's government, is so
great an enlargement of his Kingdom, by bringing of all Kingdoms and Nations
someway under his Scepter, that the Prophecy of John the Divine, Rev. 11. 15.
shall be acknowledged to be fulfilled; All the kingdoms of the earth are
become the Lords and his Son Christ's, how improbable soever this may seem:
for answerably hereunto is it said here, Yea all kings shall f^ll down before
him, all nations shall serve him, ver. 12. The fourteenth benefit serving for
the commendation of his government, is by way of giving a reason of the
mavelous enlargement of his Kingdom, from his care of the meanest of his
subjects, from his effectual pity toward them, love and estimation of them. The
care Christ has of his subjects is such, that the^e is not one so mean in all
his Kingdom, of whom, and whose necessities, and of whose particular petitions
he does not take most particular and exact knowledge, whose petitions being
presented in the sense of their need, he does not grant: He shall deliver the
needy, when he cries. There needs no Mediator be^ween him and his subjects;
He hears the needy when they cry. The man that has nothing within him or
without him to commend him to Christ, to assist, help, relieve, or comfort him
in heaven or earth, is not despised by Christ, but delivered from that which he
fe^reth: He shall deliver the poor also, and him that has no helper; and this
he does by teaching his subjects to bear troubles, by strengthening them for
the burden; by comforting them in their grief; by giving a delivery to their
spirits by faith, and a full delivery at last, v 13. The fifteenth benefit and
commendation of Christ's government, he does not exact any thing of his
subjects, but that which he offers to furnish and enable them to discharge:
he lets none be tempted above his strength; he takes small beginnings in good
part, he spares the rod in a great measure, mitigates the correction, and in
midst of wrath he remembereth mercy: He shall spare the poor and needy;
whatsoever hard exercise he put them to, he will give them their soul for a
prey: They shall not perish, who in the sense of their need depend upon him: He
shall save the souls of the needy, ver. 14. The sixteenth benefit and
commendation of Christ's Kingdom, albeit the Lord suffer his subjects to be
tried with heresies and seducers, by oppressors and persecutors, yet he will
assist them in the trial and bring them out of it: He shall redeem their soul
from deceit and violence, and if for his own glory he put any of them to lay
down their life for his cause, it shall be a point of special honoring of
them, as of precious sons, whom he esteems much of, both living and dead;
Precious shall their blood be in his sight, v. 15. The seventeenth benefit and
commendation of Christ's government is from his everlasting indurance; albeit
other Kings die, and leave their kingdom to their successor, yet it is not so
with Christ, he indureth for ever: his death for paying the ransom of our sins,
did not interrupt his reign, but made way for his more glorious reigning, after
his resurrection; he has life in himself, as in the fountain; He shall live,
he shall live conquering, and bringing in more subjects, who shall pay tribute
unto him; To him shall be given of the gold of Sheba. The eighteenth benefit
and commendation of Christ's Kingdom is this, Christ shall be well beloved of
all his subjects, whose exercise it shall be to wish and pray for the
prosperity of his Kingdom, Church, and mystical body, and who shall commend
and praise his glorious and lovely Majesty; Prayer also shalll be made for him
continually, and daily shall he be praised, v. 16. The nineteenth benefit and
commendation of Christ's government is, that a little seed of his precious Word
sown among men, of whose conversion there might be least hope, like a handful
of corn sown upon the mountains or most barren ground, shall have a glorious
increase of the conversion of many notable Saints, like as corn in a barren
place should grow up like Cedar-trees; There shall be an handful of (...) in
the earth, on the top of mountains, the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon:
and this blessing of the Gospel he can make it to be without prejudice of the
manured land of Churches already planted, which are as cities inhabited; those
he can bless and will bless at his pleasure, with the abundant growth of
grace amongst them; And they of the City shall flourish as the grass of the
earth, ver. 17. The last commendation and benefit of Christ's government,
summeth up all that can be said in these four generals; 1. That Christ's Name,
fame and honor, shall be perpetuated from one generation to another, for the
running of his benefits to his subjects, and for the course of his judgments
on his enemies: His name shall endure for ever; his Name shall be continued as
long as the Sun. 2. His Gospel shall spread further and further among men, to
deliver his own from the curse due for sin, to make them partakers of the
blessing of full felicity; Men s^all be blessed in him. 3 It shall be in vain
to seek blessedness any where, except in him only, who is the procurer,
applier and maintainer of true blessedness; the way whereunto is, to come to
God in and through Christ: In him men shall be blessed. And 4. Such a fullness
of converted Gentiles at length shall be brought in, that the blessedness of
the Gospel of Christ, and of spiritual communion with him, and the riches of
his goodness and grace shall generally be acknowledged in all the world; All
Nations shall call him blessed.

Ver. 18. Blessed be the LORD God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous
things.

19. And blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let the whole earth be
filled with his glory. Amen, and Amen.

After this gracious answer of the Churches prayer in so glorious a prophecy
of Christ, thanksgiving and praise is endited unto the Church, to be offered up
to God for this mercy. Whence learn, 1. When the heart has believed what the
ear has heard of the blessedness to be found in Christ, the mouth should be
opened to praise and bless God; Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel. 2.
As the keeping of the race of David till the coming of Christ, distinct from
other families, in so many revolutions of affairs, as were between David's
reign and Christ's coming, is very wonderful: so the enlarging of the Kingdom
of Christ, since he came, is full of wonder also, whether we look to the King,
o^ to the subjects converted, or the way of converting them, by the preaching
of his Word, or the preservation or continuing of Christ's Kingdom in the world
amongst so many Devils and wicked adversaries, all his subjects being so weak
and sinful as they are; It is a matter of great wonder indeed: Blessed be the
God of Israel, who only does wondrous things. There are no wonders like the
wonders done in the Redemption of men by Christ, (...) yea there is no other
who can work any wonders, but Christ alone. 3. As the blessings of Christ are
everlasting, so should the thanksgiving for them be; and no less can content
the heart of a true believer, who, the more he thinks of Christ, the more glory
sees he in him; and blessed be his glorous Name for ever, says he. 4. Before
Christ do put an end to his work, and give up the Kingdom to the Father, his
glory shall shine in all the parts of the world, for the prayers endited to the
Church, are not vanishing wishes, but real promises, and certain prophecies;
^et the whole earth be filled with his glory. 5. As faith sets so its seal unto
the truth of Gods Word, in special what concerns the salvation of men, and
the glory of God in Christ; so love to both the glory of God and salvation of
souls se^s to its seal also; or both faith and love do subscribe the same truth
of God in both respects, again and again:

Amen and Amen
Ver. 20. The prayers of David the son of Iesse, are ended.

This clos^e of the Psalm is added by the Psalmist David himself, and is a part
of the text; serving first, to show that this was the last of the Psalms,
endited by the Spirit to him a little before his death, when Solomon was now
reigning; howsoever in the order of providence it be not in the hindmost place
of this book of the Psalms. And next, it serves to show, that in this answer
made to his prayer set down in this Psalm, all his desires were granted, both
concerning himself and his house; for he could wish no more. And thirdly, it
serves to show his mean estimation of himself, notwithstanding of the Lords
lifting of him up so high, that so the grace of God in him may be the more
conspicuous; for which causes he calls himself, The son of Jesse. Whence
learn, 1. As a man lives, so readily he dies: David was a worshipper of God
all his life, and now when he has given over the Kingdom to his Son, and is
going his way, he is upon the same work of praying and singing Psalms, for
Gods glory and edification of his Church. 2. The meditation of Christ,
contemplation of his glory, seeking after and foreseeing the enlargement of
Christ's Kingdom, is a noble and comfortable closing of a man's life, as here we
see it. 3. It is the note of true humility and sincere love to God, to abase
our selves, and acknowledge our low condition, wherein God did find us when he
did let forth his love to us, that thereby we may commend the riches of Gods
goodness and grace unto us, as appears here in David.

PSALM. LXXIII. A Psalm of Asaph.
THe Psalmist sets down here the doctrine of Gods goodness to the faithful,
however he seem to deal with them, ver. 1. and clears it by his own
experience: Wherein first, after he had stumbled to see the wicked prosper in
the world, comparing his own calamities with their prosperity, ver. 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. he was like to be overcome with the tentation, and to
forsake the course of godliness, ver. 13, 14. Next, with this tentation he
wrestles, ver. 15, 16. And thirdly he gets the victory, by consulting the
Word of God, ver. 17, 18, 19, 20. In the last place, he makes a fourefold use
of this experience; the first whereof is, the acknowledging of his own
weakness under the tentation, ver. 21, 22. The next is, the confessing of Gods
kindness to him in the time of tentation, ver. 23. The third is, the
confirming of his own faith for time to come, ver. 24, 25, 26. The fourth is,
his resolution to draw more near to God hereafter, ver. 27, 28.

Ver. 1. TRuly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.

The doctrine set down in this verse, is the result of his sad exercise, after
he had gotten the victory of the tentation, which did call in question the
blessedness of believers, whenever their outward condition should be found
more miserable then the condition of the wicked. Whence learn, 1. As the
tentations of Satan do aim at the weakening of our believing of saving
doctrine, so our exercises, our experiences of conflicts against the tentation,
and our victories over it, should strengthen our faith so much the more, to
hold fast that truth which the tentation did oppose; After this experience the
Prophet not only holds sorth this doctrine, That God is good; but also
prefixeth unto it, truly, yet, or notwithstanding. 2. However the Lord seem to
deal more hardly with humble believers, and worshippers of him, then with the
wicked, yet is his dispensation toward them always for their welfare: Truly
God is good to Israel. 3. Those persons are true Israelites, who not only do
cleanse their conscience by the blood of the Lamb of God, but also study to be
holy in soul and body in the sincerity of their heart: This is the cleanness
of heart which the Scripture teaches; God is good to Israel, even to such as
are of a clean heart.

Ver. But at as for me, my feet were almost gone: my steps had well nigh slipped.

3. For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

The Psalmist compares his late carriage under a tentation unto the rule of
this doctrine, and does acknowledge that he did not hold it so firmly as he
should have done, but was almost driven from the maintaining of it. Whence
learn, 1. In the time of adversity a believer may prove weak in the faith of
that truth, which was not questioned by him in prosperity, and be neer-hand
unto the quitting and renouncing of it; But as for me, my feet were almost
gone, my steps had well nigh slipped. 2. Albeit the Lord so far decipher the
weakness of his own children, as to let them be brought to the very brink of
misbelieving of a necessary and saving truth, yet he preventeth their quitting
of it altogether; they may be very near the fall, and not sall altogether: My
feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped. 3. The godly will not
stand to confess to their own shame their own weakness, when it may serve to
strengthen others, and give warning to prevent the fall of others, or any way
prove profitable to others, as in this example we see. 4. The measure of our
faith or love to God and to Religion, the measure of our faith to obey known
truth, is best known in time of tentation, when the object is in our eye, and
the tempter is making use of it to ensnare us: I was envious at the foolish,
when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. 5. If the prosperity of the wicked,
and trouble of the godly be looked upon, in respect of their outward worldly
estate only, it cannot chose but trouble a man's thoughts; I was envious at the
foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

Ver. 4. For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm.

5. They are not in trouble as other men: neither are they plagued like other
men.

6. Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain: violence covers them
as a garment.

7. Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more then heart could wish.

8. They are corrupt and speak wickedly concerning oppression, they speak
loftily.

9. They set their mouth against the heavens: and their tongue walks through
the earth.

10. Therefore his people return hither, and waters of a full cup are wrung out
to them.

What was the prosperity of the wicked, which stumbled him, he sets down in
particular inthese verses, Whence learn, 1. Albeit the great multitude of the
wicked are subject to such outward miseries, as others are, yet to some of
them, yea and to some of the worst of them, God for his own holy ends uses to
give health of body, long life, little sickness, and a quiet death, when the
time of it is come, and in their death to keep them from many troubles, which
others are subject unto: and yet God does not love them, nor approve any whit
more of them for this: There are no bands in their death, but their strength is
firm; they are not in trouble as other men, etc. 2. The more liberally the
Lord deals with the wicked, they are the more insolent and proud, and
vainglorious; they are the more unjust and violent oppressors of others: their
prosperity does blind them, and serves to increase their wickedness;
Therefore pride compasses them as a chain; violence covers them as a
garment. They glory in their oppression. 3. Albeit God bestow riches on the
wicked, and more then they could reasonably wish, and do give them health of
bodies to make use of their riches as they please, so as they swell for
fatness, (which abundance should oblige a man to serve the Lord more heartily)
yet the recompense they render to God is this, they become more and more
vicious in their own persons, and do threaten more and more injuries to their
neighbors; They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: They
stand in awe neither of God nor man, but openly in their, speeches they despise
all authority over them; They speak loftily: They scoff and mock religion, and
speak blasphemously of God and his providence: They set their mouth against the
Heavens: They speak as they please of all things, and all men, not caring
against whom they speak, or what they speak to any man's prejudice; Their tongue
walks through the earth: not caring whom it tread upon, or whom it abuse. 4.
The prosperity of the wicked, and their thriving in an ill course, does ensnare
many inconsiderate people, even members of the visible Church, and moves them
to follow the evil ways of the openly wicked, and to make defection from their
own professed duties; Therefore his people return hither, says he. 5. When men
stumble at righteousness because of trouble, and follow the course of the
wicked for love of worldly advantage; it is righteousness with God, to give
both the bait for a while to such changelings, and the hook also, for hardening
them in their own wicked choice; And waters of a full Cup (says he) are wrung
out unto them: that is, they find some worldly commodity by their defection.
6. There is a threefold tentation to draw a man from the course of holiness
unto looseness and profanity; one, when the wicked (...) observed to prosper in
the world; another, when multitudes (...) off a good course, and follow the
example of the wicked: and a third, when those backsliders also seem to prosper
after their defection, as here. 1. The wicked do calumniate every good course,
and they prosper. 2. Gods people return hither for love of prosperity. 3. Then
waters of a full Cup are wrung out unto them. All these things may concur,
and the way mean time is most damnable notwithstanding.

Ver. 11. And they say, How does God know? and is there knowledge in the most
High?

12. Behold, these are the ungodly: who prosper in the world, they increase in
riches.

Here he brings in the poor deluded people defending their defection, and
their following the example of the ungodly, and hardening themselves in their
evil course, saying in substance, that if God disliked the ungodly, he would
not let them prosper so in the world, and heap riches upon them as he does: and
this is in substance to blaspheme God as an ignorant Governor of the world, or
a misregarder how men do carry themselves. Whence learn, 1. When men are once
ensnared in an ill course, they will seek reasons to justify themselves; those
thoughts which did ensnare them, do also hold them; for they to whom waters of
a full Cup are wrung out, do say, How does God know? 2. Men are ready to
reproach the Lord, if he do not guide the world to their fancy, yea and to
blaspheme God, rather then blame themselves for their faults, as these words do
import: How does God know? that is, how can it be, that God takes notice of
such men's ways as wrong, seeing he does prosper them? 3. To think that God is
well-pleased with the way of the wicked, because they prosper; and that he
respects not his Saints, because he does afflict them more then the wicked, is
as much as in effect to say, The Lord is not wise that does so well to his
foes, and deals so hardly with his friends; for so here is it interpreted by
the Lord: Is there knowledge in the most High? 4. It seems very reasonable to
carnal reason, that if God hate ungodliness, he should not suffer the ungodly
to prosper in the world: and if he will suffer them to prosper, then he does
not hate ungodliness; and therefore when it is clear to all men that the
ungodly do prosper, they conclude that God knows not; takes no notice of
ungodliness, or is not displeased with it, for here is their proof; Behold,
(say they) these are the ungodly who prosper in the world, they increase in
riches. 5. The thing that deceives the ungodly and the misbelieving world
about Gods dispensation, is, that they look only to (...) which is done by God
in this world; no punishment after death, or felicity after death do they think
upon: These are the ungodly (say they) who prosper in the world. 6. In the very
tentation whereby the wicked is ensnared, the worm of their gourd, and the
stain of their felicity is discovered: their felicity is but in riches, and
their prosperity is but in this present world; They prosper in the world, say
they.

Ver. 13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence.

14. For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.

Here is the well near slipping of the Psalmists feet, set down, in his begun
yielding unto the devils tentation, forcibly born in upon him, and repeated
over by him, after the manner of a resolute conclusion, condemning all his
former course of godliness upon this one poor pretense, because he seemed to
himself more miserable then the wicked were. Whence learn, 1. A tentation
sometime may be so powerfully born in upon the spirit of a child of God, as it
may seem to be admitted, yielded unto, and subscribed unto as truth, as here we
see; Verily I have cleansed in vain, etc. 2. The true course of sanctification
consists in the study of cleansing a man from all pollution both of soul and
body, or in cleansing the heart and the hands, as here is set down: The heart
is cleansed by the blood of the expiatory sacrifice laid hold on by faith, and
by the begun works of the Lords Spirit manifested in the hearty resolution,
purpose and study of holiness the hands are cleansed by a blameless and
harmless conversation or course of life and actions: I have cleansed my heart
and hands in innocence. 3. When a man is under a tentation, or in a fleshly
temper of spirit, for the present he puts a high price upon any good he has
done, and forgets by what strength he did it; he forgets Gods part, and
his glory in it; for the Psalmists part, was the consenters part, the
instruments part, and he was in the point of action only a subordinate agent
and co-worker at the best by a borrowed strength; and yet as if all the work
had been his work alone; In vain (says he) have I cleansed my heart, and
washed my hands in innocence. 4 That which is the break-neck of the wicked, may
readily be a stumbling-stone for a time to the godly: that which is the
irrecoverable deadly sickness of the wicked, may be the hot fever or distemper
of the godly for a season. In special, as the wicked man at all times does look
only to this present world, and to what may make him prosperous or miserable in
this present life: so it may befall the godly man also in a fit, at a time, to
look only upon temporal prosperity and trouble, as here we see the Psalmist
looks only to his present troubles; For all the day long I have been plagued;
never a word here of his sweet consolations and man fold benefits bestowed on
him. 5. To find some new cross daily, either from Godimmediately, or from the
world, or from Satan, or from our own corruption, is no strange thing to the
godly; All the day long I have been plagued, and chastened every morning, says
the Psalmist: even while he was daily cleansing his heart, and washing his
hands: so does divine wisdom see it fit for the good of his children, and
glorifying of his own Name.

Ver. 15. If I say, I will speak thus: behold, I should offend against the
generation of thy children.

Thus have we seen his tentation. In the next place, we have his wrestling with
it, by bringing this conclusion suggested by Satan to a further examination:
and first, of humane reason, whereby he perceives, that if this conclusion
should be maintained, then the Church of God in all ages, and all the godly
from the beginning of the world should be condemned as miserable souls: which
consequence he thinks to be a rash condemning of the constant resolution of
the godly wise in all ages past. Whence learn, 1. Tentations driving at the
subversion of faith in Christ, and holiness of life, do find resistance in
the heart of a renewed man, how far soever they seem to prevail at first: The
seed of God remains in him, the principles of spiritual life, the infused
habits of saving graces, the new creature by Gods up-stirring do make
opposition, as in this example we see. 2. The way to take up and decipher
Satan's tentations, is to consider what they aim at, tend unto, drive at, what
may be the consequence thereof; If I say, I will speak thus, then such a thing
will follow. 3. So long as a tentation remains under dispute, and is not come
to a settled decree and resolved practice, it has not obtained full victory; it
is with the Psalmist here, for all that was suggested and seemingly yielded, no
more yet, but, If I say I will speak thus. 4. Whosoever does condemn piety and
holy conversation, because the world does so, or because trouble does follow
such a course, he does a high injury to all the Saints from the beginning of
the world, and to God the Author of all holiness; If I should speak thus,
behold, I should offend against the generation of thy children. 5. The godly
are not the authors of their own spiritual being, the making them new creatures
is the work of God, they are the children of God, begotten of him, by his Word
and Spirit, and do resemble their Father in wisdom and righteousness; so does
the Psalmist style them, in the time of his hard exercise here, The generation
of Gods children. 6. In our disputing with tentations by the weapons of reason,
we shall do well to make God Moderator of the disputants, and to look to God in
our reasoning, that we may by his testimonies rectify every thing, lest we
reason amiss, as here the Psalmist does; I should offend against the
generation of thy children. 6. We ought to reverence the judgment of the
godly, and the more universally their judgment is one, and agreeing together in
a point of controversy, the more fear should we have to dissent from them, as
the Psalmists example teaches us.

Ver. 16. When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me.

17. Until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end.

18. Surely thou did set them in slippery places, thou castedst them down
into destruction.

19. How are they brought into desolation as in a moment? they are utterly
consumed with terrors.

20. As a dream when one awaketh: so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall
despise their image.

In the third place, finding himself not yet satisfied, he consulteth the
Oracle of God, revealed in his Scripture and ordinances of his house, and so he
finds his doubt resolved, and victory over his bitter tentation granted unto
him. Whence learn, 1. When a man does see himself in a mist, and out of the
Lords way, he is not able by himself to find it again; for the strongest of
humane testimonies will not settle him and make him quiet; When I thought to
know this, it was too painful. 2. The last refuge of brangled faith, is God
himself manifesting his will in his Word and Ordinances; no settling or
satisfaction of doubts in Divinity, but by the Scriptures; It was too painful
for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God; that is, till I consulted the
Scriptures, and considered what God had revealed in his Church by his
Ordinances; this did satisfy and settle him. 3. The Lord has revealed in
Scripture what shall be the end and close of men's course, who study not to
walk according to his direction, how prosperous soever they may seem to be: and
because the felicity of men is not to be known by Gods outward dispensation of
worldly comforts or crosses, therefore the man's end must put the difference;
Then understood I their end. 4. Whatsoever alterations and changes the godly
man be subject unto in his temporal condition, bodily or spiritual, yet his
felicity is settled unto him on the rock but (...) felicity of the wicked is
builded on the sand; the (...) are lifted up in that felicity earthly, which
only they do affect, the more near are they to a fall and fearful ruin: Thou
have set them upon slippery places. 5. Whatsoever may seem to the wicked
themselves, or to the world, or to the godly who look upon the wicked, how
little appearance soever there be of their fall; yet it is decreed it shall be;
for notwithstanding of all appearance it is said, Surely thou have set them in
slippery places. 6. As the wicked do not arise unto any greatness or power in
the world by themselves, but the Lord is he that sets them up for his own
glory; so they do not fall of their own accord, but the Lord does cast them
down: beside their own weight, they have the throw of the right hand of the
Lord, who shows his power in their overthrow, and does drive them to more
deaths then one; Thou castest them down into destruction. 7. The wicked perish
suddenly, when neither they themselves nor others are looking for their ruin,
in a way much more wonderful then their lifting up was; They are destroyed, how
are they brought into desolation, as in a moment? 8. The destruction of the
wicked is full of terror; how senselesly soever some of them go away, all their
riches, honor and prosperity is pulled from them, and in great wrath they are
sent out of the world, never to see any token of favor again; they are
adjudged to irrecoverable perdition of soul and body for ever: They are utterly
consumed with terrors. 9. When the wicked are flourishing in wealth, ease and
honor, men do think that God is as it were sleeping; but the truth is, both
the wicked themselves, and all who look upon them, and do judge them to be
happy, are in a dream, as they shall see when the Lords time is come to execute
judgment on them; for then all their riches, honor, pleasure and contentment
shall be found nothing but a despicable picture of these things; As a dream
when one awaketh: so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall despise their image.

Ver. 21. Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.

22. So foolish was I and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.

In the fourth place, he makes a six-fold use of this experience. The first is
this, that by it he is taught how weak and foolish he is in himself, and how
unable so stand in time of trial and tentation. Whence learn, 1. Hardly will a
man discern a powerful tentat^ (...) is under it. The best sight to be had of
the danger o^ (...) is, when it is overcome and gone and look how well p^ed a
man is, when the tentation is beautified with specious col^ of carnal reason,
so much will he be displeased with it, when it is seen, and discerned by
spiritual light, as here we see in the Psalmists experience. 2, Much trouble do
we bring to our own spirits, when we examine Gods dispensations by carnal
reason, and not by the Scripture; and we may thank our selves for the misery
which we draw upon our selves, as here the Psalmist does; Thus my heart was
grieved, and I was pricked in my reins. 3. So soon as the godly can perceive
rheir own error, they will no longer maintain it, and no man will more shatply
censure them for their fault then they will do themselves: This is a part of
their up rightnesse, and ingenuous honesty of heart; So foolish was I and
ignorant. 4. The sin of envy, and malcontent with Gods afflicting of us, and
sparing of the wicked, has its own judgment bound upon the back of it: for as
a soure-leavened vessel, turns all things put into it unto sournesse, so does
envy of the prosperity of others make all the good that the Lord does to our
selves, uncomfortable, and unpleasant unto us: for the Word My heart was
grieved; is in the force of the original, My heart was imbittered, made sour,
and leavened. 5. Perplexity of mind, rising upon the mistaking of Gods
providence, is like the pain of the gravel in the reins, very troublesome till
we be rid of it; I was pricked in my reins, is a similitude borrowed from the
bodily pain of the gravel. 6. Carnal reason not corrected by Gods Word, is
beastly ignorance: it may bear some show of reason among foolish men, but
indeed it is nothing before God, but brutish folly; I was as a beast before
thee.

Ver. 23. Nevertheless, I am continually with thee: thou have holden me by my
right hand.

The second use of thi^ exercise, is the acknowledgmen^ that hi^ ^nding in
grace, and Gods obedience, depended only upon the Lord, by whose powerful
susteining of him he was kept from being utterly overcome by the tentations of
Satan, and from falling from the way of God by the tentation. Whence learn, 1.
The ^verance of the Saints is not of themselves, but of the Lord, who does not
forsake them, when they of themselves are ready to forsake him, but by his
power secretly uphold them, and keep them fast to himself: This does the
Psalmist here acknowledge; Nevertheless I am continually with thee. 2. ^hen we
have gotten proof of our own folly, and weakn^ (...) deserving, then do we most
clearly see and confes^ (...) ^e and power in preserving of us: Thou have
holden me by (...) hand.

Ver. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to
glory.

The third use is the confirmation of his faith and hope in God for time to
come. Whence learn, 1. The Believer, how sensible soever he be of his own
weakness, may be persuaded of his own perseverance, by looking on Gods
constancy, and felt experience of his work of grace in him in time past; Thou will g^ me with thy counsel, etc. 2. There is an unseparable connection between
walking by Gods direction in the time of this life, and our receiving into
heaven after this life: and he who is resolved to walk by the rule of Gods
direction, may promise to himself to be received into glory immediately after
his journey in this life is ended; Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory. 3. Albeit the Believer may meet with many doubts
and disficulties in his way, yet has he a guide to direct him, and a rule to
walk by, to wit, the Word of God revealed in the Church or Sanctuary, whereby
he may be advised effectually how to walk on his way to heaven: Thou will guide
me with ^hy counsel.

Ver. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee.

26. My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

The fourth use of this exercise is, the settling of his affection and
confidence on God, as the matter of his satisfactory cont^ntment, and
upholding, when all creatures failed him. Whence learn, 1. As nothing can give
true contentment, excep^ God: so God will have us to loose our heart from all
creatures, and expect no contentment in any of them, but in himself; Whom have
I in heaven but thee? and there is none on earth whom I desir^ besides thee. 2.
He that sees Gods sufficiency, sees also t^ emptiness of the creatures, and
nothing to be in them, but wh^ they have of God. A Believer may see that he
needs nothing in heaven or ^th, but communion with God, to make him fully
blessed; (...) I in heaven but thee, and there is none (...) earth that I d^
(...) thee. 3. As to find all things to fai^ us, except God, in the time of
trial, does serve to loose our affections and confide^e off them: so to find
help in God when all things do fail, serves to tic the hear of a Believer
strongly to the Lord; My heart and my flesh fails me, but God is the strength
of my heart. (...) 4. When the Believer has seen his own strength fail him,
and yet not the less does believe in God, he shall find his sailing heart and
fainting courage upholden, and his own exhausted strength supplied with a
greater strength from God: My heart and my flesh fail me, but God is the
strength of ^y heart. 5. Every man seeks something for his portion* some one
thing in the creature, some another, but the believers portion is the Lord
himself, and no less will content him: The Lord is the strength of my heart,
and my portion. 6. This is the Believers advantage above all that do seek their
blessedness in the creature; for his portion is the eternal God, and he is
made an everlasting enjoyer of him: God is my portion for ever.

Ver. 27. For lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish: thou have
destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee.

The fifth use, is his resolution to draw nearer unto God: the reasons of which
resolution are two; one, because they perish, who do not draw near to God: ver.
27. The other is great advant^ge is to be had by drawing near to him, ver. 28.
Whence lea^n, 1. The Lords child does profit by hardest exercises, and h^
tentations being resisted by faith, do leave him in better case then they did
find him: his knowledge of Gods ways, his faith, his love to God, and hatred
of wicked courses are augmented, as in this example is to be seen. 2. They
whose confidence, ^ffections, course of life and actions do run toward, and
cleave unto the creature, do depar^ from God more and more; for here they are
said to be f^rre from God: and they that depart from God, do draw near to
eternal perdition: They that are far from thee, shall p^rish. And howsoever
this truth be not believed, yet it is as sure and certain, as if it were seen
with our eyes; For ^o, they that are far from thee, shall perish. 3. A chaste
soul ^ath no choice, no love, to delight it self in contentedly, except God:
no confidence to rest it self upon, but God. And whosoever do seek their
delight and satisfaction in the creature, especially if they be members of the
visible Church, in Covenant with God, they are adulterers: They go a whoring
from God: and they shall not find felicity in the creatures; but perdition no
less certainly, then if it were already past: Thou have destroyed all them
that go a whoring from thee.

Ver. 28. But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the
Lord God, that I may declare all thy works.

In this verse, he gives the other reason of his adherence unto God, from the
advantage he finds by so doing, and closes the Psalm with the sixth use of
his experience, which is the fixing of his faith on God, that his experiences
may be more and more frequent, and he may be a fitter instrument to glorify
God. Whence learn, 1. The right use of the perishing of the wicked, is to be
more holy, and to seek nearer communion with God, as our only blessedness, how
many soever depart from him: They shall perish who are far from thee, but it
is good for me to draw near to God. 2. No man is so near in communion with God
in this life, but there is a further degree to be aimed at, and possibly to be
found; as there are degrees of departing from God, so also degrees of coming
near unto him; and the better for us, the nearer we draw: It is good for me to
draw ne^ to God. 3. The use of all assaults against our faith, is more and more
to fix our ^ith and confidence on God; for this is the use the Psalmist does
make of the assault spoken of in this Psalm: I have put my trust in the Lord
God. 4. None but a Believer can discern the Lord* working, it is only faith
that gives a right construction unto all the Lords works, only faith makes men
fit instruments to glorify God; I (...) put my trust in the Lord God, that I
may declare all thy works. 5. As the Believer is the best observer of Gods
work^ and sit to set them forth before others; so he is the man of greatest
experience; and he of all men is filled with most matter of Gods praise: for
the Lord never disappoints the believer, but makes him ^ave new proofs of his
wonderful wisdom, power, and goodness; so does the Psalmist lay his
reckoning: I have put (...) trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy
works.

PSALM. LXXIV. Maschil of Asaph.
OF this Psalm there are three parts. In the first the pitiful lamentation of
the Church presented unto God, because of the destruction of Jerusalem, and
burning of the Temple by the Chaldeans, to ver. 11. In the next is the
strengthening of the says and hope of Gods people, that God would send a
delivery, to ver. 18. In the third, there are sundry petitions for relief of
his people, restitution of his own work, and suppression of his enemies, to the
end of the Psalm.

Ver. 1. O God, why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke
against the sheep of thy pasture?

2. Remember thy congregation which thou have purchased of old, the rod of
thine inheritance which thou have redeemed, this monnt Sion, wherein thou have
dwelt.

In the first part of the Psalm there is a lamentation and prayer for relief
in general, ver. 1, 2. Secondly, a complaint against the enemy, laying forth
before God the desolation which the Chaldeans had made, especially in
destroying the Temple, ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And thirdly, a prayer unto God
for vengeance upon them for their pains, ver. 10, 11.

From the lamentation and prayer for relief in general, Lear^, 1. In all
judgments inflicted by whatsoever instruments, the Lords people must look
first to God; and albeit wrath, and f^r of utter wrath do stare them in the
face, as hardly it can be otherwise when God puts hand in his own Temple,
and takes away all the tokens of his presence from among a people, and seems
to cast them utterly often; yet must they make their address to God, how angry
soever he seem to be; as here the Church under this sad judgment does, saying,
O God, why have thou cast u^. off? 2. In the point of casting off, and fear of
casting off for ever, the Lord craveth no yielding or submission to the
pressing thoughts thereof, but will allow us to call in question every
appearance of any such purpose of God, and to debate that point with him, and
not to endure utter casting off, yea and to say, Why have thou cast us off for
ever? whether it be our own particular case, or the case of the visible Church,
ours and others case with us, who cannot endure to be separate from God, 3.
When the wrath of the Lord is kindled against his people, all that they do see,
does seem to be but the beginning of more wrath, as smoke is but the beginning
of burning: Why does thine anger smoke against thy sheep? 4. Albeit we by our
sins have provoked the Lord to fall upon us, as (...) enemies; yet must we not
quit the least relation, no not of (...) external Covenant, between God and us,
but make use of it for supporting of our faith in him, as here; Why does thine
anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture? that is, thy Church and people,
the care of whom, thou have taken, as a shepherd over his flock. 5. The
Believers asking, Why? is no quarrelling; nor is any speech of the Saint^ unto
God, a quarrelling, which ends or resolves in petition and supplication, as
this does wherein after their asking, Why? they turn themselves to
supplication, and do pray, Remember thy congregation. 6. Let the Lord do to his
people what he pleases, they must pray unto him, and make use of all the b^nds
between him and them, as here the Church does, pleading, 1. That they are by
outward Covenant his Church, consecrated unto him; Remember thy congregation.
And 2. That they are his purchase by paying price, and conquest: Thy
congregation which thou have purchased. And 3. That they have been in his
possession for a long time; Which thou have purchased of old. And 4. That the
Lord had taken them into manuring, as a piece of land measured out by line or
rod, and his inheritance not to dispose, or put away: The rod of thine
inheritance. And 5. That he had granted deliverances out of straits before; The
inheritance which thou have redeemed. And 6. That he had taken up house amongst
them in his public ordinances: This mount Sio^ wherein thou have dwelt.

Ver. 3. Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations: even all that the
enemy has done wickedly in the sanctuary.

4. Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations: they set up their
ensigns for signs.

5. A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees.

6. But now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes and
hammers.

7. They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down
the dwelling place of thy Name to the ground.

8. They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burnt up
all the synagogues of God in the land.

9. We see no^ our signs, there is no more any prophet, neither is there among
us any that knows how long.

In the complaint he desires the Lord to come and see, and to take order with
the desolation made by the enemies in his land, and specially in the Temple,
ver. 3. What insolent domineering of them was over his people, yea over God
himself, so far as their listed up banner against him could do, ver. 4. Each
of them thinking it as great matter of commendation to them, to throw down the
Temple, as ever it was for any man to build it, or prepare materials for it,
ver. 5, 6. How they had burnt and demolished the Lords house, ver. 7. with a
resolution to root out his people, according as they had burnt all their
Synagogues in the land, ver. 8. And how there was no appearance of comfort or
delivery from this calamity, ver. 9. Whence learn, 1. All the evils which the
enemy does unto Gods Church, proceed from the Lords desertion of, and departing
from his people, who have provoked him to wrath; for this prayer, Lift up thy
feet, or come and see, does import his departure, and leaving his people naked
without his protection. 2. Albeit the Lord does seem to turn his back, and
depart far away from his own people, when they do provoke him to anger, and to
let their enemies do unto them, what they please; yet will he be entreated by
his people to come again, and see, and pity the desolation brought upon them,
and punish the instruments of it; Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual
desolations: that is, Lord, come speedily, and see what desolations thy enemies
have made amongst us, and pity and relieve us by thy manifested presence. 3.
Among all the calamities of Gods people, nothing does afflict them so much, as
the ^nsolent profa^ation of the worship and Name of God among them; for here in
the first petition, they lament the abusing of the Temple, Even all that the
enemies have done wickedly in the Sanctuary; and then do insist most upon this.
4. When the wicked are le^ loose upon Gods people, they are most insolent,
cruel and savage in their carriage toward them; Thy enemies roar in the midst
of thy congregations. 5. It will not suffice the enemies of the Church to
insult over Gods people, but they will insult over their way of religion, and
over God whom they worship; They set up their ensigns for signs; they display
their banner upon the ruins of the Temple, as signs of their victory over
that religion which is professed there, and over Gods worship there* 6. When
Gods people do abuse religion, and do mock God in their profession of worship,
and do dishonor him by their carriage and conversation; it is justice with God
to give over his people, and all the means of religion into the hands of his
enemies, to be abused by them, rather then to suffer his own people to mock him
continually, as in this example is to be seen. 7. It is a matter of a man's
commendation, to contribute any way to the setting up of Gods worship and
ordinances in a land; A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon
the thick trees: that is, as he had cut down timber out of Lebanon Wood, to
build the Lords Temple withal. 8. When the Lord is provoked by his peoples
evil carriage toward him, no wonder he let the work of edification or
reformation of religion go as fast down amongst them, as ever it rose up, as
the Church of the Jews did feel by experience, when now the enemies did break
down the carved work of the Temple at once, with axes and hammers, much more
speedily then it was builded; They have cast fire into the Sanctua^y, they have
defiled by casting down the dwelling place of thy Name to the ground. This the
Lord chused to permit, rather then to suffer his people still to mock religion,
and still to abuse the Temple, and make it a shelter for them to trust in
against all Gods threatenings, so long as it did stand. 9. Albeit the Lords
mind be only to correct his people, by letting them see their provocation in
the judgments brought upon them: yet the enemies whom he uses as instruments
in their correction, do mind their utter destruction, and the rooting of them
out of the world: They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them. 10. When the
enemies of religion cannot kill all the worshippers of God, yet will they
labor to mar the means of their assembling for public worship, so far as
they can: for after they have said, Let us destroy them together, it is
subjoyned, They have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the land: that is,
all the houses built for the weekly assembling of the people unto public
worship, in their several divisions, through the land. 11. Houses built for
meeting of the Lords people to public worship, albeit they be not typically
holy, as the Temple of Jerusalem was; yet do they belong to God, as means
dedicate for maintaining his service, and when they are marred, it is a wrong
done to God, and a cause of complaint to God against the sacrilegious spoilers
thereof, as here we see. 12. External troubles are much lighter, when the
public ordinances and signs of Gods presence in a land may be had for
spiritual comfort; but when those are removed, every trouble is the more heavy:
We see not our fignes, there is no more any Prophet, neither any among us, that
knows how long: that is, public means, ordinary and extraordinary, which
may give us comfort, do now cease. If it be asked, how can this be applied unto
the time of the captivity, seeing Jeremy, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the Prophet who
did write this Psalm by inspiration, were living at the beginning of the
captivity, and after the burning of the Temple? It may be answered, that Jeremy
was carried away ^o Egypt, and the people could not have use of his ministry;
Ezekiel and Daniel were carried away to Babylon, and the poor which remained in
the land had none of the Prophets to comfort them; yea Ezekiel and Daniel were
but now and then employed of God to utter their prophecies, and the multitude
of the captives, who were to make use of this Psalm, were scattered in sundry
places, and could not have the benefit of their or of any others ministry, as
they were wont to have; and this in special makes the Iamentation to have a
ground, that the table was drawn from the children: the people had not that
access, which they enjoyed before* unto means either extraordinary or
ordinary; they had not their former allowance; and howsoever in the copies of
Ieremiahs prophecy, 70. years was determined for the peoples captivity, yet
none of the Prophets at the time of writing this, told, or could tell them, how
long time should pass before their desolution should be repaired; how long it
should be ere the Temple should be builded again; and the Prophet, by whom this
Psalm was endited, had no further commission then he speaks of; and so these
foresaid expressions, may stand with the time of the beginning of the captivity
of Babylon.

Ver. 10. O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy
blaspheme thy Name for ever?

11. Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right band? pluck it out of thy
bosom.

After the lamentation is subjoyned an imprecation against the enemies, that
God would not defer to punish them. Whence learn, 1. Men's patience is much
short of Gods long-suffering and forbearance; for here it is the speech of a
suffering people: O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? when with God
it is not yet time to fall upon them. 2. The Lords long-suffering patience does
greatly harden the adversaries in their insolent mocking of Gods people; for
instead of saying, Lord, how long will thou bear with them? he says, O God,
how long shall the adversaries reproach? 3. The truly godly can endure their
own troubles better then they can bear the open dishonouring and blaspheming of
God, by occasion of their trouble: Therrfore this expression, from the deepest
sense of his heart, does break forth, Shall the enemy blaspheme thy Name for
ever? 4. Albeit tentations from carnal sense do represent God as if he were
idle when he suffers his enemies to trample on his people, and on his glorious
Name; yet faith will not admit of such a thought, but deals with God by
prayer, to let his strength and power be so manifest, that the world may not
think his hand is in his bosom; Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right
band? pluck it out of thy bosom. This he believes the Lord shall do, and
gives reasons for his hope, in that which follows.

Ver. 12. For God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the
earth.

13. Thou did divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of the
Dragons in the waters.

14. Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat
to the ^ople inhabiting the wilderness.

15. Thou did cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty
rivers.

16. The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou have prepared the light
and the sun.

17. Thou have set all the borders of the earth, thou have made summer and
winter.

In the second part of the Psalm, the Psalmist does confirm his own and other
believers says that God would undoubtedly deliver his people, and take order
with their enemies; First, from the interest they have in God, and God in them.
Secondly, from the experience of sensible deliveries past of his people, ver.
12. Thirdly, from the great work of redemption of his people from Pharaohs
tyranny. ver. 13, 14. Fourthly, from the Lords seeding his people in the
wilderness, ver. 15. Fifthly, from the Lords sovereignty, and disposing of all
creatures in the world, ver. 16, 17. Whence learn, 1. Relations between God and
his Church, and in special this, that he has made himself King thereof, are
pawnes of Gods defending his Kingdom and injured subjects, and punishing of his
enemies; for here the Church gives it for a reason of their hope of delivery;
God is my King. 2. The more time is past since God did avow himself King of
his Church, the more confident may later generations of the Church be to find
new evidences of his royal actions for them, and against their enemies; God is
my King of old. 3. New troubles must not make us forget old mercies, but rather
call them to memory, to be made use of afresh as pledges that what he has done
before, he will do the like again; God is my King of old, working salvation in
the earth: that is, such deliverances of his Church, as all the earth was
witness of. 4. The delivery of Israel out of Egypt, and the destruction of the
Egyptians, is a pawn unto the Church in every age after, that God will destroy
their enemies how strong and terrible soever they be, and will deliver his
Church: Thou did divide the sea by thy strength, thou brakest the heads of
the Dragons in the waters. 5. As all the enemies of the Church are no less
cruel and savage against the Lords people, then unreasonable Sea-beasts, and
Sea Monsters: so can he make their carcases a prey to unreasonable beasts, as
he made Pharaoh and his Captains to become food to the beasts of the
wilderness, when the Sea did cast up their carcases on the sho^e, like
sea-wrackt; Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be
meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness. 6. The Lord will not fail to
provide consolation to his Church in her necessity, though no probable means do
appear, as he furnished his people drink from the flinty rock in the
wilderness: Thou did cleave the fountain. 7. The Lord can and will remove
all difficulties and impediments out of the way of his people, which may hinder
them from the possession of promises, as he did to Israel: Thou did cleave
the fountain and the flood, thou driedst up mighty rivers. 8. Faith is so
thrifty, as not to let the works of creation, and common providence pass by,
without usemaking thereof: The day is thine, the night also is thine, etc. 9.
As God has appointed vicissitudes of day and night, light and darkness,
summer and winter; so has he no less resolvedly, wisely, and graciously
appointed vicissitudes of dangers and deliverances, of grief and consolation to
his people, for their good: The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou
have prepared the light and the Sun. 10. As the Lord has set bounds to the
sea, bounds and borders to every Kingdom, to summers heat, and to winters
cold: so can he do, and so has he done, and so will he do unto all the
troubles of his own, to all the rage, power, plots and purposes of their
enemies: Thou have set all the borders of the earth, thou have made summer and
winter,

Ver. 18. Remember this, that the enemy has reproached, O Lord, and that the
foolish people have blasphemed thy Name.

19. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove unto the multitude of the
wicked: forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.

20. Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full
of the habitations of cruelty.

21. O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy
Name.

22. Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember bow the foolish man
reproacheth thee daily.

23. Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up
against thee, increases continally.

In the third part of the Psalm, he returns to prayer, and redoubleth his
requests for delivery to the Church, taking arguments; Frst, from the injuries
done to God by the enemy, ver. 18. Secondly, from the danger and weakness of
Gods people, ver. 19. Thirdly, from covenanted help in time of need, ver. 20.
Fourthly, from the Lords interest in his own quarrel against the growing
insolency of his despightful enemies, ver. 22, 23. Whence learn, 1. Although
sins, especially persecution of Gods people, and blasphemy against God, be not
presently punished, yet shall they not be forgiven: Remember this, that the
enemy has reproached, O Lord. 2. All sins, but in special blasphemy of Gods
Name, are aggravated by the naughtiness of the sinner, and excellency of God:
The foolish people have blasphemed thy Name. 3. The Church of God, in
comparison of her many and strong enemies, is like a solitary, weak, desolate
turtle-dove, harmless, meek, lowly, patient in desolation, and easing her
grief by sighing, and exposed to a multitude of ravenous birds; O deliver not
the soul of thy turtle-dove. 4. How weak soever the Church be, and how many
and strong soever the enemies be, yet cannot they all devour the Church,
except the Lord should deliver his Church over into their hands, against which
evil the Church has ground of confidence to pray, O deliver not the soul of
thy turtle-love unto the multitude of the wicked; for he has given his Church
wings, and a hiding place too, as the comparison imports, if he please to
give her the use thereof also. 5. The Church is the Lords hospital, where his
poor ones are sustained upon his provision and furniture, and he will not
neglect them; O forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever. 6. Albeit the
Lords people deserve to be secl^d many times from the Covenant of grace, yet
the Lord will never debare them from their right unto it, when they in their
need draw near to him, and plead for the benefit of it: Have respect, (says
he) to the Covenant. 7. Such places as want the light of the Lords presence in
his Ordinances, are but dark and uncomfortable places, where there is no less
hazard for the people of God to remain, then for sheep to be in the midst of
the dens of cruel lions and ravenous beasts: And when it pleases God to cast
his people by captivity or exile in such places, there is much need to make use
of Gods Covenant for preservation: Have respect unto the Covenant; for the dark
places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty. 8. The emptied
supplicant coming to God, especially when over-loaden with troubles, shall
find comfort, and shall not be disappointed of his hope; O let not the
oppressed return ashamed. 9. The sense of need and emptiness, is the best
disposition for prayer, and best preparation for praises also: and such as are
poor in their prayers, shall be rich in their praises; Let the poor and needy
praise thy Name. 10. The Churches cause is the Lords cause; for the wicked do
not malign the godly for their sins, but for righteousness, and so the
quarrel is the Lords, which he will and must maintain, though he seem to sit
still a while: Arise, O Lord, plead thine own cause. 11. The Lords enemies are
all foolish men; for they beat out their brains upon the Churches bulwark;
because the Lord forbeareth for a time, they go on to blaspheme him daily to
his face, but shall find at length that God has all their reproaches upon
record: Remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily. 12. Every sin,
and in special enmity against God and his Church is fearful; but open
gloriation therein is worse, which God will take knowledge of, and punish: for
so much is imported in this prayer, forget not the voice of thine enemies. 13.
Sin, and in special persecution gloried in, does grow daily more and more;
and the growing of sin, and in special of persecution, does hasten the
delivery of the godly, and the destruction of the enemies: The tumult of those
that arise against thee, increases continually.

PSALM. LXXV. To the chief Musician Al-taschith. A Psalm or Song of Asaph.
THis Psalm does well agree with the time of David's entry into the Kingdom
after Saul's death, before he was established King over all the tribes, wherein
he with the Church; First, does thank God for bringing him wonderfully to a
begun possession of a part of the Kingdom, ver. 1. Secondly, he promises,
that when the Lord shall give him the rest of the Kingdom in possession, to
employ his power for righteous governing and settling of it, after it shall be
put once in a right frame, ver. 2, 3. Thirdly, he begins to triumph over the
wicked that followed Saul, bringing to their mind the advertisement he had
given them, not to be proud in their places, ver. 4, 5. partly, because God had
the disposing of preferments in his own hand, ver. 6, 7. and partly, because
albeit God gave to all his own children a taste of troubles, as he saw fit, yet
the dregs of wrath were reserved for the wicked, ver 8. Fourthly, he promises
to praise God continually, for casting down the wicked, and exalting of the
godly, ver. 9, 10.

Ver. 1. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks; for
that thy Name is near, thy wondrous works declare.

From his thanksgiving; Learn, 1. The Church of God should take out of his
hand every beginning of mercies and deliverances with affectionate and frequent
thanksgiving: Unto thee, O Lord, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give
thanks. 2. As the Lord is described in his Word; so will he be found in his
works, to wit, near at hand, and ready to help his people as they stand in
need; We do give thanks, because thy Name is near; for this is the neernesse of
Gods Name, when his powerful, gracious selt presence is answerable to what is
said of him in his Word. 3. Whenever the Lord does show himself for his
Churches comfort, he does it in some wonderful means, in one respect or other,
that is, a far other way then any could have expected; That thy Name is near,
thy wondrous works declare.

Ver. 2. When I shall receive the congregation, I will judge uprightly.

3. The earth, and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved; I be are up the
pillars of it. Selah.

From David's undertaking to govern the Kingdom well, when it came all in his
power; Learn, 1. Possession in part of promises made to us, does give good
hope to have the whole of what is promised in possession also; for, When I
shall receive the Congregation, presupposes his certain hope and expectation
to have it. 2. He that is advanced to a civil Kingdom, consisting of people in
Covenant with God, he has gotten charge to nourish the Church, and to procure
whatsoever a King civilly can procure to a Church, that his subjects may be all
of them Gods Church; therefore David says not, When I receive the Kingdom,
but when I receive the Congregation, or the Church. 3. Foresight of a charge,
whereunto a man is likely to be called, should make him prepare himself, and
resolve beforehand for doing the duties of that calling, as David did before
he was possessed in the Kingdom, When I shall receive the Congregation, I
shall judge uprightly. 4. When a land is destitute of godly and gracious
Governors, the whole country is left loose, both in the matter of Religion,
and of civil Justice, as was seen in Saul's time before David was settled; The
earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved. 5. Kingdoms and
Commonwealths have their pillars whereupon they should stand, to wit,
religious and righteous government; for, I will judge uprightly, in the second
verse, is as good as, I will hear up the pillars thereof, in the third verse.
6. Those that mind the reformation of a land, should be sensible of the
desolation of it, and have not only will, but also skill and place of power to
(...) matters in a right frame, as here the Psalmist, after saying, The land
and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, adds, I bear up, or shall
bear up the pillars of it. And here, whatsoever David speaks or could say,
was but a shadow of what is to be found in Christ, of whom he is a type: For
the Kingdom and Country is ill guided, where Christ does not reign; but wh^
people do subject themselves to him, he sets the Kingdom o^ Country upon true
pillars, and sustaineth all by his power.

Ver. 4. I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly and to the wicked, Lift not
up the horn.

5. Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck.

In the third place, he calls to mind his own prophecy of the change of
affairs, and advertisement given by him before to his adversaries, not to
behave themselves so insolently as they did. Whence learn, 1. Even in time of
trouble, the godly, by the light of Gods Word, may be enabled to foresee and
prophecy of the overturning of the wicked from the top of their preserment. I
said unto the fools, Deal not so foolishly, says the Psalmi. 2. When the
prophecy u^ed according to Gods Word, is like to take effect, it is no small
comfort for believers to call to remembrance acts of their believing
beforehand, what they do see in their own time; I said to the foolish, Deal
not so foolishly, is a sort of triumph over his enemies here. 3. Such as are
acquaint^d with true wisdom, do justly account all wicked men to be fools,
forsakers of Gods teaching, and followers of their own wit and will, to the
ruin of their own bodies, souls, houses and same; I said unto the fools. 4.
The fruit of a wicked man's prosperity is pride, vainglory, audacious boasting
against the godly, wherein they grow more and more insolent against all
warnings of Gods Word, as this reproof imports; Deal n^ foolishly, lift not
up the horn: list it not on high, speak not with a stiff neck.

Ver. 6. For promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor
from the South.

7. But God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another.

From the first reason of his admonition unto the wicked, Learn, 1. As the
cause of men's pride in a wicked course, is t^ forgetting of God, and of his
government in the world on the one hand, and a strong con^ of their own
ability, to co^ (...) designs by their own w^, power and industry o^ the (...)
the^ hand: so the way of wisdom to remedy the evil, is to consider that God
does govern the world, and that men are nothing but what he pleases to make of
them; Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South: that is, howsoever, or from whence soever preferment to places of power
in the world seems to come, yet the disposing of places is from a higher
hand. 2. Places of power and preferment are disposed of only by the wise and
righteous pleasure, and determination of the supreme Ruler of the world; But
God is Judge. He opposes God the Judge his determination unto all the
appearances from second causes. 3. As God has a mind for the glory of his
grace, to try, or to correct, or to comfort and employ some men in his service,
so he puts them down, or sets them up, and as he has a mind to have the
glory of his justice on other some, so he sets them up, or puts them
down; God is Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another.

Ver. 8. For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is
full of mixture, and he pours out of the same: but the dregs thereof all the
wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them.

From the second reason of the admonition given to the wicked; Learn, 1. As the
Lord does wisely distribute his benefits and temporal comforts among men, to
testify his goodness to his creatures: so also afflictions and calamities are
measured our by him unto men, to restifie his justice and indignation against
sin; For in the hand of the Lord is a Cup; that i^ a measure of affliction
proportioned unto them, for whom it is prepared. 2. This measure of affliction
ordained for each man, is prepared for the time appointed, like drink, ready
for the mouth of him to whose head the cup shall be put; it is a cup with wine
in it, in Gods hand, ready to be set to any man's head be pleases. 3. The
affliction is like strong wine, quietly piercing through all the man's veins
who drinks it, and cleaving fast unto him; The wine is red. 4. The Lord has
as it were ^oth hot and cooling waters, whereby he does mitigate the Cup (...)
calamities to some, and increases the sense of his fiery in^nation unto
others; It is full of mixture: or it is perfectly mixed, as the case requires.
5. What is each man's measure of calamities, how mixed when it is executed, all
is in Gods dispensation; He pours forth of the same into the mouth and ^lly
of every person, as he pleases. 6. The calamities of the wicked, do follow
ofttimes alter that the godly have drunk the first draughts of the Lords Cup;
It is toward the bottom and dr^ga when the wicked drink; the hottest wrath, and
heaviest indignation is reserved for them, and none of them shall escape, how
long soever their judgment shall be delayed; But the dregs thereof all the
wicked of the earth shall drink. 7. The wicked shall be no less accessory to
the drawing on of their own calamities, then he that wringeth the dregs, to
draw out more liquor for himself to drink, is accessory to his own drunkenness
and damage; The dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out,
and drink them; their vanity, pride, greediness, lust, ambition, envy, and
pleasant courses of sinning, wherein they delight themselves, while they are
drinking in iniquity as an ox does water, shall be their destruction, as in
the point of merit, so also in the point of means of their own overthrow.

Ver. 9. But I will declare for ever, I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.

10. All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off, but the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.

In the last place, he promises to make this holy and wise dispensation of
justice upon the wicked, and mercy toward the godly, the matter of his song in
Gods praise. Whence learn, 1. However matters seem to go, how deep soever the
godly drink of the cup of calamities, yet the believers in God shall ever have
matter of joy in God, and praising of him: But I will declare for ever, (says
the Psalmist) I will sing praises to the God of Jacob; yea sanctified
affliction shall be a part of their joy and their praising of God. 2. It does
delight the godly to be in the same Covenanr, and of the same faith with those
that are commended by God in the Scripture; I will sing praises, (says he) to
the God of Jacob. 3. As a sincere heart does resolve, never to weary in Gods
service, so may it be assured never to want matter of great joy in Gods
service, for (...) he has said; I will declare for ever: then he adds, I
will sing praises to the God of Jacob. 4. It is the Magistrates part, as they
have authority in their supreme or subordinate places, to cut short the power
of wicked men; All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off, says David;
which promise he did not cease to execute, by turning every man indifferently,
whom he did not judge to be regenerate, out of his place; but by taking course
how every man, whom he found in place, should be bound to apply his power for
the good of Religion and Justice, as the history of Scripture does show; and by
this means especially did David reform the Church of Israel; and this was the
way of his true policy, to cut off all the horns of the wicked, not to kill,
or banish, or forfeit, or put from all place of power and trust, all those
leading men, who did oppose and malign him under King Saul; but by causing
them all to concur with him to set up true Religion, and bring up the Ark to
Mount Sion, and to administer justice unto the subjects in their several
places. Thus by binding all men to Religion and Justice, and ordaining that
wickedness should have no horn or power for it, but all bound to be against
it; He cut off all the horns of the wicked; And because the civil Magistrate
or Ecclesiastical Governors are able to do in their Courts externally not so
much as were need, the real effecting of what here is undertaken by David
belongs to the Antitype Christ; for he only can say, and make his words good;
All the horns of the wicked will I cut off. 5. The godly shall be victorious
over all their wicked opposers, and righteousness shall bear them better out,
and shall purchase more help and power unto them, then any course the wicked do
take to have their power established against them; The horns of the righteous
shall be exalted.

PSALM. LXXVI. To the chief Musician on Neginoth. A Psalm or Song of Asaph.
THis is a Psalm of praise, given forth upon occasion of some great
deliverance of the Church, such as was that when Sennacheribs host was
destroyed, or some other like overthrow given to the enemy.

The sum of the Psalm is this, the Lord is glorious in hi^ Church, and
greatly to be praised by his people, set down, ver. 1, 2. The reasons given for
this are six; the first, ver. 3. the second, ver. 4. the third, ver. 5, 6. the
fourth, ver. 7. the fi^ ver. 8, 9. the sixth, ver. 10. the use whereof, with a
reason for it, is set down, ver. 11, 12.

From the Inscription; Learn, 1. The visible Church ha^ need to be stir^ed up
to the work of thanksgiving unto, and praising of God, no less then to any
other duty; for this duty is (...) less needful, no less spiritual, no less
difficult and disagreei^ with our carn^l and corrupt natural inclination, then
any oth^ duty, an^ usually is more neglected and more slighted then (...) point
of worship, although frequent occasion and cause be giv^ unto It* therefore it
is oftenest called for of any. If we comp^ this title with others, this is a
Song, (...) Psalm, taught to (...) Church, to stir her up to the praising of
Go^. 2. God had (...) Psalmists, more sweet Singers in Israel then one; David's
(...) is not prefixed here, and the matter is most suitable to a la^ time then
his. 3. We are not to be curious about the Pen^ of Canonick Scripture. The
first Author is he, to whom (...) must look most and rest upon him: For
concerning all (...) Hebrew ^ible, we are taught by Christ and his Apostles the
(...) was all given by inspiration, and that the holy Writers spok^ (...) they
were moved by the holy Spirit; for here it is not cer^ whether Asaph was the
name of the Writer of it, or when Asaph be the name of the order of such of
Aarons posterity, (...) were (...) unto the Church* and had the charge (...)
the Music, to whom this Psalm was committed for (...) Churches use, as many
more Psalms in David's time, and ^ter it also were; A Psalm or Song of Asaph
or to Asaph: (...) words may bear both alike.

Ver. 1. IN Judah God is known: his Na^ great in Israel.

2. In Salem also is his Tabernacle: and his dw^ling place in Sion.

From the sum and scope of the Psalm s^ down (...) Learn, 1. Albeit God be
in some sort known in all the (...) because of the works of Creation,
manifesting some way t^ visible excellencies of God, yet is he most of all made
manifest to his visible Church, where his Word does sound, and his Works are
best interpreted; In Judah God is known. 2. Where the knowledge of Gods Name is
most revealed, there should he of duty be most glorified: for albeit Israel
many times did not understand, did not acknowledge him, but were more ignorant
and neglective of him, then the ox or ass were of their Owners and Masters
crib, yet daily among them he manifested his great majesty, and sometime he
made them all acknowledge it, and of duty always they should have magnified
his majesty, and so his Name is great in Israel. 3. The Lord does provide
always a place, where his Church may visibly profess his Name, and worship
him: he will not want a place, where he has a people in Covenant-bond unto
him; In Salem is his Tabernacle. 4. It is a great glory to the place where God
is worshipped, for there also does he make his residence: In Salem also, or
Jerusalem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion. 5. It is not for
the worthiness of any people or place, that the Lord is among them, or
manifested there; but it is his own free choice, among whom and where he will
reside. The place where the vile Canaanite had been, and the place longest
possessed and abused by the Canaanite, will he choose for his chief dwelling;
he will turn the Canaanites Salem to be Jerusalem: and the strong hold of the
Jebusites to be the place of his Temple; therefore, says he, In Salem, (rather
then Jerusalem) is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion.

Ver. 3. There brake he the arrows of the bow^, the shield, and the sword, and
the battle. Selah.

The first reason of Gods praise is taken from the Lord* fighting at Jerusalem
against the enemies of the Church, and discomfiting of them. Whence learn, 1.
The greatest overthrow given to armies, will be found in their fighting against
God; Church: There (in special manner) brake he the arrows of the bow, etc.
2. In the deliverance of the Church the Lord will be seen to do all the work;
There brake he the arrows. 3. As there is no means or instrument fit to
destroy men which the enemy will not make use of against the Church* so there
is no weapon formed against her which shall prosper, when she does reli^ on her
Lord: There brake be the arrows of the bow, the sh^ld, and the sword, and the
battle.

Ver. 4. Thou art more glorious and excellent the the mountains of prey.

The second reason of Gods praise is, because he is more glorious then all the
Kings and Kingdoms of the world, wherein the cruel and beastly raging enemies
of his Church have their strength and strong h^los. Whence learn, (...). Those
Kingdoms and Powers which do not subject themselves to God or Christ the King
of Saints, are to be esteemed of as mountains where wild and ravenous beasts
do lie, every one of them according as they are more mighty, oppressing the
weaker; for they are called here, Mountains of prey or Powers maintaining all
oppression, as mountains give shelter to ravenous beasts which live upon prey.
2. Whatsoever excellency is to be found in the Kingdoms of the world, wherein
men do glory, as wisdom, riches, strength, multitude, courage, or what else can
be imagined, is all nothing to the matter of gloriation, which the Church has
in God; Thou (says the Psalmist unto God) art more glorious then the mountains
of prey.

Ver. 5. The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have (...) their sleep, and none
of the men of might have found their hands.

6. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a
dead sleep.

The third reason of Gods praise is, because he did evacuate, and make of no
use unto the enemy, whatsoever they did put their confidence in. Whence learn,
1. Whatsoever strength, courage, wit, or any other point of perfection any man
has, God who gave it, can take it away when he pleases; yea, can make it a
means of hardening his heart in carnal confidence, to engage him in a
business for a mischief to him, that he may lose all whereunto he leaned; The
stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep, and none of the men of
might have found their hands; that is, God has made the courageous and strong
to be found feeble and weak, and unable to save their own goods or lives. 2.
Albeit the Church has no strength in her self, yet the Lord can with a word of
his mouth do all her work, and defeat her enemier; At thy rebuke, O God of
Jacob, they are ca^ in a deep sleep. 3. The more powerful, wise and stout the
enemies of Gods Church be, the more should the Church rely upon God, and the
more glory does the Lord get in overthrowing them; Therefore the
stout-heartedmen of might, ch^ariots and horse are here mentioned.

Ver. 7. Thou* even thou art to be seared; and who may stand in thy sight when
once thou art angry?

The fourth reason of Gods praise is, because he is so terrible that none can
stand before him when he is angry. Whence learn, 1. When the Lord does smite
the wicked* he does wa^n his own people to stand in awe; therefore does the
Church make use of what is set down before; Thou, ^ven the art to be feared. 2.
Only God is to be feared lest we offend him, and no man's anger is to be feared
in comparison of provoking God to anger; Thou, even thou art to be feared; and
no regard unto, nor mention of any other to be feared in comparison of him. 3.
Man against man may stand, and wicked men in the time of Gods patience may
stand: but when the time comes of Gods judging and letting forth his wrath
upon his enemies, none can escape his hand; Who may stand in thy sight, when
on^e thou art angry? 4. The terror of the Lord against his ^oes, is the comfort
of his people, and the matter, as of his praise, so of their singing and
rejoicing, as here is to be seen.

Ver. 8. Thou did cause judgment to be heard from heaven: the earth feared
and was still,

9. When God arose to judgment, to save all the m^ek of the earth. Sel^b.

The fifth reason of Gods praise is, from the experience of fearful judgments
on Gods enemies, when he was about to deliver his people from their oppression.
Whence lear^, 1. Late mercies and deliverances given to the Church, should
renew the thankful memory of old deliveries, as here is done 2. When ordinary
means and advertisements do not make the Persecutors of the Church to cease,
God has extraordinary judgments from heaven, whereby he will speak unto his
adversaries; Thou did cause judgments to be heard from heaven. 3. If by one
sor^ of more mild advertisement or rebuke men cannot be brought in order; by
another, and more terrible rebuke they shall be made quiet: Thou did cause
judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared and was still. 4. The
property of the Lords people is to be so acquainted with afflictions, and so
sensible of their own sinfulness; that they do not impatiently fret at Gods
dispensation, even when they are oppressed by men; but do study submission unto
God, and commit their cause to him; therefore are they called The meek of the
earth. 5. When the Lords meek ones are in danger to be swallowed ^p, and
destroyed by their oppressors, the Lord, who is the sovereign Judge to decide
controversies, and to determine who is in the wrong, albeit he be silent for a
while, yet will arise in due time, and speak from heaven by judgments, to the
terrifying and silencing of proud oppressors; The earth feared and was still,
when God arose to judgment to save all the meek of the earth. 6. When the Lord
arises to save the meek in one place, and of one generation, it is an evidence
and earnest, that he shall arise to save at length all and every one of the
meek in every place, in all times after; for his arising for his people, which
was now past, is sai^ here to be for to save all the meek of the earth.

Ver. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath
shall thou restrain.

The sixth reason of Gods praise is, that he shall make the malice of the
adversaries of his people to contribute to his glory. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
the rage and cruelty of men against the Lords meek ones, may seem for the
present to obscure Gods glory, and to tend to his dishonor; yet when he has
humbled, tried, purified his own, and done his work in Mount Sion, all the rage
of persecutors shall turn to Gods glory undoubtedly; Surely the ^rath of man
shall praise thee. 2. When God has glorified himself in the purging of his
Saints, and punishing their pe^secutors, yet the enmity of the wicked world
against Gods people will not cease, there will be still, as here is
presupposed, a remainder of wrath 3. Let the wrath of the wicked against the
godly be never so great, inveterate, lasting and unquenchable, yet it shall
vent it self only as the Lord sees fitting: he shall madera^e the out-letting
of it, as he sees expedient for his pe^ples good; it shall not break out to
the destruction of his people; The remainder of wra^h sha^t thou restrain.

Ver. 11. Vow and pay unto the LORD your God, let all that be round about him
bring presents unto him that ought to he feared.

12. He shall cut off the spirit of Princes: he is terrible to the Kings of the
earth.

The use of the former doctrine is, to teach Gods people to give unto God that
respect and praise which is due to him from them; and to exhort all Nations
without the compass of the visible Church to submit themselves unto him, lest
he cut off fearfully the chiefest of them. Whence learn, 1. The use of the
Lords deliverances of his Church, which the people of God should make, is to
call on God in their troubles, engage themselves to glorify him in word and
deed for his mercies, and to entertain the conscience of their obligation; Vow
and pay unto the Lord. 2. It is not enough to discharge a promised duty to God
in outw^rd formality, as the Philistines made their offering to the Ark of God,
but the godly must do what service they do to God, as to their God, reconciled
unto them, and in Covenant with them; Vow and pay unto the Lord your God. 3.
The Lord is to be feared and honored of all that are nea^ to him in Covenant
or Profession, yea or in vicinity of place unto his people and Church, where
the Lord manifests himself in his ordinances; Let all that be round about
him, bring presents unto him that ought to be feared. 4. How terrible soever
the power of Princes and great men seem unto the Lords people, when they engage
themselves and their subjects against the Church; yet ere they bring forth the
ripe grapes of their designs and plots against Gods people, God can and will
cut off their wisdom, courage and lise, as easily as the branches of a
Vine-tree; He shall cut off the spirit of Princes. 5. There is greater cause
why Princes should be afraid of God, then why Gods people should be afraid of
Princes: Princes cannot do so much to any one of Gods people, as God can do to
the highest Princes on earth: God can make their fall great according to the
height of their place; he can root them out and their posteriry, not only from
all place of power, but also from all being on the earth; he can make them a
terror to themselves; he can destroy them soul and body; yea, he uses to do
this t^ his adversaries: He is terrible to the Kings of the earth.

PSALM. LXXVII. To the chief Musician, to Ieduthun. A Psalm of Asaph.
THis Psalm does express the deep exercise of the Psalmist troubled with the
sense of Gods displeasure, and how he wrestled under this condition, and had
deliverance from it, which is summarily propounded, ver. 1. and made plain more
particularly in the rest of the Psalm; for first, he sets down his trouble
of mind, ver. 2, 3, 4. Secondly, his wrestling with the sense of felt wrath,
ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Thirdly, his begun victory by faith, ver. 10, 11, 12.
Fourthly, the settling of his mind by consideration of Gods manner of dealing
with his Church of old, to the end of the Psalm.

Ver. 1. I Cried unto God with my voice: even unto God with my voice, and he
gave ear unto me.

In this summary Proposition of his sad exercise of spirit, and of his delivery
out of that condition; Leorne, That as there are many troubles whereunto Gods
children are subject (whereof this is one of the most heavy, to be under the
sense of the wrath of God, and fear of final cutting off:) so God has set
down examples of this exercise in some of his dear children, for preparation of
those who have not yet been acquainted with the like, and to teach patience,
and furnish consolation to those who are under such exercises; for here is one
of the Saints telling us, 1. That his own trouble in this kind was so
pressing, as it made him cry. 2. And showing the course he took; He cried to
God, and did put the whole powers of soul and body to a bensal, in his seeking
of God; I cried to God with my voice. And, 3. That he saw there was no remedy
for this evil, save God above, to whom he made his address with resolution to
hold unto God only; Even unto God with my voice I cried, And, 4. That at length
he did prevail and receive his request, graciously granted unto him; And he
gave ear to me: and so he was relieved.

Ver. 2. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord; my sore ran in the night,
and ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted.

3. I remembered God, and was troubled: I complained and my spirit was
overwhelmed. Selah.

4. Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak.

He declares this his sad exercise more specially; and first, how great his
trouble was. Whence learn, 1. The fearing and feeling of the sense of Gods
wrath and displeasure, is of all troubles the chief, and does challenge to it
sel^ most deservedly the name of trouble, or straitening affliction, as if the
Psalmist had never known any trouble in c^mparison of this. 2. Albeit the sense
of Gods wrath and displeasure while it does last, does seem a sort of eternity,
as, Shall I never be remembered? and such like expressions do declare; yet when
the trouble is gone, it is counted but a short time, but a day; In the day of
my trouble, says he, now being relieved. 3. As in this trouble most of any
Gods face or comfortable presence is withdrawn: so nothing in this case can
content a godly soul, till he find the Lord reconciled, and his gracious fac^
to shine again toward him; In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord. The
wicked in such a case they will either not seek God at all, but some earthly
comfort; or but take an essay what they can have by calling on God, they will
not make it their work to seek him. 4. The sense of wrath gives a sore wound
unto a man's spirit, like to a wound in the body, which is like to bleed unto
death; My sore ran in the night. 5. Trouble of conscience, as it is like a
deadly wound; so is it also like a filthy boil, venting rotten issue; for many
are the sins which the conscience does cast up in this case, which do cause
pain and loathing to look upon: My sore, or my plague, my stroke by a hand, ran
in the night. 6. There is no healing of this wound, no easing of this sore, no
cleansing of the conscience, no quieting of a man's spirit, till God whom the
soul seeks, show himself Physician; the evil continues still and grows; My
sore ran in the night and ceased not. 7. Where misery seems remediless,
there the sad soul fitteth it self to endless sorrow: and as it is hopeless
of relief, so it is heartlesse to seek comfort, yea what earthly comforts are
offered for the relief of a spiritual wound, are but a burden to a broken
spirit; My soul refased to be comforted. Nothing can satisfy a soul which is
sensible of Gods displeasure, save the sense of Gods favor. 8. A troubled
spirit has many thoughts; for it runs out in meditation, calls for the
records of the memory, but can find nothing to fix upon, save God himself; I
remembered God. 9. It is possible that the matter of most comfort at some time
may give no ease; the sweet promises of grace, when a soul is not able to apply
them; yea the thought of God himself, and his goodness, may augment grief,
when the conscience does present his abused savours, as the c^use of Gods
present felt wrath: I remembered God, and was troubled. 10. Lamentation and
complaints, when vented and not eased with following comfort, do but double the
grief; I complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed. 11. Redoubled thoughts of a
perplexed soul, do cast it over in a confusion, and a sort of swound; I
complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed. 12. A wounded spirit is able to
bereave a man of the nights rest, and affect the body with a share of its
miserable condition; Thou hold mine eyes waking. 13. When a soul could
possibly de sire to case its grief with a little forgetting of it, and seek a
sleep when the body is now weary; it may fall out, that even thus much ease,
may be refused to a Saint for a time, which must be looked on as Gods hand, for
the further exercise of the Lords sick child; Thou hold mine eyes waking.
14. Trouble not lenified, not mitigated, grows to such a height, as it stops
the use of natural powers: I am so troubled that I cannot speak. The sorrows
of a soul sensible of Gods wrath, are unspeakable, neither can the tongue utter
them, nor the mind endite to the tongue, what it feels.

Ver. 5. I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.

6. I call to remembrance my song in the night: I commune with mine own heart,
and my spirit made diligent search.

7. Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more?

8. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? and does his promise fail for evermore?

9. Has God forgotten to be gracious, has he in anger shut up his tender
mercies? Selah.

In the second place, he sets down his wrestling, and how after he was
overwhelmed, he fell again about the using of all means to be relieved,
considering the Lords work of old with others his children, and his own
experience, and what could be the cause of the change, ver. 6. and how the
Lords unchangeablenesse in his loving kindness toward his own, might help
him, ver. 7, 8, 9. Whence learn, 1. Were our case never so desperate, yet must
we not give over, but gather strength after swouning, and use all means of
^elief, as the Psalmist here does. 2. It is one chief means of comforting a
troubled sinner, and of strengthening the faith of a weak wrestler, to cast an
eye upon the Lords manner of dealing with his Saints, mentioned in Scripture,
as the ^salmist did, who had the books of Moses and Job, at least to make use
of; I have considered the days of old, and the years of ancient times. 5. It
is also a good means for gathering strength and comfort for a soul under the
sense of w^ath, to call to mind his own experiences of deliveries and
consolations received after trouble, and his own observations made upon his own
experiences: I call to remembrance my song in the night. 4. It is a third holy
means for deliverance from the straits of a troubled conscience, to search our
ways, and to seek out diligently, what cause in us we can find, which might
procure such a de sertion and sense of wrath, as we do lie under; I communed
with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. 5. Albeit it be possible
when all the former means are used, and diligent search is made by our
conscience, what may be the reason of our hard exercise, that for all that, we
find no consolation, no ease, nor event; yet the use of these means will
witness for our wise and upright dealing, and be evidences of our endeavor
and diligence in duties, as here we see the Prophet to make mention of his
diligence for this end. 6. Albeit it be no strange thing for a wounded spirit
to have suggestions cast in for overthrow of says, yea to have sense of wrath,
speaking no less then what the tentation unto desperation does allege; yet
the nature of faith is such, that it cannot yield, but must fight against the
tentation, as a thing which cannot be true, cannot be admitted, as this
disputation of the Psalmist does give evidence; Will the Lord cast off for
ever? and will he be favorable no more? 7. The Lord may seem to cast a m^n
off, and to stop the course of his wonted favor toward him, but this exercise
is only for a time: It is not possible that God should cast off for ever the
soul that cannot endure to be thrust from him: It is not possible that God
should not be favorable to such as have had experience of his favor, and do
long to have new proofs thereof: Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be
favorable no more? Which question, Will he do so and so? is thus much in
effect, as if he had said, it is not possible that the Lord should do so,
albeit it seem he will do so. 8. When the conscience of sin does make objection
against faith, then faith makes its defense in Gods mercy, and the constancy of
the course of mercy, where grace is begun to run; yea faith will not yield to
a contrary thought: Is his mercy clean gone for ever. 9. The troubled
conscience hungering after the sense of mercy, has not only Gods merciful
nature: and Gods constancy in his good will, but also his promises to lean
unto, for supporting of it self. Therefore after mention made of Gods favor
and mercy, he mentions here his promise also. 10 It is possible, that for a
time no promise do occur to a wounded spirit, which is fit for its present
condition; or at least, no promise, which it dare or is able to apply, yea it
is possible that the conditional frame of the promises being made to such as
are so and so qualified, may seem to pertain nothing to the troubled
conscience, yet faith will not quit its interest in the propromise, but will
expect good according to the promise at last; Does his promise fail for
evermore? 11. As it is the Lords nature to be gracious to such as come to him
in the sense of their unworthiness; so faith lays hold on him, as gracious,
and will never, admit a suggestion of any change in him, whatsoever seem to be
in his dispensation; Has God forgotten to be gracious? this is to faith an
absurdity and impossibility. 12. The compassions of God toward the miserable
when they come before him, are like a running fountain, that cannot restrain it
self, yet may it seem to be shut up, and wrath and displeasure to run in the
place thereof, when God is pleased to exercise his child with the sense of
wrath against sin; but faith will not admit this seeming for a certainty: Has
he in anger shut up his tender mercies? This is a saying which a Believer must
abhor to give way unto, and yet may be assaulted with, and brangled, and
weakened by the tentation of it.

Ver. 10. And I said, This is mine infirmity: but I will remember the years of
the right hand of the most High.

11. I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders
of old.

12. I will meditate also of all thy works, and talk of thy doings.

In the third place is set down the begun victory of faith, wherein the
believer checketh himself for hearkening so much unto sense, for admitting the
suggestions of misbelief to come unto a disputation, and resolves to make use
of the grounds of faith, and of his former comfortable experiences, ver. 10.
and of the wonderful dealing of God with others his Saints before, ver. 11. and
to settle his says on Gods Word, confirmed by his works, and to set himself
to give glory unto God, ver. 12. Whence lear^, 1. In the inward exercise of
Gods children, after a whiles darkness, comes light; after grief, comfort;
and after wrestling, comes victory, as here we see. 2. The trouble and
disquietnesse which comes from fear of utter rejection from God, is from the
root of natural unbelief, and in lack of the strength of faith; This is my
infirmity, says he, as being now assured, that matters were nor as they seemed
to him, concerning Gods merciful affection to him 3. Weakness of says, and
fear of utter wrath, is a sickness whereunto Gods children are subject; but a
sickness whereof they will certainly recover: a sickness not unto death: This
is my infirmity. 4. Our event from inward trouble, and our victory over it,
does begin at a right sight of our own weakness, of our own faults, and of a
right judging of our selves for them: And I said, This is my infirmity. 5. The
remembrance of the experience of former changes, which we have found wrought by
Gods great power, does serve to make us both patient under a sad condition, and
hopeful to come out of it: I will remember the years of the right hand of God.
6. Albei^ we do not see how our comfort delivery and event, from trouble shall
come, yet may we find solid ground to expect that it shall come, if we
consider aright Gods sovereignty over all creatures, that he is most High, and
the omnipoteney of his right hand; and his continuance, being the eternal,
unchangeable one, and the same from year to year, from age to age; I will
remember the years of the right hand of the most High; From this ground he
does expect, that he shall have experience yet again of the omnipotency of a
Sovereign and constant God, working for his consolation. 7. When faith begin^th
to recover after its infirmty o^ sickness, it will make use of memory,
med^tation; judgment (...) speech, which were all bound up before; I will
remember, (...), and talk. 8. We must not think to come out of perplexity, out
of sense of wrath, out of trouble of conscience, out of hard exercises of
faith, by having great consolations, high and ravishing joys of the Spirit at
the first hand; but must be content to come creeping out of our trouble by
little and little; for here the Psalmist, under the deepest sense of Gods
displeasure, must use all ordinary means, and wrestle with bitter tentations,
till he come to suc^ height as is expressed, ver. 7, 8, 9. and for an event,
must begin and reprove his own misbelief, dispute for the help of his faith*
taking arguments from his experience from Gods power and good will, and Gods
dealing with others before him. 9. The works of God, when they are looked on
cursorily, or lightly p^st by, cannot be discerned, but when they are well
conside ed, they will be found wonderful; I will remember the works of the
Lord, surely I will remember thy wonders of old. 10. It is good for a soul in a
hard exercise, to raise it self from thinking of God and of his works, unto
speaking unto God directly; no ease or relief will be found, till address be
made unto himself, till we turn our face toward him, and direct our speech
unto him, as here the Psa^mist does, from the midst of the eleventh verse to
the en^ of the Psalm. 11. Estimation of any of Gods works, and good gotten by
meditation on some of his works, is able to engage the heart to a deeper
consideration of all his works; I will medit^ also of all thy works, says he.
12. He that would have pro^ by Gods works, must bridle the levity of his own
mind, which cannot stay fixed in the consideration, till it be tied in
meditation; I will meditate of all thy works. 13. When we have ^d our own souls
upon Gods works, we should study to make use of what we have learned thereby to
the good of others, and glory of God: I will meditate of all thy works, and
t^lk of all thy doings.

Ver. 13. Thy way, O God, is in thy sanctuary: who is so great a God at our God?

14. Thou art the God that do wonders, thou have declared thy strength among
the people.

In tke last place, he confirms his faith, and setleth his mind by
consideration of the Lords dealing with his people, recorded in (...)
Scripture, whereof h^ speaks* first, in general* v^. (...)* Then more
specially, of the bringing of his people out (...) (...) through the
wilderness, terribly discomfiting their enemies, and tenderly leading them, as
his own flock, by weak and (...) instruments. Whence (...), 1. When the heart
of a man is turned toward the Lord, then the veil of darkness, confusion, and
misbelief is removed; he can justify the Lord in all that he does, as most holy
and ^ust* as here we see in the Ps^ist, who since he began to direct himself
toward God, can now ^y (...), Thy way, O God* is in the Sanctuary. 2. There is
no understanding of Gods dealing with us, nor can any right construction be
made of his exercising of us, except we come to the Lords Ordinances, where his
Word, his Oracles of Script^e do (...) his works per^ectly* Thy w^y, O God, is
in the Sanctuary* 3. When the works and ways of God are looked upon by the
^ght of the Word, in his Sanctuary, or Church; and God is looked ^o, through
his works and Word, then is a soul forced to admire his holiness, and wisdom,
and justice and power, and goodness, above, all comparison, Who is so great a
^od as our God? 4. The exercise of the believers conscience with fears and
suspicions o^ Gods affection unto him, ends in admiration of God in
exaltation of God, ^n believing more firmly in God, in magnifying the grace of
his ^ing in Covenant with God, in acknowled^ing his own blessedness, and the
blessedness of all other believers, for having God for their God; Who is so
great a God as our God? 5. So much in general* may be seen of Gods dealing with
his people, as may (...) a man in his own particular, who is troubled about
Gods ^sation toward him: for when Israel in Egypt was put to (...) straits, as
they saw nothing but rooting of them out with (...) and oppression, God did
work so well, so wisely, so powerfully, and so graciously for them, as all
their hard exercise was ^rned to their greater comfort, an^ Gods greater glory.
This in general is the use that the Psalmist makes of Gods dealing with his
people, and does find it applicable to h^s own condition; T^u art the God that
does wonders. 6. When we cannot see how it is likely or possible we can be
extricated out of the difficulties we are cast into, especially in our
spiritual condition, we are ^ged to give unto God the glory of doing above all
things we can conceive, for the good of those that des^e to be his subjects*
Thou ^t the God that do^st wonders. 7. What God has con^ed the world of
already, concerning what he can do for his (...) ^ay satisfy every par^icular
soul of his wisdom, power* and goodness toward it self, when it does draw in
toward him, (...) one of his people, for this use does the Psalmist make of
Gods doing for his people; Thou have declared thy strength among thy people.

Ver. 15. Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and
Joseph. Selah.

16. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee: they were afraid, the
depths also were troubled.

17. The clouds poured out water, the skies sent out a sound, thine arrows
also went abroad.

18. The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened the
world, the earth trembled and shook.

He descends more specially to the consideration of the Redemption of Israel
out of Egypt, (which is a representation of the spiritual Redemption of his
people) whom at the time when they were in the deepest misery, and least able
to help themselves; were most oppressed by the enemies: and for their own
disposition, were in a most sinful condition, and in a desperate mood against
the means and instruments of their delivery; God did deliver and remove all the
difficulties which might hinder their event and escaping from misery: from
whence the Psalmist might strongly reason for his own comfort, that God would
not fail to deal graciously with his soul, who was seeking favor from God,
and a renewed sense of reconciliation with him. Hence learn, 1. That no soul
can be under such sense of wrath and desolation, but he may draw comfort from
the great work of Redemption of lost sinners: for if when we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled,
we shall be saved from wrath by his life. And this spiritual Redemption was
figured by the bodily delivery of Israel out of Egypt; Thou have with thine
arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. 2. It is by reason of
the Covenant that people receive deliverances, and consolations, and proofs of
Gods power working for them: Therefore does he style the sons of Jacob from
their interest in God, and Gods interest in them by Covenant: Thou have
redeemed thy people. 3. No obstacle how great soever, can stand in the way of
the delivery and comfort o^ Gods people, but God can and will remove it; were
it as the red sea, so soon as he manifests himself, it will get out of the way
as affrighted at his Majesty; The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee,
they were afraid, the depths also wre troubled. 4. The commotions which God
has made in heaven by rain, hailstone, thunder, fire, and lightning, when he
would show himself for his people, and against their enemies, do testify
sufficiently what God can and will do for his own children, who draw near unto
him, and how he will rebuke every adversary power which is against them; The
clouds poured out water, the skies sent out a sound; thine arrows went abroad,
the voice of thy thunder was in heaven; the lightnings lightened the world, the
earth trembled and shook. Whether we refer these words to what God did in
plaguing Egypt, before he brought out his people, or after when he showed his
anger in pursuing the Egyptians in their flight, when they were seeking to
escape out of the red sea: or to what the Lord did in fighting for his people
against the Canaanites, they teach the same doctrine to us.

ver. 19. Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters: and thy
footsteps are not known.

20. Thou leddest thy people like a flock: by the land of Moses and Aaron.

He closes his meditation with two observations; one is, that the Lords ways
are past finding out, and this he insinuates by making a way through the red
sea, where never one went before, and never one could follow after. The other
observation is, that God can save his people by how few and weak instruments he
pleases. Whence learn, 1. The Lord draws deep in the working out of the
delivery and salvation of his own people, bringing them first unto extremity of
danger, and then making a plain and clear escape from all their straits; Thy
way is in the sea, where no man can wade, except God go before him, and where
any man may walk, if God take him by the hand; and lead him through. 2. What
God is in working, when he engages his children in dangers, and which way he is
going, when he leads them into overflowing troubles and deep waters; they
cannot understand, till he has done his work: Thy path is in the great waters.
3. A particular reason of every thing which God does, can no man find out: for
the which cause the Lord craveth submission of all his children in their
exercises, as he did of Job; Thy footsteps are not known. 4. Whether men do see
reasons of Gods dealing with them or not, the Lord has a care of his weak and
witless people, as a shepherd has of his flock, and is a gracious leader of
his people that follow him; Thou leddest thy people as a flock. 5. The Lord
has his means and instruments of whose ministry he makes use: and those,
albeit they be few and weak, yet shall he do his greatest works by them,
according as he does employ them; Thou leddest thy people as a flock, by the
hand of Moses and Aaron.

PSALM. LXXVIII. Maschil of Asaph.
IN this Psalm, the Lords Spirit does stir up his people to make a right use
of the Lords works of justice and mercy set down in holy Scripture, and to this
end he gives account of Gods dealing very mercifully with his people, and
never in justice, but when mercy was abused; and he shows also the peoples
dealing with God unthankfully, deceitfully, whether he dealt mercifully or in
justice with them.

The Psalm may be divided thus: After a Preface to prepare the hearer for
attention and observation of what he was to deliver, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. he
brings forth; first, the evidence of Gods gracious care he had of his people,
in giving them his blessed Word, to teach unto them faith and obedience, ver.
5, 6, 7, 8. Secondly, the evidence of Gods judgment against his people, who
were put to flight before their foes, when they did not believe the Lord, and
did not make use of his works among them, ver. 9, 10, 11. Thirdly, he sets
down how great things God did for them in Egypt, and in the wilderness, ver.
12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Fourthly, how they made no better use of these mercies,
then to tempt God, and provoke him to wrath, ver. 17, 18, 19, 20. Fifthly, how
for their tempting of God, he was angry at them for their unbelief, and
notconsidering of the miraculous feeding of them with Manna, v. 21, 22, 23, 24,
25. and how in wrath he satisfied their lust by sending quails for them, to
eat flesh their fill, ver. 26, 27, 28, 29. Sixthly, how because they repented
not of their provocation, the Lord did plague them, and they went on in their
misbeliefe and disobedience (...) and God went on in the course of multiplying
judgments on them, and cutting off multitudes of them, ver. 30, 31, 32, 33.
Seventhly, how they at last made a fashion of repenting and seeking of God, but
proved in effect nothing but flattering dissemblers and hypocrites, unconstant
in the Covenant, ver. 34, 35, 36, 37. Eighthly, how the Lord in mercy pitied
and spared them many a time, notwithstanding all their provocations of his
justice against them, ver. 38, 39, 40, 41. Ninthly, he sets down the prime
cause of all this their sin and misery, because they marked not, or made no
use of the difference that God put between the Egyptians and them; nor how for
their cause he had plagued the Egyptians with plague after plague, ver. 42, 43,
44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. And brought their fathers safely out of Egypt,
when their enemies were drowned before their eyes, ver. 52, 53. Tenthly, he
sets down how the Lord perfected their journey to Canaan, and brought them
to the possession of it, thrusting our the Canaa^ites, that they might have
place, ver. 54, 55. Eleventhly, how they for all this provoked God to anger
with their idolatry and superstition, ver. 56, 57, 58. Twelfthly, how the Lord
for this their often repeated provocation did miserably vex them in the days of
Eli and Samuel, giving over his Ark into the Philistines hand, and plaguing
their country with variety of plagues, ver. 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64.
Thirteenthly, how God of his free mercy put his enemies to shame, and restored
Religion and Liberties to Church and Kingdom, ver. 65, 66. And last of all, how
he brought them to a settled condition under David, who was a type of Christ,
ver. 67, 6^, 69, 70, 71, 72.

Ver. 1. GIve ear, O my people, to my Law; incline your ears to the words of
my mouth.

2. I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old:

3. Which we have heard and known; and our fathers have told us.

4. We will not hide them from their children, showing to the generations to
come the praises of the LORD: and his strength, and his wonderful work* that he
has done

In the Preface, the Spirit of the Lord calls for attention unto the doctrine
which he is to deliver, for four reasons. The first, because it was his law
and words of his mouth directed to his covenanted people, ver. 1. The next,
because this doctrine was mysterious and full of ^id wisdom, ver. 2. The third,
because it is an ancient doctrine delivered to the Church of old, and
transmitted unto them that succeeded, ver. 3. The fourth, because it must be
known and transmitted to the succeeding posterity, and following generations of
the Church, for the glory of Gods wonderful working for his Church, v. (...).
Whence learn, 1. Such is our dullness and slownesse of heart, to understand and
believe what the Lord does say unto us, that we have gre^ need to be
admonished* and stirred up to attention and hearing with ^aith; Give ear, O my
people, says the Spirit by his Prophet. 2. The authority of divine doctrine
should tie ou^ cares to hear it reverently, beleevingly and obediently: it is
the Lords law, and the words of his mouth, speaking by his Prophet to us: Give
ear, O my People, to my law, incline your ^ares to the words of my mouth. 3.
Albeit the Word of the Lord be plain to the attentive believer, yet to the
unattentive misbeleever it is a hid mystery, and for this reason we have need
to hear attentively and beleevingly; I will open my mouth in a parable, I will
utter dark sayings. 4. The Word of the Lord has true antiquity with it; divine
doctrine is no new doctrine: and for this reason should we hear it attentively
and beleevingly; I will utter dark sayings of old. 5. Albeit the Word of the
Lord be a mystery, and dark sayings to the misbeleeving multitude of the world,
yet it is understood, received and believed by the true members of the Church
from age to age; therefore the Prophet, speaking of himself, and of the godly
in his time, says of their parables and dark speeches, Which we have heard and
known, and our fathers have told us. 6. Those are worthy of the name of Fathers
in the Church, in relation to posterity, who transmit to posterity the truth of
God contained in Scripture, such as is here set down in this Psalm: and this
is the only infallible sort of tradition, which delivers to posterity what
God delivered to the Prophets, or their Predecessors by Scripture, such as is
the doctrine delivered in this Psalm; Which we (says he) have heard ^d known,
and our fathers have told us, we will not hide them from their children. 7. The
godly in every age ought to have the same care to transmit the Word of truth to
their posterity, which their ancestors had to transmit it unto them, and to pay
the debt they owe to their faithful Ancestors unto succeeding generations; We
will not hide them from their children, showing to the generations to come etc.
8. The subject matter of sound and saving doctrine, is the setting forth of the
glory of God in his attributes, and wonderful operations for his people:
Showing to the generations to come the praises of the Lord, and his wonderful
works that he bath done.

Ver. 5. For he established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in
Israel, which he commanded our fathers: that they should make them known to
their children.

6. That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should
be borne: who should arise and declare them to their children:

7. That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God: but
keep his Commandments.

8. And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a
generation that set not their heart aright: and whose spirit was not steadfast
with God.

After the Preface, he brings forth a notable evidence of the Lords care of
his Church, in giving them his Scriptures and revealed rule of faith and
obedience, to be transmitted from one generation to another, ver. 5, 6. that
they might have faith and hope in God, and obey his commands, ver. 7. and not
be like such of their Predecessors, as were rebellious hypocrites, and
backsliders from their covenanted duties, v. 8. Whencelearn, 1. One of the
chiefest mercies that can be bestowed on a people, is the giving of the holy
Scripture^ unto them, and revealing unto them the way of salvation, and of Gods
service which he requires; this is put in the first room here: For he
established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel. 2. Gods words
and ordinances appointed in Scripture, are witnesses for him, of his wisdom,
power, holiness, mercy, and justice against such as do not make use thereof,
and a fixed rule for men's faith and obedience; therefore is it said, He
established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel. 3. The
Scriptures were not appointed for a rule only to those to whom they were first
directed, but for the use also of the Church in all ages following, which every
man must both study to understand and obey himself, and also teach his
children, and those under his charge to understand and obey, according to his
place; he gave a testimony and a law to the fathers, That they should make them
known to their children, that the generation to come might know them, even the
children which should be borne, who should arise, and declare them to their
children. 4. The end of revealing and teaching of Gods Word, is to beget and
increase men's faith in God, and dependence upon him, as here is set down: the
Word was to be declared to their children, That they might se^ their hope in
God. 5. The way to foster says and hope in God, is to mark and consider and
keep in a sanctified memory, how God has al^eady confirmed his Word by his
works, and by pawnes and pledges, both of his power and purpose to perform what
he has said; therefore does he join unto the duty of setting their hope in
God, the duty of not forgetting his works; intimating that if his works were
forgotten, his Word would not be believed, and faith and hope in God would not
remain constantly fixed on God. 6. The faith and hope which God craves of his
people to be fixed on him, is such as may bring forth obedience to his
precepts: therefore unto hoping in God, and not forgetting his works, he
adds, But keep his Commandments: So this is the sum of true religion, to
have faith in God, upon the terms of grace offered unto us through a Redeemer,
and to hope for and expect the accomplishment of all his promises, and to
foster our faith and hope by the consideration of what he has done for his
people, and uprightly to set our selves to keep his Commandments,. 7. The
example of fathers is not to be followed, except wherein they followed the
Lord: where their practice is not conformable to Gods Word we must not be like
them; therefore says he, And might not be as their fathers were, stubborn. 8.
This is the natural inclination of corrupt mankind, to go on in our finful
course obstinately, howsoever God discharge us: to come contrary to his
commands, and flatly to refuse to obey him; and if we at any time seem to do
him service, to do it from corrupt principles and for corrupt ends, still
remaining unreconciled to him: and whatsoever we tie our elves unto by
Covenant, as double-hearted persons, to deal deceitfully therein, and turn back
from it: such were all the unrenewed Israelites: A stubborn and rebellious
generation, a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was
not steadfast with God. 9. Nothing is able to bring us off this our natural
course and sinful inclination. except faith and hope in God, and obedience to
his commands be begun and entertained in us by the Word of God, as the
connection of these duties here, and order they are set down in does teach. 10.
The Lord will have his people obediently to hearken to his reproofs, and not
reject his yoke, and meekly to submit to his government, and not rebel; to
study sincerity of affection toward God, and steadfastness in his Covenant, as
his condemning these carnal Israelites for the contrary faults does teach us.

Ver. 9. The children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying bows, turned back
in the day of battle.

10. They kept not the Covenant of God: and refused to walk in his Law.

11. And forgate his works: and his wonders that he had showed them.

In the second place under the name of Ephraim, as the most mighty and numerous
tribe of all the rest, he understands all Israel, and shows that the reason
of the Lords many a time deserting of Israel from age to age in the day of
battle, was their carnal confidence in their own strength, and their not
believing in God, their not regarding the Covenant they were entered into with
God, their disobedience to his commands, and their not making use of his
wonderful works amongst them. Whence learn, 1. When men are under greatest
guiltiness, and at greatest distance from God, they are least sensible of
their sin! least afraid of Gods wrath, and most confiden^ of their own
abilities. Ephraim and Isral many a time lying under breach of Covenant and
rebellion against God, being armed and carrying bows, do think themselves
sufficient to encounter with their enemies. 2 Multitude of men and arms will
not avail a people in the day of battle, when God is against them: God can take
wisdom, and courage, and strength, and good success from them; The children of
Epbraim being armed, and carrying bows, turned back in the day of ba^l. 3. The
cause of general calamities coming upon Gods people, will be found in their
sins, which have provoked the Lord against them, whereof God will convince them
by judgments, when they will not be convinced otherwise; They turned back in
the day of battle; how came this? They kept not the Covenant of God. 4. The
Lord uses by his Word in the mouth of his messengers to convince his
backsliding people of their defection, and to press upon them to return to the
rule, and walk in his obedience, but when this admonition and offer is refused,
then no wonder judgment come: for here, They turn back in the day of battle;
when, and wherefore? They refused to walk in his Law. 5. As the sanctified and
thankful remembrance of Gods dealing with his people, is the way to keep the
heart in the love, faith and obedience of God: so the letting of his works, and
specially the most remarkable and wonderful works, to slide out of their memory
and affection, is the fountain of defection from God, and cause of falling unto
carnal courses and confidences, and drawing on of Gods judgments on
themselves; They forgot his works, and his wonders that he had showed them.

Ver. 12. Mavelous things did he in the sight of their fathers: in the land
of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.

13. He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through, and he made the
waters to stand as an heap.

14. In the daytime also he led them with a cloud: and all the night with a
light of fire.

15. He clave the rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the
great depths.

16. He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down
like rivers.

In the third place, he sets down some of these wonderful works done for his
people, which should have tied their faith, love and obedience unto the Lord:
in special the great work of Redemption and delivery of his people out of
Egypt, representing the spiritual Redemption and delivery of his own out of the
bonds of sin, Satan and wrath,) how God plagued the Egyptians with wonderful
plagues, in the sight of their King and Princes in Z^an, the most famous City
of Egypt, ver. 11. How he dried the red sea, and made his people go through
between mountains of liquid water on both hands, ver. 13. How he directed them,
and refreshed them by a pillar of fire by night, and by a cooling cloud by day,
ver. 14. How he furnished them drink out of the flinty rock in the wilderness,
ver. 15, 16. Whence learn, 1. The great work of bodily redemption of Gods
people out of Egypt, and the spiritual Redemption of his People from the
bondage of sin and misery by Christ represented thereby, should be as
inducements unto, and props of faith in God, to all who seek life in him, and a
sufficient motive unto love and obedience unto him, to the worlds end; for to
this end did he declare his love, care and power to save them who enter in
Covenant with him to be his people; Mavelous things did he, etc. 2. The works
of God done for his people in any former age, do oblige those of that age, and
all the succeeding ages to make use thereof, for the increase of faith in God,
and of love and obedience to God, and do answerably aggravate the contrary
sins, when they are not so made use of; for, Marlous things did he in the sight
of their fathers; is the ground of challenging of the posterity for their
defection. 3. The plagues of Egypt, should serve for the comfort of Gods
oppressed people; and for terror to their enemies in all ages; Mavelous
things did be in the sight of their fathers in the land of Egypt. 4. As the
Lord avoweth his people, and owns their quarrel most openly in the sight of
Kings Courts and royal Cities; so should his people avow their loyalty to God
before all men: otherwise, the more evidently God has appeared for his
people, the more heavy is the challenge of unthankful disobedience; as here it
is made the challenge of backsliding Israel, that God in the most open theater
of the Kingdom of Egypt, (whereby the fame of his works might go into all the
world) did work for them and their fathers; Mavelous things did God for them
in the field of Zoan; from whence passage was to many countries. 5. The Lords
making of a way through the red sea for his peoples delivery, is an evidence
and pawn once for aye, of his power and purpose to make a way for his own to
escape, how great soever their straits shall be; He divided the red sea, and
caused them to p^sse through. 6. The Lords causing the liquid waters to stand
as a wall, heaped up contrary to the nature thereof, is a pawn of his power and
purpose to make the creatures, which by nature should deyoure, to be not only
harmless; but helpful also to this people, as need requires; He made the
waters to stand as an heap. 7. The Lords bringing of his people, both out of
Egypt and out of the sea, is a pawn of his power and purpose to bring his
people through all hazards whatsoever, wherein others shall perish; He caused
his people to pass through. 8. The Lords leading on of his people night and
day, is a pawn of his constant love to his own people, and of his power and
purpose never to leave nor forsake such as love to have his guiding and
conduct; In the daytime also he led them. 9 The Lords covering of the host of
his people with a cool and comfortable cloud all the day long, to keep them
from the scorching heat of the Sun in the dry and hot wilderness, is a pawn
of his kind care of his people, and constant purpose to give refreshment in
the time of persecution, or whatsoever troubles they shall be exercised with*
In the daytime also he led them with a cloud. 10. The Lords making of a pillar
of fire to burn and shine all night, for tempe^ing the cold of the night, and
directing of Isreal's steps, when they were to march in the night, is a pledge
of his love, power and purpose to furnish the light of direction and
consolation unto his own people, as they have need; He led them all the night
with a light of fire. 11. As the Lords people wanting of water in the
wilderness, through which their way did lie, does teach us that we may be
redacted to great straits in this life, both bodily and spiritual; so the Lords
furnishing unto them drink, does teach, that the Lord both can and will furnish
his people in their necessities, bodily and spiritual; He clave the rocks in
the wilderness, and gave them drink, as out of the great depths; he brought
streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers.

Ver. 17. And they sinned yet more against him: by provoking the most High in
the wilderness.

18. And they tempted God in their heart: by asking meat for their lust.

19. Yea, they spoke against God: they said, Can God furnish a table in the
wilderness?

20. Behold, be smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams
overflowed: can be give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people?

In the fourth place, he sets down how the people made no better use of the
foresaid mercies, then to tempt God, and to provoke him to wrath, by seeking
satisfaction to their carnal lusts, and questioning whether or no God was able
to satisfy their desires. Whence learn, 1. Unrenewed nature is strongly
inclined to meet the Lords goodness with more and more ingratitude, and to sin
over and over again the same sins, when new benefits and old faults being well
considered, might teach more wisdom and thankfulness; They sinned yet more
against him. 2. We are so foolish in our sinning, that we do not consider what
we our selves are, how great a majesty we offend, and what may be the
consequents thereof; They sinned yet more by provoking the most High. O how
unreasonable, uncircumspect, undiscreet and blind fools are men in their
sinning! 3. Albeit we have no outward enticements, albeit the place of our
sojourning here should warn us as strangers and pilgrims to abstain from
fleshly lusts, albeit we have the Word and works of God, as witnesses of God,
and evidences of his beholding of us, yet so pregnant are we in wickedness, so
beastly passionate in our carnal affections, and so gross in Atheism, that
naturally we run on in our own ways, as the horse rusheth into the battle;
They provoked the most High in the wilderness. 4. When God gives sufficiently
to supply necessities, and we seek to satisfy our lusts; when God has said
and done abundantly already for evidencing his power, justice, truth and care
of our welfare, and we will not rest on him, except he give such other new and
extraordinary proofs of his properties, as we do prescribe, then do we tempt
God, and highly provoke him, by seeking thus to subject him to our direction,
will and carnal affections; And they tempted God in their heart, by asking meat
for their lust. 5. When the sinful motions of the mind and heart are not
controlled, the sin will break forth openly to outward acts tending to Gods
dishonor, and to the evil example of others; They tempted God in their heart,
and then they spoke against God. 6. Words of misbelief, not disputing against
tentations, but in effect calling in question Gods truth, power, care of us, or
his good will to us, are in effect slandering of God, and bearing false
witness against him; They spoke against God: they said, Can God furnish, etc?
7. The carnal ungodly man has no estimation of God, or any of his spiritual
benefits, but does set him a task of satisfying of his fleshly conceits and
affections, which if God do not answer, he misregardeth God; They said, Can God
furnish a table in the wilderness? 8. Albeit the unbeleever be convinced of
Gods power and goodness to his people by his works for time past, yet (...) he
not the wiser afterward, when it comes to the giving credit unto God in
another work: yea, the work which God has wrought, is esteemed by him as
nothing, except God do father as the unbeliever shall prescribe; Behold, (say
they) be, (...) the rock, that waters gushed out: but can he give brea^ (...)
so? can he provide flesh for his people?

Ver. 21. Therefore the LORD heard this, and was wroth: so a fire was kindled
against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel.

22. Because they believed not in God: and trusted not in his salvation.

23. Though he had commanded the clouds from above: and opened the doors of
heaven.

24. And had rained down Manna upon them to eat, and had given them of the
corn of heaven.

25. Man did eat Angels food: he sent them meat to the full.

In the fifth place, he sets down how God was wroth for their unbelief, and
for their not having a due estimation of the miraculous feeding of them with
Manna. Whence learn, 1. Sins continued in, and in special expressions to the
dishonouring of God flowing from misbeleef, have a loud cry in Gods ears, and
he takes notice of them for executing of judgment; Therefore the Lord heard
this, and was wroth. 2. When God is openly dishonored, the Lord by open
judgment will sanctify his own Name on the sinner, whatsoever be his
privilege, and though he were never so near to God in external privileges; So
a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel. 3.
Misbelief is a more grievous sin then men do esteem of it; for it calls Gods
truth, mercy, goodness, power, constancy, and all in question, and even his
justice amongst the rest, which if the misbeleever did consider, he would not
provoke justice against himself by this sin; Wrath came up against Israel,
because they believed not in God. 4. They do not believe in God, who study not
to depend upon him for salvation, and for whatsoever is necessary to them for
salvation: yea they who do not believe that the Lord shall bring them out of
every strait, in a way most serving to their welfare, and for his own honor;
do not believe in him for salvation, so solidly as he requires of them: They
believed not in God, (says he) and trusted not in Gods salvation. 5. The more
means, encouragements, helps and props to support a man's faith are furnished
of God, the greater is the sin of unbelief in him: As the Israelites
misbelief was the greater, for Gods miraculous bringing of water out of the
rock, and Manna from the clouds, as here the Israelites misbelief is aggravated
thus; They trusted not in his salvation, though he had commanded the clouds,
and rained down Manna. 6. Man lives not by bread, but by the efficacious Word
of God. It is so easy for God to rain down victuals out of the clouds, as to
make them grow out of the ground; let him say the Word, and it is done: He
commanded the clouds, and opened the doors of heaven, and rained down Manna on
them to eat. 7. The Lord does provide well for his own redeemed people; what
the earth does not yield unto them, he makes the heaven one way or other
furnish unto them: as when the Israelites wanted the corn of the earth, the
Lord gave them of the corn of heaven, so that man did eat Angels food; not
that there is corn in heaven, or that Angels do eat any corporal food, but
manna is so called for the excellency of the food, that it might have served
for food to Angels, if they had any need of food. 8. The more excellent the
benefit is which God gives, the greater is the ingratitude of him who does not
esteem of it, and make use of it as becomes; as we see in Isreal's sin, who
did not esteem of Manna, as they should have done: had the Lord sed them with
dust of the earth, or roots of grass, be any other m^n thing, they should have
had no reason to complain: but when he gives them a new food, created every
morning for their cause, sent down from heaven as fresh furniture every day, of
such excellent color, taste, smell and wholesomenesse: what a provocation of
God was it, not to be content now; in special, when he gave them abundantly of
it? He sent them meat to the full.

Ver. 26. He caused an East-win^ to blow i^ (...) heaven, and by his power he
brought in the So^ wind.

27. He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like as the
sand of the sea.

28. And he let it fall in the midst of their cam^ round about their
habitations.

29. So they did eat and were well filled: for he ga^ them their own desire.

Here the Lord being tempted by a murmuting and unthankful people, to refute
their suspicion of his power, sends the^ the most delicate flesh that could
be found in the world, quail^ in abundance, till they were all filled. Whence
learn, 1. T^ Lord, that he may show what regard he has to satisfy good and
lawful desires, does sometime grant unto men their unlawful and unreasonable
desires, that holy desires may be the better entertained, and constantly
followed till they be granted; as appears by the Lords granting of the
unreasonable desire of the Israelites after flesh. 2. The Lord has the
Commandment of the winds to make them blow from what air and in what measure
he pleases: He caused an East-winde to blow in the heaven, and by his power he
brought in the South-winde. 3. The Lord can gather so many creatures as he
minds to make use of at his pleasure, he can gather birds and fowls, and
make their flight longer or shorter as he pleases, and make them light and
fall where he pleases, and can bring near to man's hand, what he has a mind to
give unto him: He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like
as the sand of the sea; and he let them fall in the midst of their camp, round
about their habitations. 4. As the Lord does grant lawful desires in mercy, so
also does he grant sinful desires in wrath; So they did eat and were filled,
for he gave them their own desire. 5. When the carnal heart does meet with the
object of his lust, he falls upon it as a beast does without fear of God, or
moderation of affection: They did eat and were well filled, for be gave them
their own desire.

Ver. 30. They were not estranged from their lust^ but while their meat was yet
in their mouths,

31. The wrath of God came upon them, and sle^ the fattest of them, and smote
down the chosen m^ of Israel.

32. For all this they sinned still: and believed not for his wondrous works.

33. Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in
trouble.

In the sixth place, he sets down their impenitency continued in, and the
Lords judgments poured out one after another upon them. Whence learn, 1.
Sinful lust is unsatiable, even when the body is overcharged with the service
of it; To lust sinfully is a snare, but to continue in the slavery of lust, is
a felling of a man's self, and a wedding of him unto that lust: such was the
sin of the carnal Israelites; They continued in their lusting and repented not,
albeit they ^t time to repent, they and their lust did not discord; They were
not estranged from their lust. 2. When men will not be enemies to their own
sinful lusts, they do provoke the Lord to become enemy to them, and to pour
wrath on them in the very act of their sinning; While their meat was yet in
their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them. 3. Such as are most headstrong
in sin, and take to themselves most liberty to sin, and do give example most
unto others to sin, shall be most notoriously punished. High places and
eminency in power, as it does not lessen sin, but aggravate it; so does it not
exempt from judgment, but procu^eth that it should be augmented rather, as is
to be seen here in the punishment of the Nobles and great men in the camp of
Israel; The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and
smote down the chosen men of Israel. 4. Such is the perverseness of our
natural inclination, that neither by Gods gentle dealing with us, nor by his
sad judgments on others or on out selves, can we be amended, as is to be seen
in unrenewed Israelites: For all this, they sinned still. 5. Neither
extraordinary works of mercy, nor judgment, nor miracles, are able to convert
men, or turn them from their evil ways, or beget saving faith in them, with
whom ordinary means do not prevail; For all this they sinned still, and
believed not for his wondrous work. 6. When all means are ^ssayed, and none do
prevail to bring men to repentance and reconciliation with God through faith,
no wonder God in his righteous judgment should cut off the impeuitent as an
un^ful and evil tree is cut down and cast away; They sinned (...) therefore
their days did he consume in vanity, and their ye^ (...) trouble. 7. By
following of lusts, and not seeking felicity (...) God, men do both miss the
good they hoped to have by sinning, and find nothing in their way but vanity;
and also meet with trouble and torment, which they did not fear; They sinned
st^, and believed not, therefore their days did God consume in vanity, and
their years in trouble.

Ver. 34. When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned, and
enquired early after God.

35. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and the High God their
Redeemer.

36. Neverthesse, they did flatter him with their mouth: and they lied unto him
with their tongues:

37. For their heart was not right with him: neither were they sleofast in his
covenant.

In the seventh place, he describes some fits of their temporary faith and
repentance, ver. 34, 35. which in effect proved to be but flattery or
hypocrisy, and did resolve in backsliding and apostasy, ver. 36, 37. Whence
learn, 1. When men neither by the Lords liberality, nor lighter chastisements
can be moved to repent, it is righteousness with God, by fearful judgments
to cut off a number, and to put the rest in fear of present cutting off, and so
to waken them out of security; as here, when the carnal Israelites went on in
their provocations, The Lord slew them. 2. The sense of present devouring
wrath, and the ^error of an angry God, may drive men to a temporary repentance,
and to f^king of friendship and favor with God, for sparing them from wrath
and present plagues, and all this may be without serious repenting of sin,
without flying to a Mediator by saving faith, without minding hearty and solid
reconciliation: and may proceed only from the natural principle of fear of
death, and love of selfe-preservation; as here, When he slew them, then they
sought him. 3. Temporary repentance, may make a temporary change of a man's
course of li^e and carriage, from the worse to the better; may make him leave
off his way of provocation, and seek after God for a time with some diligence
in the outward forms (...) Religion; as here, They returned, and enquired after
God (...) As there is a temporary Repentance, moving from sin op^ temporary
grounds, so there is a temporary faith in many, moving toward God upon
temporary considerations, that is, drawing toward God, to obtain of him sparing
of their life and temporal benefits, and making use of Gods goodness and
bounty, as much as serves to a man's purpose: as here, They remembered that God
was their Rock. 5. Temporary faith may make use of Redemption, so far as may
serve for deliverance from, or recovery out of temporal trouble, and present
danger of wrath, and plagues; as here, They remembered that the High God was
their Redeemer. 6. Acts of faith and repentance, extracted by sore judgments,
fear of wrath, and desire of temporal deliverance, may be found to be the
fruits of flattery, and not of saving faith; Nevertheless they flattered him
with their lips. 7. Profession of faith and repentance, which does for sake sin
and seek God only for temporal reasons, is but a lying unto God in effect,
howsoever the temporary believer and repenter may judge himself sound enough;
as here, And they lied unto him with their tongues. 8. When the heart or
affections of a man are not set sincerely against sin, and for God, or toward
God; all the outward profession is but hypocrisy in effect, and a lie; as here,
They lied unto him with their tongues, for their heart was not right with him.
9. Temporary faith can produce no steadfastness in the Covenant, or covenanted
duties, but make a man only a temporizer therein, as outward motives do lead
him toward duties, or from them: Their heart was not right with God, neither
were they steadfast in the Covenant.

Ver. 38. But he being full of compassion for gave their iniquity, and
destroyed them not: yea many a time turned he his anger away, and did not
stir up all his wrath.

39. For he remembered that they were but flesh, a wind that passes away, and
comes not again.

40. How often did they provoke him in the wilderness: and grieve him in the
desert?

41. Yea, they turned back, and tempted God: and limited the holy One of Israel.

In the eighth place, he shows the Lords merciful sparing of his people many
a time, and pitying of their natural frailty, because if he should have killed
them, they were not to live again in this world, ver. 38, 39. notwithstanding
of their frequent provocations in the wilderness, their limiting of God, and
taking upon them to direct God what he should do unto them, ver. 40, 41. Whence
learn, 1. There is a remission of sin, in regard only of temporal judgment,
Lev. 4. 20. which is in effect only the not inflicting temporal punishment
upon the sinner, or the not destroying of the sinner presently, the persons
remaining the same impenitent sinners, such as was Gods pardoning here of
impenitent Israel, flattering and false-hearted Israel: But he forgave their
iniquity. 2. It is not any good in the sinner, but pity in God, which is the
cause of sparing sinners from present perdition, when they provoke the Lord;
But he being full of compassion forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not.
3 The Lord does evidence his mercy and pity toward sinners, partly by his often
sparing to strike, and turning away of his wrath ready to break out against
them; and partly by his mitigating his anger, and not suffering it to break out
in full force; Many a time he turned his anger away, and did not stir up all
his wrath. 4. Let men conceit of their own natural strength as they list, yet
the truth is, their frailty is great; They are but flesh, and a vapor that
passes away, and comes not again. 5. When no good at all is found in man for
which God should spare him, he takes occasion of his frailty and misery,
whereunto man is subject, to pity him: For he remembered that they were flesh, a
wi^e that passes away, and comes not again. 6. The oftener sin be repeated,
the greater is the provocation; and the greater is the mercy, that so often
does forbear to destroy: and when the frequency of sinning, and frequency of
sparing are numbered the reckoning will not be easily ended, nor the number
condescended upon; How often did they provoke him in the wilderness? 7. The
sins of Gods people do greatly displease him, and that so much the more, as
they are oftener repeated and committed contrary to what Gods kindness and care
requires of them: How often did they provoke him in the wilderness? and grieve
him in the desert? where God gave his daily presence led them, sed them, and
protected them miraculously. 8. Amongst other aggravations of sin, this is not
the least, after conviction, and correction, and promise of amendment,
resolutely to go back again to their vomit; yea, they urned back, and tempted
God, 9. The Lord cannot endure that his people who, ought wholly to depend
upon, submit unto him, and be ruled by him, should prescribe, as they please,
how and when he should help them, or set bounds unto his power, truth, wisdom,
or mercy; as if he could do no more then they conceive to be probable.
Therefore is it put amongst the highest aggravations of their sins: They
tempted and limited the holy One of Israel,

Ver. 42. They remembered not his hand: nor the day when he delivered them from
the enemy.

43. How he had wrought his signs in Egypt: and his wonders in the field of
Zoan:

In the ninth place, from this to ver. 54. he sets down the prime cause of
all their sin and misery, which followed upon it; to wit, they marked not, nor
made use of the difference which God did put between them and the Egyptians,
whom he did plague for their cause, while he delivered them. Whence learn, 1.
When the merciful proofs of Gods respect unto us, do not confirm our faith in
God, and tie us to love and obedience unto him; these experiences will soon
wear out, if not out of common memory, yet out of estimative and affectionate
memory: as here, They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered
them from the enemy. 2. As the right remembrance of former mercies may be a
bridle from all sin, and a confirmation of faith against all doubtings and
suspicions of Gods good will to us: so the not rightly remembering of
experiences of Gods respect showed unto us, does prove an inlet to many wicked
mastakings of God, and disobediences to him: for here the cause of the former
sins and plagues, is rendered to be this; They remembered not his hand, nor the
day when he delivered them from the enemy. 3. Not remembering the Lords Word and
Works affectionately, and with purpose, and endeavor to make right use thereof,
is in the Lords account no remembrance of him in effect: for of this people,
who could well tell the story of their coming out of Egypt, and so had a common
remembrance thereof, the Lord says, They remembered not his hand, nor the day
when he delivered them from the enemy. 4 Signs and wonders once done for
confirmation of the doctrine of the true God and his Covenant and true
Religion, should su^e in all times and ages after for that end: and it is not
lawful to tempt God still, to do more wonders for confirmation of that truth;
They remembered not, how he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in
the field of Zoan. 5. The Lords plagues on the enemies of the Church, being
rightly remembered, should warn Gods people to stand in awe of him, depend upon
him, submit unto him, and to be wary to contend with him, which use, when it is
not made it gives a ground of challenge: They remembered not how he had wrought
his signs in Egyt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan.

Ver. 4. And had turned their rivers into blood: and their floods that they
could not drink.

45. He sent diverse sorts of flies among them, which devoured them: and frogs,
which destroyed them.

46. He gave also their increase unto the caterpiller: and their labor unto
the locust.

47. He destroyed their vines with hail, and their Sycamore-trees with frost.

48. He gave up their cattle also to the hail: and their flocks to hot
thunderbolts.

49. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath and indignation, and
trouble, by sending evil angels among them.

50. He made a way to his anger, he spared not their soul from death: but gave
their life over to the pestilence

51. And smote all the firstborn in Egypt: the chief of their strength in the
tabernacles of Ham.

He numbereth out sundry plagues poured out upon the Egyptians, whereby the
Israelites should have been wise. From ver. 44. Learn, 1. The means of men's
life comfort, wealth, and defense can stand them in no stead, when God has a
controversy against them: The Lord can deprive them of the benefit thereof,
and turn benefits into the means of their grief and vexation, as he did the
waters of Egypt, which were the means of life and wealth unto them: He turned
their rivers into blood, and their floods, that they could not drink. 2. By
what means people do sin and provoke the Lord to wrath, he can by the same
means punish them. As the Egyptians had defiled their rivers with the blood of
the infants of Israel, so God did make their river speak their sin, and
threaten their death; He turned their rivers into blood, and their floods, that
they could not drink.

From ver 45 Learn 1. The meanest and basest of the creatures do declare the
power of the Lord, and are so far from being useless, that they lie as it
were in garrison among men, to be sent out in parties upon service, as the God
of hosts is pleased to give orders; He sent diverse sorts of flies among them,
and frogs. 2. Flies and frogs, and every meanest vermin, are too sore for man,
when God does arm them to avenge his quarrel; He sent out flies which devoured
them, and frogs which destroyed them; that is, which were about to destroy
them, and were able enough for the work, and were acknowledged to be so by the
Egyptians, who did reckon themselves lost men, if these armies should not be
taken off them.

From ver. 46, 47, 48. Learn, 1. When God is not acknowledged to be the giver
of corn and cattle, and fruits of the ground, by a right using of them, he will
be known to be the giver thereof, by removing of them; He destroyed their
increase, labor, vines, and cattle. 2. The Lord has means how to destroy
and take away the fruits of the ground, and other serviceable creatures at his
pleasure; The caterpiller, the locusts, quail, frost, and thunderbolts.

From ver. 49. Learn, 1. The plagues of Gods enemies are out of mere justice,
and not from fatherly love, as the strokes of his own chosen are; He cast upon
the Egyptians the fierceness of his anger. 2. Trouble of it self is not so
heavy, as when indignation and wrath is joined with it, or sends it forth; He
cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and
trouble. 3. As the Lord has good Angels, by whom he can work his own will: so
has he also evil angels, whose service he can use holily to his own purpose;
He cast the fierceness of his wrath upon them, by sending evil angels among
them.

From ver. 50, 51. Learn, 1. When the Lords judgments lighting upon men's
houses, corns cattle, and fruit trees, do not humble men, the Lord does make
his judgment light upon their own persons; and when lighter judgments on
their persons do not yet humble them, then God will destroy their lives, and
their last plagues shall be heavier then the first; as here, when former
plagues did not the turn, the Lord laid aside former pitying and
long-suffering, and so he made a way for his anger, he (...) ^ed not their soul
from ^eath, but gave their life over to the pestilen e. 2. As the persecutors
of Gods people do smi^e that which God loves best, so does God smite that
which persecutors love best; He smote all the firstborn in Egypt. 3. The
curse of God coming upon the Egyptians, the posterity of Ch^m, commends the
grace of God toward the Israelites, the posterity of Sem his brother: Therefore
in opposition to the tabernacles of the Israelites in the land of Goshen, it is
said, He smote the chief of their strength in the tabernacles of Cham.

Ver. 52. But made his own people to go forth like sheep: and guided them in
the wilderness like a flock.

53. And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea
overwhelmed their enemies.

This was the Lords dealing with the enemies of Isr^, whereof the Israelites
made no right use. Now he sets down the Lords different dealing with
Israel, whereof also they made no right use; when he has plagued and drowned
the Egyptians, he gave Israel safe passage and conduct through the sea; Whence
learn, 1. Whatsoever be the unworthiness of Gods confederate people, yet the
Lord puts a difference between them and their enemies and testifies his
respect to the one above the other: the Egyptians he did diverse ways plague;
But he made his own people go forth like sheep. 2. Though the Lords people be
both weak and witless, yet God ca^eth for them, as a shepherd does for his
flock; He made his own people to go forth as sheep, and guided them in the
wilderness as a flock. 3. Albeit the Lord does put difference between such as
^re in Covenant with him in the letter only, and those that are in Covenant
with him in the spirit also, when he compares the sheep with the goats: yet
when he compares the whole bulk of his people with the rest of the world, and
in special with their enemies, he puts a peculiar respect upon them all, and
avoweth his interest in them all above all people in the world, and does for
them, as for his own; he (...) his own people to go forth. 4. Whatsoever ^ear
may possibly fall upon Gods people when they are following his directions, yet
their course is safe and without just cause of fear, and if at some time fear
do surprise them, yet the Lord so clears their way after that, that they are
out of fear; He l^d them on safely, so that they feared not. 5. The perdition
of the world and the wicked enemies makes the safety of those that are saved
so much the greater benefit: (...) people feared not, but the sea overwhelmed
their enemies.

Ver. 54. And he brought them to the border of his Sanctuary, even to this
mountain which his right hand had purchased.

55. He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance
by line: and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.

In the tenth place, he points at the perfecting of their journey through the
wilderness, and possessing them in Canaan, with the casting out of the
Canaanites. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever become of particular persons in the
visible Church, the Lord does follow on the course of his care and kindness
unto the Church, and increases the obligation of the incorporation in the
succeeding ages, partly by what he does for their predecessors, and partly by
what he does for themselves, as we see in the Church of Israel: whatsoever
became of misbelievers in the wilderness, he brought his own people to the
border of his Sanctuary. 2. Albeit we should fight for the liberty of a place,
where Gods ordinances may be publicly celebrated, and shed our blood in coming
by it; yet is the commodity not our purchase, but the Lords purchase, and the
Lords gift to us; He brought them to this m^untain which his right band has
purchased. 3. Success in war is the Lords work, and such as are dispossessed
of their inheritance, have God to crave for it; He cast out the he^then also
before them. It is neither the stoutnesse of the one, nor the ^eeblenesse of
the other, but Gods hand or power which does the business. 4. The settling of a
people in a peaceable possession, so as every man may without contention enjoy
what is allowed him of God, is no small benefit and obligation of a people so
dealt with by God: He divided them an inheritance by lot, and made the tribes
of Israel dwell in their tents.

Ver. 56. Yet they tempted ^d provoked the (...) High God, and kept not his
testi^onies*

57. But turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were
turned aside like a decei^ful ^owe.

58. For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to
jealousy with their grav^ images.

In the eleventh place, he sets down, how this people yet again provoked the
Lord to anger with their idolatry and superstition; ^eir high places and their
graven images: for when God had appointed one place for their solemn worship,
to wit, his Tabernacle* where his Ark and Mercy-seat was, signifying the
necessity of worshipping him through the promised Mediator Jesus Christ, in
whom alone he would be sought and ^ound, and in whom he would have all his
people agreeing, and attending his appointment, and not to devise ways of
pleasing of God by themselves; they would have a place o^ their own (...)
public worship, high places, or hills and groves, which pleased them better
then Mount Sion, or the place where the Tabernacle was pitched. They would have
representations of their own devising, and loved them better then the A^k of
the Covenant, to wit, graven images, which God had forbideen in the moral law.
and so they provoked him to anger. When learn, 1. Such is the wickedness of
natural men, that neither for judgments nor for favor shown to them, will
they subject themselves to Gods direction, but will take upon them to set rules
unto God one way or other: This the Pr^phet shows in the example of the
Israelites: Yet they tempted and pro^ked the most High God. 2. When God gives
his Word and Ordinances for his worship to a people, and they will cast away
this rule, and make another to themselves, it is a tempting of God, and a
striving with the most High God, whether he shall direct them, or they shall
direct him in the means of his worship; They provoked the most High God* How?
They kept (...) his testimonie^. 3. Altering or changing the ^orme of worship
which God h^th appointed, is a relinquishing of God and his way, a point of
treache^y against him, and a notable b^each of Covenant; They kept not his
testimonies, but turned back and dealt unfaithfully. 4. Following of antiquity
in an error is so far from the excusing of sin, that it makes the children
liable to their fathers debt and deserved punishment, because they approve
their fathers and their deeds, above God and Gods testimonies; They dealt
unfaithfully like their fathers. 5. The service of the wicked is like a bow;
they will do nothing commanded, but by compulsion; and like a deceitful bow,
which (...) it has a cast or throw in it, and does shift the arrow as^de from
the mark, whereunto it is directed: so they will aim at another m^k then God
does direct them unto; They were turned aside like a deceitful bow. 6. The
alteration of the rule of worship prescribed by God, is a provocation of God to
anger, were it but in a circumstance; They provoked him to ang^ with their high
places. 7. Such as take libe^ty to themselves to depart from the ordinances of
God in the less, will depart also from him in the greater: They provoked God
to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven
images. 8 Howsoever men do dream that they may make good use of pictures and
graven images, to further them in devotion and the service of God, who is
represented thereby, and that they mind not to communicate any of his worship
to the images, yet the Lord does count that religious use of images no less
then adultery, and matter of bitter provocation; as the word imports: Partly,
because it is impossible not to communicate divine worship to the images,
before which a man does bow himself, of purpose to be stirred up by it, to
wors^p God represented by it; Partly, because the deviser and user of this sort
of relative worship, ha^h thrust himself in the Lords place, to whom only it
belongs to prescribe how he will be worshipped; or at least he has admitted
another Lord then God, in the appointing of the means of Religion; And partly,
because the Lord expressly declares, that by graven images he is provoked
justly to jealousy; Therefore (says he) they moved him to jealousy with
their gr^ven images.

Ver. 59. When God heard this, he was wrath, and greatly a^horred Israel.

60. So that he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh: the tent which he placed
among men.

61. And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies
han^.

62. He gave his people over also unto the sword: and was wroth with his
inheritance.

63. The fire consumed their young men: and their maidens were not given to
marriage.

64. Their Priests fell by the sword: and their widows made no lamentation.

In the twelfth place, he declares how the Lords wrath was kindled, v. 59. and
how he took his Ark from Shiloh, where it was abused in Elies time, ver. 60.
and gave his ^rk (the sign of his strength or powerful presence among them,)
into the Philistines hands, ver. 61. made his people fall in battle, ver. 62.
the young men died in battle, and so maids wanted matches, ver. 63. their
Priests were slain, and their wives made no lamentation for them, 1 Samuel 4. 22.
in comparison of greater losses, ver. 64. Whence learn, 1. Corrupting of Gods
worship and ordinances, is a sin crying so judgment, which voice God will
answer; When God heard this he was wroth. 2. The Lord goes not rashly to
judgment; but as it were after perfect understanding of the cause: When God
heard this, he was wroth. 3. Were a people or person never so dear to God,
superstition and imagerie, and abusing of his public worship, will provoke him
to jealousy against them, and drew forth such judgments as will speak the
Lords abhorring them for that sin; And he greatly abhorred Israel.

From ver 60. Learn, 1 When the public ordinances, the tokens of the Lords
presence, are removed from any place, the Lord removes, and forsakes that
place; So that he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh; where the Ark had been till
Elies death. 2. It is in vain for any to boast of Gods presence in any place,
when once his public ordinances are polluted; He forsook Shiloh, the tent
which he placed among men.

From ver. 61. Learn, 1. When Gods people abuse Religion, and pollute his
ordinances, no wonder he make their open enemies to deprive them thereof as here
we see. 2. The Lords people cannot promise unto themselves the continuance of
the manifestation of the Lords strength and the Lords glory among them, longer
then they do esteem of him, and advance him as their glory and their strength;
for when Israel tempted God kept not his testimonies, and moved him to
jealousy, he delivered over his strength into captivity, and his glory into
the enemies hands.

From ver. 62. Learn, When enemies get advantage against Gods people by reason
of their provocation of God, and when the enemies of Religion get power over
Gods people, so far as to deprive them of the means of Religion, the Lords
anger will be more against his people who were the causes of this wrath, then
against the enemies who were the instruments of the execution of the wrath; and
therefore beside the taking away of his ordinances from his people, he will
send his vengeance upon them also; He gave his people over also unto the sword,
and was wroth with his inheritance.

From ver. 63. Learn, 1. When the Lord sends the sword on a land, he can
soon consume the flower of the youth as with a fire; The fire c^nsumed the
young men. 2. When Religion is overthrown among Gods people, let not the
Commonwealth think to stand; when God gave his glory into the enemies hand, he
^ave his people over also unto the sword, and the fire consumed their young
men. 3: When Gods people by abusing of Religion do provoke God against them, it
shall be no wonder if God give them such sad blows by their enemies, that
there shall be no hope for one age at least to recover their estate; and no
wonder if there be fearful appearance also of cutting off the posterity: The
fire consumed their young men, and their maidens were not given to marriage.

From ver. 64. Learn, 1. It is amongst the fearfullest tokens of Gods
displeasure against a land, when he removes his Ministers from them,
especially when the good are taken away with the bad; Their Priests fell by the
sword. 2. When the Ministers are the abusers of Religion, and chief in the
provocation, no wonder to see them also exemplarily punished; for as Hophni and
^hinehas made the sacrifice to be snuffed at, so God made their carcases fall
in the battle; Their Priests fell by the sword. 3. When Gods wrath breaks forth
against his own people for their provocations, he can make public calamities
so great, as they shall swallow up domestic miseries: yea he can make those
that live, and are reserved from the sword, so weary of their lives, as they
shall reckon the dead to be more happy then the living. Their Priests fell by
the sword, and their widows made no lamentation.

Ver. 65. Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep: and like a mighty man that
shouteth by reason of ^e.

66. And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts (...) put them to a perpetual
reproach.

In the thirteenth place, he shows how notwithstanding of all the former
provocations and sore judgments, the Lord of his own free grace, by taking
vengeance upon his enemies; restored his people to the privileges of Church
and Kingdom. Whence learn, 1. Howsoever the Lords people draw on judgments
upon themselves, and deserve to be left in their miseries; yet God of his free
and constant love to them, sends relief when they least expect, as here is to
be seen; when his people is in a most desperate condition, Then the Lord
awaketh. 2. As people do sleep securely in their sin, when God does call them
to repentance: so it is justice with God to misken them in their calamity, and
to be unto them as one asleep, as here he is described. 3. God does not so
far wink at the troubles of his own people, but the cry of their misery, and
the insolency of the enemy against them, will awake him. When Israel is now as
a lost people, and their enemies have taken Gods Ark, Then the Lord awaked as
one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouted because of wine. 4.
Whatsoever weak similitude the Scripture uses to make us conceive somewhat of
the Lords operations, yet must we always think of him, as beseems the glory
of his majesty, leaving the imperfection of the creature, (from which the
similitude is borrowed) as the dregs of the comparison, to rest with the
creature it self, as here we are led to do, except we should think blasphemous
thoughts of God. 5. Albeit the enemies of Gods people may be at ease, when his
people are in trouble, and lying under their feet, yet God will arise in due
time and punish them; The Lord awaked, and smote his enemies in the hinder
parts. 6. The dishonor done to God, and to Gods people, is but for a time, and
is shortly removed; but the recompense of the enemy which do dishonor God, is
perpetual and everlasting; He smote his enemies in the hinder parts; to wit,
with Emerods and a bloody flux; And so he p^ whom to a perpetual reproach.

Ver. 67. Moreover, he refused the Tabernacle of Joseph: and chose not the
tribe of Ephraim.

68. But chose the tribe of Judah: the Mount Sion which he loved.

69. And he built his Sanctuary like high palaces: like the earth which he has
established for ever.

70. He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds:

71. From following the ewes great with young: he brought him to feed Jacob his
people, and Israel his inheritance.

72. So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart: and guided them by
the faithfulness of his hands.

In the last place is set down, how albeit the Lord did not return to Shiloh
with his Ark ver. 67. yet he stayed in the land among his people, and placed
his Ark in Jerusalem, and built himself a glorious Temple and Sanctuary on
Sion, ver. 68, 69. and settled his people under the government of David, a type
of Christ, exalted from an humble and low condition, to be King of Israel, ver
70, 71. by whom the people were well governed, ver. 72.

From, ver. 67, 68. Learn, 1. The Lord can so temper his justice and mercy in
his dealing with his people as the effects of both shall be manifest: Because
he was so dishonored in Shiloh, he will have his justice seen, in not
suffering his Ark to come there again any more; Moreover, he refused the
Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim; to wit, for the tribe
that he would most respect, or where he would have the residence of his Ark to
be; there is his justice. Again, he will not forsake the land, or the people of
Israel altogether, but will dwell in some other part of the land, and will take
another tribe to have the chief evidence of his respect shown unto them; But
he chose the tribe of Judah: there is his mercy, with an insinuation of the
main means of the mercy, which is the coming of Christ in the flesh, out of the
tribe of Judah; Thus God will not depart from Israel, and yet he will no^ be
found save in the tribe of Judah, out of which came Christ, the root and
fountain of mercy, to all Israel, who shall seek unto God through him. 2.
Whatsoever be the privilege of the Church universal, yet no particular place
is to privileged, but God will leave it, and take another to dwell in, when he
is provoked in (...) particular place to forsake it: for the dishonor done to
his Majesty in Shiloh, he resused the Tabernacle of Joseph; he refused the his
Ark, the chief sign of his presence, should have its residence any more in the
bounds of Ephraim or Manasseh, the sons of Joseph. 3. The cause why God chooses
unto any privilege, one tribe more then another, or one person rather then
another, or one place rather then another, is only his own free will, grace and
love; He chose the tribe of Judah, the Mount Siou which he loved.

From ver. 69. Learn, 1. In the type of the building of the Temple on mount
Sion, we are taught that the Church of God is his own edifice, who ever be the
workmen, whom he in his providence does employ to build it. Therefore is it
said, He built his sanctuary like high Palaces. 2. Albeit the Lords Church, may
have many troubles and commotions in it, yet shall it endure and not be
overthrown utterly for ever; He built his sanctuary as the earth, which he has
established for ever.

From, Ver. 70, 71. Learn, 1. The Church shall not want a King to defend, and
protect her; for God has his own chosen servant appointed for the purpose. As
for the typical Kingdom of Israel he had David: so for the Church universal,
represented by the type, he has appointed Christ the eternal Son of God, who
took his humane nature of the lineage of David, to be King mystical in Sion
for ever; to be a type of whom, he did choose David his servant. 2. The Lord to
the intent he may not only show his sovereigne power, whereby he can raise the
meanest of men, and exalt them how high soever he pleases, but also to
represent from how low a degree of humiliation Christ incarnate was to be
raised to the government of his Church and Kingdom, he sets down the mean
condition of life, wherefrom David was raised to the royal dignity of governing
Israel: He took him from the sheep solds, from following the ewes great with
young; he brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.

From, Ver. 72. Learn, The duties and properties of a good King are these.
First, He must resolve to be Gods servant in his charge, as David was. Seconly,
All his subjects, and in special the Lords people, must be cared for by him in
a civil way, as a flock of sheep is cared for by the Pastor: David fed them.
Thirdly, A Kings heart must be set uprightly for Gods honor, and for the
subjects welfare in the whole course of his government; He fed them according
(...). (...), (...) King ^st de^ prudently with his subjects, accomodating the
whole ^se of his dealing with them, as their several conditions do re^ire: He
guided them by the skilfulnesse of his hands. And whatsoever measure David had
of those properties, were but a shadow of the perfections of Christ in his
Government. Fifthly, neither laws, nor teaching, nor miracles, nor benefits,
nor judgments can avail unto the salvation of a people or person, till they be
put under the hand and guiding of Christ; as we are taught here in the example
and representation of the Lords dealing with Israel in this Psalm, wherein
when God has tried his people with often repeated mercies and judgments, they
come to no settled estate, till they be put under the Government of David, who
in this is (...) type of Christ. For he closes with this, he guided them by
the skilfulnesse of his hands.

PSALM. LXXIX. A Psalm of Asaph.
THe scattered and captive people of God, after the destruction of Jerusalem
and of the Temple, do put up a pitiful complaint unto God, to ver. 6. and do
pray for a merciful relief to his Church, and for avenging their blood upon
their enemies. As for the complaint, in it they lament four things. First, the
profanation and desolation of the Lords inheritance and Temple by the heathen
their enemies, ver. 1. Secondly, the barbarous cruelty and inhumanity used
against them, ver, 2, 3. Thirdly, the contempt and mocking of their wicked
neighbors in their misery, ver. 4. Fourthly ^as they acknowledge this to
proceed from Gods displeasure, so they lament that it is like to be
everlasting, ver. 5.

In their prayer, in the latter part of the Psalm, they crave: First, justice
upon their enemies, ver. 6. 7. Secondly, pardon of their own sins, and
deliverance out of their misery, for sundry reasons, ver, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Thirdly, that God wol^d reward their inhumane neighbors who mocked at their
misery, ver. 12. And do close their petition with a promise of praise and
thanks unto God by the Church in all succeeding ages. Whence learn in general.
1. The Church of God may be brought so low, as here we see once it was 2 So
many of Gods people as live to see such public calamities and misery, must not
despair of a recovery, but should and may run to God and pray for the Church
in affliction, expecting order after consusion, and after dissipation, to see a
gathering of Gods people again, and after apparent overthrow of Religion a
restoring of Gods public worship, as the example of the Psalmist in this Psalm
does teach, whose courage and confidence in God for relief of the Lords people
is wonderful, as the condition of the Church at that time seemed to be
desperate. As the holy Ghost, the enditer of this Psalm, does give warning here
to all Churches in all ages, to beware to provoke the Lord unto wrath, lest he
deal with them, as he dealt with those Israelites: so does he give warrant to
all afflicted Churches, to follow the example of this afflicted Church, to run
to God for help: for which cause he has given this Psalm to be made use of by
the Church, A Psalm of Asaph.

Ver. 1. O God the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy people
have they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.

In the first part of this Lamentation; Learn, 1. Albeit there be no place nor
person, how near and dear soever unto God, exempted from judgment when they
are polluted, yet the wicked instruments of the judgment poured out upon the
place and persons consecrated to God, may justly be complained of, as here we
see; O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance. 2. When Gods people,
who should be holy, defile themselves and Gods Ordinances, it is no wonder that
by profane persons they be punished, and their holy things polluted; Thy holy
Temple have they defiled; that is, they have abused it, dealt with it, as a
vile and pro^ane thing. 3. Albeit people in Covenant with God have disgraced
their holy profession, and polluted his ordinances, and be justly plagued by
seeing holy ordinances put over in the hands of profane men for their cause,
yet neither will the Lord disclaim his interest in his own ordinances, nor do
his people lose right and interest in God and in his ordinances, when they take
with their punishment, and do make their address to God for relief; Thy holy
Temple have they defiled. 4. When God gives over religious ordinances in the
hands of profane men to be abused, no wonder if they that are the cause of
this, do suffer in their civil state also; no wonder the City suffer with the
Temple: Jerusalem have they laid on heaps.

Ver. 2. The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the
fowls of the heaven: the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth.

3. Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there was
none to bury them.

From the second part of the lamentation and complaint^ Learn, 1. Falling in
battle before the enemies may prove that God has a just cause against the
party overcome, but cannot prove that the victors cause is good, presuppose
both parties had appealed to God: for there the heathen do overcome, and the
Lords servants and Saints are slain, and they who are lest alive do complain
of the victors, and take with their punishment at Gods hand, who does follow
his own quarrel as he pleases, and will not at men's pleasure sit down and
decide appellations, when they call to him, or stand unto (...) time set down
by men to him, to determine their controversy: O God, the (...) are come into
thine inheritance, etc. The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be
meat to the fowls. a^. Heavy and fearful are the judgments temporal, which
may come upon Gods people, when they have provoked God to wrath against them
for their sins, even such as are here set down, to wit, overturning of the
outward face of Religion, destruction of their lands, cities and estate,
killing of them in abundance, and want of burial when they are dead. 3. As not
by outward prosperity, so also not by outward calamities, is the love of
hatred of God to be known; the same sort of outward dispensation may befall
both; The dead bodies of thy servants they have given to be meat to the fon^es
of heaven. 4. No tempered wrath hot calamities whatsoever can separate the
Lords children from Gods love and estimation of them, nor untie the relations
between God and them: for here, albeit their carcases fall, and be devoured
with the fowls of the heaven and beasts of the earth, yet remain they the
Lords servants and Saints under these sufferings. The dead bodies of thy
servants etc. the flesh of thy Saints. 5. The slaughter of the Lords people,
and the scattering of such as escape of them may be so great, when his anger is
kindled against them, that none may be found to bury the slain, but the dead
may lie unburied; Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem,
and there was none to bury them. 6. Nothing is to be expected of Gods enemies
toward Gods people when they fall in their hands, but savage cruelty and
barbarous inhumanity, for which they are to answer unto God, to whom the
complaint of the living and the cry of the blood of the slain does call for
vengeance, as the experience of the Lords people in this place does teach.

Ver. 4. We are become a reproach to our neighbors: a scorn and derision to
them that are round about us.

From the third part of the complaint and lamentation; Learn, 1. In the day of
Gods displeasure against his people, yea in the day of the trial of the faith
and patience of his people, no wonder that such as should most pity our
calamity, and be comfortable unto us, rejoice to see us in misery, yea and make
our calamity a matter of reproach to us, a matter of scorn and derision of us;
for here it is said, We are become a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and
derision to them that are round about (...). 2. When God does afflict his
people, all their privileges, and the Religion which they profess, do become
contemptible and ridiculous to the ungodly, who do not esteem either of Gods
ordinances or of his people, but when they are adorned with outward prosperity.
The Lords people were seared and honored by them that were about them, when
God did fight for them, and countenanced them; but now they lament, We are
become a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are
round about us. 3. To be mocked in misery, and specially of them by whom we
should be comforted, is amongst the saddest passages of our affliction:
Therefore here, is this part of their lamentation set down, after the formerly
mentioned misery, as a load above a burden, and that which did imbitter their
sorrow most of all, because it did reflect upon their Religion, their faith,
their interest in God, as if all had been ridiculous.

Ver. 5. How long, LORD, will thou be (...) gry, for ever? shall thy jealousy
burn like fire?

From the fourth part of the lamentation; Learn, 1. The Lords displeasure and
anger against his people, is more heavy to them then all the calamities which
have lighted on them; How long will thou be angry? puts the capstone on
their prisonhouse. 2. Guilty consciences cannot but apprehend wrath, when their
plagues are heavy, yea they cannot escape a conflict with the fear of
everlasting wrath, when his hand does lie long upon them. How long, Lord? Will thou be angry for ever? 3. When Gods people do fall from their matrimonial
Covenant with God, and their heart and eyes do go a whoring after idols, no
wonder the Lord be jealous, and his wrath for this be most hot, and be like to
devour unto utter destruction: Shall thy jealousy burn like fire? 4.
Whatsoever has been our calamity, whosoever have been the instruments of our
misery, yea how great soever our provocation of Gods anger has been: it is
wisdom, as to expound all the malice and cruelty of men to be the effects of
Gods anger and jealousy, and that his anger and jealousy is kinled by our
sins: so to run to God, and lament the whole matter before him, and
deprecate his wrath, as the Church does here; How long, Lord? Will thou be
angry for ever?

Ver. 6. Pour cut thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and
upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy Name.

7. For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.

In the latter part of the Psalm is their prayer; and first, for justice and
vengeance on their enemies. Whence learn, 1. Albeit it be not lawful for us in
our own quarrel to pray against our enemies, yet in the Churches quarrel, in
the Lords quarrel it is lawful to pray in general against the incorrigible and
desperate enemies of God and his people, as here the Church is taught. 2.
Albeit temporal judgments may overtake Gods visible Church, when the open
enemies of Gods people and of his true worship are spared, yet at length the
fullness of wrath is reserved for the ungodly, one and all: Pour out thy wrath
upon the heathen that have not known thee. 3 Prayer to God, and invocation of
his Name upon all occasions, as Gods honor and men's necessities and duties
public, private, and secret do call them to come before him, is a mark
differencing Gods people from the ungodly, whether professed or real heathens,
and a mark of such as shall find mercy distinguishing them from the object of
Gods wrath: Pour out thy wrath upon the Kingdoms that have not called on thy
Name. 4. Unto the tight worshipping of God the true knowledge of God is
required: for how shall men call upon God in whom they believe not, whom they
know not, or whom to know they care not? Therefore such as are strangers from
God here, are described by this They have not known thee, they have not called
on thy Name. 5. The members of a visible Church may be scattered one from
another, that they cannot in one place jointly and professedly enjoy public
Ordinances; as here, Jacob is devoured, and his dwelling place laid waste. 6.
The heaviest article in the ditty of the ungodly is their being either
accessory to, or active in the overthrow of Gods people; Pour out thy wrath on
them; for they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.

Ver. 8. O remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender mercies
speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low.

9. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the the glory of thy Name: and deliver
us, and purge away our sins for thy Names sake.

10. Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known
among the heathen in our sight, by the revenging of the blood of thy servants
which is shed.

11. Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee, according to the
greatness of thy power: preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

Secondly they pray for pardon of their sins, and delivery from the misery
which their sins had procured; unto which Petitions sundry reasons are added
for strengthening of the faith of the Church. Whence learn, 1. The sense of
sin makes the afflicted to be patient, and submissive unto God without
murmuration, and their lamentation for their misery does resolve in prayer, and
in a prayer for remission of sin; O remember not against us former iniquities.
2. The only right way to remedy a miserable condition, is to sue for remission
of sins, and for the renewed evidence of reconciliation: for before the Church
here do ask any thing for their outward delivery, they pray, O remember not
against us former iniquities. 3. A peoples long continuance in sin does furnish
ground of fear of the long continuing of begun wrath and judgment upon them,
and therefore they pray for the forgetting of their sin, that the quarrel being
the judgment may be removed; O remember not against us our former iniquities.
4. When warth and justice are like to consume us, and quickly make an end of
us, a refuge is open to us in Gods tender mercies, who cannot destroy utterly a
sinner fleeing to his mercy; Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we
are brought very low. 5. When the Lords people are brought low, let them not
look for a lifting up or relief, except from God only, therefore say they,
here, Help us, O Lord. 6. Such as have laid hold on God for salvation promised
in the Covenant, may also look for particular deliveries out of particular
troubles, as appendices of the main benefit of salvation; Therefore, Help, us,
O God of our salvation, say they. 7. When men do ask any thing, the granting
whereof may glorify God, they may confidently expect to have it; and in
special, when God may be so glorified, as his people may also be preserved and
comforted: Help us (say they) for the glory of thy Name, and deliver us. 8. As
the conscience of sin uses to step in oftener between us and mercy, so must we
call oftener for remission of sin; for earnest affection can double and treble
the same Petition without babbling: Deliver us, and purge away our sins. 9. It
is the glory of the Lord to forget sin, and when remission of sins is prayed
for according to Gods promise, the Lords glory is engaged for the helping of
faith to obtain; Purge away our sin for thy Names sake. 10. Idolaters are ready
to insult over Gods people and their religion, and over God also, when the
Church is afflicted, and this dishonor of God true Saints cannot endure;
Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? 11. Howsoever the Lord
will punish his own people for their sins in the sight of the heathen, yet will
he not suffer the heathen long to insult over his people, or over the true
religion; but by showing kindness to his people, will have the heathen to know
that he is their God, who will answer for himself, and for his people, and
their religion also; Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? 12.
As it does belong ^o Gods honor to deliver his people in their distress, so
also to punish the persecutors of his Church and blasphemers of his Name; Let
him be known among the heathen in our sight, by avenging the blood of thy
servants. 13. It is a comfort and encouragement of living Saints, to see God
avenge the blood of dead Saints slain by their enemies; Let him be known in
our sight, by avenging the blood of thy servants. 14. As it is no wonder to see
grief and sighing to be the cheer of Gods people when the Lord has scattered
them, and they are captive prisoners under their oppressors; so may we be sure
their tears and sighing shall not be misregarded by God: Let the sighing of the
prisoner come before thee. 15. Albeit it seem impossible to deliver Gods
people, when they are as condemned prisoners, destinated by their enemies unto
destruction, yet says sees delivery very possible to Gods omnipotency:
According to the greatness of thy power, preserve thou those that are appointed
to die.

Ver. 12. And render unto our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom, their
reproach where with they have reproached thee, O Lord.

13. So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, will give thee thanks for
ever: we will show forth thy praise to all generations.

In the last place, they pray for vengeance on their wicked neighbors, who
mocked them and their Religion in the time of their calamity: and thus they
close their prayer with a promise to praise God for the granting of their
petitions. Whence learn, 1. Such as rejoice at the calamity of Gods people, and
mock them in their misery, especially neighbors who should be most
comfortable, as they are in some respect more guilty then open oppressors; so
shall they be most severely plagued of God for their cruelty: Render unto our
neighbors sevenfold into their besom their reproach. 2. The mocking of Gods
people in their misery, especially for their Relgion, is the mocking of God,
and reproaching of him whose servants they are; Render them the reproach,
wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord. 3. When God takes vengeance on
the enemies of the Church, then is it seen what interest God has in that
despised company: for the Church here is confident, that then their relations
unto God, and Gods care of them, shall be evident; So we thy people and sheep
of thy pasture shall give thee thanks: that is, we shall come out of distress,
and gather our selves together, and profess our selves to be thy people, and
chosen flock, and shall praise thee. 4. The troubles of the Lords people, and
their mourning, are but temporal, and of short endurance: but their deliverance
and comfort, when their troubles are ended, is everlasting, and no less then
everlasting duration can suffice them to praise God and thank him for his
kindness; So we thy people shall give thee thanks for ever. 5. As the Lords
work for his distressed people calls for thanks at their hands, so also does
it call for praise at their hands, who shall hear of it; and they whose duty it
is to give thanks, ought also according to their power, to stir up others to
praise God with themselves, and to stir up also the posterity in all
succeeding ages, as the Church here promises: We will show forth thy praise to
all generations.

PSALM. LXXX. To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim Eduth. A Psalm of Asaph.
THis Psalm given to the Church to be made use of, is of the like sad subject
with the former, and may be applied to the time of carrying away the ten tribes
out of the holy land, while Judah was yet in possession of it, and the Temple
was yet standing, and the Lord was dwelling between the Cherubims in the
Sanctuary, where the Ark and Mercy-seat was yet remaining; or to the time of
the begun desolation of the land by Nebuchadnezzar, or to any other desolation
which did threaten their final rooting out. The sum of the Psalm is a
lamenting of the miserable condition of the Israelites, and an earnest
entreating of the Lord to give them repentance and a delivery. In the first
place, the Church makes her address to God, and propounds the main
Petition, ver, 1, 2, 3. In the second place, they lament their misery, and
repeat the same Petition; ver. 4, 5 6, 7. In the third place, they call to
mind the Lords care to plant his people in the land as a vine-tree, and do
lament the doleful change of their happy condition into that of their present
misery, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. In the fourth place, they pray for Gods
mercy and pity toward his desolate people, ver. 14, 15, 16. In the last place,
they pray for the standing of the tribe of Judah, and that ^or Christ's cause,
who was to take his humane nature of this tribe; and do close the Psalm with
repearing the third time their special Petition for repentance and delivery to
be granted unto them, ver. 17, 18, 19.

Ver. 1. Glve ear, O shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a
flock, thou that dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth.

Many sweet fruits has the Lord drawn forth from the bitter afflictions of his
people, and this Psalm amongst the rest; wherein first, the Church beggeth
from God audience, for the relations between God and them, ver. 1. and then
prays for salvation, ver. 2. and to this end does make request for the
gracious gift of Repentance to his people, that they might be saved, ver. 3.

From the first verse; Learn, 1. When our heart is full of grief, or of any
holy affection, which we desire to lay sorth before the Lord, we may call for,
and expect audience at the Lords hands, as the Church does here, saying to the
Lord, Give car. 2. He that would speak to God in the d^y of calamity, had need
to fasten faith on God, and should go about it, how grievous soever his rod
seem, as here the Church is taught by the Psalmist to do. 3. Albeit faith will
find small strength from anything in the supplicant, yet on Gods part it
cannot miss solid ground to fix upon, according to the tenor of the Covenant
of grace, such as is Christ's Prophetical and Kingly office, whereby the Lord
takes on him to lead and feed his people; to govern and protect them, as a
shepherd does his flock: as here the Church does, O shepherd of Israel. This is
one consideration. Another is, the constant experiment and proof given of his
actual exercising of this office; Thou that leadest Jacob as a flock: and unto
the former they ^oyn the free offer of grace to all that do seck for mercy from
God through the Mediator Christ; Thou that dw^llest between the Cherubims. 4.
Albeit sin does overcloud the manifesting of Gods favor and loving kindesse
toward his people, yet the prayer of faith upon the grounds of the Covenant
may expect the clearing up of his countenance again: O shepherd of Israel,
shine forth.

Ver. 2. Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Manasseh, stir up thy strength,
and come and save us.

For understanding of the second verse, we must remember, that when the A^k of
the Covenant rested, or marched in the wilderness, these three Tribes,
Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manassc^, were in the teareward of the host of Israel,
or on the Westside thereof, as is set down, Numb. 2. 18, 19, etc. when the host
marched, and the Art set forward, Moses said to the Lord, Rise up, Lord, and
let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee, flee before thee:
answerable to this, does the sixty ^ight Psalm begin, when the A^k removed and
was carried up to mount Sion, now the people of God being in distress here, do
call those days to remembrance, and do request the Lord, that as he had in the
eye sight of those three tribes here mentioned, ma^isisted himself many a time
to be the leader and defender of his people: so he would now also in this their
lamentable condition stir up himself for their relief and safety. Whence
learn, 1. The remembrance of the Lords humbling himself to be fafamiliar with
his people, and how sweet and glorious communion his people have had with him,
may and should encourage believers in him to seek and expect new experience of
the like mercy in their need, as here the Israelit^s do pray for new proof of
that favor, which their ancesters did find sometime; Before Ephraim,
Benjamin, and Manasseh stir up thy strength, and come and save us. 2. The
posterity of those who have been in fellowship with God, should pray for
themselves, and be prayed for by the Church, that they may have room in the
Lords host, and have God their leader, as their godly fathers had before them;
Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh stir up thy strength.

Ver. 3. Turn us again, O God: and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved.

This is the special Petition most insisted upon, that God by giving of
Repentance would reclaim his people from their apostasy, and grant the
evidence of his former favor unto them, and so deliver and save them. Whene
learn, 1. As the apostasy of Gods people from God, is the fountain of all
their calamity: so their repentance and returning unto God, is the first step
unto their relief, and delivery from procured misery of captivity, or any
other calamity, as the prayer here imports: Turn us again, O Lord. 2.
Conversion of people from their sin unto God, and leading of them back from the
misery drawn on by sin, is the work of God, which no man can work of himself,
or in himself, or in others, till God begin and enable them to return, and lead
them on in their turning; Therefore says the Psalmist, Turn us again, O Lord:
thus they say as unable to turn again of themselves. 3. When a people or person
do turn unto God, repenting their sin or backsliding from him, they may expect
the Lord shall show unto them evidences of his reconciliation and favor toward
them; Turn us again, and cause thy face to shine upon us. 4. It is to Gods
children very salvation to be in favor with God, and to be assured of
reconciliation with him: Turn us again, cause thy face to shine, and so shall
we be saved.

Ver. 4. O LORD God of hosts, how long will thou be angry against the prayer of
thy people:

5. Thou feedest them with the bread of tears: and give them tears to drink
in great measure.

6, Thou make us a strife unto our neighbors: and our enemies laugh among
themselves.

7. Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved.

In the second place, the Church lamenteth the Lords wrath, manifested first,
in answering their prayers with indignation, ver. 4. Secondly, by increasing of
their woeful misery without consolation, ver. 5. And thirdly, by making them the
matter of their enemies strife among themselves (which of them should have
meanest Hebrews to be their slaves,) and the object of their enemies sport,
when they had parted the prey among them, ver. 6. After which he repeateth the
former prayer for Repentance, and for delivery, ver. 7.

From the first part of their complaint and lamentation, set down, ver. 4.
Learn, 1. The people of God may in their affliction put up prayers to God,
which he will not accept, to wit, prayers for removing of judgment, when they
have not repented the sins which drew on the judgment; yea they may pray long,
and be instant in such prayers, and not receive a comfortable answer; yea they
may find their prayers answered with evidencing of Gods displeasing such
prayers; How long will thou be angry against the prayers of thy people? 2. When
God does not answer the prayers of his people in their affliction, the afflied
must not cease to pray on still, neither may the truly godly among them cease
to deal with God for his afflicted people, joined in external Covenant with
them, but must continue and be still instant with God, as here they do; For how
long will thou be angry against the prayers of thy people? is a part of their
prayer, notwithstanding that God seems angry at their prayers. 3. As Gods
supremacy over all the hosts of the creatures makes his wrath more terrible to
the supplicant, so should it make the supplicant more instant in prayer, and
more loath to take a refusal to his supplication, as here it does; O Lord God
of hosts, how long will thou be angry against the prayers of thy people? 4. We
are not always to look after a present answer to our prayers, but must wait on
so long as God pleases not to answer: yea it is possible, that after a
believer has begun to humble himself, God may send messenger after messenger
of more and more appearance of wrath; but we must resolve, as to wrestle with
all difficulties, so also with the sense of Gods anger against us, yea, and
that against our prayers: How long will thou be angry against the prayers of
thy people?

From the second part of the lamentation, ver. 5. Learn, 1. When Gods people
will not mourn for sin in time, as penitents, no wonder he drive them to
mourn for the fruit of their sin in sad affliction: Thou feedest them with
the bread of tears. 2. We are more sensible of the evil of trouble, then of
the evil of sin; the tears of Repentance are very rare, and soon d^ied up,
but the tears of sorrow for affliction do easily flow, as affliction
increases or continues, and that in Gods wise dispensation, that worldly
sorrow for afflictions, may drive us to godly sorrow for offending of God; Thou
feedest them with the bread of tears. 3. The comfort of the creatures, yea of
necessary food, may be overcome and swallowed up by trouble and worldly sorrow,
and that in Gods wise dispensation, that men may learn to hunger and thi^st for
heavenly and strong consolation: as it befell this people, who were taken up so
with weeping, as they forgot their ordinary meals, and when they did eat and
drink, did drench their food with tears; Thou feedest them with the bread of
tears, and give them tears to drink in great measure.

From the third part of their lamentation, ver. 6. Learn, 1. It is
righteousness for God to make his people find the bitterness of men's hatred
and enmity, when they have slighted his friendship and favor; as here, he gave
Israel over ^to the hands of their enemies, when they had provoked him: Thou
make (...) a strife to our neighbors, and our enemies laugh. 2. When the
Lord lets the wicked world loose upon his people, they find as many
neighbors, as enemies, who make havoc of them, and strive amongst themselves
who shall do them most harm, and serve themselves most of their persons and
goods; and this is the Lords wise despensation, to let hi^ own know, what his
protection is worth; Thou make us a strife unto our neighbors. 3. The grief
and trouble of the Lords people, is the joy of the wicked, and it is the
property of an enemy to rejoice at their calamity; and God in his most wise
dispensation will give his people a taste of this, that they may know the fruit
of their rejoicing in that which offended God, and what they may expect of the
world, if they fall out of his favor; Thou make us a strife to our
neighbors, and our en^mies laugh among themselves.

From the repetition of the same prayer for giving them repentance,
reconciliation, and salvation, ver. 7. Learn, 1. Ardency of affection makes
the repetition of the same prayer not to be babbling; Turn us again, O God, is
now the second time propounded. 2. The way to remedy all the evil ^oth of sin
and punishment lying upon Gods people, is to repent their sins, and to seek
reconciliation with God; if his people would repent, then would not the Lord be
angry with their prayers; then affliction should either be removed; or made
light to them: for to remedy all the lamented evils, they pray, Turn us again,
O God. 3. A praying peoples case cannot be so dark and desperate, but looking
to Gods power shall give light and hope of relief; Turn us again, O God of
hosts, says he; nothing is too hard for him to do. 4. Gods people cannot
dispense with the want of his manifested good will to them; Turn us, and cause
thy face to shine upon us, is their fixed Petition. 5. Salvation may be
certainly expected in Gods order^ and if we labor to be sure of our turning to
God, and living in the sense of communion with him, we need not make question
of salvation; for that shall follow infallibly on the former two: Turn us
again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine upon u^, so shall we be
saved. The last is not put up by way of prayer here, but p^omised to
themselves, and put out of question, that it shall follow; Turn us, so shall we
be saved, say they.

Ver. 8. Thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the heathen,
and planted it.

9. Thou preparedst room beforehand: and did cause it to take deep root, and
it filled the land.

10. The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were
like the goodly Cedars.

11. She sent out her boughs unto the sea: and her branches unto the river.

In the third place, they renew their Lamentation, by comparing the sometime
blessed condition of the Church of Israel with the present miserable estate
they are now in. In former times Israel was as a fruitful vineyard, v. 8 9, 10,
11. but now the Lords protection is removed, and they are made a prey to every
beastly enemy, ver. 12, 13. Whence learn, 1. Adversity brings to mind
neglected prosperity in time past, and the distress of a Church deprived of
former favors puts a price upon, and gives luster unto abused mercies
looked back upon: as here, the calamity of the ten tribes, or of the whole
twelve tribes cast out of their land, does make their delivery out of Egypt,
their planting in Canaan, and the mercies which they felt in that land to
appear very glorious; and sets up that their sometime condition in the
similtude of a fruitful vineyard. 2. There is no fitter similitude then of a
vine-tree and of a vineyard, to represent the weakness of Gods Church and
people, and Gods care of them, to have fruits of faith and obedience from them:
therefore here and elsewhere is this comparison made use of. 3. It serves much
to help the faith of Gods people in their calamity, to call to mind Gods begun
work among them, and in them, and for them: for when his people do claim to
wonted kindness, the Lord is ready to make his mercy run in the former
channel. This is the ground of the: Churches reasoning here, in her
supplication to God. 4. It is not enough lightly to mention a course of
kindness shown to us of God, but every part and passage of it is worthy to be
marked and prized highly; as here, 1. Isreal's bringing out of Egypt is
observed, and compared to the bringing of a noble plant out of a far country
in the Lords own hand; Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt. 2. The casting
out of the Canaanites, is compared to the purging of the ground from stones,
and thorne^, and blocks in comparison of Israel, to be planted there; Thou have
cast but the heathen, and planted it. 3. They observe the benefit of enlarging
their dwelling for commodious habitation: Thou preparedst room for it. 4. And
their settling in the land; Thou causedst it to take deep root. 5. And their
multiplying in it; It filled the land. 6. And their riches, and power, and
glory in the land, comparable to a wood of Cedars; The hills were covered with
the shadow of it, and the bought thereof were like the goodly Cedars. 7. And
the spreading of their authority and government, according to the bounds (...)
to their promised possession, Genesis 15. 18. from the Mediterranean sea westward,
to the river Eupbrates eastward; She sent out her boughs to the s^, and her
branches to the river. Thus a well ordered Church is like (...) pleasant and
fruitful vineyard.

Ver. 12. Why have thou then broken down her hedges: so that all they which
pass by the way do pluck her?

13. The boar out out of the wood does waste it: and the wild beast of the
field does devour it.

After calling to mind this glorious condition they were in, they in a weeping
and lamentable manner do compare their present misery with what happiness once
they had, and do lay it forth before the pitiful eyes of the Lord. Whence
learn, 1. As present felt misery commends prosperity past, so past prosperity
does augment present misery, when the two conditions are compared, as in this
comparison is held forth. 2. The most glorious and best planted Church may for
its unfruitfulnesse and provocation of God by its ill fruits, be plucked up
again, and the hedge of discipline, the hedge of civil government, and the
hedge of Gods protection may all be removed suddenly from it, as here we see;
Why have thou broken down the hedges? 3. It is a wonderful and astonishing
judgment, to see the Lord casting down the work of Reformation once begun by
him, and plucking up the plantation of his Church once made by him; and yet the
provocation of a wicked generation may procure this evil, which hardly can be
believed till it come; and even then it is wonderful, and should send men unto
God, to make them see rightly the causes thereof, as this interrogation
imports; Why best thou broken down her hedges? 4. When God removes his
hedges from about his people, for their provocation of him, then any body that
pleases may make a prey of them; So that all they who pass by the way do^ck
her. 5. If God remove the hedge of his protection from about his people, no
wonder they call into the hands of the most savage, cruel and beastly sort of
men, as did besal Israel; The boar out of the wood does waste it, and the
wild beast out of the field does devour it. 6. When the Lords Church is in
the worst condition, she is not so wasted and destroyed, but a remnant is left
to present by prayer her condition unto God, to deal with him for her
restoration, as the case in hand here and elsewhere does show.

Ver. 14. Return we beseech thee, O God of hosts: look down from heaven, and
behold, and visit this Vine.

15. And the Vineyard which thy right hand has planted: and the branch that
thou made strong for thy self.

16. It is burnt with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy
countenance.

In the fourth place, they pray that God who was departed from them, would
return and have compassion on the desolate condition of his Church. Whence
learn, 1 Although the Lord seem to depart from his Church, yet he is within
cry, and may be recalled by prayer, and may by his power set all right again:
Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts. 2. Although no hope of help or
possibility of relief can be seen on earth, yet there is hope of help from
heaven; Look down from heaven. 3. In the least degree of Gods respect and
kindness to a desolate Church, begun to be manifested after pouring out
judgments on it, faith will read hope; of relief and restoration of it;
Behold and visit this Vine: for to come and see, is all to them which they
crave. 4. The labor and care which God has bestowed on his Church, for
setting up, and settling of it in any place, may give hope to those who pray for
it, that albeit the Lord afflict it heavily, yet he will not lose his labor;
Visit this Vine, and the Vineyard which thy right band has planted. 5. There
was a branch to come of the stock of Israel, for whose cause the Nation of the
Israelites could not be utterly forsaken and destroyed, and this was the
Messiah, Christ Jesus (promised to come of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah,
David,) of whose coming, because God had a special care that the stock should
be underpropped and upheld and made strong till this branch came forth, the
Church of Israel might be confident not to be utterly cast off, and therefore
in their prayer they make mention of him; Visit the Vineyard and the Branch (to
wit, of the house of David,) that thou made strong for thy self: In the
Hebrew, it is the Son whom thou made strong, even Christ, who is the true
Son of God, the true Vine-tree, John 15. 1. whereabout the Fathers husbandry
is in a special way employed. 6. The visible Church or people of God by
Covenant, at some time may be so far from a glorious and flourishing
condition of prosperity, that on the contrary in outward appearance she may be
almost destroyed, and like to perish utterly, as here of the Lords Vineyard, or
the whole visible Church we read, It is burnt with fire, it is cut down: he
means Gods people; They perish (says the Psalmist,) at the rebuke of thy
countenance. 7. We are to look, not so much to instruments of the Churches
desolation, as to the peoples sins procuring it, and to Gods wrath causing
it? They perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.

Ver. 17. Let thy band be upon the man of thy right hand: upon the Son of
man, whom thou made strong for thy self.

18. So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, ana we will call upon thy
Name.

19. Turn us again, O LORD God of hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall
be saved.

In the last place, they put up three requests. In the first, they insist upon
that point of their prayer, v. ^5. which concerns the Branch of the Vineyard
of Israel, the promised Messiah, Christ the Redeemer: and do make request over
again, that the stock and lineage of David, whereof Christ was to come, might
be kept to the fore, till he should assume humane nature and become the Son
of man, according to the solid grounds which God had laid down to bring this
promise to pass: For the substance of the prayer is this: Seeing thou have
made one branch of this Vine, which thou broughtest out of Egypt, strong for
thy self, or for thy own purpose, namely, the man of thy right hand, the Son
of man, the promised Messiah, God to be incarnate: Let thy hand or power be
employed for bringing this to pass, that he who is at thy right hand, thy
equal, may be made man, the man of thy right hand, the Son of man: So will
not we go back from thee; that is, by him we thy redeemed shall be preserved
from apostasy and separation from thee. In the second request, they pray for
the pouring forth of the Spirit upon his dead people, that having spiritual
life communicated unto them, they may worship God in Spirit and truth: Quicken
us, and we will call upon thy Name, say they. In the third request, they repeat
the third time that prayed for repentance and reconciliation, to be manifested
to his people.

From the first request, ver. 17. Learn, 1. The refuge, rest, consolation and
confidence of a distressed Church or person is Christ: and toward him must the
afflicted cast their eye for relief, as here the Church in her deepest
desolation does. 2. Christ is always at the right hand of the Father, in
regard of power and glory; and it is for him no robbery to be equal with God
the Father, Phil. 2. 16. and his humane nature assumed does not degrade him
from the glory which he had with the Father before the world began, John 17. 5.
(...) is the man of Gods right hand, in a singular manner. 3. Christ and his
Kingdom are established before God for ever, for bringing to pass the purpose
and service of God in the Redemption of his elect; He is the man whom the
Father has made strong for himself: for his humane nature is united with his
divine nature in one person; his incarnation was made sure by the eternal and
immurable decree of the Covenant of Redemption, wherein the elect were given
over to Christ, and grace was granted and given to them in Christ Jesus before
the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. And as his incarnation was made (...) by decree,
so also made sure by many times repeated Promises in the Law and Prophets,
beginning at Genesis 3. 15. where it is promised, that the seed of the woman
should tread down the head of the serpent; all along the Scripture unto,
Malachi 3. (...). where it is revealed, that Christ's messenger, to wit, John
Baptist in the power of Elias should come before him: and straightway, after he
himself should show himself, as did come to pass; This is the Son of man
(says he,) whom thou have made strong for thy self. 4. To bring this promise
to effect and accomplishment, the Almighty power of God shall set on work: and
never drew back from operation, till his purpose was brought to pass; for
after the time that the man Abraham was designed, of whose seed he was to take
flesh, the Scripture shows what care the Lord had of Isaac and Jacob, and the
Patriarchs in Egypt: and about the bringing of their posterity out of it to
Canaan, till David's family is designed for his sto^k: and when the ten tribes
were scattered abroad, he preserved Judah to the fox: and when that tribe also
was thrust out into captivity, he brought it back again, and preserved David's
race, and the tribe of Judah under civil Government till Christ came; and this
the prayer here propounded did make request for: Let thy hand be upon the man
of thy right hand. 5. Neither the Church, nor any member thereof needs any
more security for their stability and perpetuation, but Christ: for now when
the Vineyard is burnt, and the visible Church defaced, the remnant are content
to rest satisfied with this, which also they take for granted, and do subscribe
unto it; Let thy hand he upon the man of thy right hand; upon the Son of man,
whom thou have made strong for thy self. 6. The consanguinity of Christ with
the believer, and his humiliation in his humane nature, are strong supporters
of the faith and comfort of his people that do seek salvation through him;
therefore do the faithful here fix themselves on this, that as he is Gods
Son, so he is a branch of their Vineyard also; that as he is at the right
hand of the Father as God, so he is the man of his right hand also: the Son of
man, or of Adam, partaker of flesh and blood with us, of the same stock that we
are of, in all things like to us, except sin: for the Son of man is the style,
whereby Christ styled himself in his humiliation. 7. The perpetuity of the
Church, and the perseverance of the Saints, is founded upon the sufficiency of
Christ: and the unseigned believer may assure himself, as of the continuance of
the Church, so of his own perseverance and constant communion with God through
him: Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, etc. so will not we go
back from thee.

From the second request, v. 18. Learn, (...) As there is a death of alienation
from the life of God in the unregenerate, and a death of disability, discomfort
and discouragement found in the regenerate in Scripture: so there is a
quickening which gives spiritual life to those that a e^t dead in their sins
and trespasses; and a quickening which gives strength and comfort to the weak,
disconsola^e and discouraged souls of Gods children: for the first sort of
quickening every regenerate man should pray in behalf of all the elect in the
visible Church, who are not as yet converted; and for quickening in other
respects they should pray in behalf of themselves and other afflicted spirits
of the godly, as here the believers do pray; Quicken us. 2. The honoring of
God in spiritual worship should be the end of our petitions which we do make
for any good to our selves; Quicken us, and we shall call upon thy Name. 3.
Albeit the work of calling on Gods Name, and worshipping of God in Spirit and
tr^h, be the work of the regenerate man; yet the spiritual life, and the motion
or stirring up of the regenerate man unto this work, the enabling of the man
unto it, and in it, and the cheering up of his heart to do it affectionately,
is the work of the Lord: for these does the P^lmist here distinguish; first, he
sets down Gods part: Quicken thou us; and then o^r part: And we shall call upon
thy Name.

From the third request, ver. 19. repeated now the third time; Learn, 1. In
what respects soever the Church of the Jewish Nation may seem to be alienated
from God, yet the^e is hope of their repentance and returning and
reconciliation unto God; for there is a petition of the Lords enditing standing
he e, thrice repeated in their favor to be granted in due time by God, to whom
nothing is hard: and here in this third repetition of this prayer, the Name of
God Jehovah, whereby he told Israel that he would be known to them to be the
performer of promises, is added expressly; Turn us again, O Jehovah, God of
hosts. 2, Albeit we our selves do breed the mist and clouds, which do hide
from us the shining of Gods favor toward us, and we do build the partition
walls, we do raise up mountains of transgressions, which separate between God
and us; vet it is the Lord himself only, who of his own free grace, and by his
own power does dissolve these clouds, and remove these impediments out of his
own way toward us; Turn us again, and cause thy face to shine. 3. So often as we
are burdened with the same pressure, and straitened with the same necessity, as
often we may and should have recourse to God for relief by prayer: for this
staff has God put in faiths hand, to help the believer in every stop of his
journey, till he come home to the Lord, and be past all peril; Turn (...)
again, cause thy face to shine. 4. As the sight of our distance from God, and
sense of his displeasure, and fear of perdition, do serve to be a spur to our
prayer: so desire of reconciliation, desire and purpose of repenting, and hope
of salvation ^o serve to encourage us to persevere in prayer, till we have what
we ask perfected to us: Turn us again, cause thy face to shine, so shall we be
saved.

PSALM. LXXXI. To the chief Musician upon Gittith. A Psalm of Asaph.
THis Psalm was appointed to be sung in their solemn seasts, new moons, and
feast of tabernacles, in special for a testimony of Gods gracious and bountiful
dealing with his people on the one hand, and of their provocation of God on the
other hand, moving him to change his dispensation toward them, and to withhold
many benefits from them, which otherwise they might have had, if they had not
rejected Gods counsel, and had chosen their own ways: that by this Psalm his
people might learn to be wiser.

The parts of the Psalm are three. The first is a Preface, wherein there is a
mutual stirring up of the Church Members, to keep the solemn feasts, and
blowing of trumpets, ver. 1, 2, 3. and a reason or this mutual exho^tation,
taken from Gods institution of this ordinance when he brought his people out of
Egypt from the service of strangers, ver. 4, 5.

In the second part is set down, how God delivered them from bondage in Egypt,
and from troubles in their journey, ver. 6, 7. and how reasonable commands the
Lord did give unto them: which commands are all summed up in this one: That God
should be their God alone, ver. 8, 9, 10.

In the third part is set down: First, how they rejected God and his counsel,
ver. 11. Next, how therefore they were plagued, by being given over to their
own lusts, ver. 12. Thirdly, how they deprived themselves of Gods benefits,
which by following Gods counsel, they might have enjoyed, ver. 13, 14, 15.

Ver. 1. SIng aloud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God of
Jacob.

2. Take a Psalm, and bring hither the timbrel: the pleasant harp with the
psaltery.

3. Blow up the trumpet in the new Moon; in the time appointed on our solemn
feast day.

From their mutual stirring up of one another to rejoice in God, commanded here
by the Psalmist in the Lords Name; Learn, 1. That whatsoever may be our own
private condition, it is our duty ever, and in all things to give glory to God
to rejoice in him, to profess and avow his Name; Sing aloud unto God. 2. The
Lords people have the fulfilling, supplying and supporting of their emptiness,
wants and weakness in God, whose sufficiency they ought to make use of, and
rejoice therein; Sing unto God our strength. 3. It is the Covenant of grace,
whereby God becomes our God, which does entitle us, and gives us interest in,
and right unto his all sufficiency, which we should entertain joyfully in our
communion with God, praising him, and thanking him for it, and delighting in
his presence, because of it; Make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob, for God
was Jacobs God, because God was by Covenant Abraham's, and his childrens God,
whose children also we are, who are Christ's, Gal. 3. 29.

From the use and variety of musical instruments called for, Ver. 2, 3. Learn,
1. Albeit the external melody of musical. instruments in the Lords public
worship, with the rest of the paedagogie, and shadowing dark figures of the
Ceremonial Law be abolished now when the Lord, the Sun of righteousness, is
come; yet the moral duties represented by them are still to be acknowledged and
followed by us, to wit, that the praises of the Lord are unexpressible by us,
and that we are unsufficient of our selves to set forth the same, that we have
matter of unspeakable joy in God our Redeemer, and should stir up all the
powers of our soul, to this part of his spiritual service; for this did those
musical instruments teach: Take a Psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the
pleasant harp with the Psaltery. 2. We ought to acknowledge the stately
magnificence of our exalted Lord, and our dullness and slownesse to praise him:
and what need we had to be stirred up, and to stir up one another to this
duty: for this was pointed at in the use of the trumpets; Blow up the trumpet.
3. We ought to acknowledge that we are subject to various changes, and
alteration of conditions in this life, and that all these changes are
sanctified unto the Lords people, and that new consolations may be expected
from God, one after another, to season the darkness and nights of our
affliction: and we should consecrate our selves anew from time to time to God,
and give him the first part and flower of our time; yea, should study, that all
our time, in all changes whatsoever may be spent in his service: for thus much
did the solemnities in their new Moons hold forth; Blow up the Trumpet in the
new Moon. 4. We ought to acknowledge that we are strangers here in the world,
and we have no certain dwellingplace, but that we are in our sojourning
depending upon Gods provision for us, and protection of us, expecting the time
when we shall appear before him, and shall be put in possession of those
mansion-places p^epared for us, wherein we shall have fullness of joy, and God
constantly present with us, and that in the mean time we should study to
rejoice in the tiches of the Lords goodness to us in our Redeemer; for this in
substance was h^ld forth in those solemn feasts, and in special, in the feast
of Tabernacles: Blow the Trumpet in the time appointed, on our solemn feast day.

Ver. 4. For this was a statute for Israel: and a law of the God of Jacob.

5. This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the
land of Egypt: where I heard a language, that I understood not.

The Church gives two reasons of the exhortation, cheerfully to glorify God
in the observation of his appointed ordinances, and solemn convocations: One
is, because God did institute and command this solemn rejoicing in him, ver. 4.
The other is, because he appointed it after the bestowing on them of a great
(...) out of Egypt from their bondage under strangers, and people of an uncouth
language, ver. 5. From the first reason; Learn, 1. It is a sufficient motive
for observation of any religious action, that God has ordained it; and no
less authority then divine can warrant a man in the matters of Religion.
therefore it is said here, For this was a statute for Israel, and a law of the
God of Jacob. As none may appoint acts of religious worship, but God: so also
none may alter nor abrogate them, except God himself only: For they are
statutes and laws of the God of Jacob. 2. The Ordinances of Religion appointed
of God, as they are witnesses of his will, how he shall be served, and
witnesses of his good will toward us, and care of us to have us saved: so a so
are they witnesses of our faith and obedience, to testify for us or against
us, as we m^ke use of them; This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony. 3. The
greatness of the work of Redemption, the powerful manner of bringing it to
pass, and the misery wherein we were before we were delivered, should augment
our joy and thankfulness to God, and (...) our tie to his worship and service,
as the force of the Churches reasoning here does teach: for the Lord went
through the Egyptians, and over their belly as a mighty Conqueror, when he
re^emed his people and delivered them from the servitude of a people of a
strange language, therefore they were bound joyfully to keep his solemn
Ordinances; He ordained this for a testimony (says the Church) when he went
through the land of Egypt, where I heard a language, which I understood not.

Ver. 6 I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered from
the pots.

7. Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the
secret place of thunder, I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.

In the second part the Lord speaks, and puts his people in mind of his
kindness to them in their delivery from Egypt, ver. 6. and of his wife care of
them in the wilderness, ver. 7. And how he c^aved nothing of them, but that
they should keep close to him, and not go after idols, ver. 8. 9. First,
because he is God all sufficient. Next, because he had entered in Covenant to
be their God. Thirdly, because he had given proof what he could do for them by
their delivery out of Egypt. And lastly, because he was ready to make them
fully blessed upon their willingness to receive his offered goodness, ver.
10. And then he shows what an evil meeting they gave him.

From the renewing the memory of their delivery out of Egypt, ver. 6. Learn, 1.
For right taking up of the benefit of our Redemption, whether spiritual or
bodily, the heaviness of our yoke and baseness of our slavery must be called
to mind; I removed his shoulder from the burden, and his hands were delivered
from the pots; for Israel were as pioneers and scullions in Egypt, basely
employed in carrying straw and mortar to make brick, as most abject slaves: and
this resembles the condition we are in by nature; under the slavery and burden
of sin and misery; 2. God only is the Redeemer of men from whatsoever evil
condition; no instruments which God does use, must intercept his glory: none
can ease our burden nor cleanse our hands, but God only: I (says the Lord)
removed his shoulder from the burden, and hands from the pots.

From the Lords wise care of them, when they were come out of Egypt, ver. 7.
Learn, 1. After delivery of us out of the state of misery, other particular
troublesome passages may meet us, as did meet Israel at the red sea, when they
came out of Egypt, and we may fall into new troubles for a little, as they did.
2. God who delivers us from the state of misery, must also deliver us from
particular miserable cases, or miserable conditions; yea, and being called upon
by us in our misery, he will deliver us as he did Israel; Thou calledst in
trouble, and I delivered thee. 3. It is Gods wise disposing, that n^w trouble
should bring to mind our former delivery, and our deliverer, and should press
us to pray to God, and make way for a new experience of delivery, as here we
see. 4. The more the Lord does manifest himself from heaven for us, and against
our enemies, the greater is our obligation, as Isreal's obligation was
augmented, when at their prayer in the red set, the Lord by thunder out of the
black cloud against the Egyptians following them, did declare himself for
Israel: I answered thee in the secret place of thunder. 5. It is an evidence of
the Lords care of his people to put them to the trial of their faith and
sincerity of affection to God, that so they may either find their former
profession and opinion of themselves solid and upright, or finding it
otherwise may be humbled and repent, and become more sincere; therefore is the
trial of Israel after their coming out of the red sea numbered among the
evidences of Gods care of them; I proved thee at the waters of Moribah. 6
Calling to mind our misbelief made manifest unto us in the day of our trial,
should make us more humble and way to depart from God thereafter; for this is
the lesson, which Isreal's striving with God at the waters of Meribah, should
have taught them; I proved thee at the waters of Meribah, or waters of strise.

Ver. 8. Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee; O Israel, if thou will hearken unto me.

9. There shall no strange God be in thee: neither shall thou worship any
strange God.

10. I am the LORD thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open
thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

We have heard of Gods gracious dealing with Israel, in the point of doing for
them; Now the Lord declares, what thankfulness he required of them, and how
reasonable and equitable his demands were: unto the consideration whereof he
wakeneth them up, ver. 8. Summeth up all in the first command of the moral Law,
ver. 9. Gives reasons io move them to this, ver. 10.

From his awaking them to hear, ver. 8. Learn, 1. When the Lords Word is to be
delivered unto us, we should have our minds gathered in, and humbled, and
fixed unto a reverent attention, hearty belief, and humbled obedience;
therefore, says he, Hear, O Israel, and I will testify unto thee. 2. When the
Lord does speak, whether for conviction of duty to be done, or duty not
discharged, there needs no other witness beside himself, to convince the
conscience, his speech is so clear, so full of truth and authority: Hear, and I
will testify unto thee. 3. Both the Lord and we our selves have just reason to
question our willingness to hear Gods Word inclulca^ed unto us: because it
will be found that we have proved misbelieving and rebellious hearers before,
and because it is our natural disposition to be averse from all Gods commands;
therefore, says the Lord, O Israel, if thou will hearken unto me. 4. The Lord
requires his people to be a willing people, and nothing can be more forcible
to make us willing and obedient to God, then to understand that God is willing
to te^h, direct and bless us; Hear, O Israel, if thou will, or shall hearken
unto me.

From the sum of that service which God requires of us, ver. 9. Learn, 1.
The sum of Gods Law is comprised in the first command: for as God is feared,
delighted in, submitted unto, and made our God in effect: so are all the
Commandments kept: There shall be no strange God in thee. 2. As soundness in
Religion, and cleaving close to our only one God, (as he has revealed himself
to be the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, of whom, and through whom, and for
whom are all things is the fountain of all obedience, and keeping communion
with God: so the corrupting of Religion, and departing from this ground in any
sort, is the fountain of all following misbehaviour, and discommunion with God;
There shall no strange god be in thee, neither shall thou worship any strange
god.

From the reasons of this duty set down, ver. 10. Learn, 1. The consideration
of having our life, and motion, and being of God, and that he will give to all
his promises and threatenings certain performance, should move us to believe in
him, adhere unto him, and serve him only; I am the Lord, I am Jehovah. 2. The
Covenant of grace, wherein the Lord has drawn us, who profess our selves to
be his in Christ, should move us to depend on him for righteousness and life,
and to study in his strength to please him; I am the Lord thy God. 3. The great
work of our Redemption, and all the benefits bestowed upon us, in relation to
our bringing out of the slavery of idolatry and Egyptian darkness, to the
beholding of the mavelous light, and Kingdom of his dear Son, represented
by the delivery of his people out of Egypt, should move us to adhere to our
Redeemer, and to aim at his service singly; I am thy God, who brought thee out
of the land of Egypt. 4. The fair allowance which God bestows upon his
servants, to wit, Ask and have, should tie our hearts to such a potent,
all-sufficient and gracious God; Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. 5. It
is the narrowness of our says, and of our spiritual desire, which hinders
our felicity; we are not straitened in God, but in our selves: for his offer
is, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. The Lord will give g^e and glory
and will withhold no good thing from them that w^e up^ightly: and for this end
he calls for the enlarging of our desires, and of our belief to receive
satisfaction, that we may have in him full contentment, and not be allured from
him to vanities which cannot profit us.

Ver. 11. But my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of
me.

In the third part of the Psalm is set down, how Israel to their own detriment
and depriving of themselves of great happiness, did reject the Lords com^and,
and the offer of his grace. Whence learn, 1. The people, to whom the Lord is
most liberal, are not always most thankful: his people by external Covenant
are not always obedient to him, but readily do give him the worst meeting; But
my people would not bearken unto my voice. 2. The cause of not hearkening to,
and obeying of Gods commands, is our not believing in God, not taking
satisfaction, pleasure and delight in God: for how came it, that Gods people by
Covenant did not obey his voice? It may serve for an answer; And Israel would
none of me, or rested not on me, or had no pleasure in me.

Ver. 12. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust: and they walked in
their own counsels.

Here is shown how fearful was Isreal's plague for their not delighting in God,
they were given over to follow their own will unto their own perdition. Whence
learn, 1. The idols which come in competition with God, are a man's own carnal
lusts and affections, as here appears. 2. If these idols be adhered unto,
when God does offer himself for giving a man contentment, it is justice with
God to take a refuse at the man's hands, and to cease to deal with his heart any
more, but to give him over to the service of his idol; They would none of me,
so I gave them up unto their own hearts lust. 3. Whosoever do refuse to serve
God, shall not eschew to serve a worse Master, to wit, their own beastly
affections, and Satan, who rules men by their lusts; They would have none of
me, so I gave them up to their own hearts lust; and this of all judgments is
the heaviest. 4. When God leaves a man to himself, there is no restraint to
keep him from going to a mischief, and to perdition, as here we see; I gave
them up, and they walked in the counsel of their own hearts.

Ver. 13. O that my people had hearkened unto me: and Israel had walked in my
ways!

Last of all, is set down by way of Gods lamenting for his people, what
felicity they did lose by this their refusing to make God their delight, and
his voice their rule to walk by. First, if they had obeyed God, their enemies
should not have been their Master, but they should have been made victorious
over their adversaries, ver. 13, 14, 15. Next, they should have been satisfied
with all contentments abundantly, set forth under the terms of feeding them
with fine wheat and honey. This lamenting of God for his peoples misery, is
borrowed from the manner of men, lamenting the misery which their disobedient
children have brought upon themselves, and is not to be taken so, as if there
were in God any passion or perturbation, or miserable lamentation, but this
speech is to be conceived, as other like speeches in Scripture, which are
borrowed from the affections of men, and are ^med to move some holy affection
in men, suitable to that affection, from which the Lord takes the similitude;
and so, O that my people had hearkened unto me, serves to move his people,
(who should hear this expressi^n) to repent and lament their not hearkening
unto God; and to study in all time to come to be more obedient unto him, even
as they would eschew the curse which came upon misbelieving and disobedient
Israel; and as they desire to obtain the blessings, whereof carnal Israelites
did come short, and did deprive themselves, and if it be asked, what may be
imported by this speech properly? We answer, O that my people had hearkened
unto me, etc. shows these six things; First, what order the Lord has set in
giving blessings to his visible Church; namely, that they begin and believe in
him, and study to obey him, and that they by means appointed by him, should
look to have such blessings, as he has promised to believers, and to obedient
people. Next, this manner of speech shows, how acceptable and pleasant unto
God it is to see the says, obedience and welfare of his people, all joined
together in his appointed order. Thirdly, that the meritorious and culpable
cause of men's misery, is not in God, but in man, who by his sin deserves it,
and draws it on himself. Fourthly, that God delights not in the death or
destruction of his people, but that they should repent and live. Fifthly, that
this is his will, that whosoever shall hear of the evil meeting, which the
Israelites did give unto God, and of the judgment which they did draw upon
themselves, may be made wise by this lamentation made by God for Isreal's
destruction, and so may rather choose to hearken to God, as they did not, then
to be given over in his wrath to their own lusts, and to perish in his
indignation as befell them, Sixthly, that God requires a suitable meeting of
his people to his dispensations, that is, that they may be so willing to
hearken to his voice, and so loath to offend him, as he does manifest by word
and works his willingness to save them, and his loathnesse to destroy them.

From the Lords lamenting, Learn further, 1. As on the one hand the miscarriage
and misery of others before us, should make us wise to eschew the evil which
befell them, and to obtain the good whereof they by their disobedience were
deprived: So on the other hand, the willingness of God to bless those who do
follow his direction, should make us diligent to understand what course God
has prescribed, and should make us confident to obtain blessedness in our
endeavor to follow it; for, O that my people had hearkened unto me, etc. does
teach us so much. 2. They may be in the number and estimation of Gods people,
by virtue of Church Covenant, who for their refusing to follow Gods counsel
may come short of Gods blessings; for, O that my people had hearkened unto me,
etc. makes this evident 3. He who hears God uttering his wishes for the
conversion of his people, and lamenting that his Word is not believed, and that
his offer of grace is not received, does give God an evil meeting, and neither
believes Gods goodness, nor cares for his own salvation, except he join with
God, lamenting his own misbelief in time past, and do wish heartily the same
wish with God for his own conversion for time to come; for this speech, O that
my people had hearkened unto me, etc. is framed to this very end, to make the
hearer willing, and so to convert him, or else to convict him, if he take not
hold of the offer. 4. Whatsoever be the Lords secret decrees concerning the
salvation of some, and condemnation of other some in the visible Church; yet
the means of execution of those decrees, are so holy and just, and wisely
carried on, as those decrees shall not be particularly revealed to the
stumbling of any man, but the offer of grace and declaration of Gods goodness
is so laid out in common, that whosoever does not embrace the same, is made
inexcusable; for when God says, O that my people had harkened unto me, he that
does not answer the Lord, with O that thou would frame this heart of mine, to
the obedience of faith, has nothing to say if he be damned, for his slighting
of the offer so freely held forth unto him, and pressed upon him.

Ver. 14. I should soon have ^bdued their enemie^ and turned my hand against
their adversaries.

15. The haters of the LORD should have submitted themselves unto him: but
their time should have endured for ever.

16. He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and with honey
but of the rock, should I have satisfied thee.

From the good which should have come to his people, set downs ver. 14, 15, 6.
Learn, 1. Gods blessings are not to be looked after, except in the ways of
God; and i^ any man come short of Gods blessing, he bears the blame himself:
O that Israel had walked in my ways, I should soon have subdued their enemies,
etc. 2. If the Lords people have provoked him to let loose their enemies upon
them, and to prevail over them; the only way to have affairs changed, is to
turn to God, and to walk in his ways; If Israel had walked in my ways, I
should have turned my hand against their adversaries. 3. They that are enemies
to the Lords people, are haters of the Lord: and where the profession of true
religion and righteousness is hated, there the quarrel is common to God with
his people; for their enemies are here called Haters of God. 4. It is a benefit
to Gods people, and a point of glory to God, when Gods enemies and theirs do
submit themselves to God, albeit but feignedly; which good Gods people do
hinder, when they walk not in his ways: If Israel had walked in my ways, the
haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves, or lied unto him; as the
Word will bear. 5. There is no means to perpetuate a visible Church in any
place, but to walk in the Lords ways: If Israel had walked in my ways, etc.
their time should have endured for ever. 6. Obeying the voice of God, that is,
the embracing of the offer of grace and reconciliation with God through the
sacrifice of the Messiah Christ, and studying to walk holily as persons
reconciled, is the only way of coming by true felicity, the only way of being
furnished with all things necessary for life and salvation, the only way of
having large allowance from God of sweet and satisfactory food, for
entertaining of spiritual life and communion with God, promised here under the
similitude of earthly food; He should have sed them with the finest of the
wheat: and with the honey out of the Rock should I have satisfied thee.

PSALM. LXXXII. A Psalm of Asaph.
THis Psalm agrees with the time of David's persecution by Saul and his
Counselors, the Peers of the land, wherein the Psalmist comfort himself
in Gods supremacy, and his Judging of all Judges on the earth; for exercising
whereof God comes unto their meeting, ver. 1. Then challenges them for their
injustice and oppression, ver 2. Thirdly, reads the law and rule of their
duty unto them, ver. 3. 4. Fourthly, condemns them as guilty ver. 5. Fifthly,
pronounces sentence of doom upon them, ver. 6, 7. And then the Psalmist
closes the Psalm with prayer, ver. 8.

Ver. 1. GOd stands in the congregation of the mighty: he judges among the
gods.

From the Lords presence in the Assembly of Judges; Learn* 1. The name of a
Congregation or Church, is given in Scripture in the orderly meeting of Rulers
and Governors, met for the execution of their office; as here, God stands in
the Congregation or Church of the mighty. 2. No Judge is absolute Lord over a
people, but in subordination to God, who is Judge above all Judges, and will
judge of all the decrees of Judges under him. God stands in the congregation
of the mighty: he judges. 3. God does put his Name upon civil Magistrates, and
has clothed them with honor; that as their eminency is a part of his image,
so their decrees should be such as God will own; He judges among the gods.

Ver. 2. How long will ye judge unjustly: and accept the persons of the wicked?
Selah.

From the Lords challenging of them for their partiality and injustice, Learn,
1. Men in honor and power, readily do forget God their Master and Sovereign
Lord; and do neglect to do justice according to their office: the splendor of
their power does make them forget their duty to God above them, and to their
subjects under them, as the instance of the Rulers of I^ shows, who had Gods
express law in stead of Acts of Pa^ meant: and God dwelling in the midst of
them in a wonde^ manner, for direction in extraordinary cases, even they (...)
judge unjustly. 2. Corrupt Judges are inclined to show (...) only to the
wicked, and are partial when the cause of the wicked comes before them: Ye
accept the persons of the wick^. 3. Albeit the Lord keep peace for a while, yet
will he no al^ be silent, but at length will call them to an account; How (...)
will ye judge unjustly?

Ver. 3. Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy.

4. Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked.

From the rule of justice which is set to Magistrates; Le^, 1. The touchstone
of Magistrates justice is in the causes and cases of the poor, fatherles,
afflicted and needy, who are not able to attend long their suits of law, have
no friends nor money to deal for them; to whom therefore the mighty should be
eyes to direct them, and a staff to their weakness, to support and help them
to their right; Defend the poor and fatherless; is justice to the afflicted
and needy. 2. As the poor and afflic^ have need of the Judges help, to clear
their right, when they seek justice: so also when they are unjustly drawn to
the (...), or any way oppressed, the mighty or Judges should interpose for
their relief, and rescue the oppressed from the oppressor: Deliver the poor
and needy, rid^ them out of the hand of the wicked.

Ver. 5. They know not, neither will they understand, they walk on in
darkness: all the foundation* of the earth are out of course.

From the condemnatory sentence for their guiltiness; L^, 1. It is a great
fault in a Judge, not to know the duty of his office, or not to acquaint
himself with the solid rules of justice, for upon this ground are they here
pronounced g^ty: They know not: 2. It is a great fault when a (...) (...), to
refuse instruction, information, and direction ^ed from the Lords Word, as
here: Neither will they under^. 3. It is yet most culpable of all, for any man,
but to ^ges in special, to go on still in a sinful course; They walk on (...)
darkness. 4. When justice, and judgement-seats are corrpted, and Judges do not
mind justice in their places, then the ^ars of that land or kingdom must
stagger, and all matters (...) to ruin or a perilous alteration: All the
foundations of the (...) (or of the land) are out of course, says the Lord,
where the foresaid injustice or faults in Governors are found.

Ver. 6. I have said, Ye are gods: and all of you are children of the most High.

7. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.

From the sentence of doom pronounced against them; Learn, 1. Princes,
Magistrates, chief Rulers and Judges, have allowance from God, of honor,
power, and strength, tribute and revenues, for the better discharge of their
office under him: I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you are children of the
most High; that is, I have put the image of my superiority on you, and given
you pre-eminence of place, power, and gifts over others in my Name. 2. Great
places among men do not exempt any man from Gods power, justice and judgment;
but all men, great men no less then others, must die and come to judgment, as
has befallen others before them. A Prince among Gods people, who does not
execute justice, as becomes Gods servant, shall be punished, as profane
persons are who rule without the pale of Gods Church; But ye shall die like
men, and fall as one of the Princes. 3. The meditation of death and judgment
following on it, is a pressing motive unto amendment of life: for this is (...)
before men of high place, who do not stand in fear of their subjects: Ye shall
die like men, and fall as one of the Princes.

Ver. 8. Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou ^lt inhert all nations.

From the close of the Psalm by this short prayer, wherein the oppressed
servant of God prays that God would put order unto the government of his
people, and redress the wrongs done to them; Learn, 1 Albeit the oppressed
servants of God cannot find justice at men's hands, yet there is help to be had
from God, and prayer, shorter or longer; as the Lord furnishes unto them, must
they seek their ease of mind and comfort; Arise, O God, judge the earth. 3.
When Magistrates or Rulers do oppress Gods people, private persons may not go
beyond their bounds, but must have their recourse to God, that he may set
matters that are wrong in a better condition, as here the Psalmist does. 4. As
the Church of God among the Jews was acquainted with the prophecies of the
enlargement of the Church and Kingdom of God among the Gentiles, and upon this
ground prayed that he would not suffer his interest in his people then to decay
by the malice of men: so may the Lords Church in any place or time upon the
same ground pray for the like mercy; for still the reason holds, that God who
is about to enlarge his Kingdom, will not lose what he has already; and so to
pray: Arise O Lord, judge the earth; for thou shall inherit all nations.

Amen.
PSALM. LXXXIII. A song or Psalm of Asaph.
THis Psalm agrees with such a condition of the Church, as we read of in the
days of Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. and serves to comfort the Church in the
greatest conspiracies of her enemies against her. The Psalm has two parts. In
the former, the Church does cry to God to show himself for his people, ver. 1.
and complains of their conspiracy and preparation to come against her, ver.
2, 3. and of their purpose to root out the Lords people, ver. 4, 5. specifying
a number of nations, who were upon the plot, ver. 6. 7, 8. In the latter part,
they pray that judgment may so befall them, as befell other such their enemies
before, who enterprised the same enterprise, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. In particular,
that the whole host may be overturned and consumed, ver. 13, 14. and the
remnant may be chased and scattered, ver. 15. and ashamed and confounded for
ever, ver. 16, 17, that so God may have the m^ glory among them, ver. 18.

Ver. 1. KEep not thou silence, O, God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O
God.

From his cry to God to let forth a word for his people in this strait; Learn,
1. The Church may be in such a strait, as if God do not speedily interpose
himself, she cannot but be swallowed up of her enemies quickly, as here we
see. 2. Sense of danger puts an edge on prayer, and kindles affection in
it; Keep not silence, O God, hold not thy peace; and again, O God, be not
still. 3. The Lords uttering a word of comfort to his people, and of terror to
his enemies in the extremity of danger, will satisfy his Church, and do all her
work; Be not silent, hold not thy peace, be not still, is the sum of all she
craveth: for let him speak, and it shall be done.

Ver. 2. For lo thine enemies make a tumult, and they that hate thee, have lift
up the head.

3. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against
thy hidden ones.

From their complaint of their enemies preparation to come against them;
Learn, 1. The enemies of Gods Church are the enemies of God, bearing the same
affection to God and to them that are reconciled to him; For lo, thine enemies
that hate thee, make a tumult. 2. The more din the enemy makes, the more
insolent he is; the higher he lifts his head, he is the more near to be
knocked down by Gods appearing for his people against him: Keep not silence, for
thine enemies make a tumult, they have lifted up the head. 3. The chief enemies
of the Church are not the silly and simple sort of people, but the most subtle
politicians usually, whose heads are most fit for Satan's devices against Gods
people; They have taken crafty counsel against thy people. 4. The true
children of God, his secret ones, who in the sense of their own weakness do
shelter themselves under Gods wings, and do glory in him, are the special
object of the malice of Satan, and of his wicked servants; They have consulted
against thy hidden ones. 5. Against the craft and policy of enemies the Church
has nothing in her self to oppose, but does run to God, who can easily
disappoint all the enemies plots, as here we see, ver. 4, 5.

Ver. 4. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation:
that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

5. For they have consulted together with one consents they are confederate
against thee.

From their purpose to root out Gods people; Learn, 1. No less will satisfy
the enemies of Gods Church, then extirpation and abolishing of the Church; Let
us cut them off from being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in
remembrance. 2. When the Church is least (...), and least able to defend her
self, the wicked encourage and strengthen one another in an evil course
against he^; They have said, one to another, Come, let us cut them off. 3.
Although the wicked be at enmity one against another, yet they will all agree
together to overthrow the Church; They have consulted together with one
consent, (says he) they are consederate against thee. 4. This consideration,
that the conspiracy against the Church, is a conspiracy against God, whose
people the Church is, is very comfortable in the Churches extremity; They are
confederate against thee.

Ver. 6. The tabernacles of Edom and the Ishmaelites, of Moab, and the Hagarens.

7. Gebal and Ammon and Amelek: the Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tire. c

8. Ashur also is joined with them; they have holp ^n the children of Lot.
Selah.

In the reckoning up of the several nations conspired against Israel; Learn, 1.
When the Church looks upon the multitude of her enemies, and their
confederacy, and their resolution to destroy her, she should gather grounds of
hope, to be helped so much the more, and so much the sooner; for this is the
Churches argument of hope to be helped here. 2. In the persecution of the
Church, no wonder to see false brethren to be the chief leaders whoever be
followers and assistants; for here the Church complains of it: They have
helped the children of Lot, and imports, that Moab and Ammon (their
bastard-brethren) were first in the enmity. 3. It is no wonder, nor strange
thing, to see many nations on all hands to invade the Lords people at once: for
here are ten nations coming all together against Israel.

Ver. 9. Do unto them as unto the Midianites: as to Sisera, as to Iabin at the
brook of Kishon.

10. Which perished at Endor: they became as dung for the earth.

11. Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea all their princes, as
Zebah and as Zalmunna:

12. Who said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.

In the latter part of the Psalm, is the Churches prayer to God, that he would
be party against her enemies, and plague them. There are sundry branches of the
malediction, which the Church does imprecate against the enemies. The first is,
that God would destroy them, as he destroyed others before them, who were upon
such a wicked plot of roo^ing out Gods people. Whence learn, 1. When the Church
has to do with her enemies, she should look what in Scripture the Lord did for
her in times past; for so does the Church look here to what the Lord did to his
enemies, Judge. 7. 22. and 4. 15, 24. and 7. 25. and 8. (...). 2. It is lawful
to pray for judgments upon the enemies of the Church, provided it be out of a
public spirit, and not out of private malice or revenge; in which case the
prayers of the Church are more forcible for the overthrow of their enemies,
then all her external force is: Do unto them, as unto the Midianites, is a hard
charge against them. 3. Former plagues poured out upon the Churches enemies,
are pledges of the Lords bringing like judgments on her enemies afterward, and
of giving like preservation unto the Church, as before; Do unto them as to the
Midianites in Gideons time, and to Sisera and Iabin in Deborah time, when small
means were sufficient for a great overthrow of the enemy. 4. The dead bodies
of Gods enemies shall not only be contemptible before men, which is incident to
the bodies of the Saints sometimes, but also contemptible before God, as here
we see; Their enemies perished at Endor, and became as dung for the earth. 5.
The Nobles, leaders, and chief amongst Gods enemies, may look for most eminent
judgment: Make their Nobles, like Orch and Zeeb, yea all their Princes like
Zebah and Zalmunna. 6. It is all one for enemies to resolve to spoil Gods
Church, and to rob God of his habitation specially; so long as Gods people
love: to have God dwelling among them, for the injuries done to the Church
redound to the contumely of God, who has taken the maintenance of (...). They
say, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.

Ver. 13. O my God, make them like a wheel: as the stubble before the wind.

14. As the fire burns a wood: and as the flame sets the mountains on fire:

15 So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.

16. Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy Neme, O LORD.

17. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: yea let them be put to shame
and perish:

From the rest of the branches of the imprecation, wherein sundry similitudes
are looked unto, for showing forth the effects of Gods wrath upon the enemies
of the Church; Learn. 1. Use is to be made of our Covenant with God, so well
against our enemies, as for our selves; for, O my God, says he no, wwhen he is
about to curse the enemy. 2. The enemies of Gods Church have many a mischief
waiting on them, of which if they escape one, another shall overtake them; yea,
no one similitude can set forth what misery is prepared for them: no peace, no
rest for them, no standing in any stablished prosperity, but they shall be
rolled as a bowl turned upside-down, or as a wheel; Make them like a wheel. 3.
They shall have no strength to resist the blast of Gods wrath; Make them as
stubble, or chafe, before the wind. 4. The Lords indignation against them
shall burn them as a flame does a Forest; let them be cons^med, as fire that
burns a wood, which is the greatest flame we can easily conceive; or when a
mountain of sulphur or coals is kindled, as the flame sets the mountains on
fire, where f^ above the earth and under it do meet together. 5. If they escape
for a while, yet judgments shall follow them, and overtake them, and (...)
them, and turn them in a circle, till they be giddy; So persecute them with thy
tempest, or whirewinde. 6. Beside what torment their present plague shall bring
unto them, horror and fear of worse to come shall vex them; Make them afraid
with thy storm. 7. At last they shall be ashamed, when both they shall be
disappointed of what they intended against the godly, and also meet with the
misery which they least feared: Fill their faces with shame. 8. If any of the
enemies of Gods people do belong to Gods election, the Churches prayer against
them gives way to their conversion, and does not seek more then that the
judgment should follow them only, till they acknowledge their sin, and do
turn and seek God: Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy Name, O
Lord. 9. For the rest of the wicked irreconcilable adversaries, when shame of
disappointment and temporal judgments are come upon them, the worst of all
does yet follow, even everlasting perdition: Let them be confounded and
troubled for ever: yea let them be put to shame and perish.

Ver. 18. That men may know, that thou, whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, art the
most High over all the earth.

He closes the Psalm with showing the end of all this complaint and
imprecation. Whence learn, 1. The end of all cursing of the wicked enemies of
the Church, is not to satisfy private revenge, but that God may be glorified;
Let them perish, that men may know, that thou art he whose Name is JEHOVAH. 2.
The Name Jehovah signifying Gods being of himself, and the cause of the being
of all things created, is incommunicable to any creature (and in Scripture is
given only unto the three persons of the Godhead, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, whose essence is one) as here is taught; The men may know, that thou
whose Name alone is Jehovah. 3. If men will not acknowledge the true God to be
the supreme and only Governor of all the world, they shall by his heavy
^ements, either upon others, or upon thgmselves, be made to show it: for the
Church does here declare, that they do use this heavy imprecation against, Gods
enemies, that men may know (say they) that thou whose Name alone is Jehovah,
art the most High over all the earth.

PSALM. LXXXIV. To the chief Musician upon Gittith. A Psalm for the sons of
Korah.
THis Psalm is of the same subject with Psalm 42. and Psalm 63. Wherein the
Psalmist lamenteth his banishment from the Temple and the public Ordinances of
Religion, to ver. 8. and then prays for his restoring to that privilege in
the rest of the Psalm. This Psalm agrees well with the time of David's
parting with the Ark, when he fled from Absalom.

In his lamentation; First, he commends the place of public worship, ver. 1.
Then shows his longing after it, ver. 2. Thirdly, he wishes to be as a
sparrow, in the meanest condition partaker of that privilege, ver. 3.
Fourthly, he proclaims the blessedness of all the Lords Ministers, who may
always be there, ver. 4. Fifthly, he calls them blessed who have liberty to
come on foot from any part of the country, to keep at least the solemn feasts,
ver. 5, 6, 7. In his prayer he requests in general terms, to be restored to
the Lords worship, ver. 8, 9 for two reasons; one is, because he prefers the
meanest officers condition in Gods house to the most quiet dwelling among the
wicked, ver. 10, Another reason, because felicity is to be found in God, by the
means of his Ordinances, ver. 11. and mean time while his p^ayer should be
granted, he rests by faith on God, in whom believers are made blessed
wherever they be.

Ver. 1. HOW amiable are thy tabernables, O LORD of hosts!

The Psalmist being now in exile, casts his eyes upon his own country,
wherein throughout all the land the Lord was worshipped in their several
Synagogues, but most solemnly in Sion, the place where the Ark and the
Tabernacle were; and putting a difference between the holy Ordinances of Gods
worship, and the multitude of profane mixed among the godly, who did join in
the worship, he beholds the glorious beauty of the holy service, and places
where the occasion thereof was offered, and so breaks out in commendation and
admiration of the loveliness thereof. Whence learn, 1. As God is glorious in
all his hosts, which all are very ready as soldiers to fight for him at his
com^d: so is he most glorious in the camp of the visible Church ^ilitant: for
here his authori^ justice, mercy, grace, wisdom, and power is most of all
manifested, for the overthrowing of the kingdom of sin and Satan; therefore
says he, How ^iable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of hosts?

(...). This beauty of the Lords Churches and places of his residence, as it is
not discerned by the blind world, but only by such as are illuminated with
heavenly light: so is it highly prized, loved and admired by them only: for it
is the sweet singer of Israel, who says, How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O
Lord of hosts? 3. Albeit the world will not believe what here is said, nor take
this praising of the lovelines of Gods public worship from the hand of the
godly, yet the Lord will receive this testimony unto the beauty of his
Ordinances from such as do present it before him; therefore does the Psalmist
most confidently direct his speech to God himself here; How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord?

Ver. 2. My soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the LORD: my
heart and my flesh cries out for the living God.

In the next place, he professes his longing after liberty to enjoy the
privileges of the public Ordinances, albeit he was to have it no ways, but
in the societe of such people, as were then in the visible Church, of whose
wickedness he had sufficient experience, they being now in arms against him,
following Absalom. Whence learn, 1. The beauty and loveliness of Gods public
Ordinances, is best discerned, and love and longing after the most stirred up,
when a man is deprived of them for a time, ^y soul longs, yea even faints
for the courts of the Lord. 2. Bodily affliction sharpeneth the sense of
spiritual wants, and the sense of wan^ of spiritual means of comfort
augmenteth bodily affliction: My soul faints, my heart and my flesh cries
out. 3. It is not the public Ordinances alone, to be enjoyed in an outward
formality, which Saints do seek after, but it is to find God in, and by the
means; it is to find the Lords lively operation on their hearts, which they
long after; My heart and my flesh cries out for the living God.

Ver. 3. Yea the sparrow has found an house, (...) the swallow a nest for
herself, where she may lay (...) young; even thine Altars, O LORD of hosts, my
King and my God.

In the third place, he wishes to be partaker of the public worship, were it
in never so mean and despicable a condition; so he may enjoy Gods presence in
his ordinances, he is content to creep into any corner of Gods house, and go
out and seek his meat, and return like a sparrow or swallow. Whence learn, 1. A
soul which loves communion with God indeed, will choose any temporal condition
of life, how poor soever, how despised soever, rather then be deprived of what
may make better for his spiritual condition, as appears in the Psalmist, who
wished to have the place of a Sparrow, or of a Swallow; any residence near Gods
Altar. 2. The soul which craveth lively communion with God, should cleave close
unto the title and interest which he h^th in God by Covenant; as the Psalmist
does here: Thine Altar (says he) my King and my God.

Ver. 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house they will be still praising
thee. Selah.

In the fourth place, he proclaims the Priests and Levites, the Lords
Ministers to be blessed men, for their privilege and opportunity to serve the
Lord. Whence learn, 1. Albeit, many who have the means and opportunity of
profiting by public ordinances, do not consider the day of their visitation,
to make use of the means while they have them: yet the godly who are deprived
of the means and do behold the fair occasions of grace offered by them, do
count them blessed, as here: Blessed are they (...) dwell in thy house. 2. It
is a blessed thing indeed to have the occasion of communion with God in public
ordinances, and to make use thereof in setting forth the Lords glory; and in
this respect there are no men in the world more blessed then faithful
Ministers; Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still
praising thee.

Ver. 5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are the
ways of them.

6. Who passing through the valley of Baca, make (...) Well: the rain also
fills the pooles.

7. They go from strength to strength: every one, of them in Sion appears
before God.

In the fifth place, he looks upon their condition who dwell far o^ from
the Tabernacle, who might at least thrice a year come front the farthest corner
of the land, to keep the solemnities appointed of God; and he counts them
blessed, albeit in their voyage they should endure never so much toil in
traveling, and should with difficulty drink their water, either rained down
from the clouds, or drawn from a well or cistern dug with much labor: for
albeit they should sustain toil and drought in their way, yet having
refreshments one after another, and renewed strength for their journey, they
should all come at last to the place of public ordinances in Sion; and here he
describes the true and blessed Israelites, whether Proselytes or borne Jews,
resolved to come and appear before the Lord in the appointed solemnities, by
these six properties: First, they encourage themselves for the journey, by hope
in God to be furnished with strength: Blessed is the man, (says he) whose
strength is in thee. Next, they are resolved in their heart for all the
inconveniences they may meet with in the journey, to hold on their course; In
whose heart are the ways of them. Thirdly, they do hold on their course
through dry and comfortless places, which may be called places of Ba^a, or
weeping; They pass through the valley of Baca. Fourthly, they overcome this
difficulty of wanting water, either by digging a Well, where they may find
water, or by finding some already dug cistern, wherein Gods providence had
reserved some quantity of rainwater for them* Who passing through the valley
of Baca, make it a Well: the rain also fills the pooles. Fifthly, after
refreshment found in their journey they are encouraged to go on their way, till
they need and find some new refreshment, and reparation of their strength;
They go from strength to strength Sixthly, these godly travelers all come at
length to the place they aimed at, to Sion, where they appear before God in the
holy Feast, cheerful and joyful souls; Every one of them in Sion appears
before God. And therefore does he call them blessed, because at length they
come through all difficulties to have sweet communion with God.

These two degrees of blessed Israelites, are so painted (...) figurative
terms, as they may most easily lead the spiritual (...) ^o the blessedness
which the figure is fit to represent, so that the typical words cannot well be
understood, except the spiritual blessedness be taken along: for there are two
degrees of really blessed persons; some are at home already dwelling with God,
of whom it may be most solidly said: Blessed are they that dwell in thy house,
they will be still praising thee, which is their perpetual exercise. Others are
travelers, who are in their way toward heaven, the Lords house; who indeed
despair of their own strength to make out their journey, but their confidence
is in Gods strength, and their encouragement to set forward is this, that of
them it may be well said, Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: such
men's journey does take up their heart, the stream of their affections run^
thitherward; I^ whose heart are the ways of them. Those travelers have a
wilderness to go through, a comfortless valley wherein they do fi^e matter of
mourning, and no solid consolation, save that which God does provide, beyond
the nature of the place, which God one way or other does furnish unto them,
that they shall not fail to have a timous consolation: Who passing through the
valley of Baca make it a Well: the rain also fills the pooles. So that
albeit God suffer them to thirst, yet he suffers them not to want a
sufficient measure for bringing them on their ways a strengthening them to go
torward: if they miss a Well, they shall have a Cistern filled with rain from
heaven; the measure furnished unto them, renews their strength after
weariness, and suffices them till they need, and meet with another renovation
of their strength; They go from strength to strength. Not one of those resolute
travelers, or self-denying persons, relying on Gods strength and furniture do
perish by the way, all are upheld, and brought forward, till they come where
they would be, to enjoy Gods presence in Sion which is above; Every one of
them, without exception, in Sion appears before God.

Ver. 8. O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ^are, O God of Jacob. Selah.

9. Behold, O God, our shield: and look upon the face of thine anointed.

In the latter part of the Psalm is his prayer, wherein he makes request for
communion with God, both in the (...) type, and in the spiritual truth. Whence
learn, 1. The godly man's holy wishes and desires do not vanish and die, but are
recommended to God in prayer. What the Psalmist longed for in the former part
of the Psalm, in the latter part he prays for. 2. The earnest supplicant has
no will to be refused, but fasteneth his hope to speed on Gods power and
Covenant, and doubleth his petitions in the Lords bosom; O Lord of hosts,
hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. 3. Albeit the believer be separate
in place from the communion of Saints in public worship, yet he will find a
conjunction with them in affection and prayer at the throne of Gods grace, and
claim the same interest with them in God for protection and comfort; Behold, O
God, (says he) our shield. 4. How little appearance soever of possession, or
performance of promises the believer has, yet must he claim his right and
titles, which shall bring him to possession; Look upon the face of thine
anointed. He counts himself King in regard of his right to the Crown, because
God had caused Samuel to anoint him to be King. 5 He who has right to a
principal mercy, may pray and look for every accessory mercy, which is
presupposed in the principal, or annexed unto it; as here upon the promise of
the Kingdom, David prays for the liberty of the Temple, which behooved to
follow upon his repossession in the Kingdom, and here also he looks through his
own anointing unto the Messiah Christ, of whom he knew himself to be a type:
and for the Messiah Christ, he seeks to have his petition granted, through
whom alone every good thing is purchased, and must be conveyed unto us: Look
(says he) upon the face of thine anointed.

Ver. 10. For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

This is the first reason, why he desires to have the privileges of the
public ordinances restored unto him. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever may be a
means to bring us to the ^ition of God, is incomparably better then any earthly
thing; and one hour^ spent in the means of eternal felicity, is worth a
thousand spent ^ (...). The lowest and most painful condition of life, joined
(...) any measure of communion with God, is better then the (...) quiet, easy,
and plentiful condition of life* without commu^ on with God; To be a
doorkeeper in the house of the Lord, better then to dwell in the tents of
wickedness. 3. The god man whose judgment is rectified about things
spiritual, is (...) only right estimator of estates and conditions of life in
the world, for that is best to him (if he may choose) wherein he may be most
serviceable to God, and best helped to heaven. He for his part had rather have
the meanest condition of life, joined with the benefit of the public
ordinances, then live without them more plentifully among the wicked; I had
rather (says the Psalmist) be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to
dwell in the tents of wickedness.

11. For the LORD God is a sun and shield: the LORD will give grace and
glory; no good thing will be withhold from them that walk uprightly.

The second reason why he so loves the public ordinances is, because by this
means he gets access to the fountain of all felicity, who does ward off all
evil from the upright believer, and gives unto him whatsoever is good for his
soul or body i^ this life and in the life to come. Whence learn, 1. The g^
have need of light and direction, life, vigor, strength and con^ folation; and
all this is in God, or what more can be imported in the similitude taken from
the Sun, in relation to earthly creatures; For the Lord God is a Sun. 2.
The godly are subject to dangers and perils from without, especially from
enemies bodily and spiritual, and have need of preservation and defense from
all adversary power, malice and craftiness: and this protection only God is
able to give: The Lord is a Sun and (...) shield. 3. The believer is burdened
with the body of sin, and born down frequently with the sense of his own
unworthiness, witlesseness and weakness, and in God is the perfect remedy of
all those evils; The Lord will give grace. 4. Albeit the beauty of godliness be
much obscured in this life, with crosses and afflictions from God, with
calumnies and persecutions from men, and the godly must lie in grave, and
suffer corruption of the^ (...), as others; yet the remedy of this also shall
be, found God to the believer; He will give grace and glory: grace in (...)
life, and glory after it without fail. 5. Albeit the Lord ^n to keep the godly
in great scarcity sometimes of things com^table in this life, and of spiritual
consolations also for a time, ^et does he so dispose of their entertainment in
all respects, as every thing shall work together for their good; For no good
thing will be withhold from them that walk uprightly.

Ver. 12. O LORD of hosts: blessed is the man that trusts in thee

When the Psalmist has lamented his exile from the public ordinances, and
prayed to be restored to that privilege; he comfort himself in the mean
time, by the consideration of Gods grace and power to supply all wants, even
that of public ordi^nces, when it cannot without hazard of life be had by the
believer. Whence larn, 1. How hard soever the Lords dispensation be to his own
children, yet must we ever continue to trust in God, as the Psalmists example
here does teach. 2. God can supply the want of the public ordinances, and be a
little Sanctuary to his children, and make them quiet; yea, and blessed in
believing in him: O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee:
for in the beginning of the Psalm his heart ^eth for the longing after the
public ordinances; he count^ the Ministers of Gods house blessed, he counts
every man who may be in any corner of Gods house happy; he counts the
traveling Israelite coming to the ordinances blessed; and at length
pronounces every believer blessed, and so himself to be blessed also.

PSALM. LXXXV. To the chief Musician. A Psalm for the sons of Korah.
THis Psalm agrees well with the condition of the Church of the Jews, now
fallen into new troubles, after their re^ from the captivity of Babylon. In the
former part where^ they pray for a new proof and experience of Gods mercy, to
(...). (...). In the latte: part is set down a comfortable answer to their
prayer, and for the help of their faith in their prayer. Fi^ they make mention
of their gracious delivery from the captivity, ver. 1, 2, 3. Next, they pray
for repentance, and removing of the tokens of Gods wrath, ver. 4, 5. Thirdly,
they pray for restoration of their miserable and dead condition wherein they
were lying, by some merciful deliverance, ver. 6, 7.

As for the answer in the latter part, he prepares himself to receive it from
the Lord, and by inspiration receives indeed a comfortable prophecy of five
notable fruits of mercy: The first is, of peace to Gods people, ver. 8. The
next is, of deliveranes and salvation to his servants, ver. 9. The third is, of
the grace of Christ unto justification, and the fruits of it, ver. 10, 11. The
fourth is, of temporal blessings, upon the place where the Lords people do
dwell, and that for his peoples comfort, ver. 12. The fifth is, of the grace of
Christ unto sanctification, ver. 13.

Ver. 1. LORD, thou have been favorable unto thy land: thou have brought back
the captivity of Jacob.

2. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their
sin. Selah.

3. Toou have taken away all thy wrath; thou have turned thy self from the
fierceness of thine anger.

After the Church of the Jews had been delivered from captivity, they fall
into new troubles, because of their sins and their new provocations of God; and
in this Psalm they cry to God for mercy, and for strengthening of their faith:
They acknowledge the Lords favor in loosing their captivity, ver. 1. and in
forgiving their sins, ver. 2. and in removing all the tokens of his wrath
from them, ver. 3. Whence learn, 1. After great mercies shown to Gods people,
new provocations do draw on new judgments, as appears in the change of the
condition of the Church here represented. 2. Neither old sins ^or late,
neither old judgments nor presently lying on wrath, must keep back Gods people
from running unto God by prayer, for obtaining favor of God again, as the
example of the Church here does teach. 3. As no sins can make the Lord so
forget his Covenant with his people, as mercy should not be let forth to ^ent
sinners suing for grace; so no wrath is so great, as ^ll debar poor
supplicants from access unto God, when they come to seek mercy. 4. As new
necessities do call to mind old supplies received from God; so they who would
have any new benefit from the Lord, should thankfully remember the old, and
take encouragement from those to hope for further; Lord, thou have been
favorable to thy land; thou have brought back the captivity of Jacob. 5. As
grace is the only ground of Gods bounty to his people, so is it the only ground
of his peoples prayer for new experiences of his grace; as here, Gods favor is
acknowledged to be the cause of bringing back the people from captivity, and
the ground whereupon the Psalmist foundeth his prayer; Thou have been
favorable to thy land. 6. As that is a benefit indeed which is given with
remission of sins; so every one who seeks a benefit, should desire to have
the benefit which they come to seek, joined with remission of their sin: as the
Psalmist here makes the bringing back from captivity a complete favor,
because joined with remission of sins: without which it had been the less
comfortable; Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people. 7. The way of Gods
forgiving of sins is, by not imputing of them, not bringing of them forth to be
reckoned, but hiding them from justices view, and covering them with the
imputation of the righteousness of the Redeemer; Thou have covered all their
sin. 8. As while sin unrepented and unforgiven remains, wrath also
remains; so when sin it taken away, Gods wrath also is taken away, when God
forgiveth sin, he takes away the punishment of sin; for after he has said,
Thou have covered all their sin: he subjoyneth, Thou have taken away all thy
wrath; thou have turned from the ^nesse of thine anger. 9. As the conscience of
sin, and feeling of wrath lying on, and fearing the growth of it, do much
hinder the guilty from confident approach unto God: so the seen experiences of
Gods drawing of those bars in form^ times, do open the door to afflicted
sinners, confidently to come and seek mercy, as here the Psalmist does teach
us, in his making of this preface to his following prayer.

Ver. 4. Turn us, O God of our salvation: and cause thine anger toward us to
cease.

5. Will thou be angry with us for ever? wilt the draw out thine anger to all
generations?

In the next place, upon the foresaid grounds, the Church afflicted prays for
grace to repent, that so remission of si^, and removing of wrath may follow.
Whence learn, 1. Whosoever in a Church afflicted are sensible of their own and
the Churches sins, should deal with God for giving repentance to his
backsliding people, and to increase their own repentance, before they seek
removal of the tokens of wrath, as here the godly do pray in the first place,
Turn us, O God. 2. The Lords Covenant with his people for everlasting
salvation, is a ground to pray and hope for temporal deliverance from God, who
has power and ways of his own, how to save, when we see no event, Turn us,
(says he) O God of our salvation. 3. When God gives grace to a people, to
repent and turn to him, the tokens of his wrath will be removed also: or be so
changed, as they shall be no more effects of wrath; therefore joyneth he with,
Turn (...), this petition also, And cause thine anger toward us to cease. 4.
The anger of the Lord toward his people, is but temporal and for a moment in
comparison of deservings, albeit it seem to endure long: and the believer may
be persuaded, that it shall not continue against supplicants long; for, Will thou be angry with us for ever? will thou draw out thine anger to all
generations? does import so much, that his anger could not be perpetual.

Ver. 6. Will thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thee?

7. Show us thy mercy, O LORD, and grant us thy salvation.

In the third place, he prays for some relief from the distress wherein they
were for the time, and puts his petition out of question, by this
interrogation, because Gods purpose and pleasure was that his people should
have joy in their God, and thereupon he requesteth for new tokens of mercy,
from the ground of his Covenant with them for salvation. Whence learn, 1. As it
is a death to be deprived so much as of the evidence and sense of Gods favor,
so it is life to be clear that we are in favor with God: and as such who have
had the sense of Gods favor, cannot endure to want it; so shall they have it
restored; Will thou not revive us again? 2. Because plagues and wrath upon Gods
people are temporal, they may look certainly for a change to the better; and
after they have smarted for their sins for a while, yet may expect to be
restored to joy and comfort again: Will thou not revive us again, that thy
people may rejoice in thee? 3. When God changes the cheer of his people, their
joy should not be in the gift, but in the Giver; That thy people may rejoice in
thee. 4. Albeit the dear children of God, for whom mercy and salvation is
appointed, may be destitute of the sight and evidence of both, yet must they
believe both, claim both, and hope for the manifestation of both unto them:
show (...) thy mercy, O Lord, etc. grant us thy salvation. 5. As mercy is the
cause of salvation temporal and eternal, and no merit in us; so must he who
looks for salvation of either sort, make mercy his plea, and no good in
himself; Show us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation.

Ver. 8. I will hear what God the LORD will speak: for he will speak peace
unto his people, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to folly.

In the latter part of the Psalm is the answer of this prayer, which the
Psalmist does expect and receive by way of prophecy, of five sweet effects of
Gods mercy to his people: whereof the first is, peace and reconciliation, and
removing the tokens of his wrath. Whence learn, 1. The prayer of a believer put
up to our everliving Lord, is not a vain work of pouring out words in the air,
but a profitable exercise of faith, grounded upon Gods Word and goodness,
whereof he may expect certainly a return: I will hear what the Lord will say.
2. Comfortable promises will suffice the believer, who if he know what the Lord
does say, he will be clear also what the Lord will do; I will hear what the
Lord will say. 3. Albeit Gods people be under the sense of wrath, yet the Lord
will comfort them after seeking grace of him: he will speak peace to his
people. 4. Those who indeed do mind true holiness, are Gods people, to whom
the Lord will speak peace; and for whose cause the society wherein they are,
shall partake of the fruits of Gods favor to them: he will speak peace to his
people, and to his Saints. 5. As the interruption of our peace with God is
procured by our folly, or foolish following of the vanities which allure unto
sin, and divert us from communion with God, so the restoring of us to peace
must come (...) our forsaking of those sinful and foolish courses which ha^
procured wrath; and the way to keep us in that peace, is not (...) return to
these courses again; and this is the very end both of God^ correcting of us,
and of his restoring of us to peace, that we sin not as before: He will speak
peace to his Saints, but let them (...) return again to folly.

Ver. 9. Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell
in our land.

The second effect of mercy to his Saints, is the nearness of free salvation
in Christ, who is the glory of the land of Iud^, where he was borne, and the
glory of that land whatsoever it is, wherein his Saints, and he amongst his
Saints do dwell. Whence learn, 1. The heirs of the promises are only such as
do study to please God, and to eschew provoking of him: for the answer of the
former prayer, and the word of Promise and Prophecy here, is made in favor
only of them that fear him. 2. There is no satisfactory deliverance to the
afflicted believer, laboring under the sense of wrath, except Christ Jesus,
who is really the only complete salvation of God: only able to answer fully to
that name, and who was known to the Church before his coming in the flesh by
that name, as we may understand, Luke 2. from the words of Simeon, who was
waiting for the consolation of Israel, and had a promise that he should not see
death, before he had seen the Lords Christ, ver. 25, 26. And when he had Christ
in his arms, he says: Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, ver. 30. There is
the name whereby Christ was of old known to the Church among many other titles,
he is Gods salvation; as he is called here. 3 Consolation, and deliverance, and
salvation in Christ, is neer-hand to every upright afflicted believer, whether
the afflicted do see it comfortably for the time or not; Surely Gods salvation
is near them that fear him. 4. What land the true Church of Christ, the Saints
and they that fear God do dwell in, there does glory dwell: there God, there
Christ by his Spirit bringing righteousness and salvation to such a society is
glorious: and for his presence the people are glorious: and the land glorious
above all other lands whatsoev^ (...) Surely his salvation is (...) them that
fear him, that glory may (...) in our land; This commendation for many reasons
the ^d of Judea might claim, far above all other.

Ver. 10. Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.

11. Truth shall spring out of the earth: and righteousness shall look down
from heaven.

The third effect of mercy, is the grace of Christ unto justification, and the
fruits thereof bestowed upon them that are justified by faith. There are here
three conjunctions or couples sweetly agreeing together; one is, of mercy and
truth; another it, of righteousness and peace: and the third is, of truth and
righteousness For the first couple, mercy and truth, may be either referred to
God, bestowing something on his people: and so Gods mercy does pity, spare and
pardon his sinful people; and his truth does perform all the good things which
in his Word he promised: and this couple indeed did most eminently meet, when
Christ the salvation of God, came in the flesh: for Christ's coming is the
highest manifestation of mercy that ever was heard tell o^, when God out of
love, and pity, and mercy, did give his Son to redeem sinners; and this also
was the most glorious performance of the richest and the noblest promises that
ever was made to man: for in the sending of Christ promised, all the promises
are made Yea, and Amen; for the way is made sure now to perform all the rest of
the promises: or mercy and truth may be referred, the one (namely mercy) to
God; and the other, to wit truth, may be referred to men, to whom God will show
mercy; and in this consideration we are given to understand, that as a merciful
God, and misbeleeving sinners are separated, and do stand at a great distance,
he one departing more and more from the other: so a merciful God and a believer
are surely reconciled, and do quickly meet together; for God in Christ holds
forth mercy to the sinner, and mercy does bestow faith upon the redeemed, and
faith lays hold on mercy, and so mercy and truth are met together: mercy
calls for faith, and creates it: and says calls for mercy, and so this
couple do meet together.

As for the second couple, of righteousness and peace, they are both of them
the effects of the meeting of mercy and truth together: or of mercy and of
faith, saying Amen to mercies offer: for faith laying hold on mercy, brings
down from God rig^teousnesse or justification by faith; and we being justified
by faith, have both peace with God and our own consciences, at least in the
point of right and privilege: albeit sense, and possession of the sense of
this peace may be interrupted. Whence learn, In whomsoever mercy, or the offer
of grace, and faith receiving the offer do meet, justification also, or imputed
righteousness and peace with God do meet: Then righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.

The third couple is of truth, or true faith in man on earth, and
righteousness from God in heaven; faith springing out of the earth, (as the
plantation of mercy,) in the sensible fruits thereof, that is, in the true
effects of sincere love to God and man; and the righteousness of God from
heaven shining down as the Sun, for nourishing and protecting his own
plantation, and performing all promises to the believer. Whence learn, As
mercy in God, and true faith in man meeting together, are followed with
righteousness of justification and peace with God; so true faith in man is
followed with fruits: for it cannot be idle, but must be operative in bringing
forth the effects of faith or truth; Truth shall spring out of the earth, and
righteousness from heaven is followed with active influence upon springing
faith, for defending, and increasing, and blessing of it, as the Sun
fostereth and refreshes the fruits of the ground; Truth shall spring out of
the earth, and righteousness shall look down from heaven.

Ver. 12. Yea, the LORD shall give that which is good, and our land shall yield
her increase.

The fourth fruit of mercy, is of giving temporal benefits to the believer, and
blessing the land where believers do dwell. Whence learn, 1. The things of this
life are Appendices of the chief mercies of the Gospel, which reconciled people
may expect to receive of God, as their need and good does require; Yea, the
Lord shall give that which is good. 2. As the place or land where the Lords
people do dwell, bears the tokens of Gods displeasure, when they provoke God:
so shall the land be sensibly blessed, when his people are reconciled unto him;
And our land shall yield her increase.

Ver. 13. Righteousness shall go before him: and set us in the way of his
steps.

The fifth fruit of mercy is, the grace of Christ for directing and furthering
of Believers in the way of sanctification; Christ shall be their leader, and
righteousness imparted unto Believers from Christ (in the grace of conversion
or holy inclination, and of perfect direction by his Word and Spirit) shall
make Believers to follow Christ's ways and go on in the paths of his obedience.
Whence learn, 1. Christ is the Captain of his redeemed and reconciled people,
or the shepherd of his purchased flock: for he and his people here are walking
in one way, wherein he goes before his people, that they may follow his steps,
and behind them also, to bring them up, and set them forward in the way that
none do fall off; as the similitude does import. 2. As Christ is the leader of
his people, so righteousness is the preparer of his people to follow him;
First, in the work of conversion or regeneration, wherein the mind is
illuminated to behold, and the heart inclined to follow righteousness.
Secondly, in the work of daily direction, by his Word and Spirit;
Righteousness shall go before him. 3. As the way that the Believer must walk
in, is that which is prescribed by the Lord his leader: so the effectual mover
of the Believer unto sanctification, is the grace of righteousness or
sanctification, which Christ the leader does send forth into his peoples heart,
to make them follow the direction given unto them: For, Righteousness shall go
before him, and set us in the way of his steps.

PSALM. LXXXVI. A Prayer of David.
THis Psalm agrees well with the time when David was in trouble, being
persecuted by Saul. The sum of it is a prayer for relief, consisting of 7.
Petitions; some of them more generally; some of them more particularly
expressing his trouble and his desire of relief: all which Petitions have
reasons joined unto them, serving to strengthen the faith of the supplicant.

Ver. 1. BOw down thine ear, O LORD, hear me: for I am poor and needy.

The first Petition is for audience, and the reason of his hope to be heard,
is, because of his necessity to be helped. Whenc^ learn, 1. When a believer
has any Petition to present unto God, he may expect access unto God, and
audience, and acceptance of his person and prayer: O Lord, hear me. 2. Albeit
the supplicant be on earth, and God to be found in heaven; albeit the
supplicant be mean and base, both in his own eyes and in effect, and God be the
high and lofty one, that inhabi^h eternity, yet will he humble himself to take
notice of the supplica^ion of (...) believing supplicant; Bow down thine ear, O
Lord. 3. Of that whereof misbelief would make use unto discouragement and
desperation, faith makes a ground of hope to be helped: for affliction, and
weakness, and want of all help and comfort from man, is the Lords forerunner
to advertise the believer, that the Lord is coming: O Lord, hear me; for I am
poor and needy.

Ver. 2. Preserve my soul, for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant that
trusts in thee.

The second Petition is for protection of his life, and the reasons of his hope
are taken from the qualities of such a person as has right to expect Gods
protection. Whence learn, 1. The bodies and souls of Gods children have
snares l^id for them by enemies, bodily and spiritual, from which they cannot
deliver themselves, except they do commit the custody thereof u^o God, as the
Prophet does, saying, Preserve my soul: our wit, our prudence our power, our
fighting, our fleeing, or whatsoever means we can use under heaven, are little
worth, if God do not preserve us. 2. That man has a ground of hope to be
preserved by God, who being pursued for his life by malicious persecutors, for
falsely alleged wrongs done by him, can attest God for his innocence, in the
particular whereof he is charged; as here David does; Preserve my soul, for I
am holy; that is, free from the fault whereof I am charged; or I am a favorite
of thine, or a man who has been bountiful in doing good, to him that pursues
me: for thus much also will the word bear. 3. The conscience of studying to
please God, is very sweet in time of trouble, and especially when trouble
falls on for Gods service; O my God, save thy servant. 4. Innocence in a
particular cause is not sufficient to bear us out, not yet the conscience of
out good service done to God, but we must make use of the Covenant, and put our
trust in Gods goodness, whenever we do expect any good from God: O my God,
save thy servant that trusts in thee.

Ver. 3 Be merciful unto me, O Lord; for I cry unto thee daily.

The third Petition is for mercy and forgiveness of sin, and the reason of
hope is, because he is a daily supplicant. Whence learn, 1. Innocence in our
carriage toward men, and the goodness of the cause which we defend, may leave
us in the mire in time of trouble, because of our sins, whereof we are guilty
in other respects, except we flee to Gods mercy: Therefore when sin is
objected, mercy must be our refuge and plea; Be merciful to my, O Lord. 2.
Assiduity and instance in prayer does promise certainly a good answer after
asking, seeking, and knocking: Be merciful to me, for I cry unto thee daily.

Ver. 4. Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee (O Lord) do I lift up
my soul.

5. For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy unto
all them that call upon thee.

The fourth Petition is for comfort; the reasons of his hope are, because he
seeks his comfort no where else but in God. Next, because God is gracious to
all supplicants. When^e learn, 1. As the Lord does burden his own children
sometime with affliction and sorrow, for their humiliation and trial of faith:
so will he also comfort them in due time, and give them cause of joy in
himself, for the strengthening of their faith, and they may pray for this and
expect it; Rejoice the soul of thy servant. 2. He that would have comfort from
God, must set himself to seek it in him only, and not look after it elsewhere
under the heaven* and in this way he may oray for it, and expect it, as the
Psalmist does here; For I lift up my soul unto thee, O Lord. 3. The knowledge
of Gods goodness and mercy, is the ^ife of ^aith, the fountain of consolation
and ground of prayer, Rejoice the (...) ^f thy servant; for thou, O Lord, art
good. 4. Whatsoever evil the sinner does find in himself, there is a remedy
in God for it: if he (...) any good thing, God has it, and is ready to
communicate it; For thou, Lord, art good; If the sinner be smitten with the
conscience of sin, and deserving of wrath: The Lord is ready to forgive; If a
man's sins do seem so many and heinous, as he dare not approach; The Lord is
plenteous in mercy. 5 He who desires to partake of Gods goodness and mercy,
must resolve to worship the Lord, to believe in him, and to pray unto him; and
whosoever takes this course, whatsoever he be, without exception he shall
find the Lord, to be good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all
them that call upon him.

Ver. 6. Give ear, O LORD, unto my prayer, and attend unto the voice of my
supplications.

7. In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee, for thou will answer me.

8. Among the gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord:) neither are there any
work like unto thy works.

9. All nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship thee, O Lord: and
shall glorify thy Name.

10. For thou art great, and do Wondrous things: thou art God alone.

The fifth Petition is for relief and deliverance out of his present
distress, propounded in the general terms of granting his supplication. The
first reason of his hope to be heard, is, because he is resolved to make use of
the Lords promise, that he will answer when one calls on him in trouble, ver.
7. The next reason is, because there is not a God beside God; and he alone
(...) able to work wonders, ver. 8. The third, is, because the Lord is to let
all nations know him; and to gain them in to his worship, by his great power
and wonderful working, as the only true God, ver. 9, 10. And therefore able
and willing to give him a new experience of his power. Whence learn, 1. When
God delayeth to answer supplicants, they must not faint in prayer, but continue
instantly, and be importunate; Give ear, O Lord, to my prayer, says he now
over again. 2. Albeit the supplicant do meet with doubts whether his Petition
be regarded or not, ye^ must he not yield to them, but pray directly against
them, as here we are taught; Attend unto the voice of my supplication. 3. Every
man should so make use of, and apply to himself the general command of God, to
call upon him in trouble, w^ a promise of deliverance, as his faith may be most
strengthened by it; for so the Psalmist does here: In the day of my trouble I
will call upon thee; for thou will answer me. And this relates to that which
is said, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of thy trouble. 4. He that has
found the fruit of true Religion, and has experience of the gracious work of
God upon his own spirit, will set at naught all Idolatry and false Religion*
Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O God. 5. The works of God working
according to his Word, are such as may prove him to be the true God; with whose
works, no creatures works can be compared. Where is such a work of power as the
creation of the world, and preservation of it? Where is there such a work of
grace as the work of Redemption? And who can work any thing like unto the least
of the works of the Lord, in his making and upholding of the meanest creature?
Neither are there any works like thy works. 6. The consideration of the
largeness of Gods grace and power, which he has manifested in the conversion
of Nations, and is to manifest yet more and more in his own due time, may
encourage any man to come and worship God, and expect grace from him for his
own particular: he will not refuse alms to any beggar, who is about to gather
all poor beggars to receive of his alms: All nations shall come and worship
before thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name. Whatsoever is already done for
accomplishing of this prophecy, more is to be done ere the Lord close the
course of time; and whatsoever shall be done by way of conversion, before the
last day, we are sure that at least by way of conviction and extorted
acknowledgement, all this shall be done at the last day, for the Lord has
sworn that every knee shall bow to him, and every tongue shall confess to his
Name. 7. It is the cognizance of a kindly subject of Gods Kingdom, to delight
in the increase and glory of it: and he that finds in his heart to love the
enlargement of Gods glory, may expect the benefit of a kindly subject, as the
Psalmist does here. 8. The omnipotency of God, and the wondrous works which God
has already done, may loose all doubts about the accomplishment of all his
promises how great soever; All nations shall come and worship before thee: for
thou art great (says he) and do wondrous things. 9. All Idols and Idolatry
must at length be defaced, and he found to be vanity, and God (...) length must
be known to be the only true God: All N^ shall glorify thy Name, for thou art
God alone.

Ver. 11. Teach me thy way, O LORD, I (...) walk in thy truth: unite my heart
to fear thy N^.

The sixth petition is, to be kept from following any sinful course, specially
now in this his trial and tentation, (...) 11. And this he hops shall be
granted to Gods glory, ver. 1^ First, because he had experience of Gods mercy
before, ver. 1^. Next, because he had to do with proud and godless enemies,
ver. 14. Thirdly, because God was exceeding gracious and merciful, ver. 15.

As for the petition to be saved from all sinful courses, it has two
branches: one is, to be instructed in Gods way; the other, that his heart may
be made to follow that way, and to stand (...) awe to offend. Whence learn. 1.
The Lords children under trouble and persecution, are in danger to be driven by
rentation to some sinful course, and this they should pray against, and be no
less feared for it, then for any bodily trouble, as hear the example of David
teaches us. 2. It is necessary for eschewing sin, to know how God uses to
deal with his own children, lest we think that some strange thing has
befallen us, when we fall into trouble; and it is necessary to know also how we
ought to carry our selves in every passage of our trouble and trial, le^ we
neglect our duty, or do contrary to it: Teach me thy way, O God. 3. Beside the
information of the mind concerning the duty in general, which God gives by
the ministry of his Word, and common operation of his Spirit, there is a more
special, lively, efficacious teaching of a man, whereby he is fitted to make
particular practical application of the general rule (...) particular
circumstances of time and place; and for this we must pray to God also, after
we are taught to know the duty in general, Teach me thy way, O Lord. 4. No man
must count (...) way to be of Gods teaching, but that which is warranted by his
Word; and no man can walk safely, except he that follows the Lords truth:
Teach me, and I will walk in thy truth. 5. Whosoever would have God to inform
them of his will, must first resolve sincerely to follow his will when he has
shown it; for so does David: Teach me thy way, and I will walk in thy (...) 6.
To make instruction effectual, not only must the mind (...) informed, but
the heart also must be wrought upon, and framed ^to obedience: Unite my heart.
7. It is the natural disease of sinful men's hearts, to be loosed from God,
and scattered and distracted about variety of vain objects, which are offered
unto it to follow; and this disease only God can cure: Unite my heart. 8. It
is not sufficient for a man once to resign over his heart unto God in his
conversion, but this resignation of the heart must be renewed upon all
occasions into Gods hand, that he may (...) the affections to himself, and to
his holy Law, and reclaim the heart from ranging and going a whoring from him
after sinful objects: for this prayer for uniting the heart is David's prayer,
who long before was converted. 9. Then is the heart united and fixed, when the
fear of God does rule it; that is, when after it is informed of Gods will, it
fears to omit what he commands, and to do what he forbids: Unite my
heart to fear thy Name.

Ver. 12. I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will
glorify thy Name for evermore.

13. For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest hell.

Here David hops to be heard, and promises praise to God, both for his
bypast, and also for his foreseen deliverance, flowing from the greatness
of Gods mercy to him. Whence learn, 1. He who prays according to Gods will,
may promise to himself satisfaction, and unto God thanks for granting his
requests: I will praise thee, O Lord my God. 2. The thanksgiving of the godly,
especially when the heart is enlarged, is very hearty, joined with great
delight, and constant purpose of glorifying of God constantly: I will praise
thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart, and I will glorify thy Name for
evermore. 3. When a man sees his sins great, his deserving great, his danger
and delivery great, he must also see Gods mercy toward him great, and his
obligation to thanksgiving great: I will glorify thy Name for evermore: for
great (...) thy mercy toward me. 4. Preventing mercy keeping us from the evil
we were in danger to fall into, is to be esteemed of by ^s as delivering mercy,
bringing us out of the evil wherein we were lying. The Lords keeping of us
from falling into hell, should he accounted by us no less mercy, then if we
had been (...) and had been brought back out of it by him: Thou have de^ (...)
my soul from the lowest hell. The same may be said of (...) particulars: and
when our eyes are open to see the evils (...) which the Lord has kept us; when
we were in danger of them, (...) shall be forced so to judge.

Ver. 14. O God, the proud are risen against (...) and the assemblies of
violent men have sought af^ my soul; and have not set thee before them.

15. But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious:
long-suffering; and plenteous in mercy and truth.

Here are other reasons of his hope to be delivered, taken (...) the pride and
oppression of the godless enemy, and from (...) pity and compassion. Whence
learn, 1. Proud, violent, cruel, and godless men, are the readiest
instruments which can be found unto Satan for persecuting Gods children: Such
were the enemies of David a type of Christ, and an example of his persecuted
followers: The proud are risen against me. 2. Whatsoever wicked man pleases to
make head against the godly, he will readily find multitudes to follow him:
The proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men have sought
after my soul. 3. When men do reject the fear of God, there is no, wickedness
so great, which they will not commit: They have sought after my soul, and have
not set thee, O God, before the that is, they neither fear thy judgments, nor
care for what may please thee. 4. The more violent, cruel, profane and
ungodly our persecutors are the more hope is of Gods pity toward us, as the
Psalmist reasons: But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion. 5.
Whatsoever objections may arise from our unworthiness, from our former sinful
provocations of God, and the multitude and greatness of our former sins, to
hinder our hope that God shall pity us in our affliction; they are all answered
and taken away by consideration of the unspeakable, greatness of Gods
goodness: for in God is compassion, he is full of compassion, a God full of
compassion; that is, infinitely compassionate, and as it were affected wi^h our
misery; he is gracious, though we be unworthy; he is long-suffering, although
we be given to strife and provocation of him; and how great soever our
misdeferrings have been, he is plenteous, in mercy; and howsoever we have
forfeited our interest in his promises, yet he will not follow the forfeiture,
but will keep up our right unto his promises still; he is plenteous in truth,
great is his faithfulness, who keeps promises, albeit he might justly reject
them.

Ver. 16. O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy
servant: and save the son of thine handmaid.

17. Show me a token for good, that there which hate me may see it, and be
ashamed: because thou, LORD, have helpen me, and comforted me.

The seventh pe^ition is, for strength to stand out, till such a clear delivery
should come to him from God, as might put his enemies to confusion, when they
should see it. Whence learn, (...) Whosoever do consider well the riches of
Gods grace and goodness, may confidently pray for a proof of it in the
changing of a miserable condition into a better, even when God seems angry
and ^erse: Thou art plenteous in mercy and truth. O turn unto me, and have
mercy upon me. 2. It is no small mercy to have strength from God to subsist
under troubles, till the delivery come; and for this strength the man emp^ied
of self-confidence may call, and should be content with supporting strength
till the Lords time of deliverance come. Give thy strength unto thy servent. 3.
The longer course the kindness of the Lord has had toward us, and the more
relations are between God and us, we may expect the more confidently for
further effects and fruit of his kindness for our deliverance: for David here
reckons from his being born within the Covenant, borne as a domestic, as a
child of the Church, who belonged to Gods, protection and care, as the son of
the handmaid belonged to the care of the master of the family: Save the son of
thy handmaid. 4. As the wicked delight to see the godly in misery, that they
may insult over godliness; so the go^ly desire deliverance, that in their
person godliness may not suffer, nor wicked men be heartened in their
insolenci^: Show me a token for good, that they, who hate me, may see it. 5.
The good success and delivery of some of the Saints out of their troubles and
(...) is a good token both to themselves, and to all other godly persons, of a
blessed event unto them from all their troubles. Therefore David prays for
it, Show me a ^oken for good. 6. As the good event of the godly from their
troubles, is a matter of (...), and gloriation unto the godly, so is it also
the matter of shame and confusion to the wicked, who do hate them: Show me a
taken for good, that they who hate me may see it, and be ashamed, because thou,
Lord have helped me, and comforted me.

PSALM. LXXXVII. A Psalm or song for the sons of Korah.
WHen God loosed the captivity of the Jews by Cyrus, son of them did return
from Babylon: the work of repuration of Church and S^ate, Temple and City had
few to assist it: their enemies were many, they were straightened with poverty and
famine; and the hearts and hands of the Godly were weakened; they were like to
faint and despair, that either Church or State should flourish any more
amongst them; for comfort in such a time was this Psalm fitted, leading the
Lords people to live by faith, and to work on in the building of the Lords
house, and reparation of the City, looking to God the Builder of his Church,
and maintainer of his people. To which purpose the Psalmist gives them seven
consolations opposite to so many tentations unto discouragement. The first is,
that they should look to God who had founded his own Temple solidly, and so
not saint for the weakness and fewness of the builders, ver. 1. The second,
that they should look to Gods love and good will, and not be troubled for want
of external power and riches, ver. 2. The third is, that they should look to
the prophecies concerning the Church, and not be troubled for what present
outward appearance and carnal reason did represent, ver. 3. The fourth is,
that they should not be troubled for the multitude of their foes for the
present time, but look to the multitude of friends and converts which they
should have hereafter, ver. 4, 5. The fifth is, that they should not be
troubled with the fear of the ruin of the Church, but look to Almighty God,
who would establish her so, that no power should overturn her, ver. 5. The
sixth is, that they should not be troubled with the present contempt under
which they did lie, but look to the glory and estimation which God should put
in his own time upon the Church and her children, ver. 6. The seventh is, that
they should not be troubled with their present grief they were in, but should
look to the spiritual joy and causes thereof, which the Lord was to furnish to
his people, ver. 7.

Ver. 1. HIs foundation is in the holy mountains.

The first comfort of the afflicted Jews, troubled for the hindering of the
building of Gods Temple is, that God had by his decree and promise made the
mountains of Sion and Moriah the place of his rest amongst his people, till the
Messiah should come, in whom these types were to be accomplished, and for whose
cause they were to be preserved till he came, who is the only solid rock
whereupon the Church is builded. Whence learn, 1. When the builders of the
Lords Church are few and weak, his people had need to be comforted against
their fears and doubts, as here we see: and the way to be comforted in such
hard times, is to look by faith to God, as the builder of his own house, who
has laid the foundation upon solid grounds, that every believer that trusts
in him, may be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed; His foundation is on the
holy mountains.

Ver. 2. The LORD loves the gates of Sion: more then all the dwellings of
Jacob.

The second comfort is, that God had chosen Sion above all other places to be
his rest, and did love there to dwell rather then elsewhere. Whence learn, 1.
The dignity of any place, person or society, proceeds not from any thing in
the place or society, but from the Lords election and free love; The Lord
loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob. 2. The love of
the Lord to his chosen Church, is a solid ground of assurance of her
continuance: as here in the figure we are taught.

Ver. 3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God. Selah.

The third comfort is, from the prophecies past about the Church; and promises
made unto ^her in figurative terms. Whence learn, 1. The Church is the
incorporation, in which the Lord reigns, rules and resideth; It is the City
of God. 2. The privileges of the Church are very glorious; the glory of Kings,
Crowns and Diadems is nothing to them, but bodily and temporal shadows of what
is spiritually and everlastingly bestowed on the Church; Glorious things are
sp^ken of thee. 3 Albeit glorious things are bestowed on the Church, yet it is
not so much any thing already done, as what is to be done, which makes the
Church blessed: it is not present possession, but hope; not sight, but faith,
which makes the Church blessed: and the Scriptures are a sufficient right to
us for all blessings which are to come: Glorious things are spoken of thee, O
City of God.

Ver. 4. I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon, to them that know me:
Behold, Philistia and Tire, with Ethiopia: this man was borne there.

5. And of Sion it shall be said, This and that man was borne in her: and the
highest himself shall establish her.

The fourth comfort is, that the Churches chief enemies should be converted to
the faith, and should count it their greatest honor so to be Whence learn, 1.
It is among the troubles of the Church that she ha^h so many enemies, and those
so mighty and potent as the Egyptians and Babylonians; I will make mention of
Rahab; that is, Egypt, and Babylon, and Palestina, and Tire, and Ethiopia,
which are here named as the most eminent oppressors of the Church, among all
other Kingdoms. 2. It should comfort the Church, that God is able to make her
chiefest enemies to become Converts, and that he has done it sundry times, and
will yet do it more; and that he can take order with those enemies which shall
not be converted, as he did with Rahab and Babylon; for, I will make menti^n of
Rahab and Babylon to them that know me, signifies a mention-making of them;
viz. to the edification of the Churches children, both concerning what God had
done to those Nations in justice, and what he would do to them in mercy, or
unto other enemies like unto them. 3. As it is the glory and comfort of the
Church, to have her enemies made Converts: so is it honorable to the enemies,
were they never so potent in the world to be Citizens of the City of God; I
will make mention of them, that this man was born there; that is, in the City
of God. 4. The conversion of men from Paganism and Idolatry unto fellowship in
the Covenant with the Church is a sort of new birth to the externally
converted, from which their new birth and n^w being is to be reckoned; This man
was borne there. 5. As whatsoever honor men have in the world, it is not to be
compared with the honor of regeneration, and being born Citizens of the
Church, so whatsoever contempt the members of the Church do suffer of the
world, it is made up by the honor of being bo^n in the Church: for, of Sion it
shall be said, This and that man were born in her. 6. I here is no reason to
fear the ruin of the Church, or the not continuing of her from age to age, to
be a mother and receptacle of Converts; For the highest himself shall establish
her, and this is the fif^h comfort of the favoure^s of the Church in the time
of trouble.

Ver. 6. The LORD shall count when he writes up the people: that this man was
borne there. Selah.

The sixth comfort is, from Gods estimation which he has of every one of the
true Citizens of his Church. Whence learn, 1. As all the elect all the
regenerate are taken notice of by God, no less particularly, then if their
names were all written up in a book one by one: so there is a time when he
manifeste^h his enrolling of them; partly to themselves by his witnessing unto
them that they are his children; par^ly to the world, by sustaining them in
their trials and troubles; and (...) by a full delivery of them, and confessing
their names before men and Angels at the great day; The Lord shall count when
he writes up the people; that is, in his owntime when he sees it fit to
manifest his respect to his own. 2. The Converts among the Nations shall be
reckoned up among the C^nverts of the Lords people of the Jews; The Lord shall
count when (...) ^riteth up the people, that this man was born there, that is,
whatsoever man he be, who is converted out of any country, tongue or language,
he shall be counted a member of the Church of Israel.

Ver. 7. As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there: all
my springs are (...) thee.

The last comfort is, from the joy spiritual, and the everlasting springs,
fountains and causes of joy, which God does furnish, and will furnish to his
Church. Whence learn, 1. As the Church is subject to her own griefs in the
world, so also is s^ sure of ahundant consolations to be had and laid up in
store for her, expressed here in the terms of typical joy, appointed in solemn
festivals; As well the fingers as the players on instruments shall be there. 2.
The causes of the joy of the Saints are everlasting, comparable to wells and
springs of living water; All my springs shall be in thee. 3. Such Saints as
have had their senses exercised, are able to subscribe the truth of promises by
their own experience, and in special, that there is no joy or comfort, no gift
nor grace, no refreshment nor delectation worthy to be named, except that which
they have by Church Priviledges, and communion of Saints, as here the Psalmist
does confess; All my springs are in thee, says he: speaking to the Church, or
to God dwelling in his Church.

PSALM. LXXXVIII. A Song or Psalm for the sons of Korah. To the chief
Musician upon Mahalath Leannoth, Maschil of Heman the Ezrahite.
THis Heman the Ezrahite, was one of those four wisest men in all Israel, next
after Solomon, who is preferred above them all, 1 Kings 4. 31. The exercise of
this wise and holy man is set down here under the heaviest condition of a
wounded spirit, of any that we read of; wherein first, he prays for comfort
to his soul, now afflicted under the sense of sad wrath and long desertion,
ver. 1, 2. In the second place, he pours out his soul to God, and lays
before him a most pitiful lamentation of his distressed condition, ver. 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8. In the third place, he wrestleth by faith in his prayer to God for
comfort, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And lastly, finding no comfort, he
renews his lamentation, leaves his prayer before the Lord, and writes it
for the edification of the Church in all time coming, as the matter of a joyful
Song.

From the Inscription; Learn, 1. David was not the only man acquainted with sad
exercise and affliction of spirit, for here is another, to wit, Heman the
Ezrahite, as deep in trouble of spirit, as he or any other beside. 2. They are
not all men of ^eak minds and shallow wits, who are acquainted with trouble of
spirit, and borne down with the sense of Gods wrath; for here is Heman, one
amongst the wisest in all Israel, and inferior to none for wisdom, except to
Solomon alone, under the heaviest exercise we can imagine possible for a Saint.
3. When it pleases God to exercise a man of parts, of great gifts and graces,
he can make his burden proportionable to his strength, and give him as much to
do with the difficulties he puts him to, as a weaker man shall find in his
exercise, as appears in the experience of Heman. 4 Wise men in their trouble
must take the same course with the simpler sort of men, that is, they must run
to God as others do, and seek relief only in his grace, who as ^e distributeth
the measures of trouble, can also give comfort, ^se and deliverance from them,
as the practice of Heman does ^h us. 5. What trouble of a wounded spirit some
of Gods children have felt in former times, others dear to God may find the
like in after ages, and all men ought to prepare for the like, and should not
think the exercise strange when it comes, but must comfort themselves in this,
that other Saints, whose names are recorded in Scripture, have been under like
affliction; for the Psalm is appointed to give instruction; it is Maschil of
Heman. 6. What is at one time matter of mourning to one of Gods children, may
become matter of joy and singing afterward, both to himself and to others, as
this sad anguish of spirit in Heman is made a song of joy, unto Gods glory and
the comfort of all afflicted souls, laboring under the sense of sin and felt
wrath of God to the worlds end; It is a Song, a Psalm for the sons of Korah. 7.
Such as are most heavily afflicted in spirit, and do flee to God for
reconciliation and consolation through Christ, have no reason to suspect
themselves, that they are not esteemed of and loved as dear children, because
they feel so much of Gods wrath: For here is a Saint who has drunken of that
Cup, (as deep as any, who shall read this Psalm here is one so much loved and
honored of God, as to be a Penman of holy Scripture, and a pattern of faith
and patience unto others; even Heman the Ezrahite.

Ver. 1. O LORD God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee.

2. Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry.

In the first place, he fasteneth his faith and resolution to pray constantly
to God, till he receive answer, and requesteth for comfort now at last. Whence
learn, 1. Whosoever have fled to God for grace, and have received the offer of
reconciliation made to the Church in the Messiah, are entered in Covenant with
God for their everlasting salvation, and ought to stand fast in the holding of
this Covenant, whatsoever hard condition they may fall into, as Heman does
here, saying to God, O Lord God of my salvation. 2. When'a soul has received
the offer of grace made to the Church, in the common tender of the Covenant of
grace, he is entered into Covenant with God so particularly, as if the
Indenture were past between God and that soul by name, so that the believer may
read his own name in Gods everlasting styles and titles, and may read in
himself the mark of Gods interest unto him, and the mark of his interest in God
for evermore; for, O God of my salvation, imports no less. 3. When a
believer has laid hold on eternal life, he may by the same right ask and
expect comfort in, and deliverance out of every trouble, as an Appendix of the
great salvation, which is coming unto him, as here Heman does. 4 God can love a
man, and keep him in faith and exercise of prayer a long time, without a
comfortable answer, and all in love, wise love: I have cried day and night
before thee, says Heman, and the answer is not come yet. 5. There is a
difference of the lamentation of the worldly man, and of the believer: The
worldly man sighs and cries, and he knows not to whom, but the godly do
present themselves in their lamentations to God; I have cried day and night
before thee; as his d^lour did cleave unto him, or was renewed upon him, so he
had his recourse to God at all times. 6. Albeit our prayer being presented
before God, do seem to us ^ot to have been admitted, yet must our bill lie
still, and be put up to God again and again, till it be received to our sense
and knowledge; Let my prayer come before thee 7. The beleevd may be sure to
have a good answer at length, but he must be instant, and deal still with God
for it, and press it hard, and patiently wait for it, as Heman here does;
Incline thine ear unto my cry.

Ver. 3. For my soul is full of troubles, and my life draws nigh unto the
grave.

In the second place, he lays out his trouble before God in nine degrees
thereof each of them superadding something to the former: under which he is not
only wonderfully upheld, but also he makes use of this lamentation and long
catalogue of miseries, as a ground of his hope, to have a gracious answer at
last, which came to pass, as the turning of this lamentation into a Song, to
the comfort of others in the Church, that should feel the like in any measure
thereafter, does show; for his condition, he sets it down under the name of
trouble, soul-trouble: more troubles then one or two: and the first degree
thereof is, that his soul is ful^ of troubles, replenished so as it can hold no
more. Whence (...). (...). Albeit we h^d nothing to bring before God but our
grief and misery, we want not matter of confidence to find favor from our
pitiful God, as this example teaches us; Incline thine ear, for my soul is
full of trouble^. 2. If the godly should sm^ther their grief, and not go to God
with it, then sorrow were able to ch^ke them; but this is no small ease to them
that they have God to go unto, to whom they may freely vent their mind, as
here we see. 3. Soul troubles are the most pressing troubles, and with those
readily will the Lord exercise his children, when he minds to try their
faith, making their spirits to smart with trouble after trouble, with a number
of troubles, which they are neither able to reckon nor to bear; My soul is
full of troubles. 4. The dolours of the mind are able to waste away the body,
which cannot but shrink and pine away when the soul is sick with anguish; My
life draws near to the grave, says he; and this is the second degree of his
trouble.

Ver. 4. I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that
has no strength.

The third degree of his trouble is, that in the judgment of them who knew his
condition, and possibly lamented i^, he was counted a lost man: yea and he
himself did find no strength to bear out, or to recover himself. Whence
learn, 1. It is no small tentation and vexation of spirit to the godly
believer, to be in the judgment of beholders a lost man, because of the
seeming desperate condition of his soul, and yet it may befall a dear child of
God; I am counted with them that go down in the pit. 2. Albeit God has by
grace severed death from hell unto the believer, yet the connection of these
two, if justice were not satisfied in the Redeemer, should never be forgotten,
as the Scriptures giving the same name to death, grave and hell, may teach us;
I am counted with them that go down to the pit, or grave, or hell. 3.
Whatsoever strength of soul or body a man has in his possession, shall be soon
emptied when God puts him in distress, except new furniture be supplied
unto him, and that no loss then unto the weakest; I am as a man that has no
strength.

Ver. 5. Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou
remembrest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.

The fourth degree of his trouble is, that he is like the Leper in the law,
shut out from the living, and put among the dead, and no more fit for any duty
of the living; which teaches us, that the believer in God may at some time be
so burdened with trouble of spirit, as he can neither think, nor speak, nor go
about any duty of the living for a time; I am, or I am counted (says he,) as
one free among the dead, or shut out, and separate among the dead.

The fifth degree of his trouble, he is a man whose life is violently plucked
from him; who gets not liberty to die at leisure or in peace, but is thrust out
of the world suddenly with a deadly wound; and such may the condition of a soul
dear to God, seem to it self to be: I am like the slain that lie in the grave.

The sixth degree of his trouble is, he seems to be deprived of the
comfortable vicissitude of the common benefits of life, and of those changes
which ordinarily Gods visitations do make, as if he were left under the power
of death, there to lie without a change of that condition for ever: and such
may the case of a beloved Saint seem to be, both to himself and to others; I am
as one in grave, whom thou remembrest no more; yea, the believer at a time may
lose the sight of everlasting promises, and seem to himself to be rejected of
God; I am as they that are cut off from thy hand.

Ver. 6. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit: in darkness, in the deepes.

The seventh degree of his trouble: he seems as a man already condemned and
possessed of the torment of hell, in the extricable misery of the damned,
deprived of all light of consolation, in the gulf of desparation, wherein a
man cannot find ground, nor deliverance from it. Whence learn, 1 That this
also may be the case of a believer in his own sense; Thou have laid me in the
lowest pit: in darkness, in the deepes. 2. Whatsoever trouble we are in, or
how great danger soever we seem to our selves to be in; it is the believers
wisdom still to look to God, as our party with whom we have to do, and to lay
it forth before him: for albeit this may augment grief and fear on the one
hand, yet it prepares way for the remedy, and keeps the believer in terms
with God on the other hand, as this example does teach us; Thou have laid me in
the lowest pit: in darkness, in the depths.

Ver. 7. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy
waves. Selah.

The eighth degree of his trouble is, the felt wrath of God pursuing him,
overtaking him, lying heavy upon him, tossing him with new affrightments and
assaults, as the waves of the sea do, when they come one after another, and do
beat with endless dashing upon what they find in their way; and such may be
the case of a beloved soul in its own sense, which when we consider, we may
say, How gentle is the ordinary exercise of weak believers, when this exercise
is looked upon? Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with
all thy waves.

Ver. 8. Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me: thou have made me
an abomination unto them: I am shut up, and cannot come forth.

The ninth degree of his trouble is, that beside all the burden of the foresaid
vexation, the Lord deprived him of all comfort, and did not bestow upon him so
much as any consolation from his friends, or from the fellowship of the godly
wise; but by Gods providence they did leave him as a man desperate, yea as a
man whose condition they were afraid to look upon; yea they abhorred his case
and forsook him: and he being thus in appearance shut out from heaven, and
followed with wrath from God, was not only left comfortless among men, but
also was looked upon by his friends as a damned and abominable reprobate; dealt
with as a man shut up for the plague of pestilence, so that he kept his chamber
and could not come abroad to look any man in the face: and this also may be the
case of a soul precious in Gods eyes, beloved and accepted of him in the very
mean time of all this hard exercise: Thou have put aw^y my acquaintan^e far
from me, tho^ast m^de me an abomination to them: I am shut up, and cannot come
forth.

Ver. 9. Mine eye mourns by reason of affliction, LORD, I have called daily
upon thee: I have stretched out my hands unto thee.

In the third place, he wrestleth by prayer with God for comfort, using for
this end four reasons to st^engthen his faith, and hope to be comforted. The
first is, from the conscience of his earnest seeking his comfort and ^elief
from this his trouble only in God. Whence learn, 1. G^dlinesse does not make
men senseless of grief, nor does it hinder te^re, or mourning, or any other
effects of sorrow to be seen in their body; Mine eye mourns because of
affliction. 2. Sorrow should neither hind^ the godly to seek God, nor move them
to seek their consol^ elsewhere: Lord, I have called daily upon thee. 3. It is
possible that a go^ly man may be instant daily with God, praying with tears
for comfort, and yet not obtain for a long time, as this example does ^each. 4.
As in serious prayer, specially in secret, the affections of the heart do utter
themselves in the answerable gestures of the body, as well as in the voice and
words of the mouth: so those gestures have their own speech unto God, no less
then the words o^ the mouth have; as here, I have stretched out my hands unto
thee, is brought forth to express his submissive rende^ing up of himself unto
God, and his dependence upon him.

Ver. 10. Will thou show wonders to the dead? shall the deadrise and praise
thee? Selah.

11. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness
in destruction?

12. Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land
of forgetfulness?

The second reason is because if God do not shortly answer him, (as he thinks)
he cannot choose but die, and then it will not be time to give an answer to his
prayer, for the edification of others, and glorifying of his Name among men in
this world, by relieving of a poor supplicant, such as he was, except he would
raise him up again after he is dead extraordinarily and miraculously, which he
cannot look for, and therefore he hops and prays to be comforted in time;
wherein he puts it out of question, that he cannot but die quickly, if the Lord
comfort him not shortly. Here he speaks his own sense, and hastes a little
to be comforted, and does somewhat indirectly set a time to the Lords
manifesting of himself, and shows some humane infirmity, yet such as the
Lord uses not to quarrel for with his children in their lamentations, mean
time in this he shows himself a noble wrestler; First, that he assures
himself God would not fail so comfort him before he died; and again that the
Lord would rather miraculously raise him from the dead, then not glorify
himself in his deliverance: and in this also he takes a safe course to seek
for what he might expect, rat^er in an ordinary way, then to look for miracles.
Whence learn, 1. When the Lord delayeth to comfort a believing supplicant, he
does call him to wrestle in prayer, and to exercise his faith so much the more,
as here we find this Saint to do, expounding Gods dispensation, and bending
his spirit in his supplication to w^estle for comfort, as those often
interrogations do make evident. 2 When faith is fixed upon the Covenant, and
p^omises and power, and goodness of God; it will expect miracles, rather then
sea breach of Gods Promise: as, will thou show wonde^s to the dead? does
import. 3. A true believer should love to be comfored, yea and to live in the
wo^ld, not so much for his own satisfaction, as that he may glorify God in his
life: as, shall the dead rise and praise thee? does import. 4. It will not
content a believer to have the use of any benefit unto himself alone, but
resolves to make it forthcoming, as to the glory of God; so also to the
edification of others: and therefore loves to have the benefit which he
seeks, mainly for that end; as, Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the
grave? does import. 5. The only time to glorify God, so as others may be
edified, is this present life; after death a man may praise God in heaven, but
shall not instruct any ignorant person there by his example or counsel; as,
Shall thy faithfulness be declared in destruction? does import: and that which
follows also shows the same; Shall thy wonders be known in the dark, and
thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness? 6. There is no commerce
between the living and the dead, the dead do not know what men are doing on the
earth, for death is the land of forgetfulness, wherein the living and dead so
part and go asunder, as those do who forget one another. 7. A soul acquainted
with God, has no will to die, till the sense of wrath be removed; and the
feeling of the sense of reconciliation be granted, as this example does show;
and no wonder in this; for it is a fearful thing to have the terror both of
temporal and eternal death to set on at once.

Ver. 13. But unto thee have I cried, O LORD: and in the morning shall my
prayer prevent thee.

The third reason of his hope to have his request granted is, from his
resolution never to give over praying, but as he had done before, so to
continue still in his supplication. Whence learn, 1. Instancy in prayer, and
resolution never to give over, as it argues solid and strong faith: so does it
give good ground of hope to be heard, as in this example of the Prophet may be
see^ 2. Albeit we do not find an answer to our warrantable prayers so soon as
we would, yet we must not conclude that our bypast prayer has been amiss,
but rather must avow our bypast exercise, and resolve to continue as the
Psalmist does here: But unto thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning
shall my prayer prevent thee.

Ver. 14. LORD, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?

The fourth reason is, from the impossibility of his being a castaway, albeit
it seemed so or that God should always hide his face from him, albeit it
seemed so, as his asking Why, in the reasoning of faith against sense and
outward appearance, does show to be his meaning, especially if these words be
compared with the ^ceding ver. Whence learn, 1. As the faith of Gods dear
children ^y be assaulted with suggestions moving them to suspect their ^ection
from God; so is it the nature of faith, and the duty of ^ievers to reject those
thoughts, to lay them out before God, ^d to dispute against them; Lord, why
castest thou off my soul? (...). When God does hide the sensible signs of his
favor toward ^s, we are allowed to deal with God to remove the veil; Why
hidest thou thy face from me? 3. A glimpse of Gods face, or of his sensible
manifested love may mitigate the sorest trouble of (...) s^d soul, and satisfy
the afflicted, as the Petition involved in this speech, Why hidest thou thy
face from me? does import: for if he could have found any glimpse of favor, he
would not have so complained.

Ver. 15. I am afflicted and ready to die, from my youth up: while I suffer thy
terrors I am distracted.

In the last part of the Psalm, the Prophet finding no conselation, returns
to his lamentation, by which he made way to his wrestling in prayer, from ver.
3. to the 9. and lays down his misery at the Lords feet, as the object of the
bowels of his pity: in which misery he is persuaded, that he could not but
find the effects of the Lords compassion in due time. The parts of the
lamentation are three. The first is, for the long continuance of his sad
exercise, even from his youth up, wherein he shows first, that he was
afflicted, that is, put to great strait^ by calamities. Secondly, that he was
ready to die, as a man overset and able to bear no more. Thirdly, that he was
as much vexed with what he feared to come, as he was troubled with what he
felt; He suffered the terrors of the Lord. Fourthly, that he was exercised
frequently, and of a long time this way; From his youth ^p. Fifthly, that by
the hard exercise, and returning terrors of God upon him, he was so rent and
perplexed, that oft-times he could not; make use of his natural reason; as he
did reckon. Whence learn, 1. When we have assayed all means for having comfort
of God, it is safest for us to lay our grief before God, till he be pleased to
show pity: The child of God has no oratory but mourning to his Father, as
here we see. 2. A grieved mind can reckon all its afflictions, and call to
remembrance those troubles that are long since past, as here we see. 3. It is
an ordinary doctrine, but hardly believed, when it comes to application, that
God loves them whom he chastises, as the Proph^ (...) mentation and
wrestlings do teach us. 4. In a through (...) the Lord brings the soul to the
b^ink of death. I am ready (...) die. 5. The weight of present troubles, is
accompanied readily wi^h the fear of worse to come, and the fear of evil to
come dot^* double the weight of evil that is present; for the Lords terrors
here are reckoned as his saddest sufferings. 6. Some of Gods children are more
exercised in their consciences then other some, yea some souls may all their
days be frequented with the terrors of the Lord and fears of his wrath; as
this example of Heman exercised from his youth up, does show. 7. Sore trials
may put fait^ sometimes to stagger with doubting, and by perplexity put a man's
reason to a stand, and make him many times like a man beside himself; I am
distracted. 8. Albeit the godly may be p^ to doubt, yet are they not driven to
despair; Albeit they be cast down, yet they are not destroyed, as he^e we see.

Ver. 16. Thy fierce wrath goes over me: thy terrors havo cut me off.

17. They came round about me daily like water: they compassed me about
together.

The second part of the lamentation, is for the feeling of the apparent effects
of Gods wrath; fierce wrath, overwhelming wrath going over him, fears and
terrors of more and heavier wrath coming: affrighting wrath in appearance,
surrounding wrath and terror compassing about, like deep waters, from which no
event can be seen. Whence learn, 1. Trouble has its own weight, but wrath
makes it unsupportable; the wrath of a Father, when it is seen, is terrible;
but fierce wrath of a Judge, when it appears, is unspeakable: it ove
wh^lmeth, swalloweth up, and yet this may be the exercise of a child of God;
Thy fierce wrath goes over me. 2. Albeit the exercise of a child of God may
seem to himself to be the very case of 2 damned reprobate, yet in the midst of
it the footsteps of gr^e and evidence of faith may be seen by a beholder, as in
the experience of (...), who in his deepest trouble adhered to God, may be
seen: For first, the sea^ which set upon him, is called the terror of God,
which imports not only wrath, present wrath, but also unresistible wrath: yea
and growing of Gods wrath, comi^g* apace upon him, for terror imports this.
2. The terrors of God in the plural number are upon him, that is, frequent
terrors, and multiplied terrors. 3. The effect of those terrors as the seemed;
they were aff^ighting terrors, which did threaten to separate his soul from God
utterly, altogether, and for ever to his ^ense and likelihood; they sp^ke no
less then that he was to be sound a cast^way: Thy terrors (says he) have cut
me off. 4. L^st of all, for the manner of the assault made by those terrors
upon his poor soul, they are compared to wate^s enclosing a man before he be
aware, compassing him so about that he can find no event; and like the
returning of the tide, compassing him daily; yea like contrary tides one of
them thrusting another, and setting upon him on all hands together; whereby the
inexpressible trouble of a soul under the sense of Gods wrath is described, bu^
so as none can understand it, except he, who either in lesser or greater
measure has felt i^; and all this may b^all a chil^e of light: Thy fierce
wrath goes over m^, thy terrors have cut me off, they came round about me
daily like wa^er, they compassed me abo^t together.

Ver. 18. Lover and friend have thou put far from me: and mine acquaintance
into darkness.

The third and last part of the lamentation is repeated from ver. 8. that there
was no man compassionate towerd him* (...)* none to pity him, none to counsel
or comfort him, none to whom he might imp^rt his mind fully for easing of him;
b^t his ol^ friends, and such as loved him before, did fail him and forsake
him: and God m^de it manifest, that he did thrust them away from him; none were
to be^r him company, but he demea^ed himself to sit solitary in darkness. So
then L^rn, 1. A^beit a friend be made for the day of trouble; and a^beit it
would have been an ease to have had any friends company, ^or means of c^fort,
yet he could find none: God withheld them all for the trial of his servant
he^e: and such a heavy and comfor^lesse co^di ion may be the lot of a beloved
child; Lover and frien^ have thou put fa^re from me, and mine acquaintance
into (...). 2. In that he ends the P^alme without any comfort for the time,
it makes this Psalm no less comfortable, then any other* Psalm; because it
shows that he was suppo^ted insensibly for the ^ime, and had comfort given to
him the ^after, so much as to make this sad complaint to be turned into a song
both to himself, an^ ^o the Church. and it teaches, that seeing God can
sustain a (...), secret supporting of a man's faith, without comfortable sense;
yea and that under the sadd^st ^ense of wrath; therefore a believ^* in G^d must
lay hold on (...) goodness, Promise, and Covenant, and must trust still in the
Lord; a^beit he should seem to s^ay him, as the example of Heman the Ezrahite
here does teach us.

PSALM. LXXXIX. Maschil of Ethan the Ezr^ite.
THis Psalm is intit^led Maschil, or a Psalm written for instruction by Ethan
the Ezra^ite, who after Solomon was another of the ^our w^st men in Israel: ^is
man survivi^; the glory of Solomon's Kingdom, and beholding the diminishing o^
the glory of David's house, lamenteth the desolation thereof unto God.

The Psalm has three parts. In the first he sette^h his says upon God, and
labors to strengthen it against the te^ation which was boiling in his
breast, to ve^. 9. In the second part he expounds the ^umme of the Covenant
of Grace, made between God and Christ, typi^ied by David: wherein indeed,
alb^it David has his own interest, yet the substance was t^ be found only in
Christ, who came of David according to the ^esh, from ver. ^9, to 38. In the
thi^d part is a lamentatio^ of the apparent dissolving of this Covenant with
David's (...), and a prayer for repairing the ruins of ha^* Kingdom, (...) the
glory of God: which prayer he (...) himself shall be granted.

From the inscription; Learn, 1. Wisdom does not exempt a man from grief and
anguish from tentation of faith and hard exercise of mind: for here is another
ex^mple beside Heman; to wit, Ethan the Ezrahite, a man of the ^ame family with
Heman. 2. The Lord does (...) unto men their in^ard exercises, that one may
have his trouble for one ^ause, and another have it ^or ^th (...) cause as it
ple^seth him to measure out in his wisdom; (...) He^ans ^ouble is made about
his own p^ivate condition, but Ethans trouble is about the publi^k calamity of
Church, an Kingdom Not tha^ we think ^eman ^as insensible of the public* or
Ethan not acquainted with trouble for his own pa^ticular also, but because the
Lord will have the one exemplary in the one sort of exercise, and the other
^xemplary in the other sort of exercise, and will have the exercise of both to
be the instruction of his people: Maschil of Heman, and Ethan both.

Ver. 1. I Will sing of the mercies of the LORD for ever: with my mouth will I
make known thy faithfulness to all generations.

Before he utter his tentation, or bring forth his lamentation for the
apparently dissolved Covenant between God and David, he obliges himself to
maintain the glory of the mercy and faithfulness of God, ver. 1, (...). in
relation to the stability of the Covenant made with David particularly, ver. 3,
4. and to this end he strengthens his faith by a numbor of reasons to ver. 19
The first is, from his resolution to hold fast the b^liefe of Gods mercy and
faithfulness, notwithstanding it did at this time seem that God had dissolved
the Covenant with David's house. Whence learn, 1. Whatso^ver promises the Lord
has made to his people, they must not wonder, albeit sometime he makes it very
improbable to carnal sense and reason, that ever they shall be performed: for
this is needful for the exercise of faith, as in this example we see. 2. In the
conflict of faith with misbelief, it is wisdom for the believer to suppress
the suggestions of unbelief, to take part with says, to break through the
throng of desperate thoughts, and without disputation close with the mercy of
Good, and with the faithfulness of his Word, and to avow faith, and to engage
himself to maintain faith, before he utter his tentation unto misbelief* or
suffer it to vent it self; as here the Psalmist does re^ch by his example,
saying, I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever, etc. 3. The mercy of
God, and the faithfulness of God, are two strong pillars of confidence in God:
mercy to take away sin and mi^ery, and faithfulness to perform all the
promises of every good unto the believer: I will sing of the mercies of the
Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all
generations.

Ver. 2. For I have said* Mercy shall be built up for ^ver: thy faithfulness
shall thou establish in the very heavens.

He adds a reason of his resolution to give the glory of mercy and truth unto
God, because he was pe swaded the work of Gods mercy promised to David in the
Messiah, should go on and be perfected and settled for ever, and that the
evidence of Gods faithful promise should be manifested from heaven, albeit
sometime it should disappear in the earth. Whence learn, 1 It is believing with
the heart which seals Gods truth, and makes the mouth to consesse unto God:
With my mouth will I make known thy faith fullness, for I have said, Mercy
shall be built up for ever. 2. The sure mercies promied to David in special
concerning the Redeemers taking flesh of his stock, is like a building which
has a foundation already laid by a wise and powerful builder, and shall come
up certainly to perfection, and endure for ever; I have said that mercy shall
be built up for ever. 3. When the effect of Gods truth disappeareth on earth,
it is to be found in heaven in Gods decree, good will, power, and
faithfulness, whence it will not fail to manifest it self in due time: Thy
faithfulness shall thou establish in the very heavens.

Ver. 3. I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworn unto David my
servant.

4. Thy seed will I establish for ever: and build up thy throne to all
generations. Selah.

That which he means by the Lords truth and faithfulness in general, he
expounds in particular to be in relation to the Lords promise made to David
concerning the perpetuity of the Kingdom in his posterity for the good of the
Church; which promise has accomplishment in Christ the Son of David
according to the flesh Whence learn, 1. As all the Lords promises, so
especially these which concern Christ, and all saving graces in him (which are
called the sure mercies of David) should be narrowly looked upon, that nothing
be passed by, whereof faith may take advantage: for what is promised concerning
Christ, does concern all believers in him to the worlds end; and this the
example of the Psalmist here does teach us: for he observes the promise-maker,
I the Lord; and the qualification of the receiver of the promise, clothed with
the styles of Christ, whom David represented, and in whose favor chiefly the
promise is made: Thy chosen servant; and the nature of the promise by way of
solemn ^ovenant; and the consirmation of it by an ^ath; I have sworn; and the
substance of the promise, that one should come of David who should be of
everlasting continuance, stablished by divine power for ever; to wit, Christ
the Lord: and that the kingdom of Israel called David's throne, which was
erected for governing the people of God, as it was now well founded upon the
decrce of God, and begun to be builded already, should be builded up, and grow
unto a perspicuous perfection, from one generation to another; and be
perpetuated for ever: Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy
throne to all generations. When disappearance of hoped good things does brangle
faith, then the Word of God and his promises must be called to memory, upon
which faith must fix it self, as this example teaches. 3* The mercy and
faithfulness of God, which are the common grounds of the stability of all he
Lords promises, being believed in the general, should be applied particularly
to every promise, as we have need thereof, that we may strengthen our faith by
reasoning from this ground thus; Gods mercy and faithfulness do make all his
promises fast, and therefore do make fast this particular promise also,
whereupon I do row pitch, as the example of the Psalmist does teach us. 4. As
all the promises of God are worthy to be taken notice of; so in special these
promises that are made to Christ in favor of Believers, who are the subjects
of his Kingdom, in whom all the promises are made Yea and Amen, to the benefit
of the subjects: for this are we taught to do by the example of the Psalmist,
who when desolation was like to swallow up both Church and Kingdom, does make
fast to his own faith the promise of Ch^lst, and of the stability of his
Kingdom; which promise being sure of necessity, the tribe of Judah, and the
posterity of David behooved to be preserved, and continued till Christ came.

Ver. 5. And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O LORD: thy faithfulness
also in the congregation of the saints.

He labors to strengthen his faith in this promise by ten reasons further.
The first whereof is this, The heavens are an evidence both of Gods power to
work wonders for his people, and of his faithfulness to perform promises unto
the Church; therefore will he say, I have reason for me to believe this promise
made to David concerning Christ* Kingdom. Whence learn, 1. The consideration
of the power of God manifested in the works of creation, to be able to perform
whatsoever he promises, were it never so wonderful, may and should confirm our
faith in his promise, how improbable soever it appear: For the heavens shall
praise thy wonders, O Lord. 2. As the heavens are a pawn of Gods power, in
respect of their first framing them out of nothing: so are they a pattern of
Gods faithfulness, in their constant and orderly motion according to his Word
since their framing; The heavens shall praise thy faithfulness also. 3.
However the power and faithfulness of God may be seen and heard in the work
and speech of the heavens by all men, yet are they not observed and hearkened
unto, except in the Church by Gods children; Therefore says he, They shall
praise thy faithfulness also in the Congregation of the Saints.

Ver. 6. For who in the heaven can be compared unto the LORD? who amongst the
sons of the mighty can be likened unto the LORD?

The second reason to confirm his faith is this, God is above all Angels in
heaven and men on earth, and has them all under him to perfect by them what
work he pleases; and presuppose they had a mind to hindet any purpose of God
concerning performance of his promise, they could not hinder him, they being
infinitely inferior in all excellencies unto God, and no way to be compared
with him: Therefore will he say, I have reason to believe his promise
concerning the stability of Christ's Kingdom. Whence learn, 1. The height of
Gods excellency is above the reach of our thoughts, and we cannot take him up
otherwise then by climbing up upon the shoulders and tops of all created
eminency, and there to proclaim God to be greater then them all: for Who in
heaven can be compared unto the Lo^d? Who among the sons of the mighty can be
likened unto the Lord? 2. God has given power natural, most of all to Angels;
and power accessory, most of all to Princes and Magistrates and Potentates in
the earth, whom here he calls the sons of the mighty; in whose power and
authority we may see somewhat of God, if they be for God; and may see Princes
to be nothing, if they be against God; for, Who in heaven can be compared unto
the Lord? who among the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?

Ver. 7. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints: and to be
had in reverence of all them that are about him.

A third reason to confirm his faith, is this; God is terrible, and to be
stood in awe of by all his people, and it were a fearful injury for his Saints
not to give him the glory of his power and sidelity; Therefore will he say, I
have reason to believe what he has promised concerning the Kingdom of Christ.
Whence learn, 1. Holy Angels and sanctified men, of all creatures have nearest
access unto God, and are most like to the domestics and Courtiers of a King,
who attend him daily, and wait upon him; for they are here said to be about
him. 2. The fear and reverence of God imprinted on Angels and Saints, does
evidence the greatness of Gods power, excellency, and majesty; God is greatly
to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints. 3. The terriblenesse of Gods holy
Majesty, and the reverence due to him from all his Saints, should make us
afraid to misbelieve his Word and Promises; for this is made a reason of the
Psalmists believing the Lords Word: God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly
of the Saints, and to be had in reverence by all them that are about him.

Ver. 8. O LORD God of hosts, who is a strong LORD like unto thee? or to thy
faithfulness round about thee?

A fourth reason to confirm his faith, is this; GOD is LORD of Hosts, and
incomparable in strength and faithfulness, whereby he is compassed on all
hands round about; therefore will he say, I have reason to believe his promise
concerning Christ's Kingdom. Whence learn, 1. As the Lord only knows
persectly his own Omnipotency, and his own Excellency in all perfections; so
we know GOD b^st when we come to him, and acknowledge that he only knows
himself fully, and do give unto him this glory, as the Psalmist di^ecting his
speech to GOD immediately does t^ach us: O LORD God of hosts, who is a strong
LORD like unto thee? 2 The same power which serves to humble a man by
afflicting of him, serves also to comfort him, and strengthen his faith in
affliction, when he does draw near unto God: for the Psalmist makes use of
the same style here, both to direct his says, and to keep down his pride, his
s^etting and repining against God, saying, O LORD God of hosts. 3. As the Lord
is (as it were) compassed about on all hands with power, and is incomparably
strong in all difference of time past, present, and to come, above all his
creatures; so also first and l^st, in all difference of time, he is
incomparably faithful above all his creatures: O LORD God of hosts, who is a
strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy faithfulness round about thee?

Ver. 9. Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou
stillest them.

A fifth reason to strengthen his faith, is; The LORD who does rule the raging
Sea, is able to suppress and compose all tumults and troubles, whatsoever are
raised, or shall be raisd against his Church; Therefore I have cause, will he
say, to believe his promise concerning Christ's Kingdom. Whence learn, That the
power of GOD in ruling and calming the raging Sea, may strengthen the faith of
his children, amidst all the tumults of people against Christ's Kingdom.

Ver. 10. Thou have broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain: thou have
scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.

The sixth reason, is this; GOD has done as much already for delivering his
Church, by destroying Rahab, or the Egyptians, and scattering of his enemies
from time to time, as may assure me both what he can, and what he will do for
his people, therefore I may be quiet. Whence learn, 1. Faith may, and should
make use of every example of GODS working for his people in all times after,
and in special the overthrow of the Egyptians, as a perpetual pawn of GODS
promise to tread down and destroy all the enemies of his Church and Kingdom:
for Thou have b^oken Rahab in pieces, is here and elsewhere frequently called
to rememb^ance for this end. 2. It is as easy for GOD to dest^oy a Nation of
enemies, were they never so many or powerful, as to wound or kill one man: Thou
have broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou have scattered thine
enemies with thy strong hand.

Ver. 11. The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world and
the fullness thereof, thou have founded theu.

Ver. 12 The North and the South, thou have created them: Tabor and Hermon
shall rejoice in thy Name.

The seventh reason for confirmation of his faith, is: Heaven and earth, and
all creatures in all corners of the world, are the LORDS work sustained by him,
and cared for by him, and there is not a mountain or hill greater or lesser,
such as Tabor or Hermon, which do bear grass, or corn, or herbs, or trees, or
whatsoever may make them look as it were cheerfully and rejoice, but it is by
the power of GODS Name: Therefore I may be sure, GOD will much more care for
his Church, and for the stability of the Kingdom of Christ. Whence learn 1.
The heaven and earth, and fullness thereof, belongs to the LORD by due right,
and are cared for by him as his own possession: The heavens are thine, the
earth also is thine: as for the world and fullness thereof, thou h^ (...)
sounded them. 2. The making and governing of the world, which was made and is
governed for the use of man, may give assurance that his Church and people,
(for whose cause especially all was made,) shall be continued from age to age,
to long as heaven and* earth do remain; and shall be more particularly cared
for, then any other part or piece of his workmanship: for to this end does the
Psalmist make mention of other creatures appointed to serve man. 3. Seeing the
Lord makes the hills and mountains, after Winter-blasts of frost and snow, to
change their countenance, and as it were look joyfully and rejoice; we may be
persuaded that his Church after troubles shall much more change its
countenance,, and rejoice in Gods Name: For to this end is it said, that these
mountains Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy Name.

Ver. 13. Thou have a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right
hand.

The eight reason is taken from the exceeding great power of GOD, to do more
then ever he has done for his Church. Whence learn, If a greater work then
the making and upholding of the world; or if a greater work then any thing
which is done by GOD hitherto, were needful to be done for the good of the
Church, there is power enough, infinite power in GOD to effect it; Thou have a
mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.

Ver. 14. Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne; mercy and
truth shall go before thy face.

The ninth reason for strengthening his faith, taken from the properties and
attendants of GODS Kingdom, is this: Justice and judgment are the supporters
of his throne; and mercy and truth are his officers, preparing way for the
LORD, when he is about to do justice in favor of his people: therefore I need
not fear that the promise of Christ's Kingdom shall fail. Whence learn, 1.
Whatsoever oppression or desolation the Lords people may be under, the
unalterable tighseousnesse of GOD cannot f^ile to execute justice and judgment
for punishing of the oppressor, and relieving of his people: for Justice and
judgment are the habitation of his throne: or the base whereupon his throne is
settled. 2. Albeit the sins of the Lords people might stop the way of relief
coming to them, or prejudice them of having any benefit from justice; yet mercy
and truth are ready at hand, to prepare the way by pardon of their sins, and
performing all promises unto them: Mercy and truth shall go before his face.

Ver. 15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O
LORD, in the light of thy countenance.

16. In thy Name shall they rejoice all the d^y: and in thy righteousness
shall they be exalted.

17. For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favor our horn
shall be exalted.

18 For the Lord is our defense: and the holy One of Israel is our King.

The tenth reason for strengthening of his faith, is taken from the
blessedness of Believers in GOD, whose properties and privileges are set ^own
in order, six: all of them proving GODS people to be blessed. Whence learn. 1.
Whatsoever are the afflictions of the LORDS people, and in what danger and
difficulty soever they be in, yet are they certainly blessed: Blessed is the
people that know the joyful sound. 2. Those are to be accounted GODS people,
who with a good heart join with others at GODS command in the worship and
service of GOD; Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: for the
joyful sound was the sound of the silver trumpets, which were blown at the
joining in battle in their wars, or for their journeys, or gathering of
Assemblies, or intimation of solemn feasts, and at the offering of the
sacrifices of Israel, Psalm. 81. Numb. 10. Joel 2. And the knowing of this
joyful sound signifies the alacrity of Gods people to serve and obey the
Lord, as he in his Ordinances should warn, direct and guide them. 3. The
properties and privileges of B^lievers in GOD, make sure proof of their
blessedness; for they live in grace and favor with GOD, whether they do
sensibly feell it or not: as their persons, so also their carriage in faith,
and upright endeavor to please GOD, are always acceptable to GOD: And this is
the first privilege of GODS people, They shall walk, O LORD, in the light of
thy countenance. 4. Believers have matter and just cause to rejoice in GOD for
their interest in him, what soever be their present condition; In thy Name
shall they rejoice all the day. This is another privilege of Gods people. 5.
The joy of Believers is underpropped and enlarged, when they consider that Gods
righteousness (which is by faith in Christ,) is imputed unto them, and Gods
righteousness in performing his promises is set on work for their direction,
encouragement, reformation and defense; And in thy righteousness shall they be
exalted. This is the third privilege of Believers. 6. Albeit the godly find
no power in themselves, either to do or suffer, no power either to defend
themselves, or oppose their enemies; yet they want not strength, either
employed for them, or furnished (as they need) unto them, by God in a glorious
manner, as they will see, if his helping them be rightly looked upon; For thou,
Lord, (says he) art the glory of their strength, wherein they may glory in
their weakest condition. And this is the fourth privilege of GODS people. 7.
The free grace and love of GOD graciously tendered to Believers, is the ground
of their strength, comfort, confidence and gloriation, because it is the
fountain of all their felicity, and wellspring of life to them, to look unto
this, that they are in favor with GOD; And in thy favor our horn shall be
exalted. And this is the fifth privilege of the LORDS people. 8. Albeit
B^lievers be destitute of help from men; yet they are neither left without
protection, nor without government, because God or Christ who is God, is the
Churches King, to protect, guide and govern her; for The Lord is our defense
or shield; and the holy One of Israel is our King: the O^iginal also will bear
of and to, The Lord is our defense of and to, the holy One of Israel is our
King; whereby what may be said of the typical King, David, and of the true
King, Christ, considered as man, may give assurance that God would be their
defense and King, because David, ann Christ as man, were Gods Kings, and Kings
for Gods service and honor, authorized of God, and devoted to him. And this is
the sixth privilege of GODS people. All which privileges are so many proofs
of the blessedness of the Believers, in whatsoever condition they are. 9. It
is wisdom for every Believer, when he is about to reckon the riches of GODS
people; and to set forth their privileges, to make application thereof to
himself in amongst the rest of that number, as the example of the Psalmist here
does teach us, who in the later part of this computa^ion does so: In thy favor
our horn shall be exalted, the Lord is our defense, our King.

Ver. 19, Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy One: and said, I have laid
help upon one that is mighty: I have exalted one chosen out of the people.

20. I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him.

In the second part of the Psalmist, for the further comfort of the Church in
her saddest condition, and to strengthen yet more the godly in their troubles.
1. He expounds the Covenant of Grace made with Christ, represented typically
by David, because he must be looked upon only as the shadow, but Christ as the
chief party and as he in whom the real substance is accomplished perfectly.
Therefore shall we speak of both, as the word does relate unto the one, or unto
the other, or to both in several respects. And first of the circumstances of
the Covenant, and then of the several Articles thereof: for the Psalmist
marketh, 1. The time of revealing of the Covenant; They, to wit, when it
pleased God to let it be known, that he purposed to take a course for the
comfortable governing of his Church and People. 2. He observes the way of
revealing it, which he shows to be by vision; he spoke to his holy servant,
to wit, Samuel or Nathan. 3 He commends the man who was to rule, as fit and
able to be helpful to his people; I have laid help upon one that is mighty. 4.
He shows the cause of his prese^ment, to be his own free love and good will;
I have exalted one chosen o^t of the people. 5. He names him and his offi^e: I
have found David my servant. 6. He tells of his spiritual furniture, figured
sorth by anointing; With my holy Oil have I anointed him. Whence learn, 1.
Albeit the Lord has always a special care of the governing of his people, yet
does he not at all times alike clearly make manifest this care, by giving
comfortable Governors he has his own times, as to hide his face in this
particular, so his own then also, when to show his love; Then thou spakest. 2.
The Lords mind is not to be found by conjectures, but by his Word revealed to
his holy Prophets; Then thou spakest to thy holy One in vision and said. 3. As
the Lo^ds people stand in need of a good King, a man of power, able and willing
to be helpful to the subjects, and not hurtful: so God must be the inabler of
him, and designer of him after the way he pleases, and the maker of him to be
effectually helpful: I have laid help upon one that is mighty. 4. It is
conducible, to the intent a Ruler may be helpful to the subjects, that there be
some natural tie between him and them: for this God did provide for in the
appointing comfortable Governors over his own people; I have exalted one,
chosen out of the people. 5. That one is preferred before another, or advanced
to any place of power or trust over others in mercy, it is of Gods grace, free
choice and good will; I have exalted one, chosen out of the people. 6. The man
who must in his government do good to Gods people, must be a man for God, Gods
servant, not by office and duty only, but of a set purpose also: I have sound
David my servant. 7. The man whom God imployeth in Government for his people,
must be furnished with gifts and graces of his Spirit, figured by holy oil;
With my holy oil have I anointed him. 8. As David was in type, so Christ is in
truth, and in all respects more eminently then David^ strong helper, mighty to
save, appointed of the Father to help us in all cases; and to whom we are
directed to go, that we may find help, on whom help does lie, in whom we
sha^ surely find help; he is one of our kind, taken out from among the
people, acquainted with the meanest condition his subjects can be in, exalted
to be a Prince and a Savior, chosen and predestined (as man) for the office
before the world was, devoted to the service of the Redemption, sanctification,
government, and salvation of his people; and filled, as man, with the holy
Ghost above measure, that out of his fullness we may all receive grace for
grace: of whom it is most really true, With my holy oil have I anointed him.

Ver. 21. With Whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall
strengthen him.

From this ver. to the 38. he brings forth ten promises, as so many heads
and articles of this Covenant, whereof this is the first, concerning assistance
to be given to David in type, and to Christ more substantially, and in more
eminent effects. Whence learn, (...). As to David in his Kingdom: so to Christ
as man in his Kingdom, God has engaged his outwardly assisting power
constantly: With whom my hand shall be established. 2. As to David: so to
Christ full furniture of power for all the parts ^f government is p^omised in
favor of all the subjects of his Kingdom^: Mine arm also shall strengthen
him; as the work is great or difficult, divine strength shall enable him to go
about it and do it.

Ver. 22. The enemy shall not exact upon him: nor the son of wickedness
afflict me.

The second promise is, that as David's subjects, albeit they had many battles,
yet were they not subdued in his time, nor made tributaries to their enemies,
nor made miserable by them: so shall Christ's subjects and kindly converts unto
him, be sound during his time, which is from generation to generation, and for
ever; albeit troubled by the spiritual enemies of his Kingdom, yet they shall
not be made tributaries, voluntary servants, or miserable slaves to them: for
sin shall not have dominion over them, nor shall Satan or persecuters have
such power, as to drive them away from their liege Lord Jesus Christ, the true
David, the true King of the I^rael of God: The enemy shall not exact upon him,
nor the son of wickedness afflict him, or make him really miserable: for all
things shall work together for their good.

Ver. 23. And I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that
hate him.

The third promise, is of the destroying the enemies of David's and Christ's
Kingdom, which albeit they should not want enemies, both open enemies, openly
envading the Kingdom, or opposing it to their power, and also inward secret
enemies, who in heart should wish the hurt and harm of their Kingdom, yet God
should dest^oy as David's enemies, so far as might serve the type, so Christ's
enemies more eminently, and in a more complete manner and measure: I will beat
down his enemies before his face, this is for open enemies: I will plague them
that bate him, this is for secret intestine enemies in special: both these
sorts shall be permitted to exercise Christ's subjects, but shall at length be
fully destroyed.

Ver. 24. But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my Name
shall his horn be exalted.

The fourth promise is, for removing all difficulties and impediments which
might hinder the growing of Christs-Kingdom, and of his subjects unto full
glory: for here the promi^e, as it relates unto the type, has not the
accomplishment clearly and fully. Whence learn, 1. There are two things which
do oppugn and assault faith: the one is, the greatness of the work and
benefit promised: the other is, the sins of these to whose behoof the promise
is made; but Gods faithfulness and mercy promised to be with Christ for the
benefit of his subjects, does answer both those obstacles: for Gods promise
must be accomplished; how great things soever he has promised, there is
nothing too hard for him: and Gods mercy takes away the obstacle of
unworthiness and ill-deserving by reason of sin: Mercy holds truth on upon
the course thereof toward us, when justice otherways might break it off from
us; But my faithfulness and my mercy shall ^e with him. 2. The subjects of
Christ's Kingdom want not matter of gloriation, albeit they have nothing in
themselves to boast of: Gods power, misdom, goodness and mercy manifested in
the Word, is the only ground of their gloriation: In my Name shall his horn be
exalted; for when Christ's subjects glory in God through him, Christ's glory is
exahed in Gods Name.

Ver. 25. I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.

The fifth promise made to David in the shadow, but to Christ in the most real
substance, is the enlarging of his Kingdom through the world by sea and land,
continent and is^es: and so Christ's Kingdom must not be confined to more narrow
bounds then his charter does bear him unto, but must be stretched out to the
due length and breadth, even to whither soever he sends out his Gospel: and
does extend his hand to subdue and conquer subjects unto himself, and to bring
them within the visible Church; for, I will set his hand also in the sea, and
his right hand in the rivers: shows, that the Kingdom must reach beyond the
bounds of Canaan, whether we look to David the type, or to Christ the Antitype;
we are led by this speech to the largeness of this Kingdom.

26. He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father: my God, and the rock of my
salvation.

The sixth promise, properly belonging to Christ, according as it is declared
by the Apostle, Heb. 1. 4. from this place, and from a Sam 17. 19. For albeit
David and Solomon were God; sons by adoption, office of Government, and
chosen types, yet Christ who came of David according to the flesh was Gods
Son by personal union of the humane nature with the Word or second Person of
the Trinity. And here he is promised as Head and Prince of the Covenant of
salvation, made in favor of the elect, only Mediator and Intercessor for all
the redeemed. Whence learn, 1. The Covenant of grace is consolidated in Christ
our Head: and he has the first right as man, to say unto the Father, that
which is here said as Intercessor and Mediator for the elect; He shall cry
unto me, Thou art my Father: my God, and the rock of my salvation. 2. Hereby it
is intimated also, that both Christ in his own person, and the persons of his
redeemed ones also, (in whose name Christ takes the right of what is promised
to his subjects) was to be exercised with trouble, and was to be put to it, to
make use of the Covenant, and of the privileges and promises of it for
sustentation and salvation; Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation.

Ver. 27. Also I will make him my firstborn, higher then the Kings of the
earth.

The seventh promise most proper also to Christ, who in respect of his humane
nature personally united with the divine nature of the eternal only begotten
Son, is made and declared to be the Fathers firstborn, and more excellent
then all the Kings of the earth, how despicable soever his Kingdom does seem;
for all ear^hly Kings are under his foo^stool, and of them none can make or
preserve the life of one of his subjects, nor his own; Also I will make him my
firstborn, higher then the Kings of the earth. David's prerogative above other
Kings, was but a shadow of this, and of short continuance.

Ver. 28. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my covenant shall
stand fact with him.

The eighth promise is of everlasting mercy to Christ's subjects, to be kept in
store for Christ's dispensing forth thereof; My mercy will I keep for him for
ever; and this is the ground of the Cov^nant, and the sweetest consolation of
the Covenant, which shall never he disannulled, because established in Christ,
and to him for our behoof; My Covenant shall stand fast with him.

Ver. 29. His seed also will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the
days of Heaven.

The ninth promise is, of the continuance and increase of his off spring and
Kingdom, while the world stands, which cannot be fulfilled but in Christ.
Whence learn, 1. Christ has from age to age a succession of children, whom he
by his Word and Spirit begets unto a spiritual life; and this succession
shall not be cut off, but one generation shall follow another: His seed also
will I make to endure for ever. 2. As Christ shall not want subjects in any age
to shall he not cease to govern his people in any age; His throne shall be as
the days of Heaven.

Ver. 30. If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments:

31. If they break my statutes, and keep not my Commandments:

32. Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity
with stripes.

33. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him: nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail.

The tenth promise is of a merciful manner of dealing with Christ's subjects,
(that is, with persons regenerate and reconciled with God, by correcting them
with temporal rods, when they break forth into offenses, and do turn back or go
aside from obedience to Gods law, that being corrected they may repent, and so
be saved. Whence learn, 1. The Covenant here made with David in type, and with
Christ the Antitype, is for the behoof and benefit of the children, as this
article makes evident; If his children forsake my law. 2. There is a provision
in the Covenant, against the sins which may fall out in the persons covenanted,
and might mar all our comfort if remission were not covenanted; If his
children forsake my law. 3. If the Lords children watch not over their own
corrupt nature, and against tentations, they are in danger of falling, and
certainly will fall into fits of fearful sinning against Gods revealed will,
both by way of commission and omission, so as they may seem not renewed, as
here is presupposed; If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my
judgments: if they break my statutes, and keep not my Commandments. 4. The Lord
does not allow sin in his own children more then in others, but will testify
his indignation against the sins of his own children with ^ad judgments; If
they keep not my commandments, then w^ll I visit their transgressions with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes. 5. The sharpest rods and forest stripes,
wherewith God does visit the children of Christ, may stand, and do stand with
loving kindness unto them; for they are fatherly corrections, medicinal
pre^ervatives against sinning afterward, and tokens of Gods hating of sin,
and not of rejection of their persons, but rather effects of his love to the
persons corrected; Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take
from him. 6. The mercy shown to the children, is with respect to the Father
with whom the Covenant is made in favor of the children: My loving kindness
will I not utterly take from him: that is, from David as type, and Christ as
Antitype, for whose sake the kindness is derived to the children. 7. Except
the Covenant of grace had this article in it, for remission of sin, and for
fatherly correction, to drive unto repentance, that the penitent person coming
to God by faith, might have sin forgiven him, and loving kindness shown to
him; this Covenant should fail us no less then the Covenant of works: My
loving kindness I will not take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

Ver. 34. My covenant will I not break: nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips.

35. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David.

36. His seed shall endure for ever; and his throne as the Sun before me.

37. It shall be established for ever as the Moon: and as a faithful witness
in heaven. Selah.

After the articles of the Covenant, he subjoyneth the confirmation of it;
first, by the subscribed Peomise of God, ^or evidencing of the immutability of
it, ver. 34 Secondly, by ratification of his oath formerly made for the
stabili^y of it, ver. 35. Thirdly, by witnesses and pledges o^ the indu^ance of
it, to wit, the Sun and the Moon, ver. 36. 37. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the
sins of Gods children do b^eak the Covenant on their part, ve^ do they not
dissolve the Covenant on Gods part, or make God to break his part of the
Covenant, which is to correct and chastise the sinner, and bring him back by
repentance, and not take away his loving kindness^ from the sinner; My Covenant
will I not break. 2. The Covenant of grace is that which is revealed in the
Gosp^l for ^emedy of sin, and relief from wrath; and what is revealed we may be
sure shall not be altered: My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing
that is gone out of my mouth. 3. As we are (...) to be naturally averse from
believing God, who do stand ^n need of confirmation by his ^ath: so God by
ratification of his promise by oath does declare his will to the uttermost,
that we should believe in him, and rest upon this Covenant, and so make an end
of controverting with him any more by ^r misbeli^f in this matter; Once have I
sworn. 4. There can be no^, eater security, then the true Ch^istian has for
his sal^tion; for God has laid in pawn his truth and his holiness which is
the glory of all his attributes, that he will not take his loving kindness
away from any of Christ, children: Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I
will not lie unto David. 5. The stability of David's seed which is Christ; and
the pe^petuity of his kingdom for the comfort of all his subjects, as it is
confirmed by an oath, and by pledges laid down for assurance thereof: so has
the Lord taken the Sun an^ Moon to be witness, of this Covenant of grace,
as the r^inebow is wi^nesse of that Covenant for not destroying the worl^ wi^h
a flood: ^is seed shall endure for ever; and his throne as the Sun before me.
6. As the witnesses of the Covenant, the Sun and the Moon, do remain in
heaven whatsoever change do seem in them, and howsoever both of them do
disappear every day once, and the Moon every day and every month seems to
change something in the measure of her light, yet is the^e no question made
about them, but they shall appear again in due season. so the Covenant of grace
made with us in Christ, (whatsoever alterations do seem to come therein, and
howsoever it does disappear at some times) should not be called in question,
but esteemed faithful as the witnesses of (...); It shall be established for
ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven.

Ver. 38. But thou have cast off and abhorred: thou have been wroth with thine
anointed.

In the third part of the Psalm he falls upon a sad lamentation, and
represents the affairs and Kingdom of David, as in appearance close
contrary to the Covenant, to v. 46 where be takes up himself, and prays to
God ^or remedy o^ all those evils, and closes the Psalm with thanksgiving and
prai^e.

In his lamentation he b^oaneth first, as it seemed to him, that David and his
house we^e rejected of God, and that in wrath, v. 38. Next, that the Covenant
was dissolved and the Kingdom and Crown ruined together, ver. 39. Thirdly,
that all ^ences and strong holds were removed and thrown down, ver. 40.
Fourthly, that he was made a prey to any that pleased to spoil him, and a
reproach to his neighbou^s, ver. 4. Fifthly, that his enemies were assisted of
^od, and he being (...) in b^ttel was put to flight, ver. 42, 43. Six^hly, that
all the privileges and prerogatives of his Kingdom were abolished, ver. ^4.
Seventhly, that the happiness of his Kingdom had lasted a very short time, and
that ^ll expectation of hoped for blessings were blasted, and turned to matter
of sh^me and confusion, ver. 45. Whence learn, 1. From the order and place of
the lamentation; It is not time for us to enter the lists with ^entations and
doubts, till first we have fixed our heart^ by faith in the Lords promises
against all tentations, and doubts, and fears, and appearances of evil, as the
P^almist does here. 2. The esta^e of Christ's Kingdom, no l^sse then of David's
Kingdom, may at some times seem to humane sense in a condition qui^e contrary
to what is promised concerning it' as this lamenta^ion, wherein the hopes of
Christ's Kingdom is questioned by the Psalmists tentation, does m^ke evident. 3.
The only relief of Gods distressed people at such a time, is to follow the
ex^mple of the Psalmist, that is, to st^engthen their faith, contrary to what
appears outwardly to sense, and then lay out the doubts, fears and
tentations before God, to be answered by him, as here the Prophet does. 4. All
those calamities might come upon David's civil Kingdhm, and yet this Covenant
made with him as the type of Christ not be dissolved, as experience has
proved, because the Covenant was not made to exempt him, or his family, or
Kingdom from the rods of men, in case by their miscarriage and transgressions
they should provoke the Lord; for the last article in the Covenant, in ver. 30,
31, 32. expressly holds out the contrary. Secondly, because the Covenant in
the main scope belonged to Christ and his spiritual Kingdom; to David and his
children and Kingdom, as to a type and shadow of Christ and his Kingdom, or as
they were members of Christ's Kingdom for their spiritual good. 5. Sense and
carnal reason may misrepresent the Lords dispensation, as if it were contrary
to his Covenant and Promise, and contrary to what the godly do believe
according to Gods Word; as here we see, comparing this lamentation with the
former part of the Psalm. 6. If the godly do hold fast to the Word of God, and
believe what the Lord has promised, whatsoever appear in the contrary, then
may they with great freedom, (yea, and they should of duty and wisdom) lay
forth all their tentations, and what carnal reason and sense speaks to them
before the Lord, who is able to solve all doubts, and satisfy faith, without
fear of being mistaken, as this lamentation compared with what precedeth,
makes manifest. 7. Whatsoever calamity shall cross the believers hope, God
still must be esteemed and held the sender out of the calamity, as well as the
Author of the Promise, which the dispensation seems to cross: that the
glory, both of justice wounding his child, and of mercy healing him, may be
given to the Lord, as the example of the Psalmist does teach, who in all the
complaint fasteneth all the branches of the calamity upon Gods doing.

Ver. 46. How long, LORD, will thou hide thy self, for ever? shall thy wrath
burn like fire?

47. Remember how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all men in vain?

48. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his
soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.

49. Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses, which thou swarest unto
David in thy truth?

50. Remember (Lord) the reproach of thy servants: how I do bear in my bosom
the reproach of all the mighty people.

51. Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O LORD: Wherewith they have
reproached the footstops of thine anointed.

52. Blessed be the LORD for evermore; Amen, and Amen.

Here he turns his complaint into prayer for remedy, to show that he did not
fre^; but believe, that the Lord both could and would give relief. The reasons
for strengthening of his faith are four. First, because the wrath of God
against his people cannot be everlasting, ver. 46. The second, because the
Lords afflicted people were of a short life, and did expect comfort before they
died, ver. 47, 48. The third, because former experience, and Gods sworn
Covenant behooved to have evident comfortable effects, ver. 49. The fourth,
because the mockery of the enemy against Gods people, and Christ's Kindom was
insupportable, ver. 50, 51. After which, as being assured of a good answer, he
closes the Psalm with p^ayer and thanksgiving. Whence learn, 1. From the
first ^eason; The children of God are more affected with Gods displeasure, then
with the t^ouble they a^e put unto; How long, Lord, will thou hide thy face?
This shows their chief wound. 2. Whatsoever be the Lords purpose in
afflicting, yet sore trouble does always speak the wrath of God, to the
apprehension of the afflicted; Shall thy wrath burn like fire? 3. As God
cannot be angry for ever with his people; so his people cannot endure any
appearance of everlasting wrath, and utter destruction; How long, Lord, will thou hide thy face, for ever? shall thy w^ath burn like fire?

From the second reason, to confirm his hope to be heard, set down, ver. 47,
48. Learn, 1. As our life is short, and the shortness of it should be a spu^e
to seek the sense of Gods good will to us while we are in this life: so may all
Gods children expect, how short soever their life be, to find sensible proofs
in this life of Gods love to them, and care of them; for, Remember how short my
time is: does import so much in the Psalmists reasoning. 2. Albeit God has
created no man in vain, but for his own glory one way or other, yet Gods
children have little or no estimation of this life, except that they therein
may find God reconciled, and have communion with him in this life; for this
passionate expression, Wherefore have thou made all men in vain? does import
as much; as we count our life in vain, and nothing worth to us, if thou shall
not be reconciled unto us. 3. Albeit our words in prayer should be well
weighed, yet in sad affliction and grief of heart, words sometime may escape a
Saint, which cannot be justified, as here this speech gives us an instance:
for this is a limiting of God to crave comfort in this life to the afflicted,
at the time when they shall prescribe, or else to make all their formerly
received comforts, and life it self to be in vain given unto them: for
presuppose a man should suffer Gods terror from his youth up, as Heman did, and
be as a distracted man, because of the terror of God, and should end his life,
as Heman does the preceding Psalm without comfort; yet life eternal might make
up the troubles of the wrestling of such a man's ^aith, and soon recompense the
loss of comfort in this life: and yet such is the weakness even of Champions
like Ethan; as to vent some passionate expressions in their trouble: Why have
thou made all men in vain? 4. Mortality and shortness of life is common to all
men: but to be stirred up thereby to the more earnest seeking of spiritual
comfort, and preparation for eternal life, is the property of a child of God
only; such as the Psalmist is, who for this very end, that he might have
spiritual comfort, draws an (...) from mortality; What man is he that lives,
and shall not see death?

From the third reason set down, ver. 49. taken from the experience of mercies,
and sworn promises made to David; Learn, 1. Albeit a man were in never so hard
a condition for his own case, or the case of other godly persons, yet that
which God has done and promised to do unto any believer, may sustain him when
he misseth all comfort or appearance of it; Lord, where are thy former loving
kindnesses unto David? 2. When the believer does miss the comfort which he or
any other has got (...) of God, he should go to the same fountain to have some
new experience thereof, as the Palmists example does teach. 3. The believer
takes Gods part against all doubts, and disappearances of the performing of
his promises, as we see in the Psalmist, who when he is missing Gods former
loving kindness, the continuance whereof was promised and sworn; he asserteth
the truth of the promise, saying, Which thou swarest unto David in thy truth.

From the fourth reason of his hope to have a gracious answer to his prayer,
taken from the reproaching of the enemies, as it is set down, ver. 50, 51.
Learn, 1. Beside inward tentations unto misbelief in the day of trouble, the
Lords people use to meet with the mockings of the wicked, insolently scorning
their faith in God, which as it vexes the godly, so is it taken notice of by
God: Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants. 2. The mocking of Religion
in the day of the Churches calamity, is so much the more a terrible tentation,
as the adversaries who do insult over Religion, are many and powerful to annoy
Gods people, and tread down Religion; Remember the reproach of all the mighty
people. 3. The reproach of Religion and of the godly does lie near, and should
lie near the heart of every lively member of the Church: Remember the reproach
which I do bear in my bosom. 4. Such as do reproach Religion and the godly in
their calamity, are Gods enemies, and against them God is engaged; Remember the
reproaches, wherewith the enemies have reproached, O Lord. 5. The blasphemies
which do strike against Gods promised salvation in Christ, and the progress of
his Kingdom, are of all tentations most heavy, and are resented of God most
deeply; Remember the reproaches, wherewith they have reproached the footsteps
of thine anointed; for as David's posterity and succession went on one
generation after another, so Christ made his approaches nearer to his
incarnation; and when the family of David seemed to grow weak, the godly were
assaulted with fears and doubts about the coming of the Messiah: and the
ungodly mocked the matter of Chris^s coming altogether, and reproached the
promise of his progress.

From the close of the Psalm, ver. 52. Learn, 1. Presuppose a believer should
not find present comfort in his sad condition, yet it is an ease to have
poured out his complaint before the Lord: and this liberty of speech is a gift
worthy of thanksgiving; for, Blessed be the Lord, does the Prophet add, when
he has said all he would say. 2. We should close and leave our prayer before
God in good terms, however he shall answer us, or seem to dispose of matters
toward us: and we should bless him, do what he pleases as the Psalmist does
here: Blessed be the Lord for evermore. 3. The believer may be sure to have his
lawful requests granted unto him, and may (...) to his seal to Gods promises
without fear, as the Psalmist teaches us in his saying, Amen. Yea the more
tentation does drive us unto misbelief, the more should faith look for a
deliverance, and adhere to the truth of Gods Covenant, as here the Prophet does
by doubling his seal, say,

Amen, and Amen.
PSALM. XC. A Prayer of Moses the man of God.
THis Psalm agrees well with the latter end of Moses's life, when he being now
to remove, did present this prayer to God, and delivered it unto the Church,
for their comfort and direction, how to carry themselves toward God in their
short and sorrowful life.

The Psalm may be divided into three parts. In the first, is the Churches
fourfold comfort against temporal troubles and miseries in this world. The
first is taken from the Lords kindness to his people in all ages, ver. 1. The
second is taken from the decree of their election, ver. 2. The third from the
hope of their resurrection, ver. 3. The fourth from the shortness of time unto
it, ver 4. In the second part, the shortness and miseries of life procured by
sin, are lamentably set forth before the Lord, who is full of pity, ver. 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. In the last part are six petitions, some whereof are for
the right use of the shortness and sorrows of this life, and some of them for
a gracious deliverance from them, ver. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

From the Inscription; Learn, 1. A teacher of Gods people should earnestly
intercede by prayer for Gods people, as Moses did; This is a prayer of Moses.
2. He that sits in Moses his chair should be furnished with gifts for the
Ministry, called of God, consecrated unto God in his heart for this purpose,
and altogether set for God in his practice, for so Moses was, A man of God. 3.
As the conscience of being, A man of God, is a singular comfort and
encouragement to a Minister in his lifetime: so is it a singular honor to
him, living and dead, before God and men, to be in effect, A man of God, as
here it is to Moses, who is called, A man of God; ^o his commendation, because
he was faithful in all the house of God.

Ver. 1. LOrd, thou have been our dwelling place in all generations.

The first comfort of the Lords people, against the miseries of this life is,
from the Lords kindness to his people in all ages. Whence learn, 1. There is
no dealing with God in prayer, except we lay hold on the offer of Gods
kindness, according to the Covenant of grace, and do look upon God as gracious
to us in Christ; Therefore here and elsewhere, supplicants do begin with
renewed acts and expressions of saving faith. 2. Gods people in every place and
age, is one incorporation with Gods people in all ages preceding and following
and may lay claim to all the privileges of Gods people before them, as here
the Church in Moses time joyneth it self with all the Lords people in former
times, for the use of succeeding ages which were to come; Lord, thou have been
our dwelling place in all generations. 3. Albeit the Lords people be strangers
in the earth; partly, because they have no certain residence in this world;
partly, because they are evil entertained by men of this world, but specially,
because in their affections they are pilgrims in this world; yet they want not
a resting place, and a dwelling in heaven, even God himself, in whom they dwell
by faith, and find in him rest, and food, and protection, and comfort; yea,
and in his heart they have had a lodging in all generations; Lord, thou have
been our dwelling place in all generations. 4. Troubles and miseries of this
life do make the godly to search out their interest in God, and in another
life, as here and elsewhere we may perceive in the exercise of Gods children:
their straits on earth, do make them seek enlargement in heaven.

Ver. 2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed
the earth and the world: even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

The second comfort of the Believer against the miseries of this short life, is
taken from the decree of their Election, and the eternal Covenant of Redemption
of them settled in the purpose and counsel of the blessed Trinity for their
behoof, wherein it was agreed before the world was, that the Word to be
incarnate, should be the Saviout of the Elect: for here the asserting of the
eternity of God, is with relation to his own chosen people; for, Thou have been
our dwelling place in all generations, and thou art God from everlasting to
everlasting, is in substance thus much. Thou art from everlasting to
everlasting the same unchangeable God in purpose and affection toward us thy
people, and so thou art our God from everlasting, in regard of thy eternal
purpose of love, Electing us; and in regard of thy appointing Redemption for us
by the Redeemer. Whence learn, 1. From Gods good will to us in time, we may
arise to Gods good will to us before time; and from grace showed to us in time,
we may conclude grace and good will purposed toward us, and ordained for us
before time: Thus does the Psalmist teach us to climb; for after he has said,
From generation to generation, thou have been our dwelling place, that is, in
all time past thou have been our God; he subjoyneth, Before the mountains were
brought forth, cre ever thou had formed the earth and the world, thou art
God: That is, the same God unchangeably in thy purpose and love toward us
before time from everlasting. 2. From special love shown to us in time, we
may conclude love toward us, not only before time from everlasting, but also
that it shall continue toward us after time for ever; Even from everlasting to
everlasting thou art God, says he; that is, the same strong God immutable in
thy purpose and love toward us first and last: and indeed faith cannot fix it
self, till by the warrant of Gods Word, and feeling of his gracious working
(...) us in time, it join Gods wo^k of grace, and his purpose of g^ together.
Therefore the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. d^h lead the Believer in Christ, to election
in Christ before the world was, and to predestination unto Adoption by Jesus
Christ, according (...) the good pleasure of his will before the world was,
ver. 3, (...), 5. And 2 Timothy 1. 9. he leads us to a completed Covenant
before the world was made, between God the Father and God the Son, according
whereunto all conditions required of the Redeemer are settled; and all the
Elect, all the redeemed are delivered over to the Son, the Word to be
incarnat^, designed Redeemer; and all saving grace is given over into Christ's
hand, to the behoof of the Elect, to be let forth unto them in due time: for
there it is said, That grace was given to us in Christ Jesus, before the world
began. 3. The nature of God which is to be one and the same, unchangeable from
everlasting to everlasting, is the solid ground of the reasoning of faith after
this manner, as here we are taught; From everlasting to everlasting, thou art
God. 4. The knowledge of Gods eternal goodwill to us, is a sufficient cordial
to soften and sweeten all our grief and affliction in this life: for the very
end why this Doctrine is prefixed unto what is following about temporal misery,
is to comfort the Lords people against all the troubles of this life.

Ver. Thou turnest man to destruction: and say, Return, ye children of men.

A third comfort, is from the resurrection of the dead. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
God does execute the decree, which has appointed all men once to die, yet he
has appointed also a resurrection, whereby he is powerfully to recall and make
return from death all the posterity of Adam; Thou turnest man to destruction:
and so all men must die, and say, Return, ye children of men, and so all
men must rise again. 2. It will cost the Lord but a word to make the dead to
rise again, or to make them that are destroyed, to return again; Thou
say, Return, ye children of men. His Word is already past forth in the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, and is altogether operative, shall prove fully
effectual at length.

Ver. 4. For a thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday, when it is
past: and as a watch in the night.

The fourth comfort, is from the shortness of the time between a man's death
and his returning from it in the Re^urrection, set down by way of answering an
objection, which might be moved concerning the long time since the Resurrection
was promised, till the time that it be really accomplished. Whence learn, 1.
Albeit it may seem a long time between a man's death and his Resurrection, yet
is it before God but a short time; yea and in effect it is nothing in
comparison of eternity: For a thousand years in thy sight is but as yesterdy
when it it is past, and as a watch in the night 2. Except we do reckon time as
God does re^on it, we cannot but be weary and think long, and wonder at the
^elay of the performance of promises, and so to fall in tentation of unbelief,
as we are taught by the obviating of the objection, and comparing of a thousand
years in Gods sight with yesterday when it is past, and with a watch in the
night.

Ver. 5. Thou carriest them away as with a flood, they are as a sleep: in the
morning they are like grass which grows up.

6. In the morning it flourishes, and grows up: in the evening it is cut
dowwn and withers.

In the second part of the Psalm he sets forth the shortness and miseries
of this life; first in general, v. 5, 6. and then the miseries of the people of
Israel in special, to ver. 12. As for the first, he sets forth the mortality
and misery of men under the similitude of men overflowed with a flood, and in
the similitude of a sleed; and of grass or flowers, which flourish in the
daytime, and et even are cut down and wi-her. Whence learn, 1. Mortality is
like a flood growing greater and greater, compassing some sooner, others later,
and at last overflowing all men without exception; as the deluge in Noah's days
once did overflow all the earth, so does death: which similitude gives all men
advertisement in time to prepare for an Ark, that death may not drown both soul
and body: Thou carriest them away as with a flood. 2. This mortal life is like
a sleep, wherein men do dream that they have riches, honor, strength, and
pleasure, but when they do awake, these things will be found but dreams and
shadows; and it is like a sleep, whether we look to the time of abiding in the
world, or to the time between death and resurrection; it is but as a sleep,
wherein time is not observed for shortness: They are (says he) like a sleep.
3. This mortal life is like grass, or flowers, which have small beginnings; at
their best are but we^k, and after a short season do wither; and like grass
and flowers, whereup in the mower falls with his fithe or hook, and cutteth
it down in the vigor of it. They are like grass which grows: in the morning
it flourishes and grows up, in the evening it is cut down and withers.

Ver. 7. For we are consumed by thine anger: and by thy wrath are we troubled.

8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee: our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.

9. For all our days are passed away in thy wrath, we spend our years as a
tale that is told.

10. The days of our years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of
strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for
it is soon cut off, and we fly away.

He descends now to the mortality and calamities of the people of Israel,
which he had observed in his own time; they were consumed in wrath for their
sins, and had their lives cut short and replenished with miseries while they
lasted; whereby he points forth the power of the Lords anger, which few did
consider. Whence learn, 1. Common calamities and worldly miseries may be found
as evidently in Gods visible Church, and among Gods people, as in any
incorporation in the world; for here is the the^ter of Gods judgments as well
as of Gods mercies, and when Gods people do provoke God, his judgments begin
at his own house: We are consumed by thine anger^. The effects of Gods anger
are very terrible, and able to astonish the beholder; By thy wrath are we
troubled. 3. In the time of Gods forbearance usually men's sins do lie hid in
atheism, ignorance, oblivion, and careless security; but Gods judgments do
draw them forth to the light, and do make it appear that God has observed them
all; Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light
of thy countenance. 4. The misbelief and disobedience of Gods visible Church
makes their life both short and miserable, as the experience of the Israelites
does show; For all our days are passed away in thy wrath, we spend our life
like a tale that is told. 5. The more we study to see the length of man's life,
it appears the shorter; the more we look upon man's strength, and beauty, and
glory, we find him the weaker, the vainer, and the naughtier: The days of our
years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of strength they be
fourscore years, yet, etc. 6. If our infancy, and ordinary sicknesses and
casualties of incident griefs and sorrows, sometimes for one cause, and
sometimes for another, be considered, the life of man has little in it, except
trouble and grief; Their strength is labor and sorrrow. 7. If any man seem to
have less trouble and sorrow, or more strength then others, it is nothing to
count upon, the shortness of it makes it to lose worth and estimation; for,
It is soon cut off, and we flee away.

Ver. 11. Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so
is thy wrath.

In the calamities of the Israelites he observes how terrible the Lords wrath
is, which albeit few do consider, yet might men see it in his fearful
threatenings and judgments. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the misery and short life
of sinful man does speak somewhat of the terriblenesse and power of Gods anger,
yet is it taken notice of by few; Who knows the power of thy anger? 2. The
wrath of God may be known by the fear and terror of God, which his severe
justice, almighty power, terrible threatenings, and fearful judgments executed
against sin do teach m^n to know; Even according to thy fear, so is thy
wrath. Seeing men know not the power of Gods wrath till it break forth upon
them, it is wisdom to study his fear, that wrath may be prevented; and to take
the measure of the power of Gods wrath, by measuring his dreadful fear and
terrible terror, and to stand in awe of him in time: Who knows the power of
thine anger? even according thy fear, so is thy wrath.

Ver. 12. So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our heartt unto
wisdom.

In the third part of this Psalm, he puts up six Petitions for the right
use and gracious seasoning of the short and sorrowful life of the Lords people.
The first Petition is for wisdom to provide in time for the remedy of sin and
of everlasting misery, before this short and uncertain life be ended. Whence
learn, 1. Albeit our life be both short, and uncertain how soon it may end, yet
we look upon the indesinitesse of the time of continuance of it, as if the
duration of it were infinite, and our years were innumerable; for, Teach us to
number our days, imports some acknowledgement of this fault. 2. Albeit it be
easy for us to consider how many of our days are already past, and how few
these that are to come must be by course of nature, or may be few in the way of
Gods ordinary providence; yet this lesson, how easy soever, must be taught of
God before we can profitably consider of it; So teach us to number our days, as
we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. 3. The only remedy of sin, and of the
wrath of God, and misery of mortal men for sin, is the wisdom which is taught
of God in the Scripture; to wit, that sinners should seek reconcilia^ion with
God, through the ^acrifice and obedience of Christ, and study to keep
friendship with God by the power of his Spi^; So teach us to number our dayas,
as we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. 4. The right use of the sin, wrath,
and judgments, which we see in our time manifested, is to deal wi^h God by
prayer, that not only he would inform us of our danger and duty, not only
reveal to our minds the mystery of grace and reconciliation, but also that he
would effectually move our will, he^t, and affections by faith which works by
love, to make application of the remedy of those evils to our selv^s: So teach
us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Ver. 13. Return (O LORD) how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy
servants.

The second Petition is, that God would not only remove the tokens of his
displeasure against his people, but also now at length would show himself
reconciled, by changing his dispensation toward them in a course of comfort;
Whence learn, 1. Albeit the Lord do not go away from his people, but ^oth ever
remain with them in some one or other gracious operation; yet in respect of a
comfortable presence he may turn away till his people request him to return, as
here: Return, O Lord. (...). The Lords withdrawing of his comfortable p^esence
from his people, for how short a time soever, seems a long time to us in this
short life; Return, O Lord, how long? 3. Albeit the Lord do not change his
affection and repent like a man, yet he can change his operation like a father,
who commiserates his childs affliction, and goes about to cherish him after
correction^; Let it repent thee concerning thy servants. 4. Albeit we be but
very slight servants, and be fore smitten for our disobedience, yet should we
not cast away our calling, nor suffer our rel^tions unto God to be dissolved,
but should adhere unto them by any means, as here they call themselves still
servants; Let it repent thee concerning thy servants.

Ver. 14. O sati fie us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice, and be glad
in our days.

15. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us: and
the years wherein we have seen evil.

The third Petition is for some spiritual comfort and refreshment to their
spirits, which might keep them in heart and hope of eternal salvatior. Whence
learn, 1. A soul sensible of wrath, has as great hunger for spiritual comfort,
as a ^ished man has for meat; O satisfy us. 2. The renewed intimation of Gods
mercy, pardoning sin* and making clear ou^ ^onciliation, is able to comfort us
in our greatest sorrow; O satisfy us with thy merry. 3. As bodily hunge cannot
suffer delay, so neither can sense of wrath, and desire of^favourable
acceptance long endure the want of consolation; but after a night of trouble
earnestly expects a morning of comfort: O satisfy us early with thy mercy.
4. A poor hungry soul, lying under sense of wrath, will promise to it self
happiness for ever, if it can but once again sinde what it has sometime felt;
the is, one sweet fill of Gods sensible mercy toward it; O satisfy us, that we
may rejoice and be glad all our days. 5. Were ou^ trouble never so great, and
of long continuance, the renewed intimation of Gods reconciliation to us, shall
season and sweeten all our trouble, recompense all our losses, and make our
condition in this short and miserable life tolerable; yea in God very
comfortable: Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted
us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.

Ver. 16. Let thy work appear unto thy servants: and thy glory unto their
children.

The fourth Petition is, that God would continue the work of building and
enlarging of his own Church, and of glorifying himself in their s^ght, and in
the sight of the posterity from generation to generation. Whence learn, 1. The
building, purging, enlarging, propagating of the Church, and manifesting of
Gods care for it, is the Lords own proper work, which he will not leave off,
but albeit he hide his working for a time, yet is he on his work, and his
people should pray for, and may expect the manifestation of it; Let thy work
appear unto thy servants. 2. As it is the glory of the Lord to manifest his
grace an^ mercy toward his people. or visible Church, so the desire of his
people is to have the Lord glorified, no less th^n to have themselves
preserved or comforte^; Let thy work appear to thy servants, and thy glory to
their children. 3. The Church in every age should have a care, that the
posterity may be partakers of the same merciful work of God, which they in
their time have had experience of; and that their children may profit by the
co^ections of their predecessors; Let thy work appear to thy servants, and thy
glory to their children.

Ver. 17. And let the beauty of the LORD our God be upon us, and establish thou
the work of our hands upon us: yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.

In this last verse are the two last heads of his prayer; The first Petition
is, that God would beautify his people with his holy Ordinances, with order,
and unity and peace, with a holy conversation, and the evidences of his
dwelling among them, as his own confederate people, proper subjects of his
Kingdom, and domestics of his own family. Whence learn, 1. As God is the
glory of his own people, in whom is their beauty and ornament, whereby they are
made honorable in the sight of all Nations, as the Bride is made comely by the
attire and ornaments put upon her: so should his people esteem of him, affect
and love him, remember him, and seek their beauty in him: Let the beauty of the
Lord be upon us. 2. Then is the beauty of the Lord upon his people, and seen to
be on them, when they behave themselves as his covenanted people, walking in
faith and obedience before him, and he shows himself their covenanted God,
protecting and blessing them: Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us;
and this Petition was granted all the days of Ioshuah, and of the Elders that
outlived Ioshuah.

The sixth Petition is, that God would bless the endeavors of his people for
promoting of Gods work among them, and for transmitting his Ordinances and his
truth to the posterity. Whence learn, 1. Whosoever do pray for the advancing of
the Lords work in his Church, must resolve not to be idle, but to engage
themselves to endeavor in their places and callings, according to their power,
the promoting of his work, as becomes his servants and instruments: Establish
thou the work of our hands 2. Whosoever go about the building of the Lords
Church, and promoting of Religion, must acknowledge that the success of their
labor depends only upon God, who must be entreated for the blessing:
Establish thou the work of our hands. 3. In respect that our work is so mixed
and defiled with imperfections and sins, that God may justly withdraw himself
from it, we must the more earnestly deal with God, to keep his own hand about
his work, and about our hands in it, as the twice repeating of the Petition
does import; Yea the work of our hands establish thou it.

PSALM. XCI.
ALbeit this Psalm has no inscription nor the name of the penman who did write
it, yet Satan could not deny it to be the Lords Word, for out of this Psalm he
brought one of his darts against our Savior, Matthew. 4. and the Promises which
are made here to the believer, are so much more strongly ours; as Christ head
of all his people, has interest therein as man, and has taken them to him in
our name.

Ver. 1. HE that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty.

The sum of the Psalm is, an encouragement to believe in God, by nine
motives or inducements, most of them being precious Promises, whereunto Christ
our Lo^d has the first right and title; and we only in and through him. The
first motive is, because the believer shall have the warm and comfortable
protection of God Almighty. Whence learn, 1. Trusting in God, is the means of
entertaining of constant conjunction and communion with God; for he that is a
believer, dwells in the secret place of the most High. 2. The unsearcheable
depths of the riches of Gods truth, grace, power, and goodness, and of his
other attributes, whereupon faith does fix it self, are a mystery to the
world, which carnal reason knows not, nor how to make use thereof; and
therefore is well compared to a secret place: He that dwells in the secret
place of the most High. 3. In the most High is whatsoever the Believer stands
in need of, a habitation, well furnished with ease, comfort, peace,
refreshment, protection, and whatsoever else a soul could wish; for, the
secret place of the most High, where the believer may and must dwell, is Gods
truth and love; and unto him that dwells here, is the Promise made. 4. The
Believer is not exempted by his faith from trouble (yea, trouble and exercise
from his enemies he may surely expect) but he is exempted from being taken,
overcome, and destroyed by them: for a refuge, even the secret place of the
most High; here is provided for him. 5. He that betaketh himself unto God for
refuge. and will make his refuge his habitation, shall not be refused lodging,
nor be thrust out when he is entered: He shall abide in the shadow of the
Almighty. 6. The scorching heat of persecution shall not prevail against the
Believer; for Gods omnipotency shall be employed for his protection and
consolation: He shall abide in the shadow of the Almighty.

Ver. 2. I will say of the LORD, He is my refuge, and my fortress, my God, in
him will I trust.

The second motive is the Psalmists example, who in his own experience having
felt the good of trusting in God in hardest straits, does resolve to believe in
him still. Whence learn, 1. He that has experience of the fruit of faith, is
the fittest man to bear witness of it, and most able to speak from his own
persuasion to the persuasion of others; I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge
and my fortress. 2. The duty of the Believer is to go on and grow in faith,
and the right use of his experiences, is the confirmation of him in the faith
of the Covenant, and resolution to grow therein in measure of strength and
sincerity: He is my God, in him will I trust.

Ver. 3. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler: and from
the noisome pestilence.

The third motive to believe in God, is a promise of deliverance out of danger,
which by humane wit could not be eschewed, which he expresses under the
similitude of snares and pestilence, which do overtake a man before he be
aware. Whence learn, 1. A kindly believer should love to have others believing
in God, as he himself does, and should leave nothing undone to persuade others
to believe, as his calling requires: for the example of the Psalmist teaches
us so. 2. There are many tentations, whereby Satan (as a fowler laying snares)
catches poor foolish sinners, and there is much contagion of sin, whereby
albeit men are infected one by another, and many do perish; yet the believer in
God is either preserved from falling into the snare, and from being corrupted
with contagion of others ill speeches and manners, or else he is rid and
delivered out of the danger; Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the
fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. 3. As there are dangers in relation to
our spiritual condition unavoidable, if God do not deliver us; so are there
dangers of plots and conspiracies by wicked enemies in relation to bodily
dangers also, from which the wisdom of believers could not deliver them: but
God has promised a deliverance, or a good escape from them all, so as the
believer shall be no loser; Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the
fowler, etc.

Ver. 4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou
trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

A fourth motive is, a promise of comfortable and sure defense against the
invasion of the enemies, set forth under sundry similitudes usual in Scripture.
Whence learn, 1. The care and watchfulness of God over his own is such, as
neither Nature nor Art can yield sufficient similitudes to express it, as the
borrowing of more similitudes, some from one thing, and some from another, does
here show. The watchfulness of the bird over her young ones, and the care that
a man has in battle to preserve his own body from hurt, are but imperfect
shadows to represent the watching care of God for a believer. 2. As the Lord
descends unto our capacity in such low similitudes of protection and comfort,
so he requires of us, that by those we should ascend in our faith to rely
confidently and lovingly upon him: He shall cover thee with his feather; and
under his wings shall thou trust. 3. That which we must oppose to all perils,
is the Word of God; so long as we keep that, and ward off dar^s and swords by
that means, we shall not be overcome: His truth shall be thy shield and
buckler.

Ver. 5. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night: nor for the arrow
that flees by day:

6. Nor for the Pestilence that walks in darkness: nor for the destruction
that wastes at noone day.

7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but
it shall not come nigh thee.

A fifth motive to believe, is from a more particular promise of safety unto
the believer from all sort of deadly enemies and dangers, wherinto when many do
fall the believer shall stand. Whence learn, 1. The true remedy against
tormenting fear, is faith in God: for many terrible things may befall men, when
they are most secure, like unto those that befall men in the night: but for any
harm which may befall the believer this way, the Lord here wills him to be
nothing afraid: Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night. 2. Many
sudden accidents may befall men when they are most watching, and upon their
guard, but the Lord wills the believer to be confident, that he shall not be
harmed this way: Thou shall not be afraid for the arrow that flees by day. 3.
Many evils are men subject unto, which come upon them they cannot tell how, but
from such evils the Lord assures the believer he shall have no harm; Thou
shall not be afraid of the pestilence which walks in darkness. 4. Men are
subject to many evils which come upon them openly and not unawares, such as are
calamities from enemies and oppressors; the Lord wills the believer to be
confident that he shall not be harmed this way; Thou shall not be afraid for
the destruction which walks at noonday. 5. When trials and tentations come
upon the world to try the children of men, albeit many fall by those
tentations, yet the man who believes in God shall stand: whether the tentation
come upon the left hand, with l^sse appearance of good offered in it; or upon
the right hand, with (...) pretenses of lawfulness and holiness in a sinful
course, whereunto the tentation does drive: albeit a thousand should fall by
the tentation on the one hand, and ten times more on ^he other hand yet the
believer in God, going upon the grounds of Gods Word, shall not fall: those
evils wherein others fall and pe^ish shall not come near him. as to the point
of harming of him, or of destroying of him; A thousand shall fall at thy side,
and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come near thee. 6. The
Lord will not only one way be helpful to the believer, but so many ways as he
can be in danger. as the enumeration of so many sund^y cases, wherein he
promises deliverance, does teach us. 7. The only persons who are hurt by
judgments and tentations, are such unfenced souls as believe not in God, are
not reconciled with him, and stand at a distance opposite to him, as the object
of his wrath, for none have ^ight to the former promises, except the believer
only, as all the text holds forth

Ver. 8. Only with thine eyes shall thou behold, and see the reward of the
wicked.

He answers an objection: It may be said that the former mentioned evils,
tentations and calamities, do come very near unto the godly, for they a^e
ofttimes no less deep in them, then others are. He answers, that the Lord
may well acquaint them with the danger, and with the sense of their own
weakness, but for the point of h^me from those evils, or for the point of
destruction by those evils, which ^s the reward of the wicked; the godly have
no more but a discovery of it, to see it, wherein they might have fallen if God
had not preserved them; and wherein the wicked do fall and perish. Whence
learn, 1. Albeit the same ca^amities ^xternal may befall the believer and the
wicked; yet the close of their course, the reward of their works shall put the
difference: for the godly shall only behold the reward of the wicked. 2. Albeit
the believer may be exercised with the fear of destruction, yet he shall be
free of falling into it; Only with thine eyes shall thou behold and see the
reward of the wicked.

Ver. 9. Because thou have made the LORD, which is my refuge, even the most
High, thy habitation:

10. There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.

A sixth motive to believe in God, is a promise general to be delivered from
all evil, that nothing shall harm him, but all things shall rather work
together for his good. Whence learn, 1. All believers have one object of their
faith, one relief in their troubles, one retreat from the vexations which do
assault them in this world; even God: Thou have made the Lord, who is my
refuge, even the most High thy habitation. 2. One believer may and should
encourage other believers by the same motives whereby he himself is encouraged,
as here; Because thou have made the Lord, who is my refuge, to be thy
habitation: therefore such and such blessings shall come upon thee, says he. 3
The nature of true faith is to make use of God in all conditions; in peace and
war, in prosperity and adversity, as here he is both a refuge and an
habitation. 4. As we have need to have the same promises repeattd unto us, and
inculcated upon us, so slow and dull are we to receive them: so the Lord does
repeat and urge the receiving thereof, with an enlarging and not abridging of
what once he promised, as this general promise teaches: There shall no evil
befall thee, nor any plague come near thy tabernacle, to wit, to harm thee: for
God, who is the believers habitation, in terposeth himself, and turns the
calamity to his good; if it be suffered to come on, that it come not near to
his disadvantage.

Ver. 11. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee: to keep thee in all
thy ways.

12. They shall bear thee up in their hands, l^st thou dash thy foot against a
stone.

A seventh motive to believe in God, is a promise of making Angels wait upon
the believer, and carefully to attend his motions in all his lawful affairs,
lest he should stumble and suffer harm; which promise even Satan does
acknowledge to belong unto Christ, and Christ does own it, being taken in a
right sense, Mat. 4. Whence learn, 1. Such is the indulgent love of God toward
his own, as he does obviate all doubts, which from any hand might hinder them
to believe in him: if the severity and justice of God terrify, the Lord
offers himself as a bird, with stretched out wings to receive the supplicant,
ver. 4 If enemies who are too strong do pursue, the Lord opens his bosom as
a refuge, ver. 3. If his child be assaulted, he becomes a fortress, ver. 3.
If he be hotly pursued and enquired after, the Lord becomes a secret place to
hide his child; If persecution be hot, God gives himself for a shadow: If
Potentates and mighty Rulers turn enemies, the Lord interposeth as the most
High and Almighty Savior. ver. 1. If his adversaries be crafty like fowlers or
hunters, the Lord promises to prevent or break the snares, ver. 3. Whether
evils do come upon the believer night or day, secretly or openly to destroy
him, the Lord preserves his child from destruction; and if stumbling blocks
be laid in his childs way, he has his instruments, his servants, his Angels
prepared to keep the believer that he stumble not: He shall give his Angels
charge over thee; not one Angel only, but all of them, or a number of them. 2.
The Angels are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for every believer:
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. 3.
Promises are not made to foster men in their turning after folly, but to
encourage them in the course of obedience in their several callings; They have
charge to keep thee in all thy ways. 4. Albeit stumbling stones be laid in the
way of Gods child, yet while he behaveth himself as a believer in God, he
shall not stumble; Great peace have they who love Gods law, and nothing shall
stumble them, Psalm. 119 165. They shall bear thee up in their hands, left thou
dash thy foot against a stone.

Ver. 13. Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the
dragon shall thou trample under feet.

The eighth motive to believe, is a promise of victory over every enemy of his
salvation, how fierce, strong and cruel soever they be; how crafty, malicious
and dangerous soever they be: Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder. God
shall put Satan under his feet; tyrants and bloody persecutors, heretics and
seducers shall not prevail over the believer: The young lion and the dragon
shall thou trample under feet.

Ver. 14. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I
will set him on high, because he has known my Name.

15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in
trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him.

16. With long life will I satisfy him: and show him my salvation.

The ninth motive to believe in God, is taken from a bundle of five or six
promises, as spoken immediately by God the Father of his Son Jesus Christ as
man, and of every believer and true member of his mystical body. The first
promise is of delivering of the believer from whatsoever trouble or danger he
can be presupposed to fall into: I will deliver him, says the Lord. 2. For
trial of true faith, the unquestionable property of a believer, and the
evidence of a sound and saving faith in God, is fixed love toward God; because
he has set his love upon me. 3. As there is a because and a therefore in the
process of the law, in concluding death for sin, so there is a because and a
therefore in the process of grace, and of the Gospel, which does reason from
one grace given to infer another grace to be given, even grace for grace: and
such is this here: Because he has set his love on me, I will deliver him. 4.
Sound love to God flows from, and is joined with sound knowledge of God, as
his Majesty is declared unto us in Scripture: The believer who has set his
love upon God, has known my Name, says he. 5. As the believer is highly
privileged and honored of God, being made a son and an heir, and co-heire
with Christ: so shall he be made also more then a Conqueror over all his
enemies, through Christ; I will set him on high, because he has known my Name;
this is the second promise. 6. The third promise is, the Lord will give the
Spirit of supplication to the believer, and also a satisfactory answer unto his
prayer; for as when (...) man gives way to misbelief, he cannot pray any more:
so when he entertaineth faith, it makes him eloquent and instant in prayer,
till he receive what he seeks; He shall call on me, and I will answer him. 7.
As it is not to be expected, that the man who believes in God shall want
trouble, so the believer may be sure, that God who exercises him with trouble,
shall bear him company in his trouble, shall direct him how to behave himself
in it, strengthen, support and comfort him under it, and give him delivery out
of all his trouble, and not only put respect upon him in the sight of them who
did behold his exercise, but also at last shall glorify him before men and
Angels; and this is the fourth promise: I will be with him in trouble, I will
deliver him and honor him. 8. While others do either want submission unto God
at Gods pleasure to live in trouble, or do want submission to die at Gods
pleasure, if they be not in trouble; the believer only has satisfaction in the
length of his life, to die or live as the Lord likes, and he only departs
contentedly, and enters into a life everlasting; With long life will I
satisfy him; and this is the fifth promise. 9. When the believer has received
of God satisfaction in the length of life in this world, God will enter him
into the possession of blessedness, of everlasting salvation in the world to
come; which is worthily called the salvation of God; With long life will I
satisfy him; and what then shall become of him? And I will show him my
salvation; and this is the sixth promise. Above all which promises what can be
more added, to induce a soul to embrace the free offer of grace in Christ,
tendered in the Gospel to sinners, or to move him to entertain friendship with
God, by still believing in him, and resting on him?

PSALM. XCII. A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day.
THis Psalm is entitled, A Psalm for the Sabbath Day; wherein the Church is
stirred up ^o praise God, by sundry reasons, ver. 1, 2, 3. but specially for
these three causes; First, for the great work of creation, sust^ntation and
wise governing of the creatures, ver. 4, 5. The second cause is, for his wisdom
and justice in punishing the wicked, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. The third is, for his
grace and goodness toward believers, ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

From the Inscription; Learn, 1. The Lord has had a special care of
sanctifying the Sabbath, as the appointing of this Psalm for that day may
amongst other things give evidence: A Psalm, a Song for the Sabbath Day. 2.
For the sanctification of the Sabbath, it is not sufficient to rest from our
own bodily, servile, distractive works, bot we must rest and cease from our own
works, and be employed in religious service and worship, and exercises suitable
for that day, whereof singing of Psalms to the honor of God is one; This is a
Song for the Sabbath Day. 3. God has appointed that the Church should have
solemn meetings on the Sabbath, wherein God may be publicly by his own
ordinances honored, and the Congregation edified in their most holy faith: for
this Psalm is given to the Church with this title and Inscription, A Psalm or
Song for the Sabbath Day; to be sung in the Assemblies.

Ver. 1. IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the LORD: and to sing praises
unto thy Name, O most High.

2. To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning; and thy faithfulness
every night.

3. Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the Psaltery: upon the Harp
with a solemn sound.

From the exhortation unto praising of God, and thanksgiving with the reasons
thereof; Learn, 1. Albeit we be daily receiving mo and mo benefits from God,
yet are we flow to acknowledge this, or to give thanks unto him, and have need
to be stirred up to the duty, as this exhortation imports. 2. Not only do we
discharge a piece of our duty in thanksgiving unto God, but we also receive a
new benefit by doing of this duty: It is a good thing* (pleasant to God, and
profitable to us and others) to give thanks unto the Lord. 3. Albeit we cannot
give thanks unto God as we desire, or as he deserves, yet to acknowledge and
confess to God our debt, and what we have received of him, shall be accounted
thanksgiving; for the word in the o^ginal does give ground for this. 4.
Approving of our selves to God in sincerity of affection, when we are about the
Lords praises, is no less profitable to us, then it is pleasant to God, It is
a good thing to sing praises to thy Name, O most High. 5. It is not enough to
praise God in and with the Church publicly assembled; but also it is a duty to
be performed daily by every family and person, according to their place and
power, as fit occasion is offered, morning and evening: It is good to show
forth thy kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night. 6. The
matter of Gods praise and our rejoicing, is chiefly the Lords mercy and truth,
in pitying, and pardoning, and lovingly entreating of sinful men, and
performing the promises of the Covenant to his people, contrary to their
deserving; It is good to show forth thy loving kindness and thy faithfulness.
7. As it is the duty of every one to study to observe and to believe, and to be
sensibly affected with the Lords mercy and truth: so also to express their
belief and sense thereof cheerfully and joyfully, according as the
signification of typical ceremony of musical instruments under the pedagogie
of the Law did require, It is good to show forth thy loving kindness, etc.
upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the Psaltery, upon the Harp, with a
solemn sound.

Ver. 4. For thou, LORD, have made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in
the works of thy hands.

5. O LORD, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.

The Psalmist descends more specially to the works of creation and common
providence, which is the first special matter of Gods praise, and of the
worshippers joy, wherein he sets forth the glory and greatness of Gods
works, and deepnesse of his wisdom and counsel. Whence l^arn, 1. One of the
parts of the well-spending of the Sabbath, is the looking upon, and
conside^ation of the works of creation: I will triumph in the works of thy
hands. 2. The consideration of the Lords works, is a matter full of sweet
refreshment and joy, when God blesses our meditation; which blessing as we
should call and look for at his hands, so should we acknowledge it thankfully,
when we find it bestowed on us, and lift up our hearts in his way, being so
encouraged: Lord, thou have made me glad by thy works, I will triumph in the
work of thy hands. All the works of the Lord in their own order and degree,
even the least of them, do bear the Impression of wonderful greatness, and
shall be acknowledged to be such by the man that sees them rightly: O Lord,
how great are thy works. 4. There is as great wisdom of God in ruling and
disposing of the creatures, as there is power in making of them; and as the
power in making is wonderful great, so is his wisdom also in governing them
passing deep, and thy thoughts are very deep.

Ver. 6. A brutish man knows not: neither does a fool understand this.

7. When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity
do flourish: it is, that they shall be destroyed for ever.

8. But thou, LORD, art most High for evermore.

9. For lo, thine enemies, O LORD, for lo thine enemies shall perish: all the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered.

The second special matter of Gods praise, is his just and wise providence in
dealing with the wicked, whom the Lord punishes and overturneth by their
temporal prosperity which they seek so much after, as if it were their
happiness, Whence learn, 1. Albeit wicked men do seem rational, yet are they
indeed beastly slaves to their sensual lusts, and therefore are called here
brutish men, back and belly is that which they most care for: and albeit they
do seem very wise, yet are they indeed fools, because they do choose
temporal things rather then everlasting; and lose themselves in seeking
worldly gain, and therefore are called here fools. The wicked may for a time
spring up, flourish in worldly prosperity, as here is presupposed, but this
springing up and flourishing is of short continuance, and subject to sudden
alteration: They spring up, and flourish as the grass. 3. The end of the
temporal prosperity of the ungodly, is perdition: They shall be destroyed for
ever: yea, their very prosperity (by its somenting their sinful lusts, and
hardening their hearts against Gods Word) becomes a means to draw on their
everlasting perdition, and that in Gods righteous judgment against them, who
have preferred earth to heaven, their bodily lusts unto the salvation of their
souls and bodies; for when the wicked spring up as the grass, and when all the
workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.
4. The ungo^ly are so besotted with the love of the world, and possession of
things temporal, that they neither do know, nor will know, nor can know this
mystery; except God supernaturally do reveal it to them, and give them
spiritual wisdom: A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand
this. 5. Albeit the wicked be in power and high place, there be little
appearance of their overthrow, yet God is higher then they, and so able
according to his place to take order with them: and albeit they seem to live
long, yet God endu^ for ever, and so able to cut them off when he pleases, and
to perpetuate their torment for ever: But thou, Lord, art most high for
evermore. 6. To acknowledge that God is supreme and everlasting Judge and Ruler
of all things, is a sufficient ground to quiet our minds, however matters see^
to go: for because he is the Sovereigne Ruler of all the world, and the
eternal God, he cannot but govern all things well and wisely; and will not
fail to do as he has said in his Word, to punish the wicked, how great soever
prosperity he grant them for a time: for the believer does from this doctrine
draw light to show him the mystery of the perdition of the wicked, by the
means of their prosperity, which the foolish and wicked man cannot consider;
But thou, Lord, art most high for evermore: for lo, thine enemies, O Lord,
shall perish. 7. Workers of iniquity, pretend what they please, are Gods
enemies, and seeing they are Gods enemies, they cannot but perish: for lo,
thine enemies, O Lord, and the second time, for lo, thine enemies shall perish.
8. The wicked who now combine together, shall be separated from God, and from
the society of the blessed company of the righteous, and shall not be able to
help one another in the day that God shall bring judgment upon them: All the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered; and this is another part of the right
spending of the Sabbath, to learn this lesson well.

Ver. 10. But my horn shall thou exalt like the horn of an unicorne: I shall
be anointed with fresh oil.

11. Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears shall
hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against me.

The third special reason and matter of ^ods praise, is his grace and
goodness to believers, wherein the P^almist does speak first with relation to
his own particular, ver. 10, 11. And then in general of all the godly, from
what he believes toward himself, as serving to teach every one to make
application of the doctrine to their own use. Learn, 1. The same supremacy of
God over all creatures, which gives assurance of the over^row of the wicked,
gives also assurance of the welfare and felicity of the Godly; ^or from ver.
8. he deduceth this also, But my horn shall thou exalt. 2. The best condition
of the godly, is not in what they are for the present, but in what they shall
be hereafter; for albeit they be now under, they shall have dominion at length,
expressed here under the terms of exalting the borne, which is the emblem of
dignity and power and victory; My horn shall thou exalt like the horn of the
unicorne 3 That general doctrine may be comfortable, it must be applied, as
the ^ists example does teach here. 4. Whatsoever weakness ^ef the godly do
labor under for a while, they shall have in due time festival refreshment,
comfort and encouragement from Gods Spirit and powerful providence, and that
renewed unto them from time to time as need requires; I shall be anointed with
oil, with fresh oil. 5. Whatsoever might be the Psalmists persuasion of
victory over his par^icular enemies; yet as a type of Christ, and as one of the
Believers having interest in Christ, and in all blessings purchased by him, he
might by faith see and hear in the Lords Word the ovethrow of all the enemies
of his welfare, and so may every believe: be persuaded; Mine eye also shall see
my desire upon mine enemies; and mine cares shall bear my desire of the wicked
that rise up against me.

Ver. 12. The righteous shall flourish like the Palmtree: he shall grow like a
Cedar in Lebanon.

13. Those that be planted in the house of the LORD, shall flourish in the
Courts of our God.

14. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing.

15. To show that the LORD is upright, he is my rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him.

From the Lords goodness to all believers in general; Learn, 1. The promises
and comforts given to any one believer, are not proper to him only, but common
to all believers; and the man who can apply these promises to himself, is the
fittest man to bear witness of the interest which others have therein: for
what the Psalmist has applied to himself, he extends to all in substance;
The righteo^s shall flourish. 2. The godly shall get up their head,
notwithstanding of whatsoever weight of troubles laid upon them, and they shall
constantly grow up to the full stature of perfection, whatsoever opposition be
made; They shall flourish like the Palm Tree, he shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon. 3. The Lords children are like trees which do not grow in every soil,
are not nourished with every moisture; the place of their planting, growth and
flourishing, is the house of the Lord, where the Word and Spirit of the Lord
joined with the holy ordinances may be had for food: They are planted in the
house of the Lord, and fl^rish in the Courts of our God. 4. Not every barren
tree or weed, not every one who is in the visible Court of Gods Church does
grow and flourish; or is made partaker of the spiritual grace and blessing of
the ordinances, but only planted ones, that is, such plants as the heavenly
Father has planted: for to those only, who by Covenant have embraced God, is
the promise made; Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall
flourish in the Courts of our God. 5. True believers shall still persevere, and
the decay of the outward man shall not hinder the renewing of their inward man
day by day; and their last works shall be better then their first; They shall
still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing. 6. The
end of the Lords destroying of the wicked, and of his blessing of the true
believer with the growth of grace, and perseverance to the end, is the glory of
Gods righteousness, singleness in Covenant-making, and of his constant
affection to uprightness; for these threatenings and promises shall be made
good, To show that the Lord is upright. 7. Whosoever neglect to give glory unto
God, the believer will not fail to lay his own weight upon God, and build all
his felicity on him, being assured that he will neither flee from, nor fail
the godly; He is my rock. 8. Let the Lord do what he pleases, let the wicked
prosper for a while, and the godly be troubled for a while, yet God is wise,
and just, and holy: and that man has profited well in the school of God, who
give^h this glory unto God constantly, as the Ps^lmist does here; He is my
rock, and there it no unrighteousness in him.

PSALM. XCIII.
IN this Psalm for the comfort of Gods people, against the multitude and power
of their enemies, and the greatness of Kings and Potentates in the world, who
often times are like to overflow, devour and drown the Church, the glory of the
Lord is described, in whom is the Churches defense, comfort and victory. For
this end; f^st, the praises of God for the Churches comfort are set down
absolutely, ver. 1, 2. Then the opposition of the enemies of the Church is
compared to the growing flood or raging sea, ver 3. And thirdly, the prai^s of
God are set down in opposition to their power, ver. 4, 5. with the use of this
doctrine, ver. 7.

Ver. 1. THE LORD reigns, he is clothed with Majesty: the LORD is clothed
with strength, wherewith he has girded himself: the world also is
established, that it cannot be moved.

2. Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.

From the praises of God absolutely set down for the comfort of the Church in
all respects, and for strengthening of their faith, specially against all her
enemies: Learn, 1. Howsoever matters concerning the Church or any member
thereof shall go; whatsoever he be that has power for troubling of the Church,
God is he who is great Governor of all; and this ^s one ground, of confidence
and comfort to the Lords people; The Lord reigns. 2. The outward splendour of
ear^ly Kings and Potenta^s in the world, opposite to Christ's Kingdom, is no
small tentatio^ to Gods people, but the believer must oppose unto this the
g^orious government of God; He is clo^thed with Majesty. 3 How strong soever
the adverse powers of the world do see^, it must not terrify the believer in
following the Lords cause, b^ his st^ength must be opposed thereun^o, and that
so much the more comfortably, as Gods strength is not borrowed from ^y, as the
strength of the creature is; The Lord is cl^thed with strength, wherewith he
^th girded himself. 4. The (...) of the constant guiding of the world, shows
the power and wisdom of God, employed much more in settling the work of his
Church, for whose cause the world was made, and is upheld and est^blished; The
world also is established, that it cannot be moved. 5 The Lords Kingdom in his
Ch^h is not like the new upsta^ts in this world, which are of short standing
and unstable. If any King be kind to his Church, his people have reason to
thank God, but they must not lean to such a King; his ^eign shall be but short,
and if any King be froward and oppose himself to the Church; we must not be too
much feared for him, because his Kingdom is but lately begun, and is of short
continuance: but the Kingdom of the Lord is an ancient Kingdom and well settled;
Thy throne is established of old. 6. The eternity of God is the ground of the
immutability of his Kingdom, and of the perpetual comfort of the Church against
all opposers; Thou art from everlasting.

Ver. 3. The floods have lifted up, O LORD: the floods have lifted up their
voice: the floods lift up their waves.

In the second pl^ce, is the tentation of the Church; they are like to be ^ve
flowed as with a deluge, by the multitude of powerful enemies, whereof the
Church complains unto God. Whence learn, 1. It is no wonder to see the world
rising up tumultuously to overthrow the Church, and as it were a deluge coming
upon them to drown and devour all: no wonder to hear the enemies threatening
destruction to the Church, like to the noise of waters after rain coming down
the mountains upon them, which are not able to flee; The floods have lifted up,
the floods have lifted up their voice; and the third time, the flood^ lift up
their waves. 2. The best way to encounter threatenings and fears is, to oppose
God unto them; and to lay them forth before the Lord, that he may answer them,
as here the Psalmist does; The floods have lifted up O Lord, says he, etc.

Ver. 4. The LORD on high is mightier then the noise of many waters: yea then
the mighty waves of the sea.

In the third place, he sets down the power of God, in opposition to all the
b^ags, and malice, and power of the enemies, as very far above the power of
the enemies, and more mighty for the defense of the Church, then the enemy is
powerful to oppose it. Whence learn, 1. Heavenly help and comfort from above,
is only able to quiet our minds in time of persecution against the fears of
enemies here beneath: The Lord on high is here opposed to the roaring of the
floods and waters dashing against the Church. 2. We can neither glorify God,
nor comfort our selves against the power of the enemies of the Church, except
we lift up the Lords power above them all; The Lord on high is mightier then
the noise of many waters. 3. The Lord is above all terrible things, to bridle
them at his pleasure, and by his power able to terrify them that terrify his
Church; The Lord is mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the mighty
waves of the sea.

Ver. 5. Thy Testim^nies are very sure: holiness becomes thine house, O LORD,
for ever.

The uses of this doctrine concerning the Lords power, and good will to defend
his Church, are two: the one is, that as the Word of the Lord is, sure and true
in it self, so we should acknowledge it to be sure, and should set to our seal
unto it, as the Psalmist does here; Thy testimonies are very sure. The other
use is, that such as love to have the benefit of the protection which is
promised here, should labor to be holy. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever is said in
the Scripture, needs no probation; for it is the deposition of God, declaring
truth in every thing which it determines; therefore are his promises called
here, His testimonies. 2. By giving credit to the truth of the Scriptures, or
to the Lords testimony expressed therein, no man can be deceived: for when we
have his Word, our minds may be quieted and at rest; Thy testimonies are very
sure. 3. The honor, strength and happiness of the Lords people is, that they
are the Lords habitation and place of residence, dedicated and consecrated unto
him; Holiness becomes thine house: that is, thy Church and people, whereof the
Temple was only a shadow. 4 God will be sanctified of all that draw near unto
him; and whosoever do love to enjoy the preservation and privileges promised
to the Church, must study for holiness, which is the duty of the members of
the Church also; Holiness becomes thy house 5 The dignity, duty and
privileges of Gods people, and especially his of consecration, sanctification
in affection and carriage, and vindication from sin and misery, do not belong
unto any one time or age, but are perpetual, belonging to all such as study to
be approved unto God, protected, and made blessed by God, in all times and
ages, in all places and company all the days of their life; For holiness
becomes thine house for evermore.

PSALM. XCIV.
THis Psalm is a prayer and a complaint of the Church unto God in the time of
her oppression by intestine enemies, in special by unjust and cruel Rulers,
whereunto sundry grounds of comfort to the godly in this hard condition are
subjoyned. The prayer and complaint reach unto ver. 8. The grounds of comfort
are four; the first is, the consideration of Gods wisdom in the permission of
this sore trouble of his people, with a check unto the oppressors for their
Atheism, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11. The second is, the consideration of the profit
which Gods people shall have by this exercise, ver. 12, 13. The third is, from
a promise that God shall change the face of affairs to the joy of the godly,
ver. 14, 15. The fourth is, from the experience which the Psalmist had of GODS
helping of him in this case, set down at large to the end of the Psalm.

Ver. 1. O LORD God, to whom vengeance belongs: O God, to whom vengeance
belongs, show thy self.

2. Lift up thy self, thou Judge of the earth, render a reward to the proud.

In the prayer, the Church requesteth the Lord to be avenged on intestine
enemies, her proud oppressors. Whence learn, 1. The Lords people are subject
to trouble and oppression, as from foreign, so also from intestine enemies,
as bypast experience shows, and this Psalm presupposes, being set forth
for her comfort in such cases in time to come. 2. The Lords people may find as
bitter affliction from domestic enemies, as from foreign, as the doubling of
the prayer unto God the Avenger, to rise and take order with their oppressors,
does import. 3. God will not fail to be avenged on the enemies of his people^
for He is the Lord God to whom vengeance belongs. 4. Albeit for a while the
Lord suffer the troublers of his people to go on in their persecution, yet he
will show himself a righteous Judge in due time: O God, to whom vengeance
belongs, show thy self. 5. The Lord will sometime, as it were, hide himself,
and not appear in the execution of his judgments against wicked oppressors,
till his people come crying unto him for justice, as is imported in this
prayer; ^ift up thy self, thou Judge of the earth. 6. The Lords people are not
troubled by humble souls, sensible of their own sinfulness and frailty; but
by those who little know how it fares with the Lords hidden ones, and afflicted
children, for the oppressors are here called the proud. 7. The Lord will give
the proud oppressors of his people a meeting, and grieve them as they have
grieved his Saints; Render a reward to the proud. 8. When the cause is not our
private quarrel, but concerns God in his glory, and the Church in her
safety: such complaints as are here, are lawful; for this Psalm is put in the
Churches hand in such cases.

Ver. 8 LORD, how long shall the wicked? how long shall the wicked triumph?

4. How long shall they utter, and speak hard things? and all the workers of
iniquity boast themselves.

The Psalmist complains; first, of the long continuance of the insolent
triumphing and boasting of these intestine enemies. Whence learn, 1. When the
wicked go away unpunished, they think their cause right; and the cause of the
godly, who lie under their feet, to be wrong; and thereupon do insult over the
godly, and boast of their purpose to do them more and more mischief: for here,
They triumph, they utter, and speak bard things, they boast themselves. 2. The
Lord may delay execution of judgment on the wicked, so long as his children
may begin to wonder how his justice can endure it: Lord, how long shall the
wicked? how long shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they utter, and speak
hard things? 3. When the godly are borne down by oppressors being in power,
all the ungodly of all ranks become insolently bold also against them: How long
shall the workers of iniquity boast themselves? 4. As the injuries done to the
godly, do force the godly to complain; so the working of iniquity by
persecutours, provokes God to punish their oppressors: This the Psalmist
holds forth, when he give^h the adversary this description; How long shall
the wicked? how long shall the wicked triumph? and all the workers of iniquity
boast themselves?

Ver. 5. They break in pieces thy people, O LORD: and afflict thine heritage.

6. They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.

7. Yet they say, The LORD shall not see: neither shall the God of Jacob regard
it.

The wickedness of the oppressors is here described more particularly, by
their cruelty against such as humanity would spare; such as are the Lords
harmless people, the widow, fatherless, and stranger, whom the oppressors
abuse without all fear of GOD, who does behold them. Whence learn, 1, When
wicked men, haters of piety within the Church, get power in their hand, they
will be more cruel enemies then men use to be, who have only humanity and
civility, and want profession of Religion; They break in pieces thy people, O
LORD: and afflict thine heritage. They slay the widow and the stranger, and
murder the fatherless. 2. The more relations a people has unto God, it is the
more wickedness to oppress them, and the more dangerous for the oppressors:
for they have an owner which others have not, even the Lord; They break in
pieces thy people, and afflict thine heritage. 3 It is not profession, but
practice which witnesses what impression the Deity has upon men's spirits:
oppression of such as God has promised to protect, speaks blasphemy of God
in effect; They say, The Lord shall not see. 4. Oppression of the just does
cauterize the conscience, ex^inguish the sense of a Deity, and makes the
oppressor secure and fearlesse of judgment; Yet they say, The Lord shall not
see: neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.

Ver. 8. Understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will ye
be wise?

9. He that planted the ear shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall
he not see?

10. He that chastises the heathens, shall not he correct? he that teaches
man knowledge, shall not he know?

11 The LORD knows the thoughts of man: that they are vanity.

By way of rebuking the Atheism of the oppressor, verse. 8. he gives the
first ground of comfort unto the godly from the attributes of God, as Gods
wisdom, ver. 9. and from his justice against ^ffenders, and from his care of
instructing his people to be wise by all means, ver. 10. and from his
disestimation of men's vain thoughts, ver. 11. Whence learn, 1. The wisdom of
wicked oppressors is brutish folly, however they themselves or others do
esteem of them: and whatsoever high thoughts the wicked have of themselves, or
others have of them for their high place; yet they are notwithstanding all
their honor. nothing in Gods estimation, but as the meanest of the people;
yea, as the beasts that perish: understand ye brutish among the people. 2. The
wicked within the visible Church have this advantage over those that are
without, that in Gods longsuffering they have time to repent, and admonition to
be wise for gaining of their souls, or clearing of Gods justice in their
condemnation: for here they are spoken to; Ye fools, when will ye be ^ise? 3.
The knowledge which wicked men do seem to have, or pretend to have of God, is
nothing but a base conceit of God, as if he were a dead Idol, which neither
hears nor sees: for this the Psalmists instruction given to them does
impo^t; He that planted the care, shall he not hear? 4. Beside what the Word
does teach of God, his Works also do teach convincingly what he is; He that
planted the care, shall he not he^r? he the formed the eye, shall he not see?
5. ^he Lord rules among the Heathen, and chastises them when they sin against
the law written in their hearts: He chastises the heathen. 6 The judgments
which the Lord executes among the H^then, is a sufficient evidence of his
purpose to execute judgment on oppressors within the visible Church, which
draws much rea^er unto him; He that chastises the heathen shall ^e not
correct? 7. The diverse measures of wit, learning, prudence, and wis^ome, which
God does bestow upon men, is sufficient to prove how incomprehensible his own
f^tain-wisdome is: He that teaches man knowledge, shall he not know? 8. It is
a matter of great consolation to the godly in their oppression, to know that
their oppressors are fools; and that God in his wisdom is overruling all
confusions. and leading them and their thoughts unto wise ends, as ^ere the
Psalmist (...) the Church; The Lord know^th the thoughts of man. 9. The enemies
of godliness, and persecuters of the godly, are at a ^hreefold di^advantage.
First, they do not put God upon their couns^l, and yet he knows their
thoughts. Next, They hope to make their own standing fast, and herein they are
disappointed Thirdly, They think that they are able to suppress piety, and
that by this means they shall establish themselves; and here also are they
fools, and do deceive themselves; The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that
they are vanity. And this is the first consolation of the godly oppressed.

Ver. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O LORD: and teach him out
of thy law:

13. That thou may give him rest from the days of adversity: until the pit
be dug for the wicked.

The second consolation is, from the benefit which comes to the godly by their
exercise under the cross: their temporal trouble serves to prepare them for
everlasting ^est. When^e learn, 1. The persecution of the godly by the wicked,
must be expounded, as it is indeed, the Lords chastening of the godly by such a
rod. This trouble whereof they complain here is called, The Lords chastening.
2. Suffering for righteousness is no token of Gods displeasure against a man,
nor part of his misery, if it be well considered; for, Blessed is the man whom
thou chastenest, O Lord. 3. The exposition of a man's exercise, and the meaning
of the rod must be taken from Gods Word, and God only can effectually teach men
to carry themselves in trouble holily and righteously in all patience; Blessed
is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord: and teach him out of thy law: 4.
When God teaches his child by his Word, to possess his soul in patience
under the cross, then does he also give him a sort of deliverance from the
trouble; yea, the Lord chastising of his own, and his teaching them out of his
law to make the right use of it, is the means whereby he does save his own,
that they perish not with the world in his wrath; Whom thou chastenest, and
teach out of thy law: That thou may give him rest from the days of
adversity. 5. As condemned men are suffered to live till their gallows and
grave be made ready, that after their execution they may be thrust into it; so
are wicked men suffered to live till they fill the cup of their iniquity, and
till God have filled the cup of his wrath for them: and this is the termeday of
the Saints patience; That thou may give him rest, until the pit be dug
fvr the wicked.

Ver. 14. For the LORD will not cast off his people: neither will he forsake
his inheritance.

15. But judgment shall return unto righteousness, and all the upright in
heart shall follow it.

The third consolation is, that the Lords people shall not be always under the
feet of oppressors: but because the Lord will not forsake his people;
therefore such a change of affai^es shall come, as the godly shall have comfort
and encouragemen^ from authority, which shall countenance and encourage them
unto righteousness and piety. Whence learn, 1. A^beit men do oft-times cast
off Gods people as unworthy to be members either of Church or of any civil
incorporation, yet God will not c^st them off; The Lord will not cast off his
people. 2. Albeit the Lord may seem for a while to hide himself from his
people, when he suffers the wicked to persecute and oppress them; yet
because of their relation to him as his people, and for his interest in them,
as his own inheritance, he will not suffer himself to be be^eft of them; He
will not cast off his people: neither will be forsake his inheritance. 3. It
comes to pass sundry times, that righteousness and judgment are parted
asunder for a while; partly by earthly Judges, refusing to do justice and
judgment for Gods people: and partly by the righteous Judge of the world his
suspending for a time to manifest his judgment for the godly, and against
their oppressors; and that for his own wise and holy reasons. This was the
case of the godly in this Psalm, who were waiting for the returning of
judgment unto righteousness. 4. Righteousness, and righteous judgment
executed in favor of it, shall not long be separated: for God shall either
raise up righteous Judges to savor righteousness, or he shall make his
righteous judgments testisie for the godly, and against their oppressors, or
he shall do both these, for God will not forsake his people, but judgment
shall return to righteousness. 5. When the Lord makes Judges and Courts of
justice to favor righteousness, then the righteous have a banner li^ted up
for them, to gather them together again, who before we^e scattered in
persecution; to encourage and countenance them in their godliness, and
righteous w^yes; Judgment shall return to righteousness, and all the upright
in heart shall follow it.

Ver. 16. Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? or who will stand up
for me against the workers of iniquity?

The fourth consolation is from the example and experience of the Psalmist, who
in his righteous cause sought assistance from men in a lawful way, when he was
oppressed, ver. ^6. but found none to help him, except God only, who was his
supporter and comforter, ver. 17. which he thankfully acknowledges, and
praises God for it, ver. 18, 19. believing that as God was displeased with
unrighteous Judges, and their cruelty against the righteous, ver. 20, 21. so he
would certainly defend him against their oppression, ver. 22. and cut them off,
ver. 23. and this his experience and example he propounds to the Church, both
to comfort them in their oppression, and to direct them in their behavior,
till the relief should come.

From his seeking assistance against oppression; Learn, 1. There is a lawful
defense of the godly, while they are oppressed by their superiors, which is no
ways injurious to authority, such as is to bear witness for the godly, to
speak and make request unto the Rulers for them, as Jonathan did for David, and
Ebedmelch did for Jeremy, to countenance and assist them in their appearances
for defense of the truth, as Paul's companions should have done, when he was
brought before Nero, and such as here was sought after by the Psalmist; Who
will rise up for me against the evil doers? who will stand up for me against
the workers of iniquity. 2. When the godly suffer injury by their own Rules,
who should maintain them, few or none possibly will be found to countenance
them in their righteous cause; for this saying, Who will arise for me? does
show that none did offer themselves: and he knew none, when he thus did miss
all help. 3. Before the godly complain of wrongs done to them by their
superiors, they should be first sure that they have done no wrong, or any
thing which Rulers may justly punish, and that their Rulers are not only
injurious to them in a particular, but evil doers also, and open enemies to
equity; Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? or who will stand up
for me against the workers of iniquity? 4. Rulers should be wary that they
force not the righteous to complain to God and man of them; for if they do, the
oppressed may readily fell upon the Psalmists outery, and that is not safe for
the Magistrate, that any should have cause to cry, Who will rise up for me
against the evil doers?

Ver. 17. Unless the LORD had been my help: my soul had almost dwelt in
silence.

He shows what success his seeking of help from men had, and that was none
at all; for if God had not helped him, he should have perished before help had
been given to him from men. Whence learn, 1. Whosoever do engage in any cause,
were it never so just, with confidence in man, or with hopes to carry it on and
go through with it by man's assistance, need not wonder if they be disappointed;
Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence. 2.
Whatsoever lawful means the righteous man does use for his own relief, they
may fail, if he lean to them, and not to God only: but if he rely upon the
Lord, he shall be relieved: Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had
almost dwelt in silence.

Ver. 18. When I said, My foot slippeth: thy mercy, O LORD, held me up.

He shows how he received help of God, to wit, by acknowledging unto God the
danger he was in, and his own weakness to relieve himself, whereby he found
support from the Lords mercy. Whence learn, 1. Such as are put upon the trial
of their faith and obedience to God by persecution, are in danger either to
fall into sin or present trouble, yea possibly also to lose their life, like
unto men driven unto the edge of a steepdown place, as the similitude of my
foot slippeth, does import. 2. In time of trial and tentation, as ordinarily
God makes men's own wisdom, courage, and strength fail them, that they may
distrust themselves and come to him: so should they acknowledge their own
weakness, and lay it out with the danger they are in before God: I said, My
foot slippeth. 3. The sense of our own weakness presented to God in prayer, is
a forerunner of Gods relief coming to us: When I said, My foot slippeth, thy
mercy held me up. 4. As it is our duty to acknowledge Gods power and mercy in
our supplications; so also it is our duty to glorify the mercy of God afte^ the
self experience of it; Thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.

Ver. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts: within me thy comforts delight my
soul.

He sets down here a further benefit of his faith in God; to wit, that by
what he saw in God, he found comfort and joy in all his perplexities. Whence
learn, 1. In the time of danger, or of narrow trial, many questions and
doubts, and discourses of mind use to arise, which did not appear in time of
ease, and these multiplied thoughts do breed perplexity, anxiety and grief,
which call for comfort, as the experience of the Psalmist does teach; In the
multiude of my thoughts within me, etc. 2. No ease for a perplexed soul till
it go to God in Christ, the resting stone in Sion: and in him support is to be
found under burdens, and comfort against whatsoever cause of grief; yes, and
more also, joy and delight swallowing up all grievances, (...) the Psalmist by
experience did find usually. In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy
comforts delight my soul; now Gods comforts are Gospel comforts.

Ver. 20. Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee: which frames
mischief by a law?

21. They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous: and
condemn the innocent blood.

He shows what use he made of the oppressors wickedness for supporting of
his own faith; to wit, that he was persuaded that God allowed not their
mischievous courses, howsoever they pretended to do what they did by a Law;
because not the good of the subject, but the overthrow of the godly was
intended by them. Whence learn, 1. The seat of Justice within the visible
Church, may possibly turn enemies to piety and righteousness, and to those
that follow Gods Word; In which case, the grief, tentation, wrestling and trial
of the godly, is not small, (...) the Psalmists experience does teach us, who
here comes to God with a question; Shall the throne of iniquity have
fellowship with thee? 2. As the Thrones of Justice are honorable, are
countenanced and protected of God, when they decree and execute righteousness;
so they lose their reputation, and are de^uded of Gods approbation, comfort,
and defense, when they decree and execute iniquity; Shall the throne of
iniquity have fellowship with thee? 3. Albeit wicked men ofttimes love to have
the appearance and shadow of equiry, yet unrighteousness, impiety, oppression
is not the more justifiable, that it be covered with the authority of a law,
but rather God will abhorte that wickedness which is enjoined by a law, so
much the more as it has pretense of law: Shall the throne of iniquity have
fellowship with thee, that forgeth mischief by a Law? 4. The iniquity of
persecutors is the matter of confidence for the oppressed; for if our
adversaries be against God, and against us also, then have we fellowship with
God in a common cause; Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee?
says he. 5. When mischief is enacted by Law, then shortly may the godly be
pannelled as criminally guilty, and they who allow the Law, shall be found
ready to sit upon Assizes to condemn the righteous, as the experience of the
Psalmist does show: They gather themselves together against the soul of the
righteous, and condemn the innocent blood.

Ver. 22. But the LORD is my defense: and God is the rock of my refuge.

23. And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in
their own wickedness: yea, the LORD our God shall cut them off.

From this consideration he draws two conclusions, one assuring him of his
own protection, ver. 22. another assuring him of the destruction of the
adversary, ver. 23. Whence learn, 1. As nothing save faith in God can uphold a
man in time of persecution: so by persecution and trouble, God uses to cause
his own to make use of faith, and to draw nearer hand unto him, as the Psalmist
did find by experience, saying, But God is my defense. 2. It is needful that
he who would have Gods help and protection in a particular good cause, should
see that the reconciliation of his person be solidly grounded on the Covenant
of Gods grace: My God is the rock of my refuge. 3. The godly may from Gods Word
give out damnatory decrees against their persecutors, which surely shall he
executed; as here thrice destruction is pronounced by the Psalmist against the
oppressors. 4. The destruction intended against the godly by their oppressors,
is as ready ^s any thing to be the trap to take themselves in; God shall bring
upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut thent often in their own wickedness.
5 How little appearance soever there be of the vengeance of God upon wicked
Rulers abusing their power against the godly for their righteousness and
piety, yet the overthrow of them must not be doubted of, because of the
Covenant past between God and his servants, who serve him in suffering for
righteousness; for the repeating of the sentence of destruction the third time
against such oppressors, does teach so much: Yea, the Lord our God shall cut
them off.

PSALM. XCV.
THis Psalm is applied to Christ by the Apostle, Heb. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Whereof there are two parts. In the first, is an exhortation to worship God in
Christ, or Christ God with the Father and holy Spirit, dwelling among them in
the Temple, and representing unto them his future incarnation, and the
execution of his offices in types and figures. The arguments of pralsing and
worshipping of him are five. The first, because he is the rock of our salvation,
ver. 1, 2. The second, because of his greatness, ver. 3. The third, for his
power, ver. 4. The fourth, because he created all things, and us his people,
ver. 5, 6. The fifth, because he is our covenanted God and Pastor, ver, 7. In
the latter part of the Psalm is another exhortation unto the visible Church, to
evidence their obedience of says, and not to harden their heart in the time of
Gods dealing with them by his Word, as their fathers did, who perished in the
wilderness for their provocation, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Ver. 1. O Come let us sing unto the LORD: let us make a joyful noise to the
Rock of our salvation.

2. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and make a joyful noise
unto him with Psalms.

From the first exhortation unto a cheerful praising and worshipping of God,
manifesting himself in Christ to his Church, and unto joyful thanksgiving for
salvation offered, and granted to us in him, which is the first reason to move
them to the duty; Learn, 1. As the necessity and acceptablenesse of the duty of
praising God, and thanksgiving unto him, is very remarkable; so is our
unreadinesse unto the duty, and unchearfulnesse in it observable also: for the
frequent and pressing exhortations thereunto do intimate so much unto us: O
come, let us sing unto the Lord; let us make a noise, let us come before him.
2. Every one, but specially the Lords Ministers, should stir up their people
and others also to this duty, to discharge it not only in secret, but also
publicly in their Congregations, and that with cheerfulness, with heart and
voice, whatsoever shall be their private grievances and burdens; Let us come
before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise unto him with
Psalms. 3. Whatsoever evil or grief do trouble us; there is reason of joy and
praise and thanks, when we look to Jesus Christ and his benefits: Make a joyful
noise unto the Rock of our salvation. From him is our full deliverance, and
upon him lies our victory over sin, Satan, death, hell, and all enmity,
founded as upon a Rock. 4. It is time to come before God for mercy to prevent
justice, while yet we are spared; and he is not come to us in judgment; for so
the Word in the original gives ground, signifying coming speedily, and with
prevention: Let us speedily come before his presence, or preoccupy his
presence. 5. He that comes to God in Christ, meets with his reconciled face;
for the coming to the Tabernacle, the Ark and mercy-seat, did signify and
promise so much: and therefore it is said, Let us come before his presence, or
before his face. 6. Singing of Psalms should be done as a matter of honoring
God, and not as a matter of pleasing our own ears, or the ears of others; Let
us come with thanksgiving, or confession and praising, and make a joyful noise
unto him with Psalms:

Ver. 3. For the LORD is a great God: and a great King above all gods.

Another reason of praising Christ, is his greatness and supremacy above all
Rulers, and above all imaginable excellency: Whence learn, 1. He that has a
mind to praise God, shall not want matter of praise, as they who come before
Princes do; who for want of true grounds of praise in them, do give them
flattering words: For the Lord is a great God, for power and preheminency, for
strength and continuance. 2. Except we put all things that bear the name of
excellency under Gods feet, whethe^ they be Angels or Princes, or whatsoever
the world makes their god, we do not give him his due honor: He is a great
King above all gods.

Ver. 4. In his hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the
hills is his also.

A third reason of his praise is this, he is strong, sustaining by his power
sea and earth, and all things of weight. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever is most
secret and remote from men's power, or from our sight and knowledge, God has it
at his disposing; for he sustaineth it, and makes it subsist: In his hand are
the deep places of the earth. 2. There is nothing of any strength among all the
creatures, which has not its strength borrowed from God: The strength of the
hills is his also.

Ver. 5. The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.

6. O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel down before the LORD our
maker.

A fourth reason of Christ's praise is, because he is the Creator of all
things, and to be worshipped of us as our Creato^u^ That Christ as God, or God
to be incarnate, one with the Father and holy Spirit, is here intended,
appears by the command given to the worshippers to present themselves in the
Temple, and to kneel down toward the place of the A^k before God dwelling
between the Cherubims; that is, before Christ, God to be incarnate, Whence
learn, 1. All things were made by Christ, whether high or low, Coloss. 1. 16.
And it was meet that our Savior should be no other then he by whom sea and dry
land were made, so great is the work which the Mediator has in hands. The se^
is his, and be made it, and his hands formed the dry land. 2. Christ as he is
one with the Father and holy Spirit in greatness and power, in respect of his
Godhead and divine nature: so is he one with the Father and holy Spirit in the
capacity of divine honor; O come, let us worship and show down. 3. Religious
kneeling is a part of divine worship, whereby we testify our absolute
submission unto and highest giving of honor to God in soul and body; and this
honor is incommunicable to any creature: Come, let us worship and bow down,
let us kneel before the Lord our maker.

Ver, 7. For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep
of his hand: to day if ye will hear his voice.

The fifth reason of Christ's praise is, because he is our God, and Pastor of
his Church by office of his Mediatorship. Whence learn, 1. God deserves praise
of all the world, but specially of his Church, because of the near relation of
Covenant between God and his Church; Let us worship and bow down: for he is our
God. 2. The good shepherd of the Church, who lays down his life for his
sheep; the great Doctor and Prophet of the Chuech; the Mediator of the Covenant
of grace, and covenanted spouse of the Church, is very God, and was known,
believed on, and worshipped as very God, before his incarnation: He is our God,
and we are the people of his pasture. 3. Christ the Make^, the God, the
Mediator and Pastor of the Church, does not only effectually feed his people by
teaching, but also effectually governs and defends his Church by his
omnipotent power; We are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand:
whom his Almighty hand and power governs and protecteth in all ages.

Ver. 8. Harden not your heart, as in the provocation: and as in the day of
temptation in the wilderness:

9. When your fathers tempted me: proved me, and saw my work.

10. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, It is a
people that do ^re in their heart: and they have not known my ways.

In the latter part of the Psalm, which begins in the former verse, To day
if ye will hear his voice, harden not your heart (...) he gives another
exhortation to his Church visible, to believe and obey the voice of our great
Prophet Jesus Christ; as the Apostle, Heb. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. teaches us to
expound it. The main argument to enforce the exhortation is, lest the curse of
God should overtake the disobedient, and they should be debarred from heaven
and happiness, as the misbelieving Israelites were secluded from Canaan; and
from heaven signified by it: the history may be seen, Exodus 17. Whence learue,
1. The voice of God in the Scriptures, in the Gospel, appointed to be preached
by sent Ministers, is the voice of God the Father, God the Son, and God the
holy Spirit, one God in three persons: for all who do grant the Scriptures, to
be divine, do acknowledge also that the Scriptures are the voice of God the
Father; and this Psalm the Apostle, Heb. 3. 7. calls the saying of the holy
Ghost: and in that same place he expounds his voice, of whom this place does
speak to be the voice of the Son, Jesus Christ; and so the voice of God in
the Scriptures, in the Gospel, appointed to be preached by sent messengers, is
the voice of God the Father, Son and holy Spirit, as David also does teach us,
2 Samuel 23. 2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, there is the person of the
holy Spirit: The God of Israel said, there is the ordinary designation of the
person of the Father without secluding of the Word or Spirit: The Rock of
Israel spoke to me, there is the description of the person of the Son, who is
the Builder of the Church, his house, and the foundation whereupon his Church
is builded; against which the gates of hell shall not prevail. 2. The visible
Catholic Church, which has the Word of God preached unto them, and are in
Covenant with him, is the people of Christ's pasture, and sheep of his hand,
wherein may be found many such as harden their heart and perish, and so are not
all of them elect persons; for, To day if ye will hear his voice, is spoken
unto all, to whom the Word of God does come, and does bring them in the bond of
the Covenant to hear his voice. 3. Of such as are in Covenant with God in
Christ, to believe and obey his voice, those only are actually true disciples,
who have this property; to love, to believe, and to obey Gods voice, to yield
their heart to the Lords Word: To day if ye will hear his voice, is here the
probation of their covenanted profession. 4. The present time only is the
opportunity of salvation, or embracing of the offer of Gods grace, and
testifying of our obedience of says; we are not sure how long the Word shall
remain with us, or we with it: To day if ye will hear his voice. 5. How
ignorant, weak, and unable soever a man be by nature, to believe and obey the
voice of God, yet seeing God does offer himself by his Word to cure him of all
his evils, he cannot endure that a man should wittingly and willingly reject
the counsel of the Lord, and resolutely strengthen himself in his natural
misbelief and disobedience, for this were to harden his own heart yet more,
which here is forbidden: To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
heart. 6. The example of other men's sins should be made use of to make us
wise for eschewing the like; as here the history of the peoples murmuring
against God and his Ministers, is for this end recorded from Exodus 17. 3, 4.
concerning their tentation of God, and provocation of him in the willernesse.
5. It is to good purpose that we look upon the sins of our forefathers, and
upon Gods judgments on them for their sins, that we may be humbled and m^de
watchful against heredita^y sins, so this end is the time told them, When your
fathers tempted me, proved me. 8. He that makes question either of Gods power
or good will, after he has had experience and proof thereof, burieth
unthankfully the Lords bounty, and does draw a great deal deeper in the sin:
for this does aggravate the provocation of God by the carnal Israelites here,
that they had often proof what God could do, They saw my works, says he. 9.
The Lord not only marketh men's sins, but also does reckon how long they
continue in them: Forty years long was I grieved. 10. M^sbelieving of God,
and not submitting our selves to his government, is a vexing of his Spirit, and
a provocation of him to reject the sinner; Forty years long was I grieved
with this generation. 11. The errors of the mind are dangerous; but the errors
of the heart are yet more dangerous: for the faults of the mind simply
considered, are ignorance and error; but the fault of the heart, is a loving of
darkness and error: the error of the mind says, I knew not, I did not
understand such a duty; but the error of the heart says no less then, I will
not know; I desire not to hear of, I care not for such a duty; I said it is a
people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways: that is,
they have not regarded my ways, have not allowed of them, or loved them; for
otherwise they were not simply ignorant of them; they heard his words, and saw
his works. 12. Not to subject our selves to such and such particular hard
exercises, difficulties, straits, and sad dispensations, as it pleases God to
put us under, is a not knowing and disapproving of the ways of God, which he
follows in dealing with his people, and is no less then if we did take upon
us to be wiser then he, and to counsel and direct him how to govern the world
and our particulars better then he does; They err in heart, and have not known
my ways.

Ver. 11. Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my
rest.

To enforce the exhortation, the Lord repeateth the doom pronounced upon such
as harden their own hearts, in their unbelief and disob^ience of the voice of
God; to wit, that he swear, they should not enter into his rest, that is, they
should not enter into the rest of reconciliation and peace with God, which is a
part of the believers rest, whereof the Apostle speaks, commenting on this
place, Heb. 4. 3. nor into the rest of Canaan the type of heaven; so they ^ied
in the wilderness: nor into the rest of heaven signified by Canaan, so many of
them as continued in this sin of hardening their heart against the voice of
God. Whence learn, 1. There is a rest of God ordained for Believers, who give
up their hearts to the impression of Gods voice, in the obedience of faith; to
wit, the rest of justification, reconciliation, and peace with God; the rest of
begun sanctification, and ceasing from their own works, and the rest of
everlasting refreshment, begun in this life, and perfected in the life to come:
for this is the rest which God calls here his rest: They shall not enter into
my rest. 2. A^ all sin has judgment following after it, as the shadow
follows the body: so hardening of the heart against Gods Word in special,
has wrath annexed unto it; To whom I swear in my wrath. 3. Obstinate hardeners
of their heart in unbelief and disobedience against Gods Word, are near to the
curse; and whosoever do continue to the end, shall be found reprobates justly
damned to the eternal torment of restlesseness, against whom God stands
sworn, to condemn them and destroy them: Unto whom I swear in my wrath, that
they should not enter into my rest. 4. The most fearful curses and threatenings
pronouncel against sinners by God, and the most terrible judgments which have
been executed upon disobedient unbelievers of Gods Word, are merciful and
fatherly warnings of Good children, to eschew such ^ns as carefully and really,
as they abhor the punishment inflicted for them; for the Lords making use of
his wrath against the misbelieving and disobedient Israelites here does teach
us so much.

PSALM. XCVI.
WE fin'e, 1 Chronicles. 16. 23. a part of this Psalm, sung at the bringing up of
the Ark to Sion, to be in substance and almost in words al^o one and the same
with this which is here; for as there, so here the Prophet foreseeth in the
Spirit the spreading of the Kingdom of Christ among the Nations; And therefore
first, he exhorts all people heartily to receive Christ, and propagate his
glory, ver. 1, 2, 3. And gives reasons for it, ver. 4. 5, 6. Then he repeateth
and inlargeth the exhortation to glorify God, and to rejoice in him, because
Christ was indeed to come among the Gentiles, to reign among them righteously,
ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Ver. 1. O Sing unto the LORD a new song: sing unto the LORD all the earth.

2. Sing unto the LORD, bless his Name, show forth his salvation from day to
day.

3. Declare his glory among the heathen: his wonders among all people.

From the exhortation given to all Nations to rejoice for Christ's coming among
them; Learn, 1. As sadness and sorrow, misery and mourning, is the condition
of all people, till Christ the true Ark of the Covenant come unto them: so
Christ's coming among them, is the matter of the greatest joy that ever sinners
did hear of: for upon this ground are all here exhorted to rejoice; O sing unto
the Lord. 2. As the matter of ^oy in Christ is everlasting, and shall never
decay: so the reason of praising of God for salvation in him, is everlasting
also, new and fresh matter being always offered of joy to us, and praise to
God, which shall never vanish nor wax old; Sing unto the Lord a new Song. 3 All
the earth has interest in this Song, and is obliged unto the duty of joy and
praise, because out of all people, tongues and languages, God is to gather a
people to be saved: Sing unto the Lord all the earth. 4. We have ^eed again and
again to be stirred up to joy in Christ, to praise him: for we are dull, and
the work excellent, and no man does discharge the duty sufficiently: therefore
is it said the third time, Sing unto the Lord. 5. The grace offered in Jesus
Christ, is a perpetual reason of declaring the goodness of God, and that
Christ is the fountain of all blessedness to them who do receive him: for,
Bless his Name, does import so much. 6. The salvation which comes through
Christ, ought to be commended as Gods salvation indeed, because he devised it,
he purchased it, and he it is that does apply it to us, and makes us partakers
of it; Show forth his salvation. 7. The doctrine of salvation by Christ, is the
common good of mankind, and ought not to be concealed, but set forth to all,
preached, and proclaimed, and spoken of by all, according to their vocation and
ability: Show forth his salvation from day to day. 8. It is a part of the
Commission given to the Ministers of the Gospel, not only to teach their
Congregations concerning Christ, but also to have a care that they who never
did hear of him, may know what he is, what he has done and suffered, and what
good may be had by his mediation: Declare his glory among the heathen. 9.
Nothing so glorious to God, nothing so wonderful in it self, as is the
salvation of man by Christ: to behold God saving his enemies, by the
incarnation* sufferings and obedience of Christ the eternal Son of God;
Declare his glory among the Heathen, his wonders among all people.

Ver. 4. For the LORD is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared
above all gods.

5. For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the LORD made the heavens.

6. Honor and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.

The reasons of the exhortation are, because God is sovereign above all, ver.
4. and all other gods beside God are idols, ver. 5. and whatsoever is glorious
is to be found in him only, ver. 6. Whence learn, 1. None can praise God till
they consider his excellency, and that his wisdom, power and empire is above
all created or imaginable greatness; for The Lord is great and greatly to be
praised. 2. As the Lord is praiseworthy for his goodness and readiness to
communicate of his riches to all his creatures, and most of all to his
servants: so is he able to punish his adversaries, and all that contemn his
Authority, which no creature is able to do* He is to be feared above all gods.
3. Whosoever do not submit themselves to God, and worship and obey him, shall
be found to serve idols and vanities, whereby they can have no good, but
disappointment of hopes: for, All the gods of the Nations are idola. 4. The
framing of heaven and earth, and the upholding and governing of all the
creatures proves, that the Maker thereof is God alone, and that there neither
is nor can be any beside him; all others who have the name of gods are idols:
All the gods of the heathen are ^dols: but the lord made the Heavens. 5. Before
a man can come to the knowledge of God, he must first meet with the shining
beams of his honor and majesty in his Word and in his Works; for these are
Apparators and Harbingers going before him; Honor and majesty are before him.
6. The power and glory of God is not rightly seen, either to Gods praise or a
man's salvation, except by his own ordinances in his Church where he himself is
both teacher, and the substance also of what is taught; Strength and beauty are
in his Sanctuary.

Ver. 7. Give unto the LORD, (O ye kindreds of the people,) give unto the LORD
glory and strength.

Here he repeateth and dilateth the exhortation in four branches. In the
first, he exhorts to acknowledge, that glory and power belong to God, both in
decreeing wisely, and in executing timously and powerfully his own decrees; in
special, the work of Redemption and Conversion of the Gentiles by Christ.
Whence learn, As it is the sinful sickness of natural men, to take to
themselves, or to give unto the creatures the glory of every excellent work,
which is properly due to God alone: so is it the part of a renewed soul, to
give the glory of every thing which is praiseworthy unto God alone; which
glory God expects, and shall have it of the Gentiles being reconciled and
instructed by the Gospel: Give unto the Lord, O ^e kindreds of the people, give
unto the Lord glory and strength.

Ver. 8. Give unto the LORD the glory due unto his Name, bring an offering, and
come into hi^ courts.

In the second branch, he exhorts all to acknowledge the Lord, as they who
are worshippers of him, and who are taught by his Word, should do. Whence
learn, 1. It was foretold, that as the Church of Israel was taught by the Lords
Word to know him: so should the Gentiles be so taught also; for, Give unto the
Lord the glory due to his Name, presupposes and imports, that they should
have his Name set forth in his Word, and should be instructed to know him, and
how to worship him acceptably. 2. Whatsoever point of glory the Scripture
gives unto God, it may not be withdrawn from him, nor communicated to any
other be^de him; for it is his own proper due: Give unto him the glory due to
his Name. 3. It is the manner of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, to
express the spiritual service of the Gospel in the terms of the service of
the Law: Bring an offering, and come into his courts. 4. Albeit bodily
sacrifices and oblations, and the material Temple of Jerusalem be taken away:
yet the moral duties shadowed forth in them, are still necessary to be done: we
must not come for fashion, empty and vain before God, but with the calves of
our lips, offering up our selves in a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to
him: Bring an offering unto hm. 5. The Church of the Gentiles make up one
Church with the Jews, and are of the same incorporation and holy society, and
partakers of the privileges of the Church with them: Bring an offering, and
come into his courts.

Ver. 9. O worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness: fear before him all
the earth.

In the third branch, he exhorts more particularly all the Gentiles to
worship and fear the same God with the Church of the Jews. Whence learn, 1.
True Converts must submit themselves absolutely unto Christ's Government, in
soul and body; for, O worship the Lord, imports so much. 2. Then is a man's
worship and submission sanctified, and made acceptable when it is offered in
and through Christ, and in society with his Church represented by the
Sanctuary, here called the beauty of holiness; Worship the Lord in the beauty
of holiness. 3. Among all Gods works nothing so beautiful as his ordinances,
rightly made use of in his Church: Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.
4. All our worship must be seasoned with fear, lest we swerve on either hand
from the rule prescribed by God: Fear before him all the earth,

Ver. 10. Say among the heathen that the LORD reig^th: the world also shall be
established, that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously.

11. Let the heavens rejoice: and let the earth be glad: let the sea roar and
the fullness thereof.

12. Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the
tre^s of the wood rejoice.

13. Before the LORD, for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: he shall
judge the world with righteous^esse, and the people with his truth.

In the fourth place, he exhorts the Lords Ministers, his called messengers
every where to proclaim Christ King in his own Church, and to declare the
benefits of his reigning; in special these three. 1. The putting of all things
which are in disorder and confusion in the world by sin, into their own order
again; and settling all things to the perpetual benefit of his subjects. 2.
Christ's righteous governing and de^ending of his subjects. 3. The unexpressible
joy which Christ does bring to his people, for setting forth whereof, all the
reasonable and understanding creatures are unable. Whence learn, 1. Wheresoever
the Gospel is preached, there without injury to Magistrates Christ may and
should be declared King, sovereigne Lord and Lawgiver in all the matters of
Religion, and whatsoever concerns the salvation of men and service of God:
Say among the heathen that the Lord reigns 2. Before Christ come to a people,
men neither know God, nor themselves, nor what is their profit, nor what is
their loss: for before Christ reveal himself to a man, things earthly and
temporal are put in the room of things heavenly and everlasting: the creatures
and lusts of men are put in the room of God, and the sinner is made a slave to
his own lusts and unclean spirits; but when Christ comes, who is the light of
the world, and the life of men, and convin^eth men of sin and righteousness
and judgment, then is the sinner humb^ed, and God exalted, and every thing is
put in its own place, and a solid state of grace and glory is ^ounded by his
Word and working, and is settled by his decree for the benefit of the world of
his Elect and Regenerate people: for by Christ's governing the world also shall
be established. 3. The Kingdom of Christ is a Kingdom which cannot be moved,
and they who are his Subjects, do receive this Kingdom in title and right, and
begun possession, which cannot be taken from them again; The world also shall
be established that it cannot be moved. 4. The government of Christ's Kingdom is
so well and wisely carried by him, as right is done to God and man, to friends
and foes, and no injury to any party is allowed; and course is taken to give
effectually to every man according as his work shall be: He shall judge the
people righteously. 5. There is no true rejoicing for sinners in heaven or
earth, except in and through Jesus Christ alone: all joy of sinners without him
is madness, and in him men have cause of rejoicing whatsoever condition they
shall be in: Let the heaven rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea
roar, and the fullness thereof 6. The joy which Christ brings to his people
is such, that men and Angels are not able to express it; and if all the dumb
creatures had minds and mouths to set it forth, it were a task and more for
them to undertake it: Let the heavens rejoice, and the earth be glad; let the
sea roar, and the fullness thereof, etc. 7. As all the creatures are in a sort
of bondage and subjection unto vanity through the sins of men; so have they
their own redemption and freedom from vanity in relation to Christ, and the
service which they do unto the Saints, who make right use of them; and at
length the creature shall be fully delivered from the bondage of corruption,
and in its own kind have cause of rejoicing: Let the heaven, earth, sea and
fields rejoice, etc. 8. All the creatures are at enmity with man, before he be
reconciled to God in Christ; but when peace is made by Jesus Christ, they look
upon man all of them with another countenance, as servants unto and children of
their Lord, who is Father of the reconciled, and governor of all for their
good: Let the fields be joyful, and all that is therein; then shall all the
trees of the wood rejoice. They shall look upon a reconciled man walking in the
light of Gods countenance as a Paradise. 9. The first and second coming of
Christ to show himself King of his Church, is ground and cause of all joy to
his Subjects; Let them and all the creatures rejoice before the Lord, for he
comes, for this for he comes (twice said) to judge the earth, is given for a
reason of the exhortation. 10. By Christ's government, every poor and needy
Subject is helped, supplied, comforted and provided for, as their case
requires: all the Subjects are justified by the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ, all of them are renewed and begun to be sanctified,
and made to aim at righteousness more and more in their ways; all the proud
and adversaries of his Subjects are declared against; course is laid down in
the Word of truth for a full deliverie of his people from all injuries and
oppression, from all misery and sin, with the full punishment of their
enemies: He shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his
truth.

PSALM. XCVII.
THis Psalm contains a prophecy of the spiritual glory of Christ's Kingdom,
to ver. 8. And the use of the Doctrine to the end of the Psalm. The comfort of
Christ's Kindome in relation to his Church is set down, ver. 1, 2. And the
terriblenesse thereof in relation to his enemies, ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. with a curse
upon image-worshippers, ver. 7. The uses of the Doctrine, they are four. The
first is, that all excellency, and whatsoever is honorable in the world,
should do homage to him, set down in the end of ver. 7. The second is, that the
true Church should be glad at the hearing and the seeing of the execution of
Gods judgments upon idolaters, with a reason for it, ver. 8, 9. The third use
is, a direction to the Saints to beware of sin, with some reasons for it, ver.
10, 11. The fourth use is, that the righteous should rejoice, and thank God
upon all occasions, ver. 12.

Ver. 1. THe LORD reigns, let the earth rejoice: let the multitudes of Isles
be glad thereof.

2. Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are
the habitation of his throne.

The Psalmist proclaims Christ King among the Gentiles, and does commend his
Kingdom to them, as full of joy, full of majesty, and full of righteousness.
Whence learn, 1. Beside the sovereignty which God has over all people; he has
a special Kingdom, wherein he reigns by the Gospel of Christ: this is it
whereof here he speaks, saying, The Lord reigns. 2. Comfort against all
grief from sin or misery, true matter of joy and full felicity, is to be had by
the coming of this Kingdom; The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice. 3. The
Isles of the Sea are in Christ's charter, and have their share of the joy which
is to be had in Christ; Let the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof. 4. How
despicable soever Christ's Kingdom may seem to the world, yet it is full of
heavenly majesty; Clouds and darkness are round about him. 5. The glory of
Christ's Kingdom is unsearchable, and hid from the eyes of the world, who
cannot take up the things of God, except he reveal himself to them, and do
open the eyes of their understanding; Clouds and darkness are round about him.
6. The Kingdom of Christ gives no liberty unto sin, but is altogether for
righteousness and judgment; for therein righteousness is taught to sinners,
and they made righteous, and kept in the course of righteousness, and defended
from the harm of their adversaries, and rewarded according to their
righteousness, and all the unrighteous are adjudged to punishment according to
their works; Righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne.

Ver. 3. A fire goes before him, and burns up his enemies round about.

4. His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw it, and trembled.

5. The hills melted like wax at the presence of the LORD: at the presence of
the Lord of the whole earth.

6. The heavens declare his righteousness: and all the people see his glory.

After the Psalmist has set down how comfortable Christ is to His Subjects, he
shows how terrible he is to his enemies. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the Kingdom
of Christ be a Kingdom for righteousness, and a fountain of joy to all who
do receive him; yet such is the natural wickedness of men, that he shall not
want enemies, as here is imported plainly. 2. There is no less, but rather
more wrath attending the despisers of the Gospel, then did attend the giving
out of the Law, Heb. 12. 29. A fire goes before him. 5. Albeit the enemies of
Christ were never so many, invironing his flock round about; yet shall he reign
in the midst of them, and consume all his adversaries: A fire goes before him,
and burns up his enemies round about. 4. He lets forth his wrath, not all
at once, but by degrees; lighter judgments, and foregoing terrors come before
destruction: His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw it, and
trembled. 5. Christ shall utterly undo the greatest Potentates on earth, if
they stand in his way and oppose him; The hills melted like wax at the
presence of the Lord. 6. There is no comparison between Christ and his enemies;
how great Monarchs soever they be, they cannot stand before his presence; For
he is the Lord of the whole earth. 7. Our Lord shall not want Preachers of his
righteousness: for beside the Word of God, blessings from heaven upon his
friends, and judgments from heaven upon his enemies, according to the Word,
shall testify for Christ; The heavens declare his righteousness. 8. The
judgments of God upon the enemies of the Church, and his blessings upon his
Church, shall be so evident, as beholders shall be forced to acknowledge God in
them, manifesting himself for Christ's Kingdom, And all the people shall see
his glory.

Ver. 7. Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast themselves
of idols: worship him all ye gods.

He sets down Gods curse upon idolaters, or image-worshipers, and then
shows the uses of the former Doctrine, for further setting forth the glory of
Christ's Kingdom. Whence learn, 1. All they who either serve or worship graven
images, are reckoned by God for enemies to God and to Christ; and it is a part
of Christ's glory to abolish images, and all worship and service unto images out
of his Church: Confounded be all they that serve graven images. 2. Albeit such
as are lovers of imagery, not only do serve images, but also will defend the
state of images in the exercise of Religion, and glory in them; yet shall they
at length be ashamed of their boasting: Confounded be all they that serve
graven images, that boast themselves of idols 3. God will not have such
relative worship as men would give him, by serving or worshipping of him in,
at, or before imag^ the way how God will be served, is by a direct and immedi^
worshipping of him, without the mediation or intervening (...) any thing which
may intercept his worship: for in opposition t^ relative worship in the service
of graven images, he says, Worship him; importing that when images are
worshipped, God is not worshipped at all, whatsoever the image-worshipper does
i^tend. 4. Whatsoever creature has excellency in heaven or earth, or can
pretend to any eminency or excellency of whatsoever sort, must do homage unto
Christ: Worship him all (...) gods, and this is the first use of the former
Doctrine.

Ver. 8. Sion heard, and was glad: and the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because
of thy judgement^, O LORD.

Ver. 9. For thou, LORD, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted far
above all gods.

The second use is to comfort all true worshippers; partly, because they hear
Gods wrath threatened and executed against Idolaters; and partly, because they
have hereby a clear evidence o^ Christ's supremacy over all creatures. Whence
learn, 1. The condemnation of imagerie, and of all service and worshi^ ^ven
images, is a Doctrine comfortable to the true mem^ the Church; Sio^d, (to wit,
this curse against Ido^ and was glad. 2. The true ^rch considered in her
collect^ incorporation, as the Mo^ Sion, and in her particular branches and
subdivisions, as Daughters of Judah depending upon Christ, the true Vine-tree
of Judah, have the same reason^ of joy, and the same grounds of edification by
Gods Word, and works of judgment, wrought for clearing of true Religion and
shaming of false worship: Sion beard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah
rejoiced, because of thy judgments, O LORD. 3. The manifestation of the Gospel
of Christ, is the exaltation of God, and manifestation of his excellency; whose
dishonor as it should be the matter of our grief; so his manifested glory
should be our joy, as the reason here given of the joy of the Saints does teach
us; For thou, Lord, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted far above
all gods.

Ver. 10. Ye that love the LORD, hate evil; he preserves the souls of his
Saints: he delivers them out of the hand of the wicked.

11. Light is sown for the righteous: and gladness for the upright in heart.

The third use of the Doctrine, is an exhortation to the faithful to study
holiness, and to eschew the fellowship of sin, whatsoever may be the danger;
partly, because the Lord will deliver his own out of the hands of their
enemies: partly, because God h^th appointed comfort unto them, both in and
after their afflictions. Whence learn, 1. A Believer in God, or a true
worshipper of God in Christ, is a lover of God; for thus are they described
here, Ye that love the Lord. 2. The love of God must be joined with, and
manifested by the study of a ^oly life, and with not only abstaining from, but
also with hating and abhorring of that which is sinful; Ye that love the Lord,
hate evil. 3. Albeit the hating of evil and loving of God may readily make a
man the object of malice and of persecution from wicked men, yet shall the
godly have their souls saved; yea, and at length be fully delivered from the
harm which S^tan and the wicked intend to bring upon the godly for that cause;
He preserves the souls of his Saints: he delivers them out of the hand of
the wicked. 4. All the exercises of the godly, and specially their troubles for
righteousness, are but the seeds of their joy and consolation, which God is to
bring forth unto them out of these troubles: Light is sown for the righteous.
5. The Lords children, who love him, and hate evil, must not think to have the
fruit of their rightcousnesse presently in possession, but must give a time
unto it, as is given to (...) that is cast into the ground, and as after a time
the corn does spring, and comes to a ripe harvest; so shall the troubles of
the godly have a comfortable issue: Light is sown for the righteous, 6. In
reckoning of the righteous, the Lord counts men by their heart: and so many
as by faith in Christ have purified their hearts unto the un^eigned study of
holiness, they are righteous before God, albeit their infirmities be many: and
whatsoever fit of grief and interruption of joy such men be subject unto for a
time, yet at length their po^tion shall be a full harvest of gladness; Light
is sown to the righteous, and who these are he shows, and gladness for the
upright in heart.

Ver. 12. Rejoice in the LORD, ye righteous: and give thanks at the remembrance
of his holiness.

The fourth use of the Doctrine, is an exhortation unto Believers, to be
joyful and thankful whatsoever be their condition in this present life,
because of the salvation manifested in Christ. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever may
be the tribulation of the faithful in the world, they have matter of joy in
the LORD, and they should stir up themselves to rejoice, and make conscience
of the commandment; Rejoice, ye righteous, in the LORD. 2. Whatsoever can be
taken from the godly, their right and interest in CHRIST can never be taken
from them, and so there is cause to give thanks for this gift for ever; And
give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness, or confess to the remembrance
of his holiness; that is, acknowledge to his glory the benefit which you have
by being a Subject to this King. 3. Whatsoever word or work of CHRIST does
bring us to the remembrance of his Name, should bring us also to the
consideration and remembrance of his holiness, which is the untainted glory of
all his attributes, wisdom, justice, goodness, power, mercy, truth, etc. and
is the untainted glory of his Word, works, and purchase unto us; Give thanks
at the remembrance of his holiness.

PSALM. XCVIII.
THis Psalm is an exhortation to Jew and Gentile, to rejoice and bless the
Lord for Christ's coming, to set up his Kingdom in the world. The exhortation
is thrice pressed. 1. In proper terms, requiring the Church to sing for joy,
with reasons adjoined, ver. 1, 2, 3. Then it is repeated, and musical
instruments called for, to show that by humane voice the matter of the joy
which is in Jesus Christ, is inexpressible, ver. 4, 5, 6. 3. To show that
neither voice of man, nor musical instruments are sufficient to express the
joy which comes by Christ's Kingdom: the whole creatures are called unto this
work of rejoicing, and setting forth his glory, ver. 7, 8. And the reason is
given, because Christ comes to set up, and exercise his Kingdom in
righteousness, ver. 9.

Ver. 1. OSing unto the LORD a new song, for he has done mavelous things:
his right hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory.

2. The LORD has made known his salvation: his righteousness has he openly
showed in the sight of the heathen.

3. He has remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: all
the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

The exhortation to sing unto the Lord, who is Christ, has five reasons
adjoined. The first is, because he has wrought the work of Redemption
wonderfully. The next is, because he has done his work by conflict with his
enemies, and has gotten the victory, ver. 1. The third, because he has caused
to preach his salvation to the Gentiles, ver. 2. The fourth, because he has
performed his promises made to the Jews. And the fifth, because he has made
all the earth to see the salvation, which God in Covenant with his Church has
wrought for his people, ver. 3. Whence learn, 1. The joy which Christ does
bring, can never wax old: but because mercies through him are everlasting, and
the persons who have share in this joy, are made new, and all things unto them
are made new; therefore the song and joy also shall be made new: O sing unto
the Lord a new song. 2. Salvation brought by Christ, and the work of Redemption
wrought by him, is a most wonderful work; for it is brought about by the
incarnation of God, by the painful suffering and shameful death of God
inearnate; by whose stripes we are healed, and by whose death and resurrection
we have life, and immortality given unto us: For he has done mavelous
things. 3. It is by battle against the enemies of our salvation that we are
delivered: for Christ has wrestled with the guilti, nesse, merit, and
punishment of our sins; wrestled with the curse of the Law, with Satan, death
and hell; and whatsoever could hinder our Redemption and Salvation, and has
gotten unto himself the victory to our advantage; His right hand, and his holy
arm has gotten him the victory. 4. No creatures help has our Lord used in
this work, but done all immediately by his own divine power, being God
Omnipotent; His right hand, and his holy arm has gotten him the victory. 5.
The glory of the salvation of man, by this means is most justly to be ascribed
to him alone, and to be called his salvation; because he devised it, and
brought it about immediately by himself, and causes to proclaim it in his own
Name to the world by the preaching of the Gospel: so it is in all these
respects his salvation: The Lord has made known his salvation. 6. The way how
Christ makes known his salvation, and makes us partakers of his salvation, is
by making known his righteousness, or the righteousness of faith; and making
us partakers thereof by the preaching of it among the Gentiles; His
righteousness has ^e openly showed in the sight of the heathen. 8. Whatsoever
promise he has made to the Jews, he does not forget it; but whatsoever cloud
is come upon that Nation, all the mercies and promises made to them, shall all
be performed: He has remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of
Israel. 9. The fullness of the Gentiles shall be made partakers of the Covenant
of Grace, with the true Church of the Jews; All the ends of the earth have
seen the salvation of our God.

Ver. 4. Make a joyful noise unto the LORD all the earth: make a loud noise,
and rejoice, and sing praise.

5. Sing unto the LORD with the harp: and the voice of a Psalm.

6. With trumpets and sound of cornet: make a joyful noise before the LORD the
King.

From the repeating of the exhortation to the whole earth, Jews and Gentiles,
and calling formusical instruments to express this joy, whereby the paedagogie
of the Church under the ceremonial law, (which now is abolished) taught them
the greatness of the spiritual joy of Christ's coming. Learn, 1. The joy of
faith, the joy allowed unto believers in Jesus Christ, is unspeakable and full
of glory, which cannot be exp essed by words or humane voice; for this the
vary y of musical instruments in Gods praise, at the offering of the
sacrifices, did shadow forth under the law; and here it is signified by this
exhortation; to sing with the harp, trumpet and cornet; and that with special
relation to Christ, as King in Sion: Make a joyful noise before the Lord the
King.

Ver. 7. Let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof: the world, and they that
dwell therein.

8. Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together.

In the exhortation directed to the dumb creatuees, sea, floods and hills, that
they should utter Songs of joy; (...), 1. The setting forth the praise of
Christ for the Redemption of sinners, may not only furnish work to all
reasonable creatu^s, but also if every drop of water in the sea, and in every
river and flood, every fish in the sea, every foul of the air, every living
creature on the earth, and whatsoever else is in the world: if they all had
reason and ability to express themselves; yea, and if a^ the hills were able
by motion and gesticulation to communicate their joy one to another; there is
work for them all to set out the praise of Christ; for, Let the sea roar, and
the fullness thereof: the world, and they that dwell therein: Let the floods
clap their hands, etc. does import so much. 2. As the Lord can never be
sufficiently praised for salvation through Christ: so cannot any hearers
dutifully, and as becomes them, hear this doctrine without great jov or
stirring up themselves to rejoice therein: for if senseless creatures in their
own kind be called upon to rejoice, much more sinful men, to whom the grace of
Christ is offered, and for whom the work of Redemption is wrought.

Ver. 9. Before the LORD, for he comes to judge the earth: With righteousness
shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.

The reason of all this joy is rendered in this, that Christ is coming to judge
the earth and the world righteously, and to judge his own people in special.
Whence learn, 1. All the joy conceived for the Redemption and Salvation wrought
by Christ, and all the joy which flows from his righteous Government, should
be offered unto God in sincerity, as a part of worship and thankful
acknowledgement of his gracious gift: for the exhortation is not to rejoice
simply, but, to rejoice before the Lord. 2. Christ is very God, essentially
JEHOVAH, before he be incarnate: and when he comes into the world, by assuming
our nature, he is the same: Rejoice before the Lord or Ichovah, for he comes
to judge the earth: that is, Christ who is Jehovah comes to judge the earth.
3. It was soretold, that the work of governing the Church, and of ^uling the
whole earth for the Churches behoof, is committed unto Christ incarnate, or to
Christ coming into the world; He comcth to judge the earth. 4. Christ shall
guide the whole world, so as all wrongs shall be condemned, and be taken order
with: his own people shall have injuries done to them avenged, and themselves
directed, protected and comforted; With rightcousucsse shall he judge the
world. 5. As Christ shall reward every man according as his works have been,
and do no man wrong: so shall he make his own people righteous, and followers
of the rule of equity; With righteousness shall he judge the world, and the
people with equity.

PSALM. XCIX.
FOr the comfort of the Church against the multitude of enemies round about
her, there is in this Psalm (...) declaration of the Kingdom of Christ,
reigning as God, one with the Father and holy Spirit, in the Church of Israel,
before his Incarnation: with a fourefold exhortation to all who shall hear
tell of him. The first exhortation is to stand in ^we of him, because of his
great majesty manifested in Sion, ver (...), 2. Another exhortation is, to
praise him for his greatness, terriblenesse, holiness and righteousness,
ver. 3, 4. A third exhortation is, to glorify and worship him for sundry
reasons, ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. For which he repeateth the exhortation the fourth
time, ver. 9.

Ver. 1. THe LORD reigns, let the people tremble: he sits between the
Cherubims, let the earth be moved.

2. The LORD is great in Sion, and he is high above all people.

From the first exhortation to fear Christ, and to stand in awe of him; Learn,
1. Christ was King in his Church, before his incarnation, and did reign in the
sight of his Saints, from the beginning of the world: for as the Father from
the beginning was in Christ his Son the Mediator, reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them: so Christ the eternal Son
was in the Father, and with the Father and holy Spirit gathering and governing
his Church all the time before his incarnation: for it is Christ of whom ^ere
the Psalmist speaks, and calls him Jehovah, King in Sion; The Lord
reigns. 2. Albeit the Church be compassed about with enemies, as the lilie
among the thorns; yet because her Lord reigns in the midst of her, she has
r^ason not only to comfort her self in him, but also has ground of de^ying
her enemies, and boasting against them; The Lord reigns, let the people or
Nations tremble. 3. The Lords people do not worship an unknown God, they know
who he is, and where to find him, to wit, in his ordinances, on the throne of
grace, reconciling himself to the world in Christ; He sits between the
Cherubims. 4. Whosoever do seek God in Christ, have the Angels attending on
Christ, to go forth for the service and safety of the believer and worshipper;
for this did the ceremonial figure signify: He sits between the Cherubims.
5. As Christ is attended by Angels to the comfort of his Church, so also for
the terror and punishment of all adversaries in the world; He sits between
the Cherubims, let the earth be moved. 6. Albeit the Lord be great in his works
every where, yet is his greatness most manifest to his Church by his Word and
Works to her and for her; The Lord is great in Sion. 7. There is no opposition
which can be made against the Church; no power or multitude of people able, to
prevail by counsel, device, plot or practice against his Sion or his Church;
for, He is high above all people: to dissipate their devices, bridle their
fury, and destroy them at his pleasure.

Ver. 3. Let them praise thy great and terrible Name, for it is holy.

4. The Kings strength also loves judgment, thou do establish equity: thou
executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.

The second exhortation is to praise Christ the King of his Church, for his
greatness, terror, holiness, moderation of his power, and love of justice.
Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever we know or understand of God, we should not only by
faith subscribe to it, and seal it, and praise God for it our selves, but
should also commend it to others, and wish the like should be done by all men:
Let them praise thy Name. 2. As the greatness of God in Christ on the one hand
should induce men; so the terror of our God, who is a consuming fire to his
adversaries on the other hand, should press men to praise him; Let them praise
t^y great and terri^le Name. 3. Whatsoever in Scripture is said of Christ, will
be found to be really in him; he will answer to his name perfectly in all
things, without stain or blot: Let them praise thy great and terrible Name,
for it is holy. 4. Albeit the enemies of Christ, despise the weakness and
simplicity of his Government, yet he is a powerful and strong King, both in
himself, and in and for all who believe in him; for here the Church praises
the Kings strength. 5. Christ moderateth his power, specially in relation to
his subjects, and does not what he may: deals not in the rigor of justice
with his people, lays no more on them then they are able to bear: his yoke
is easy and his burden is light; yea, he suffers them not to be tempted
above their strength, but deals discreetly with them; moderation and
discretion pleases him: The Kings strength loves judgment. 6. The course
which our God has set down for comforting the afflicted, relieving the
oppressed, taking order with hypocrites and obstinate offenders, is very
equitable, and a course which he will not alter or change; for, He loves
judgment, and thou do establish equity, says he. 7. Christ's actions and
dispensations are answerable to his Laws and his revealed Word; he teaches
his subjects righteousness; he makes them righteous, performs his promises,
and executes his threatenings in his Church, according to his sacred Word: Thou
executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.

Ver. 5. Exalt ye the LORD our God, and worship at his footstool: for he is
holy.

A third exhortation, wherein he presses the same duty of glorifyng of God the
third time, by three reasons; One is, because he is holy, ver. 5. Another is,
from the example of the Lords most approved servants, who did subject
themselves unto the Lords ordinances, to their own and others advantage, ver.
6, 7. A third reason, from the example of the Church both in the wilderness
and in aftertimes, who as they found the benefit of obedience of the
ordinances of God, when their worshipped God as he commanded them: so did they
smart so their disobedience when they followed their own inventions, ver. 8.
whereupon he repeateth the exhortation the fourth time, ver. 9.

Whence learn, 1. Then is God rightly acknowledged, when his Covenant of grace
offered in Christ is embraced, when men join themselves to the true God of
Israel, and when they esteem of God and acknowledge him, as supreme Lord and
King over all: Exalt ye the Lord our God 2. God will be worshipped, when, and
where, and how he pleases to command, and will not be worshipped but in
Christ, figured by the Temple and Ark of the Testimony in it: worship as o^
before his fo^tstool. 3. The worshippers of God under the Old Testament were
taught to lift their minde^ above all earthly things, and loose their minds
from all limitation of God unto any corporal presence in the Sanctuary or Ark,
and to worship him at Solomon did, to wit, as God incomprehensible, every where
present, and to be sought in heaven, and adored in a spiritual manner: for the
Temple and Ark were but as his footstool, 1 Kings 18. 27. Exalt the Lord our
God, and wors^ip at his footstool. 4. Holiness is the Lords property: he is
holy in himself, holy in his appointing of his ordinances, and holy in his
receiving of worship; rejecting all worship, But what he commands and calls
for, and he will be acknowledged holy by all that worship him: and worthy is he
so to be esteemed of; for, He is holy: and this is the first reason.

Ver. 6. Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among them that call
upon his Name: they called upon the LORD, and he answered them.

7. He spoke unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his Testimonies, and the
ordinance that he gave them.

The next reason is from the example of holy men of God, Moses and Aaron,
Priests or chief Officers, and Samuel a Priest, Prophet, and Ruler of the Lords
people, who all of them subjected themselves to the Ordinances of God; and
worshipped him to their own great utility, and advantage also of them, with and
for whom they prayed unto God, and worshipped him. Whence learn, 1. The
examples of holy men of God commended in Scripture unto us, do serve for
inducement and encouragement unto us, to believe in God, to worship, and to
obey him: Moses and Aaron among his Priests, or chief Officers, and Samuel
among them that call upon his Name. 2. Because the holiest men of God that ever
were in the Church, stood in need of the ordinary means of grace and worship,
and subjected themselves unto Ordinances, the Lord will have none of his people
to neglect Ordinances, or lift themselves above Ordinances; for, Moses, Aaron
and Samuel were among them that call upon his Name. 3. Whoever worship God, and
obey his Ordinances uprightly, are enrolled in the catalogue with the chiefest
Saints, worshippers of God; Moses, Aaron and Samuel among them that call upon
his Name. 4. The prayers of the faithful are not frustrated, but have a good
answer; and the answer of the holiest supplicants is set forth to encourage the
meanest of believers to call upon God also, as the impartial hearer of the
prayers of all that call upon God in truth; for he is no accepter of persons:
and to show this, it is said here, They called upon the Lord, and he heard
them. 7. The more evidences we have of Gods presence, and the more familiarly
he condescendeth to teach us, the more humble and observant should we be of his
Ordinances and Commands; He spoke unto them in the cloudie pillar: they kept
his testimonies, and the Ordinances which he gave them.

Ver. 8. Thou answeredst them, O LORD our God: thou wast a God that forgavest
them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.

The third reason to move all to the duty of worship and obedience, is from the
example of the mercy of God toward sincere worshippers on the one hand, and
justice toward them that followed men's inventions in Religion in the
wilderness or afterward on the other hand. Whence learn, 1. The same God; the
same Mediator, the same Covenant of grace belong to the true Church both in
former and latter ages; Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God. 2. Albeit the
Lord give fo^th his Ordinances most holy and perfect, to direct men in their
worshipping; yet so perverse is men's corrupt nature, as from time to time they
are devising devices, and following their own inventions, as here is imported.
3. As the Lord is very merciful to his people, when they continue in his fear:
so is he just to correct them, when they pollute Religion; Thou tookest
vengeance of their inventions. 4. Penitent sinners; although plagued for their
sin, yet were never refused forgiveness of sin, when they prayed and sought
unto God for it; Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest
vengeance of their inventions. 5. Plagued inflicted for sin upon Gods people,
are not punishments satisfactory unto justice, but means of correction, serving
to drive men to repentance, and to seeking of mercy, and may well stand with
forgiveness of sins; for G^d can both plague sinners to drive them to
repentance, and forgive their sin when they do repent: Thou wast a God that
forgav^ them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.

Ver. 9. Exalt the LORD our God, and worship at his holy hill: for the LORD our
God is holy.

The fourth exhortation to glorify God, wherein he does expound what he means
by the footstool of the Lord spoken of, ver. 5. to wit, mount Sion, the holy
hill where the Ark was* adding the same reason of the exhortation which was was
before, because the Lord our God is holy. Whence learn, 1. It is a part of our
exalting of the true God, to join with his true Church, and to offer unto him
with others, such worship as he does prescribe; Exalt the Lord our God, and
worship at his holy hill. 2. The Lords holiness requires of all men the
exaltation of his Name, and subjection to his Ordinances; neither can his
holiness suffer any other worship then what he himself does appoint: Worship
at his holy hill, for the Lord our God is holy. 3. The holiness of God, and
the untainted glory of all his attributes, is both the glory and comfort of his
people who are in Covenant with him, and a motive also to them, to invite all
men to the fellowship of his service with themselves: Exalt the Lord our God,
for the Lord our God is holy.

PSALM. C. A Psalm of praise.
THe title of the Psalm shows the sum and scope thereof to be for stirring up
of the whole Church to praise God cheerfully; unto which duty all are exhorted
once, ver. 1, 2. for three reasons. First, because he is God. Secondly, because
we are his creatures. Thirdly, because we are his covenanted people, or members
of the visible Church, whereof he takes care as a Pastor does of his own
flock, ver. 3. And again, all are exhorted to thank, praise, and bless him,
ver. 4. And that for his goodness, mercy, and truth, ver. 5.

Ver. 1. MAke a joyful noise unto the LORD, all ye lands.

2. Serve the LORD with gladness: come before his presence with singing.

From the first exhortation to praise God; Learn, 1. The d^y of the Church
visible, in all her particular meetings in every place, how largely soever God
shall extend it, is to accept the offer of the grace of God joyfully, and to
acknowledge the glorious riches of the graee of God, which he offers unto
them in the Gospel; Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands, or, all
the earth. 2. As we ought to accept of the offer of the grace of God joyfully't
so should we also dedicate our selves to Gods service heartily, as he calls
for it; because according to the Gospel, our persons and service are accepted,
imperfections pitied, our sins pardoned, and our holy endeavors are graciously
rewarded: Serve the Lord with gladness. 3. Our joy should be stirred up, and
expressed by singing of Psalms, especially when we come to the assemblies or
public meetings, wherein the Lord has promised to give his presence with his
own Ordinances; Come before his presence with singing.

Ver. 3. Know ye that the LORD he is God, it is he that has made us, and not
we our selves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

From the reasons of this exhortation; Learn, 1. Such is our natural Atheism,
that we have need again and again to be instructed, that the Lord is God; of
whom, and through whom, and for whom are all things; Know ye, that the Lord he
is God. 2. If we did consider well, that we are Gods creatures, it were a
forcible motive unto us, to employ in Gods service whatsoever we have of God,
life, motion, being, and gifts; and to beware to make any thing we have of God,
a weapon of unrighteousness for fighting against him; and of this
consideration we have need to be put in mind, and to be stirred up to the
duty: He it is that has made us. 3. The glory of our regeneration or new
creation belongs unto God, no less then the glory of our creation and
natural birth: and it is no less madness to ascribe the work of our
regeneration to our own power, then to ascribe our first ^tion to our selves;
for in both respects here it is said that (...) is ^e that made us, and not we
our selves. 4. As the Lords people should stir up themselves to more thankful
service unto God, as their relations unto God, and obligations to him as their
King and Pastor, are joined; so may they expect from God for their
encouragement, whatsoever is needful to a people or a flock to have^ from a
good King and faithful Pastor; We are his people, and sheep of his pasture.

Ver. 2. Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and in into his cours^ with
with praise: be thankeful unto him, and bless his Name.

From the repetition of the exhortation; Learn, 1. It is our duty in our
approaches unto God, specially for any solemn service, to consider what rich
benefits we have from him, that thereby we may be stirred up unto the more
hearty acknowledgement of his favors; Enter into his gates with thanksgiving.
2. ^s the Lords benefits to us should be looked upon in our address^s unto him:
so also his glorious attributes, and his works answerable thereto, should be
considered; whereby we may be the better disposed to give unto him glory in all
respects: Enter into his co^s with praise. 3. The more we look upon Gods
praises, the more shall we see our own riches, and the solidity of our
blessedness in him; and the reasons to move us to thank and bless him: Be
thankful unto him, and bless his Name.

Ver. 5. For the LORD is good, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
to all generations.

From the reasons subjoyned to the second exhortation to praise the Lord;
Learn, 1. It is a matter of perpetual praise of God, and of thanksgiving, and
blessing of him, that as he is alsufficient in himself: so he is also
communicative of his riches unto his creatureas, and unto us his own people
most of all; Bless his Name, for the Lord is good. 2. Albeit we be sinful,
and deserve to be cut off in justice from the benefits which Gods goodness
might bestow upon us; yet the course of his pardoning mercy, renewing the
remission of sin to us, as often as we come to him in his Christ, does keep the
channel of his goodness open and clear to us, that it may run toward us for
ever. His mercy is everlasting. 3. The Covenant of grace set down in the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, with the legacy of so many rich
Promise^erving to strengthen the faith of every weak believer, does make the
matter of Gods praise, and of his peoples joys so sure, that how sad soever
our spirits may be, when we look to our selves; yet we shall have matter of
praising, thanking, and blessiug God, when we look to his goodness and mercy,
and to what he has for our comfort said in the Word of his everlasting truth:
Be thankful unto him, and bless his Name: for the Lord is good; his mercy is
everlasting, and his truth endures to all generations.

Amen.
FINIS.

