Miracles not ceased.

TO HIS GRACE

GEORGE Duke of Buckingham, etc. Of his miraculous Cure, and of the rest of all
the most wonderful and glorious Miracles and Cures, wrought by a Roman
Catholic Priest, in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, in the
Months of June and July 1663, in confirmation of the holy Roman Catholic
Faith.

By A. S.

These Signs shall follow them that believe. Mark 16. 17.

Benedicite Deum coeli, and coram omnibus viventibus confitemini ei, quia fecit
vobiscum misericordiam suam. Etenim sacramentum Regis abscondere bonum est:
opera autem Dei revelare and confiteri honorificum est. Tob. 12. 6, 7.

Obedire oportet Deo magis, quam hominibus. Act. 5. 29.

Printed at London the first of August, 1663.

Clama, ne cesses, quasi tuba exalia vocem tuam and annuntia, etc. Isaiae 58.
1.

Io nobIsCVM DeVs IsraeL; gaudeamns, and exultemus, and demus gloriam ei.
Alleluia, Amen. Alleluia sine fine.

Dominum formidabunt Adversarii ejus: and super ipsos in coelis tonabit. 1 Reg.
2. 10.

Miracles not ceased.
CHAP. I.
To his Gnace George Buckingham, etc. of his miraculous Cure, etc.

1. BY a Fall from your Horse, my Lord, you have lost the use of your right
Hand; but by the Prayers of a Roman Catholic Priest, with the sign of the
Cross, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (when
you vowed, and promised to God, that if he should restore you to your health
again, you would become a Roman Catholic) you were forthwith perfectly Cured.
Confiteantur Domino misericordiae ejus et mirabilia ejus fillius hominum, Psalm.
106. 9. Behold thou art made whole, sin no more, John 5. 14. Hitherto, my Lord,
you have lived in Heresy and Sin, henceforth be converted, and godly given,
and delay not, to pay and perform what you have vowed and promised to God: for
An unfaithful and foolish promise displeases him, Eccles. 5. 3. And it were
much better for your Lordship not to have vowed at all, then not to perform
after you have vowed. Pay then your vows, my Lord, else know that what happened
to you in Body, is but a type or figure of what hereafter shall happen to your
Soul; you shall be cast off your Horse, that is, your Soul shall be separated
from your Body, and you shall lose the use of your right Hand, that is, your
hope of everlasting bliss shall fade, and perish for ever. Perform therefore
your promise, my Lord, (which you have confirmed with an Oath, no less then the
holy and terrible Name of God) and sin no more, least some worse thing chance
to thee, John 5. 14.

2. Sin is the cause of all infirmities, sin is the cause why some once
perfectly cured, do fall again into a greater relapse. When the unclean spirit
departs out of a Man, he wandreth through places without water, seeking rest,
and not finding, he says, I will return into my House whence I departed, and
when he is come, he finds it swept with a Besome, and trimmed; then he goes,
and takes seven other spirits worse then himself, and entering in they dwell
there, and the last of that man is made worse then the first. Luke 11. so it is
with infirmities, and this is the reason why many who were sometimes cured by
the man of God, are as ill now again, or perhaps worse, then they were before.
Therefore let such as received benefit by him give God thanks, pay their vows,
and perform their promise to him, and sin no more; and so once made whole, they
shall be preserved, and kept whole and sound, as long as it is to the glory of
God, and good of their souls.

3. Were not ten made clean, and where are the nine, Luke 17. 17. How many
tens? how many thousands has been made clean, and cured by this holy man to
God? and how few of them returned to give glory and due thanks to God? Give
glory then to God, my Lord, give glory to God and good example to others; be
you this one of the ten that returns and give glory and due thanks to God for
his benefits, become a good and holy Roman Catholic, according to your
promise, and so God will prosper and bless your Grace. Amen.

4. For your scruples in matters of Faith, if your Grace have any, Read I
beseech you, my Lord, my little Book, entitled The Reconciler of Religions;
where I clearly prove, First, Tha^ the Roman Catholic Church is the only true
way to God, out of which no man can be saved: Secondly, That the Protestant or
Sectarian Religion is but a mere cheat, a delusion, an heresy, an heathenisme:
Thirdly, That the Roman Catholic Church is the insallible and inerrable Judge
of all Controversies in matters of Faith: Fourthly, That the Protestant or
Sectarian Bible is not the Word of God more then the Alcaran of the Turks; and
the old vulgar Latin Bible is defended: Fifthly, That the Protestant Bishops,
Ministers, and Preachers are but Cheaters and Deluders, false Prophets, and
Priests of Baal: Sixthly and lastly, All our Adversaries objections answered
and confuted, to all which I suppose they will not answer in haste, otherwise
then thou lie Bellarmine, or some such way, which shall not be enough for me,
nor I believe for any other sincere and reasonable man. In the mean time your
Grace may be pleased to peruse this ensuing Challenge of (one of your own
Ministers, lately converted) Dr. Baylie, to all Schismatics, Sectaries, and
Heretics whatsoever.

CHAP. II.
Doctor Baylie's Challenge to all Sectaries.

IT Romans 1. V. 8. 12. White's defense of his way, pa. 435. King James Speech in
parliament. Whitaker in answer to Doctor Sands 2. demonstrat. Fulk in Epist. 2.
ad Thessolsect. 7.
will not be denied but that the Church of Rome was once a most excellent
flourishing Mother Church. This Church could not cease to be such, but she must
fall either by Apostasy, Heresy, or Schism.

1. Apostasy is not only a renouncing of the Faith of Christ, but the very
name and title to Christianity. No man will ever say that the Church of Rome
had ever such a fall, or fell thus.

2. Heresy is an adhesion to some private and singular opinion or error in
Faith, contrary to the general approved Doctrine of the Church. If the Church
of Rome did ever adhere to any singular or new Opinion disagreeable to the
common received Doctrine of the Christian World, I pray you satisfy me to
these particulars, viz. 1. By what general Councels was she ever condemned? 2.
Or which of the Fathers ever writ against her? 3. Or by what authority was she
otherwise reproved? For it seems to me to be a thing very incongruous, that so
great a Church should be condemned by every one that has a mind to condemn her.

3. Schism is a departure or division from the unity of the Church, whereby
that bond and communion held with some former Church is broken and dissolved.
If ever the Church of Rome divided her self by Schism from any other Body of
faithful Christians, brake Communion, or went forth from the society of any
elder Church, I pray satisfy me to these particulars. 1. Whose company did she
leave? 2. From whom did she go? 3. Where was the true Church that she did
forsake? For it appears a little strange to me, that a Church should be counted
schismatical, when there cannot be assigned another Church different from her
(which from age to age has continued visible) from whence she departed.

CHAP. III.
A Dialogue between a Catholic and a Protestant concerning Religion.

1. IT happened on a time, that a certain Roman Catholic and a Protestant,
discoursing together of Religion, after many words changed, concluded in this
manner following.

Catholic. Do you believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and
Earth; and in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord?


Protestant. I do.


Cath. Do you believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church?


Prot. I do.


Cath. Why then would you not hear and obey the Holy Catholic Church, as
Christ and his Father, under pain of eternal damnation commands thee? Do you
not know; that the Scripture affirms, It is not every man that says, Lord,
Lord, to Christ, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the
will of his Father, Matthew. 7. 21. But the Will of the Father is, that every man
hear Christ. This is my beloved Son, him hear ye, Matthew. 17 5. Therefore every
man, that hears not Christ, shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. But
Christ wills and commands, that every man hear the Church, Mat. 18. 17. He
that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and he
that despises me, despises him that sent. Luc. 10. 16. He that hears not
the Church, let him be unto thee, as an Heathen and Publican, Mat. 18. 17.
Therefore every man, that hears not the Church, shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Why then, I say, would you not hear and obey the Church;
which is always Holy and Catholic? why would you not believe all, whatsoever
she proposes to be believed? why forsake you her? why follow you the
Protestant?


2. Prot. I do hear and obey the Catholic Church. I believe all, whatsoever
she proposes to be believed. I forsake her not. I follow the Protestant,
because this is the Catholic Church.


Cath. How can you prove, that the Protestant Church is the Catholic Church?


Prot. I must confess, though I have not sufficient learning to prove it, yet I
have faith enough to believe it, because our learned Ministers tell us so.


Cath. You cannot tell, but your learned Ministers may be mistaken.


Prot. Neither can you prove they are mistaken.


Cath. Yes; I can.


Prot. How, I pray you?


3. Cath. Very well; because there is but one Catholic Church; that is to say,
one Church, which is universal for time, place, and believers, Luke 1. 33. Mark
16. 15. which is the faithful people dispersed throughout the world. St
Augustine in Psalm 149. which is the Light of the world, and a City built upon a
Mountain, that cannot be hid, Matthew. 5. 14. and consequently visible, and known
and easily discerned from Turks, and Jews, and Heathens, and Heretics, even
by her name. But this Catholic Church is the Roman Pontificial: for She
alone is the visible and known universal Church, for time, place, and
believers. All the rest are not universal for time, place, nor believers; for
they began of late; they are but in few places; they are but on handful in
respect of the Catholic Church. Therefore they are mistaken, that tell you,
She is the Protestant.

4. Moreover, if the visible and known Catholic Church cannot fail, or err in
matters of Faith, She must have always remained, since Christ's time, to this
day, without interruption, and error: But the visible and known Catholic
Church cannot fail, or err in matters of Faith; for She is always Holy: I
believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church. (The Apostles Creed.) She
is the spotless Spouse of Christ, Hos. 2. 9. with which her Head and spouse,
and the Spirit of Truth, abides for ever, Matthew. 28. 20. John 14. 16. The
pillar and firmament of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against her, Matthew. 16. 18. Therefore She must have always remained
since Christ's time to this day, without interruption, and error. (Otherwise we
could have nothing sure.) But no ^ther visible Catholic Church remained, since
Christ's time to this day, without interruption, and error, but the Roman
Pontificial: Therefore the Roman Pontificial alone is the visible and known
Catholic Church.

5. If any can say, that the Roman Pontificial Church has not always
remained, since Christ's time to this day, without interruption, and error, let
him tell, when was the Succession of her Bishops, Pastors, and Believers
interrupted; or when, and wherein did She err; what general Council condemned
her; what holy Father wrote against her. Or that there remained any other
visible Church on earth, since Christ's time to this day, without interruption,
and error. Let him tell, what was She? what is She? where was she? where is
She? what is her name? what Bishops and Pastors had She, or as yet has She?
what Emperors, or Kings, did adhere unto her, or now do? what General Councils
did She hold? what Heretics did She condemn? what Academies did She confirm?
what Churches, Monasteries, and Hospitals did She build, etc.

Sure, the Greek Church, or Churches, have not always remained, since Christ's
time to this day, without interruption; witness the world: nor yet without
error; for they Heretically deny the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the
Father and the Son, etc.

The Lutheran and Calvinian Church (which they call Reformed) is erroneous and
new; for it began with the Reformation (from whence it has its name) which was
done by Luther and Calvin, as their Followers gloriously averr.

But I ask them, that so glory in this Reformation, were not Luther and Calvin,
when they first boasted of the Spirit, and began to reform the Church, were
they not (I say) then to be tried?


Prot. They needed no trial: for their Spirit was of God.


Cath. How do you know, their Spirit was of God? or how can you make this
appear?


Prot. I know it very well; and though I cannot make it appear, yet our learned
Ministers can sufficiently prove it.


Cath. They never yet could prove it, nor ever shall: we defy them; and
suppose their Spirit were from God, yet still they were to be tried according
to the Scripture. 1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit; but try the
Spirits whether they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into
the world. Upon which words, even your own newest Bible, in the Argument of
this Chapter, says, He warns them not to believe all Teachers, who boast of
the Spirit, but to try them by the Rules of the Catholic Faith. Therefore
they were to be tried: and so they were indeed tried by the Rules of the
Catholic Faith; that is to say, by a General Council, approved by the Head,
and received by the Body of the Catholic Church, and they were found guilty of
Apostacy and pertinacious error, of going out of the Catholic Church, and her
religious Monasteries, contrary to their Rules and Sacred Vows, into the world;
of preaching new Doctrine, prophesying falsely, and consequently Anathematized
and condemned for Heretics, they and all their followers, according to that of
the Galatians 1. 9. If any Evangelize unto you contrary to that you have
received, be he Anathema. Therefore the Reformed, or Protestant Church is not
the Catholic.

The Independents, the Anabaptists, the Socinianists, the Quakers and Shakers,
etc. are also erroneous and new; neither can they, or the Reformed Church, show
any continual and uninterrupted Succession of Bishops, Pastors, or Believers
from Christ; if they can, let them produce it. But the Roman Pontificial alone
is old, and always remained, since Christ's time to this day, without error,
or interruption of Doctrine, Bishops, Pastors, Believers, etc. and will to the
consummation of the world; what can all your learned Ministers answer to this?


Prot. I Will warrant it; our Ministers will answer them word by word. Know, Sir,
we have as learned Head-pieces of our Church, as any in yours.


Cath. Who are these, I pray you?


Prot. Dr. Pierce, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Gunning, and diverse others; which will make
nothing to answer these.


Cath. Alas! good Sir, lean not so much upon a broken stick. I assure you; that
neither Pierce, nor Calamy, nor Gunning, nor any cunning Sophister of them all,
nor all the Shismaticks, and Sectaries, and Heretics in the world, can refute
these, or answer them categorice and clearly.


Prot. No?


Cath. No truly; and if you do not believe me, try, and then believe your
self, when you have found it true, that I tell you.


8. Prot. May it please you, Sir, to give me this Discourse in writing.


Cath. I will give it you even in writing, though not the whole Discourse, yet
more of it then ever they will answer unto.


Prot. I thank you, Sir: if God bless me, I will present it them.


Cath. Do so; and if they cannot answer it in scriptis categorice and clearly,
without any shifting and winding about, leave them, and become a Catholic.


Prot. I promise you, by the grace of God I will: and God forbid but I should.
For I think it neither Duty, nor Devotion, nor Discretion; nor yet Religion,
nor Reason, nor Right, to be of a Church, that is not always able and ready to
give a satisfactory answer to every man, that asks her a reason of the hope
that is in her. Whence I ask you also, whether the Romane-Catholick Church can
give me a satisfactory answer, why She worshippeth Images, prays to Saints,
prays for the Dead, etc.


Cath. Yes, that She can; if true Scripture, right Reason, General Councils,
holy Fathers, and the Consent of all Ages may satisfy you.


Prot. Say you so?


Cath. Come, and see.


praIseD be the thrICe hoLy naMe of Our Jesus. AMEN.
Now let us come to the Miracles.
CHAP. IV.
A Praeludium to the Miracles.

1. ALL men naturally are moved in matters of Religion, by Miracles; nay some
are so perverse, that otherwise they cannot be moved. Whence considering
seriously with my self the perverseness and height of Infidelity the Sectaries
and Heretics of this Nation are come to, I always thought it (as it were)
needful for their conversion to the true Religion, that God should send some
one thereof that would work Miracles before their faces. Neither was I
mistaken, as it clearly appears; for God ( who loves the souls, Sap. 11. 27.
and wills that all men be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth 1 Timothy
2. 4.) of his infinite mercy and goodness, was pleased to send them a Roman
Catholic Priest, who, in confirmation of the holy Roman Catholic Church, and
of her Tenets and Doctrines, was for the space of five weeks daily working
Miracles before their eyes; and would be longer, had not they repelled him, and
as it were judging themselves unworthy of eternal life commanded him away;
which the Turks or most barbarous Infidels would not have done, yet England has
done this evil.

2. Mountebanks and Cheaters are permitted, but the man of God must be
repelled. Foxes, that is, cunning Heretics, have holes; and Birds of the air,
that is, fantastical, frentick, mad Sectaries have nests in England, but the
man of God has not whereupon to lay his head. Not this man (cry the
Antichristian Pseudo-Bishops, the Sons of Iniquity, and Fathers of Mischief)
not this man, but Barrabas. Of the man of God then what shall be done? Let him
be banished, cry they. Blessed be God, they did not cry, Take him away, Take
him away, Crucify him; they were (though against their nature) so civil, as to
conten^ themselves with his Banishment only. Amaziah (the Protestant Bishop)
said unto Amos (the holy man of God) O thou the Seer, go flee thou away into
the land of Judah (to Rome, or amongst Roman Catholics) and there eat thy
bread, and prophecy (or work wonders) there. But prophecy no more at Bethel
(at London, or amongst Heretics) for it is the King's Chapel, and it is the
King's Court. So the Protestant Bible, Amos 7. 12, 13. But ours has it
somewhat otherwise, and adds: Amos answered and said unto Amasias, etc. Thou
say: thou shall not prophecy upon Israel; (that is, upon the Tribes of
Israel that fell from Judah; that is to say, upon Schismatics, Sectaries, and
Heretics, that fell from the Roman Catholic Church) and thou shall not still
upon (or preach unto) the House of the Idol; (in Hebr. it is Risus) that is to
say, upon the Idolatrous and ridiculous Protestant Religion. See 3 Regum 12.
26, etc. usque ad finem. For which, thus says the Lord: Thy Wife, etc. Amos 7.
16, 17. He must be banished then: and why? What harm has he done? Because he is
contrary to the Protestant Bishops, the rebellious and idolatrous Priests of
Bethel; because he is holy, they wicked; because he would convert the Nation to
God, they would keep it in flavery to the Devil; because he works Miracles,
they can work none: He must go therefore; he is gone then, blessed be God, even
while they were consulting and saying, What shall we do? for this man does many
Miracles. He is gone even before they remembered: if we let him go so, all will
believe and be converted by him; and the Roman Catholic Bishops shall come,
and take both our Place, and our Dignity, which we have wrongfully kept from
them, almost this hundred years. He is gone then.

3. Notwithstanding good God has done his work, and his Servant whom he has
sent, has also in an high degree finished his course: for even in the space of
those five weeks he wrought more Miracles before their faces, then we read were
ever yet done, at any of the former Conversions of England; it remains then,
that now they willingly believe and be converted to the Holy Roman Catholic
Church, or hereafter against their will suffer the heavy and just judgment of
God which hastens to fall upon them. Woe be to the Sectaries and Heretics of
England, woe be to them (if now they be not converted) for if amongst the Turks
and Infidels had been wrought the Miracles, that has been done amongst them,
they had done penance in hair-cloth and ashes long ago. They have seen devils
cast out of possessed Bodies, the Blind restored to their sight, the Deaf to
their hearing, the Dumb to their speaking, the Lame to their going: in fine
they have seen all sorts of infirmities cured before their eyes, by a Member of
the Holy Roman Catholic Church, in confirmation of her Faith and Doctrines,
which are the Signs our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ told his Disciples should
follow them that believe, that is to say, his Church, Mark 16. 17, 18, etc. so
that they have no excuse, and that such of them as have not seen those Miracles
may also have no excuse. but be as well satisfied, as they that have. I thought
fit to present before their eyes, the matter of a dosen (which is enough here)
of the persons upon whom some of those Miracles were wrought; by whose proper
confession, and Neighbors relation they may be informed of the truth, which is
as much satisfaction, as in reason they can expect.

CHAP. V.
A dozen of the abovementioned Miracles, with the names of the Persons, and
Places where, and whereupon they were wrought.

1. COlonel March and his Wife perfectly cured, he of Deafness, she of Lameness
and weakness of limbs, which troubled her many years; they live in Hartstreet
in Covent Garden, over against the Heart.

2. Colonel Chapman's Wife being very lame and troubled with inward Diseases,
and so ill that for one year and an half she was hardly able to go out of her
chamber, was perfectly cured. She lives in Holliesstreet by New Market, next
door to the Goat.

3. Captain Richard Dwire, one of his Highness the Duke of Yorks Lifeguard,
being troubled with a sore Eye was perfectly cured; and his Wife who was seven
years deaf was also perfectly cured.

4. George Brown Esquire living in Queenstreet, having for several years a pain in
his Knee, was forthwith perfectly cured.

5. Captain Walter Tressy, one of his Highness the Duke of Yorks Lifeguard,
stark blind of one eye, was restored to his sight.

5. Captain Leonard Blanshfield, one of his Highness the Duke of Yorks
LifeGuard, being many years very ill, with great and desperate inward Diseases,
and at length being given over by the Physicians as incurable, was perfectly
cured

6. Margaret Peter's in Mr Williams Rents hard by the three Horshoos in St Giles
right over against the Pound, being born purblinde, or almost altogether
blind, was perfectly restored to clear sight. It Is admirable, how speedily
this maid was cured; for when the Holy man laid his hand on her head, and said
that short and wellknown Prayer; Super aegros manus imponent and ^bene
habebunt. Presently she confessed she saw something better; then he made upon
her eyes the Sign of the Cross in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost; and forthwith she did as it were leap for joy, and cry out,
I see clearly. Qui vidit testimonium, perhibet; and verum est testimonium ejus.

7. Richard Golden, a Porter, living in the Cross-lane going into
Newton-street, being for many years deaf and dim of eyes, was perfectly cured.

8. Thomas Elder, the red-bearded blind man, who was led up and down the City
a begging this twenty years, living now at Gaffer Carriers house over against
the Guy of Warwick in St Gile's beyond the Church, being stark blind, was
restored to his sight, and forthwith became a Roman Catholic.

9. Valentine Dawes, a Quaker, living in Aier-street in the Piccadilly, being
for many years troubled with the Falling Sickness, was perfectly cured; and
thereupon presently became a Roman Catholic.

10. Mary Grant, living in Millyard by the Sign of the Castle in Rosemary-Lane,
being a Blind Protestant was restored to her sight, and presently converted to
the Holy Roman Catholic Church.

11. Mrs. Bridget Treswell, living at Mr. Huberston's House in Newton-Street,
having for many years almost all her Guts or Intrails hanging out (to all men's
astonishment that saw her) at her navel, was perfectly cured.

12. Mrs. Isabell Barret at the OrangeTree in great Turn-Stile at Holborn,
being for many years very much troubled with great Lameness and weakness of
Limbs, was perfectly cured.

13. Jane Shirly, living next door to the Cock over against the Kings Head in
Saint Giles's, was perfectly cured of the Palsy, which troubled her for many
years before.

14. Mrs. Anne Grub, an ancient Woman of Eighty years of age, living in
Luthners-Lane, at Mr. Jews his House the French Chyrurgion, being for many
years so Lame that she could not go, but upon Crutches, was perfectly cured,
went upright, and left her Crutches behind her.

15. Mrs. Anne Prince, living at the Hen and Chickens in Middle-Rowe at
Holborn, being just a year troubled with Withcraft and Devils, was perfectly
cured and dispossessed of both.

16. Hannah Gammis a Servant Maid, living in Mr. Farmors House in
Ragged-StaffCourt, at the upper end of Drury Lane, being possessed with Evil
Spirits, was in the presence of many Lords and Ladies, and People of Quality,
perfectly dispossessed and cured. It were worth any man's hearing, to hear how
this Maid was first possessed, how she continued so, and how she was
dispossessed, and perfectly cured.

17. Edmond Swine Soldier, living in Eagle-Court over against Somerset House
in the Strand, in Mr. Crossbye's a Shoomakers House, being by Witchcraft
impotent to know his new married Wise, was perfectly restored.

18. My Lady Hameltons Waiting-Maid in the Piats, being so Lame, that by no
means she could kneel or bow, was perfectly cured.

19. Mrs. Joan Cunningham, living at the Sign of the Star in Moorfields, being
very Lame for Eight years, was perfectly cured.

20. John Digby Esquire, at Queens-Street, cured of some infirmities about his
Eyes, ask him (if you please) and he can tell you twenty times more Miracles
then here are, as I suppose he, and also Mr. Sheldon, and the others beneath
spoken of, will hereafter declare to the view of the World. Their relation,
without doubt, will also satisfy and please all rational Men. For while the
holy man was at the Queens Chapel, no Infirm were permitted to come at him
without a Ticket. Before they went to him. they were examined what Infirmity
they had, and when they came from him, what benefit they received.

If any has removed from the appointed or prescribed place since the first day
of August, enquire there whether he or they be gone, and you may know.

CHAP. VI.
The Epilogue with Objections answered.

1. SUch as desire to hear and know more of those admirable wonders of our
Lord, let them hearken to public Fame, and enquire of Mr. Sheldon at the
Queens Chapel, and of Mr. Digby in Queens-Street, and others that have taken
particular Lists of many of them, and they may further inform them, if they
please (as they ought; for the great Mercies and admirable Wonders of God are
not to be concealed, or hid under a Bnshel.) I said of many of them, because
they could not of all: for this man of God has wrought innumerable other
Mirac^es also, in the face of the Church, and in the view of the World, which
are not written in this little Paper, nor in their Lists: and these are written
that you may believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholick-Church; and that
believing, you may have life everlasting. Amen.

2. Here I could and would check all such as stiff-necked and of uncircumcised
hearts and ears, do always resist the Holy Ghost, had I not stinted my self to
the August capacity or inscription of this little Book, a great volume in Folio
being ready to come forth, Entitled The most remarkable Miracles wrought by
the Reverend Fathhr J. O. E. wherein all such Backbiters and Murmurers are
clearly confuted.

3. In the mean time to such as say; First, That he is a Cheater and Deluder,
and that what he does, is but Sorcery and Witchcraft. Secondly, That many comes
to him, he cannot eure at all. Thirdly, That to some he gives but little ease,
or partly cures them, not wholly Fourthly and lastly, That others whom he has
cured, whether partly or wholly, do continue so but a little while, and fall
back again into a relapse, and are afterward as ill, or worse then they were
before; to all which one after another I answer.

4. To the First. The Jews said to Christ, that in Beelzebub Prince of the
Devils he cast out Devils; who then can wonder, hat Jewish Heretics should say
the like to the Servant of Christ? If they called Christ Beelzebub, Sedueer and
Cheater, who can think that their Successors the Heretics should give better
Language to his Disciple? Let them therefore say what they will, and think what
they please: what then? they can prove nothing of what they say, nor yet
disprove what is said and done against them. Certainly if this holy man of God
were a Seducer or Cheater, as indeed he is not, he does not seduce nor cheat
us: for in casting out Devils, and in all his Cures, he uses no Charms, nor
unknown words; but he uses the Prayers of the Holy CatholickChurch, the Sign
of the Cross, and the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: so that if he were, I say, a Deluder, he does not delude us, but the
Church, and Christ, who commands us to hear and obey her. But Christ and his
Church cannot delude or deceive us, therefore he is no Deluder nor Deceiver. We
never yet heard nor read, that Seducers or Cheaters, or Thieves or Murderers,
or Witches or Wizards, or False Prophets, or Priests of Baal, could, or did
work Wonders by the Sign of the Cross, and in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (as he does) Nay it is impossible they should, as
we proved in the Reconciler of Religions, chap 3. number. 9. and elsewhere. Whence
we conclude with the holy Scripture, John 9. 33. If this man were not of God,
he could not do any thing.

5. To the second, I answer, did those whom he could not cure at all deserve to
be cured? had they requisite faith to be cured? was it to the glory of God and
good of their souls that they should be cured? forsooth you know not, why then
do you murmr? is it because some were cured, all must be cured? is it because
God is good, you must be naught? cannot God distribute his gifts as he will,
and to whom he please? why then, say you, does he pretend to cure all? I
answer, you mistake Sir, he does not pretend nor profess to cure all, no nor
any at all, but through the bowels of Charity he receives all, and refuses
none, and cures only such as please God. He is not to the right or left hand of
their cure, but as please God, whence to whom God please to give little, he
gives little; and to whom God is willing to give much, he gives much, and that
freely and gratis.

6. To the third I answer, were they who received but a little cure, worthy of
greater? was the faith they had greater then the cure they received? was it to
the glory of God and to the good of their souls that they should receive more?
neither this do you know! why then do you backbite? was not the least cure or
benefit they had by him, supernatural; and consequently miraculous and from
God? yes you will say, why then do you despise or undervalue it? forsooth
because you are envious, or ignorant, or both. No, say you, but Gods works are
perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. I answer. Gods works are perfect indeed (every work in
its own kind) and therefore when he gives a little ease, its his perfect work
as well as when he gives much, or wholly cures: otherwise a man that is born
blind should not be the work of God, which to affirm were absurd. Read John 9.
1, 3. and Mark 8. 24, 25, 26. and see my former answers to such objections in
the Epistle Dedicatory of the reconciler of Religions.

7. To the fourth and last I answer, did they who were once cured, and
afterward fall into a relapse, give due thanks and glory to God for his
benefits bountifully and gratis bestowed on them? did they amend their life and
conversation? did their good works abound? did their faith continue or
persevere longer then their cure lasted? did not St. Peter walk upon the water
while his faith was strong but when he staggered, did he not begin to sink? did
he not hear said to him, you of little faith, why did thou doubt? Let
themselves lay hand on their breast and answer to this; for your part you know
nothing of it; therefore you may sit down, hold your peace, and admire the
wonderful works of the holy Ghost.

8. But all such as have received any benefit by him, let them stand up and
bless God, and before all the world confess unto him; for whether they have
been cured partly or wholly, God has showed them his mercies according to his
good will, and perhaps also according to their preparation or merit de congruo.
And if afterward any of them has fallen into a relapse, it was not Gods fault,
nor in any wise to be imputed to his servant by whom he has once so cured
them, but either to themselves, or to their demerits de condigno; or may be to
the further mercies and goodness of God toward them, for his greater glory,
and everlasting good of their souls. Quis enim cognovit sensum Domini? aut quis
consiliarius ejus fuit? Romans 11. 34.

Alleluia.
ThrICe bLesseD be JehoVa JesUs aMen, The Father, and the Son, and the holy
Ghost, holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath. Alleluia, Amen Alleluia without
END.
An Additional Advertisement to 8. of CHAP. V.
NOte here, That this poor man Thomas Elder being cured and glorifying God
(like him that was cured by Christ, and examined by the Jews, John 9.) was
brought to Hixe's-Hall, and there publicly examined: How were your eyes
opened? how did you see? He answered, The Holy man of God cured me. They like
the Jews replied We know he is not a man of God, but rather of the Devil, a
Papist Priest, a Seducer, a Witch, a Cheater, etc. and therefore we command
thee speak no more of him: for if you tell any man that he cured thee, we will
put thee in prison. O potent Command! O wise Threatening! Put me in prison, said
he; You may indeed imprison my body, if you please, but you cannot imprison,
confine, or coarct my soul. While I have breath in my body, said he, I shall
openly acknowledge and confess God's admirable Wonders; and respect and honor
his Servant whom he made an Instrument and Minister of his Mercies unto me,
etc. Ask himself, he is alive still; Ask his neighbors; Ask them at
Hixe's-Hall.

To the King and Parliament.
HOw long my Liege? how long my Lords and Gentlemen? how long will you halt in
parts? If Jesus Christ be God, follow him, and observe his Commands: but if
Baal be God, follow Baal. If the holy Roman Catholic Religion be the true and
only way to salvation, be of it: But if the Sectarian or heretical Protestant
be it, remain Sectaries and Heretics. If all the Sectarian and Protestant
Bishops and Ministers in England can disprove and falsify what I say, let me
suffer what you please: But if all what I say be substantially true, let the
Priests of Baal, let the Ministers of Satan, let the Enemies of God and of your
Souls dye and perish, if they will not be converted and live. Si veritatem
dico, quaren on creditis mihi? Why would you damn your selves, and the whole
Nation committed by God to your Charge? Operibus credit. Exurgat Deus and
dissipentur inimici ejus, and fugiant qui oderunt eum a facie ejus.

Amen.
A Commemoration for the King.
Antiphona.
God save the king, and convert his Enemies, the Sectaries and Heretics of
England, Ireland, and Scotland.

V Lord give thy Judgment to the King;
R And thy Justice to the King's Son.
Let us pray.
O God in whose hand is the Kings heart, and who can turn it as you will;
grant we beseech thee to our King Charles the Second, Holiness in His Head,
Urim and Thummim in His Breast, Booz at His Side, and Jachin on His right Hand;
that He may know, and do sweetly and strongly what is pleasing to thee, and
Good for Himself and His Loyal Subjects, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
JESUS MARIA EASVS VIRGO Jesus Fili Dei vivi, miserere nobis. Sancta Maria,
Matter Dei, and Virgo perpetua, ora pro nobis. a and o

AMEN
FINIS.

