A Dialogue, between Toney, and the Ghost of the Late LORD VISCOUNT- STAFFORD.
Ghost. WHy do thou restless Spectour haunt a Shade,
Who thy false practices, a Ghost has made?
Why do thou with Incessant rage pursue
Those whom thy only Crimes to ruin drew?
Thy false pretenses of a wreched PLOT,
Whose vile Conception, thy own Brain begot
Much Blood has spilt; and on thy Head has brought,
Heavens Vengeance, for the perjuries thou'st taught.

Toney. Poor empty Shadow? can thou think that I,
Will like thy self, contented go to Dye?
Know senceless Shade; Whenever I do Fall,
Millions at least shall wait my Funeral.
The kind believing Crowd; which I have led
Long in a Noose; and my Revenge has fed:
Who still with acclaimations made my Name,
Reach to the Clouds t'imortalize my Fame.
Will not believe that I,
Bent my Designs, t'establish Anarchie,
Thou see I still the Idol am,
They think it was for their Liberties I came,
The unthinking Vulgar; will not see him Fall
Whom they so often, did their preserver Call.

Ghost. Thou Hellish Engine no, Heaven has at last
Decreed, to open all thy Treasons past,
Thy Insinuating Arts henceforth shall fail,
Thy Ianus Head at last shall loose it is vail:
Thy Cankered Soul displayed to open view
Shall turn on thee, the Venom which they drew,
The Peoples Eyes, shall be at last unsealed
And all thy Traiterous Designs Revealed;
Thy damned Arts, and Engines, all shall be
Laid open, the whole World thy PLOTS shall see.
Read in thy Heart; Writ in Large Characters
The Hellish Cause of our Domestic Jarrs:
Then to thy horror, thou amazed shall see
The abused People, my Revengers be.

Toney. Let it be true, let all the horrors come
Thou'st mentioned, Furies join to give me Doom,
Let in my Fall, both Heaven, and Earth Conspire,
My deep Designs shall not with Life Expire:
My Days, and Nights, (whilst here) I will employ
In Studied mischiefs Kingdoms to destroy;
My Emissaries shall Insinuate,
Seeking the Nations safety, brought my Fate;
I Will sow such Seeds; Sedition shall not cease
Nor shall they after I am Dead have Peace:
For with my fall, I Will darken all the Stars,
And leave the World in Universal Jars.

Ghost. Hold Impious wretch, what has thy fury fed!
Add not more Blood to that already Shed;
Think what Reward, to Blood and Treason's Due,
And think how many thy Ambition Slew:
Think e're it be too late, and think withal
Heaven does by me thee to Repentance Call;
The Gates of Mercy are not yet made fast,
O! seek it, and Repent thy Treason's past:
Or else when Death, has closed thy Mortal Eyes,
Then EVER will BEGIN thy Miseries.

LONDON, Printed for P. M. 1681.


