OBSERVATIONS ON THE 22. STANZA IN THE 9th. CANTO OF the 2d. Book of SPENCERS
Faery Queen. Full of excellent Notions concerning the Frame of Man, and his
rational Soul.

Written by the Right Noble and Illustrious Knight Sir Kenelme Digby, at the
request of a Friend.

LONDON: Printed for Daniel Friar Bookseller, at the Red-Bull in Little
Britain. 1643.

OBSERVATIONS on the 22. Stanza in the 9th. Canto of the 2d. Book of SPENCERS
Faery Queen, written by the Request of a Friend.
My most honored Friend,
I Am too well acquainted with the weaknesses of mine abilities (far unfit to
undergo such a Task as I have in hand) to flatter my self with the hope I may
either inform your understanding, or do my self honor by what I am to write.
But I am so desirous you should be possessed with the true knowledge of what a
bent will I have upon all occasions to do you service, that obedience to your
command weighs much more with me, then the lawfulness of any excuse can, to
preserve me from giving you in writing such a testimony of my ignorance and
erring Fantasy as I fear this will prove. Therefore without any more
circumstance, I will, as I can, deliver to you in this paper, what the other day
I discoursed to you upon the 22. Staff of the ninth Canto in the second Book
of that matchless Poem, The Faery Queen, written by our English Virgil; whose
words are these: The Frame thereof seemed partly Circular,
And part Triangular: O work divine!
Those two the first and last proportions are;
The one, imperfect, mortal, feminine;
The Other immortal, perfect, masculine;
And twixt them both a Quadrate was the Base,
Proportioned equally by seven and nine;
Nine was the Circle set in Heavens place,
All which compacted made a goodly Diapase.


In this Staff the Author seems to me to proceed in a different manner from
what he does elsewhere generally through his whole Book. For in other places,
although the beginning of his Allegory or mystical sense, may be obscure, yet
in the process of it, he does himself declare his own conceptions in such sort
as they are obvious to any ordinary capacity: But in this, he seems only to
glance at the profoundest notions that any Science can deliver us, and then on
a sudden (as it were) recalling himself out of an Enthusiasme, he returns to
the gentle Relation of the Allegorical History he had begun, leaving his
Readers to wander up and down in much obscurity, and to come within much
danger of erring at his Intention in these lines? Which I conceive to be
dictated by such a learned Spirit, and so generally a knowing Soul, that were
there nothing else extant of Spencers writing, yet these few words would make
me esteem him no whit inferior to the most famous men that ever have been in
any age: as giving an evident testimony herein, that he was thoroughly verst in
the Mathematical Sciences, in Philosophy, and in Divinity, to which this might
serve for an ample Theme to make large Commentaries upon. In my praises upon
this subject, I am confident that the worth of the Author will preserve me from
this Censure, that my Ignorance only begets this Admiration, since he has
written nothing that is not admirable. But that it may appear I am guided
somewhat by my own Judgment (though it be a mean one) and not by implicit
Faith, and that I may in the best manner I can, comply with what you expect
from me, I will no longer hold you in suspense, but begin immediately, (though
abruptly) with the declaration of what I conceive to be the true sense of this
place, which I shall not go about to adorn with any plausible discourses, or
with Authorities and examples drawn from others writings (since my want both
of convenience and learning would make me fall very short herein) but it shall
be enough for me to intimate mine own conceptions, and offer them up to you in
their own simple and naked form, leaving to your better Judgment the
examination of the weight of them, and after perusal of them, beseeching you
to reduce them and me if you perceive us erring.

It Is evident that the Authors intention in this Canto is to describe the body
of a man informed with a rational soul, and in prosecution of that design he
sets down particularly the several parts of the one and of the other: But in
this Stanza he comprehends the general description of them both, as (being
joined together to frame a complete Man) they make one perfect compound, which
will the better appear by taking a survey of every several clause thereof by
it self.

The Frame thereof seemd partly Circular,
And part Triangular --
By these Figures, I conceive that he means the mind and body of Man; the first
being by him compared to a Circle, and the latter to a Triangle. For as a
Circle of all Figures is the most perfect, and includes the greatest space,
and is every way full and without Angles, made by the continuance of one only
line: so man's soul is the noblest and most beautiful Creature, that God has
created, and by it we are capable of the greatest gifts that God can bestow,
which are Grace, Glory, and Hypostaticall Union of the Humane nature to the
Divine, and she enjoys perfect freedom and liberty in all her Actions, and
is made without composition which no Figures are that have Angles (for they are
caused by the coincidence of several lines) but of one pure substance which
was by God breathed into a Body made of such compounded earth as in the
preceding Stanza the Author describes. And this is the exact Image of him that
breathed it, representing him as fully as it is possible for any creature which
is infinitely distant from a Creator. For, as God has neither beginning nor
ending: so, neither of these can be found in a Circle, although that being made
of the successive motion of a line, it must be supposed to have a beginning
somewhere: God is compared to a Circle whose Center is every where, but his
circumference no where: But man's soul is a Circle, whose circumference is
limited by the true center of it, which is only God. For as a circumference
does in all parts alike respect that indivisible Point, and as all lines drawn
from the inner side of it, do make right Angles within it, when they meet
therein: so all the interior actions of man's soul ought to have no other
respective Point to direct themselves unto, but God; and as long as they make
right Angles, which is, that they keep the exact middle of virtue, and decline
not to either of the sides where the contrary vices dwell, they cannot fail,
but meet in their Center. By the Triangular Figure he very aptly designs the
body: for as the Circle is of all other Figures the most perfect and most
capacious: so the Triangle is most imperfect, and includes least space. It is
the first and lowest of all Figures; for fewer then 3 right Angles cannot
comprehend and enclose a superficies, having but 3 angles they are all acute
(if it be equilaterall) and but equal to 2 right; in which respect all other
regular Figures consisting of more then 3 lines, do exceed it.

(May not these be resembled to the 3 great compounded Elements in man's body,
to wit, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, which mingled together make the natural
heat and radical moisture, the 2 qualities whereby man lives?) For the more
lines that go to comprehend the Figure, the more and the greater the Angles
are, and the nearer it comes to the perfection and capacity of a Circle. A
Triangle is composed of several lines, and they of Points, which yet do not
make a quantity by being contiguous to one another: but rather the motion of
them does describe the lines. In like manner the Body of man is compounded of
the four Elements which are made of the four primarie qualities, not
compounded of them (for they are but Accidents) but by their operation upon the
first matter. And as a Triangle has three lines, so a solid Body has three
dimensions, to wit, Longitude, Latitude and Profunditie. But of all bodies, Man
is of the lowest rank, (as the Triangle is among Figures) being composed of the
Elements which make it liable to alteration and corruption. In which
consideration of the dignity of bodies, I divide them by a general division,
into sublunarie (which are the elementated ones) and Aethereall, which are
supposed to be of their own nature, incorruptible, and peradventure there are
some other species of corporeal substances, which is not of this place to
dispute.

O work divine!
Certainly of all Gods works, the noblest and perfectest is Man, and for whom
indeed all others were done. For, if we consider his soul, it is the very Image
of God. If his body, it is adornd with the greatest beauty and most excellent
symmetry of parts, of any created thing: whereby it witnesses the perfection
of the Architect, that of so drossie mold is able to make so rare a fabric: If
his operations, they are free: If his end, it is eternal glory. And if you
take all together, Man is a little world, an exact type of the great world, and
of God himself. But in all this, me thinks, the admirablest work is the joining
together of the two different and indeed opposite substances in Man, to make
one perfect compound; the Soul and the Body, which are of so contrary a nature,
that their uniting seems to be a Miracle. For how can the one inform and work
in the other, since there is no mean of operation (that we know of) between a
spiritual substance and a corporeal? yet we see that it does: as hard it is
to find the true proportion between a Circle and a Triangle; yet, that there
is a just proportion, and that they may be equal, Archimedes has left us an
ingenious demonstration; but in reducing it to a Problem, it fails in this,
that because the proportion between a crooked line and a straight one, is not
known, one must make use of a Mechanic way of measuring the peripherie of the
one, to convert it to the side of the other.

These two the first and last proportions are.
What I have already said concerning a Circle and a Triangle, does sufficiently
unfold what is meant in this verse. Yet twill not be amiss to speak one word
more hereof in this place. All things that have existence, may be divided into
three Classes; which are, either what is pure and simple in it self, or what
has a nature compounded of what is simple, or what has a nature compounded of
what is compounded. In continued quantity this may be exemplified by a Point,
a line, and a superficies in Bodies: and in numbers, by an unity, a Denary, and
a Centenary. The first, which is only pure and simple, like an indivisible
point, or an unity, has relation only to the Divine nature: That point then
moving in a sphericall manner (which serves to express the perfection of Gods
actions) describes the Circles of our souls, and of Angels, and intellectual
substances, which are of a pure and simple nature, but receives that from what
is so, in a perfecter manner, and that has his, from none else. Like lines
that are made by the flowing of points; or Denaries that are composed of
Unities: beyond both which there is nothing. In the last place, Bodies are to
be rankt, which are composed of the Elements: and they likewise suffer
composition, and may very well be compared to the lowest of the Figures which
are composed of lines, that owe their being to Points (and such are Triangles)
or to Centenaries that are composed of Denaries, and they of Unities. But if we
will compare these together by proportion, God must be left out, since there is
as infinite distance between the Simplicity and Perfection of his nature, and
the composition and imperfection of all created substances, as there is between
an indivisible Point and a continuate quantity, or between a simple Unity and
a compounded number. So that only the other two kinds of substance do enter
into this consideration: and of them I have already proved, that man's Soul is
of the one the noblest, (being dignified by hypostaticall Union above all other
intellectual substances) and his elementated Body, of the other the most low
and corruptible. Whereby it is evident, that those two are the first and last
Proportions, both in respect of their own Figure, and of what they expressed.

The one imperfect, Mortal, Feminine:
The Other immortal, perfect, Masculine.
Man's Body has all the proprieties of imperfect matter. It is but the Patient:
of it self alone, it can do nothing: it is liable to corruption and dissolution
if it once be deprived of the form which actuates it, and which is
incorruptible and immortal. And as the feminine Sex is imperfect, and receives
perfection from the masculine: so does the Body from the Soul, which to it is
in lieu of a male. And as in corporal generations the female affords but
gross and passive matter, to which the Male gives active heat and prolificall
virtue: so in spiritual generations (which are the operations of the mind)
the body administers only the Organs, which if they were not employed by the
Soul, would of themselves serve for nothing. And as there is a mutual
appetence between the Male and the Female, between matter and form; So there
is between the body and the soul of Man, but what ligament they have, our
Author defines not (and it may be Reason is not able to attain to it) yet he
tells us what is the foundation that this Machine rests on, and what keeps the
parts together; in these words.

And twixt them both, a Quadrate was the Base.
By which Quadrate, I conceive, that he means the four principal humors in
man's Body, viz. Choler, Blood, Phleme, and Melancholy: which if they be
distempered and unfitly mingled, dissolution of the whole does immediately
ensue: like to a building which falls to ruin, if the foundation and Base of
it be unsound or disordered. And in some of these, the vital spirits are
contained and preserved, which the other keep in convenient temper; and as long
as they do so, the soul and body dwell together like good friends: so that
these four are the Base of the conjunction of the other two, both which he
says, are Proportioned equally by seven and nine.


In which words, I understand he means the influences of the superior
substances (which govern the inferior) into the two differing parts of Man;
to wit, of the Stars (the most powerful of which, are the seven Planets,
into his body: and of the Angels divided into nine Hierarchies or Orders) into
his soul: which in his Astrophel, he says is By sovereign choice from
th`heavenly Quires select,
And lineally deriv`d from Angels race.


And as much as the one govern the Body, so much the other do the Mind.
Wherein is to be considered, that some are of opinion, how at the instant of a
child's conception, or rather more effectually at the instant of his Birth, the
conceived sperme or tender Body does receive such influence of the Heavens as
then reign over that place, where the conception or birth is made: And all the
Stars or virtuall places of the celestial Orbs participating the qualities
of the seven Planets (according to which they are distributed into so many
Classes, or the compounds of them) it comes to pass, that according to the
variety of the several Aspects of the one and of the other, there are various
inclinations and qualities in men's bodies, but all reduced to seven general
heads and the compounds of them, which being to be varied innumerable ways,
cause as many different effects, yet the influence of some one Planet
continually predominating. But when the matter in a woman's womb is capable of
a soul to inform it, then God sends one from Heaven into it.

-- Eternal God,
In Paradise whilome did plant this Flower,
Whence he it fetched out of her native place,
And did in Stock of earthly flesh inrace.
And this opinion the Author more plainly expresses himself to be of, in
another work, where he says: There she beholds with high aspiring thought
The cradle of her own Creation;
Emongst the seats of Angels heavenly wrought.


Which whether it have been created ever since the beginning of the world, and
reserved in some fit place till due time, or be created on emergent occasion;
no man can tell: but certain it is, that it is immortal, according to what I
said before, when I spoke of the Circle which has no ending, and an uncertain
beginning. The messengers to conveigh which soul into the body, are the
Intelligences which move the Orbs of Heaven, who according to their several
natures communicate to it several proprieties: and they most, who are
Governors of those Stars at that instant, who have the superiority in the
planetary aspects. Whereby it comes to pass, that in all inclinations there is
much affinity between the Soul and the Body, being that the like is between
the Intelligences and the Stars, both which communicate their virtues to each
of them. And these Angels, being, as I said before, of nine several
Hierarchies, there are so many principle differences in humane souls, which
participate most of their proprieties, which whom in their descent they made
the longest stay, and that had most active power to work on them, and
accompanied them with a peculiar Genius (which is according to their several
Governments) like the same kind of water that running through various conduits
wherein several aromatike and odoriferous things are laid, do acquire several
kinds of tastes and smells. For it is supposed, that in their first Creation,
all Souls are alike, and that their differing proprieties arive to them
afterward when they pass through the spheres of the governing Intelligences.
So that by such their influence, it may truly be said, that Nine was the Circle
set in Heavens place.


Which verse, by assigning this office to the nine, and the proper place to the
Circle, gives much light to what is said before. And for a further confirmation
that this is the Authors opinion, read attentively the sixth Canto of the 3.
Book, where most learnedly and at large he delivers the Tenets of this
Philosophy; and for that. I commend to you to take particular notice of the
2d. and thirty two Stanzaes: as also the last of his Epithalamion: and
survaying his works, you shall find him a constant disciple of Platoes School.

All which compacted, made a goodly Diapase.
In Nature there is not to be found a more complete and more exact Concordance
of all parts, then that which is between the compaction and conjunction of the
Body and Soul of Man: Both which although they consist of many and most
different faculties and parts, yet when they keep due time with one another,
they altogether make the most perfect Harmony that can be imagined. And as the
nature of sounds, that consist of friendly consonancies and accords, is to
mingle themselves with one another, and to slide into the ear with much
sweetness, where by their unity they last a long time and delight it: where as
contrarily, discords continually jarre, and fight together, and will not mingle
with one another: but all of them striving to have the victory, their
reluctation and disorder gives a speedy end to their sounds, which strike the
Ear in a harsh and offensive manner, and there die in the very beginning of
their Conflict: In like manner, when a man's Actions are regular, and directed
toward God, they become like the lines of a Circle, which all meet in the
Center, then his music is most excellent and complete, and all together are
the Authors of that blessed harmony which makes him happy in the glorious
vision of Gods perfections, wherein the mind is filled with high knowledges
and most pleasing contemplations; and the senses, as it were, drowned in
eternal delight; and nothing can interrupt this Joy, this Happiness, which is
an everlasting Diapase: Whereas on the contrary, if a man's actions be
disorderly, and consisting of discords, (which is, when the sensitive part
rebels and wrastles with the Rational, striving to oppress it) then this
music is spoiled, and instead of eternal life, pleasure and joy, it causes
perpetual death, horror, pain, and misery. Which unfortunate estate the Poet
describes elsewhere; as in the conclusion of this Staff he intimates: the
other happy one, which is the never-failing Reward of such an obedient body,
and ethereall and virtuous mind, as he makes to be the feat of the bright
Virgin Alma, man's worthiest inhabitant, Reason. Her I feel to speak within
me, and chide me for my bold Attempt, warning me to stray no further. For what
I have said (considering how weakly it is said) your Command is all the excuse
that I can pretend. But since my desire to obey that, may be seen as well in
a few lines, as in a large Discourse, it were indiscretion in me to trouble you
with more, or to discover to you more of my Ignorance. I will only beg
pardon of you for this blotted and interlined paper, whose Contents are so
mean that it cannot deserve the pains of a Transcription, which if you make
difficulty to grant to it, for my sake, let it obtain it for having been yours.

And now I return to you also the Book that contains my Text, which yesterday
you sent me, to fit this part of it with a Comment, which peradventure I might
have performed better, if either I had afforded my self more time, or had had
the conveniencie of some other books apt to quicken my Invention, to whom I
might have been beholding for enlarging my understanding in some things that
are treated here, although the Application should still have been my own: With
these helps perhaps I might have dived further into the Authors Intention (the
depth of which cannot be sounded by any that is less learned then he was) But
I persuade my self very strongly, that in what I have said there is nothing
contradictory to it, and that an intelligent and well learned man proceeding on
my grounds might compose a worthy and true Commentary on this Theme: Upon
which I wonder how I stambled, considering how many learned men have failed in
the Interpretation of it, and have all at the first hearing, approved my
opinion.

But it was Fortune that made me fall upon it, when first this Stanza was read
to me for an indissoluble Riddle. And the same Discourse I made upon it, the
first half quarter of an hour that I saw it, I send you here, without having
reduced it to any better form, or added any thing at all unto it. Which I
beseech you receive benignely, as coming from

Your most affectionate Friend and humble Servant, Kenelm Digby.

FINIS.

