A DISCOVRSE, CONCERNING INFALLIBILITY IN RELIGION.

WRITTEN BY SIR KENELME DIGBY, TO THE LORD GEORGE DIGBY, ELDEST SON OF THE
EARL OF BRISTOL.

Printed at Paris by PETER TARGA, Printer of the Archbishoppricke.

M.DC.LII.

-- Nihil dulcius est, bone quam in^^nita tenere,
Edita doctrina sapientum templa se^^ena:
Despicere vnde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque viam pa^^n^^eis quaerere vit^^.
LVCRET. MY LORD,
I come now to pay your^^ lordship the debt I have owed you ever since our long
discourse in one of the sideChappels of S. Germans church; when we spent most
part of the afternoon in examining and weighing, which of the several
Religions that at present have course in the world, a prudent man should
rationally venture his soul upon. It seemed to me that it was not a small
^^^^pe I had advanced in obtaining your assent to the Catholic, when your
lordship acknowledged great defects of several kinds, in all others, and that
ours, was adorned with more comeliness and Majesty, was maintained with more
orderlynesse and prudence, was propped with more powerful means to preserve
unity among the professors, and in the general course of it was replenished
with more efficacious motives to incite men to the love of God, then any of the
others. But withal, you professed that there were some particulars of so
harddigestion in it, as you could not win of your self to yield your assent
unto them; Nor were persuade^^ that the authority from whence we receive our
faith was infallible, but that in all those particulars it had varyed and
swarued from what in the beginning was taught by Christ and had bin preached
throughout the world by his Apostles. What I replied hereunto, seemed to your
lordship out of the ordinary tracke of those who now adays use to handle
controversies. And it is but just, that to so sublime a wit as yours is,
arguments of a higher strain should be offered then such as are pressed to
vulgar capacities. For as the ordinary sort of mankind, have their
understanding satisfied with barely looking upon God in quality of a Judge,
that punishes or rewards according as men have obeyed or transgressed his
laws: so is the enquiry of what they are to do or believe, at an end, when
those unto whose conduct Gods providence has committed them, do pronounce his
decrees to them in a legislatiue way. But so piercing a judgment as yours that
knows there is an orderly and natural connection between all causes and
their effects, and that suspecteth, not God Almighty of having bound mankind
to a mere arbitrary law for the bare showing of his authority and the
exercising of their obedience; will not be appayed, without having some
scantling of the Why; as well as of the What, you are to do and to believe.
Should we therefore apprehend their lot to be the worse, that are endowed with
the eminentest talents; since so much labor and pains is necessary to the
quieting of their doubts; when as simple people acquiesce so easily to what
they are plainly taught? Nothing less. For though it is true, the difficulty
be great in ouercoming their strong resistance: yet, that once done, the
vigorous progress they afterward make, recompenseth to the full the
precedent pains in wrestling with their reluctant imaginations and their
opposing reasons. Whereas new storms are easily raised by any cross wind that
shall blow upon the others flexible nature. S. Augustines long irresolutenesse,
his anxious seeking of truth, and his difficult rendering him self unto it, was
followed and crowned with admirable perfection in his own particular, and with
unspeakable advantages to the Church of God in general: so as he is the only
saint in heaven after S. Paul, that has the day of his conversion celebrated
in the Church. Hence is it that I am not one of those who wonder that your
lordship is so long before you come into the fould that encloseth and secureth
us. You were not whom I take you to be, if you should yield up your weapons
before you were fully convinced; or be convinced before you have searched into
the bottom of the question. To putt you into the way of receiving an entire
happy defeat in this conflict, I took the freedom to represent unto you such
considerations as had bin heretofore most preualent with me, when I had great
unquietness in believing what I was taught till my reason was convinced that I
should do unreasonably if I gave not my assent thereunto. Not that I am so
vain as to think that my proper poor stock can furnish ought that you
already abound not more plentifully with. But it has bin my good fortune;
(that is to say, Gods Grace has bin so merciful to me;) that I have met with
a knowing and judicious guide, to lead me through this dark and intricate
labyrinth. What I had formerly derived from him for my own satisfaction in
this matter, I tendered to you for yours. And wherein I fell short^^ by
delivering you but a lame copy (according to my mean skill) of so excellent
an original, I referred you either to his learned writings or to his fuller
conversation. For your lordship knows, he bears you so great respect, that
upon any least intimation from you, he would purposely make a journey to you
from any remote place to do you service. In the mean time, I endeavored to
take a suruay as well as I could of the whole race that Man runs; from the
first moment of his being produced a reasonnable creature, to the last periode
of his journey, when he is settled for ever in a state of permanency. For in
such a subject, the symmetry of the whole, and the due cohoerence of the
parts, are of great weight with prudent and solid men. This can not be
completely nor orderly done, without first settling firmly the fundamental
principle, That Man's soul is immortal and incorruptible, and suruiueth
aeternally after the death of te body. In the next place, I applied my self to
show, how the different courses of living in this world, do begett in the
future, different conditions of happiness or misery, each of them exceeding,
beyond all conceiuable pr^^portion, the goods or evils of this life. Then, upon
consideration of the difficulty, or rather impossibility, for mankind to
arrive to the assured knowledge of those paths which are necessary for him to
walk in to bring him to Beatitude, that so his steps might be steady and
bold ones; I concluded, that since God would have dealed more hardly with
mankind then with all other creatures besides, if to every one of them he had
assigned due and proportionable means to bring them to the utmost periode of
their nature, and should have left only him in the dark among inevitable
precipes; It was certain he had bequeathed to him a science or art whereby to
govern himself and steer his course so as to be able to arrive safely into
his wished haven, and to that end which he was created for. And lastly, I
urged, that since the men who live in ages after his who taught them this
science (which we call Religion) can not be conceived to receive it immediately
from hismouth; They would fall back to an ince^^itude and distressed condition
equal to the former, if he had not settled as infallible a means to convey
entirely to them this science, as in it self it is an infallible guide so
bring them to Beatitude. And thence I proceeded to ^^stablish that rule which
keeps us Catholics in unity among our selves, and in security that we are
in the right way.

This was the scope of our conference then: which comprising so many, so
weighty, and so difficult points, that a few hours conversation was too
scanty a time to discuss them as they ought to be; I promised to give your
lordship in writing a summary collection of some of the most important
reflections I had made upon them. The doing whereof, is the subject of the
following discourse.

THE FIRST CHAPTER
Of mistaken demonstrations.
IN this course that I have proposed to my self, my first endeavor must be to
prove, that the soul of man is immortal; neither dying when the body dies;
nor being liable to corruption or destruction after it is severed from the
body, either through defectible principles in it self, or by the violence of
any outward agent working upon it. I conceive I have fully performed this in a
former treatise, that I have written upon this subject. But I may resonably
apprehend that the length of that, and the heap of various arguments cumulated
there one upon another, may not obtain from a ^^person so full of great
employments as your lordship is, that discussion which belongs to every one
of them in particular, to be secure of the consequence drawn out of them;
which requires greater leisure, then your active and solicitous charges do
allow you: And therefore I will here select some few of the chief of those
which that treatise abounds with; And will endeavor to make them as plain
as I can, that the discerning of the demonstration which I conceive is
contained in them, may not oblige you to laboring meditation, and
Metaphysicall abstractions (in which no man can fly with a stronger wing then
you, when your leisure can allow you the time and quiett of mind that is
necessary for such entertainements) But may be obuious to you upon such present
reflection as the multitude of your present affairs can afford you. My aim,
and hope, is to prove this truth fully and evidently: That is to say, to make
a firm demonstration of it; against which no solid opposition can be produced
to weaken it; and by which a iuditious and subtle understanding shall be fully
appayed and quieted. To know when that is done, it will not be amiss (before
we enter into the substance of the question) to consider in short, the nature
of a true demonstration; that so we may be sure not to be deceived by seeming
proofs: which how many or how plausible soever, can but persuade opinion;
never force assurance.

Some there have been, who have thought that a multitude of reasons, may have
the force to prove and convince that, which no one of them single, can reach to
do. As particularly in our present case; they produce for the souls
immortality, numerous testimonies of great men, both such as have been eminent
in natural knowledge, and such as are estimed for supernatural illuminations;
and to these, they add their own moral and natural considerations: for
example; that, since it can not be doubted but that God is both wise and just,
and consequently will reward or punish every man according as he has deserved
or demerited; and yet we see that such lottes do not always betyde men in this
life; It follows, that there must be an other life after this here, wherein
men shall reap the harvest they have sown upon the earth. Again; That, seeing
all creatures who have souls do move themselves; and that no inanimate
creature, can do so; It follows, that the soul is the virtue and principle
by which an animal is moved. But if the soul can make an other thing move it
self, it cannot be doubted but that she has in her self the power of moving
her own self. Now, life consisting in a thing's moving it self, it is clear
that what can do so, has within it self wihout the help of ought else, a
principle of living; and consequently is not subject to dying. Afterall these,
and many more such plausible arguments, they conclude, that howbeit never a
one of them alone can be accounted a demonstration, yet all of them in bulk
have the strength to convince and quiett a rational man. I will not here
examine what force they may have over the understanding of a moral prudent
person, who in debates before him uses to inquire no further then whether side
is the more gravely and the more learnedly disputed: But most certain it is,
that if they come before a subtle Metaphysitian or a cunning Logitian, they
will fall mainely short. Fo^^ when such a one shall have rigorously discussed
each particular argument, and shall have found every one of them to be
deficient in some regard or other; he will conclude, that no more then many
nothinges can ever be multiplied so as to make somethings; no otherwise can
never so many apparent proofs (which being but such, are in truth no proofs)
ever arrive to constitute one real proof.

Others there are, who fixing themselves upon some one argument, do not
consider in it the material nature of it; That is to say, what connection the
medium on which they build their proof, has with the effect or proposition
that they conclude out of it: but only, whither their argument be difficult to
be solued, or no. As for example; a person of great eminency and reputation for
learning, did use to putt the following argument to prove that it was possible
for Infinite to have an actual and real being: Namely. There is no
inconvenience that God almighty should produce at one instant as many Angels
as he can produce in that instant. Suppose then that he does so. Which if he
do, the multitude of them will be greater then any determinate number
whatsoever; and consequently, that multitude will be infinite. Therefore an
infinite multitude is not impossible. This argument has perplexed many great
wits and learned men: But if we look strictly upon it, we may observe how it
it is not formed out of the notion of the subject in question (that is, of
infinite) but, out of the quality of God almighty and the Logical notion of
Possibility: And so, may be a hard argument, but not a demonstration, And will
appear to be a fallacy, if one reflecteth that the notion of infinity may
agree to a thing in potentia, but not to a thing in Act: And therefore it can
not be supposed that God has done or will do all that he can do. According to
which course, if in this question of the souls immortality, they frame a
subtle argument out of what is common to all forms, or out of the nature
common to all souls; and withal discern not how it may be untied; They
presently persuade themselves they have demonstrated what they intended. Nay,
though their discourse be drawn but out of the Logical notions of contraries,
of antecedents, and consequents, or out of some parity between the subject
they treat of and some other they compare it to; they ^^traight flatter
themselves with a conceit that they are arrived to science in that point. Not
considering, that to know, requires that one be absolutely certain that his
proof be a firm demonstration; and not only, that it be such an implicated
Gordian knotte, as that neither he himself nor any others he has yet met
with, are able to untie it; but that truly and really, of its own nature, it
be impossible to be untied and solued. And ordinarily, they who ground their
discourse upon common and remote propositions (as for example, they who use
Lullies art) do unwarily slide over some unsound step between the axiom
they rely on, and the conclusion they would infer, which they see not. Whence
it happens, that such manner of arguing, rather serves for ostentation, then
to acquire true knowledge. And as for such Logical terms as we have above
mentioned; it seldom happens but that they are liable to some aequiuocation
or other; which quite enerueth the force of any proof derived from them.

Both these sorts of persons do err in assenting too lightly to an apparent
proof, and in taking that for a demonstration which in effect is none. But a
third sort there is, who fail on the contrary side; by conceiving that a
demonstration is never made, as long as any thing can be urged against the
Conclusion proved by it. This arises from a great deficiency both of wit and
of Judgment. Of judgment; because they are not able to discern the evidence
of a discourse in it self, but are feign to look into external accidents to
frame their opinion of it. And of wit; in that they observe not how the force
and subtility of man's wit is so great, as to speak (and that, most
ingeniously too) in opposition of such things as are most manifest. Zeno, even
whiles he walked with him that he disputed with, would be thought have to
demonstrated that it was impossible any thing could be moved in the world from
one place to another. Anaxagoras was as peremptory that snow was black. We
find ingenious Orations and whole books, whose scopes are to extol the
greatest defects and blemishes of nature, as baldness, lamenesse, blindness,
unreasonableness, and the like. What can be more evident then that 2. and 2.
do make 4? yet Aristotle tells us, that 2. and 2. are are two distinct
numbers; and that 4. is but one number; and consequently, that 2. and 2. are
not 4. And to conclude, the Academikes or sceptikes have labored with much
industry to take away all certainty. He were a weak man that would retain his
assent from an evident conclusion as long as subtle or cauilling disputants do
catch at ought to oppose against it. But a judicious person, when he sees a
solid demonstration upon any subject, is not at all shaken by any thorny
difficulties that acute sophisters endeavor to implicate him in; which though
at the first sight they may a while perplexe him; yet he is sure that with
orderly reflection and due attention to every joint and progress of their
arguments, they are to be unfolded and displayed, and the inconsequence of them
to be made appear.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Of the true nature of demonstration.
THat then which imports us mainely not to err in, is in iduging when a
perfect demonstration is produced. The true nature of such a proof requires,
that it make the reader or the hearer see evidently that the conclusion is
directly so as the demonstrator avouches it to be, and that it is impossible
it should be otherwise. Neither have we reason to suspect that this can not be
performed as well in other sciences as in Geometry; Seeing that there are
definitions in all sciences as well as in it; and that the terms of these
definitions are linked together: And therefore it is obuious, that one
conclusion maybe evidently and demonstratiuely drawn out of another. This can
not happen in a scientificall discourse, unless that which is taken to proone,
be either the cause or the effect of that which is proved. But if there be any
failure in either of these, then the demonstration can not be a perfect one.
And though in substance it should not be deficient; yet at the least it would
be superproportioned on one side, and not according to the strict rules of art;
which requires that every truth be proved by his proper cause. As for example;
if Rationality, of its own nature, and out of the force of Rationality, be the
cause of immortality; It follows evidently that whatsoever is Rational is
immortal. And contrariwi^^e; if Immortality, precisely by being such, do make
the subject unto which it belongs, to be Rational; It followheth that
nothing can be immortal but it must also be Rational. So that if either of
these be so, he who considers these two terms, sees clearly that of
necessity^^ both of them must belong to what subject soever he finds either
of them to reside in; And why it is so; and that it is impossible it should be
otherwise. But if a third thing or term, be cause of both; or be the cause of
the one and be caused by the other; then the demonstration is mediate, and as
it were a double one: As, if immateriality be the adaequate cause both of
rationality and of immortality; it is evident that whatsoever is rational is
immortal. But where the one side is superproportioned; the proof, though in
substance it be true, yet is it not a proper and a perfect one. As for example;
if one should prove any thing to belong to a man because he is a sensible
creature; the effect, though it be in him, yet is it not peculiar to him, but
common to all irrational animals as well as to him. Such were the
considerations that I had when I composed the two treatises out of which I
concluded the immortality of Man's soul. For in them, this is the scope of my
discourse: Corporeity and mortality, are adaequate to one another; the first as
cause, the second as effect: But a Rational soul, is not corporeal:
Therefore, not mortal. The subsumption I made evident, by showing, that all
operations whatsoever among bodies, are performed by the disposure of gross
and subtle, or of dense and rare, parts; and that what can not be effected by
such, is not the operation of a body. For, the nature of a body (in as much as
it is a body) is nothing else but to be a thing capable of division; or, that
has a possibility of being made many (which amounts to as much, as to be
liable to destruction; since the division of the parts that do essentially
compose any thing, is the destruction of it.) And the origidall difference of
bodies, is, that some are more subject to such division, that is are more
easily divided; others with greater difficulty; which resulteth merely out of
the parts being grosser or subtiler. So that, seeing the very essence of a
body is, to be a collection of such parts; It is evident that what can not be
performed by such parts, is beyond the orb of sole and mere bodies, and
cannot be achieved by them. It is true, that in all the first treatise, which
is of the nature of Bodies, I have neither established nor made any mention of
this Principle; but have reserved it to the second, where I make use of what is
settled in the former to discover the nature of the soul: And the reason why I
have done so, is, because the slight mocke-Philosophy of this Age, not reaching
to comprehend the true difference between a body and a spirit, easily
swalloweth spiritual qualities in bodies, and as familiarly attributes
corporeal proprieties to spirits: And therefore I was obliged to run
briefly over the nature of all bodies, and to show how all their operations
(even the most refined ones, and that savor most of a spiritual nature) may
be performed by the mere disposition of gross and subtle parts; there by to
prevent the objections that might be made me from such corporeal actions as
vulgar Philosophy dispatcheth like spiritual ones. And I thought is not
sufficient for a iuditious readers satisfaction, to do this only by bare
casting a composition in the air; as Monsieur des Carts and some others have
very ingeniously attempted to do: but I have endeavored to strengthen the
proofs rising from the force of discourse, by accompanying them with such
further observations as do clearly euince that whither or no I hitt right on
all the particular lines that I trace out for the performance of those actions,
yet it can not be doubted but that their causes are comprised under those heads
I have there established; and that the ways by which they are brought to
effect, are not unlike, (if not the very same) to those that I have pitched
upon. This being the ^^orke of the first treatise; The second looks into the
operations of a rational soul; And having discovered their nature, it shows
that they can not be performed by the mere disposition and ordering of gross
and subtle parts of quantity or of a body; and by consequence, that they
proceed from an immateriall and spir^^tuall substance. Now here, use is made
of the former principle: for, it being made evident, that nothing but
corporeity and diuisibility is the cause of corruption, and of subiecting the
things where they reside to the servitude of Mortality; it follows
indefectibly, that the spiritual substance which we call a soul, can not be
mortal and corruptible. This is the whole scope and discourse of that book:
out of which, for the reasons I have already touched, I will here select only
three of the proofs contained in the latter treatise, to show that our soul
is a spirit, void of all quantity and materiality.

THE THIRD CHAPTER.
The Immateriality of the soul proved out of the Nature of universal terms
or Pr^^posi^^ions.
THE first of them is drawn out of the nature of universal terms or
Propositions. Logicians do define an Universal term or Notion, To be that,
which being the same, may be aff^^rmed of many. Metaphysicians define it to be,
Somewhat that is the same in many. But to speak more familiarly to common
sense, we may say, That it is, somewhat which is any of m^^ny. For when we say,
Peter is a man, John is a man, and Paul is a man; If Peter and man be not the
same thing, the saying is false: And the like is of every one of the other two;
to wit, if John, or Paul, be not a man. Again; seeing that one man is not two
men; If when I say, Peter is a man, the thing which I say of Peter were the
same thing which is John; Such my saying would also be false; for, Peter would
be Peter and John too, by being the man which is both Peter and John. The
notion therefore of Man, which is truly reported both of Peter and of John; is
not both Peter and John; but either Peter or John. And this is that which we
call an universal. This being hitherto evident, the demonstration proceeds
thus: We see that the thing which we call Peter or John; does get, by being in
the soul, to be a thing that is either Peter or John: But this condition or
quality, to be either this or that, or to be a thing that is either this or
that; can not be had or gotten by the nature of a body, or by the disposition
of subtle and gross parts: Therefore, the soule^^ in, and by which, it
gets this condition; is of a different nature from Bodies. If here any one
should answer me, that howsoever our words may seem unto him who shall
stick and criticize upon them, to import that there is a notion in our mind,
when we speak them, correspondent to those words; which notion is no one of
the subjects it is affirmed of, and yet is common to them all: Nevertheless,
if he look carefully into his mind, he shall find that in truth there is no
nature of Universality there. For if he examine what picture he has in his
brain when he reflecteth upon the notion of a man which he calls an
Universal; he shall find there the image of some particular and determinate
man; and no such thing as a man in common. To such a person as should say thus,
I might reply, that to endeavor satisfying him with a long discourse, might
seem as ill placed pains as if I should go about to prove with learned
arguments, that there are such bodies in the world as men call fire, water,
earth, and the like. For every man's senses of seeing and feeling, that are not
depraved and corrupted, do assure him that they are, and that he continually is
conversant with them. In like manner, it is as evident to every man who has
common sense and reason, and who reflecteth upon what passes in his
understanding when he speaks suc^^ propositions, or considers such terms,
as we have even now insisted upon; That indeed there is an Universality in
them. And therefore, if he be so unhappy and short sighted, as not to discern
in his own mind, that which common and continual experience enforces every
rational man who looks into the nature of understanding and discourse, to
own and confess; he should, in speculations of this nature, content himself
with believing the multitudes of others who are capable of judging of them (as
blind men, ought to rely upon those whose eyes are not vitiated, in matter of
colors) and not hazard his actions and his aeternall welfare ( which
depends of his actions in this life) upon his own soddaine and slight
conceit, in a matter whereof he has no skill: As they do, who to justify the
strength of their wits, will not only speak and argue, but also live, as
though they believed there where no life for the soul after the bodies death.
But to be more indulgent to him then so; I shall desire him to examine his
instance, and to consider, that as when a square (for example) or a triangle
delineated upon paper, is proposed unto a Mathematician to look upon, there by
to discuss some Geometrical proposition; though that square or triangle there
drawn, be a particular determinate one, so and so formed, of such and such
precise dimentions in each line and angle, and the like: yet the figure that is
in his head, abstracteth from all those particular circumstances that
accompanye either of these upon the paper, and agrees to any square or to any
triangle imaginable, be their lines never so long or short, or drawn with red
ink or with black, etc. In the same manner, that corporeal figure of a man
which appears to our reflection and resideth in our fantasy, is not the notion
of a man that we here mean and speak of. But it is evident to any one who
shall look heedefully into his understanding, that from the particular picture
of some one man which his fantasy represents to him, his understanding has
gathered and framed a large notion of man in general, which is applicable and
indifferent to every particular indiuidualll man. As is evident, if we look
into our own meaning and intention, and consider what will satisfy us; as when
(for example) I stand in need of some one of my servants to do some thing
about me and therefore do call or ring a bell for some of them to come to me;
which soever of those that wait without, comes in, my turn is served and I
am satisfied. In like manner, if a tenant is to pay me ten pounds; It is allone
to me, whither he brings it in half crowns or in shillinges or in six
pences. And therefore it is evident that my intention aymeth no further then
at a common notion; and that I know so much. Now, my intention being regulated
by my apprehension preceding it; it is clear that my apprehension is also of
the like nature; that is to say, it is indifferent and common to any one in
particular. It may be further objected, That from the apprehending of a thing
which is indifferent to many, it can not be deduced that the apprehending
nature is not corporeal but spiritual: for when we look upon an object a
far off, before we can distinguish enough particulars of it, we are irresolute
what it is; whither (for example) it be a horse, or an Ox: And yet no man will
infer out of such indifferency that the eye in which it is, is a spirit and
not a body. To this I answer, that the supposition is a false one; there is no
such indifferency in the eye as is intimated: all that is there, is precisely
determinate: For, the whole object, and every part of it, concurreth to the
making of the picture in the eye; and consequently there must needs be in the
eye a representation of the whole and of every minute part of it; which is, a
complete determination of it. Whence it appears, that the indetermination we
have of the object, is seated merely in the understanding; which judges it
but imperfectly, by reason of the weak though entire picture that the object
has imprinted in the eye. And accordingly, a painter that were to draw that
object at that distance, must comprise it within such lines as the eye
receives from it. But that which in this case is indistinct and indifferent,
is our knowledge, which resideth in our mind. For, it not being able to
determine by the figure that the eye sends to the fantasy, whither it be of
an Ox or of a horse; remains suspended, with an indifferency to attribute it
either to the one or to the other. It may be further urged; that such
indifferency of our souls thoughts, is no argument of her being a spirit: for
if it were, spiritual substances would be accompanied with such indifferency:
the contrary whereof^^ is evident; seeing that no Angel (for example) can be
either Michael or Gabriell; but is precisely such a one determinate Angel,
distinguished from all others. To this I answer, that I do not urge such
indifferency as a condition propper to spirits. For, in truth, they are more
determined then bodies, by reason of their indiuisibility. The which is seen
in these very notions; that are more determined then the bodies from whence
they are drawn, merely because they are in a spiritual subject. But by this
indifferency in the understanding, springing from a determinate object; and by
such transformation there, of corporeal natures, to a quite different manner
of being then they are in themselves; I gather a different nature (that is, a
spiriturll one) in the subject where they are thus transformed. For, that
bodies can be in our mind (as they are when we think of them) notwithstanding
such indifferency (which accords not with their na^^ure) is an evident
freeing of the mind from corporeal bonds.

Now, that such a nature as this, of indifferency to distinct and different
things; can neither be in it self corporeal, nor be represented by bodies or
by subtle and gross parts variously disposed; is so evident that it were a
vain labor to go about to prove it. The mere casting of our eyes upon
material things, conuinceth it, without needing further discourse. We can not
conceive a chair, a knife, a house, a metal, a plant, an animal, or any
visible thing what soever, to be in it self without an actual termination. No
Statue, no picture, no manufacture, nor ought in the world (excepting
intellectual expressions) can be imagined to be, without its being con^^ined
in all determination to such other bodies as comprise, enuiron, and besett it.
Whosoever can doubt of this, is incapable of any evidence. And consequently,
where we see an abstraction from all determination, and such an indifferency as
we speak of; we may securely conclude, that the subject where it is made and
where it resideth, and whence it has it, is not of kin to bodies, but is
immateriall and spiritual.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
The Immateriality of the soul, proved out of the Natvre of Understanding.
THE second proof of our soul's immateriality and spirituality, I derive from
her manner of operation when she understands any thing. That which she then
does, is to compare the thing by her understood, with some other; and by the
relation or respect that is between them, she knows the nature of that thing
which she so considers or compares. So that we may conclude the particular
prerogative of a soul is, to have or rather to be, a power of comparing one
thing to another. And in truth, if we look well into the matter, we shall
perceive that the notion which we frame of her under this consideration,
compriseth all her whole negotiation. For, when the notion of Existence or
Being is once imprinted in the soul, all others what soever are nothing else
but respects to Being. Thus, when we consider what that is which we call a
thing; we find, it is that which has Being; or which can have Being. The
Quantity of a thing, is, what respect a determinate thing has to the Being of
the world; which in plainer terms is, how much such a thing takes up of the
extension that stretches out or that belongs to the great bulk of what is
corporeal. The Quality of a thing is, what relation or respect it has to
other things that are of its own nature and line. The other seven
Praedicaments, or Classes of notions, are manifestly comparatiue betwixt diverse
things considered together: All which I have so fully explicated in the second
part of my discourse of the Immortality of the soul, and is in it self so
plain; that I will not enlarge my self further upon it here, where for your
sake I am as succinct as I can; referring you to that, if you should desire
further explication of this matter. Now these ten ranks, or rather general
heads, of notions, comprising all the things and creatures that are or may be
in the world; and they being all of them comparatiue, and nothing but respects
of one thing to an other: And all the working of our soul, being grounded upon
her notions: It follows evidently, that all her notions being comparisons and
respects, her nature must necessarly be the power of comparing or of making
respects. Which how plain soever it be in these notions of her first operation
or of single apprehensions; It is yet clearer in her second operation of
deeming, judging, or knowing. For, this is nothing else but a comparing of one
notion to an other, and of compounding them together: As when we say, the wall
is white, or aman is a reasonnable creature, we look upon the notions that we
have of the extremes, and consider what respect they have to one an other; and
do find that they are united and identifyed between themselves by the force of
Being. The very same that we find of this second operation of our soul,
belongs to her third; which is but a multiplication of her second: for,
discourse is noething else but a double or a treble composition; which being
taken in pieces, every one of them is a Iudgement^^ or enunciation: and
consepuently, the work of comparing which is performed in a Judgment, is but
multiplied or repareaed in a discourse From these three operations of the
soul, do spring her affections within her self, and her proceeding to action
without her. For, according to the apprehensions she makes of things, and to
the Judgments that she forms of them by comparing some of those notions
among themselves, and to the consequences she draws out of a further
composition of judgments; she is affected with a liking or with a dislike of
them: and accordingly, proceeds to action for the acquiring or repelling of
them. Beyond this, our soul neither does nor can do any thing. All her whole
negotiation is comprised within these limits. And in all this, there appearing
nothing but a power of comparing and of referring one thing to an other, It is
most evident that the nature of comparisons and of respects must necessarily be
the nature of a soul, And that she is nothing else but a thing or a power of
making Respects.

Let us then in the next place consider what a respect is. Has it any
dimensions? do any colors make it visible? does any figure or shape belong to
it? does it take up any place? Or is it measured by time? All these things do
necessarily accompany a body: And whatsoever is a body, is affected by every
one of them. But a respect, we find has neither length nor breadth, nor is
white or red or green, nor is square or round, has no dependence of time, and
is so far from taking up place or filling of room, that unless both the
terms which we consider as respective to one another, be indiuisibly together,
there is no nature of respect between them. Thus, in the respect of Likeness;
if you leave out one of the terms on which the comparison is grounded,
likeness vanishes; it is lost. This square which resembles that other
square, or this white wall which in being white is like to that other white
wall; if you lay a side the other square and the other white wall, likeness is
gone, and there remains nothing but a square figure, or a white wall. None of
the Qualities or properties which inseparably accompany bodies, have any thing
to do with this notion, to be like. It is every way indivisible. If we ask our
senses, they will tell us, that it is neither white nor black, nor hott nor
cold, nor smooth nor rugged, nor sweet nor sower, nor of any other
qualification that they are capable of discerning. And when we turn to our
inward Judgment, we shall find that all these things and what soever can
affect our senses, are Respects. So that howeuer our senses have cognition of
objects by a material participation of them, our mind knows nothing but by
respects, nor can acquire any knowledge but by them; and therefore, to be able
to know any thing, she presently turns it into respects; And by doing thus,
she is capable of knowing all things. For, respects do not hinder one an
other. Bodies do exclude other bodies, from the place they possess and fill.
But respects, are so far from shouldering out one an other, that they rather
infer and draw in one an another. And hence it is, that nothing can escape
the knowledge of a soul, if she were not clogged by her body.

Now, to make use of what we have here explicated of the souls working by
respects; and of the nature of a respect; let us return to our Principle, that
what soever is done among bodies, is performed by the disposition of gross and
subtle parts; and examine, what disposition or ordering of such parts, can
make a respect. We see well, that the things which are compared and are
respective to one an other, have parts. The wall that is like to an other
wall, has parts: And that other wall to which this is like, has also parts:
But all that which their parts can effect about each of them, is but to make
them be white, It is not they that make their likeness. What new parts must
there be added, or how must these that are already there be placed and ranked,
to make the walls like? My eye sees each of them to be white, and my hand
feels each of them to be rough: yet neither my eye nor my hand determines
them to be like. But my understanding, which neither touches nor sees them;
yet by comparing the one of them to the other; finds them to be like, which
their generation did not make them to be. So strange and so different from the
nature of bodies is the nature of the soul.

^^ I will not be so prodigal of your lordships time, or so abuse your
patience, as to apply my self here to answer a slight objection that may be
made from the petty apprehensions of some modern Philosophers of the schools,
who conceire, that as well gross bodies as the sub^^iler soul are stored with
respects; and consequently, that according to what I have said, those bodies
should be immateriall, and spirits: which being evident that they are not, the
souls being stored with like respects, can not be an argument of her
immateriality. Thus, when they explicate the nature of gravity (for example)
they tell us, it is a quality whose nature is to have a respect to the center
of the world: When they teach us what the power of seeing in an eye is; they
tell us as gravely as if they bettered our knowledge much, That it is a
quality, whose nature is to have a respect to the animals action of seeing.
When they explicate what it is to be in a place, they tell us it is an entity
in the thing placed; whose nature is to be a respect to the thing (or to the
nothing, if you please; when they will have it be in Spatio imaginario) that is
called Place. And the like empty imaginations, by which they confound the
common notions of things, making all Praedicaments to be relations, and
affixing to them a surname of Transcendentall. For, such discourses are so
wretched and so pitiful ones, that I think a neglect is fitter for them
here, then in disputing against them to loose time, which should be better
spent: Especially to your lordship, whose sharp eyes wi^^l at the first sight
look through the inanity and vacuity of them.

THE V. CHAPTER.
The Immateriality of the soul, proved out of her manner of knowing objects
without her.
THe third proof of our souls spirituality, I deduce from her manner of
knowing the objects that are out of her. For the better explication of this
point, I will make use of a corporeal example; which howbeit it falls far
short of the wonderful operation of the soul in this particular, yet it will
conduce much to the illustration of it. Be pleased to reduce into your
remembrance (my Lord) how you and I coming one morning into a fair ladies
chamber, (I am sure you will not have forgotten, not be to seek, whom I mean)
we surprised her so attentive upon her looking glass, as if she had bin
discoursing with the fair image that she contemplated there. She was so
pleased with gazing upon that beautiful resemblance which her self made, as
for a while she scarce took notice of our being at each hand of her: by which
means we enjoied as well as she, the same pleasing sight; till her ciuility
making her turn from it toward us, bereaved us of that picture, which our
eyes must have bin loosers to have changed for any other object but the
original that she then showed us. And even then, looking upon her face, how
lovely soever it was; our eyes could discern no advantage it had, of the fair
picture in the glass; so exactly was it drawn. Now if we ask the vulgar
Philosophers of the schools, how this so lively and so like representation of
this ladies face was made in the glass they will tell us, that the superficies
or out side of that cristalline body, was imbued, or as it were tincted and
dyed into the very substance of it, with a certain representative quality,
whose nature is to make it be like unto the object or imbuing beauty opposed
before it; in such sort, and as truly, as the quality of whiteness makes a
wall white, or as quantity makes a body become great. Now, because likeness
is defined, to be an imperfect unity between two objects that are like one an
other (for, likeness is ever accompanied with some unlikeness; else, they
would be no longer like, but the same) we may safely say, that as far as the
looking glass agrees by its likeness, without any disagreement, to the
object that it is like unto; so far, the glass is the very object it self.
Hitherto, I have borrowed the assistance of the ordinary explication how Images
are formed in looking glasses: which how erroneous soever it may be in them;
yet being translated to our minds, it will find there the truth which was from
thence wrongly translated to bodies. For, even they as well as we, do use to
say (as Aristotle teaches us) that th^^ soul ^^s its objects; that is, she is
all things, by knowledge. For, knowledge is not made in the soul by addition
of several new entities, that joined to her do become the parts of a new
compound: But must necessarily be a true impression made in her; that is,
herself new stamped; And is as truly the very same thing with the soul it
self, as the figure left by a seal, is the very wax it self, (newly
modifyed) in which it is impressed. And therefore it cannot be denied but that
the soul is truly the object she understands, as far forth as the object
is by her truly understood. And accordingly, we see that a person who has a
right understanding of any thing, does make use of that thing in such sort as
is fitting and agreeable to the nature of it; applying to it what is requisite
to be applied, and remoouing from it what is fit to be removed: so taking the
knowledge which he has of the nature of that thing (that is, the thing it
self, as far forth as he has right knowledge of it) for a principle by
which to operate; that is, for his instrument, or for a part of his power of
working. Now, because this instrument, this principle this knowledge, by which
^^he soul works when she has occasion to use it, is truly and really the
knowing thing it self (that is, the soul) it is clear, that by such
knowledge the knowing thing is truly the thing known; and the thing known,
is truly a part of the knowing thing. If barely thus much, would suffice,
without any further addition, to denominate or affixe the attribute of kn^^wing
unto a thing wherein we find this performed; we might with reason esteem a
looking glass, or any material sense of an animal (which in like manner
receives material impression from an outward object) to know, or to be a
knowing thing. But when we proceed a degree further, and examine what more then
this is in a soul when she knows any thing, we shall find that whereas the
first is nothing else but that a likeness of an outward object is in the
glass or sense which receives it; A man, when he has knowledge of an object,
does know, besides the likeness of the object within him, that the thing he
knows is without him. For example; one who hears a bell ring; knows, that
the bell is not only within himself by the cognition he has of it; but also,
that it is out of him too; to wit, in the steeple by its proper Essence and
existence. This further addition then, to the bells being within him, that the
bell has a proper Essence and Existence in nature (that is; that the bell is,
or is a thing) is that which belongs to knowledge; and denominateth the man
in whom it passes, with the attribute of kn^^wing, or of being a knower. And
this is not in the looking glass. For although it is true, that the outward
object is in the looking glass, as far forth as it is not unlike to its
picture there, or as it is the same with it, and that the object without,
smites and impresseth this likeness in the glass: Yet all this, amounts
not, to make the looking glass equal to a man in point of kowledge; for this
regard, that the obiect's being out of the looking glass, is not in the
glass; whereas, the bell's being in the steeple, is in him that has the bell
in him by hearing it ring. And the like to this, is in the senses of beasts:
who having within them no understanding, unto which the object may penetrate,
their senses do serve them but like burning glasses, that multiplying by their
virtue the force of light, refracting through them, do set on fire some thing
behind them: for the senses of the beast strengthening and increasing the
action of the object that strikes upon them, do set on working those more
inward gimmals which nature has prepared within them for the conservation and
good of that living creature. Now the use we are to make of this discourse, is,
to examine whither this odds which a knowing soul has over a representing
looking glass, can be reduced to the disposition and ordering of gross and
subtle parts; which is all the way and course by which material effects are
wrought. And in steed of that, even nature her self presently suggesteth unto
us, that for nothing is more impossible then for the same body to be at the
same time in two different places. But in our case there is yet a greater
impossibility then that, to be performed by mere bodies: for it is not only
employed that the body of the bell which is in the steeple, be in the brain of
him that hears it ring; but also that its very being in the steeple, be at
the same time in the hearer. Which is a far more uncouth matter then the
former (though that be impossible too) t^^ be wrought by bodies. For, if its
being in the steeple do include tha^^ it is not corporeally in the soul; then,
its being in the soul dot^^ bring along with it that it is no^^ corporeally in
her; and consequently, that in her it has not a corporeal existence. Now if
any Archimedes or Archytas or subtle Ingenieur, can design such an order
(...) material Phantasmes in the braine^^ or such a dance of animal spirits,
a^^ merely by them to make this b^^ thus in the knower; I will acknowledge,
that the part of him where^^ by he knows, (that is, his soul) is material
and a body. But because^^ that is all together impossible, i^^ can not be
doubted but that she is a^^ immateriall and a spiritual substance^^

If any man shall object against me, that this knowing of an object to be
without the knower, at the same time that by his senses it i^^ brought into
him; is no particular prerogative of a man: but is common to all beasts with
him; vho we see move themselves to or from the objects that they see or hear,
in the same manner as a man does; And yet for all that, their souls are not
immateriall: I shall not make difficulty to answer, that if this could be
proved to me, I would conclude their souls to be immateriall, and consequently
immortal, as well as men's. But the truth is; they mistake much in making such
judgment of beasts actions: they pronounce too soddainly, without examining
as they ought from what principles such actions proceed: they are carried away
by the outward likeness of gestures and behauiours between beasts and men,
not considering how the one are determined irresistably to what they do, by the
outward objects working upon them; and that the others do determine themselves
by their own election: All which I have at large explicated in my often
mentioned book, where I treat of the operations of beasts. Let them call to
mind how many and how strange things we hear of, made with such a
ressemblance of life that the beholder an scarce doubt of their being living
creatures unless he were warned of it before hand; and yet, they are nothing
but dead pieces of wood, iron, leather, feathers, and the like artificially
composed; and the springes within them, wound up, and then let loose. As
Archytas his dove, and Regiomontanus his like curiosities were; some of which
even imitated exactly humane voice and words. As also is delivered to us by
antiquity, of Memnon's statue, that gave Oracles when the morning sun first
shined upon his eyes; his priests having in the night time ordered the engines
within, in such sort that such soundes and words should break out of his
mouth at the appearing of the sun. The like of which Monsieur des Carres was
confident he could have produced: and I believe that Cornelius Dreble would
have performed the like if he had bin sert about it, as well as he composed his
organes that when the sun shined upon them played such songs as he had
contrived within them. And the inventions of statues moving themselves in
diverse postures and progressions are now a days so ordinary, that they may
begett a credence of several stories of the ancients which have hithetto
passed for fabulous tales; as when they tell us that Vulcan and Daedalus made
Statues to behave them selves like living persons; And that Hiarchas called men
out the walls to wait upon Apollonius Tyaneus, and the like. And when he has
reflected upon these things, let him consider, how infinitely the Architect
of nature and of all creatures, surpasses the subtilest ingenieurs; And he
will see that such manner of arguing, carries no force along with it.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
That the soul has a Being and proprieties of her own: And consequently, is
Immortal. And of the nature and extent of the knowledge of a separated soul.
THus, having gathered from these three proprieties of knowledge (which when
have showed, are impossible to be performed by mere corporeal motions, or by
the sole disposition of gross and subtle parts) that the source of knowledge
in man is of an immateriall and spiritual nature: It follows that she has
an Existence or Being of her own, and proprieties agreeable to such a nature:
and consequently, that she is a spiritual substance. For it can not besayed,
that she is an accident; seeing that all accidents imply a substance, of ^^
nature proportionable to them, for them to depend on. And therefore, if she
were an accident, since we have proved her to be of such a nature as can not
depend of bodies, ^^here must, be in man some other spiritual substance whose
accident ^^he were. Which no man will object, seeing there is no pretense at
all for any other spirit^^all substance to be in man besides his soul; And
that the reason why any person denies her to be so, is because they would not
acknowledge any thing in Man to be immateriall and other then mere body.
Seeing ^^hen that the ^^oule is a spiritual substance, and has an Existence
belonging to her self, of her own nature and strain; that is, a spiritual
one: It is evident that her continuance depends not of the body, that in this
life is her copar^^ener; but that her Existence still remains with her, after
the bodies death: which in familiar language, signifies that she is and
suruiu^^th after the body is fallen from her; and that its death, is her birth;
and the breaking down of those clay walls, is the freeing of her from prison,
and the setting her at liberty: since by that means, she enjoys fully and
solely her own Existence, without being clogged and pestered with a gross
yoke fellow that will have a share of it whiles they are together. Neither can
it be surmised that any outward agent can, by working upon her after this her
birth out of the body, make her cease to be: since by being a spiritual (that
is an indivisible) substance, she is not liable to any of those operations or
local motions, or divisions that change and destroy bodies; or is in danger of
meeting with any other substance that is of a contrary nature to hers. Besides
which, there is no means in nature that we know of, to bring any substance to
its end. Which I conceive is sufficient for this discourse; wherein your
lordship will expect no more, then that I prove the soul to survive the bodies
death, and to be in condition like that of Intelligences or Angels: And
therefore I will not troble you here with such Metaphysicall proofs, as to
make them clear would require large explication and the laying of Principles a
great way off: As for example, that (since Nature repugneth against
annihilation) there can be no change in a thing that affords not matter to be
susceptible of a new form. Or, that where Existence is once joined immediately
to a subsistent form without matter, there is nothing can sever them.

But peradventure some may conceive I have not given full ^^atisfaction in this
poinct, unless I answer the famous argument wherewith Pomponatius has
perplexed even the learnedest men that were of his time, and have bin ever
since. For their sakes therefore, I will samne up in short what he urges
against the souls continuance after the bodies death; and in as succinct a
manner, give my solution to his difficulty. To this effect then he seems to
say. Every thing that nature makes, is designed by her for some proper and
peculiar action or operation. For it would argue her (that is to say, God, the
author of of Nature) of imprudence, if she should bring forth into the world,
an idle and vselesse thing, that where to do nothing, and consequently were to
serve for nothing. Now, the proper operation of Man's soul, is to understand:
phich action of understanding, is werformed by the souls considering the
fantasmes that reside in the brain; and without such fantasmes, she can not
acquire knowledge of any thing. But, after the bodies death, there remain no
fantasmes for her to speculate; they being material impressions from
corporeal objects; and consequently, following the lotte of the material part
of man that compriseth and harbors them. Therefore it follows, that if she
should ^^e severed from the body and survive it, she would have no operation;
but have a rank among substances for no purpose and to no end. For avoiding of
which inconvenience, there is no other remedy, but to allow her Being a
cessation as well as the Bodies, when Nature has putt ^^o periode to all that
^^he is able to do or is fit for, by taking from her the means by which only
she was able to work. This is the sum of his objection. For the clearing of
which, we may consider, that an agent may be conceived to have two sorts of
operations; the one transient into the subject it works upon; the other
immanent in it self. The first drives to the performing of some effect; which
being compassed, the action cease. As when an Artificer makes some thing, or
a Traveler goes to any place; as soon as the one has finished his engine,
or the other is arrived to his journeys end, their working and their motion do
cease. But an action immanent in the agent, continues working though the cause
be taken a way which did set it on foot. As when a burning coal shines or
gloweth, though the fire be out, and the blowing ceased that kindled it: and as
a bell hummeth, after the clapper or hammer has done striking it. Many such
conditions of actions we may observe in Nature, which the latins do express
by Neuter verbes, as A^^der^^, splendere, furere, aegrot^^re, insanire, and the
like: all which do import a kind of exercise or actual Existence within the
subject of what they signify, without relating to any extrinsecall cause. The
which, though they come verry short of the acts of our soul; yet of all
corporeal expressions they come nearest to them: There being in our soul, a
kind of vital reflection in its proper acts; which being nothing but the very
Existence of the soul it self, does comprehend and aequalise as much as in
nature is performed by an agent and a patient and their working. In this manner
it is, that the soul after her separation from the body, continues to
understand objects, though the fantasmes that at the first served her to
acquire her knowledge, be taken from her. And even whiles she was in the body,
the speculating of fantasmes was not all the business that belonged to her:
for though it is true, the doing of that, was necessary for her to be able to
store her self with any thing: Yet she transferred the notions of things from
those fantasmes into her own spiritual store house; and did, even her own
very self, become ^^he things which she understood; as we have already
explicated. So that she was built up of the knowledges that she thus acquired
by spiritualising of objects and by converting them into her own very
substance. And that speculation of fantasmes which is attributed to her in the
body, is rather a passion then an action: for the doing of that work, is the
souls receiving impression from those fantasmes. The retaining of which, is
her knowing. And this knowing, must necessarily remain always with her; since
it is nothing else but she her self so molded and so impressed. That is, her
own Bein^^: which because it is a spiritual one and superior to corporeal
ones, does resume in it self the two natures of Essence, and of Operation that
in bodies are separated: And so is, both her Being an her work. And
consequently she knows and understands (which is her proper operation) when
she is severed from the body and has no more fantasmes to work by. But it is
a kind of standing or fixed state of knowing (if so I may say) and immanent in
her self; (as the shining or glowing of a fire coal, seems to us to be) not
at all accompanied kith motion, as is her gaining of wnowledge in this life.
Which will be better understood, if we consider how her first object, is Being;
and that her first operation, or understanding, is to be Being, (as, whose
essence is nothing else but a capacity of knowledge, or of a new manner of being
Being) and that all the rest of her understandings, are nothing else but to
know other things to be; or, for her to be the Being of other things: that is,
to identify them with her self by this imbibition of Being, that sinketh the
objects into her. And therefore, when a soul is once completly become all
things (that is, that she knows all things) which she becomes it the very
instant of her separation, and indeed, by her separation from the body; It is
evident, she needs no further action to gain any thing or to better her
self. For she has then all that she is capable of hauing^^ and is at the
periode she was made for. And consequently, Pomponatius his argument is of no
force, since after the bodies death the soul may continue that operation (of
knowing) which she is made for: And no^^ only continue it, but have it
infinitely exalted and refined over what it was in the body.

By my answer to this objection, I am led to observe how a separated soul
must necessarily retain knowledge of whatsoever she knew in the body. For,
since her knowledge of any thing is her very Being the thing she knows; It
follows, that as long as she conserueth her own Being, the knowledge of that
thing must remain with her. But does her knowledge rest here? Has she
acquired by this second birth, no addition to the stock she had bin
toylesomely traffiking for in this life? A child in his mothers womb, has no
other cognition then such a dull and limited one as his sense of touching or
feeling could afford him; but as soon as he is borne into this worlds light,
he receives impressions by his eyes of the colors, figures, magnitudes, and
other qualities, of all kinds of bodies that enuiron him: And shall a soul,
borne into that bright day of intellectual light, see then no more then she
saw here in her dark prison? She shall certainly. And not only see more, but
see so much more, that it even dazeleth our eyes to look upon the excess of
her seeing. Let us proceed by steps; and consider how the ordering of a few
notions, begets new knowledges and conclusions, that he who was imbued with
those notions never dreamed of, till he had marshalled and ranked them in such
order. And by new ordering and weauing those new conclusions among themselves
and with his former notions, he further acquireth new knowledges. Which the
more numerous they grow, the higher and larger is their multiplication; like
numbers, which by every addition of a new figure, do increase their valewes
ten fold. Thus, sciences do grow, from a few plain obuious principles to
the vastenesse we admire, So, the science of Mathematikes, by enterweauing a
few axioms and definitions, sprooteth out, into an vnbelieuable progeny of
subtility and variety. Likewise, the science of Metaphysikes, by ordering such
notions as occur to every man of common sense runs over the whole machine
and extent of all that is: And not content with the whole world of bodies, and
of what is measured by time, soareth with a bold wing and piercing eye into a
new world of Intellectual inhabitants; where finding them settled by their
nature in a state of aeternity, she perceives time that deuoureth all things
beneath their orb, flide weakly under them into an abyss of nothing; without
being able to give the least attainte to their sublimed nature. All this is
done, merely by orderly disposing those notions that by our senses we acquire.
And if these, in a man (whose gross allay of a body, so cloggeth and benummeth
the vigor of his subtle inhabitant) do grow up to so incredidible a bulk and
height; what will their extent be in a separated soul, that is all actiuity?
Her nature, is, to be an orderer, or rather, to be an order it self: for
whatsoever proceeds from her, is orderly: which it would not be, if order were
not first in her. Order then being in her, it must be her nature; since all is
nature and substance, in that thing which is indivisible. It is clear then
that whatsoever is ordered by an agent whose nature is order, it must needs be
ordered to the utmost advantage that by ordering it is capable of. And
consequently, seeing that new knowledge springs out of the well ordering of
precedent notions; It follows, that whatsoever is knowable out of those
notions and principles, is fully known by a separated soul. But when we
consider the connection that all things have, one with an other, (seeing that
all the things in the world, are but like linkes of a chain, forged by an all
knowing Architect; who does all his works, by the rules of perfect order and,
wisdom) we can not doubt, but that a separated soul, by ordering those
knowledges she has acquired in the body, and by reflecting upon them with her
unlimited actiuity and energy (she being then entirely a pure Act) must needs
attain to the knowledge of all that is. And if we examine wherein this
connection consisteth^^ as it is in our soul; we shall find that it is placed
in this, that the thing which has one notion, is the same which has an other.
Whereby we find that the first notion we have of any thing, does by the nature
of our understanding comprehend all other notions; and that it can not be
perfectly understood, unless all others be known. Wherefore, we may conclude,
that a separated soul, does either comprehend no one thing, or else that she
must needs comprehend all things. As for example; If she know her self, she
knows that she was the form of a body; and not only of a body in general,
but of one, so composed, so rempered, so formed, and all other particulars
belonging to the body that she is separated from. From hence she gathers,
that this compound of soul and body, must necessarily have a father and a
mother; and by the individual proprieties of her body, she infers the
indiduall proprieties of her father and of her mother. Whose being such,
requires further such and such other causes and circumstances whereon they
depend. And every one of them, require such and such others that have caused
them. And so proceeding on from one to an other, she discovers not only the
first, but also all the causes that have relation to one another: Which in
effect, is the complexe of the whole world; since all things in it, have (one
way or an other) relation to one an other, either nearer or further off: As
Master White has ingeniously and solidely showed in the first of his
dialogues of the world. And this is the method of acquiring all sciences, by
the virtue of syllogismes. And this vast extent of knowledge, will be the
firmer and the stronger in her, out of this regard, that every one of her
knowledges will add a confirmation and a verifying to every particular that
she knows. For all things in nature, having a perfect connection with one an
other; whosoever knows truly the nature of any thing, knows also the nature
of all that has reference to it, either as cause or as effect, or by any other
regard that linketh them together. And thus, every one of her multitude or
rather infinity of knowledges, riueteth faster each other of them: every one of
them affording her a new reason, why that is so; like stones in an arch, where
every stone is not only a support to it self, but also to all and to every
one of the other stones that compose the arch. So that every knowledge of hers,
has a superproportion in a manner infinite, beyond any thing she knew in the
body. And according to the strength of her knowledge, is the strength of her
other actions, as, of desiring or loving any thing that her knowledge informs
her to be good: since they proceed immediately from knowledge; and are more or
less vehement, according as her knowledge decyphereth them more or less
abounding with the nature of good. Nor can she be deceived by any appearance of
truth, that may plant an Error in her, instead of a true Judgment: which is
evident, not only out of what we have even now said, that every one of her
knowledges makes good every particular one in her; but also more immediately
out of this, that it is impossible for Contradictory Judgments to dwell
together in the soul; since one of them, is engrafted in her, or rather is
identifyed with her, by the nature of Being; and the other, must consequently
be excluded from her, by not being; (as even in in this life, we can not judge
any thing, at the same time, to be and not to be:) And therefore, since all
that she knew in this world, remains with her in the next; and that out of
the perfect ordering of that, she deduceth the knowledge of all things else,
and so enjoys the fullness of science in her; and that all she knows, is
always present to her, as being in truth her own indivisible nature,
substance, and Being; it follows, that no falsehood (which is a contradiction
of some truth incorporated, as I may say, into her substance) can have
admittance to her belief: And if any were mistakingly harbored by her during
her abode in the body (which hindered her from completely ordering her notions,
and from deducing true consequences from them) this her new condition of
abundant light, soon discovers and cancelleth it.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
The answer to an objection.
BUT if error, mistaking, or falsehood, can not harbor in a separated soul;
And that the fulness of knowledge, be the periode and perfection of her
nature; It may at the first sight appear impossible, that any soul should
fail of being happy. For, seeing that a Rational creatures desiring of any
thing, depends of the Judgment that he makes of such a things being good
for him: It should seem, that there is great Error in his knowledge, and much
mistaking in his Judgment, when he sets his heart upon desiring and longing
after that which is most hurtful and pernicious to him. To answer this
objection, I must entreat your lordship to look into the nature of the will:
Which though in substance^^it be the same with the understanding (that is, the
soul her self, according as she is ready to proceed to action) yet as it is
the origin of the souls desires, and the impellent of her to action, It
requires a particular consideration. We may then determine the will in a
Rational creature, to be a mastering and conquering Judgment or resolution,
that fixes peremptorily upon what is to be done. For it is clear, that it is
nothing else but a Man's immediate disposition to work, or to do some thing:
And he is always ready to proceed to action, and does proceed thereto
(unless he be hindered) as soon as his understanding judges and tells him
what is best to be done. Next, be pleased to consider how we find oftentimes by
experience, that after we have judged and determined by our reason and
understanding, what is best and fittest for us to do; there reseth in our
breasts, a certain material motion or tide of spirits, that beats us off
from that resolution, and disposes us an other way. If it happen that this
inundation of spirits do chance to ebb back again, and leave the channel
free for the calmer waters of reason to have their course in; we return to our
former temper and Judgment. But if a new flood of them do break in upon it,
too strong for it to resist; then they carry the man's resolution to their side.
And according to the violence and repetition of their strokes that beat him
off from his first Judgment, the resolution that is made by them is strong and
vigourous. For as ourvery Being, and all our knowledges, in this world; are
made by material actions: So, more, and stronger knowledges and Judgments,
are made by more and by stronger material actions. And therefore, if these
currents and tides of material spirits, have the force to make in a man strong
impressions and judgments of the good they propose, and by a continued long
beating upon his understanding do in manner confine it to what they propose;
they will in the end, as it were blind our reason, and make us think only,
or at^^least chiefly, of the good and advantage that they suggest. They will
sink into the bottom of our soul, and settle there, the apprehensions of
what they recommend. And in comparison of those Apprehensions, they will
weake^^ the truth we see, making it a appear to us like a dream, or a thing
in the air, that concerns us not^^ Which in this case, I may compare (not
improperly) to oil swimming upon some heavier liquo^^ in a caske. For, that
remains at the top, without motion or actiuity; whiles the water beneath,
runs precipitously out at the spigot into the vessels that are set to
receive it. In like manner, here, truth remains without all efficacy; whiles
the contrary judgments, do flow impetuously into action.

Now, when a man thus tempered comes to dye, and that so his compound comes
to be resolved into body and soul; It is evident, that in his soul, there
must remain a great inequality, between that Judgment of hers which
concerns the material good, and ^^er other which concerns the true good:
And, that although the ^^ur^^ent of material spirits which was ^^ont to foment
this Judgment, be now gone, yet the effect of their strokes (that very same
effect which remained in her, when soever she had truce from their actual
assaults) remains after death in the separated soul; and if it be the
stronger, will of it self still press her on to the same material good, that
the spirits which begott it, recommended to her. For by the stroke of death,
the soul loses nothing of what she had purchased in the body: But all that
she had or rather that she was there, is enlarged and heighthened by this
second birth of hers; And she becomes such a thing, as the precedent moulding
of her settled her in a capacity to prove; like as the several parcels of
warm mudde upon the banks of Nilus, do become such various living creatures,
by the last action of the enliuening sun working upon them, as by their
precede^^t dispositions and circumstances they were designed to be. Add to
this, that there is no formal opposition between two such Judgments in a
man. Let the one of them be (for example) that it is good for him to go to a
feast, to satisfy and please his appetite; The other, that it is better for him
to go to the Church to pray: And it is evident that the truth of this latter,
does not contradict the truth of the other; but both of them are consistent
together. If then he dies with his soul fraught with these two Judgments;
death will leave them both in his soul; each of them stretched out, ^^n such
sort as belongs to a separated soul; but still, in such proportion as it
found them in her, ^^hen it came to deliver her out of her body. So that, if it
found them ^^n such a proportion that the Judgment of good in going to a
feast, did clearly ouerbeare the Judgment of good in going to the Church; the
desire of feasting in the next: world, will likewise ouerbeare in ^^er the
desire of that good, for the obtaining whereof she was to go to ^^he Church to
pray. And although ^^ll the circumstances and possibility of going to a feast,
be taken ^^way, with the taking away of the body; yet, the desire of feasting
(which depends not of considerations to be made in the next world, but only
of those which were made in the body) remains as fresh and as quick as it
was when the Man settled his last Judgment and resolution in this world. Nor
does it import, that a separated soul has no taste to be pleased with meat or
with drink. For, as all her desires were framed in the body; so, are they
such, as belong to a whole complete man, and not to a naked soul. And
therefore, she desires to be built up again an entire man, and to wallow
again in such sensual pleasures as then prouayled with her. To which I may
add, that although a separated soul have not a taste to relish meat, yet she
has a will to wish for it. And this will, is now to her, of a like nature, as
to us in this world, the wish of Bea^^i^^de; which depends of no other
consideration, nor is referred to any furthe^^ End; But is of it self the last
End; as being desired for its own sake; and not under the reglement, or to
serve for obtaining of any thing else, more desired then it. Nor does it
prei^^dice what I have here determined; to consider, that a separated soul, is
a pure spirit, delivered from that impugner of Reason, her flesh, which used to
draw her from her greater good. For we must not vnderstand^^ her being a pure
spirit, to signify her being a^^ untainted spirit: for she is wholly defiled by
her habitation in the body. But she is called pure, by negation of conjunction
to any body: which hinders not, but that she may have in her substance, the
spiritual effects and contaminations of a corrupted body. For whiles she and
her body were but one thing (both of them subsisting by one Existence) the
agents that wrought upon her body, did build and qualify her according to what
she was to be when she was to be severed from her body, and to Exist by her
self. Now if these agents were perverse ones, they hammered out such effects
in her as made her become a spiritual monster of many heads, (which are, the
reluctant and incompossible Principles that reign in her) each of them drawing
and tearing her a different way from the rest; as in the next Chapter I shall
more amply declare. And altough she erreth not in prosecuting her judgments
and desires, supposing the principles from whence they spring; which are now
natural to her: yet all her operations, flowing out of those: principles, are
strangely defective, ugly, and monstrous. And the reason why her Judgments
and affections in this state of separation, are natural to her and
unalterable; whereas before they were but accidental; is this: Whilst she was
in the body, there was no thought or Judgment so deeply settled in her, but
(by reason of her bodies subjection to externe agents) might be weakened by the
much importunity of other thoughts occurring to her and pressing upon her; and
by little and little, might be worn away and forgotten: And therefore her
nature, that was thus flexible and changeable in her Judgments and desires,
resided purely in the common inclination to Good in abstract or in general;
the which was common to all kinds of desires; and so, only the desire of Good
in general, was natural to her: All particular desires, being but accidental
to her; and such, as might be removed by extrinsecall causes and agents. But
when all this subjection of her to such agents by means of her body, shall be
removed by death; and that no causes shall afterward be able to work upon
her; and that she herself shall be nothing else but a Being or a substance
left out of these impressions, the stamping of which is now at an end; Those
desires which formerly were but accidental, are now become natural to her.
And whatsoever she loves for it self, remains settled and riuetted in her,
as a supreme principle; over which none other has any authority or preualence;
and against which, nothing can be urged to infeeble it. And in the mean time,
all other judgments and desires that are less preualent then these, do keep
their inferior ranks and beings, (without loosing ought of the clearenesse of
evidence that accompanyeth them) until an other change do come by the
reioyning of her body to her. By all which discourse it appears, how a
separated soul that is badly and unequally built up; is free from error and
falsehood in her Judgments; though her misseplaced affections and the
improportioned composure of her will, do make her neglect her true good, for
inferior and unworthy goods.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
Of the Misery of a disordered soul after it is separated from the body.
Having cleared (as I conceive) this great difficulty; I shall apply my self
to explicate in the best manner I am able, the different states, that the
different courses and manners of living in this world, do settle a separated
soul in. These may be comprised under two general heads. For; there being in
man two principles from which all his operations do spring; Reason and sense;
his soul and his body; It is evident that according as either of these swayeth
and has strongest influence into his actions, his course of life is to receive
its denomination. I will begin with taking a short suruay of a soul torn from
the body of a man that spent his life in the pursuit and in the enjoying of
sensual objects. It is already concluded, that all the Judgments and desires
which a man contracteth in this life, do remain in the sepated soul, in the
same proportion and excess over one an other, as they were here. It has bin
also showed that notwithstanding such a souls desiring a particular and
inferior good, more strongly then she does an universal and superior one: yet
is she not carried by error or mistaking, to prefer the inferior good before
the superior; but sees clearly the difference that in truth is between
them; and that the superior good, is of its own nature, preferable to the
other; though, by reason of the temper she is in, she prefers for her
enioyment the other meaner good. Next, let us consider the great vehemence
wherewith the desires of a separated foul are accompanied. Examples daily
occur to us, of the great earnestness wherewith passionate men desire and
prosecute the objects that their hearts are set upon: In such sort, that
neither difficulties, nor dangers, can divert them from them. And yet, the
greatest and violentest of these, is not comparable to the least and weakest
desire of a separated soul. In her, there is nothing that can retard any
operation that she is about: as in bodies there is; unto whom, motion belongs
not but as they are moved by an other thing; and therefore, all that
appertains to them in regard of motion, is in a manner resistance to it, or a
repugnant yielding to what is too stong for them: and consequently, succession
of time, and conueniency of place, and a mastering power in the agent that
works upon them, are required to all corporeal motions and operations. But a
separated soul, being (as we have formerly showed) an indivisible substance,
and not measured by time, nor comprehended by place; and withal, her self
being the principle of her own operations (which are nothing else, but her
very being what she is) It follows that whatsoever she does or desires, is,
with the whole energy of her Nature; who^^e force and actiuity bears such
proportion to the strength of the greatest and most powerful body that is, as
all time does to an instant, or as the whole extent of quantity does to a
point; seeing, that her actiuity (were she to work) reaches to all place, and
to the whole mass of corporeal magnitude, in an indivisible of time. Now,
let us apply these three considerations, to such a soul as we have proposed
for our first suruay. Her wearing out her time in the body, with continual
conversation among sensual objects; and through the love of them, her neglect
of rational and intellectual goods; will have caused, that after death, her
affections to them, will prevail over these latter. Such affections, can not
be conceived to be, but of one, or but of two, or but of a few, of those
material objects; but of many, and of different natures. For the puddles of
flesh and blood, having this property, that full draughtes of them do begett a
satiety and loathing in in the persons that feed greedily upon them; their
ouerburthened stomakes do seek to please themselves by variety; and do hope to
find fresher and quicker delight in some new object. Thus, they travel and
wander as far as they can, in this labirinth of vanity: One pleasure still
succeeding an other: Their thoughts sometimes bent upon richesse, otherwhiles
upon power; as often upon honor and estimation from others; sometimes upon
revenge; and peradventure continually, upon the meaner objects that in their
several kinds do affect their grosser senses. All this variety of affections,
that requires succession of time to be contracted and enjoyed in the body,
will reside together all at once in the separated soul; or rather, she her
self will be all of them. Many of them, will be incompatible with one an
other: yet she mustendure them all; and endure every one of their drawing her a
different way: like those unhappy monsters that some historians tell us of,
which being composed of two, or of more, different animals, united together by
some part of their bodies common to them all, they are at continual debate
among themselves, one of them desiring to carry their whole load one way, or
to busy themselves about one thing, the other contesting against that. But the
incompossible affections of such a soul, are yet more lamentable then can be
represented by the sad conflict of such monsters: for, these latter, are not in
the same indivisible place: they are but near one an other; and they are not
always in opposition, and at wars, between themselves: whereas, the souls
unhappy desires, do constitute and build up her very substance; which being
indivisible, they lie always together in the same indivisible restless bed:
like snarling dogs, like angry vipers, and poisonous serpents, perpetually
biting and tearing one an other. Nor can any of them be laid a sleep, for one
single moment of time: They are continually awake, continually raging, and
continually devouring one an other: and consequently, continually devouring
thebowels of that wretched soul that harbors them. Who in the midst of
this torment and misery, sees clearly that it can never have end, as longas
she has being; she being now, no longer subject to mutation: and that
therefore she must remain thus, for all aeternity. But this tearing her in
pieces by incompossible desires, is but part of the torment she sustayneth: She
is so unhappy, as to be incapable of enjoying any one of those objects she so
extremely thirsts after. None of them can follow her into that region, where
she now dwells; nor has the means or instruments to converse with them,
were it possible (as it is not) that they could approach her and offer
themselves to her. Consider now how great an anguish endures that man, who
having passionatly set his heart upon some beloved object, is hindered from
enjoying it. The proportion of his sorrow, will be according to the proportion
of his desire, and to the actiuity of his nature. We see, how much the grief
of a quick and smart person, exceeds the grief of a dull and heavy one: and
particularly when it is for the privation of the object that he prised most. We
have daily examples, of men, that dye for such losses. How strangely excessive
then must the sorrow be of a separated soul, that wants what she so
vehemently desires, and that she is sure she shall never attain to enjoy? How
great this sorrow and anguish is, we can not comprehend, because we can not
comprehend the actiuity of a separated soul. But we shall discover enough to
strike us with amazeme^t and horror at the sight of it, if we reflect, how
sorrow and pain works upon a man in this life. It is evident, that even in
corporeal pains, it is not the body that feels that which tormenteth him.
For if the mind be strongly fixed upon some other thought, so as not to attend
unto what passes in the body, or that by outward agents is wrought upon it,
(as happens in Ecstasies, and in like vehement applications of the mind an
other way) the man feels neither gout, nor stone, nor the incision of any of
hislimbes, nor the violent action of fire feering or burning any of his
sensiblest parts. It is the soul then that feels all such pain; and the
body, with its senses, serves but as the channel or conduite to carry it to
her. Much more is it out of all question, that the sorrows of the mind,
reside only there. It follows then, that since only the soul is
susceptible of torment; a separated soul, must necessarily be liable
thereunto, in an infinite excess beyond what an embodied one is capable of.
Now consider, how all the evil that can arrive to her, is, her being crossed
in her affections, and her being deprived of what she desires and tends unto
with greater actituity and pressure, then that wherewith the weight of the
whole world would fall back to its place and center, if after being removed
from it by a maistering force, it were soddainly let at liberty to return
whither its gravity would carry it. And from hence we may conclude what a state
of violence, and of suffering contradiction to her nature, must such a soul
necessarily be in? It is evident, that all the torments invented and inflicted
by such Tyrants as have bin most ingenious in cruelty; or caused by the
violentest and sharpest diseases; are but shadows to what such a soul
endures. To heighten yet more the anguish she sustaineth; she looks with an
envious eye upon the excessive happiness that other souls enjoy, who spent
their time in storing themselves with such true goods as now do settle them in
such a delightful state: she sees how easy it had bin for her to have made
her self one of that happy number: and how foolishly she took more pains to
render her self thus miserable, then they have done to attain Beatitude:
since the ones course, was a calm smooth progress in the high way that nature
herself traced out to them, and to all men else that have the good fortune to
discern it: and the others, was a continual toylesome wandering in the rugged
and stony bypathes, full of briars and thorns, where inevitable precipices
surrounded them on every hand. And she sees that the things for which she
took all this pains, and for which she now endures so much, and lost so
much; were most unworthy and most contemptible pleasures; not deserving the
name of pleasures, even whiles they were enjoyed in their greatest height; that
she is ashamed, and has horror, to think of: And yet, so wretchedly unhappy
she is, that she can not choose but prefer them infinitely above those true
goods, which at the same time she sees do in reality and in solid estimation
more infinitely surpass them; And which therefore she can not forbear loving
and desiring with a most vehement earnestness, though not so much as the
mastering affections that tyrannise over her. And consequently she is most
unhappy, upon that score too; since her misplaced affections, have rendered her
incapable of enjoying any pleasure in them. How miserable must we conclude such
a soul to be, though she remained in this state for never so short a while?
But when we consider, how she is to remain in this condition for all
aeternity; that nothing can never happen to comfort her, or to assuage her
torments, much less to lay them a sleep for one small moment of time; that
she is certain they will dure for ever all in a heap, and each single by it
self, corroding her bowels with the same raging violence; what distress, what
horror, what despair must she be in? If the looking upon eternity with our
faint eyes, and the taking such a poor scantling of it as we are able, by
adding of the greatest numbers we can comprehend in our fancies to others as
great as they; then, multiplying them between themselves, and with their
productes, till we have wearyed out our selves, and exhausted the rules of
Arithmetike and Algebra, in counting millions of years that it is to endure:
And yet after all, we find that we have not attained to so much as a shadow of
that all comprising, never ending, eternity: so that we grow giddy with seeking
to sum up such an endless account: What should we conceive will be the
sense, the horror, and the despair, of such a soul; who by the superiority of
her nature has now full knowledge, in its most horride semblance, of that
dreadful eternity, whose bare shadow (or scarce so much) strikes us into
such an amazement and affright?

By this little (very little, in respect of what this subject requires) Your
Lordship will conceive, what apprehension I make of the state of a separated
soul built up of improportionable and unequal judgments, by having in this
life entertained her self totally or chiefly with material objects, and
settled her mastering affections on them.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
Of the Beatitude of a well ordered soul, after its separation from the body.
IT is now time that veturne over the leaf, and take a view of an other soul,
that in this life has cultiuated her knowledges and affections to the best
advantage; and has employed her self, about intellectual and re^^ll goods;
and has contracted a love of them; and in comparison of them, neglects the
other muddy ones that belong to flesh and blood. It is evident out of what I
have formerly said, that the affections of such a soul, when she shall be out
of the body, will be wholly bent upon intellectual goods; as, knowledge, and
truth; and that if she enjoy them, she will be contented and happy. That she
shall enjoy them, is already concluded; when we showed, how every separated
soul, is endowed with fullness of knowledge, and shall understand and know all
that is knowable in nature; which imports, All that is, that ever was, and
that ever shall be: And that she shall know all this, truly without any
admixture of falsehood or error. But what degree of happiness she shall be in
by such knodwledge, is that which we are to inquire into: In doing whereof, we
shall be feign to take ou^^ measures, by discoursing comparatively of her
delights, to such as do delight a soul in this life; since such a soul is so
noble a creature, and so above our reach, that we are not able to judge
positiuely of her by looking singly. on her self, in her own nature. How
great the pleasures of sense are, is but too easy to apprehend. Mankind is
continually too conversant with them, to be ignorant of them. And so powerful
they are, that we daily see men of excellentest parts, sacrifice their whole
lives to the purchasing and enjoying of them. But if we compare them with the
pleasures of the mind, even in this world; we shall find that in respect of
them, they are flatt, mean, brutall, and inconsiderable. We see daily examples
of persons, that having bin deepest immersed in those, (and therefore can not
be suspected, to want the skill of gusting them) as soon as they have come to
relish the superior delights that are afforded by Intellectual goods (for
every taste is not presently fitted for them; being depraved by preoccupation of
the others) they grow to despise the entertainements and objects that formerly
were the Idols of their affections; and do acknowledge, that one hour of
contemplation of some noble truth, outweigheth in the scale of pleasure, years
of such delights as belong to sense. But I must not content myself, with
producing examples or authorities, to your Lordship: Such arguments are to be
used only to those that can not penetrate into the natures and causes of
things. You will expect from me, that I should lay the grounds, why
Intellectual pleasures, do, of their own nature, affect a man more then
corporeal ones. This is easily and presently done, if we but consider what it
is in Man that is affected with pleasure: even with sensual pleasure. And as
before, in point of pain; so here, upon the same principles, we shall find,
that it is not the body, but the soul, that is affected with pleasure, and
that the body and senses, do but serve to convey the outward objects or
motions, to the tribunal of the mind; who only sauoureth and embraces them
under the notion of delightful. If she be distraught an other way, with some
strong thought that carries her from the present objects and company; be the
man at other times never so much affected with music, (for example) or with
pictures and statues, or with parfumes, or with pleasant wines, or with like
entertainements of the senses: All these may beat at their doors; and yet he
be so far from being then delighted with them, that he will not so much as
have taken notice of them. If then it be the soul only that tastes pleasure,
she only being capable of cognition and able to make reflection, (which are
necessary circumstances to the enjoying of pleasure) It follows necessarily
that in a well composed man, those delights must affect him most, that are most
agreeable and proportionable to that part of him by which he is delighted. He
who feels not this truth experimentally within himself, may be said to have
the complexion of his soul spoiled; like those ill governed maids, who by
feeding on trash of bad nourishement, do get the green sickness; and then
do loath meats of wholesome juices. For, the truth is (though it fall not
within the compass of this discourse) that humane nature has bin corrupted in
its very source; like a child that sucketh contagion from an infected nurse;
and is delivered over, to ill affections, and to ignorance of what is good for
it. Now, the proper business of the soul, is the enriching her self with
knowledge; and her satisfaction and contentement, is the contemplation of
truth. If the doing that, in the lowest and meanest subject of knowledge,
(qnantity, which is but the accident and attendant of bodies; out of the
consideration of which, Geometry has its birth) and whose verities have no
real existence in nature; but may seem in respect of solid substances, to be
but fine cobbewebbes spunne in the air; If that (I say) do oftentimes carry
men of strongest parts and judgment by the delight and pleasure they find
therein, to the neglect of all sensual pleasures, and even of their life it
self; How great may we think must the delight be of him that should have the
solid knowledge of whole Nature it self, and of all her real and numerous
progeny? If the contemplation of a few lines, Angles, and figures, whose
Existence is no were considerable but in the brain and fansy of him that
plays with them (for they are but like sport and exercise to the mind, to
get her an appetite to meat of solider nourishement) can carry away with the
delightfullnesse of it such a man as Archimedes (one of the greatest wits that
ever were) so far, as rather to part with his life, then with so pleasing a
thought: What pleasure must there be in considering the whole machine of the
Universe, and of all the bodies that are contained in it? to behold the
beautiful proportion and symmetry, that is in every part of it? the admirable
connection, that is between each one of them? the nature of every one in
particular? and the long chain of causes and effects, that runs trough them
all, and comprehends them all? But when from hence, we raise our selves above
all this, and discover a new world (infinitely greater then all this) of pure
intellectual creatures; that have no allay of quantity or of bodilinesse; that
are not measured by time; that are not comprised in place; that are stored with
infinite knowledge; and that enjoy all possible bliss and happiness, all at
once; And that this all at once, shall be stretched out to a never ending
Eternity: what words can express, how this thought mu^^ needs affect him
that penetrater^^ duly into it? But, when to all this he adds, that these
are not bar^^ truths which are only pleasant t^^ look upon, and do not
concern^^ him in his own particular: but tha^^ indeed, whiles he contemplateth
their nature, he informs himself of his own: And that he does not study
this map, like a scholar that is learning Geography; but like an Emperor, an
Alexander, that is providing to make himself master of the whole region he
sees there abridged before him (for to such a state, his soul will arrive,
when she shall be out of the body) What soule-rauishing pleasure can we
conceive he then enjoys? How little must he set by all the fond toys that
vulgar people busy themselves about? And how contemptible and base must he
judge all those pleasures that affect the senses, in respect of this that now
fills, swells, and enlarges his soul? Yet all this is but a shadow; nay
it is not so much; it is nothing; in respect of the pleasure of a separated
soul that during her habitation in the body, cultiuated these thoughts: Which
we shall the better discern, ^f we examine the differences that are between
the cognitions, from whence spring the pleasures, of an embodyed, and of a
separated soul. When a man knows any thing, his soul speculateth the
fantasmes that are in his brain; and by reflection upon his knowledge, he is
delighted with it: and the more present he makes it to himself by close
reflection, the more is his delight: But the knowledge of a separated soul, is
always essentially present to her; it is her very self; her own very Essence
and substance: which can not choose but affect her more vigourously and lively,
then what is but knocking at her door. Next, a man can think of but one
single thing at a time; and at that present, be delighted with that only:
which is, because his soul not being able to work whiles i^^ is in the body,
but by means of the fantasmes in the brain; and they being material objects,
and residing in a material place; the on^^ of them shouldereth out his
fellows, whenfoeuer he comes to the narrow window by which he is to show
himself, and to give an account of himself, to the soul. But a separated
soul, shall in the same indivisible of time, reflect upon all, and every least
circumstance that she knows; which is, all that she gained knowledge of
during her whole abode in the body; and all that can be deduced out of that:
which (as I have formerly showed) is all that is, or ever was, in the world, or
ever shall or can be. And she shall have perfect knowledge, not only of every
one in particular; and of all the causes, effects, conformities, contrarieties,
and such other circumstances as immediately belong to every one of them: But
shall also see the connection that every one has with every one: how the
several linkes of this admirable chain that contains all that is in the
world, from highest to lowest, are so fitted to one an other, that if any one
of them were but broken or in disorder, all would fall in pieces; and withal,
are made with such powerful art, that every one of them is a support and a
strengthening to all the rest: So that the whole empire of nature must be
destroyed, before there can be the least failing in any of the meanest of them.
In the third place, let us consider how an embodyed souls knowledge is but a
kind of passion or impression from outward objects; and in all her operations,
is dulled by her heavy and resistent copartner: But a separated soul, is a
pure actiuity; a subsistent form; no potentiality or resistance belonging to
it: So that nothing among bodies, can express the nature and manner of its
working. It were too little, far, to say that her operations are like the
soddainenesse of the suns illuminating the whole hemisphere, or like the
quick violence of lightening, when in the twinkle of an eye it reaches from
East to West, and teareth vast trees (...) by the roots, and ouerturneth
solidest buildinges: for between such, and the weak creeping of a snaile,
there is some proportion; but between the other, none at all. In the fourth
place, let us consider how the pleasures of this life consist in succession.
When one part of them is, the other parts of it are not. Or rather, no part of
them is present. For you can not assign, not so much as with your thought, any
present moment; but whiles you are thinking of it, it vanishes. If the Now
which you would pitch upon, be more then an indivisible instant, part of it is
past, and the other part not yet come: what you graspe art, to stay it from
sliding by you, is such an indivisible as may be called nothing; and yet that
nothing, whiles you are but thinking Here it is, is flowne as much out of your
reach as the first hour the world was created in. On the other side; the
pleasures of a separated soul, are stretched out as farreias Eternity
extends it self; by an uninterrupted succession, of continual enjoying
without any diuisibility, or subsequent or precedent parts, of its durance:
And do comprehend all sucession, all time, (were it multiplied by the sands of
the sea, upon millions of years; and infinitely beyond all that) not in one
permanent and standing Now, of actual comprehension of them by Existence
(which belongs only to God) but in an assurance and evident certainty, that
her present happy condition is liable to no change, to no vicissitude, to no
diminution, to no ebbing and flowing. The pleasures that would require millions
of years to taste them all (and infinitely more) are here by a strange Alchymy
distilled and exalted into a quintessence of one minute, which minute is fixed
for ever from fleeting, is permanent, can never fade, or the pleasures of it
relent in the least degree. And in the last place, let us consider how great an
allay to all the pleasures of this life, is, the casuality of them^^ the
thought that they may betaken from him who enjoys them, or he from them; and,
that griefs and sorrows may succeed to the happiest humane condition that
can be imagined; is enough to sower it all. But a separated soul is secure
that she can never have her state changed. She knows, that for all aeternity,
it will ever be the fame. Her pleasure being the result of her knowledge, she
sees clearly that there are but three gates by which any change can come in
upon it: And if all these be safely barred and fenced, she is out of danger or
any mutation. These three, are; either her self, who is the knower; or the
objects, which she knows; or the knowledge, that she has of them. As for her
self; her Indiuisibility, and her immateriality, do exempt her, both from any
inward principles of failing within her self, and from the power of any
outward Agents working to her prejudice. And therefore, on that side, she is
immutable. As for the objects she knows; there can arrive no change in them,
in regard of her: for though some of them be subject to the empire of time, and
consequently are always in a fleeting and changing condition; yet, those
changes she is aware of; they are all present to her: so that if they did not
change according to the law settled for their change, which she is fully
acquinted with; there would be a change in them, in respect of her. Lastly; her
knowledge, can admit no change; since nothing of what she knows, can ever be
lost by her; it being all as indefectible as her self; and indeed, her very
self ^^ Neither can she purchase any new knowledge to contradict or weaken
what she already knows; since she already knows all that is knowable. And
thus it is evident, that her pleasure, being built upon these indefectible and
unchangeable foundations, is immutable, and will last in the same height for
all (...): And of this, she is most certain; and consequently enjoys her
happiness with all security. Let us now sum up the account we ha^^e bin
making of a happy souls joys; and we shall find the product ^^o great as
will amaze us. We have found, how the pleasure of the soul, consi^^teth in
knowledge; or, at least, is a result of knowledge. And to prevent, that
sensual men may not think ^^his to be but a dull and flatt pleasure, in
respect of the poinant ones that the body seems to be (...) of, we have
showed, how even all corporeal pleasures, are no otherwise pleasures then as
they affect the soul; and that it is only she, who is delighted with them:
And that her ^^ne proper and immediate pleasure, does affect her, even in this
life, without comparison more then those turbulent ones which come to her by
the conduites of her senses, after that custom and due perception of them has
once rendered them familiar to her, and has restored her to the government of
that Common wealth which her vassals had gotten possession of in her minority,
and whiles (as I may say) she was in her cradle and not yet awake. We have
found, that this pleasing knowledge is not only, of one, or of a few objects;
(like those of men; who whiles they are intent upon the delights of one
object, can not relish those of an other) but of the whole machine of the
Universe; all, that Gods hand maid, nature, ever did, will, or can make;
gouerner, and conserve; and how, when, and why, she performs all her works:
Not only in all the vast world of matter, (whereof we in this life; converse
with, and have knowledge of, but the least parcels) But also in the much vaster
Region of spirits; who, besides the near infinity of their number, have yet
this advantage over corporeal^^ things, that the meanest and lowest of all
that innumerable multitude, is in entire world within himself, infinitely
greater richer more beautiful and excellent then all the whole vast world of
bodies; And has infinitely more power to work what he will upon it all, and
upon every part of it, at once, (when the doing so, should agree with the
rules of his wisdom) then the strongest Giant that fiction ever built up, can
be imagined to have in respect of moving a slender straw or downy feather, or
of crushing a little bubble upon the water. We have also found that this
vnfatho^^able sea of knowledge, is always in a high flood of a spring ^^ide on
every coast; not sometimes ebbing on one shore, whiles it flows on (...)
other; but always swelling and ouling every where over all banks that might
hemme it in; and enioy^^ng all her several knowledges, and the delights of
them, all at ^^nce; as intent to every one of them a particular, as to any one
of them whatsoever: Which are so far from breeding a confusion, that even one
of that incomprehensible multitude, strenghtheneth and heighteneth every other
of them; and i^^ again strengthened and; heightened by it; and each, makes
the other be more tasted and better relished. Which taste in her, is not a cold
or flatt one, dulled and blunted with too much feeding upon her delights (as
happens to corporeal ones, who loose their smartenesse, either by the too
great actiuity of the objects working upon them, as when too great a light
blinds ones eyes; or by being too much glutted with them, as when one
surfetteth with delightful mea^^es; and the like) but is all actiuity a kind
of perpetual growing in appetite; a continual effusion of itself with
violent transport upon this All and every least parcel o^^ it, that so
delights it. And ye^^ this effusion is not as upon a pleasant object art some
distance from i^^selfe; as when a man looks upon a fair picture or fairer
original, that delights him: Nor yet at less distance, as when pleasant
wine or meare slideth over the pala^^e that is affected with them, and does
mingle some little atoms of their bodies with it: Nor as when more delightful
motions make a change in the sensiblest parts of a man's body, to begett in him
a higher strain of pleasure then all the former; then which, it may seem that
nothing can be nearer. But it is far more intime to the soul then all this:
It is she her self: All this pleasure of hers, is engrafted upon her own very
Being: ^^t is a perpetual effusion of her who^^e self, upon her whole self:
she needs no reflection upon it to make it present to her (as all pleasures of
the body do, to make them perceived and relished) or rather, she is in a
continual most strict reflection upon it, as having it most intimely and
substantially present to her; for it is purely she her very self: And
therefore she is in a perpetual, uninterrupted, chewing, relishing, and
enjoying, with a most quick sense, hungry appetite, and incomprehensible
actiuity, of all and of every one of these her wonderful delights. Which it
is not enough to say she enjoys all at once; meaning only that she enjoys
the pleasure of every one of them at the same time: But because her enjoying
is without succession; It fares with her, as with wine, for example; the
actiuity and virtue of a whole tonne whereof is drawn into a small measure of
aether^^all spirit: or as with the diffused sun beams; which being reduced
to one point, do there become burning; whereas in their extension, they were
but warm: So in her the whole ^^asse and dilatation of delight which we may
fansi^^ would take up innumerable millions of years to run over, is
extracted into one Minute; into a perpetual N^^w; And the virtue (as I may
say) which required to be diffused through all that vast space, is sublimed
into this narrow, room: and yet again this narrow room, or the concentrated
virtue of it, is multiplied so as to be all of it in every moment of such a
vast succession: As if after the extraction of the spirit, it were, multiplied
to fill again the whole vessel with such: or after the burning glasses
exposition to the sun, every line of light reflected from it or refracted
through it, should become as hott and burning, as that single one which makes
the top of the Cone that terminateth the suns rays. Now then, after we
have multiplied such excesses, such burning points of pleasure, by every one
of the several innumerable pleasures she enjoys thus all at once, and that
she is effused upon with the whole actiuity of her Nature (which is all sense,
all fire) What will be the product and total of such immense particulars? The
vast number of atoms of sand, that Archimedes has so wittily set down, and
showed was sufficient to fill up all the space between our earth and the
heaven; would not express this foot of our account; No not though it were
never so often multiplied within it self. For those multiplications would
still begett but terminated numbers; whereas this, is beyond all number, as she
is above all time, by being above and beyond all quantity. Lastly, when for a
crown and full completing of all this immense delight and happiness, we shall
consider, that the state she is in, admits no lessening or change; that she
is secure she can never loose any smallest parcel of it, nor be interrupted in
the full and vigourous fruition of it; but that it will last ever the same, for
all aeternity; and beas it were still beginning, and still fresh; Your Lordship
(I believe) will not expect from me any further reflection upon this dazeling
subject. I will therefore put an end to my course and weak expressions, that
fall infinitely short of what I feel within me, when, in silence and in quiet,
I contemplate the joys and bliss of a separated soul, departed out of her
body, after due cultiuating her self there, by such a course of life, as
Reason (could we but discern and follow her directions) prescribes to every
man: The deuiating from whose rules, begets such an unhappy state as on the
other side of this medall, I have endeavored to engraue. Both which, I have
sheved to be unchangeable, as long as the souls that enjoy them do remain
naked and severed from their bodies. But what alteration they may be capable
of, if ever they come to be clothed again by their bodies, and to be reunited
to them; (by whose mediation only, new impressions may be made upon a soul)
belongs to another place to consider.

THE X. CHAPTER.
That the complete Beatitude of a separated soul consists in the sight of
God.
MAy I not seem unto your Lordship to have amplifyed and exaggerated beyond
possibility of truth, the states either of weal or of (...), belonging to a
separated soul? If it happen, that any besides your self, do read this
discourse (especially if they be not inured to rigourous proofs, and to
Metaphysicall speculations) I can not expect, but that they should look upon
the immense happiness or misery, I have in it allotted to the share of a
separated soul, as an vnbelieuable Paradoxe. And they that should be most
favorable to me, will be apt to suspect (according to their looser manner of
judging moral affairs; which endure not such peremptory decisions, and so
remote inferences heaped one upon an other) that howeuer there seems to be a
pretty connection in all I have said, and an appearance of a sequel between
the principles I have taken, and the conclusions I have deduced out of them;
Yet, that I have driven them too far; and that in so perplexed and long a
discourse, there may easily have slided in some little errors or aequiuocations
in sundry iointes of it, which in the last conclusion may have caused an
enormous mistake, though every one of them in particular were almost an
imperceptible one: And therefore, that these are rather pretty dreams, hanging
handsomely together, of a much thinking and melancholic man; then real and
solid truths. And at best, they will look admiringly upon them, as upon
inconceivable expressions; without being at all moved and affected by them.
But whatsoever others may think, who like unto ill husbands do look but upon
the total sommes of the accountes their Stewardes bring them in, without
examining the particulars from whence they grow; I am sure your Lordship will
exactly weigh the reasons, upon which I ground this bold and far, re-reaching
conclusion; And when you have done so, I doubt not but you will find in it the
same fault that I do; namely, that my expressions arrive not to set out the
real vastness of the thing I speak of. To the reasons I have brought, I
could have added many more in confirmation of this great truth, for, the
arguments I have produced, are but a few, and that first occurred in the heat
of writing, among the many that I might have employed, if I would have aimed
at making a large and complete treatise upon this subject. But my aim, is,
only to give your Lordship hintes of the chief points that I should
recommend to your consideration, as relying more upon what your o^^ne strong
discourse will suggest unto you upon such important considerations, after your
thoughts are once wakened to attend to them; then upon any thing I should be
able to say. I pretend but to spring the game for you: And then, if you like
what rises, you will fly it home.

If an Apology for the faintness of my expressions, was ever needful;
certainly it is now most necessary, for what I shall say in this Chapter: Where
I labor under such a Weight of matter, that I want language to express but a
bare shadow of it. Yet I must not do as the great painter did, who having
expressed as much passion as he could in the looks of the bystanders at
Iphigenia's Sacrifice, drew a veyle over her fathers face; because he found his
art too weak, to describe so great a sorrow as his; And so left it to the
spectators thoughts, to conceive what a one that might be. For if I say nothing
more then I have done, of a separated souls bliss or woe: It may seem that I
have no apprehension or suspicion of any thing, beyond what I have already
laid grounds for. And on the other side, if I should go about to delineate
scrupulously that which is the title of this Chapter; I should, not only miss
of displaying to your Lordship the redundant light that shines in this next
region; but strike my self blind with looking too fixedly upon it. I will then
go^^ a middle way, And say enough to make you see, how that marvelous
exuberance of good or bad I have showed does betyde a separated soul, is
nothing, (not near so much as an Atome to the whole world) in respect of what
will be her lotte in order to the seeing (...) God Almighty: And yet, not
engulfe my self far in this (...) ocean, that has no shore on any side.

It is evident, out of what ha^^ been already said; that, seeing this life is
short, our acts in it mean, and our science in it very limited and narrow: And
that on the contrary side, the next life is aeternall, a souls acts in it
wonderful high, and her science immense: The great and final happiness of
man, is not to be expected in this life, but in the next. It is evident also,
that our happiness being to be respited till the next life, where we shall have
no senses to reap pleasures by^^ it can not consist in sensual pleasures: And
consequently, that it must consist in the operations of the soul; which are
nothing but knowledge, and what resulteth out of that. Now, all knowledge, is
either of effects, or of causes. Of the first kind, is all that knowledge of a
separated soul which we have bin hitherto discour^^ing of: for, all the
objects of it, are ^^omprised under the general head of Creatures. The
knowledge of ^^heir Creator, can not be doubted ^^o be as much superior to
that, as the nature and excellency of such a cause, is superior to the effect
that proceeds from it. And considering the dignity of so Almighty and
infinite a cause, as God, the Creator of all things; a natural man may
reasonably question whither a separated soul (who is but a particular and
limited creature) be capable of arriving to see (that is, to know) this all
comprehending and infinitely all exceeding cause. He may soon be resolved of
his doubt, if he reflect upon the course of nature in wafting man kind to his
long home: for doing so, he will see how this life is a perpetual progress in
bettering, (or, designed to the bettering) of the soul's knowledge in the next
life; as being the end of humane nature, and the only thing that can give it
rest and satisfaction. He will also see, that as in the next life there is an
infinite increase of knowledge: so must there be also, an infinite increase of
the desire to see the cause of those infinite effects which we shall then see
and admire; Experience telling us, that a clear and lightsome understanding,
is ever vnquiett and thirsting to see the cause of the effect he takes content
in; And reason likewise abetting it, by showing how it is impossible to see an
effect perfectly, if one pierce not into the cause of it; for unless he do so,
he would not know why the effect is. So that it is evident, the whole course of
nature, drives to promote and advance in us the desire of seeing the
Universal cause of the infinite effects that a separated soul shall see. And
consequently, the desire of seeing God our creator, is planted and engrafted
in man by the intention of nature. What is so; is impossible to be
frustraneous, and totally without effect; but of necessity will be fulfilled in
some. For, Nature, is nothing else, but the rules that the infinite wisdom
and goodness of God has allotted to all creatures. And it would not agree with
those attributes, to prescribe any of them a periode, unto which none of their
kind should ever arrive. Well may those he planteth in the Sphere of
contigency, miscarry in sundry indiuiduals; since it is the nature of
contingency, that some should miscarry, whiles others arrive to their periode.
But if all should miscarry, and none succeed; it would no longer be
contingency, but impossibility: and it might be concluded, that nature were
unduly molded; and the means to bring it to its end, unwisely ordered. And
in our case, we might add, malice and cruelty, to the imprudence: since, by
the course of our nature, we should be brought ineuitably to an eternity of
misery, by causing in us a most vehement and most actife desire of knowing and
seeing that which we must never attain to see. And the best men, that have
most cultiuated their souls according to the prescriptions of nature, would
drink deepest (...) this bitter cup of gall and misery. Therefore, we may
settle it for a firm and certain truth, that some souls shall arrive to see,
(that is, to know) God, the Universal cause of all things; as already I have
proved, that all souls shall arrive to know all things else. Let us now
compare these two knowledges, one with an other; and examine which of them is
the greater and the more excellent. We are sure that God is an understanding:
And consequently, he knows what he is to do, before he does it. Whence
follows, that he being the cause and maker of all creatures, he understands
and knows them all. Therefore, he that should have that great register
displayed to him to read the contents of it, would find all creatures
comprehended in it. And to know them there, is so much nobler, then to know
them in themselves; by how much nobler and excellenter, they must necessarily
be in that great unity and identity which they have in him, then in their own
multiplicity and dispersion. Unto which we may add, the infinite excess of
things, which he could, but never will, make; over those he has or shall have
made. And then we can not doubt, but that the knowledge of God, must be far
beyond the knowledge of all creatures. But when besides this knowing of all
creatures in God, we shall putt into the scale to it the knowledge of God in
his own nature and Essence; the other scale wherein is the knowledge of
creatures in themselves, will not only become light beyond all proportion, but
will vanish out of sight; like a candle, that though it give light enough to
make a whole chamber luminous in the night, dissappeareth (even whiles it
burns) if you set it in the beams of the noone day sun. They who
understand Metaphysikes, will contemplate how the nature of Existence, is of a
pitch incomparably above that of Essence. For Essences are but possibilities;
dead notions; till Existence come to enliuen and to actuate them. After which
they are still defectible. For they carry always with them a capacity of being
divided from their Existence; which if it happen, they presently fall back to
their invisible Chaos. But Existence can never fade. The nature of it, is, to
Be; and consequently, to exclude not Being. It dwells in so high a region,
as nothing can arrive thither, but whom It eleuateth up to it self. Here, God
has his habitation. But I correct my self: this is improperly said; as though
God, had his place among other things, likewise ranked there. He endures no
companion. He fills the whole region. All of it belongs to him singly. He
alone possesses it all. And therefore it follows, that a ^^oule raised up to
the knowledge and sight of him, must needs be infinitely more noble and more
Excellent, then an other that has but the Essences of things drawn into her
by the knowledge of them. If then, these two knowledges, that of God, and that
of creatures, could not agree together; but, that to acquire the one, the other
must be deserted; There can be no doubt, but that the knowledge of creatures,
ought to be abandonned for the sight of him. For it is evident, that the
happiness which a soul must necessarily enjoy by seeing of him; is as much
beyond that happiness which we have formerly described, resulting out of the
vast knowledge which a soul has in the next life; as that knowledge,
exceeds the tryfling knowledge mankind enjoys in this world. But this is
not the case. These knowledges are not incompossible. For it is the nature of
knowledge, to be so far from ones hindering an other; that there is none, but
of its nature, induces and perfecteth some other knowledge. And accordingly,
the knowledge of Almighty God increases the knowledge of creatures; showing us
why they are; and solidating their knowledge, upon the vnshakable foundation of
Gods knowledge. And consequently, the more that a soul shall know God; the
more firm and the more strong will be the knowledge she shall have of
creatures. Nevertheless, when we consider that God is an object, whose
admirablenesse is aequall to his own understanding: that is, exceeding ours,
beyond what it possible to be conceived: we must conclude, that when a created
understanding enjoys the knowledge and sight of him, it can not choose but be
so employed and taken up by that sight, as not withstanding the vehement desire
which we have showed it has to see it, yet it has not desire enough to cleave
and apply it self to that object: much less, has it any left for other
things, but merely as it is carried on by the sight of God. And consequently,
it mattereth not to a soul that sees God, whither she see any thing else or
no: but she is entirely contented and overwhelmed with the greatness of that
fundamental sight. And although she knows and estimeth to the full the true
worth of the sight of other things: Yet she is so drowned and absorbed in the
sight of God (which so infinitely exceeds the other) that she is no more
affected with it, then a man would be with the having of that which is but a
pure medium to help him to compass some end or good he desires for its own
sake. As for example; when a sick man drinks a potion to recover his health;
if the physike be such as has no plesantnesse, (but rather the contrary) in
its taste; he valueth it not at all for its own sake, but only as it is a
means to procure him health. And so, the soul that sees God, accepts of
the sight of all creatures, as a mere consequent and appendix to the sight of
God. Thus we see clearly, that in this composition of these two knowledges;
the whole of both, is comprised in that which is the principal; And by it, is
all the pleasure, and in it, all the good of them both. And consequently; God
and the sight of him, is the true bliss of man; the sole end for which he was
created; the periode whereunto nature drives, in all her course concerning
him; and which once attained, he is quiett, entirely contented, and can wish
for no more.

On the contrary side; If a separated soul do fail of the sight of God, she
cannot choose but know, that all this we have declared is true; And the
evidence of it, will be confirmed to her by all the immense knowledge she shall
have in the next world: And consequently, she must needs be unspeakably
^^rtured by this unhappy loss; and, ^^s it were, gnash her teeth and gnaw her
own bowels, for remorse, shame, and indignation. And thus, the misery or
happiness of a separated soul; by the interuening of God into the account,
comes to be raised and swelled above what in the last Chapter I declared of
them, as much as what is infinite exceeds the least parcel of Quantity;
AEternity, time; selfe-Existence, defectible natures; And in a word, God,
creatures.

I am persuaded that after all this, your Lordship will not censure me of being
niggardly in allowing pleasure or pain to souls in the next world. Yet seeing
that the composition of man, includes a body, as well as a soul: I conceive
you will not be displeased, if I add a word or two concerning the pleasures of
sense, which will belong to a happy soul: the contrary whereof, will be the
lotte of an unhappy one; And therefore what I shall say of the one, will
require but turning over the leaf to refer it to the other. It is very true,
a separated soul is eapable of no other pleasure, then such as belongs to a
soul: Yet if we look well into the matter, we shall find, that this pleasure
of the soul compriseth also all the pleasures of the senses. For this end,
your Lordship may please to remember, how I have formerly showed that in the
sensual pleasures which a man enjoys in this life, it is not his senses that
are affected with them. For, all pleasure depends of knowledge: And
therefore, wheresoever we meet with expressions or semblances of pleasure,
that are not accompanied with knowledge; we may truly say, they are but like
such expressions and imitations of life, as cunning artificers bring to pass
by wheels and engines enclosed in a box, whereby the statue of a man, of a
beast, of a bird, of a fish, or of a fly, is made to imitate the natural
motion of the creature it tepresenteth. But our senses are not endewed with
knowledge, as has been explicated: Therefore the pleasure which they convey
unto us, can not reside in them; but belongs only to that part of us, where
knowledge is; that is, to our soul: And in truth is nothing else but the very
pleasure of knowledge. Hence it follows, that since in the next life we have
all knowledge; and consequently all knowledge gotten by sense; we must have
there, also all pleasure of sense. So that we shall have there by our natural
knowledge, all pleasure, both of sense and of understanding. Now, because the
sight of God comprehends in it self, all pleasure of understanding; it
follows, that in it alone is comprised all pleasure of sense, and of
understanding, together with that pleasure which is proper to the sight of God.
Which in sum, is a collection of all good, in an act that of its own nature
is vnperishable. And so it is evident, the sight of God, is, true and complete
happiness; including in it self, all that a man can desire; without fear of
ever loosing it: And therefore, perfectly quieteth the mind that enjoys it,
for all AEternity.

I have said vnperishable; not only, as the soul her self and her acts, are
naturaly unchangeable: but, out of the speciality and propriety of this very
act of seeing God. For, God of his own Nature, actuating all things that have
Potentiality to him; and the soul, being by Love a potentiality to God; It
follows, that as long as she loves him, he can not forbear the actuating of
her; which is, the being her Bliss. And on the other side; his actuating of
her, being her seeing that he is all her good; she can not cease from loving
him, as long as he does not cease from actuating her. So that, his actuation,
being necessitated by her loving him; and her loving him, being necessitated by
his actuating of her; the conjunction is made inseperable, by the very Essences
of the two parts. Besides this, if we consider how divines teach us, that our
beatificall vision is made by the immediate conjunof God Almighty his Essence
to our understanding; and that by consequence, his being understood by him
self, becomes the Being of our soul as it understands him: And, that his
being understood by himself, is his very AEternity: We shall find, that
Eternity it self, is the duration of our soul, as she is the understanding or
seeing of him. Now, if Eternity be the duration of our bliss; who can question
whither it be vnperishable, or no? See (My Lord) what a pitch we are arrived
unto, to participate the very Godhead it self, in its own Eternity! Is not
what the Apostle has told us, perfectly true, Quod, oc^^lus non vidit, ne^^
aur^^ andiuit, nec in cor hominis ascendit, quae praeparauit Deus ijs qui
diligunt ilum?

THE XI. CHAPTER.
That there is a certain method and way to bring mankind to Beatitude. And of
the necessity of knowing it.
WHat has been hither to said; bauing euinced the Immortality of the soul;
and pointed at the pleasures of a happy one when she is out of the body,
together with the miseries of an unhappy one; and glanced in gross, at the
different ways which lead to these so different states; And settled this
great Principle, That Beatitude is not to be looked for in this world, but in
the next: It can not be doubted, but that when an understanding man shall have
well considered all this, his heart will be set on fire to learn which is the
straight, and beaten way, that may lead him with security to so great a good,
intended him by God and Nature. For he can not choose but see, that no good of
this world can be paragoned to that bliss; as also, that no action is worth
the doing, that is not aimed at purchasing that hoped and desired Beatitude.
But when to this he shall add; that although he travel not by design in the
opposite way, but that merely through heedelessenesse or ignorance he do walk
out of the vight way; all such by-steppes do swerve his soul from her true
good; and as far as they advance him not, so far they prejudice him: He
will then conclude, that the method and course of arriving to this supreme and
sole good; is not only the worthiest, the noblest, and the vsefullest art he
can study: But that in very deed, all others are but fond and vain
misse-spendings of time; And that this only, is the business he is to employ
himself a bout, with all his industry and application. He will be afraid of
being ill directed: and will be solicitous to meet with a clear and distinct
rule that may instruct him how to tread boldly in every step he is to make:
And therefore will not be content with discerning in gross, that the
entertaining of his thoughts and affections with Intellectual goods, will make
him happy; and that his settling them upon sensual ones, will bring him to a
contrary condition: But seeing that these generals do branch out into numerous
particulars, every one of which requires a particular diffection, and proper
motives and inducements to embrase or avoid them; He will be anxious and
serupulous in seeking out the greatest certitude and infallibility that man's
nature and the course of second causes can afford him, to be right in this
point. In the mean time, during such his attentive and earnest inquiry, he
will have the comfort of being secure that there is such an art: And that it is
not like the specious vndertakinges (for example) of those who pretend to an
universal science, or Matrice tongue, whereby one may learn all others in
very short time; which have no subsistence, but in credulous persons ayry
fancies. For he who is able to weigh in his thoughts the progress of Gods
providence in his ways to compass his desired Ends upon this world; can not
doubt but that he must have framed stronger engines to bring about the
salvation of mankind, then for any other design that he has set on foot
within our reach and kenning: not only, as being the noblest end of all
others; but even that, unto which the whole course of nature tends, and for
which all this world that we converse with is made. And therefore he will
conclude, that the security of obtaining the true means to gain Beatitude,
must be as great (if not greater) then the security of men's living peaceably
and happily together under the reglement of civil and politic constitutions,
or what other security soever is in the government of man's life. And
consequently, if he compare the certitude belonging to the science which is to
bring mankind to Beatitude, with the certitude of such knowledges or rules as
govern the arts that are usual among men, (as Agriculture, Military
discipline, the art of Navigations, and all sorts of handicraftes and trades)
he will look for at the least as great in this science, if not greater. But
all these sorts of men, being taught by continual experience, that when they
work according tho the rules of their art, the effect succeeds to their
wish; are so secure in their several ways, that they can not admit any doubt
of the certainty and truth of their rules. We have reason therefore to expect
in this art of governing our actions in order to Beatitude, at the least such
a security as may aequalise the security springing from experience that is in
trades and manufactures. And this is by so much the more necessary, by how much
the subject of this art, has greater difficulties then the subjects of others
arts. First, because this is both speculatiue and practical; whereas others
are only practical. In others, every man desires to do well: In this, for
the most part, passions and interests make men desire not to do well. In
others, no man doubts of his rules; and all his labor is only to apply them
rightly: But in this art, there is difficulty, as well to understand and believe
the principles of it; as to apply them to our life when we know them. In other
arts, a Master or teacher is readily met with, and the manner to acquire them
is obuious: But in this, a maine difficulty is the seeking and discerning of a
right teacher. Lastly, other arts contain but some one part of a man's action
and life; But this, comprehends all our whole life; and principally, the
highest parts of it. I may therefore conclude, that the art of coming to
Beatitude (which we call Religion) is the highest, the amplest, and the
necessariest of all Arts whatsoever. The highest; because the scope of it is
to gain Beatitude: which is our chief End; and upon which, all that is
otherwise pleasing to us ought to depend. The amplest; because in the use and
application of it, it extends to all our actions. And the most necessary;
because if he be not instructed in it, he will infallibly miscary and perish.
For as a man that is no Architect or Musician, and has not learned how to
build a house or to play a lesson on the lute; though he will not be blamed for
his ignorance in those arts, (which happily is not through his own default;
but by some impossibility of getting instructions in them) yet if the one go
to build himself an habitation, or the other to touch a lute, they will not
effect what they aim at: But the disordely machine of stones and timber of
the first's imitation of a house, will fall upon his head; and the seconds
inconcerted strokes and stoppes, will annoy his own and his hearers ears. In
like manner, if a man have not the true knowledge of living so as to attain
Beatitude; Although he be not blamed for incredulity, if it were never duly
proposed unto him; yet he shall fail of obtaining the bliss that follows
out of a well ordered life, and shall inherit in the next world all those
torments and miseries which I have expressed and showed to be the effects and
sequel of a disordered life in this. And therefore, no excuse serves a man's
turn for his ignorance in this art: which is so absolutely necessary, that
without it (be the cause what it will) he is lost and ruined for ever.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
How the method and science of attaining to Beatitude (which is true Religion)
is to be learned. And that it is not come into the world by humane reason or
invention.
THE art then of well living, or Religion, being a certain and a diffu^^ed
science, reaching to every action of a man's life, as is delivered; Our next
inquiry must be; how to compass the knowledge of it. It is evident that there
can be but two ways to arrive unto it; namely; Either by ones own Invention,
or else by an others instruction: There being no third way of acquiring any
science. For, a man comes unto it, either by driving of consequences out of
knowledges that are evident as soon as they are proposed (such like as are the
Axioms, upon which Mathematicians do build their demonstrations) And this is
the course of Invention: or else, he must be beholding to some other man who
knows that science, for instructing him in it. And from such a one, he may
derive his knowledge in two different manners: The first, when he that is
posseded of a truth, does so explicate it and all belonging to it, that at the
last the learner sees the truth it self, and comprehends all the reasons of
it, as fully as his instructour does; And so, though he be beholding to him for
begetting such science in him; yet now he has no longer need of him, but is
as strong in it as he. And the gaining of knowledge in this manner, may be
conceived to savor in some sort of Invention, as well as of discipline. But
the second, belongs purely to discipline; As when the learner arriueth no
higher then barely to understand what his teacher says; and at the furthest,
to have some moral likely hood that it is true; but at the head, relyeth upon
his teacher, as one who he is certainly persuaded can neither be ignorant of
the truth he delivers, nor can lie and deceive his disciple. For if either of
these fail, the disciple can have no certainty or rational confidence of the
t^^uth delivered him: And then consequently, in our present case of Religion,
he will want that quiet, that security, and that content of heart, which
accompanyeth ones believing that he is in the right way of obtaining the
happiness he aymeth at.

Now to apply unto the knowledge of Religion, these two ways of attaining any
science, Invention and discipline: I will begin with examining whither it may
reasonably be hoped, that humane Invention could discover it, or no. Some may
think the negative; because in the mysteries of it there are no lines of
demonstration; that is, no such connection of them unto principles evident to us
by nature, that out of them any man, be he never so knowing, or even an Angel,
could deduce them. To discuss this in particular, were to enter upon all the
several mysteries of our faith; and show, how they either are, or are not,
connexed with reason: which, besides that it were two long a work for my
designed breuity, would be too heavy a burden for my weak shoulders; who am
not so vain as to pretend to any more of divinity then what is necessary for
every rational man to settle him in a right course; which amounts to no
more, then to the finding of a certain and infallible guide to carry him safely
to the end of this important journey; But if your Lordship desire to satisfy
your self herein, give me leave refer you to Master Whites. Dialogues
(under the name of Rushworth) of the Judgment of common sense in choice of
Religion, and to the same author's sacred Institutions newly come a broad
into^^ the world; in which learned works you will find abundanr content. That
therefore which I shall note upon this occasion, is, That howeuer there may be
in the mysteries themselves, sufficient grounds to build demonstrations upon;
yet in regard of us, there is no hope that we should be able to penetrate into
them, without having first learned them otherwise. For our Nature is so
encumbred with material fantasmes; and all that we speak, or think, is
delivered in such aequinocall words; and above all, most men are so blinded by
passions and so biased by interests; and they ^^eete with so little to help
them in this design; that very few (and they neither, not till toward the end
of their life) can be expected to make any progress in so high an attempt. And
therefore we may conclude, it is impossible, by invention to reach the
amplitude of those mysteries which are necessary to be known, to bring
mankind to Beatitude; the doing whereof, is the scope of that art or science
which we call Religion. Unto which determination, drawn out of mature
considering of the causes, no small corroboration is added by experience,
showing us effectiuely how little mankind had advanced herein during the long
space of 4. or 5, thousand years, that nature had continued from the beginning
of the world, till our Saviors coming to teach it us completely. For if we
look upon what the learned Grecians delivered to their Roman Masters, at the
time when the ouergrowne wealth of Rome was proposed unto them to fire their
wits to find out what Beatitude was (which was the learnedest age, the most
abounding with great men, and the last, in which their studies were employed on
that subject; and in a great measure sharpened by the opposition of
Christianity, then beginning to grow into the world) we shall find that their
attempts never reached with any steadiness beyond this life. For although some
of them discoursed that the soul was Immortal; Yet they held it rather as a
plausible opinion, then as a solid truth whereon men should ground their
actions, and should govern their lives here by it. As your Lordship (if you be
desirous to satisfy your self in this particular) may find in Lucretius,
Tully, Seneca, Epitectus, Antoninus the Emperor, and several others of that
strain; who prescribing remedies against the fear of death, and making
exhortations to virtue in this life; do never extend their motives to any good
obtainable in the next life. Which your Lordship may see proved at large in
Lactantius; who purposely makes it his task to do so. For of those
Philosofers who guessed furthest into the state of the future world, none were
ever able to ftame any scantling of the diversity of the souls treatement
there, otherwise then by Gods arbitrary distributing of reward, or inflicting
of punishment: which way belongs clearly to belief, and not to science. So
that, as far as history can inform us, Man's nature and wit did never
attain to the first principle of well living; which consists in considering
what condition souls be in, after they are out of the body: so far were they
from having discovered true motives to balance our passions, and to set us in
an even way between the allurements of this world and the hopes of the next.
And this is the good that we expect from Religion: whose scope is to raise and
inflame the souls that are a wake, and to rouse those that are a sleep in the
dalliance of this world, to the esteem and relishing of the happiness they
may enjoy in the next.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
That religion has not bin introduced into the world by one man's teaching an
other. Nor by Angels instructing of men. But has bin taught by God. And that
Christian Religion is the true one.
IT can not then be expected that Religion should be iutroduced among men by
invention or strength of wit. It remains that it must be by discipline and
by teaching. Whereof, seeing there are diverse kinds, or rather diverse kinds
of teachers; our next enquiry shall be, at whose hands we are to look for
it. Our first position shall exclude one man's teaching an other. For, suppose
that some one man should have beaten out by long study the true way of
attaining to happiness (which nevertheless, out of the former discourse
seems unlikely, if not impossible) the way for him to derive it to others,
must be, either by demonstrating it to them by reason, or by winning their
belief to it because he assures them of it. But, demonstration, in a matter
so high and so difficult, can not be communicated to many: very few being
capable of the strength of such a proof, in much lower and easier subjects. It
can not then be derived to the people by any other means then by their relying
upon him that should positiuely tell them what they are to believe. But upon
him, they could not rely: for he being but a man they can not be assured
whither what he says be true or false: either, because he might be deceived
himself, and so deliver them a falsehood for a truth: Or else, because there
might be considerations for him to propose it to them for true, although in his
own hart^^lie knew or doubted it to be false: As for example, either his own
particular profit, or glory, might prevail with him to do so; or he might
deceive them for their benefit; keeping them by that means under good laws,
and to an obedience that should make them live happily in this world. And from
the suspicion of this latter, even the best man that can be imagined (so he be
no more but a man) can not be free. For, if he want power to introduce among
men that which he judges best for them; it may be doubted that he ayme^^h at
bringing about his designs by art and cunning; according to the old parable,
of sowing the foxes skin to the lions to make it reach. Now if all these
difficulties happen in the case of one man's propagating to the multitude this
science of Religion, which he is supposed to have beaten out by his own
industry and learning: They would be no whitte less, but rather more, when
such (...) and demonstrators should be many. And without their being many, it
can not be conceived how the generality of mankind that is spread so wide in
place, an of so long durance in time, can be imbued with it. Add to this, the
much that half learned men, and half wits, would object against Religion
proposed by such as pretend to rely on it because they have demonstration for
it; which would be far more plausible to the vulgar of mankind, then all
that can be said to solue those objections; considering the profoundenesse and
subtility that can not chose but be in such a demonstration, and the
vngraspablenesse of the very Nature, and Essence of a separated soul, which is
the necessary entrance into it: So that such men would give over their inquiry
and attention, before ever they advance so far as to weigh the reasons
whither or no a soul can be without a body; because they can not conceive what
such a soul is: And yet this is the hinge and fundamental point of all
Religion. So that it can not be expected, that if there were no more
efficacious means then this to persuade mankind; they should by virtue of
this only, dis-seise their harfs from the goods of this world (to which the
course of our nature gleweth them strongly) and settle them upon inconceivable
ones in an other world; from whence they have not experience of any soul that
has come to assure them thereof, and to inform them what kind of inhabitants
they shall become there, when they arrive to the possession of those goods. We
may then from this discourse conclude, that for prudent men to receive Religion
in the way of belief, they will expect to have it built upon a stronger rock
then humane credit.

The next stop above the degree of men, is the Sphere of spirits or of
Angels. Among whom, seeing there be good ones, and bad ones; let us begin with
considering what we may expect in this case at the hands of these latter: And
let us suppose them to converse with men, by giving them Oracles; as ancient
stories do record of Apollo at Delphos, or of Jupiter Hammon in Lybia, and the
like. Can any thing they shall declare and reach, be a sufficient ground of
belief? Surely, if ever any such Oracle were animated with its ambitious soul
(as is pretended) it is not reasonable to expect that the spirit of lying
should always speak truth. And if he do not; one single lie, takes away the
credit of all the Religion that he should have founded. For, if he can, and
sometimes do, lie: Whence may it be certain that he does not lie, when he
delivers such vnknowable things as those which concern the state of the
other world? And consequently, if mankind had no better security then this,
the greate^^ and highest design of nature, woul^^ be loosely gimalled, and
more ^^^terring then every mean trade. But let us consider what security we
may have from good spirits. If such should denounce Religion to us; it must be
either in their own names, that they would speak; or it must be in Gods, as
his Ambassadors. If in their own names, what confidence can he to whom they
speak, have, that they may not be as well of the tribe of lying spirits, as of
the blessed Angels? If he ask them, whither there be not such deceiving ones,
who were once their companions, and of the same nature as they; and are since
become wicked and malicious; they will acknowledge there are, And then, what
infallible marks can he have to secure him, that these he conferreth with, may
not be such, though they style themselves Angels of light? And their very
speaking in their own names, may justly render them suspected: for, if they
were such as they pretend to be; that is, out of danger of falling (as their
mates have done) by having perpetual sight of the aeternall verity; then,
their very being such, would reasonably make a man expect that what they
deliver him of that verity and of the way to arrive to it, should rather be a
message from him that makes them so stable and indefectible, then an
instruction proceeding from their own single impulse. And after all, if he do
believe them to be of the happy sort, and for that cause do give credit to what
they say; it is in effect upon the score of him that enlighteneth and
strengthens them, that he believes them; And the speaking of such, is rather
from him, then from themselves. We may therefore conclude, that there never
was, nor ever could, or can be, any true Religion among Gentiles or Idolaters,
or among any who do not profess their belief has its source from the true
omnipotent God, the selfe-verity, and the spring-bonity. Nor can they pretend
to such certainty of rules for bringing them to Beatitude, as experience
shows accompanies the rules of all trades and manufactures. All these then
being excluded from all pretense to true Religion; and all created instructors,
appearing of too mean credit to settle it in the world; It remains only
that we have recourse to God alone for this supreme blessing; And that we
inquire what laws and ordinances he has given mankind, to govern and direct
them until the end of the world, that they may attain to Beatitude. And we
find no marks in story of any, that with likelihood we may pitch upon, besides
those tree memorable laws which have succeeded one an other: to wit, The law
of Nature; the written one; and the last, given by Christ. The first of these,
can not be admitted now to any plea; the succession of it being so interrupted,
that no body can claim the inheritance of that faith, Nor does any body know
the feuerall contents and articles of it, further then as some few of them may
be supposed to be included in the written law; and by the succession of them
who profess the written law, derived in them and in Cristians to our days.
The Jews can as little pretend that the law which God give them by Moses, is
the religion whereby the whole bulk of mankind in all ages is to be saved.
The uery nature and essence of it, and all the maine circumstances that
accompany it, do contradict that claim. For it is manifestly limited to
selected persons, to a determined time, and to a narrow place. Nor is it a good
objection, that some Proselytes of other nations were allowed to be adjoined to
the seed of Abraham, in participation of rites and sacrifices: For such an
adiunction could not reach to whole nations; but contrariwise, some were
expressly forbidden by name. And so, their law, was not a law for mankind; but
only for the family of Abraham. Besides, God himself determined the land in
which it should be practiced: So as, sacrifice could not be lawfully made, nor
altars erected, in the way of their profession, in any country but their own:
Which conuinceth that it was never intended for the salvation of mankind,
whose numerous progeny is dispersed over the face of the whole earth. And it is
clear that their Messiah was promised them at the end of the reign of David's
house, and before their dispersion into the whole world: both which can not be
denied to have bin long since performed: And consequently, it was a temporary
Religion, and not designed to last till the worlds end; which is a necessary
propriety of that Religion, whereby all nations (that is, all mankind) in all
ages, are to obtain Beatitude. It remains then, that Christian Religion must
necessarily be the law that God has designed for the salvation of all men, at
all times, and in all places. Yet because Mahomet pretends as well as
Christians, that his law is derived from God; it will not be amiss to examine
his claim in a word or two. First, there is a great disparity between the
Christians and the Turks law, in this; that Mahomet pretends not to be
himself God, as Christ does; Nor that he had his law immediately from God; but
that it was sent him by an Angel. Next, he allows Christ to have bin a
Prophet; and yet taxes him of lying for having given himself out to be God.
By doing which, he makes his own doctrine rely but upon a fallible authority.
For since he obiecteth lying to Christ, whom he allows to be a Prophett: What
security can one have, that he who pretends not to be more, lies not as well
as he? Again; Christians pretend a publicity of infinite miracles done by
Christ, attesting his Godhead and the truth of his doctrine: Mahomet and his
sectators, none; or at least, such as by their own confession are but obscure
ones. Lastly; the abominations of Mahomets law, against both reason and nature;
and a total submitting of the soul by it to bodily objects; do evidently
convince, that the observing it is not a promoting and perfecting of Nature
toward the great end of Beatitude, deduced in some of the former chapters;
but a strong and maine alienation from it: and consequently, a peruersion of
humane nature, and a carrying of mankind to eternal disgustes, miseries, and
torments.

THE XIV. CHAPTER.
How Christ's doctrine has bin conveyed purely and entirely to succeeding
ages. That puritanes and Protestants can not lay claim unto it.
IT is then only the law of Christ, that can pretend with reason to the
glorious title of a doctrine, able to bring a man securely to his desired
happiness. Let us then examine in the next place, if all they who give
themselves out to be Christians, do deserve that name, and in reallity and
effect be such. No man will doubt, were he Jew on infidel, but that if Christ
were God (as Christians do profess and believe) he was both able and willing
to deliver unto his flock the truth so necessary for them. Which once granted,
it presently appears, that Photinians, Arrians and all such pretended
Christians as denied Christ's being true God, had no Religion; they bringing
down the certainty of faith, to an authority under God; that is, to a fallible
one, as I have already showed; and consequently, subject to falsity; and
therefore not to be relied upon. For, Christ spoke not an others dictates, as
Moses did; nor in his difficulties, had recourse to God, as to his lord or
Master: but spoke as a master, and wrought as a Lord; as one, from, and of,
himself: and who when he prayed to his father, did it for our example, not for
his own necessity; addressing himself unto him, by the ^^ame of father, not
of master.

But setting a side all such blasphemours, as persons no ways considerable;
let us look back upon the maxim we have formerly set down; to wit, That
he who li^^eth not well, that is, who does (...) actually tread in the way
which ^^eadeth to Beatitude, shall not be happy; how excusable soever he be for
not knowing the way or law: And then we shall straight discover, that it is not
sufficient for any man to say, he has Christ's doctrine, and is willing to
follow it; unless he be certainly assured that he have it. Nor can he be sure
that he has it, unless he have some infallible means whereby to discern it
from false and pretended doctrines. This infallible means, can be none other,
but the infallibility of the authority and conueyance, by which this doctrine
comes to him. If Christ, whom he believes to be God, did speak himself
immediately to him; he would require no more: But seeing he is departed many
ages since, from conuersing with mankind; we must inquire what infallible
conueyance of his doctrine to us, we may rely upon. It is clear, there can be
but two ways to perform that work; the one, by writing; the other, by being
handed down from generation to generation; by the mouths of them who first and
immediately received it from Christ, and taught it to those that they conuersed
with; who again preached it all over the world; and they who learned it of
them, taught it at their turn to those who succeeded them; and so from
generation to generation, and from age to age, is come down to our present
age. The universality which (even in the very beginning, and whiles the
doctrine was fresh in their memories that had it from its source) requiring a
great time to the forgetting and extetminating of it every whe^^e, it may be
conceived to have ^^in conserved pure and entire all this while, in some great
part of the world. Third way, there is none: unless peradventure we make a
subdiuision of writings; distingui^^ing betveene such as came from ^^he pens
of those teachers who ^^eceiued what they write, immedia^^ly from Christ; and
whose words (...) authentical and law^^ And such other writings, as being
composed by authors in succeeding age^^, do inform us what the Church has
held in all times. This sort of writers, may seem to partake of both ways: Of
the first, as being writers: And of the second, as far forth as they are in a
manner a part of the hands through which Christe's doctrine has bin conveyed
unto us. These two ways may seem to have bin shared between the french
Caluinistes (among us, called Puritans or Presbyterians) and the English
Protestants or common prayer men: But in reality, they have them not. For, the
Puritan, as soon as he has highly and peremptorily pronounced, that nothing
but scripture must be Judge of Religion; and that the word of God, pure and
alone, must govern; he presently makes you a Catalogue of articles, which you
must hold, if you will not be excommunicated and cost out of his Church. And
howeuer he may pretend that he de^^iueth these articles out of scripture: yet,
the words of them not being in the Scripture, he can not deny but that they
are his own collections and interpretations: So that if he miss in
interpreting Gods written word; the sense, as well as the words, will be his,
and not the Scriptures. Now the Protestant; seeing the unreasonableness of
this proceeding, that a particular man or company should oblige all men to
receive his interpretation of Scripture; thinks to take a more plausible
course, by pretending to explicate Scripture by the fathers; especially, by the
fathe^^s of the primitive ages. But this seems to me more irrational then
the puritanes proceeding. For, first, he goes against his own principle, by
appealing to the fathers after having pr^^tested against all humane authority,
(...) fallible. Secondly, he makes himself judge which of the fathers ^^re to
be received; and when; and ^^hat of them to be rejected; and how to be
understood: And so draws the question, from the sole book of Scripture, to
the infinite volumes of fathers. And lastly; that he may serve himself of the
fathers manner of expressions, jointly with his own conceits and opinions; (so
to boulster out his fancyes with the semblance of their authority) he
confounds his own language with their manner of speaking; and neither
understands himself, nor (much less) can make an other man understand what
he says. Like those commentors of Aristotle and S. Thomas; who not being bold
enough to deny their authority, which has taken so deep roots in all the
schools of Christendom; do render their doctrine, and themselves,
unintelligible, by their wrested and confused interpretations. Yet I deny not,
but that a right Protestant, is in many points nearer truth then the
Presbyterian^^ For, his reading of the fathers, and his allowing them some kind
of estimation; can not choose but work some good effect in his mind. But that
which I complain of him for, is, that the rule he pretends, (as he uses it)
is more intricate then the Presbyterians; and his discourse, is more ambigous
and confused, by his counterfeiting to hold with the fathers, when in truth he
renounceth them.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
A further consideration, of the insufficiency and unreasonableness, of the
late Protestants proceeding, in point of Religion.
TRVLY it seems to me so evident, that neither of these have any rule of
Christianity; as I have oftentimes wondered when I have heard some men (in
other things, appearing to be prudent) say in earnest that they believe they
have one, and grow warm in their maintaining so much. For, there being but two
channels whereby Christ's doctrine can descend to us; writting; and delivering
from hand to hand; How can they pretend to Christianity, who accept of neither
of these? As for tradition by hands; they clearly defy it. And as for
Scripture; If they take that for their rule, why do they bind men to opinions
that can not be decided out of Scripture, but remain still disputable after
all is said that can be urged from thence? Well may they, in pursuance of their
own rule quarrel at such as shall deny any point that is clear and evident
in Scripture: But to anathematise, and punish (when they have the power) those
that produce out of Scripture as fair proofs for their opinions, as any thing
they are able to bring against them; seems to me a great injustice.
Certainly, nothing can be more-euident, then, that in all the points which have
bin disputed, out of Scripture alone, between Catholics and them, now almost
an 100. years; the textes produced by them, have not at all inclined the
balance on their side; but rather (if I may'be allowed to give my verdict, in
a case where I am in^^ere^^ed) it has weighed notably on our side. And
therefore, let them pretend what they will; it is clear, that Scripture is
not their rule. As for the Protestants pretending to the authority of the
fathers in interpreting Scripture, the case is yet more clear, if more may be.
For, they stick not to say upon every occasion, that the fathers erred; and
that they might err, both in common and in particular. So that, theirs is but
like a cobwebbe lawne lining: (of no substance or solidity) to the Nettelike
cloak, wherewith the Presbyterians do endeavor to hide their foul play, when
they recede from the rule which themselves propose; and is looked through at
the first casting of ones eyes upon it: And in this regard, both their cases
are the very same. And to speak plainly; the rule common to both these, and
to all others, who proposing Scripture for their rule, do afterward prefixe
particular opinions to their Church; neither is, nor can be any other, then a
heady pride and wilfulness, to bind all other men to their, not knowledge, but
guessing. Now if such guessing, can be judged a sufficient means, for
themselves and others, to be assured of those things, without the doing
whereof mankind must be eternally miserable; these men may pretend to
Christianity: But for my part, I can entertain but a very mean estime of it.
I know, ^^euerall of them are held for learned men: And that, not only in
their own opinions, but by many others besides: How justly they deserve that
title, will appear if we consider, what true learning and knowledge in any
science, is. I take it, to be an assurance of the nature of the things that
are treated of in that science. Such, Mathematicians have in their profession;
such, the masters of all the arts that belong to man's life. Such, Philosophers
have, (or should pretend to have; though some, unworthy the name of
Philosophers, do content themselves with probable opinions) and much more,
deuines ought to have such assurance of what concerns their profession;
seeing, that any mistake therein, exposes men to eternal ruin and misery.
Now the learning of these men that would pass for so great deuines, wherein
does it consist? They pretend to no other, then to know that has bin said by
others. Which others, are God and men; to wit, what has bin said by God in
Scripture, and by men in their books. If they rightly understood all this,
they might with reason ha^^e a good conceit of themselves. But let us examine
how they behave themselves, in their proceeding with both these. As for
Scriptures, I have already touched how their penetrating into the sense of
them, is but a mere guessing: Yet were it something, if they could make it
appear that they guess fairly. I will allow them so much, if they can show
how any of their deuines in any one question, has faithfully paralleled the
places of Scripture used to be brought on each side; and has fairly compared
and weighed them in the balance, one against the other, and has given each of
them their full weight; and then has pronounced an orderly sentence, in this
sort; that by reason of plurality of places, propriety of words, efficacity of
texts, and the like, the advantage falls to this side, rather then to that.
If they should pretend they are able to do this (which I am sure they never
have as yet performed) I would entreat them to show me a learned logike of
words, out of which they had extracted the rules whereby the sense of words
may be pondered; and whereby one may be certain when their sense is
demonstratiuely known, and when but probably; and by what weights, one
probability appears greater then an other; And after all this pains, I would
tell them (and they can not deny it) that as long as both senses are probable,
the less probable may peradventure be the true one: And so, all their labor
is lost. But let us examine, if their learning be any greater in humane
writers. The depth of it is, to boggle at any dark place of History, or of
fathers; and by it, persuade such men as are not conversant in antiquity, to
frame a judgment coutrary to the public practice of the Church of those
ages. As for example; what can be more public and notorious, then the
succession and authority of Bishops; then the being of Monks and Nuns; then
the principality of the Bishop of Rome; then the practice of the Mass,
Sacrements, and ceremonies; then the custom of praying for the dead; then the
use of Crosses and of pictures? And even for all these, they make it their
labor (and for which they pretend the title of subtle and deep scholars) to
persuade you, out of some not fully declared sentence of a father, speaking
upon the by, that there were no such things as these in antiquity. Yet had our
contryman more sincerity then this; who in his translation of S. Augustines
confessions, professes plainly, that he had left out many things, because S.
Augustine had erred in them. So the Centurists, and Luther, and Calvin, and all
Nouellists, whiles there remained any ingenuity among them, confessed that the
opinions which they rejected, were ancient errors of the fathers. But now, all
their learning consists in belying of antiquity, and in pinning a false mask
upon the venerable face of it. How then can men deserve the name of learned,
who take not the course to know any thing at all? Nevertheless, they must
pass for great deuines; when peradventure they are all together ignorant, what
divinity is. Divinity signifies a science, that follows out of faith or out
of the discipline of salvation; in such sort as Euclides Elements do follow out
of the definitious and axioms, which he has prefixed as grounds for his
books, and that he has supposed before them. In like manner, faith must be
supposed to divinity. But in s^^eed of doing so, these men who term themselves
deuines, do spend all their pains and employe all their schollership, in
opposing the received tenets of faith. So that they are such eminent deuines,
as he would be a Geometrician, who in steed of studying thoroughly Euclides
Elements, should never go beyond the first leaf; but should busy himself
many years, and write great volumes, to prove that his definitions are ill
contrived, and that this axioms are false. And yet must such seely
aequiuocation, so pusse them up, and persuade their followers they are so great
Clerks, that all Antiquity, all the latter and present ages, and common sense
it self, must be deserted to adhere to these learned Masters. Whereas those
who are truly deuines, are beyond common Christians, and do begin their science
and employment at the height of those notions which belong to common
Christians: Whiles these, whom the Protes^^ants term deuines, do never attain
to the knowledge that the simplest Christians are imbued with, by relying upon
tradition and upon the authority of the Church. But enough of this: since it
seems that God himself has taken it to his task to ruin them wheresoever
they appeared to have power.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
The Socinians and the Independents, excluded from having the true doctrine of
Christ.
THESE two, being rejected from holding the rule of Scripture; (whatsoever they
may pretend:) there remain yet two other families who lay claim to that rule;
namely, the Independents, and the Socinians. Their difference, I take to be
this: That the Independent acknowledges the book we call the Bible, to be
truly the word of God; and accordingly, makes it his precise study to know
what is said in this book. All that no lest finds there, he holds for most
certain and holy. He binds others no further, then to acknowledge the
letter; and to draw the best meaning out of it, that of themselves they are
able. He accompteth all who do so, to be of his religion and communion, if they
agree thereunto. If they will not communicate with him, he presses them not:
but if they will, he refuses them not. The Socinian his difference from the
Independent, I take to be this: That he judges the Bible to be the wisest and
most authentical book that ever was written; such a one, as no other humane
writting can contest with it; yet not such a one, as no ^^ippe or error might
fall into it; even in matters of importance, and concerning our salvation: And
therefore, that where reason is absolutely against it, he may seaue it; though
for ciuility sake, he will rather choose to putt a wrong gloss upon it, then
plainly refuse it. Further, he thinks it not fitting to no lest anyman, who
bears the like respect to Scripture, and proceeds modestly in his actions.
Now it is clear, that both of these do stick to the rule that they propose to
themselves, for attaining the science of Beatitude: And therefore their
deficiency, is such as humane nature is liable unto; It being incident to all
men, to fail in their discourse, when it is long. Whereas Protestants and
Puritans do in the same breath contradict themselves, and renounce the
Principle which they lay for the first foundation of their receding from that
Church they were borne in, and of their erecting a new one. This proceeding, no
man can excuse from barbarous impudence, and irrationality; or admit them
among the pretenders to religion, upon the score of Scripture; which at every
turn, they change into their own fancy. But as I can not but praise the other
two for going consequently, and for sticking to their rule and principle; and
so esteem them to be rational men and such as deserve to be discoursed with:
So withal, I can not allow that they have (properly speaking) a religion among
them, or such a rule as they may securely rely upon for the salvation of their
souls: Especially the Socinian; according to the explication that I have here
made of his tenets: which whither it agree, or not, to all those who pass
under the name of Socinians, I dispute not; as not leuelling my arguments
against Persons but against opinions. Against these then that I have related, I
thus frame my oppositio^. If it be true (as I have already declared) that
ignorance of the way to Beatitude, will hinder v^^ from ever arriving to it;
And that it imports not, whither it be by our own default, or no, that we
are ignorant of it; (for be it upon what score you will; and be we as
inculpable as you will suppose; still, the missing of the way, will bring us to
a wrong periode and end of our journey; where we shall be plunged in infinite
and eternal miseries:) It follows that it concerns us mainely, to provide
that we have more security in this point, then in any other art or trade
whatsoever that belongs to our well being in this life. Now whither the
Socinian have such security or no, in the rule he relyeth upon to bring him to
Beatitude, is that which we are to examine. It can not be pretended that
Scripture is his rule: for, seeing he supposes Scripture to be fallible, and
that upon all occasions he corrects it by his discourse; it is not Scripture,
but his discourse, and his reasoning, that is his true and supreme rule: which
is the cause that they, or some of their party, did denominate themselves
Sanarations, from right reason. Now, seeing that his discourse, is not
confirmed by sensible and real effects abetting it; (as for example, by
miracles, wrought to take away all doubts or scrupules against it; or by the
return of souls from the other world, to assure us by their experience that
we may safely rely upon such a rule, as having brought them to Beatitude) It
can not be denied, but that it has no other strength, then that which it
comprehends within it self and carries in its own bowels. And this
strength, ought, to be no less then certainty and vnanswerablenesse, if he
intend that it shall settle all doubts and quiett all scruples in this affair;
where it imports every man to be cautious, inquisiti^^e, doubtful, and
scrupulous to the utmost. For if his discourse be any degree under certain, it
is but probable: And every point that is but probable, the contrary of it may
peradventure be true: And consequently, all bare probable points, are either
false, or el^^e not known to be true; which is no better then false, to a man
that can not be satisfied with less then an infallible rule to rely on. And
therefore, the Socinian can not satisfy a reasonable man, nor does he give a
good account of himself, unless he profess to demonstrate his assertions.
And not only those assertions, wherein he contradicts Scripture; but also
those, wherein he agrees with it. For, seeing that Script^^re has with him no
further authority, then of being probable; all that he gathers there, can
have no more^^ force then of being likewise probable; and consequently, to make
it infallible, he must support and Corroborate it with a demonstration. But
what I have already said about demonstration in this subject, will cool our
hopes in expecting any at the Socinians hands: Neither do they (as far as I
ha^^e understood) pretend there unto. There remains then, only the
Independents rule of attaining to Beatitude, to be discussed. Whose proceeding
is certainly more allo^^ble, more judicious, and more pious, then all the
others that we have hitherto looked upon. For, he resolves his belief and
groundeth ^^his actions, wholly upon him that can neither be deceived himself,
nor deceive others. In this matter, he is not content with any less
authority^^ then Gods wor^^ What he finds not in Scripture, belongs not to
his Creed. Infine, he gives Scripture its true value; and he sticks firmly
to it, as his rule. But if all this may not suffice, unless he have security
of his tenets out of Scripture; I doubt he will have a hard task to prove them
sufficient for salvation. For, omitting that he must be assured of the texts of
Scripture which he makes use of; that those very words which belong to his
purpose, are in the original, that the translation he reads, is not
discrepant from the original, in as much as concerns his text (both which
are impossible to be known by ordinary Sti^^klers in controversy) I am
persuaded it is much harder to demonstrate out of words the way to Beatitude,
then out of natural principles; if not wholly impossible. Th^^ which, though I
will not here dispute, (it being largely handled b^^ others; and particulary by
Maist^^ Rushwor^^ in his second Dialogue yet I will crave leave to represent
unto your Lordship how the prejudice of continual experience, for now at the
least 1600. years, is strong against the Independents undertaking. We know
well, how during all this tract of time, there has still bin great disputing
out of Scripture against sundry most important propositions; diverse of them
directly impugning our Savior him^^elfe and his dignity and Godhead; for the
settling whereof in men's beliefes, it appears that a great part of the
Scripture was written: And yet peradventure, never a one of them was ever
convinced and beaten down by Scripture, or by any other means then by
Tradition and by the title of possession of the contrary Doctrine. And shall
not the consideration of this success after so many attempts, make us very
doubtful and a fraid, that nothing can be convinced out of ^^ole Scripture? I
have heard some, ^^ho have employed their studies to be exact in the
controversy about Scriptures being the rule of faith, challenge others that
have pretended to have greatest skill and insight in Scripture, to convince out
of it alone that there was but one God (a point wherein all Christians agree)
and t^^ey could never receive satisfaction in it. The Ecclesiastical stories
inform us, how the Arrians defended their denying of our Saviors d^^uinity,
by pregnant texts of Scripture; and could not be convinced, otherwise then by
Tradition: And how it fared in like manner with sundry others. The very nature
of words; so subject to diuerses senses and understandings: The length of the
Bible; whereby all sorts of metaphores and improper manners of speaking do
occur in it: And th^^ reiterating of the same speech, diversely, in diverse
occasions: Do render it mainely suspicious, that it is impossible to make a
demonstration for proof and explication of the true meaning of any passage in
it, which great wits have engaged themselves in explicating a contrary way.
And therefore, before a man can rationally rely upon Scripture for a sufficient
rule to bring him to Beatitude; he must be satisfied and convinced, that there
is a means, whereby he may certainly know what is the sense of Scripture; and
how he may compass this means. For otherwise; all that he draws our of
Scripture, is uncertain; And no less uncertain it is, whither what he has
drawn, be enough; or whither more be not necessary: And in a word, he
remains on all hands in perpetual inc^^titude.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
That Tradition is the only means of conueying Christ's doctrine to
succeeding ages.
OF the two ways of conueying Christ's doctrine to Mankind in all ages (the
first of which, is by writing; and that ^^e have bin hitherto reflecting upon)
there remains only the latter (which is by handing it from one to an other)
to be considered. A doctrine so conveyed, implying thereby that it has been
in all ages; that is to say, in the universality of time; belongs only to
Catholics, to lay claim unto it; and only they who do so, may properly be
styled Catholics. Neither can it be objected, that the Greeks may pretend it
in such points of faith as they differ in from those that live in communion
with the Roman See. Well may they, in matters of custom: But these are of such
a nature, as they may have bin different in several places, even at the very
origin of them; without any inconueniency at all: And consequently, in
different places, there may have continued different practices, cuer since the
Apostles time. But let us examine more particularly what advantages or
prerogatives, this way of transmitting Christe's doctrine from hand to hand
until our days, has over the retriuing it in Scripture. First, we shall find
that it has the prerogative of Possession; All adversaries having found the
Catholic Church (out of which they broke) in a quiett credulity that her
doctrine was so descended from the Apostles. Next, it has the prerogative of
all the approbation and commendation that our fathers could give it; by
themselves, by their laws, by their rewards and punishements, and by
whatsoever else they could invent for the continuation of it. It has a high
strain of testification, above all that is to be found in our titles to land,
inheritances, legacies, bargains, and all other moral transactions and
concernements whatsoever. It has the testimony of all our adversaries, to have
continued for a thousand years, even in those points wherein they dissent
from us: but in all others wherein they agree with us, they allow our
continuance from the very origin of Christianity. So as it can not be doubted,
even by our Adversaries confession, but that this way is capable of bringing
down truths unto us uncorrupted. But above all, it has the evidence or its
fidelity in conueying to posterity the doctrine of Salvation, by the connection
of one age to an other, Out of this maxim: That it is impossible, all fathers
through out the whole world, should conspir^^ to deceive their Children, in so
important an affair. For, this Maxim does so connect the knowledge of every
century, to what was known in the century immediately preceding it; that it is
impossible for any error to creep in between them. And the maxim it self;
is as evident as any that belongs to Mathematikes: And so much more clear
then any of those, as perpetual daily practice; beats us into the knowledge
and continual view of it. For, as no man could doubt but that the brains of
that person were crased, who conuersing with merchants upon the Exchange in
London, and hearing them speak daily of Paris, and of moneys they remitt
hither, and of letters they receive from thence; Should nevertheless think
confidently there were no such town as Paris, because he was never there
himself: So, much more, should he be held for a mad man, that living in
England, and conuersing with all forces of people, reading their books of all
kinds, hearing their sermons, considering their laws and the change of some
particular ones in matter of Religion, and innumerable other particulars, which
speak manifestly how Catholic Religion had course in England before Henry the
VIII. changed it; should nevertheless deny it, because he lived not in the
time when that Religion was publicly professed. For in this case, the number
of witnesses is far greater then in the other. Now, when a motive of humane
prudence is so preualent a one, as to brand him with want of common sense, who
shoud not assent to what it induces; It is a manifest sign of a conquering
and axiomaticall evidence in the proposition that he should so deny. And
consequently by this discourse, (applying it to every age since Christ's
planting of his Church) the descent of Christian or Catholic Religion from
Christ is as evident as any Geometrical demonstration whatsoever.

One great prerogative more, I must not omit, that Tradition has above
Scripture: which is, that Scripture is delivered in precise and determinate
words; whose sense, is not understood: But Tradition, is delivered in almost
as many several expressions, as there be several persons that deliver it. So
that, in Tradition, the sense is constant, though the words be uncertain:
Whereas in a truth delivered by writting; though the words be agreed upon, yet
the meaning of them is disputed of. And therefore, seeing it is the meaning
that we are to govern our actions by; and, that words; without meaning, are
of no weight; ^^t is evident, that Tradition is a rule, And that Scripture is
none.

But why do I troble your Lordship with such scrupulous balancing of these
rules one against the other; since by my discourse in excluding ^^ll former
pretended rules, it ap^^eareth evidently, that if Tradition ^^e not the light
which God has hung out to his Church, whereby to know true doctrine from
false; when he sent his Apostles to preach, and promised he would be with them
(that is, with their preaching, or with their successors in preaching) until
the end of the world: We may truly conclude, there is no light or certainty to
guide his Church by. Which is as much to say, as; that when he had built the
world for men; and had fitted them with all things, requisite for their
natural and civil life in this world; he failed and mistook in the maine and
chief end for which he had contrived all the rest.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
Against the opinion of some deuines that place Tradition in the consent of
fathers that have written in their several ages: and against some other
opinions of particular deuines. As also against Naturalists and Socinians.
I am not ignorant, that among us, there are some deuines, who as they
acknowledge Tradition to be the rule of faith (for without doing so, they could
not be styled Catholics) so, they place Tradition in the consent or fathers
through all ages. But I conceive I shall not wrong them, if I say that in doing
thus they consider only themselves, and not the Church; which is composed of
all sorts and of all degrees, of persons; simple and wise; learned and
unlearned. For no man is so weak, as not to see, that it were a wilder arrant,
to send the commonalty of Christians, to the multitude of Fathers for their
faith; then to remitt them to the Scriptures. It can not be doubted, but that
the rule of faith, must be somewhat within the peoples kenning. All sorts of
persons are capable of discerning whither, or no, they are in the public
communion of those who profess they have received their doctrine by a
continued sequel of teachers succeeding one an other: But, for studying of
fathers, or Scripture; the universality of mankind, wanted for the most part
capacity, talents, and leisure. And no small difficulty will be added to this
task, by our adversaries endeavoring all they can, to cast a mist before men's
eyes and to obscure what of it self is mo^^ clear. I take therefore the
conse^^ of fathers, to be a confirmation an^^ a testimony to learned men, of
th^^ Tradition that is delivered by hands: but not to be the substance of
Tradition: which of its nature might have bin (if so God had pleased) and would
have maintained its unshaken and invincible force, though there had bin neither
writings of fathers, nor Scripture.

Others, seem to think, that some points of faith are known by Tradition
(or, as they call it by the unwritten word) to wit, those whereof they find
not sufficient proof in Scripture: but that for the maine ones, we are to have
recourse to Scripture. Now for these, I admire at the looseness of their
discourse; when they allow Tradition to give assurance of those points which
are the outmost, and which can not be known without the former; and yet will
not have the former to be known by the same Tradition. And therefore I imagine
it is but a mistake in their delivering themselves; and that their meaning is,
that all points are known by Tradition^^ but some, not only by tradition,
but by Scripture too. And it is evident, that all they who refer unto
Tradition, the knowing that Scripture is the word of God, and that this book
is the Canon of Scripture; must needs relate all certainty of faith, to
Tradition; even of what they think they demonstrate out of Scripture.

Other deuines there be, who add to Tradition, some power of revealing new
verities to the Church. But even they themselves do confess that the knowing
that there is such a power, must rely finally upon Tradition. And then, seeing
it is a point not fully resolved of among our selves; I conceive it is not fit
to press it upon those who have yet reluctance in digesting so much as is
resolved of, and is evidently true.

The reason why I have mentioned these opinions of some particular deuines; is,
because I desire that your Lordship should see that the way wherein we walk,
is not only a plain and a smooth one; but an easy one to be found out: which
it would not appear unto you to be, if you should be obliged to what these men
would impose. By my exceptions against which, as well as out of what I have
formerly established; I conceive I may safely conclude, That all Catholics, do
take Tra^^ition, for the last rule, into which the certainty of all particular
articles of faith, is to be resolved.

Now, were my task performed; and Tradition set in the throne of commanding
Christian belief: Did not the Naturalist and the Socinian, with iointe forces,
endeavor to possess Reason, of that chair: Alleging, how Reason is the
nature of man; the sole power in him, that can give consent to any thing
proposed unto him; And therefore, in spite of all I have said, must be Queen
and commanderesse both of his belief and of his actions. But when they object
this to me, they do not consider, how I have been all this while laboring to
do in effect that which they require. For, what has all my discourse leuelled
at, but to show, that reason obliges us to ground our belief upon Tradition?
So that I profess Tradition has no force to command belief, unless Reason
tell us so much; and as it were deliver us up to Tradition. Reason tells us,
it is fit to believe a knowing teacher or directour, in a matter wherein ones
self is ignorant. She tells us, that she herself has not principles and
means, without believing some teacher, to give us certain information of the
state of our soul in the next world, and of the ways in this whereby
Beatitude is to be obtained. She tells us, that Tradition has derived this
knowledge from a Master who was well assured of it; and that she contains
within her self, a strength of infallibility, to reach us without mistake what
she learned of him. And So; Reason concludes, that we must barken to
Tradition, and follow that rule. Else she renounceth us, and protests we go
against her sentiments; that is, we do unreasonably. Will not this satisfy any
man that professes to follow the conduct of Reason? Yet I will say more: Let
either Naturalist, or Socinian, produce true Reason (that is, demonstration)
against any thing that is attested by Tradition; and I will grant him, we
ought to leave Tradition and follow reason. But, if reason could do that, i^^
would not assert and maintain the Infallibility of Tradition. It is not
therefore true reason, but defective and Topicall essays, and flashes of wit,
which these men produce, and upon which they rely: that is, upon a broken
reed; whose splinters (as the Scripture tells us) will gore them that lean
upon it.

Yet is it not my intention, by this discourse to persuade your Lordship that
it is impossible, since the mysteries of Christian faith have been revealed, to
reach by the help of faith unto the demonstration of revealed truths; so as,
nature be first duly understood. I know, the words in which our faith is
delivered, ought to be explicated by natural definitions. I am sure, that by
the knowledge we have of God by natural sciences (as, that he is a spirit;
that he is immutable; and the like) we come to know, that many words and
expressions delivered of him in Scripture, are to be understood as spoken
Metaphorically: And the like of angels, and all spiritual substances. I know
that Man's freewill, is a natural thing; and that by Philosophy and Looking
into our selves, we may come to understand what it is; and that out of the
right or wrong explication of it, great and noble truths may be discovered;
and, as great and foul errors incurred. I know, that terms, once rightly
understood, must of necessity have connection among themselves; and that we do
not loose our understanding, as soon as we apply it to faith; And therefore,
may make legitimate consequences out of faith and natural principles joined
together. I know, the doing of this, is expected from Deuines; is commended to
them by S. Paul; the example of it is given them by the fathers; is professed
by the Princes of our schoolmen; and, that consequently, there can not be a
greater irrationality, then for a Divine to say there can be no demonstration
in Divinity. Which were, in effect, to style himself a professor of Divinity;
and at the same time to profess there is no such science as Divinity. For,
whatsoever is delivered as Divinity, and is neither demonstration, nor the way
to it; is, not only idle garrulity; but profane and temerarious contamination
of our holy Christian faith.

But my Lord, I perceive my weak boat is sliding apace, before I am aware,
into a sea too rough and too dangerous for me to steer a steady course in. It
is time for me to take in my sails, and to let fall an anchor. I pretend not
to learning: much less to be knowing in Divinity. The various courses in the
world that my several employments and fortunes have cast me upon, have not
allowed me time nor means to store my mind as I would with knowledge and
solid litterature. If I have acquired any thin sprinkling in any of the
parts of natural learning, I owe it to my misfortunes, and to the reuolutions
of my country causing them; that have condemned me to such a manner of living,
as if I should not converse with books, and employ my time in some study, it
would become burden some and in supportable to me. And then, since my study is
chiefly for my entertainment; you may easily conceive that my application of
it, has bin upon such subjects as I have been most willing to be informed of.
To see whither the Immortality of the soul may be demonstrated by reason, or
no, has bin a maine one among them: And then, having found satisfaction
therein; and by following of my principles, having discovered a new world in
that region where she lives, when the body is dead; and meeting there such
amazing considerations of weal or woe, resulting out of the guidance of ones
life and actions in this world, as would rouse the sleepiest person alive to be
very solicitous what course he takes here; I do not deny, but that it has
made me more inquisitiue, then peradventure, I should otherwise have bin, into
what rule and guide may secure a man in his journey thither. For without such
lively stirrers up, it is not unlikely but that I might have contented my self
with walking dully and implicitly in the way that my birth and education had
set me in. Thus, My lord, I have gleaned so much of Philosophy, and have cast
an eye so far into Divinity, as I have judged necessary for my own private
use. In these few sheets, you have an essay of the little I know in either. If
it may prove as useful to you, as I conceive it has done to me; I were much
too blame, if I did not impart it to you, unto whom I have long since given an
equal share and power with my self, in all that is mine. For besides your
excellent parts in all kinds, (as well the more gentle and the winning ones,
as the strong ones) that make you highly esteemed and honored by all those who
know you; your particular kindness and friendship to me, requires a
particular return of affection from me. I can not express it better, then by
confidently imparting to you, my priuatest thoughts; which as they are the
pleasingest I ever had; so seem they to me, the vsefullest. Such as they are,
you have them here. You will not deny them a welcome, for his sake, who truly
loves you, and is,

MY LORD, Your most affectionate kynsman and most humble and most obedient
servant KENELME DIGBY

THE APPROBATION OF the Doctors of Divinity of the Faculty of Paris.
THIS small, but learned treatise, entitled, A discourse concerning
Infallibility in Religion; full of sublime and Christian truths, expressed even
beyond the expectation of what humane language could afford; does clearly show
how Grace is engrafted upon Nature, that is, how the Divine and revealed tenets
of our Catholic Church, are framed to heighten, as most connaturall to, the
light of reason; whereby to raise our souls to a more celestial strain of
love and piety, then ever pure nature could have attained unto. To say, it
containe's nothing, in relation to faith not Catholic; In reference to
manners, not Christian; were to discount from the worke's desert^^ It being an
evident conviction o^^ the ever inviolable and permanent subsistence of them
both in the universally united Roman Church: Demonstrating withal, the false
foundations of the Presbyterian consistory of the Socinian ratiocination, of
the Independents priua^^ Spirit, and of the erroneous, or rather no grounds or
principles of the late particular English Protestant Schismatic Synagogue.
Let it then be set upon a candlestick by public print, and give light to
all it is readers; that it is bright flames may loudly speak it is Author's
unspeakable worth and learning. And ^^ee Doctors of Divinity of the Faculty
of Paris, by signing here unto, need only say, it needed not our
^^approba^^ion. Paris the 28. November. 1652.

H. HOLDEN.
E. TIREL.

THE Printer entreats those who shall take the pains to read this
discourse, that they will be pleased (before they do so) to correct some
errors, in the manner as is intimated hereafter. Others of less importance
(as, the mistake sometimes of a letter in a word; or the putting two words so
near together as if they were but one; or some failing in Orthography, or
sum misse-pointing) that will not perplexe the sense, to any easy reflection;
he submits to their courtesy to pardon. Which he doubts not but they will
be fauoubly induced to do, when they shall consider that the composer and the
corrector of the press for this piece, are Strangers to the tongue it is
written in: and that they wrought not upon the original; but upon such a
copy, as having descended by several transcriptions, and passed through
sundry hands, fell in the end casually into mine: who durst not adventure to
have recourse to the Author for his assistance herein, least he should have
hindered the publishing (as hitherto he has done) of what is so much desired
and sought after by all those who have heard of it.

Page. 2. line. 4. palanteis. p. 9. l. 6. the. p. 10. l. 3. precipices. p. 20.
l. 16. to have. p. 27. l. 10. it. p. 43. l. 17. repeated. p. 66. l. 17. which.
l. 18. performed. p. 69. l. 1. on. p. 71. l. 4. with. l. 5. knowledge. p. 105.
l. 3. ever. p. 145. l. 15. is. p. 147. l. 26. tortured. p. 164. l. 9. too. l.
22. leave to refer. p. 172. l. 5. and. p. 178. l. 8. God did give. p. 215. l.
12. writing.


