THERAPEUTICA SACRA, Showing briefly The method of healing the diseases of the
Conscience, concerning REGENERATION: Written first in Latin BY DAVID DICKSON,
Professor of DIVINITY in the College of Edinburgh, And thereafter Translated
by him.

Matthew. 9. 12. They that be whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
1664.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VERY NOBLE, The COUNTESS Dowager of GLENCAIRN.
MADAM,
AFter the Author had written and published this Treatise in Latin, for the
use of young Students in Theology; by the earnest and frequent entreaty of
friends, he was induced and persuaded to translate it into our vulgar Tongue,
for the benefit of these who understood not the Latin; and for preventing the
labor of others, who, more forward then skillful, were about the doing of it,
and had once so far proceeded, as to offer it to the Press, without acquainting
him therewith.

When he had finished the Translation, his purpose was to have dedicated it to
your Ladyship, and to have sent it abroad into the world under your protection:
but weakness and sickness, the ordinary companions of age, and after them,
death (whereby God Almighty and Gracious, called him from his labors to enter
into his Master's joy) seasing upon him, before he could write an Epistle
Dedicatory, it was his will, that your honorable Name should be prefixed unto
it. In pursuance whereof, it comes now, as an Orphan, to kiss your noble Hands,
fraughted with hopes of favor and shelter for the Parent's sake, and of
acceptance, as a testimony of the sincerity of the respects he carried to your
Ladyships virtues.

It has the stronger plea for a tender reception, that it is the child of his
age, being his last labor, and being brought forth in his seventy and second
year; and that it comes arrayed in a suit of Country-cloath, which himself put
upon it, being published according to the Copy written with his own hand.

That it may be, as it was designed by him, useful for the good of souls, and
that God may comfort you under your present sad affliction, and make up the
loss of your noble Husband, the late Lord high Chancellor of Scotland, is the
prayer of,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most humbly devoted Servant, Alexander Dickson.
Edinburg^* 13. June, 1664.
THERAPEUTICA SACRA, Translated by the Author; Showing shortly, The method of
healing the diseases of the Conscience, concerning Regeneration.
CHAP. I.
Of Conscience in general.
Seeing our purpose is to speak of the curing of sundry ordinary cases* or
diseases concerning Regeneration, by a prudent application and use-making of
divine Covenants* made about and with man, for his coming to eternal life; it
is needful to speak in the entry a little, first, of the nature of the
Conscience, and use thereof in general; next, of the cases of the conscience in
general; thirdly, what Regeneration is, and who is the man regenerat; fourthly,
of divine Covenants, relating to everlasting happiness; and, fifthly, of the
orderly and prudent application of these Covenants in general, that thereafter
we may descend to speak of application thereof in particular Cases the more
clearly.

2. As to the first, what conscience is, It has pleased God, the sovereign
Lord and Judge of all men, in the Creation, to put in man's soul a natural power
or faculty, whereby he might not only understand the revealed will of God, (the
only Lord of, and Lawgiver to, the Conscience) not only concerning what he
should believe and perform, but also might judge of his own faith and
obedience, whether performed or not performed; yea, and might judge also of the
faith and obedience of others, in so far as evidences may be had of their
conformity unto, or dis-agreement from, the revealed rule of faith and manners.
This power of the soul of man, whether it be considered only in its natural
aptitude and fitness to judge, (though not as yet, or for the time, actually
judging) or whether it be looked upon as it is putting forth it self in
exercise, we call it by the name of Conscience.

3. The word Conscience is diverse ways taken; for sometime by it is meaned the
natural power of the mind, to judge both of our own and others conformity to
the rule: and in this larger acception we say, Every man has a Conscience,
that is, every man, whether male or female, whether old or young, whether
sleeping or waking, has a faculty, which may, and sometime shall, judge of
their own and others behavior toward God. Sometime it is taken for that
natural power of the mind, putting forth it self actually in exercise, by
judging of others; So does the Apostle take it, 2 Cor. 5, 11. I trust, says
he, we are made manifest in your consciences. But here, in this Treatise, we
take Conscience more strictly, as it examineth and judges of our selves; for,
in this sense, it is most properly called Conscience, or joint knowledge;
partly, because it supposes, that God and we know our obedience, or
disobedience, to the rule prescribed to us by Him; partly, because Conscience
imports, first, our knowledge of the rule; and, next, our knowledge of our
behavior in relation to the rule, and our comparing of these two together, and
passing of sentence of our selves answerably.

4. Conscience, as it does respect our selves, is no other thing, in effect,
then the understanding power of our souls examining how matters do stand betwixt
God and us, comparing His will revealed, with our state, condition and carriage
in thoughts, words or deeds, done or omitted, and passing jud^ment thereupon as
the case requires: So that in the court of Conscience, (which is Gods Depute in
us, as it were) these five things are to be considered; 1. the duty of
self-examination; 2. the thing we are to examine; 3. the rule whereby we are to
examine; 4. the process of the Conscience unto sentence giving; and, 5. the
execution of the sentence, so far as the Conscience may.

5. As to the first, the duty of examination of our selves and ju^ging our
selves, it is required of us, lest we be judged of God and chastised with sharp
rods, 1 Cor. 11. 31. 32. and hereunto we are exhorted, Ps. 4. 4, Commune with
your own hearts upon your beds, and be still.

6. As for the second, the thing which we are to examine concerning our selves,
it is one of three, or all the three, in their order; to wit, either our
estate, whether we be in the state of nature, under wrath, or not; or whether
we be regenerat and in the state of grace through faith in Jesus Christ, or
not. Of this speaks the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye
be in the faith. Or it is our condition, whether being in the state of grace
our present disposition or inclination of heart and affections be such, as
becomes a man reconciled or not. To this point of examination, Christ does
call the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. Remember therefore from
whence thou art fallen. Or, the thing we are to examine is our deeds, words and
thoughts actually done or omitted; the neglect of which examination is
reproved, Ierem. 8. c. and Revel. 2. 19, 20.

7. The third thing to be looked unto in the court of Conscience, is the rule
whereby we are to examine our selves in all, or any, of the former respects,
which is the revealed will of God in holy Scripture; wherein is set down to us
what we should believe, and what we should do, and what is the reward of the
obedience of faith, and what is the punishment of disobedience. And here if the
Conscience be not well informed, and the rule closly cleaved unto, the erring
Conscience may swallow down the grossest idolatry, and cry up Diana for a great
goddess, Act. 19. 28 and make the murderers of the Saints conceive, that in
killing them they do God good service, Ioh. 16. 2.

8. The fourth thing is, the judicial process of the Conscience, for giving
such a sentence of direction for what is to be done, or of absolution or
condemnation, in the point examined and found done or not done: which process,
if the Conscience be well informed, is after the manner of clear reasoning, by
way of Syllogism, wherein we lay down the rule given by the supreme Lawgiver,
in the major or first proposition. Then we do lay our selves to the rule in the
minor or second assumed proposition; and from the comparison of our selves,
with the rule, we give out sentence in the third room, which is called the
Conclusion. As for example, If the Conscience be about to give direction for
what is to be done, it reasons thus,

What God has appointed to be the only rule of faith and manners, I must take
heed to follow it as the rule.

But, the holy Scripture, God has appointed to be the only rule of faith and
manners.

Therefore, I must take heed to follow the Scripture as the only rule.

Or more shortly, the Lord has commanded to repent and turn unto him,
(offering reconciliation in Christ) therefore it is my duty so to do.

But in the process of the Conscience unto conviction or absolution, sometime
more, sometime fewer reasonings are used.

As for example, for conviction, the process goes thus, That which God has
commanded me, I should have ^one: But, to repent and turn to Him, He has
commanded me; Therefore, I should have repented and turned to God.

Again, He that has not obeyed the Lord, in repenting of his evil ways and
turning unto God, is under great guiltiness, and worthy of death, by the
sentence of the Law;

But, such a one am I, may every impenitent person say of himself:

And, therefore may conclude of himself, I am under great guiltiness, and
worthy of death, by the sentence of the Law.

Likewayes, in the process of the Conscience, a humbled person well informed,
may reason thus,

That way of reconciliation which God has appointed a self-condemned sinner to
follow, I am bound to follow;

But, this way ( and no other) has God appointed, that the sinner, convinced
of sin and of deserved wrath should flee to Christ Jesus the Mediator, that by
Him he may be justified, sanctified and saved:

Therefore, this way of reconciliation, and no other, I am bound to follow.

Again, Whosoever, by the grace of God, in the sense of sin and deserved wrath,
is fled unto Christ for righteousness and eternal life and in Christ's strength,
is endeavoring to give new obedience to the will of God, is undoubtedly a true
believer and child of God;

But, such a one am I, may the humbled sinner, fled to Christ, say of himself:

Therefore, I am, by the grace of God, undoubtedly a true believer and a child
of God.

And yet again he may go on, to strengthen his faith, and to comfort himself in
the Lord, thus,

Whosoever in the sense of sin, poverty and weakness, has fled to Christ the
Redeemer, resolved never to part with Him, and has consecrated himself, in the
strength of Christ, to endeavor to give new obedience to the will of God, he
is an heir with Isaac of the promised blessings, and may hope to have them
perfectly in possession at last;

But such an one am I, may the humbled sinner, fled to Christ, say of himself:

Therefore, I am an heir of the promised blessings with Isaac, and may hope to
have them perfectly in possession at last.

Such a process as this does the Conscience of the regenerat man follow, when
he renews the acts of his repentance, and sentenceth himself worthy of what
the Law pronounces against his sin; and when he renews the acts of his faith
in Christ, through whom alone he is fred from the deserved curse of the Law.

9. As to the fifth thing to be observed in the court of Conscience, which is,
the execution of the sentence it has pronounced; because the Conscience is set
over the man by God, as Judge-depute: therefore it goes about, in the name of
God, by and by to execute, as it may, the sentence justly pronounced by it; and
according to the nature of the sentence, of condemnation or absolution,
pronounced by it, it stirs up diverse motions and affections in the heart;
some of them sad and sorrowful, some of them joyful and comfortable. The sad
and bitter passions that follow upon the sentence of conviction and
condemnation, justly pronounced, are shame, grief, fear, anxiety, vexation and
suchlike; whereby the guilty sinner is either fretted, as with a worm, or
fired and tormented. Of this we have an example in our first parent Adam, who,
being convicted in his conscience of sin and deserved wrath, did flee from the
face of God, all amazed and a frighted, Genesis 3. 9. 10. The Lord called unto
Adam, and said unto him where art thou? And he said, I heard thy voice in the
garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid my self.

But the Conscience, after it is furnished by the Gospel to absolve the
penitent believer fled to Christ, does stir up more sweet and comfortable
motions in the heart, such as are, peace, comfort, joy, gladness, exultation,
confidence, and such like. An example whereof we see in Paul, 2 Cor, 1. 2. Our
rejoicing, says he, is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world.

So the Conscience, after it is wounded by the man's transgression, does the
part of a Judge, citing the man before its Tribunal; and the part of an
Officer, presenting the man at the Bar; and the part of an Accuser, challenging
the man for his transgression; and the part of the Recorder, producing the book
of Statutes; and the part of sufficient witnesses, proving and convincing him
of the deed done.

Again it does the part of a Judge, pronouncing sentence and condemning the
convicted transgressour; and the part of a Sergeant and Marshal, binding the
condemned wretch; and the part of the Prison and Stocks, pinching and pressing
the bound sinner; and the part of the Burrio, scourging and tormenting him.

But the Conscience, after examination, finding the man either innocent and
free of the crime, or forgiven and reconciled to God by Christ, after
repentance and faith, embracing the Redeemer, it does the part of an honest
Friend, carefully comforting the innocent or penitent; and the part of an
Advocat, excusing and defending the man against all challenges; and the part of
Witnesses compurgatours; and the part of the Judge absolving; and the part of
the Rewarder. And so much concerning the nature and use of Conscience, as may
suffice our purpose.

CHAP. II.
Of Cases of Conscience in general.
A Case of Conscience, taken in a large sense, comprehends every accident which
any way affects or qualifieth the Conscience, And in this sense, the persuasion
and certainty, which the Conscience may have, the soundness, health and
strength of the Conscience, may be called Cases and good Cases of the
Conscience.

So also, any effect which the Conscience does work on the soul, such as are
peace of conscience, comfort and joy in the heart, may be called Cases of the
Conscience also.

But the Cases whereof we are to treat, are the ill Cases of the Conscience,
whereby it is fallen from the soundness and streightness it should have, which
we call by the name of wounds, diseases, and sickness of the Conscience:
whereunto, that we may descend to speak more orderly, a twofold difference is
to be observed.

2. First, we must put difference between a healthy and a sick Conscience. A
healthy Conscience is that, which after examination of our ways, according to
the rule of Gods Word, does justly absolve us, and speaks peace to us toward
God. Of such a conscience it is said by Solomon, A sound heart is the life of
the flesh, Prove. 14. 30. by the heart he means the conscience, which
ordinarily in Scripture is called the heart And he says, the sound conscience
is the life of the flesh; because the body is so much in better case, that the
conscience be at peace toward God. And this blessing is allowed upon every
believer in Christ, in his orderly walking, 2 Timothy 1. 7. God has not given us
the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind. A Conscience in
this disposition needs not medicine, but spiritual nourishment and exercise
in all Christian-duties.

A sick Conscience we call, that which either is senseless of its own evils and
dangers it is in, and sits down securely, and rests without a warrant; Or,
which is justly wounded, and labors under the sense of its pain; or, which is
unquiet upon mistakes and ignorance of making use of the true remedy: of such a
sick Conscience we are to speak, if possible, by Gods blessing, a word in
season may be spoken, to waken a secure conscience, or to refresh the weary
soul, that being recovered from its malady, it may be able to feed upon the
bread and water of life, and work the works of God in the strength of Christ.

3. Secondly, we must put difference between a troubled Soul and a troubled
Conscience; for, the Soul is more largely taken then the Conscience. The Soul
comprehends all the powers and faculties of the man; but the Conscience, as
we speak of it, is only one faculty of the mind, judging of the man's moral ill
or well-being; and so all cases of the Conscience are cases of the Soul: but,
all the cases of the Soul are not cases of the Conscience. For, the Soul may be
troubled while the Conscience is not troubled at all; yea, a man may have a
commendable trouble in his soul, when he sees God dishonored or His Church in
hazard, whereby his conscience is so far from being troubled, that such a holy
trouble strengthens his conscience in his address to God, as is in many places
of the Psalms to be seen.

Again, a man's mind may be troubled by sundry natural or civil motives; while
the conscience is allowably quiet, as in losses of things temporal, fears,
pains or unexpected inconveniences occurring; yea, there may be passions and
perturbations of the mind in persons that are not capable for the time of the
exercise of Conscience, as may be seen in young infants, and in the elder sort,
in fits of fever, melancholy and frenzy: and yet further, it is possible
that passions, perturbations and troubles of soul, may be found without any
disease of the Conscience; because our Lord Jesus, in the days of his
humiliation, was a man acquainted with sorrows, but was not obnoxious to sin or
any self-challenging; for, he knew no sin in himself. He had trouble in his
soul, but could not have trouble of conscience, Job: 12. 27. Now is my soul
troubled, and what shall I say? ^ather, save me from this hour; but for this
cause came I unto this hour. Of the cases of the Soul we speak not here, but of
the sinful diseases of the Conscience.

4. There is also a third difference to be observed between common cases of
Conscience, and these that specially concern Regeneration. Common cases
comprehend all these questions and doubts, wherein the Conscience is seeking
light and resolution about the rule of faith and manners, that it may better
inform it self about the sense of Scripture, and about the application thereof
in the point of direction in faith and practice. These common cases are of as
large extent, as the bulk of Divinity, as large as the Doctrine held forth in
Scripture concerning faith and manners: for, there is not any one article of
faith or duty prescribed, as a point of piety or righteousness, about which
questions may not be moved and cases propounded, wherein the Conscience may
seek satisfaction.

Of this hudge great tree, we take but only one branch to speak of, so far as
makes for our purpose concerning Regeneration.

CHAP. III.
Of Regeneration, what it is; and the regenerat man, who he is.
WE speak not here of the regeneration of elect infants, dying in their
infancy, God has His own way of dealing with them; but of the regeneration of
those who are capable of being outwardly called by the ministry of the Word
which we may thus describe,

Regeneration ( being one in effect with effectual caling) is the work of Gods
invincible power and mere grace, wherein, by His Spirit, accompanying His Word,
He quickens a redeemed person lying dead in his sins, and renews him in his
mind, will and all the powers of his soul; convinceing him savingly of sin,
righteousness and judgment, and making him heartily to embrace Christ and
Salvation, and to consecrat himself to the service of God in Christ, all the
days of his life.

2. The main thing we must take heed to in this work, is to give to God
entirely the glory of His Grace and Power and Wisdom, so that the glory of man's
regeneration be neither given to man, nor man made sharer of the glory with
God, but God may have the whole glory of His free grace, because out of His own
goodwill, not for any thing at all foreseen in man, He lets forth his special
love on the redeemed in a time acceptable; And the glory of His Almighty power,
because by His omnipotent and invincible working He makes the man dead in sins
to live, opens his eyes to take up savingly the things of God, takes away the
heart of stone, and makes him a new creature, to will and to do His holy will;
And the glory of His Wisdom, who deals so with His creature as He does not
destroy, but perfect the natural power of the man's will, making the man
regenerat, most freely, deliberatly and heartily to embrace Christ, and to
consecrat himself to Gods service. The reason why we urge this, is, because
Satan, by corrupting the doctrine of regeneration, and persuading men that they
are able of themselves by the common and the natural strength of their own
freewill, without the special and effectual grace of God, both to convert
themselves and others also, does foster the native pride of men, hinders them
from emptying and humbling themselves before God, keeps them from
self-denial, does mar the regeneration of them that are deluded with this
error, and obscureth what he can, the shyning of the glory of Gods grace,
power and wisdom in the conversion of men: for, whatsoever praise, proud men
let go toward God for making men's conversion possible, yet they give the whole
glory of actual conversion to the man himself, which Christ ascribes to God
only, and leaves no more for man to glory in his spiritual regeneration, then
he has to glory in his own natural generation, Ioh. 3. 5. 6. 7. 8. And the
same does the Apostle teach, Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. 10. and, Philip. ^. 13. It is God
(says he) which works in you both to will and to do of His own good
pleasure. And therefore it is the duty of all Christ's disciples, but chiefly
their duty who are consecrat to God, to preach up the glory of Gods free grace,
omnipotent power and unsearchable wisdom, to live in the sense of their own
emptiness, and to depend upon the furnitour of grace for grace, out of Christ's
fullness; and zealously to oppose the proud error of man's natural ability for
converting himself, as they love to see, and find the effectual blessing of
the Ministry of the Gospel, and themselves accepted for true disciples at the
day of their meeting with Christ the Judge at His second coming.

3. For opening up of regeneration, these five propositions must be hol^en. The
first is this, the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of god;
for, they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

The second is this, it is the Spirit of God which convinces man of sin, of
true righteousness and of judgment, Ioh. 16. 9. 10. 11.

The third is this, in regeneration, conversion and quickening of a sinner, God,
by his invincible power, creates and infuseth a new life and principles
thereof, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power,
and, Ioh. 5. 21. and 6. 63.

The fourth is this, the invincible grace of God, working regeneration and a
man's conversion, does not destroy the freedom of man's will, but makes it truly
free, and perfects it. Ier. 31. 31. I will make a Covenant with the house of
Israel and with the house of Judah, and will put My law in their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts, etc.

The fifth is this, albeit a man, in the act of Gods quickening and converting
of him be passive, and in a spiritual sen^e dead in sins and trespasses, yet,
for exercising external means, whereof God makes use unto his conversion, for
fitting him and preparing of him for a gracious change (such as are, hearing of
the Word, reading of it meditating on it, inquiring after the meaning of it,
etc.) the natural man has a natural power thereunto as to other external
actions, which suffices to take away excuse from them who have occasion of
using the means and will not use them, Matthew. 23. 37.

For clearing of the first proposition, we must remember, that the object of
actual regeneration, conversion and effectual calling, is the man elected or
redeemed by Christ, lying in the state of defection from God destitute of
original righteousness, at enimity with God, bently inclined to all evil,
altogether unfit and impotent, yea even spiritually dead to every spiritual
good, and specially to convert, regenerat or quicken himself: for albeit after
the fall of Adam there are some sparks of common reason remaining, whereby he
may confusedly know that which is called spiritual good, acceptable and
pleasant unto God and fit to save his soul; yet the understanding of the
unrenewed man judges of that good, and of the truth of the Evangell wherein
that good is proponed, to be mere foolishness, and does represent the
spiritual object, and sets it before the will, as a thing uncertain or vain;
and the will of the unrenewed man, after deliberation and comparison made of
objects, some honest, some pleasant and some profitable in appearance,
naturally is inclined to prefer and choose any seeming pleasant or profitable
thing, whether the object be natural or civil, rather then that which is
truly honest and morally good. But if it fall out that a spiritual good be
well and in fair colors, described unto the unrenewed man, yet he sees it
not, but under the notion of a natural good, and as it is clothed with the
image of some natural good, and profitable for preserving its standing in a
natural being and welfare therein. So did the false prophet Balaam look upon
the felicity of the righteous in their death, when he did separat eternal life
from faith and sanctification, and did rent asunder the means from the end
appointed of God, saying, Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my
last end be like his, Numb. 23. 10.

After this manner the woman of Samaria apprehended the gift and grace of the
holy Ghost, and saving grace offered to her by Christ, Lord (says she) Give me
of that water, that I may not thirst again, and may not come again to draw
water, Joh. 4. 15. So also did the misbeleeving Jews judge of the application
of Christ's incarnation and suffering for their spiritual feeding, Joh. 6. 33.
34. 35. for, The natural man cannot know the things of the Spirit of God,
because they are spiritually discerned, and the natural man is destitute of
the spirit of illumination. 1 Cor. 2. 14. And the wisdom of the flesh is
enimity to God: for it is not subject to the law of God, yea, it cannot be
subject unto it, Romans 8. 7. The power therefore of the natural or unrenewed
man is not fitted for the discerning, and loving of a spiritual good, because
he is altogether natural and not spiritual: For, a supernatural object,
requires a supernatural power of the understanding and will, to take it up,
and rightly conceive of it: But of this supernatural faculty, the unrenewed
man is destitute, and in respect of spiritual discerning, he is dead, that he
cannot discern spiritual things spiritually.

4. As for the second proposition anent a man's regeneration, the Lord, that He
may break the carnal confidence of the person whom He is to convert, first,
shows him his duty by the doctrine of the law and covenant of works, making
him to see the same by the powerful illumination of the holy Spirit, and so
takes away all pretext of ignorance. Secondly, He shows him his guiltiness
and deserved damnation wherein he is involved, and so taken away all conceit
and imagination of his innocence, Thirdly, He does convince him of his utter
inability to satisfy the law, or to deliver himself from the curse thereof,
either by way of action and obedience, or by way of suffering and paying of the
penalty of the violat law of God: And so overturneth all confidence in himself,
or in his own works. Whence follows the elect man's desperation to be
delivered by himself, because he sees himself a sinner, and that all hope of
justification by his own deeds or sufferings, is cut off. Now, that this is the
work of the holy Spirit, is plain, Ioh. 16. 8. When the comforter, the spirit
of truth, shall come, He shall convince the world of sin, etc. And in this
condition sundry of Gods dear children, for a time are kept under the bonds
of the law, under the spirit of bondage and sad conviction.

5. As for the third proposition, the Lord after He has laid the sin of His
elect child, who is to be converted, to his charge by the doctrine of the law,
first, opens up a light unto him in the doctrine of the Gospel, and lets him
see, that his absolution from sin and his salvation is possible, and may be
had, by flying unto Christ the Redeemer. Secondly, the Lord drawing near hand
the humbled self-condemned soul, deals with him by way of moral swasion,
sweetly inviting him in the preaching of the Gospel, to receive the Redeemer
Christ Jesus, the eternal Son of God manifested in the flesh, that by
receiving of Him as He is offered in the Evangel, for remission of sin,
renovation of life, and eternal salvation, he may close the Covenant of grace
and reconciliation with God. Thirdly, because the fall of Adam has bereft man
of all spiritual and supernatural power, till he be supernaturally quickened
and converted by the omnipotent power of Gods grace: Therefore the Lord
s^peraddeth unto moral swasion, effectual operation, and forms in the soul
a spiritual faculty and ability for doing what is pleasant unto God, and
tends to save himself according to the will of God. This infusion of a new
life, sometime is called the forming of the new creature, sometime
regeneration, sometime rising from the dead and vivification, or quickening of
the man, sometime saving grace and the life of God, and the seed of God, having
in it the principle of all saving graces and habits, which are brought forth
afterward to acts and exercise.

Mean time, true it is, that all men, because of their inborn corruption, have
an inclination and bent disposition to resist the holy Ghost; But when the Lord
will actually convert the man, He overcomes and takes away actual
resistance, and does so break the power of natural rebellion that it does not
for ever after reign in him: for, if God did not take away actual resistance
of the man in his conversion, no conversion should certainly follow, and God
should be disappointed of His purpose to convert the man, even when He has put
forth His almighty power to work conversion; But God does so wisely and
powerfully stir up this new infused life of grace, and sets it so on work,
that the understanding and judgment like a counselor, and the Will like a
commanding Emperor, and the active power of the new infused faculty as an
officer, do all bestir themselves to bring forth supernatural operations.
Whence it comes to pass, that the new creature begins to look kindly on
Christ the Redeemer, and to desire to be united unto Him, and does streatch
forth it self to embrace Him heartily, for obtaining in Him righteousness and
salvation, as He is offered in the Gospel: And so he casts himself over on
Christ with full purpose never to shed from Him but by faith to draw out of Him
grace for grace, till he be perfected. And here the man that was merely
passive, in his quickening and regeneration, begins presently to be active in
his conversion, and following conversation: for, God gives to him to will and
to do of His good pleasure; And he having obtained by Gods effectual operation
to will and to do, does formally will and do the good which is done.

6. As to the fourth proposition, when the power of God is put forth,
invincibly for the converting of a soul, that invincible working is so far from
destroying the natural liberty of the will, that it does indeed preserve it,
and sets it right on the right object, and does perfect it: For, as when God
opens the eyes of a man's understanding, that he does behold the wonders of
His law, when he removes the natural blindness of the mind, and makes a
man see that the Gospel is the wisdom and power of God unto salvation; which
sometime he counted to be mere foolishness, he does no ways destroy the man's
judgment, or understanding, but does correct, help, heal, and perfect it; So
when the holy Spirit does powerfully and effectually move and turn the Will of
the man to embrace the sweet and saving offers of Christ's grace in the Gospel,
and makes him deliberatly choose this blessed way of salvation, and to
renounce all confidence in his own, or any others worth or works, He does not
destroy, but perfect the liberty of the Will, and raises it up from death and
its damnable inclination, and makes it most joyfully and most freely to make
choice of this pearl of price, and bless it self in its choice for ever.
Therefore, let no man complain of wrong done to man's free will, when God stops
its way to hell, wisely, powerfully, graciously and sweetly moves it to choose
the way of life; But rather let men beware to take the glory of actual
conversion of men, from God, and either give it wholly to their idol of
free will, or make it sharer of the glory of regeneration with God, which glory
God will not give to another, but reserve wholly to Himself: for, all men, in
the point and moment of regeneration, are like unto Lazarus in the grave, to
whom God, by commanding him to arise, gave life and power to arise out of the
grave where he lay dead and rotting.

7. As to the fifth proposition, We must distinguish the work of regeneration
from the preparation and disposition of the man to be regenerat, whereby he is
made more capable of regeneration to be wrought in him: for, the material
disposition of him, fitting him for regeneration, is neither a part nor a
degree of regeneration; for, albeit the Lord be not bound to these preparatory
dispositions, yet He will have man bound to make use of these external means
which may prepare him; because, by the use of external means (such as are,
hearing of the word, Catechizing and conference, etc.) a man may be brought
more near unto regeneration, as Christ does teach us by His speech to that
Pharisee, who was instructed in the law and answered discreedy unto Christ;
Thou art not far (says He) from the kingdom of God, Mark. 12. 24. This
preparatory disposition, in order unto regeneration, is like unto the drying of
timber to make it sooner take fire, when it is casten into it. For, dryness in
the timber, is neither a part nor a degree of kindling or inflammation of it;
But only a preparation of the timber to receive inflammation when the fire
shall be set to it, or it put in the fire, possibly, a long time after. In
these preparatory exercises then, no man will deny, that the natural man
unrenewed, has a natural power to go and hear a Sermon preached, to read the
Scripture, to be informed by Catechizing, and conference of Religion and
regeneration, whereof God when He pleases may make use in regeneration of the
man. Wherefore, whosoever in the preaching of the Gospel, are charged and
commanded to repent, to believe in Christ, or turn unto God, they are commanded
also to use all these external means whereby they may be informed of the duty
required, and of the means leading thereunto; in the exercise of which
external means, they may meet with sundry common operations and effects of
Gods Spirit, before they be regenerat or converted, whereof the use may be
sound not only in, but also after, conversion; And if any man shall refuse,
slight or neglect to follow these preparatory exercises, which may prepare him
for conversion, he is inexcusable before God and man, and guilty of rejecting
of the offer of reconciliation, yea guilty of resisting of the holy Ghost, of
which sin and guiltynesse the holy martyr Stephen charge the misbelieving
Jews, Acts 7. 51.

8. As for the regenerat man, he it is who in the acknowledgement of his
sinfulness and deserved misery, and of his utter inability to help himself,
does cast away all confidence in his own parts, and possible righteousness of
his own works, and flees to Christ offered in the Gospel, that in Christ alone
he may have true wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; and
does with full purpose of heart consecrat himself, and endeavor, in the
strength of Christ, to serve God acceptably all the days of his life.

For the ground of this description, we have the words of the Apostle, Philip.
3. 3. Where putting a difference between the true people of God, and the
counterfit, he says. We are the circumcision who worship God in the spirit,
and rejoice in Jesus Christ, and have no confidence in the flesh. In which
description of the regenerat man, the Apostle first points forth unto us three
special operations of the Spirit of regeneration, then three duties of the man
regenerat.

The first operation of the Spirit of God, the only circumciser of the heart,
is the humbling of the man in the sense of his sin by the doctrine of the law,
and cutting off all his confidence in his own worth, wit, freewill and strength
to help himself. So that the man has no confidence in the flesh.

The second operation, is the infusion of saving faith, making the man humbled
to close with Christ in the Covenant of reconciliation, and to rest upon Him as
the only and sufficient remedy of sin and misery, so that Christ becomes to
him the ground of rejoicing and gloriation.

The third operation, is the upstirring and enabling of the believer in Christ,
to endeavor new obedience, and to worship God in the spirit.

As for the three duties of the man regenerat. The first is, to follow the
leading of the Spirit in the point of more and more humbling of himself before
God in the sense of his own insufficiency, and ^shewing of all leaning on his
own parts, gifts, works, or sufferings, or any thing else beside Christ; He
must have no confidence in the flesh.

The second duty, is to grow in the estimation of Christ's righteousness and
fullness of all graces to be letten forth to the believer employing Him by
faith, and comforting himself in Christ against all difficulties, troubles and
temptations; He must rejoice in Jesus Christ.

The third duty, is to endeavor communion-keeping with God in the course of
new obedience in all cases, worshipping and serving God in sincerity of heart;
he must be a worshiper of God.

As to the last thing holden forth in the Apostles words, which is the
undoubted mark and evidence of the man regenerat and circumcised in heart, it
stands in the constant endeavor to grow in these three duties jointly, so as
each of them may advance another: for, many failings and short-comings will be
found in our new obedience and worshipping of God in the spirit; but, let these
failings be made use of to extinguish and abolish all confidence in our own
parts and righteousness, that our daily failings may humble us and cut us off
from all confidence in the flesh.

But let not these failings so discourage us, as to hinder us to put confidence
in Christ; but by the contrair, the less ground of confidence we find in our
selves, let us raise so much higher the estimation of remission of sin and
imputation of Christ's righteousness, and stir up our selves by faith to draw
more strength and ability out of Christ for enabling us to walk more holily and
righteously before God; and having fled to Christ and comforted our selves in
him, let us not turn his grace into wantonness; but the more we believe the
grace of Jesus Christ, let us strive, in his strength, so much the more to
glorify God in new obedience: And in the circle of these three duties, let us
wind our selves up stairs toward heaven: for, God has promised, that such as
wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as
Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint, Isaiah
40. 31.

In the conjunction of these three duties, the evidence of regeneration is
found. If there be not a sincere endeavor after all these three duties, the
evidence of regeneration is by so much darkened, and short for probation: for,
it is not sufficient to prove a man regenerat, that he is driven from all
confidence in his own righteousness, and filled with the sense of sin and
deserved wrath, because a man that has no more then that, may perish in this
miserable condition, as we see in Judas the traitor, whose conscience was
burdened with the sense of sin, but did not seek mercy and pardon. Neither is
it sufficient to boast of acquaintance with Christ, and profess great respect
to him, because many do cry, Lord, Lord, who neither renounce their confidence
in their own righteousness, nor worship God in spirit; for, of such Christ
says, Matthew. 7. 21. Not every one that says to Him, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of God. Neither is it sufficient to pretend the worshipping of
God in spirit: for, all they who think to be justified by their own works, do
esteem their manner of serving of God, true and spiritual service and worship,
as may be seen in the proud Pharisee glorying before God in his own
righteousness, and acknowledging that God was the giver unto him of the
holiness and righteousness which he had, Luke, 18. 11. I thank Thee, O God,
says he, that I am not like other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or
even as this publican: for, of this man Christ says, he returned to his house
unjustified, that is, a man lying still in sin unreconciled.

Neither is it sufficient to prove a man regenerat, to confess sin and bygone
unrighteousness, and to promise and begin to amend his ways and future
conversation; for, so much may a Pharisee attain. And there are many that
profess themselves Christians, who think to be justified by the merits of
their own and other saints doings and sufferings, and do disdainfully scoff and
mock at the doctrine of the imputed righteousness of Christ; how many are they
also, who think their bygone sins may be washen away, and be recompensed by
their purpose to amend their life in time to come? How many are they, who,
being willingly ignorant of the righteousness of God, which is of faith in
Jesus Christ, go about to establish their own righteousness as the Jews did?
Romans 10. 3.

And how few are they who follow the example of the Apostle, who carefully
served God in spirit and truth, but did not lean to his own righteousness, but
sought more and more to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness,
which behoved to be made up of his imperfect obedience of the law, but that
righteousness which is by faith in Jesus Christ? Philip. 3. 9.

But that man, who daily in the sense of his sinfulness and poverty sleeth unto
Jesus Christ, that he may be justified by His righteousness, and endeavors
by faith in Him to bring forth the fruits of new obedience, and does not put
confidence in these his works when he has done them, but rejoices in Jesus
Christ the fountain of holiness and blessedness; That man (I say) undoubtedly
is regenerat, and a new creature, for so does the Apostle describe him, Philip.
3. 3.

CHAP. IV.
Of divine Covenants about the eternal salvation of men; and in special, of
the Covenant of redemption, showing that there is such a Covenant, and what are
the articles thereof.
BEcause the healing of the sickness of the conscience comes by a right
application of divine Covenants about our salvation: therefore it is necessary,
that some measure, of the knowledge thereof be opened up.

1. A divine covenant we call, a contract or paction, wherein God is at least
the one party contracter. Of this sort of covenants about the eternal
salvation of men (which sort chieflly belong to our purpose) there are three.
The first is, the covenant of redemption, past between God, and Christ God
appointed Mediator, before the world was, in the council of the Trinity. The
second is, the covenant of works, made between God and men, in Adam in his
integrity, endued with all natural perfections, enabling him to keep it, so
long as it pleased him to stand to the condition. The third is, the covenant of
grace and reconciliation through Christ, made between God and believers (with
their children) in Christ.

2. As to the covenant of redemption; for clearing the matter, we must
distinguish the sundry acceptions of the word redemption: for, 1. Sometime it
is taken for the contract and agreement of selling and buying-back to eternal
salvation, of lost man, looked upon as in the state of sin and misery. In which
sense, we are said to be bought by Christ, both souls and bodies, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
20. Ye are not your own; for ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God
in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. And this may be called
redemption by paction and agreed bargain. 2. Sometime redemption is taken for
the paying of the price agreed upon. In which sense, Christ is said to have
redeemed us, by suffering of the punishment due to us, and ransoming of us.
Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us. 3. Sometime redemption is taken for the begun application of the
benefits purchased in the covenant by the price paid, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we
have redemption through His blood, even the remission of sins, according to the
riches of His grace. 4. Sometime redemption is taken for the perfect and full
possession of all the benefits agreed upon between the Father and Christ His
Son the Mediator. In which sense, we are said to be sealed with the holy
Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. and Ephesians. 4. 30. it is
said, Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption; which is the day of Judgment, when Christ shall put us in full
possession of all the blessedness which He purchased by bargain and payment
for us.

In this place we take redemption in the first sense, for the covenant past
between the Father and Christ His Son, designed Mediator, about our redemption.

3. When we name the Father as the one party and His Son Christ as the other
party in this covenant, we do not seclude the Son and holy Spirit from being
the party offended; but do look upon the Father, Son and Spirit, one God in
three Persons, as offended by man's sin; and yet all three contented to take
satisfaction to divine justice for man's sin in the Person of the Son, as
designed Mediator, to be incarnat. Whereby the Son is both the party offended
as God, one essentially with the Father and holy Spirit; and the party
contracter also, as God designed Mediator personally for redeeming man, who
with consent of the Father and holy Spirit, from all eternity willed and
purposed in the fullness of time, to assume the humane nature in personal
union with Himself, and for the elects sake to become man, and to take the
cause of the elect in hand, to bring them back to the friendship of God, and
full enjoyment of felicity for evermore.

When therefore we make the Father the one party, and the Son designed
mediator the other party, speaking with the Scripture, for the more easy
uptaking of the Covenant, let us look to one God in three Persons, having
absolute right and sovereign power according to His own pleasure to dispose of
men, looked upon as lying before God (to Whom all things are present) in sin
and death, drawn on by ma^s own deserving, and yet for the glory of His grace
resolving to save the elect, so as His justice shall be satisfied for them, in
and by the second Person of the Trinity, the co-eternall and co-essentiall Son
of the Father.

4. This covenant of redemption then may be thus described. It is a bargain,
agreed upon between the Father and the Son designed Mediator, concerning the
elect (lying with the rest of manking in the state of sin and death, procured
by their own merit) wisely and powerfully to be converted, sanctified and
saved, for the Son of Gods satisfaction and obedience (in our nature to be
assumed by Him) to be given in due time to the Father, even unto the death of
the cross.

In this bargain or agreement, the Scripture imports clearly, a selling and a
buying of the elect, Acts 20. 28. Feed the Church of God, which He has
purchased by His own blood, 1 Cor. 6. 20. ye are bought with a price, and 1
Pet. 1. 18. The seller of the elect, is God; the buyer, is God incarnat; the
persons bought, are the Church of the elect; the price, is the blood of God, to
wit, the blood of Christ, who is God and man in one person.

This covenant of redemption, is in effect one with the eternal decree of
redemption, wherein the salvation of the elect, and the way how it shall be
brought about is fixed, in the purpose of God, who works all things according
to the counsel of His own Will, as the Apostle sets it down, Ephesians. 1. unto
the 15 verse.

And the decree of redemption is in effect a covenant, one God in three persons
agreeing in the decree, that the second Person, God the Son, should be
incarnat, and give obedience and satisfaction to divine justice for the elect:
unto which piece of service the Son willingly submitting Himself, the decree
becomes a real covenant indeed.

But for further satisfaction, that there is such a covenant between the Father
and the Son, as we have said, for redeeming of the elect, Scripture gives us
evidence six ways.

The first way is by expressions, which import and presuppose a formal
covenant between the parties, buying and selling; the second way is, by styles
and titles given to Christ the Redeemer; the third is, by expressions relating
to an eternal decree for execution and performance of the covenant of
redemption; the fourth is, by representation of this covenant in the Leviticall
types; the fifth is, by Christ the Redeemer now incarnat, His ratification of
the covenant; and the sixth way is, by holding forth to us the heads and
articles agreed upon, wherein the covenant consists.

The first poof.
AS to the expressions, importing a formal covenant, first, Ephesians. 1. 7. it is
called a redemption, or a buying of the elect out of sin and misery by blood,
showing that no remission of sin could be granted by Justice, without sheding
of blood, and Christ undertook to pay the price, and has paid it.

Again, the inheritance which the elect have promised unto them, is called a
purchase, importing, that the disponer of the inheritance to the elect, must
have a sufficient price for it, and that the Redeemer has accepted the
condition and laid down the price craved for it, Ephesians. 1. 14. and so bought
back lost heaven and forfeited blessedness to so many sinners, who otherwise
for sin, might justly have been excluded and debarred therefrom for ever.

A third expression is holden forth, Acts 20. 28. wherein God disponer and God
Redeemer, are agreed, that the elect shall go free for God the Redeemer's
obedience unto the death, who has now bought them with His blood.

A fourth expression is in plain terms set down by Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are
bought with a price: God the disponer sells, and God the Redeemer buyeth the
elect to be His conquest, both body and spirit. And Peter more particularly
expresses the price of redemption agreed upon, to be not gold or silver, but
the blood of the Mediator Christ, the innocent Lamb of God, slain in typical
prefigurations from the beginning of the World, and slain in real performance
in the fullness of time, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. 20. 21.

A fifth expression is, that of our Lord Jesus in the institution of the
Sacrament of His Supper, Matthew. 26. 28. This is my blood of the new Testament,
which is shed for many, for remission of sins. Here an agreement between the
Redeemer and God disponer, that these many which are the elect, shall have
remission of sins for the Redeemers ransom of blood paid for them. The
purchase of this ransom of blood, He makes over in the Covenant of grace and
reconciliation to believers in Him, and seals the bargain with them by the
Sacrament of His Supper.

The second proof.
THe second evidence of this Covenant of Redemption past between God and God
the Son Mediator designed, is from such titles and styles as are given to
Christ in relation to the procureing of a Covenant of grace and reconciliation
between God and us. First, He is called a Mediator of the Covenant of
reconciliation, interceeding for procureing of it, and that not by a simple
entreaty, but by giving Himself over to the Father (calling for satisfaction to
Justice, that reconciliation might go on) for paying a compensatory price,
sufficient to satisfy Justice for the elect, 1 Timothy 2. 5. 6. There is one God
and one Mediator between God and man (to wit, God incarnat) the man Christ
Jesus who gave Himself a ransom for all (to wit, elect children) to be
testified in due time.

Another title is given to Him by Job, Chap. 19. 24. Where He is called a
Redeemer, a near kinsman, who before His incarnation had obliged Himself to
take on humane nature, and to pay the price of Redemption (represented by slain
sacrifices) for the elect His kinsmen.

A third title is held out, in that He is called a Surety of a better Covenant,
Heb. 7. 22. Whereby is imported, that God would not pass a Covenant of grace
and reconciliation to men, except He had a good Surety who would answer for the
debt of the party reconciled, and would undertake to make the reconciled stand
to his Covenant. And Christ undertook the Suretyship, and so has procured and
established this Covenant of grace, much better then the Covenant of works, and
better then the old Covenant of grace with Israel, as they made use of it. This
necessarily imports a Covenant between Him and the Fathers Justice, to whom He
becomes surety for us: for, what is suretiship, but a voluntary transferring
of another debt upon the Surety, oblieging to pay the debt for which he
ingageth as Surety?

A fourth title given to Christ, is, that He is a reconciliation by way of
permutation; the atonement, Romans 5. 11. We have by Christ received the
atonement, that is, that which has pacified the Fathers Justice and reconciled
Him to us, is made over in a gift unto us; for, by Christ, procurement we have
God made ours, and Christ pacifying God, put, as it were, in our bosom: for,
God having sold us to Christ, by taking Christ's satisfaction for ours, He has
come over to us as reconciled, and given us Christ the Reconciler and the
atonement, to be ours. Here is an agreement made between God and Christ, and
the condition of the agreement between the parties for our behoof, clearly
imported and presupposed.

The fifth title given to Christ, is this, He is called the propitiation, 1
Ioh. 2. 2. Whereby God is pacified, not only for the believing Jews, but also
for the whole elect World, which should believe in Him. And if He be the
pacifying propitiation, then God has satisfaction in all that His Justice
craved from Christ for the elect; and, Romans 3. 25. He is called a propitiatory
sacrifice, wherewith God is so well pleased, that He makes offer of Him to us,
and sets Him forth to us for pacifying our Conscience through faith in His
blood, to declare His righteousness for remission of sins, without breach of
Justice; wherein, what price God required and was paid by Christ, is insinuat
and presupposed; for, satisfaction could not be, except the price agreed upon,
had been promised and accepted before in Covenanting.

The third proof.
THe third evidence, proving that there was a Covenant of Redemption past
before the beginning of the World, is, because the eternal decree of God was
fixed about the way of Redemption to be fulfilled in time: for, Known unto God
were all His works from the beginning, Acts 15. 18. And whatsoever God does in
time, He does it according to the eternal counsel of His own Will, Ephesians. 1.
9. Now, Christ the eternal Son of God, being made man, laid down His life for
His sheep. The Son of man goes, as it was determined, but woe unto that man by
whom He is betrayed, Luke, 22. 22. And whatsoever Christ suffered, was by the
determined counsel of God, Acts, 2. 23. And God the Son, before He was
incarnat, declares the decree of the Kingdom promised unto Him by the Father,
and of the victories which He should have over all His enemies, and of the
felicity and multitude of the subjects of His Kingdom, that should believe in
Him, Psalm. 2. 7. I will declare the decree, says He; presupposing therefore
the decree of God, of sending His eternal Son into the World, to become a man
and to suffer, and thereafter to reign for ever, we must also necessarily
presuppose the consent of the Son, making paction with the Father and the
Spirit, fixing the decree and agreement about the whole way of Redemption, to
be brought about in time: for, the same Person, Christ Jesus, who dwelt among
men in the days of His humiliation, Ioh. 1. 14. Was with the Father from
eternity: and as by Him all things were made, which were made, Ioh. 1. 2. 3. So
without Him nothing was decreed which was decreed, Prove. 8. 22. to 32. which
also is manifest in the Apostles words, 2 Timothy 1. 9. He saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to His own
purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the World began.

For, as before the beginning of the World, the elect were given to the Son
designed Mediator to be incarnat, and the price agreed upon; so also grace to
be given in time to the redeemed by compact, was given from eternity unto
Christ, their designed Advocat. Also, Ephesians. 1. 3. 4. 5. we were elected in
Christ, unto holiness and salvation and unto all spiritual blessings, and
were predestinat to the adoption of sons by Jesus Christ. And 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19.
20. we are redeemed, not with gold or silver, but by the precious blood of
Christ, who was predestinat before the beginning of the world. Whereby it is
manifest, that the Covenant between the Father and the Son, was transacted
concerning the incarnation of the Son, and His sufferings, death and
resurrection, and all other things belonging to the salvation of the elect.

The fourth proof.
THe fourth evidence of the passing a Covenant between the Father and the Son,
is holden forth in the typical priesthood of Levi, by the altar and
sacrifices, and the rest of the leviticall ceremonies which were prescribed by
God: for, as these things were testimonies, preachings, declarations and
evidences of a Covenant, past of old between God the disponer, and the Son the
Redeemer, about the way of justifying and saving such as believed in the
Messiah by an expiatory sacrifice, to be offered in the fullness of time, for
the redeemed; So also they were prefigurations, predictions, prophesies and
pledges of the Redeemers paying of the promised price of Redemption. And this
agreed-upon-price (because of the perfections of the parties contracters, the
Father and the Son) was holden and esteemed as good as paid from the beginning
of the World; and the agreed-upon-benefits purchased thereby to wit, grace and
glory, were effectually bestowed on the faithful before Christ's incarnation,
as the Psalmist testifies, Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord, says he, is a sun and a
shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will He withhold
from them that walk uprightly; and, Psalm. 73. 24. Thou shall guide me with Thy
counsel, and afterward receive me into glory; and that because the promised
price of Redemption was of no less worth, to give righteousness and life
eternal to believers in the Messiah to come, then the price now paid is now
of worth to give for it, righteousness and life eternal to these that believe
in the Messiah now come, Jesus Christ incarnat. And this donation of saving
graces, as remission of sin, and carrying on to life eternal, was sealed unto
believers in the Covenant of reconciliation, by the appointed Sacraments of
circumcision and the paschal lamb.

The fifth proof.
THe fifth evidence of a Covenant past between the Father and the Son Mediator
to be incarnat, is this, Christ now incarnat, does ratify all these things
which the Father and Himself not yet incarnat, and the holy Spirit had spoken
in the old Testament about the salvation of the elect, and the price of their
redemption, and of the conditions to be performed on either hand; And, as it
were of new, does repeat and renew the covenant which before was past between
the Father and Himself before He was incarnat: for, Luke, 2. 49. speaking to
Joseph and His mother when He was about twelve years old, He says, Wist ye
not, that I must be about My Fathers business? and, Matthew. 3. 13. He presents
Himself pledge and surety for sinners before the Father, to be baptized for
them with the baptism of affliction, and to fulfill all righteousness, as was
agreed upon before, verse. 15. whereupon the Father does receive and admit the
surety and His undertaking for payment, verse. 17. and, Lo, a voice from heaven,
saying, this is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; and Ioh. 5. 39. He
stands to all things which were testified of Him in the Scriptures; Search
the Scriptures: for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they
that testify of Me. And verse. 36. He professes, that all that He does, is
with the Fathers consent and concurrence, and that He came into the World, that
He might finish what the Father had sent Him to do and suffer, which He calls
His work that He was about. And more specially He shows the agreement past
between the Father and Him before He came into the world concerning his
incarnation, and the discharge of his Mediatory office, and his power to give
eternal life to those that believe in him: for, the Father sent him to be
incarnat, verse. 37. and that he with the Father, might give eternal life to
whomsoever he will, and might quicken the dead, verse. 21. and that he might
exercise judgment, authority was given to him as the Son of man, verse. 27.
Yea, he shows, that it was agreed upon between the Father and him about all
the doctrine which he should reach, John 8. 26. I speak to the World these
things which I have heard of him; and he shows that they were agreed about
the price of redemption of the elect, and about his resurrection from the dead,
and that his death did fully satisfy the Father, Ioh. 10. 15. As the Father
knows Me, even so know I the Father; and I lay down My life for the sheep;
and verse. 17. therefore does the Father love Me, because I lay down My life
that I might take it again; and, verse. 18. this commandment have I received of
the Father. And, Luke, 24. 25. he propones in short the sum of the covenant
past between the Father and himself, speaking to the two disciples going to
Emaus; O fools and slow of heart, to believe all that the prophets have spoken,
ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter in his own glory?
But most briefly he shows the whole matter so often as he calls the Father his
God, and that in respect of the covenant past between God and him to be
incarnat, and now incarnat indeed.

The sixth proof.
THe sixth evidence of the Covenant of Redemption, past between the Father and
the Son, stands in the heads and articles of the Covenant wherein they were
agreed.

Now there are as many articles of the Covenant, as there are injunctions,
commands and conditions required on the one hand, and promises to fulfill all
on the other hand; as many predictions as there are of Christ's sufferings, and
promises made to the Church through and for Him. Of these many, we shall touch
only at four, whereby the faith of believers in Him may be confirmed about
their Redemption by Him, and whereby the erroneous doctrine of them who evacuat
the Covenant of redemption of the elect, may be refuted: wherein they teach,
that Christ, by His obedience yielded unto the Father, even to the death of the
cross, did purchase no more but a possibility of salvation, and no more grace
for the elect then for the reprobat, as if He had not purchased a certainty of
salvation to be given to any, but had suspended all the fruit of His suffering
upon the frail, mutable, inconstant and corrupt free will of men; so that no
man can by their doctrine have more certainty of their own salvation, then they
have of the certainty and stability of their own sickle mind and will: and so
no more certainty of their own salvation, then of their own perdition. The
order we shall keep in speaking of the articles of the Covenant of Redemption,
shall be this.

The first article, shall be of the persons redeemed.

The second article, shall be of the price of Redemption to be paid by Christ
in the fullness of time.

The third article, shall be about the gifts and benefits purchased for, and to
be given unto, the persons Redeemed.

The fourth article of this Covenant of redemption, past between the Father and
the Son, shall be of the means and ways whereby the gifts and benefits
purchased, may be wisely, orderly and effectually applied to the Redeemed.

In ranking of these articles, we do not presuppose a priority of one of them
before another in order of nature or time; But we choose to speak of them in
order of doctrine, for our more easy understanding of the matter.

For, the Covenant of Redemption past between the Father and the Son, is by way
of an eternal decree of the Trinity, comprehending all and whatsoever
belongs to Redemption. In the decerning of which decree, there is not a first
nor a last, but a joint purpose of God to bring about and accomplish all the
heads and articles of the Covenant, each in their own due time, order and way
appointed.

The first article of the Covenant of Redemption concerns the persons
redeemed.
THe redeemed in Scripture, are pointed forth under sundry expressions;
sometime they are called the predestinat; sometime the elect; sometime these
whom God foreknew; sometime they who are called according to His purpose;
sometime they that were given to Christ of the Father; sometime Christ's sheep;
sometime the children of God, etc. But whatsoever name they have, the persons
are the same, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 29. 30. whom He did
foreknow, them He did predestinat to be conform to the image of His Son --
Moreover whom He did predestinat, them He also called; and whom he called, them
he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. The number
and the names of the persons here spoken of, are the same; and they are called
the predestinat, in regard that God has appointed them to a certain end, to
wit, eternal life, to be brought thereunto effectually by certain means for
the glory of Gods grace. They are called elect, verse. 33. in regard God in the
purpose of his good pleasure, has severed them from among the rest of men,
lying with them in the state of perdition by their own procurement, and has
designed them to be partakers of eternal salvation. They are called foreknown,
and written in the book of life, in regard God has comprehended them in his
special love, no less distinctly and unchangeably, then if he had their names
written in a catalogue, or book. And they are called given unto Christ, in
regard the redeeming of them, and bringing them to life is committed to Christ.
But by whatsoever name they are designed, the persons redeemed are still the
same.

2. But whereas the elect, given to Christ, are called the redeemed, it
presupposes, that they were considered and looked upon as now fallen by their
own fault, and lying by their own merit in sin and misery, enemies to God, and
altogether unable to help themselves. For, this much does the notion of
Redemption, or buyingback again import: and that it is so, is clear, because
the mercy of God, the grace of God, the good will of God, is put in Scripture
for the only motive and impulsive cause of Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 7. 8. 9. In
whom we have Redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins
according to the riches of his grace, wherein he has abounded toward us in all
wisdom and prudence, having made known unto us the mystery of his will
according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself.

3. The Scripture shows us that there is an innumerable multitude of redeemed
persons, and a sort of universality of them, extended unto all nations and ages
and states of men; so that this hudge multitude for whose redemption Christ's
blood was shed, Matthew. 26. 29. is justly called by the name of a world, an
elect world, Ioh. 3. 16. to be called out of that reprobat world, for which
Christ refuses to interceed, Ioh. 17. 9. the truth of this matter, the redeemed
do acknowledge in their worshipping Christ their Mediator, Rev. 5. 9. and they
sang a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the seals
thereof; for, thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of
every kindred and tongue and people and nation These are the all men whom God
will have saved and does save, 1 Timothy 2. 4. these are the all men of whom the
Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3. 9. God is patient toward us (to wit his elect) not
willing that any of us should perish, but that we all should come to
repentance: And this the Apostle gives for a reason of the Lords deferring his
coming, till all the elect should be brought in, of whom many were not yet
converted in the Apostles time and many were not yet born, and if Christ should
not delay his coming, till they were born and brought in to reconciliation with
God, the number of the elect should be cut short.

4. In no place of Scripture is it said, that all and every man are elect, or
every man is given to Christ, or every man is predestinat unto life; in no
place of Scripture is it said, that Christ has made paction with the Father
for all and every man without exception; But by the contrary, it is sure from
Scripture, that Christ has merited and procured salvation for all them for
whom he entered himself Surety. Their sins only were laid on Christ, and in him
condemned, satisfied for, and expiat, Isa. 53. for these, and in their place he
offered himself to satisfy Justice, for them he prayed, them only he
justifies and glorifieth: for, the sentence of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 15.
stands firm; in Christ all are dead (to the law) for whom and in whose room
Christ did die. And therefore for these his people the law is satisfied: from
these the curse is taken away, to them heaven and all things necessary to
salvation are purchased, and shall infallibly in due time, yea invincibly be
applied.

Christ has not sanctified, consecrat, and perfected all and every one, Heb.
10. 14. only for his sheep predestinat, he laid down his life, John 10. 15. 16.
26. he did not buy with his blood all and every one, but his Church called out,
and severed from the world, Acts, 20. 28. he saves not all and every man from
their sins, but his own people only, to wit, whom he has bought with his blood
to be his own, Matthew. 1. 21. whom he has purchased to be his own peculiar,
whom he does purify, and kindle with a servent desire to bring forth good
works, Tit. 2. 14.

Such as Christ has redeemed, he loves them infinitely, and counted them
dearer to him then his life. But many shall be found to whom Christ shall say I
never knew you, to wit, with approbation and affection, Matthew. 7. 23.

They for whom Christ has died shall sometime glory against all condemnation;
but so shall not every man be able to glory, Romans 8. 34. 35.

Christ never purposed to lay down his life for those, whom going to die he
refuses to pray for; only for those who are given to him out of the world will
he pray and die, and rise, and will raise them to eternal life, Ioh. 17. 9.

So far is it from Gods purpose and Christ's to redeem all and every man, that
he has not decreed to give every nation so much as the external necessary
means for conversion and salvation, Psalm. 147. 19. 20. He shows his word unto
Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel; He has not dealt so with
any nation; and as for his judgments they have not known them.

And for this wise and holy course of hiding the mystery of salvation from
many, even wise men in the world, Christ Jesus glorifieth and thanketh the
Father, Matthew. 11. 25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them to babes, even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

The second article.
AS to the second article of the Covenant of Redemption concerning the price of
Redemption, and the sitting of the Redeemer for accomplishing the work of
Redemption, God would not have silver, or gold, or any corruptible thing, 1
Pet. 1. 18. He refuses all ransom that can come from a mere man, Psalm. 49. 8.
But He would have His own co-eternall and only begotten Son to become a man, to
take on the yoke of the law, and to do all His will, that He alone might redeem
the elect, who by nature are under the curse of the law. He would have Him the
second Adam to be obedient even to the death of the cross, that by His
obedience many might be justified, Romans 5. 19.

This is clearly confirmed by the Apostle* Heb. 10. 5. 6. 7. 10. commenting
upon the 7. and 8. verses of Psalm. 40. In burnt offerings and sacrifices for
sin thou have had no pleasure, then said Christ coming into the world, Lo, I
come (in the volumne of the book it is written of Me) to do thy will O God --
by the which will we are sanctified, by the offering up of the blood of Jesus
once for all.

2. By Christ's obedience we understand not only that which some call his active
obedience, nor that only which some call his passive obedience: for, his active
and passive obedience, are but two notions of one thing; for, his incarnation,
subjection to the law, and the whole course of his life was a continued course
of suffering, and in all his suffering he was a free and voluntary agent,
fulfilling all which he had undertaken unto the Father, for making out the
promised price of Redemption, and accomplishing what the Father had given him
command to do. His obedience, even to the death of the cross, did begin in his
emptying himself to take on our nature, and the shape of a servant, and did run
on till his resurrection and ascension. As for these his sufferings in the end
of his life, which he suffered both in soul and body, they were the completing
of his formerly begun and running obedience, but were not his only obedience
for us, or his only suffering for us, for he had done and suffered much from
his incarnation before his last passion and death, but the highest degree of
his obedience, whereby he bought deliverance unto us from sin and misery, and
whereby he bought unto us, immortality and eternal blessedness in heaven, was
his death on the cross completing our ransom.

3. Whereas some have said, that one drop of His blood was sufficient to redeem
more worlds then one, if there wre any more, it is but an inconsiderat speech,
and destitute of Scriptural authority; for when Christ had suffered all things
before the time of His death, it behoved Him to be crucified also, Luke 24. 26.
but it behoved Him not to suffer more then justice required for a ransom, but
only as much as was agreed upon, and no less could satisfy. Now this
commandment He received of the Father, that He should lay down His life for His
sheep, Ioh. 10. 18. For, the wisdom of God thought good, to testify His own
holiness and hatred of sin, and to testify His love to the elect world, and
riches of His grace toward them to whom He would be merciful, by inflicting no
less punishment of sin on the Mediator His own dear Son (taking upon Himself
full satisfaction to justice for all the sins of all the Elect given unto Him
to redeem) then the death both of His body and soul for a season.

And indeed it was suitable to His holy and sovereign Majesty, that for the
ransom of so many thousands and millions of damnable sinners, and saving of
them from everlasting torment of body and soul, no less price should be paid
by the Son of God, made man and surety for them, then His sufferings both in
His body and soul for a season, as much as should be equivalent to the due
deserved punishment of them whom he should redeem; and it became the justice of
the infinite Majesty offended, to be reconciled with so many rebels, and to
bestow upon them heaven and eternal blessedness, for no less price then the
sufferings of the eternal Son made man, whose humiliation and voluntary
obedience, even to the death of the cross, was of infinite worth and value; and
therefore he yields himself to the sufferings agreed upon in the covenant of
Redemption, both in body and soul.

Of the sufferings of Christ in His soul.
OUr Lords sufferings in His body did not fully satisfy divine justice; 1.
because as God put a sanction on the law and covenant of Works, made with us
all in Adam, that he and his should be liable to death, both of body and soul,
(which Covenant being broken by sin, all sinners became obnoxious to the death
both of body and soul) So the redeemed behoved to be delivered from the death
of both, by the Redeemers tasting of death in both kinds, as much as should be
sufficient for their redemption. 2. As sin infected the whole man, soul and
body, and the curse following on sin, left no part nor power of the man's soul
free; So justice required, that the Redeemer, coming in the room of the persons
redeemed, should feel the force of the curse, both in body and soul.

Ob. But how can the soul die, seeing it is, by the Ordinance of God in
creation, made immortal?

Ans. The death of the soul is not, in all things, like to the death of the
body; for, albeit the spiritual substance of the soul be made immortal and not
to be extinguished, yet it is subject to its own sort of death, which consists
in the separation of it from communion with God, in such and such degrees, as
justly may be called the death of the soul, from which sort of death, the
immortality of the soul, not only does not deliver, but also it does augment it
and perpetuat it, till this death be removed.

Obj. But, seeing the humane sold of our Lord could never be separated from the
permanent holiness wherewith it was endued in the first infusion of it in the
body, and could never be separated from the indissolvable personal union with
the second person of the Godhead assuming it, how could His soul be subject to
any degrees of death?

Ans. Albeit the con-natural holiness of the soul of Christ could not be
removed, nor the personal union of it be dissolved no not when the soul was
separated from the body, yet it was subject, by Christ's own consent, to be
emptied of strength-natural, to be deprived for a time of the clearness of
vision of its own blessedness, and of the quiet possession of the formerly felt
peace, and of the fruition of joy for a time, and so suffer an eclipse of
light and consolation, otherwise shining from His Godhead; and so in this sort
of spiritual death might undergo some degrees of spiritual death.

The degrees of the suffering of Christ's holy soul.
AMong the depr^^s of the death suffered by Christ in His soul, we may number,
first, that habitual heaviness of spirit which haunted him all the days of His
life, as was foretold by Isa. 53. 3. He was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief. We hear He weeped, but never that he laughed, and but very seldom
that he rejoiced.

2. He suffered in special, sorrow and grief in the observation of the
ingratitude of them, for whom he came to lay down his life, we hid as it were
our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not, Isa. 53. 3.

3. The hardness of men's hearts, and the malice of his own covenanted people,
and the daily contumelies and despightfull usage he found from day to day,
increased his daily grief, as by rivolets the flood is raised in the river; he
was despised and rejected of men, Isa. 53. 3.

4. He was tempted in all things like unto us, and albeit in them all never
tainted with sin, Heb. 4. 15. yet with what a vexation of his most holy soul,
we may easily gather by comparing the holiness of our Lord with the holiness
of his servants, to whom nothing is more bitter then the fiery darts of the
devil, and his suggestions and solicitations to sin: especially, if we
consider the variety of temptations, the heinousness of the sins, whereunto
that impudent and unclean spirit boldly solicited his holiness, Matthew. 4. and
withal, the importunity and pertinacy of the devil, who never ceased, partly
by himself, partly by those that were his slaves, and partly by the corruption
which he found in Christ's disciples, to pursue, press, and vex the God of
glory all the time he lived on earth.

5. The guilt of all the sins, crimes, and vile deeds of the elect, committed
from the beginning of the world, was imputed unto him, by accepting of which
imputation, albeit he polluted not his Conscience, yet he burdened his soul,
binding himself to bear their deserved punishment.

Now when we see that the vilest sinners, as liars, thieves, adulterers, cannot
patiently hear themselves called liars, or thieves, nor bear the shame of the
vileness, whereof they are really guilty, with what suffering of soul? with
what clouding of the glory of his holiness, think we that our Lord took upon
his shoulders such a dunghill of all vileness, then which, nothing could more
be unbeseeming his holy Majesty?

6. Unto all the former degrees of suffering of his soul, the perplexity of his
thoughts fell on him, with the admiration and astonishment of soul, when the
full cup of wrath was presented unto him, in such a terrible way, as made all
the powers of his sense and reason for a time to be at a stand. Which suffering
of his soul, while the Evangelist is about to express, he says he began to be
sore amazed, and also to be very heavy; and to express himself in these words,
My Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death, Mark, 14. 33. 34.

Obj. But did not this astonishing amazement of Christ's soul speak some
imperfection of the humane nature?

Ans. It did no ways argue any imperfection or inlake of sanctity in him, but
only a sinlesse, and kindly infirmity in regard of natural strength, in the
days of his flesh; for, the mind of a man, by any sudden and vehement
commotion arising from a terrible object, may without sinning be so taken up,
that the swift progress of his mind in discourse may for a while be stopped,
and the act of reasoning suspended a while: all the cogitations of the mind
fleeing together to consult, and not being able to extricat themselves in an
instant, may stand amazed, and sit down a while, like Jobs friends astonished.
Now our Lord, taking on our nature and our common sinlesse infirmities, became
like unto us in all things except sin. Daniels infirmity at the sight of an
Angel, was not sin, Dan. 10.

Obj. But does not this astonishing admiration, suddenly lighting upon Christ's
soul, prove that something unforeseen of him did befall him?

Ans. Not at all; for, he knew all things that should befall him, and told his
disciples thereof, and was at a point and resolved in every thing, which was to
come before it came. But this astonishing amazement did only show forth the
natural difference between things preconceived in the mind, and these same
things presented to sense: for, there is in the mind a different impression of
the preconceived heat of a burning iron, before it do touch the skin, from that
powerful impression which a hot iron thrust into the flesh does put upon the
sense. In regard of which natural difference between foresight and feeling,
between resolution and experience, this astonishment befell our Lord, and in
this regard, Christ is said to learn experimental obedience by these things
which he suffered, Heb. 5. 8.

7. Another degree of the suffering of our Lords soul, is the interruption, for
a time, of the sensible uptaking and feeling of that quiet and peaceable
enjoyment of the felicity of the humane nature, given (for the point of right)
unto it in its personal union with his Godhead, in so far, that in the midst
of many disciples, Greeks and Jews looking on him, the vehemence of his trouble
did not suffer him to hide his perturbation; for. (Ioh. 12. 27.) our Lord cried
out, Now is My Soul troubled, and what shall I say? and, Mark, 14. 34. made him
declare his exceeding heaviness; My Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death.
In which words he insinuats, that to his sense, death was at hand; yea, that in
no small measure, it had seized on him, and wrapped him up in the sorrows of
death, for the time, as in a net of which he knew he could not be holden still.

Obj. But did not this hudge heap of miseries take away from the humane nature,
the felicity of its union personally with his Godhead?

Ans. It did indeed hide it for a time, and hinder the sensible feeling of it
for a time, as it was necessary, in his deep suffering; but it did not take it
away, nor yet eclipse it altogether: for, as a corporal inheritance has a
threefold connection with the person owner thereof; so a spiritual inheritance
has a threefold connection with the believers soul. The first is, of lawful
title and right; the next is, of possession of the inheritance according to the
lawful right; the third is, an actual fruition and present feeling of the use
of the inheritance. The fruition and felt benefit and use, may be marred or
suspended, and the possession stand: and the possession may be interrupted and
suspended, and the lawful right remain firm. Christ had not only an undoubted
right to this felicity standing unto him, by the personal union, but also a
fast possession of it, in as far as the personal union was indissolvable. But
the actual felt fruition in his humane sense and uptaking, was so long
interrupted as the humane nature was diverted from this contemplation for its
present exercise, and turned to look toward the sad spectacle of imminent and
incumbent wrath: especially when, and how long it was, as it were, bound to the
feeling of the present stroke which did fill the soul with sadness and grief,
anxiety and vexation, without sin.

8. Neither did the vindictive justice of God, pursueing our sins in our
Surety, stay here, but in the garden went on to show unto Christ the cup of
wrath, and also to hold it to his head, and to press him to drink it; yea, the
very dregs of the agreed-upon curse of the law, was poured into his patient and
submissive mouth, as it were, and bosom, and the most inward part of soul and
body, which as a vehement flame, above all humane apprehension, so filled both
soul and body, that out of all his veins it drew and drove forth a bloody
sweat (the like whereof was never heard) as when a pot of oil, boiling up and
running over by a fire set under it, has yet further the flame increased by
the thrusting of a fiery mass of hot iron into it.

Hence came such a wasting and eating up of all his humane strength, and
emptying of his natural abilities, such a down-throwing of his mind, such a
fainting and swounding of his joy, and so heavy a weight of sorrow on him, that
not only he desired that small comfort of his weak disciples watching with him
a little, and missed of it, but also stood in need of an Angel to comfort him,
Luke, 22. 43.

It is without ground, that some of the learned have denied the cause of this
agony to be the drinking of the cup of wrath holden forth to him by the Father,
saying, that the sight of it only and of the peril he saw we were into, was
the cause of this heavy exercise: for, the cup was not only showen unto him,
and the hudge wrath due to our sin set before him that he should see it, and
tremble at the apprehension of the danger we were in, but it was poured into
him, and not only on him, that he for the sins of his redeemed should suffer it
sensibly, and as it were drink it, that the bitterness thereof might affect
all the powers of soul and body: for, the Scripture testifies, that not only
upon the sight and apprehension of this wrath and curse coming on him, the holy
humane nature did holily abhor it, but also that he submitted to receive it,
upon the consideration of the divine decree and agreement made, upon the price
to be paid by him, and that upon the feeling of this wrath this agony in his
soul, and bloody sweat of his body, was brought on.

Obj. But, how could the pouring forth of the Fathers wrath upon his innocent
and dear Son consist with his Fatherly love to him?

Ans. Even as the innocence and holiness of Christ could well consist with his
taking upon him the punishment of our sins; for, even the wrath of a just man,
inflicting capital punishment on a condemned person, put case his own child,
can well consist with fatherly affection toward the child suffering punishment;
therefore it is not to be doubted, but these two can well consist in God, in
whom affections do not war one with another, nor sight with reason, as it
falls forth among men; for, the affections ascribed unto God, are effects
rather of his holy will toward us, then properly called affections in him; and
these effects of Gods will about us, do always tend to our good and
blessedness at last, however diverse one from another in themselves.

9. Among the degrees of the sufferings of Christ's soul, we may number not only
the perturbation of his mind and thoughts, but also the perturbation of his
affections, and especially his fear; for, his humane nature was like unto ours
in all things except sin, and was indeed feared when it saw and felt the wrath
of God, least it should have been swallowed up by it, and of this fear the
Apostle ( Heb. 5. 7.) bears witness, saying, who in the days of his flesh,
when he had offered up prayers and supplications* and strong cries and tears,
unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared.

Now, albeit this seems the saddest passage of all his sufferings, that he
was feared for being swallowed up, yet this his fear is not to be wondered at,
nor is it inconsistent with his holiness; for when Christ assumed our nature
(as has been said) he assumed also all the common and sinless infirmities,
passions, and perturbations of our nature: Now it is kindly that the creature,
at the sight of an angry God should tremble; for, we read, that the rocks and
mountains have trembled before God, when he did let forth his terror; and it
is natural to man, at the sight of a terrible object, at the sight of a peril
and evil coming upon him, but much more already come upon him (especially if
the evil and peril be above all his natural strength) to tremble and fear
the worst; and this becomes holy nature very well to fear present death,
off-cutting, perdition and swallowing up in the danger, when God appeared angry
and was hasting to be avenged on sinners in the person of their Surety, what
could the humane soul of Christ gather from this terrible sight, but that which
sense and reason did teach? In the mean time there was no place here for his
doubting of the issue and his escapeing from being swallowed up; for, natural
fear of the manly nature, arising from the infirmity of the creature, differs
very far from the fear arising from the infirmity of faith in Gods
faithfulness and power; and natural fear of the worst, can very well stand
with the strength of faith to overcome the natural fear: for, as the sensitive
appetite may abhor a bitter cup of medicine, and cause all the body tremble for
fear to take it, while in the mean time, the man by reason is resolved to drink
that bitter cup of medicine, because he confidently hops to help his health
thereby; so natural fear in Christ to taste of the cup of wrath, could very
well consist with strong faith and assurance to be delivered therefrom: for, it
is very suitable that faith should as far overcome the natural apprehension of
sense and reason natural, as reason does overcome sense in drinking a loathsome
and bitter cup of medicine.

And to clear this yet further, that extreme fear to be swallowed up of wrath,
could well consist in Christ with strong faith to overcome and bear out that
terrible wrath, Let it be considered, that as it was needful Christ should be
subject to the infirmity of natural strength, that he might suffer death; so
it was needful, that he should have strong faith to enable him to bear out, in
a holy way, that which he behoved to suffer: for, if on the one hand, Christ
had not been weakened, and emptied of all humane strength in his flesh, he could
not have been humbled enough for us, he could not have suffered so much, as
Justice did exact for satisfaction for us; and on the other hand, if he had not
stood firm in faith and love toward Gods glory and our salvation, he could not
have satisfied Justice, nor been still the innocent and spotless lamb of God,
nor have perfected the expiatory sacrifice for us.

Obj. But was he not tempted to doubt by Satan?

Ans. We grant that he was indeed tempted by Satan to doubt, yea we shall not
stand to grant that he was tempted to desperation; But we altogether deny, that
he was tainted with sin by temptation in the least degree: for, the Scripture
says, he was tempted in all things like unto us, but yet without sin in him or
yielding in any sort to any temptation. And seeing by the Evangelist, Matthew. 4.
we understand, that he was tempted in the wilderness by the devil unto the
most horrible sins that Satan could devise, and yet was not stained or polluted
in the least degree, with the least measure of yielding to the sinful
temptations; we need not stand to grant, that he might be tempted, or that he
was tempted unto doubting and desperation; for, this was among the most notable
and prime temptations, whereby Satan, in his impudent boldness, solicited the
Son of God, very God and man in one person, even to doubt of that what Satan
knew he was; If thou be the Son of God, says he. It is true indeed, that we
who are sinners by nature and corrupted in all the powers of our soul, cannot
be tempted, tossed, and troubled, but therein our sinful nature in some
measure may appear, and be polluted: But the matter was not so with our holy
Lord, the God of glory, who was separat from sinners; for our impure nature is
like to water in a pudle, which being stirred, does presently become muddy and
foul; but the holy humane nature of Christ, was altogether pure, like unto
clear and pure fountain water in a glass, which howsoever it be troubled and
tossed, remains most pure and free of all muddinesse.

Obj. But at least, was there not a conflict in our Lord between his faith, and
the temptation to doubting?

Ans. We grant not only a conflict of Christ's humane natural strength, with
the burden of affliction, but also a conflict and wrestling of his faith
against the temptation to doubting; for, wrestling does not always argue the
infirmity of the wrestler, for the Angel who is called God, Hos. 12. wrestles
with Jacob, and in God was no infirmity. Again, wrestling does not argue
always infirmity, but does only evidence the wrestlers power and the
importunat obstinacy of an adversary, who being repulsed and cast down, does
not at first leave the field, but rises up again, insists and presses on so
long as it pleases the most powerful party to suffer the adversary to make
opposition.

Obj. But you must grant, that in the conflict of Christ's humane natural
strength, with the affliction and burden of the punishment laid upon him by the
Father, he was overcome, and succumbed and died.

Ans. Yes indeed: but we must put a difference between the conflict of natural
strength with the burden of affliction, and the conflict between faith and a
temptation unto sin; in the conflict of holy humane nature in Christ with the
punishment of our sins laid on Him, it was not a sin to have his natural
strength overpowered, and to lie down under the burden and to lay down his life
and die; but it was a main part of His obedience, it was the performance of His
promise and undertaking, to yield himself to Justice and to die for us, that we
might be delivered from death eternal. But in the wrestling of His faith with
the temptation unto doubting, it had been a sin to have yielded in the least
degree, and that which could not consist with the perfect holiness of the
Mediator, Surety for sinners.

Obj. But, did not the perplexity of His thoughts and the anxiety of His mind,
diminish something of the vigor and constancy of his faith?

Ans. It did diminish nothing of the vigor and constancy of His faith; for
there is a great difference between the troubling of the thoughts, and the
hesitation or weakening of faith, as there is also a great difference between
the perturbations of the mind and the perturbation of the conscience. For, as
the mind may be troubled, when in the consideration of some difficulty it
cannot at first perceive an outgate, mean-time the conscience remaining sound
and quiet; so may the work of the mind's discoursing, be interrupted and at a
stay for a time, faith (mean time) remaining untouched, wholly sound and quiet.
For example, upon the sudden receiving of a wound, or upon an unexpected report
of some great loss, such as befell Job, the wheels of the reasoning faculty
may be at a stand for a time, and the conscience in the mean time be quiet;
yea, and faith in the mean time, remain strong, as we see in Iob^ first
exercise.

Now if this may be found in an holy imperfect man in any measure, why shall we
not consider rightly of the exercise of the holy one of Israel suffering in His
humane nature the punishment of our sin?

Let us consider but one of the passages of our Lords exercise, Ioh. 12. 27.
28. Now (says He) My Soul is troubled: wherein behold the perplexity of His
mind, smitten with the horror of the curse due to us, coming upon Him; then
comes forth, what shall I say? wherein, behold! reason standing mute and
altogether silent, only He lets forth the confession of His perplexity:
presently after this, He subjoyneth Father, save Me from this hour; wherein
behold! Holy nature, trembling and shrinking to fall into the wrath of the
Father, and according to the principles of holy nature, testifying the simple
abhorrency of His soul from such an evil as is the wrath of God His Father,
which had it not been for love to save our souls. He could not have yielded his
humane nature to endure, or bear it: therefore He, considering that we were but
lost for ever, if He should not suffer wrath for us, He repeats the sum of the
Covenant of Redemption agreed upon, But for this cause came I unto this hour.
And last of all, shuts up His speech and exercise in the triumphing voice of
victorious and untainted faith, Father, glorify thy Name; and here He rests:
wherewith the Father is so well pleased, as that from heaven He speaks to the
hearing of the multitude standing by, I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again.

10. Among the deepest degrees of the suffering of Christ in His soul, we
reckon that desertion whereof Christ on the cross gives an account, crying
out, My God, My God, why have Thou forsaken Me? By which speech He does not
mean, that then the personal union of the natures was in him dissolved, nor
yet that God had withdrawn His sustaining strength and help from the humane
nature, nor that the love of the Father was taken off him, nor that any point
of the perfection of holiness was taken from him; but his true intent is, to
show, that God for a time had taken away sensible consolation, and felt joy
from His humane Soul, that so justice might in His sufferings be the more fully
satisfied: And this is the forsakeing of Him here given to us to understand. In
which desertion Christ is not to be looked upon simply as He is in His own
person, the Son of the Father, in whom He is always well pleased, but as He
stands in the room of sinners, Surety and Cautioner, paying their debt: In
which respect He behoved to be dealt with as standing in our name; guilty and
paying the debt of being forsaken of God, which we were bound to suffer fully
and for ever, if He had not interposed for us.

11. The last degree of Christ's sufferings (wherein He may be said to have
descended into hell so far as Scripture in the old Testament or the hystory of
Christ's passion in the new, will suffer us to expound that expression) is that
curse wherein the full wrath of God, and the dregs of that horrible cup was
poured forth upon His holy humane nature, while heaven and earth and hell,
seemed to conspire to take vengeance on Him, and fully to punish our sins in
the person of Him our Surety by that cursed death of the cross, which was the
evidence foretold of the malediction of God lying on Him, in so far as was
necessary to compleet the punishment of loss and feeling both in soul and
body. And therefore not without ground have Orthodox divines takenin Christ's
suffering in His soul, and the detaining of His body in the grave (put in as
the close and last part of Christ's sufferings) as the true meaning of that
expression He descended into hell: not only because these pains which Christ
suffered both in body and soul, were due to us in full measure; but also
because that which Christ suffered in the point of torment and vexation, was,
in some respect, of the same kind with the torment of the damned: for, in the
punishment of the damned, we must necessarily distinguish these three things,
1. the perverse disposition of the mind of the damned in their sufferings; 2.
the duration and perpetuity of their punishment; and, 3. the punishment it
self, tormenting soul and body. The first two are not of the essence of
punishment, albeit by accident they are turned into a punishment, for the
wickedness, vileness and unworthiness of the damned, who neither will nor
can submit themselves to the punishment (and put the case they should submit,
are utterly unable to make satisfaction for ever) do make them in a desperate,
doleful condition for ever, though obstinat sinners do not apprehend nor
believe this, but go on in treasuring up wrath against themselves, pleasing
themselves in their own dreams, to their own endless perdition. Of these
three, the first two could have no place in Christ: Not the first, because He
willingly offered Himself a sacrifice for our sins; and upon agreement, paid
the ransom fully: Not the second, because He could no longer be holden in the
sorrows of death then He had satisfied Justice, and finished what was imposed
on Him; and His infinite excellency made His short suffering to be of infinite
worth, and equivalent to our everlasting suffering.

The third then remains, which is the real and sensible tormenting of soul
and body in being made a curse for us, and to feel it so in His real
experience. And what need we question hellish pain, where pain and torment, and
the curse with felt wrath from God falls on, and lies still, till Justice be
satisfied? Concerning which, it is as certain, that Christ was seized upon by
the dolours of death, as it is certain in Scripture, that He could not be
holden of the sorrows of death, Acts. 2. 24.

Quest. But what interest had Christ Godhead in His humane sufferings, to make
them both so short and so precious and satisfactory to Justice for so many sins
of so many sinners, especially when we consider that God cannot suffer?

Ans. Albeit this passion of the humane nature, could not so far reach the
Godhead of Christ, that it should in a physical sense suffer (which indeed is
impossible) yet these sufferings did so affect the person, that it may truly be
said, that God suffered, and by His blood bought His people to Himself, Acts,
20. 28. for, albeit the proper and formal subject of physical suffering be
only the humane nature; yet, the principal subject of sufferings, both in a
physical and moral sense, is Christ's person, God and man, from the dignity
whereof, the worth and excellency of all sort of sufferings, the merit and the
satisfactory sufficiency of the price, did flow.

And let it be considered also, that albeit Christ, as God, in His Godhead
could not suffer in a physical sense; yet, in a moral sense He might suffer,
and did suffer: for, in as much as He, being in the form of God, and without
robbery equal to God, did demit His person to assume humane nature, and empty
Himself so far as to hide His glory and take on the shape of a servant, and
expose Himself willingly to all the contradiction of sinners which He was to
meet with, and to all railings, revilings, contempt, despisings and calumnies,
shall it seem nothing, and not enter in the count of our Lords payment for our
debt?

Obj. But, how could so low a downthrowing of the Son of man, or of the humane
nature assumed by Christ, consist with the Majesty of the person of the Son of
God?

Ans. We must distinguish in Christ these things, which are proper to either of
the two natures, from these things which are ascribed to His person, in respect
of either of the natures or both the natures; for, infirmity, physical
suffering, or mortality, are proper to the humane nature. The glory of power
and grace and mercy, and superexcellent Majesty and such like, are proper to
the Deity; but the sufferings of the humane nature, are so far from diminishing
the glory of the divine nature, that they do manifest the same and make it
appear more clearly: for, by how much the humane nature was weakened, depressed,
and despised, for our sake, by so much the love of Christ, God and man in one
person, toward man, and His mercy and power and grace to man, do shine in the
eyes of those that judiciously look upon Him.

Obj. But seeing Christ's satisfaction for sinners, does not stand in any one
part of His doings and sufferings, but in the whole and entire precious pearl,
and compleet price of His whole obedience from His incarnation even to the
death of His cross, how comes it to pass, that in Scripture the whole
expiation of our sins, is ascribed so often to His passion, and particularly to
His blood?

Ans. This comes to pass, 1. Because the certainty and verity of His assumed
humane nature, and the certainty of His real suffering, and the fulfilling of
all the leviticall sacrifices, did most evidently appear unto sense in the
effusion of His blood. 2. Because the expression of His sufferings, both in
soul and body, appeared in the effusion of His blood: for, in the garden, while
His body was not as yet touched, or hurt by man, from the mere pains of His
soul, drops of blood fell down out of all His body to the earth. 3. Because His
blood-sheding and death, was the last act of compleeting the payment of the
ransom to the Father for us, which payment began in His humble incarnation and
went on through all His life, and was compleeted in His bloodshed and death,
whereof our Lord gave intimation on the cross, when He cried as triumphantly
victorious, it is finished.

The use of this article of the covenant of Redemption.
WE have at some length spoken of the price of Redemption, and of Christ's
defraying the debt by His passion. 1. That hereby the merit of our sins, may
the more clearly be seen. 2. That the sublimity and excellency of divine
Majesty, offended by sin, may appear. 3. That we may behold the severity of
Gods justice, till He have satisfaction and reparation in some sort of the
injuries done to Him. 4. That the admirable largeness of Gods mercy may be
acknowledged and wondered at.

For in the price of Redemption paid, as in a mirror we may see, how greatly
the Lord hates sin,; how great His love is to the world in sending his Son
Christ amongst us; how heavy the wrath of God shall lie upon them that flee not
to Christ's satisfaction for their delivery; how great the dignity and
excellency of the Lord our Redeemer is, for whose cause reconciliation is
granted to all that take hold of the offer of grace through him; how great the
obligation of believers is to love God, and serve him; and how greatly the
glory of all the attributes of God, does shine in the work of Redemption.

2. By this doctrine, it appears how vain and wicked the devices of
superstitious men are, who, for pacifying of Gods wrath, have appointed
pennances, and pilgrimages, and self-scourgings, and soul-masses, and
purgatory, and such like other abominations, whereof the word of God has not
spoken, but forbidden all the inventions of men, as unworthy conceits, to bring
about men's salvation: which inventions tend only to derogat from the dignity of
the price of Christ's ransom, and to cry down the fullness and perfection of the
price paid by our blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ, and to set up other Saviors
in his room.

3. Hence also it is manifest, how fit a high Priest is appointed over us, who
is touched with our infirmities and temptations; by whom we may have so solid
consolation in all the pangs of our tormented consciences, and in whom we have
a solid foundation laid down to all that flee to him, for settling our faith and
hope in the Son of God, who has of set purpose, with the Fathers consent,
suffered so many and great evils that he might redeem us.

4. And hereby we may perceive also how well divine Justice is satisfied, and
with what warrant the consciences of the weak believers may be quieted, who so
use to exaggerat the grievousnesse and the multitude of their sins, that they
forget to put a right estimation upon the satisfaction made by Christ for all
that come unto God through him.

The third article.
THe third article of the covenant of Redemption^ past between the Father and
the Son, concerns the benefits, gifts and graces to be given unto the
redeemed: all which gifts and graces, are summarily comprehended in that one
gift of God, spoken of, Ioh. 4. 10. which gift is Christ, who is freely offered
unto, and given to, the elect believer for righteousness and eternal life,
according to what was said, Isa. 9. 6. for, unto us a child is born, a Son is
given, on whose shoulders the government is laid, whose Name is called Iehovab,
the wonderful counselor, the strong God, the eternal Father and Prince of
peace. And, 2 Pet. 1. 3. who according to his divine power, has given unto us
all things which pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of Him
who has called us to virtue and glory.

2. The benefits which are appointed for the redeemed, are so conveyed and
brought unto them, that first, they are Christ's riches which he has purchased
unto the elect, and being resolved to die, that the purchase might be made fast
to his people, he has made his latter Will and Testament once and again, and
left in legacy to all that believe in him, all things which belong to
righteousness and salvation; and these benefits, in an acceptable time, he
effectually applies and puts them in possession thereof. Of which gifts, we
shall name chi^fly three: the first is regeneration, or turning of the man
toward himself; the second is the gift of saving faith; the third is
perseverance. In which three gifts, the patrons and magnifiers of the power of
man's freewill, do what in them lies to obscure the glory of Gods free grace,
by glorying that without the special grace of God they can convert themselves
or not, as they please, so that when God intends their conversion, and uses
all means for their conversion, they are able to resist all his gracious
operation, and make void his purpose and endeavor. But this covenant of
Redemption, past between the Father and the Son, Mediator and Redeemer, does
decide the question and give them the lie: for, only they whom God did
foreknow, did he predestinat to be conform to the image of His Son -- and whom
he did predestinat, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8. 28.

Concerning these three gifts.
IT is agreed between God and Christ, that the elect shall be converted
invincibly and infallibly, and that saving faith shall be bestowed on them, and
that they shall persevere in the obedience of faith so, as they shall not
totally and finally fall away from Gods grace.

It is promised to Christ, Psalm. 110. 3. that in the day of His power, His
people shall be willing; for, albeit the native corruption of their will,
opposes it self and resists the holy Spirit, when he is using the means to
convert them. yet in an acceptable time, the invincible power of Gods free
grace toward them, so takes away all actual resistance, that the man,
unwilling of himself, is made most freely and heartily willing to be reconciled
to God: for, God can both preserve the natural liberty of the will, and take
from it that crookedness and frowardness that is in it; he can infuse and
creat in the man a right spirit, and new habits of grace, and can bring forth
these habits unto exercise, making the redeemed man not only able to will, but
also actually to will and to do what is pleasant to him, Philip. 2. 13. and,
Ephesians. 2. 8. we are taught, that faith is not of our selves, it is the gift of
God; not of works, least any man should boast. And this gift of saving faith,
is bestowed only on the elect; and therefore it is called the faith of the
elect, Tit. 1. 1. and only they believe in Jesus Christ, that are ordained unto
eternal life, Acts 13. 48. yea, every one comes to Christ, who is given to
him of the Father, Ioh. 6. 37. and no man comes to Christ, save he whom the
Father draws, Ioh. 6. 44. but they that are not redeemed, do not come to
Christ for righteousness and life, Ioh. 10. 26. ye believe not, says Christ
to some Jews, because ye are not of my sheep, My sheep hear My voice and I know
them, and they follow Me.

As for perseverance, the Father promises to the Son, that the work of grace
shall be firm in all the redeemed ones, or in his elect seed, Isa. 59. 21. as
for Me (says the Lord to Christ) this is my covenant with them, my spirit that
is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out
of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy
seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. And, Jer. 32. 40. I
will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from
them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me.

And a special command is given unto Christ, for preserving all unto eternal
life who come unto him, Ioh. 6. 39. this is the Fathers will, which has sent
me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise
it up at the last day: which Christ undertakes, that he will faithfully
perform, Ioh. 10. 28. while he says, I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand, etc. But,
that we insist not too long in this argument (whereof the Orthodox divines have
written abundantly in their disputations against the foresaid error) because
the adversaries take their pretended arguments from the instability of men's
will, in the matter of perseverance, and from the freedom and power of man's
changeable will in the matter of conversion and saving faith, and from the manner
of Gods speaking to the mixed multitude of both called and not chosen, and to
them that are both called and chosen, we shall content our selves for clearing
this covenant betwixt the Father and the Son, Mediator and Redeemer, to make
the matter fast concerning the elect, founding their conversion, faith,
repentance, perseverance, and salvation, upon the unchangeable covenant of
Redemption, fixed upon the settled agreement between God, and God the Son
Mediator and Redeemer, as shall be proven from five places of Scripture.

The first proof, is from verse. 13. of Isa. 52. to the end of Chap. 53.
THe first place is Isa. 52. verse. 13. and forward to the end of chapter 53.
where we have, first, the two parties contracters, God the Father, and Christ;
for, the Father brings forth his confederat Son to be incarnat by covenant, his
servant, whom he imployes in the whole work of Redemption, as the meritorious
cause and accomplisher of it; behold My servant, says God the Father by his
Spirit, speaking by the Prophet, Chap. 52. 13. Next, both parties are sure of
the event of the paction, and of the accomplishing of the whole work
gloriously, behold, (says he) My servant shall deal prudently and
prosperously, He shall be exalted and extolled and be very high, verse. 13.
Thirdly, he tells the proper price, which Christ the Son shall pay for the
Redemption of his people, agreed upon by paction, to wit, the exinanition and
humbling of the Son incarnat unto the ignominious death of the cross, that His
visage shall be marred more then any man, and His form more then the sons of
men, verse. 14. and more particularly, Chap. 53. 2. He has no form nor
comeliness, and when we shall see Him, there is no beauty that we should
desire Him, He is despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief, etc. verse. 2. 3. He was wounded for our transgressions,
verse. 5. He shall make his Soul an offering for sin, verse. 10.

Fourthly, Christ the Son of God incarnat, is assured and confirmed of the
sweet fruit of his passion in the conversion of many nations, whom he should
sprinkle with the blood of the covenant and sanctify by the water of His holy
Spirit, Chap. 52. 15. He shall sprinkle many nations, etc.

Fifthly, God and Christ are agreed and well pleased in the conversion of so
many as are elected, and given to Christ, to have in Him the right of adoption,
Chap. 53. 10. He shall see his seed, that is, He shall regenerat the elect, and
make them His children, and see them so, to His satisfaction.

Sixthly, no meritorious nor impulsive cause is found in the persons redeemed,
for which the punishment due to them should be transferred upon the Mediator
Christ our Redeemer; for, they should be found in themselves but despisers of
Christ, because of His sufferings, Chap. 53. 4. Surely he has born our griefs,
and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and
afflicted.

Seventhly, no sin nor meritorious cause of punishment is found in Christ the
Redeemer, for which He should be smitten, Chap. 53. 5. 9. He was wounded for
our transgressions -- he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his
mouth.

Eigthly, peace and reconciliation and healing of our sinful and miserable
sicknesses, and deliverance from wrath, are purchased by the price of His
blood, Chap. 53. 5. the chastisment of our peace, was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed.

Ninthly, these sufferings Christ did not endure unwittingly, or unwillingly,
but by consent, by covenant deliberatly, Chap. 53. 7. He was oppressed, and he
was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before his shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth.

Tenthly, the cause of this covenant, whereby the price is called for an
yielded unto, and paid, is the only free grace of God and His good pleasure,
Chap. 53. 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, He has put him to grief.

Eleventhly, It is agreed between the Father and the Son, that our sins should
be imputed unto Him, and His righteousness imputed unto us, and that the
redeemed should believe in him and so be justified, Chap. 53. 11. he shall see
of the travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied, by his knowledge, or faith
in Him, shall My righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their
iniquities.

Twelfthly, It is agreed between the parties, that for whom Christ should lay
down His life, He should stand intercessour also, for bringing unto them all
the purchased graces and blessings, Chap. 53. 11. he bare the sins of many, and
made intercession for the transgressors: the rest of the world beside the
elect, He interceeded not for, Ioh. 17. 9. 10.

Hence it follows, that God and Christ did not bargain for the Redemption of
all and every man; no not for the Redemption, conversion and salvation of all
and every man to whom the Gospel was to be preached: for, many were to be
called, who were not chosen, to whom the gift of saving faith was not to be
given, nor the power of God to salvation was never to be revealed; and this is
the observation which the Evangelist makes upon the 1. of Isa. 53. Ioh. 12. 37.
etc. But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not
on him, that the saying of the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled which he
spoke, Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? therefore they could not believe, because Isaiah said again, (Isa. 6.
9. 10.) he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, etc.

Secondly, it follows hence, that election and Redemption were not for the
foreseen faith or works of the elect redeemed, but of the mere grace and
goodwill of God, and all done for them and in them, contrair to their
deservings: for, it is said, Isa. 53. 6. all we, like sheep have gone astray,
and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.

Thirdly, it follows hence, that it was agreed upon, that saving grace and
conversion and sanctification should infallibly and invincibly come to pass
and be given to the redeemed, Isa. 52. 13. Behold, My servant shall deal
prudently and prosperously; and, verse. 15. be shall sprinkle many nations; and,
Isa. 53. 11. by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many.

Fourthly, hence it follows, that the agreement is past for their final
perseverance and full salvation: for, Isa. 53. 5. with his stripes we are
healed: now our healing, is our full salvation from our sin and misery, or our
deadly sicknesses. And, Isa. 53. 10. the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand: the pleasure of the Lord is partly our sanctification, 1 These. 4. 3.
partly, our salvation and glorification, Joh. 6. 39. this is the Fathers will
which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing;
but should raise it up again at the last day. And to this purpose powerfully
does his intercession serve, from which the Apostle concludes, that believers
shall be perfectly saved, Heb. 7. 25. wherefore he is able also to save to the
uttermost, them that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them.

The second proof is from Isa. 59. 20. 21.
THe second place is from Isa. 59. 20. 21. where, first, we have the parties
agreeing pointed at: the Lord Jehovah says and of the Redeemer He says, that
He shall come to Zion as Redeemer. Next, we have the kind of agreement between
the parties, God on the one hand, and the Redeemer with the redeemed, for whom
and in whose name he makes the agreement; this is my Covenant with them, but
first with Christ, as the words following do show. Thirdly, we have the party
redeemed, Zion and Jacob that turn from transgression, which is the mark of
true believers in Christ and of the elect, for whom this grace is appointed, as
Romans 11. 7. Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for, but the
election have obtained it, and the rest were blinded. And, Romans 11. 26. all
this Israel shall be saved, as it is written. Fourthly, we have the sort of
their delivery, which shall be not only by price paying, but also by powerful
and effectual working, as the original imports, Romans 11* 26, and, Isa. 59.
20. Fifthly, the benefits bestowed upon the elect, are comprehended under the
designation of the redeemed; they are to be turned from their iniquity by
effectual conversion, by granting them faith in Christ, repentance and
reconciliation. Sixthly, it is showed how these graces shall be brought to
pass, to wit, by application thereof by the word and Spirit of Christ; from
which, sanctification, salvation, and the perpetuation of all graces unto
salvation, do flow and follow on them; My Spirit that is in thee, says the
Lord to the Redeemer incarnat, and My word which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, etc.

These articles of the covenant of Redemption make expressly, first, against
universal Redemption of all and every man: because Christ, as is showed
before, makes his bargain for the elect, and leaves the rest in blindness, and
is a Redeemer of none but of these to whom He is a deliverer actually, from
whom He turns away iniquity and ungodliness; which benefits befall none, but
the elect and the redeemed.

Next, they make against election for faith and foreseen works, because when
Christ comes to call-in the Jews. He finds nothing commendable in them but
impiety and transgression and defection, and whatsoever might provoke Him to
reject them; they are turned from transgression.

Thirdly, they make against a mere possible and contingent conversion: for,
invincible grace is promised here; for, the word and the Spirit of Christ shall
take up a dwelling in them, and not depart from them.

Fourthly, they make against the doctrine of the Aposlasie of the saints, and
uncertainty of their perseverance, because here it is promised to Christ, that
from the heart and mouth of His seed, the word and Spirit of Christ shall never
depart.

The third proof is from, Joh. 6. 37. etc.
THe third place is, Ioh. 6. from, v. 37. to 45. where, first, is set down the
party contracters in the Covenant of redemption; for, the Elect are given over
into the hand of Christ by the Father; All that the Father gives to me, comes
to me. v. 37.

Secondly, upon the Fathers giving of the Elect unto Christ follows, in due
time, the conversion and saving faith of the redeemed; All that the Father
gives me, comes to me, says Christ.

Thirdly the redeemed are committed unto Christ, as to their leading on,
preservation and perfecting of their salvation; This is the Fathers will which
has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but
should raise it up again at the last day.

Fourthly, it is agreed by what means the faith of the redeemed shall be formed
in them, which are, the revealed sight of Christ the Son of God in the Word;
the powerful drawing of the illuminat soul unto Christ, which powerful
draught overcomes all opposition and resistance, because it is omnipotent and
invincible: for, no man comes to Christ, but he whom the Father draws, v.
44. and that by making them savingly, and in a lively manner see the Son and
believe on him. v. 40.

Hence follows, 1. that it is false Doctrine to teach, that there is an
universal redemption unto life of all and every man; because not all, but only
some are given, and made to come to Christ; the rest that are not given, come
not.

Secondly, it follows, that Election is of mere free grace; because men come
not unto Christ that they may be given, but they are given unto Christ, that
they may be brought and come unto him.

Thirdly, by this agreement, the powerful conversion of the redeemed and their
powerful preservation unto eternal life, is as certain as the power, and
constancy, and obedience of Christ unto the Father, is firm and certain; This
is the will of him that sent me, that of what he has given me, I should lose
nothing, but raise it up at the last day, ver. 39.

The fourth proof is, Joh. 10. 14.
THe fourth place is, Ioh. 10. from v. 14. to v. 30. where we see, that the
Lord Jesus, the true Pastor of Israel, before he was incarnat, Ps. 23.
continues in that same office now, being incarnat, and gives his people to
understand this, when he says, I am the good sheepherd.

Secondly, the care and custody of all the redeemed, both converted and
unconverted, was put upon Christ, v. 14. 16. I know my sheep, and am known of
mine; and other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, them also I must
bring in, and they shall hear my voice.

Thirdly, the price of their redemption is clearly agreed upon, v. 15. As the
Father knows me, even so know I the Father; and I lay down my life for my sheep.

Fourthly, the Father accepts the price, and is satisfied and well pleased with
it, v. 17. 18. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life,
that I may take it up again. etc.

Fifthly, all the redeemed are infallibly converted, but they that are not
redeemed are not converted, v. 27, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them and
they follow me; and, v. 26. but ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep.

Sixthly, albeit the redeemed and converted shall not want enemies, who shall
go about to mar their perseverance and salvation, yet shall they not prevail,
v. 28. I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluck them out of my hand.

Hence follows, first, that the doctrine of universal redemption of all and
every man unto life is false; because only the redemption of the elect sheep is
agreed upon, for whom he lays down his life, v. 15. and the rest are not
redeemed nor ordained to life, for these he speaks to, v. 26. they were not of
his sheep, but remained unbelievers.

Secondly, it follows, that the election of men is not for faith or works
foreseen, but on the contrary, faith is ordained to be given unto the
redeemed, because they are elected and given over unto Christ to convert and
save them, v* 16. other sheep I have, and them I must bring in, and they shall
hear my voice.

Thirdly, it follows, that the conversion of the Elect does not depend on
their will, but upon Christ's undertaking to make them believe and upon His
omnipotency, verse. 16. other sheep I have, and them I must bring in and they
shall hear my voice.

Fourthly, it follows, that albeit the redeemed believers be in themselves
wirlesse as sheep, and weak, and ready to be destroyed, and compassed about
with many enemies as sheep among wolves, yet because of the omnipotency of the
Father and of the Son, that have taken the care and custody of them, they shall
persevere, and it is impossible they should perish or not persevere, Ioh. 10.
28. 29. I give them eternal life; and they shall never perish, and none can
take them out of My Fathers band.

The fifth proof.
THe fifth place is, Psa 40. explicat by the Apostle, Heb. 10. 5. 6. 7. where,
first, the Spirit of God expounds the covenant whereof we are, speaking, and
brings in the parties, God and Christ as speaking one to another, and as it
were, in our sight and audience, repeating the terms thereof. The price of
Redemption is first spoken of, for expiation of sin, not to be forgiven without
blood, without better blood then the blood of beasts, Heb. 10. 4.

Secondly, all satisfactions by men, and whatsoever price can be paid by mere
man* are rejected; sacrifice and ob^^tion thou would not, verse* 5.

Thirdly, nothing except only the incarnation of the Son the Mediator, His
obedience and suffering to the death, could satisfy divine Justice; But a body
have thou prepared Me, verse. 5.

Fourthly, the Mediator Christ, offers Himself pledge and Surety of His own
accord, and takes the condition; then said I, lo, I come, to wit, as Surety to
pay the ransom and to do thy will, Heb. 10. 7.

Fifthly, Christ the Surety; not only condescends upon the price, but also upon
the persons to be redeemed, and their sanctification; by which will we are
sanctified, by the offering of the body of Christ once for all: and this price
is now actually paid, Heb. 10. 10.

Sixthly, the price being paid, the Mediator goes about the application of
the purchased benefits, by His intercession, Heb. 10. 12. 13. this man after he
had offered one sacrifice for sin for ever, sat down on the right hand of God
from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.

Hence follows, first, that there is no universal Redemption of all and
every man unto life, because by one offering he has perfected for ever, them
that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. therefore they were never redeemed, who are
never sanctified; and only they are perfected, who are redeemed.

Secondly, it follows, that not for any thing in man, neither foreseen faith
or works, are men elected and redeemed, because all is rejected that mere man
can do, that the mere grace of God may appear in Christ's undertaking for men of
His own accord; Sacrifice and oblation thou would not, then said I, behold^
I come, Heb. 10. 5. 7.

Thirdly, by Christ's death, purchase is made of the infallible conversion and
sanctification of the redeemed, and of their perseverance unto perfection. By
one offering of Christ He has perfected for ever them that are sanctified,
Heb. 10. 14. and therefore the redeemed cannot but be converted, cannot but be
sanctified, cannot but persevere unto perfection, and that for ever, Heb. 10,
12, 13, 14.

The use of this article is, first, that all these who hear the Gospel, and
have in any sort embraced it, should in the acknowledgement of their natural
corruption and perverse wickedness, humble themselves before God, and pray
for, and expect grace according to the promises offered in the Gospel.

Secondly, that they who are already sensible of their sins and ill deservings,
may not run away or be discouraged, but so much the rather, fl^e to Christ in
whom relief from sin and misery is promised to such.

Thirdly, that they who have fixed their eye on the Son, resolving to cleave
unto him, should acknowledge the powerful draught of Gods almighty hand, who
has caused them to come to Christ, and should upon the begun work of grace,
conceive lively hope of salvation, and study to purify their souls in this
hope.

Fourthly, that they who find the instability and inconstancy of their own
free will, and have experience of their own heart, deceiving them frequently,
after they have engaged themselves by promises and vows to take bett^r heed to
their ways, should not cast away their confidence in Christ because of their
own infirmity, but that they should lean less to their own strength, and lay
hold on Christ's power, fidelity and constancy so much the more, for to help the
weak at such a dead lift. The Apostle, looking to Christ's engagement in the
covenant, for those who in any measure of sincerity adhere unto him, has said,
1 Cor. 1. 8. 9. Christ shall confirm you unto the end, that ye may be
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye
are called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Fifthly, let us not take the guiding of our own freewill, but let so many as
are fled to Christ, give him the glory of the incli^ing of our heart to his
testimonies, and to his obedience in any measure, and know that every
spiritual motion flows from his purchase, and application of what is
bestowed on us. And when we find his hand withdrawing, and our heart inclining
to what is not right, let us run to him to right it, in hope to be helped by
his grace to fight against whatsoever adversary of our salvation.

The fourth article.
AS to the fourth article of the covenant of Redemption, it concerns the
means and manner how the elect shall be called forth from the perishing world,
and be effectually called and turned unto God, so as the world among whom the
elect do live, shall not have cause of stumbling justly: for, he has taken a
most wise course so to execute the decree of election and Redemption, as he
shall be sure to bring in his own to himself, and not open up his counsel in
particular to the discouraging of any, as is told by the father, Isa. 52. 13.
My servant shall deal prudently and prosper. The chief mean appointed, is the
preaching of the Gospel to all nations, commanding all men, where the Gospel is
by Gods providence preached, to repent and believe in the Name of Jesus Christ,
and to love one another as he has commanded them, Acts 17. 30. and, 1 Ioh. 3.
23. and they who refuse to obey are without excuse.

Another mean is, the bringing of so many as profess their acceptance of the
offer of grace by Christ Jesus, them and their children into the bond of an
express solemn covenant, that they shall submit themselves to the doctrine and
government of Christ, and teach their children so to do, as Abraham the father
of believers did, Genesis 18. 19. Matthew. 28. 19. 20. make disciples of all
nations, or, make all nations disciples to Me.

A third mean is, the sealing of the covenant by the Sacrament of baptism,
Matthew. 28. 19. 20. make all nations disciples to Me, baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

A fourth mean is, the gathering them into all lawful and possible communion
with others his disciples, that by their Church Fellowship one with another,
they may be edified under their officers, appointed in Christ's Testament to
feed, govern and lead them on in the obedience of all the commands which Christ
has commanded his people in his Testament: by which means he goes about his
work, and does call effectually, sanctify and save, his own redeemed ones,
leaving all others without excuse.

Concerning all these and other means and manner also of executing his decree,
it is agreed upon between the Father and His Son Christ, as His holy Spirit
has revealed it to us in Scripture. All which may be taken up in two heads;
the one is the agreement about the doctrine, and directions given to His
Church; the other is about actions, operations, and all effects to be brought
about for making his word good.

Concerning his doctrine, Christ says, Ioh. 12. 49. 50. I have not spoken of
my self, but the Father who has sent me, he gave me a commandment what I
should say, and what I should speak, and I know, that his commandment is life
everlasting, whatsoever I speak therefore, eve^^ as the Father said unto me, so
I speak.

Concerning actions and operations, and the executiou of the decrees, it is
agreed also between the Father and the Son, Ioh. 8. 16. If I judge, my
judgment is true* for, I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me; and,
verse. 29. He that sent me, is with me, the Father has not left me alone: for,
I do always these things that please him; and Joh. 6. 38. I came down from
heaven, not to do my own will (without the consent of the Father) but the will
of him that sent me.

In a word* the consent and agreement of the Father and the Son Jesus Christ
our Lord, is such, that the Son ^oth nothing by his Spirit, but that which the
Father ^oth work by the same Spirit from the beginning of the world, Ioh. 5.
17. My Father works hitherto and I work; and, Col. 1. 16. for by Christ were
all things created that ^re in heaven and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, ^hether they be throns or dominions, or principalities, or (...)
(...) created by him and for him. He is alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending, the first efficient, and the last end of all things. Rev. 1. 8. because
for the glory of Christ, the creation, the covenant of works and the covenant
of grace, were made, and had, and shall have their full execution, all for the
glory of God in Christ, by whom all things were made and do subsist.

CHAP. V.
Of the Covenant of works.
WE have spoken of the first divine covenant, wherein God, and God incarnat are
the parties; it follows to speak of the next divine covenant, to wit, the
covenant of works between God and man, Adam and his posterity, made in man's
integrity. In which covenant, God is only the one party of the covenant, and
man created with all natural perfections, is the other party. In this
covenant, man's continuing in a happy life, is promised, upon condition of
perfect personal obedience, to be done by him out of his own natural strength
bestowed upon him, as the Apostle teaches us, Gal. 3. 12. the Law is not of
faith, but the man who shall do these things shall live by them. And unto this
law or covenant of works, is added a threatening of death in case man should
transgress: the sense whereof is ^old by the Apostle, Gal. 3. 10. cursed is
every one who does not abide in all things, that are written in the book of the
Law to do them.

The difference between the law, and the Covenant of works.
THe word Law, is sometime taken for the matter or substance of the law of
nature, written in the hearts of our first Parents by creation; the work of
which law, is to be found in the hearts of their posterity unto this day. And
in this sense the word Law, is taken by the Apostle, Romans 2. 15. the Gentiles
(says he) show the wrok of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness, etc. Sometime the word, is taken for the formal
covenant of works, as Gal. 3. 10. as many as are of the works of the Law, that
is, under the covenant of works, are under the curse; for, it is written,
cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written, in the
book of the law, to do them.

2. The law as it is taken for the covenant of works, differs from the law of
nature, written by creation in the hearts of our first Parents; first, because
the law of nature, written in the heart of man, in order both of nature, and
time, went before the covenant made for keeping that law; because the covenant
for keeping that law, was not made till after man's creation, and after his
bringing into the garden to dress it and to keep it, Genesis 2. 16. 17.

Secondly, God by virtue of the law written in man^ heart, did not obliedge
Himself to perpetuat man's happy life: for, albeit man had kept that law most
acuratly, God was free to dispose of Him as he saw fit before he made the
covenant with him; But so soon as he made the covenant, he obliged himself to
preserve him in a happy life, so long as he should go on in obedience to his
law and commands, according to the tennor of the covenant, do this and live.

Thirdly, death was the natural wages and merit of sin, albeit there had no
covenant been made at all: for, sin against God, deserves, of its own nature,
death of soul and body, by the rule of simple justice, whether the sinner had
consented to the punishment or not. But man by entering in the covenant
actually gave a formal voluntary consent, that death should sease upon him, if
he should sin, as Evah bears witness in her conference with the serpent,
while she does repeat the condition put upon the breaking of the particular
command given by God, and accepted by man, Genesis 3. 3.

Fourthly, when the covenant of works is abolished so far, as it can neither
justify, nor condemn the man that is ^led to Christ, and entered in another
posterior covenant of grace, the natural obligation of the man slandeth still,
for taking direction from, and giving obedience to, the law; for, it remains
still the rule of a man's walking, and it is impossible that a mere man should
be exeemed from the authority of God over him, and from subjection due by
nature to his Creator: for upon this account, that man is a reasonable
creature, understanding Gods will about his behavior toward God, he is always
bound for ever to love God with all his mind, heart and strength, and his
neighbor as himself. Neither can the natural merit of sin be taken away, nor
death deserved be eshewed but by forgiveness of it for Christ's merits.

The covenant then was superadded unto the law in the deep wisdom of God: for,
this way of dealing with man by a Covenant, was, of its own nature, a most fit
mean unto man's felicity, and unto the glory of God.

How the Covenant of God with man was a mean to man's felicity.
THe Covenanting of God with man, tended of its own nature to man's good and
happiness.

First, because a singular respect and honor was put upon man, when he was
made a confederat friend of God: for, if it be an honor to a mean and poor man
to be joined with a King or Prince in a formal bond of mutual friendship, how
much greater honor is it unto man, to be joined in a bond of mutual love and
friendship with God?

Secondly, before the making of the Covenant man had no promise made to him by
God, but so soon as the Covenant was made, the Lord did freely obliege himself
to give, and made to man a right to ask, and to expect of God, with a ground of
certainty, to obtain of him such things, as without promise (...) he could not
ask, or at least, he could not certainly expect to have granted unto him.

Thirdly, before the making of the Covenant, nothing hindered the Lord, if he
had pleased, to command man to return to dust whereof he was; but after the
Covenant, it pleased God, by his own free promise, to obliege himself to
perpetuat man's happiness wherein he was made, so long as he should go on in
obedience.

Fourthly, by the making of the Covenant, a door was opened, and a fair entry
to a higher degree of felicity then he possessed by his creation: for, when a
natural life and earthly felicity was given to Adam to enjoy upon the earth,
God, by the Covenant, made paction with him upon condition of perfect
obedience, to give him a life and felicity supernatural, opposite unto death
bodily and spiritual, which was threatened unto him if he should transgress the
command.

Fifthly, Adam, by the Covenant, had a sort of help to make him keep the Law
written in his heart more carefully and cautiously, and a prop to make him
stand more fixed: for, on the one hand, he was advertised and forewarned of the
danger of sinning, that he might beware to offend God; and on the other hand,
he was encouraged and allowed to serve God more cheerfully, and to perform due
obedience to God the more diligently: for, in the Covenant, the greatest reward
that could be thought upon was set before him, and promised unto him; to wit,
eternal life upon his obedience and the greatest punishment threatened if he
should dis-obey; both which served greatly to move him to be constant in his
obedience.

How Gods covenanting with man served for Gods glory.
IN Gods covenanting with man, his glory did notably shine and show forth it
self to man. First, the goodness and bounty of God, did manifest it self
therein: for, in making a Covenant with man, the Lord demitted himself, and in
a manner humbled himself to deal with man for the standing of mutual friendship
between himself and man for ever: and when we consider this, as the Psalmist
says, Ps. 8. 4. What is man that thou are mindful of him? and the Son of man
that thou visitest him? So may we say, what is man? or the Son of man that thou
should enter in covenant with him?

Secondly, by covenanting with man, God did show his wonderful moderation:
for, God is sovereign Monarch and absolute Emperor over his own creature, to
make of it what he pleases; yet, in covenanting with man, he did sweetly
temper his supreamacy, seeking, as it were, to reign with man's consent. And
when because of his sovereign Authority and absolute Right and Interest, he
might have put upon man harder commands and conditions of the Covenant, and
these also altogether righteous and just, he choosed to use such moderation,
that he would require nothing of man, except that which man should, and behoved
in reason judge both a just and an easy yoke, and in accepting the condition
of the Covenant, acknowledge it to be such.

Thirdly, the Lord declared his wisdom in covenanting with man, because when he
had made man a reasonable creature, he choosed to draw forth a free and
voluntary service, most suitable to his reasonable nature, and that in a most
sweet way; to wit, not only by giving unto man a most equitable Law, but also
by setting before the man, by way of paction, the highest reward that he could
be capable of, even life everlasting.

Fourthly, in covenanting with man, God did most wisely and holily have a
respect to the glory of his own, both sovereignty and holiness; because after
he had made man by nature good and holy (albeit mutable and subject to change,
if the man pleased to essay another way) he took course to help the mutability
of his free will, not only by setting a reward of obedience before him, but
also by a threatniug of punishment, if he should transgress, and so on the one
hand and the other to hedge him in, and guard him against all temptation unto
sin, that neither he should be forced by any external power to sin, nor by any
counsel or suggestion or moral swasion (whereunto only man was exposed in the
trial of his obedience) should have so strong motives to draw him to
disobedience, as the promise of God and the threatening should have force in all
reason, to keep him fast to his due and loyal obedience. Thus was Adam
forewarned and fore-armed against whatsoever, without himself, might assault
him: for, what reward for disobedience could be offered unto him, so great as
the favor of God and everlasting life in the fellowship of God promised to
him, if he continued fast in obedience? and what terror could be so great to
afright and skar him from sin, as the threatening of death bodily and spiritual,
if he transgressed?

Quest. But the profane curiosity of man dares to ask a reason, why God did
not make man both good by nature and immutably good also?

Ans. It is indeed proud curiosity to enquire for reasons of God's holy will,
which has its own most sufficient reason in its self, and may satisfy all his
subjects, who will not devilishly prefer their own wisdom and counsel to his:
But we shall content our selves soberly to answer the question thus; To be both
originally, or by nature good, and unchangeably good also, beseems God
himself only, as his property and prerogative, which it became his Majesty to
reserve to himself as the fountain of all goodness, and not to communicate this
glory either to Man or Angel in their creation, that the due distance between
God and the natural perfections of the creature, should not only be provided
for, but made manifest to the creature also. It Is true, Christ's humane nature,
was so sanctified in his conception, that there was no possibility that sin
should be in it; but let us consider, that Christ's person which did assume the
humane nature into personal union with his Godhead, is not a creature; and to
assume the humane nature into a personal union with his divine nature, is the
proper privilege of God over all, blessed for ever. And what the humane nature
of Christ has of holiness, it has it not of it self, but of grace from the
second person of the Godhead, who did assume it. And the Angels that stood
when the mutability of angelical nature was manifested in the fall of many of
them, did stand by the grace of free confirmation of them in their station.

Fifthly, God in covenanting with man, made way for the demonstration of his
most holy Justice in the execution of punishment, which was not only the
natural wages and deserved reward of sin, but also by paction and covenant
appointed by mutual consent of parties, if man, so much obliged to God, should
break so equitable and easy a command, as was given to try him by, being
forewarned of his danger.

Sixthly, this way of covenanting with man, was a most holy and fit mean to
manifest the vanity and instability of the most perfect creature, except in the
exercise of all its abilities and habits, it do acknowledge God, and in every
thing less and more, constantly employ him, and depend upon him.

Last of all, this was a most holy mean to bring forth to light the grace and
mercy of God in Christ, providing a remedy for fallen man before he fell, and
to open up the decree and covenant of Redemption in due time to be brought
about by Christ* to the glory of God in Christ, by whom, and for whom all
things were made, Col. 1. 16.

Quest. Had this Covenant of works no Mediator, no Surety engaged for Adam and
all his posterity?

Ans. No Mediator was in this Covenant; for, the party on the one hand, was
God, and on the other hand was Adam and Eve our common parents, standing upon
the ground of their natural abilities, representing and comprehending all their
natural offspring; and according to the condition of the Covenant in their own
name and name of their posterity, promising obedience, and receiving the
condition of life if they continued, and of death in case they failed, Genesis 2.
17. In whose sin we all have sinned, Romans 5. 12.

Now, the necessity of a Mediator, did not appear in this Covenant so long as
it stood, that afterward in the making of another Covenant it might more
timously appear. First, because man, being created holy according to the image
of God, was the friend of God while he had not sinned; and again his service,
while he stood in obedience, was very pleasant and acceptable to God, because
so long freely and sincerely he served God according to the command and rule
written in his heart.

Quest. After that his Covenant was broken, was it not abolished altogether,
seeing it could not now be any longer perfectly obeyed, nor save us who are
sinners?

Ans. Albeit this Covenant, being broken on man's part, did become weak and
utterly unable to produce Justification by works, or eternal life to us, by our
inherent righteousness; yet, on Gods part, the bond of this Covenant, does
stand firm and strong against all men by nature for their condemnation, who are
not reconciled to God: Wherefore all that are not renewed and made friends with
God by another Covenant of faith in God incarnat (the seed of the woman, who
destroys the work of the devil) do lie bound under the bond of this Covenant
of works, as Christ testifies, Ioh. 3. 18. He that believes on me, is not
condemned; but he that believes not, is condemned already; to wit, by the
force of the Covenant of works violated by them, and are nor delivered from the
curse by Christ the Son of God, till they fly to him: And this does the Apostle
confess, speaking of himself and other elect Jews before their regeneration,
Ephesians. 2. 3. We also were children of wrath. even as others: for, whosoever is
not reconciled to God by Christ, against him does the sentence of the Law, and
curse for violation of the Covenant, stand in force; for, sinning against the
Covenant, does not loose the man from the Covenant, neither from the obligation
to obey it, nor from the punishment of breaking it.

Obj. But seeing a man is utterly unable to obey the Law, or to keep that
Covenant, does not his utter inability excuse him and dissolve the bond?

Ans. No ways: Because that inability is the fruit of our sin, and is drawn on
by our selves; nor does God lose his right to crave the debt due to him,
because the Bankrupt is not able to pay what he owes: For, even among men,
such as have misspent their patrimony, are not absolved of their debt because
they are not able to pay the debt; yea, even the children of the mis-spender of
his goods, do stand debtors so long as the debt is neither paid nor forgiven.

The Covenant of works therefore being broken, the obligation stands, to make
us give obedience so much the more in time to come, and because of the curse
pronounced for the breaking of the Covenant in time past, the obligation to
under-lye the punishment for bygone sins does stand; and so both the
obligation to underlye the punishment, and the obligation to give obedience, do
stand together, while a man is not absolved from the Covenant of works, by
entering in a new Covenant, whereby the debt is paid and the sinner absolved.

Whosoever then conceive, that they may be justified from bygone sins by their
own obedience in time to come, either by way of doing or of suffering, they but
deceive themselves, dreaming they can do impossibilities; for, the punishment
to be suffered for sin by the sinner, is the curse-everlasting of soul and
body, seeing a mere creature cannot for ever satisfy for his rebellion, how
long soever we presuppose his duration under suffering. And for obedience by
way of doing perfectly what the Law does crave, it is utterly impossible,
because we are carnal, sold under sin, and cannot satisfy the Law; and because
we cannot satisfy the Law, the Law becomes weak and unable to justify and
save us, Romans 8. 3.

How the Covenant of works may be called the Covenant of nature.
ALbeit the Law written by nature in men's heart, differs from the Covenant
for performance of the Law, as has been shown before; yet, the Covenant of
works made with Adam before he fell, tying him to keep that Law, may be called
the Covenant of nature.

First, because the Covenant of works is grounded upon the Law of nature, and
does exact nothing of man, save that which God might require of him according
to the Law of nature.

Secondly, because when the Covenant of works was made with Adam, it was made
with all his natural posterity, which was to spring of him by natural
generation; and so the obligation thereof did pass upon all his natural
posterity, by the Law of nature, which makes the child begotten to bear the
image of the begetters.

Thirdly, that the Covenant of works may justly be called the Covenant of
nature, appears by the force of the conscience being wakened from its sleepy
security; for, it challenges for sin according to that Covenant, and
pronounces the sentence of God's wrath against the sinner: For, the conscience
does acknowledge the Judgment of God, that they which commit such things, are
worthy of death, Romans 1. 32.

Fourthly, because the conscience naturally inclines a man to seek
justification by his own works, if it can any way find pretense for it, as we
may see in the Pharisee, who in his speech to God, does judge himself a holy
man, because he is not amongst the worst of men, and has many good works above
others to reckon forth and lay before God, Luke 18. 11.

Fifthly, the inclination of man's heart, to expect a reward of every good work
he does, whether it be in some part real, or only apparently such, testifies
so much, Judge. 17. 13. Micah so reasons, Now know I the Lord will do me good,
seeing I have a Levit to my Priest. And how miserably the conscience may be
deluded in this case, when men do dote upon their own well-deserving, appears
in Leah: for, Genesis 30. 18. Leah says, God has given me my hire, because I
have given my maiden to my husband.

Sixthly, this point is also made manifest by the natural ignorance of
righteousness by faith, and affectation to be justified by works, which the
Apostle finds fault-with in the Israelits, Romans 9. 31. They sought
righteousness not by faith, but as it were by works: And, Romans 10. 3. being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own
righteousness (to wit, righteousness by works, according to the tenor of the
Covenant of works) they did not submit themselves to the righteousness of God.

Seventhly, the same course followed by Papists and other erroneous teachers,
testifies the natural inclination of men to seek righteousness by works
according to the tenor of the Covenant of works, and not by faith in Christ
Jesus, that righteousness may come by grace only: And so are some men's hearts
glued to this error, that they do transform justification by faith in
justification by one work in stead of all, as if the work of faith were the
man's righteousness, and not Christ him-himself laid hold on by faith: Not
considering, that to the man that renounceth all confidence in any work of his
own, and flies to Christ by faith, Christ is made of God unto that man wisdom
and righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Last of all, this natural inclination, even of the regenerat, to seek
righteousness by works, does prove the Covenant of works to be naturally
ingraft in all men's hearts, as appears in the Galatians, who being instructed
in the doctrine of justification by faith in Christ without the works of the
Law, did easily upon a tentation offered, look back, with likeing, to the way
of Justification by works, for which the Apostle reproves them, Gal. 4. 21.
Tell me (says he) ye that desire to be under the Law, or Covenant of works;
and ver. 9. But now after ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how
turn ye again to weak and beggarly elements, whereunto you desire again to be
in bondage?

Obj. But, the Galatians as it seems, did not reject Justification by faith,
but, did join with it Justification by the works of the Law, thinking that the
safest way was to join both together.

Ans. The inconsistency of these two ways of Justification, the Apostle
shows, Romans 11. 6. For, Justification by grace, is no more by works,
otherwise grace is no more of grace, and what Justification is by works, is no
more of grace, otherwise work is no more works. And therefore, the Apostle
makes the joining of these two ways of Justification to be nothing else but a
plain seeking of Justification by the Covenant of works, which cutteth a man
off from any benefit by Christ, Gal. 5. 2. and whosoever seeks to be
justified by the Law^ or Covenant of works, is fallen from grace, ver. 4.

For further clearing this matter, we may distinguish two sorts of the Covenant
of works: The one is true, genuine, and of God's institution, which God made
with all men in Adam, for perfect obedience unto God's Law, out of man's own
natural abilities. There is another counterfeit, bastard covenant of works, of
man's own devising, which a sinner, lying in his sins (unable to do what the Law
commands, or to suffer what the Law being broken binds upon him) of his own
head devileth, upon other conditions then God has set, and will have God to
take his devised covenant in stead of perfect obedience to the Law, that so he
may be justified. Such was the covenant, which the carnal Israelits made with
God in the wilderness, and which their posterity did follow, turning the
Covenant of grace, whereunto God was calling them, into a covenant of works of
their own framing: For, the grace which was offered to them in Christ under the
vail of levitical types, figures and ceremonies, they turned into an external
service of performance only of bare and dead ceremonies, and into a ministry of
the letter and death; for they did not take up Christ to be the end of the Law
for righteousness to every one that believes in him, but did think, that both
the moral and ceremonial Law was given unto them of God, to the intent that
they should do the external works of the moral Law, so far as they could; and
when they transgressed the moral Law, they should fly to the ceremonial Law,
and make amends for their faults by satisfying for their sin by the external
sacrifice of some clean beast offered to God, or by the washing of their body,
and their clothes. Such also is the covenant, which now adays many make with
God, cutting short, with the old Pharisees, the sense of the precepts of the
Law, by extending it no further then they may keep the same, that so they may
make their own inherent righteousness the longer, and conform unto their own
clipped rule of righteousness: and this they do by denying themselves to be
guilty of original sin after baptism, and by extenuating and diminishing many
faults, as but light and venial as they call them, and by devising
satisfactions for expiating the sins of the living, by penances and
pilgrimages, and of the dead by their sufferings in their imaginary purgatory,
that so they may be justified by their works and sufferings. Such also is their
covenant, who seek justification by deceased Saints merits, hoping they may so
have absolution from sin, and obtain life eternal. And all these sorts of
covenants of men's framing, we call bastard-covenants of works, because God will
not admit any other Covenant of works then that which requires perfect
personal obedience. And therefore so many as seek to be justified by works, do
stand under the obligation of perfect personal obedience under pain of death,
and will be found not only utterly unable to do any good work, but also to be
without Christ, and to be fallen from grace, as the Apostle ( Gal. 5. 3, 4.)
does teach us.

Obj. Seeing God does abhor these bastard-covenants of works, and does well
know, that men are so far from performance of the due obedience of the Law,
that they are utterly unable before they be reconciled through faith in Christ,
to do so much as one acceptable work, as the Psalmist teaches, Psalm. 14. 1, 2,
3. Why does the Lord exact perfect obedience unto the Law from sinners? why
does he press so instantly the slaves of sin to perform the duties required in
the true Covenant of works?

Ans. The Lord justly does abhor and reject these bastard-covenants, because
they evacuat and make void both the Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace
which is by faith in Christ; and he does press all men to perform perfect
obedience to all the commands whereunto they are naturally obliged, to the end
that proud men, conceity of their own natural abilities, may find by
experience, that they are unable to perform the condition of the Covenant of
works, and may acknowledge the same, and so despair of righteousness by their
works, and be forced to fly to Christ, and to the Covenant of grace through
him, that they may be fred from that covenant; and being justified by faith in
Christ, may be enabl^d to begin new obedience to the Law in the strength of
Christ's furniture: For, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every
one that believes, Romans 10. 4* And the Law entered, that men might by the Law
see and acknowledge that the offense did abound, and then might perceive, that
the (...) ^^gr^ce by Christ, did super-abound, Romans (...) and, 1 Timothy 1. 5. The
end of the command, is (...) of a pur^ heart, and a good conscience and faith
unfamed.

This was the end of the promulgation of the Law in mount Sinai, that a
stiff-necked people trusting in their own abilities, might be made sensible of
their imperfection, by the repetition of the Law. And to this also God
super-added the external yoke of the ceremonial Law, which neither they nor
their posterity were able to bear, Acts, 15. 10. that the people perceiving
their manifold pollutions and guiltiness, wherein they were daily involved by
breaking of God's Law: might in the sense of the burden lying on them, and of
their damnable estate under it, fly to Christ the lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world, as he was, represented and offered to their sight in the
sacrifices and burnt offerings.

Of this end of pressing the Law upon proud men, we have an example, Math. 19.
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. In the conference of Christ with the young conceity
rich man, who in the opinion of his own inherent righteousness, and of his
abilities, was hudgly swelled, as if he had already for time bygone satisfied
the the whole Law, and that he was able and ready to do any good work which
could be prescribed unto him, for obtaining of eternal life; whose proud
conceit that Christ might humble and bring down, he craveth nothing but that he
would keep the commands: And when the young man denied that he had broken the
Law, he proves him guilty of gross and vile Idolatry, from this, that he put a
higher estimation on his riches than on remission of sin, and did love them
more then heaven and fellowship with God in eternal life.

In all this let it be considered, that albeit men's confidence in their works,
does displease God; yet good works do not displease him, but they are so far
pleasant unto him, that there is no moral motive which may serve to stir up in
his people, an endeavor to follow after good works, which the Lord does not
make use of; partly, by setting before them the reward if they obey; partly, by
setting punishments before their eyes if they obey not: yea, and the very
observation of external moral duties and obedience, such as may be discharged
by the unregenerat man (albeit God in relation to Justification do esteem it
polluted and vile) yet he does sometimes reward their external works by giving
them external and temporal benefits for their encouragement: for, even Ahabs
temporary humiliation the Lord so far accepted, that there-upon He took
occasion to delay to take vengeance upon him, 1 Kings, 21. 27, 28, 29. Likewise
the Lord uses to recompense the civil justice of Pagans with a temporal
reward, yea and to reward the outward diligence of every man in every lawful
occupation, with some answerable outward reward.

The very Pharisees, who for the raising to themselves a fame and higher
estimation for holiness, did take a great deal of pains, in prayers in the
streets, and Mercat-places, and other exercises of Religion, wanted not an
answerable reward; ve^ily (says Christ) they have their reward, Matthew. 6. 2.

And this course the Lord does keep, that he may encertain and foster the civil
society of men among themselves, and that His people looking on this bounty of
God, may be stirred up the more to bring forth the fruits of faith, in hope of
a merciful promised better reward of grace in the life to come, beside what
they may have in this life.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Covenant of Grace.
THe third and last covenant concerning man's eternal salvation, is the
covenant of Grace made between God and man, through Christ the Mediator.

Grace, some^imes simply and absolutely taken, is opposed to merit; and in this
sense, every good thing, which of Gods good pleasure is ordained, or promised,
or actually bestowed on the creature, presuppose innocent, is called Grace:
because it is impossible that a mere creature, can properly merit any good
thing of God: because the creature neither has nor can have, that which it
has not received, Romans 11. 35. who has first given to Him, and it shall be
recompensed to him again?

Sometime Grace is taken for every gift or good, bestowed by God upon the ill
deserver: in which sense, gists, common to elect and reprobat, are called by
the name of Grace, Romans 1. 5. Ephesians. 4. 7.

Sometime Grace is taken in opposition to the pactio^all merit of works, or to
the reward due by debt covenanted, as Romans 4. 4. To him that works, the
reward is not reckoned of grace, but of debt. In which sense, that which is
given for works, is not given of grace, Romans 11. 16. and in this sense, we take
Grace as it is opposed to the covenant of works: for, the condition of the
covenant of works, is the giving perfect obedience to the law; But the
condition of the covenant of grace, is the receiving of Christ by faith unto
righteousness and life, offered in the Gospel, without the works of the law;
which covenant, may thus be described. The covenant of grace is a contract
between God and men, procured by Christ upon these terms, that whosoever in
the sense of their own sinfulness shall receive Christ Jesus offered in the
Gospel, for righteousness and life, shall have Him and all the benefits
purchased by Him, according to the covenant of Redemption; and that God will be
his God, and the God of his children. This covenant of grace is founded upon
the covenant of Redemption, past between God and Christ, wherein it was agreed,
that all the elect given unto Christ, shall be reconciled in due time to God,
and that to this end, this grace should be preached to bring about the
reconciliation; and therefore Christ is called the Mediator of the new
covenant, Heb. 12. 22.

Of Infants interest in this Covenant.
Quest. WHat interest have infants in this covenant?

Ans. The same which they had since the first express and formal making
thereof with Abraham, to whom God promised to be his God, and the God of his
children, whose children all are, who are in Christ, Gal. 3. 27, 28, 29.

For, of the redeemed some come to age, whom God, having called by the
preaching of the Gospel, does induce and effectually move to embrace solemnly
the offered fellowship with God and his saints in Christ, and to consecrat
themselves and their children unto the service of God. There are other redeemed
ones, who die in their infancy, before they come to the use of reason, to whose
salvation God has express respect in making his covenant with their parents,
that he will not have them excluded from the blessing, when he calls their
parents to him, but in the common offer of grace and reconciliation by Christ,
he makes the promise jointly to the parents and the children; for, in one
sentence, and, as it were, with one breath, He says, I will be thy God and thy
seeds after thee, Genesis 15. 17. whereof the Apostle makes good use, Acts 2. 39.
declaring the promise to be made to the Jews and their children, and to the
called Gentiles and their children. And upon this ground Paul and Silas,
timeously did offer consolation to the Jailour, trembling and anxious what way
he should be saved, Acts 16. 31. saying, Believe in Christ Jesus, and thou
shall be saved, thou and thy house.

As for the manner how the Lord deals with the souls of infants in converting
them, the Scripture does not speak, for this lies among the secrets of God,
which does not concern us to search after, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. It should be
sufficient to us, that God in covenanting with the parents, promises to be the
God of their children. And according to this covenant the Lord complains of
their staying and offering their children unto idols, calling them His own sons
and daughters, Ezekiel. 16. 20. and upon this ground, in the second command, the
Lord promises to show mercy to the thousand generation of believing parents;
and, 1 Cor. 7. 14. the Apostle does call the children of one of the parents
believing, holy children, because of their consecration unto God by the
believing confederat parent, and in regard of Gods right and interest in them
as the children of His own family by covenant.

And Christ our Lord upon this ground, does call the children of confederat
parents, burgesses of heaven; of such is the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 19. 13,
14. and because infants are dedicat to Christ, to be taught and governed by Him
in His own way and order, they are called disciples, Acts 15. 10. as the
disputers for the circumcision of Christians children, as well as of their
parents, after the law of Moses, do make it manifest: and in the institution of
baptism, our Lord gives the privilege of the covenant unto every nation, no
less then to the Jews, that by covenant whole nations might be drawn in and
given up as disciples to His doctrine, Matthew. 28. 29. make all nations
disciples by your doctrine, baptizing them, etc. that the children with the
parents, might be partakers by baptism, of the seal of the covenant for the
righteousness of faith, no less then the children of Israelites were by
circumcision.

Of the means to draw on the making of this covenant.
OF these means we have spoken in the fourth article of the covenant of
Redemption, and need not to insist more about them then to name them.

The first mean to draw men into this blessed covenant, and to keep them in it,
is the external revelation of the will of God, for teaching men how great
their sin and misery is, and how they may be reconciled and delivered by the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and how they may testify their thankfulness
(being reconciled) for such a mercy; which grounds of saving knowledge, are
fully and faithfully set down in holy Scripture, and committed to His servants
in the ministry, who should in preaching of the Gospel, inform and persuade men
to repent and embrace the grace of Christ, and put on His sweet yoke of
obedience upon them.

The second mean is, after application of the Lords word to the hearers for
convincing them of sin in them, and righteousness in Christ, and judgment to
follow, to wit, of absolution of the believer, and of condemnation of such as
believe not, To receive into the bond of this covenant of grace, all that
appear seriously to consecrat themselves and their children to the faith and
obedience of the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, without determining whether
they be regenerat for the present or not.

The third mean, is the solemn sealing of this covenant, for righteousness of
faith and salvation through Christ, by baptizing both the parents that accept
the covenant, and their children also; and by exhortations, promises and
comminations, and all other arguments, which may more and more convince them of
their need of Christ, and duty of following Him, to fix and strengthen their
hearty purpose to cleave unto the Lord. Such as are, the Lords command to
believe in Christ and love one another, 1 Ioh. 3. 23. and His threatening, if
they believe not, Ioh. 3. 18. and, 1 Ioh. 5. 10. 11.

The fourth mean, is the gathering of these that have embraced this covenant,
into all lawful and possible Church Communion with other His disciples, and
fixing them in their several congregations, that they may be edified under
their Officers, appointed by Christ in His Testament in their most holy faith,
and obedience of all His ordinances. And for further clearing the way of Gods
bringing the visible Church of Christ into this covenant with Himself, let it
be considered.

1. Albeit of those that are come to the use of reason, with whom God does
formally and solemnly make this covenant of grace and reconciliation, many are
externally only called, and few in comparison chosen, Matthew. 20. 21. yet, it is
not the will of God, otherwise then by doctrine to separat the elect from the
rest of them that are externally called, or to make the elects name known to
the world: for, the kirk knows not, but God only knows who are His, 2 Timothy
2. 19. And therefore He has ordained means common to the elect and reprobat,
to bring both unto the external embracing of His covenant, and continuing
externally therein, and He does bestow gifts both to the one sort and to the
other, and He works in both the one sort and the other according to His own
will; But as for inward and effectual calling, or special saving graces which
do accompany salvation, and the special operations of the holy Spirit, He
reserveth to the elect and redeemed only, to whom in a time acceptable, He
reveals Himself, and seals them for His own service.

2. By this wise and holy dealing with the hearers of the Gospel, whereby the
Lord so makes good the covenant of Redemption, and brings His decrees to
pass, as none shall have just reason to stumble; no wonder, that many be
compassed within the draught-net of the Gospel, and be moved to enter into this
holy and blessed covenant, of whom there may be elect, not as yet converted,
whereup on by Gods appointment, follows a solemn covenanting of all that
consent to the condition of the covenant, and profess their faith in Christ:
all whom (with their children) Christ translates from the Pagan world, into His
visible kingdom and fellowship of His Church militant and grants unto them
right to the common privileges of Citizens, in the order appointed in His
word, that keeping all lawful and possible communion with the Catholic
visible Church of Christ, they may be edified in their particular
congrega^ions, and governed with others by Ecclesiastical discipline.

3. Together with these external means, serving for drawing on the covenant
and going on in it, the common operations of God do concur; common to all the
called, both elect and reprobat, and gifts common to both, are bestowed, such
as illumination, moral persuasion, historycall, dogmaticall and temporary
faith, moral change of affections, and some sort of external amendment of
their outward conversation, saving grace being the special gift of God to His
own.

4. Of this manner of covenanting and taking into Church Fellowship, all the
called that consent in a moral way to the condition of the covenant, regenerat
and unregenerat, we have a pattern in the Lords covenanting with all Israel,
Exodus 19. the covenant is offered to all the Israelites, without exception; all
are invited to enter in covenant without exception, arguments, motives and
moral inducements are made use of, from their experience of the Lords
goodness and gifts given to them before; most ample promises of spiritual
benefits, are made unto them, conditionally to be bestowed on them both in this
life, and in the life to come, verse. 4. 5. 6. the people embrace the condition
of the covenant, V. 7. 8. the people are sanctified, and prepared to receive
the holy commands and will of God, in the rest of the chapter; then, in the 20.
chapter and in the rest of the book, the duties of the covenanters are
propounded, which concern the acknowledgement of sin and deserved death; and
these also which concern obtaining of justification and sanctification by
Christ, and which concern their showing forth their thankfulness, all the
days of their life.

The same covenant, after forty years, is repeated and renewed by Moses, a
little before his death in the land of Moab, Deuteronomy. 29. the Lord commands Moses
to renew the covenant with all the people, verse. 1. all the people of Israel,
are gathered together, regenerat and unregenerat, verse. 2. the sum of arguments
and motives to enter in covenant of new, is shortly set down, verse. 3. the
greatest part of the people to be joined to God in covenant, are openly
declared by Moses to be unregenerat, verse. 4.

After that, arguments are used to move them, in all time coming, to trust in
the Lord and to obey him, to verse. 9. the covenant is made with the heads of
the tribes, and elders of the people, and their governors, and with all the
men of Israel, with their little ones, with the women, and with the strangers
that were in the midst of their camp, verse. 10. 11. the covenant is solemnized
with adjuration of all to keep the conditions thereof, verse. 12. 13. the
covenant is extended with adjuration to the posterity, verse. 14. 15. neither is
there any exception made, or exclusion of any that consented to the covenant,
whether unregenerat Israelites or strangers, but all are admitted within this
covenant.

The same way of covenanting did John Baptist follow, admitting to his baptism
the seal of this covenant, all those that came from Jerusalem and out of all
Judea, and from the borders of Jordan, without exception; whosoever confessed
their sins, or that they were sinners, and professed they did receive the offer
of grace, made in the Name of Christ Jesus, the true lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world, Matthew. 3. 5, 6. and so far was John from waiting
for evidences of saving grace and regeneration, before he admitted them that
came to his baptism, into the fellowship of the external covenant of grace and
reconciliation, that on the contrair, he made public profession, that the fan
whereby the chaff is separated from the wheat, and the hypocrit discerned from
the sincere Christian, was not in his hand, or in any other man or men's hands,
but in the hand of Christ Jesus Himself only. And therefore (which is worthy to
be observed) after he had publicly testified his suspicion of the hypocrisy
and old poysonabled is position, in the Pharisees and Saddu^es that came to his
baptism, and offered to receive the covenant of grace and the seal thereof,
verse. 7. forthwith, without inquiring into their regeneration and sincerity of
heart, he baptized them among the rest, v. 11. and left them to be examined
thereafter by Christ Himself, whether they were upright in heart or not.

The same way of gathering members of the visible Christian Churches out of the
world, did Christ's own Apostles follow in His own company, Christ himself being
present bodily, beholding and approving their baptizing of multitudes, who
after hearing of Christ's sermons offered to receive baptism, and went down to
the water Arnon, where Christ's Apostles did make and baptize more disciples then
John, Ioh. 4. 1. that is, they admitted multitudes into the holy covenant, and
sealed the same with baptism, taking no stricter course of examination of them
then John did, but admitting all that craved the benefit of the covenant and
the seal of it, though they had no certain evidence of their regeneration,
being satisfied, that Christ did not forbid to baptize them, when he saw them
go down to the water to be baptized, after hearing His sermon. Now, there is no
question He knew their hearts, all of them, and that many of them would
afterward shortly make defection from Him, and depart from him, and from his
disciples fellowship, as is plain, Ioh. 6. 6, 66, 70.

This way of receiving into external covenant, all these who receive the offer
and the condition of the covenant, without inquiring into their election or
reprobation, their regeneration or unregeneration for the time, (which may be
called a covenanting outwardly and in the letter) in the deep and wise counsel
of God, is appointed for the gathering and constitution of the visible kirk:
for, by this mean, first, God so executes and perfecteth the decree of
election, that in the mean time he hinders none, of all the hearers of the
Gospel from receiving the grace of Christ offered therein. He excludes no man
from embraceing the covenant; but, on the contrair, he opens the door to all
that are called, to enter into (as it were) the outer court of his dwelling
house, that they may so draw more near to him; and so he does not particularly
manifest any man's reprobation.

Secondly, by this means also he hides the election of the elect from others,
and from themselves till they repent their sins and flee to Christ* and bring
forth some evidences of their election, in their obedience of faith and begun
sanctification.

Thirdly, the Lord makes use of this outward and common covenanting with all
receivers of the offer, as a mean to draw the confederat in the letter, to be
confederat in the spirit; for, the faith which he requires as the condition of
the covenant, he works in the elect, if not before, or with the external
covenanting, yet undoubtedly after, in a time acceptable, and that by the
ordinary means, the use whereof is granted to all confederat externally: and so
as common illumination is a mean to that special, spiritual and saving
illumination; and dogmaticall or historical faith, is a mean unto saving
faith; and external calling, is a mean of effectual calling, So external
covenanting in the letter, is a mean most fit, and accommodat to make a man a
covenanter in the spirit.

Fourthly, this external covenanting, wherein God promises to be the
believers God, and the God of their children, is a mean not only to beget and
foster faith in the covenanting parents, for their own salvation, but also a
mean to comfort them about the salvation of their infants, dying in their
infancy, whether before or after their baptism; and a mean to give them good
hope of those childrens blessed resurrection, by virtue of the promise, because
in covenanting, the Lord does promise to be the believers God, and the God of
his children, and does not exact the condition of actual faith from their
dying infants.

From these grounds, it follows, first, that some are taken externally and
conditionally into the covenant, upon their engagement unto the righteousness
of faith, and their baptism is a seal of their engagement unto it, who albeit
they be not as yet regenerat, yet they are to be esteemed members of the
Church, and Christians outwardly, Christians by calling, and in the letter,
whose praise is of men, as they were also in the Church before Christ's coming,
Jews outwardly and in the letter, whose praise was of men, commended indeed for
so much: but if they came not up to lay hold upon, and follow after,
righteousness by faith, were not Jews in Gods account, and unto them
circumcision was but in the letter, and the sealing of the engagement only, and
not of the good things covenanted, Romans 2. 28, 29.

Secondly, it follows, that there are some covenanters outwardly and inwardly
also, in the flesh and in the spirit also, whose praise is not of men only, but
of God also, to wit, such as not only have engaged to fulfill the condition of
living in the faith, and following after the righteousness of faith, but are
performers really of their engagement, and unto those their baptism, is not
only outward and in the flesh, but inward also, in the spirit also, approven of
God also. Such as were in the visible Church of old, Jews inwardly, performers
of their engagement to live by ^aith, Jews in the spirit and not in the letter
only, whose praise was of God, and not of men only, Romans 2. 28, 29.

Thirdly, it follows, that some are in the covenant absolutely, or without
condition required of them for their part, whom God takes in his own hand
absolutely, such as are elect infants, dying in their infancy, for whom, that
they might be delivered from original sin and deserved wrath, Christ has
engaged and laid down his life, and promised in the covenant to be their God;
whom therefore ere they die, he does immediately quicken, and sanctify, and
translateth to heaven after death; of such (says Christ) is the Kingdom of
heaven, Mark, 10. 14.

How the external dispensation of the Covenant of old, differs from that
which now is under the Gospel.
ALbeit the covenant of grace in it self, be one and the same, from the first
preaching of it in Paradise, unto the end of the world, because Christ the
Savior of his people, is one and the same, yesterday and to day and for ever,
and because the faith of the elect is of one kind, and was and shall be to the
worlds end; yet, the external outletting and dispensation of the covenant
differs, as it was propounded before Christ's incarnation and after it: for,
in Paradise this covenant was set forth by way of promise, (according to the
articles of the covenant of Redemption) that Christ should assume the seed of
the woman, and should suffer in the flesh, or humane nature, and by his power
destroy the works of the devil, in favors of his own chosen people, which
should militat against the devil under his banner.

2. And least any man should fancy, that the covenant of grace, founded upon
this promise, was made with all the posterity of Adam, as the covenant of works
was made with Adam and all his posterity the Lord, in the uttering of the
promise, did not direct his speech unto Adam and Evah, but to the devil by way
of threatening, and cursing him and his seed* even all the reprobat, in the
audience of Adam and Evah, that our first parents over-hearing the curse of the
serpent and his seed, and the promise of Christ's incarnation, in laying hold
upon the promiser by faith, might be justified and saved as private persons,
after the same way as other believers after them should be justified and saved.
This their faith in Christ, the Lord did foster and augment by his doctrine
taught unto them, and by the prescribing typical sacrifices to be offered in
faith to God for remission of sins: And the Lord did admit their children into
the external fellowship of this covenant, without putting difference between
one and another outwardly, as we see in Cain and Abel: of which two, the one,
to wit, Cain, was a covenanter in the flesh outwardly and in the letter only;
for he was destitute and void of saving faith; the other, to wit, Abel, was
both outwardly and inwardly a covenanter, not in the letter only, but in the
spirit also, endued with lively, justifying and saving faith in Christ to be
incarnat, and to die for his own people, as the Apostle testifies, reckoning
him up among believers justified by faith, Heb. 11. 4.

3. After the flood, God did not make the covenant with every man, nor with any
family by way of explicit and formal paction, except Abraham and his family
only, of whom the Messiah, God the Mediator, was to come according to the
flesh; and with him the Lord confirmed the covenant, by adding unto it the
Sacrament of circumcision, as the seal of righteousness and justification by
faith.

4. In the wilderness at mount Sinai, that the Lord might make evident the
necess^^y of justification by faith in Christ to come, he did repeat the law to
works; and to them that did acknowledge their si^^ he did set forth Christ
their deliverer, under the v^^l of sacrifices and leviticall types, and the
very same is the covenant now, whereunto Christ and his ministers, laying aside
the vail of the ceremonies, did openly invite their hearers, that acknowledging
their sins, and renouncing confidence in their own power and worth, they should
cast themselves into the arms of Christ the Savior, that through him they
might obtain justification and life eternal. We see here indeed a diverse
manner of dispensing, and outward managing the making of the covenant with men,
but the covenant was still the same, clothed and set forth in a diverse manner,
and did no other ways differ then and now, but as one and the self same man
differs from himself, clothed sutably one way in his minority, and another
way in his riper age.

5. If the covenanters therefore be compared among themselves in respect of
diverse dispensations, the covenanters in spirit after Christ's incarnation* are
in a better condition, then the believers before Christ's coming; for, the
believers before Christ incarnat under the pedagogie of the law, did lie under
a servitude and bondage as to the outward man, for then the sons and heirs not
come to age, did differ nothing from servants, Gal. 4. 1. and in regard of the
inward man, they saw the mystery of salvation, albeit savingly, yet more
obscurely, for, through the vail they saw the mystery of salvation to be had by
Christ; but after Christ's coming, the Lord dealt more liberally with believers,
because by their freedom from the leviticall ceremonies, taking away the vail,
they may behold with open face the glory of the Lord, as in a mirror, and be
transformed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

6. But as for what concerns the covenanters in the letter and outwardly only;
they are in worse condition after the coming of Christ, then the literal
covenanters before his incarnation: for, the unregenerat under the Gospel, are
in danger of more heavy judgment, then the uncircumcised in heart were before
Christ came, in regard it is a greater sin to neglect and despise Christ
speaking from heaven, in the more clear manifestation of himself in the Gospel,
then it was before Christ came to contemn the darker doctrine of Moses, Heb. 2.
3. and 10. 20.

Concerning the condition of the Covenant.
IN receiving or admission of persons, who are come to the use of reason into
the covenant, these three things are to be observed, and distinguished one from
another; first, the condition of the person, desireing to be in covenant with
God, for reconciliation and grace through Christ; 2. The condition upon which
he is entered in covenant; 3. The condition required of him, for evidencing of
his sincere covenanting.

The first condition required of the man who desires to enter in the covenant
of reconciliation, is the acknowledgement of his sins; for, except a man
confess himself a sinner, and unable to help himself, Christ rejects him,
and will have nothing to do with him, for Christ has said, I came not to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9. 13.

As for the next, the condition of the covenant upon which the man is received,
and whereby the man becomes a confederat, it is his consent to receive the
grace offered, even Christ with his benefits, as he is holden forth in the
Gospel; or, the condition of the covenant is faith, receiving Christ for
righteousness and eternal life.

As for the third, the condition required of the man now entered in the
covenant, for evidenceing the truth and sincerity of the faith which the
covenanter professes* it is the taking on him the yoke of Christ, which he
lays on his confederat people; or, this condition, is the covenanters
up-giving of himself to Christ's government, and obedience of his commands: and
all these three, are expressed by Christ, Matthew. 11. 28. 29.

First, they that labor, and are heavy laden, are they whom Christ calls
unto a covenant and fellowship of his grace.

Secondly, he propounds the condition of the covenant, to wit, that they
believe in Christ, or come unto Him, that in him they may find full relief from
sin and misery, and in him full righteousness and felicity.

Thirdly, he requires of them who do embrace him by faith, and so have accepted
the condition of the covenant, that they give evidence of their faith in him,
by taking on of his yoke on them; take my yoke upon you, ^aith he.

All these three, a covenanter in the letter externally, will profess to have,
and to purpose to follow; but the true covenanters in spirit, have indeed all
the three: for, true faith in Christ, or the receiving of Christ offered in the
Evangell for justification and salvation, which is the condition of the
covenant, presupposes the condition of the man who is called to embrace
Christ, and draws after it the condition required of the man covenanting:
for, he that receives Christ for righteousness and eternal life, of
necessity must acknowledge himself a man in himself unrighteous, and a lost
man, and that he comes to Christ to be justified, and sanctified and saved by
him, and so to persevere in this course unto life eternal.

Of the terms whereupon this Covenant is offered and pressed in Scripture.
THe terms of the covenant, are diversely propounded in Scripture, Exodus 19. 5.
the Lord propounds it thus, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my
covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar people unto me, etc.

In these words, the condition required of those that are already entered in
covenant is most eminent; for, this people was in covenant from the time of
Abraham's covenanting, and was admitted to the Sacraments before their coming
forth of Egypt; and therefore the conditions previous to their entering in
covenant, and required for closing the bargain, are not so much insisted on at
this time. This condition the people do accept, and give answer to God by
Moses, verse. 8. all that the Lord has spoken we will do.

Another form and expression, is used, Acts 16. 31. Paul and Silas say to the
Jailour, now anxious how to be saved, believe in the Lord, and thou shall be
saved; thou and all thy house. The Jailour accepts of the condition, and he is
baptized and all his house, verse. 33.

The condition of his person taking with guiltiness, and granting his lost
condition is spoken of, verse. 37. the condition of the covenant therefore is
propounded in the next room, and is accepted, where-upon baptism is
administered unto him.

Psalm. 27. 8. In other words the same condition is propounded: the Lord craveth
faith, seeking communion on with God for the condition, seek ye my face; the
Psalmist accepts the condition and answers, Thy Face, O Lord, will I seek.

Isa. 45. 22. Christ requires faith in these he calls, and upon that
condition promises salvation, Look unto (...), all ye ends of the earth, and
be ye saved: the answer of the believer is set down, verse. 24. Surely shall one
say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength.

Likewise the way of making this covenant, is set forth by Christ, offering
himself a Savior on the one part, and the believers receiving Christ on the
other part, Ioh. 1. 11, 12. as many as received him, to them he gave power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.

And, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. upon this only condition of consenting to
reconciliation offered, he summeth up most shortly and clearly the
covenant-making, We are ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled to God. There remains no more
for making of the covenant, but that the hearer do honestly answer, thus, the
offer and condition pleases me well, I consent to be reconciled. Now he who
consents to be reconciled, 1. Grants his natural enimity; 2. Accepts
Christ the Mediator, Redeemer, Reconciler, offered to him by God, whose
fullness is in Christ; And, 3. obliedgeth himself to entertain this friendship
all his life after.

Last of all, the making of the covenant, is sometime pressed to be received
and followed under the form of a precept, 1. Ioh. 3. 23. this is his command,
that ye believe in the Name of His Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he
has commanded us: In which words the condition, or estate of the person, who
is called to believe and enter in covenant, is presupposed: for, it is
imported, that he must acknowledge, nor only that he is a miserable sinner, and
unable to relieve himself, but also that he is naturally averse from the way of
seeking righteousness by faith in Christ, and has need that the sovereign
power of God draw him to Christ. Secondly, the condition of the making of
covenant is propounded, which is to believe in Jesu, Christ. In the third room,
the con^ition require^ of him that is entered in covenant by believing (...):
Christ, is, that we love one another as he has commanded us.

This offered and commanded condition of the covenant of grace, some by the
grace of God do accept, and engage to perform, and do perform sincerely, albeit
weakly; other some, trusting in their own strength, engage unto the obedience
of faith, and with their mouth profess they are sinners, and do believe in
Christ, and that they will submit themselves to his Government, drawing near to
him with their lips, when their hearts are far from him; and such men's faith,
changes not their old disposition and way of living, but it suffers them to
serve their belly, or mammon, or vain glory, and such other idols; yet because
the Church are not judges of the secrets of the heart, they must receive into
Church Fellowship, all who confess themselves to be sinners, and profess they
do accept the offer of Christ's grace, and promise subjection to his ordinances.

Obj. But how can the Church receive men in Church Fellowship, who are
destitute of lively faith?

Ans. The Church is not judge of the heart, or of the secrets thereof, because
it cannot see faith in it self, but must look to the profession of faith, and
to the fruits thereof in the own order and time; the Church is witness to
their engagement, but not judges of their sincerity.

2. The covenant of grace does not exclude the most vile sinners, if they
acknowledge their sinfulness, and do solemnly consent unto the condition of
the covenant: because, according to this covenant nothing is bestowed on the
covenanter, of merit, but of grace only, which the Church knows God can give,
and sometimes does give unto counterfit confederats, making them sincere in his
own time, and that by the means of the ordinances, made use of in the visible
Church.

3. It is one thing to be a confederat Christian in the letter, externally in
the sight of men; another thing to be a covenanter in the spirit, inwardly in
respect of the heart and inward man, Romans 2. 28. and albeit the external
covenant does not bring on righteousness and life, except a man be also a
covenanter inwardly in his heart, in the sense of sin and imperfection, making
daily u^e of Christ: yet it is certain, that outward covenanting, is an
ordinary and blessed mean unto many, to beget and foster faith, and help forth
the fruits thereof.

4. It may and should suffice us, that God, in the first framing of a national
Church, did admit, and commanded Moses to admit all the Israelites in covenant,
of whom very few were converted, or reconciled to God in their spirit; and this
was not hid from Moses, or from the truly godly in the camp of Israel, as is
plainly shown to us, Deuteronomy. 28. 29. where God bears witness against the
people, that their heart was not according to their profession and engagement:
and Moses speaks out this truth in all the peoples audience, while he is
renewing the covenant with them, notwithstanding they were unregenerat, Deuteronomy.
29.

Obj. But some will insist and tell us, that the visible Church is a society of
Saints or regenerat persons, and that they who live in the visible Church, must
be visible Saints, whole li^e at least does not contradict their profession,
and such as by the judgment of charity we must esteem regenerat.

Ans. Christ's visible Church, is the company of them that are called out of the
world unto him; the company of them that are consecrat to God, and engaged by
solemn covenant to follow the course of holiness: By ^^lling they are Saints,
albeit many of them may be ^ound polluted in their manners: thus does God
Himself reach us to judge, Psalm. 50. 5. Gather unto me my saints, says He, and
who are these? These who have made a co^^nant with me by sacrifice. Now, of
these, many did not worship God in spirit, but placed all their religion in
ceremonies, and went about by their outward sacrifices to pacify God, and to
expiat their sins, as is plain, verse. 7. 8. others of these called saints,
consecrat unto God, and joined with him in a visible covenant, were very
wicked, who no ways behaved themselves as became covenanters with God; and who
therefore were to be excluded from the benefit of the covenant, except they
repented: for, they hated true holiness, and did cast the commands behind
their back, verse. 16. were thieves and adulterers, slanderers and calumniatours
of their brethren, verse. 18, 19. and yet for all this, the Lord does not
exclude them out of the visible Church, but does in a fatherly manner reprove
them, that they might repent and not perish.

2. There is no question, whether all in the visible Church ought to be both in
open conversation, and in heart holy, and that they shall certainly be damned
and perish, that are not such? but the question is here, about the duty of the
Governors of the Church, and of the godly in it, whether they should exclude
from Church Membership all who are not regenerat, at least so to be esteemed in
the judgment of charity? or, whether all are to be holden for Church Members,
and kept within the Church, who are in covenant with God, and sealed with the
seal thereof, to the intent that by doctrine and censures of the Church (so far
as may be by means) they may be regenerat, and being regenerat, be helped on in
the way of holiness?

3. There is a difference to be put betwixt the precepts, concerning the
personal sanctification of every man in himself, and the precepts given for
the governing of others, and keeping holy society with the called saints,
renewed or unrenewed in the visible Church, so far as Gods word gives light
and order: for, it is commanded to me and thee, that we pursue peace and
holiness, without which none shall see the face of God; but it is not commanded
to me or thee, that we should keep no Church Fellowship in God's ordinances,
except with the regenerat. It is not commanded to the Governors of the Church,
that they must examine every person concerning their regeneration; neither are
they forbidden to ad^^t any into the society of the Church, save these whom
they esteem regenerat: But they are commanded to bring in to the Church, all
that oblige themselves to be Christ's disciples, with their children, and by the
means appointed of God, in doctrine and censures of the Church, to promove
their sanctification and salvation; for, so many does Christ's commission to the
Pastors of the Church import, Math. 28. 19, 20.

4. Regeneration is not the just measure, whereby to square the dimensions and
extent of the visible Church; but, confederation and obsignation of the
Covenant by baptism: For, the Church is Christ's visible kingdom, whose visible
subjects are all they who solemnly are engaged to subject themselves to his
doctrine and government; and therefore the Church visible, is not to be
defined, the company of the regenerat, but the company of the confederat with
God, and called unto holiness; among whom, Christ tells us, there are few
elect, and so fewer regenerat; and therefore the Church of Christ, is compared
to a barnfloor, whereinto is gathered both the chaff and the wheat, both they
that have faith and they that profess faith, out of whom Christ does gather his
own Elect and redeemed ones.

Obj. But at least in gathering of a Church out of the world, respect must be
had, that the consenting of the covenanter be serious; and how can the consent
be serious, where the heart is not sincere, where the person is not regenerat?
Such a man's consent to the covenant, as is without saving faith, is but fained,
counterfeit, hypocritical, and such a consent as may hinder the man's
regeneration, and do nothing but provoke Gods wrath against the man and the
receivers or admitters of him also.

Ans. Serious is sometime opposed to sport or play, and so a matter may be
serious which is in earnest gone about, and is not openly histrionical. And
sometime, serious is opposed to the intention of fraud and deceit; and so that
may be called serious, which is done without a purpose to deceive or beguile
the party. But when the consenter to engage in covenant, speaks as he
thinks, albeit possibly his own heart deceive him, his consent to the
condition of the covenant may justly be called serious, because he intends to
deal in earnest, as in a weighty business. And such was the consent of the
people of Israel unto the covenant made with God, Exodus 19.

Likewise, counterfeit and hypocritical, is sometime called so, in opposition
to that which is real, true and spiritual: And so all consent to the covenant
of Grace, which does not proceed from the spirit of Regeneration is but fained
faith, and indeed is not saving faith; yet, it may be serious and morally
honest, like Isreal's, Exodus 14. 20. and so sufficient to make a covenant, and
to tie an obligation on the man to such duties as may lead to salvation.

Again, fained, connterfeit, hypocritical, is called that which a man purposely
does fain, making show of that which he knows not to be, being conscious to his
own wickedness; and such a fained consent, we grant, does provoke God against
such a person; but the Church is not judge of this, so long as they know not of
this gross hypocrisy.

We hold then, that there may be, and usually fall forth, such a moral consent
unto the covenant of Grace without saving faith, which may be called a serious,
really honest consent, as to the agreement of the mind and mouth of the
covenanter, such as is found in ordinary civil contracts, between one man and
another, and must be acknowledged to be an external Church-covenanting with
God, and with the rest of the members of the Church: and so the consent in
respect to the making a covenant, is not fained, neither is it displeasing unto
God in the own kind, albeit it be not sufficient or acceptable to God unto the
persons salvation: For, so much does God himself testify (Deuteronomy. 5.) speaking
of the Israelits (who were ignorant of the deceitfulness of their own heart,
and of their inability to perform what they promised) he says, ( ver. 28, 29.)
They have well said, all that they have spoken. Therefore unto the tying a man
in this bond of the covenant, this moral honesty, is sufficient, albeit to
salvation it is not sufficient, but in order thereto a mean of God's
appointment.

Now, that there is such a thing as we call moral integrity or honesty, which
differs from the true Christians spiritual honesty, or sincerity, it is plain
from these places of Scripture, which speak of this integrity of heart in such
persons as were not renewed, because they intended no other thing then they
pretended. Thus Abimelech excuses himself to God when he took away Sarah,
Abraham's wife from him, thinking Sarah had been his sister and not his wife,
Gen, 20. 6. In the integrity of my heart and innocence of my ^^ads, have I done
this. And this the Lord does acknowledge to be true, ver. 17. So also the
captains that came with their companies to David in Ziklag, are said to have a
perfect heart, because they were morally honest, and resolved, as they
professed, uprightly to make David King, and to help him in the war, and not
betray him, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33. 38.

Of the sundry ways of men's framing of the covenant of Grace.
AS we told there was a covenant of works, one truly so called of Gods
institution; and another false sort of covenant of works, of man's framing: So
it is also in the matter of the covenant of Grace, there is one truly so called,
and another sort false and counterfeit of man's framing. That which is of Gods
framing is the covenant, that God makes with the Church, for giving
righteousness and life by faith in Jesus Christ: that which we call a
counterfeit covenant, is the covenant, which men frame unto themselves upon any
other condition then faith: Such was the counterfeit covenant of the false
apostles, who corrupted the Gospel Covenant among the Galatians, whereof the
Apostle Paul complains, Gal. 1. 6, 7. challenging them, that they had
forsaken God, who called them to the grace of Christ, and were turned over to
another Gospel, that is, to another covenant of grace, then the true one, which
is only one, and not various, but by the troublers of the Church was changed
into another frame; for, the true covenant, was perverted and corrupted by
these who went about to join together Justification by works, and Justification
by grace through faith in Christ: which two sorts of covenant, are
inconsistent, and do mutually overthrow one another; So also did the Pharisee (
Luke, 18. 11, 12.) corrupt and pervert both the covenant of works and the
covenant of grace; he corrupted and perverted the covenant of works, because he
put up to God some external good works for the perfect obedience of the law;
and he perverted the covenant of grace, because albeit he did acknowledge the
grace of God, and gave him thanks for giving him ability and power to do good
works, and for infusing habits of piety and justice in him; yet, he exalted
himself, and took the thanks and praise to himself who had made good use of
these ver^uous habits, God, I thank thee, (says he) that I am not like other
men, etc.

2. Like unto this fault, is the error of many, of whom some makes the act of
faith brought forth by the power of natural free will, to be the condition of
the covenant, contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, which makes says
infused, to be the gift of God, renouncing its own righteousness and the merit
of all works also, and resting on Christ, to be the condition: For, the
sentence of the Apostle, stands firm and unmovable, Romans 11. 16. If it be by
grace, it is no more of works, etc.

Other some make this the condition of the covenant, that Christ should pay for
mortal sins by his own temporal sufferings, and so take away everlasting
punishment, but will have the sinner himself to pay for venial sins by
temporal sufferings, partly in this life and partly in purgatory.

Other some dream of framing the covenant of grace thus, if a man do all the
good he is able, and has a will to serve God better then before, they
conceive, that God must take the will for the perfect dead, and so for good
payment.

Which counterfeit conditions, and other such like inventions of self-pleasing
conceits, are all of them nothing else but the adulterating both of the
covenant of works, and of the covenant of grace appointed of God, by which
inventions men deceive themselves to their own perdition.

Now, that such perverting of the covenant of works and of grace, are rife and
frequent among men, experience may prove: For, before Christ's coming, this was
the way of carnal Israelits, Romans 10. 3. and Romans 9. 30. For they being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, went about to establish their own
inherent righteousness, and would not subject themselves to the righteousness
of God. And of the Galatians, it is said* chap. 5. 4. Christ is become of none
effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from
grace; that is, ye who seek righteousness or justification by work, have
renounced so far as in you lies grace to be had by Christ; and experience
daily shows the same disposition in many professed Christians.

Quest. Are not then such corrupters of the covenant of grace loosed from their
obligation, wherein by their baptism they were tied to seek righteousness by
faith only?

Ans. No: for, albeit by so doing they prove themselves to be corrupters and
falsifiers of their covenant, to their own perdition, if they repent not; yet
they stand obliged still before God to their covenant sealed in baptism: For,
the covenant of God with man, cannot be dissolved by men's treachery, and
without Gods consent, not only because the covenant of God, with men, in regard
of the perpetual equity thereof, has in it a perpetual obligation, but also
because the sovereign dominion of God, has the force of a law to oblige them
whom God has taken in among his people, that being once his confederat
subjects, they should remain still his subjects: For, as circumcision was a
seal of covenanted righteousness by faith, So baptism is a seal of the same
covenanted righteousness by faith, whether the covenanters remain constant unto
their covenant or not, as we see in the Israelits, who albeit they were
polluted with idolatry in Egypt, and albeit they proved rebellious in the
wilderness, and in the land of promise were found often guilty of breach of
covenant; yet, still in the Scripture they are called God's people, and the
Lords interest and right in them, stood fast, and their right also unto the
external privileges of the citizens of God's kingdom, remained fast also,
until the time that for their open and obstinat rejecting of Christ, the
children of the kingdom were cast out and were broken off the true olive tree:
So also, the obligation of the baptized, who turn the true covenant of grace in
a^o^her of their own framing, does still stand, tying them to perform the
condition of the true covenant: and their right to the external privileges of
the confederat, does remain still in some sort* even when they are inter-dyted
from the honorable possession thereof by excommunication: For, the Apostle
teaches us, that the excommunicat remain, as to their ecclesiastic state,
(albeit not as to their present ecclesiastic condition) citizens and members
of the Church, and subject to Jurisdiction ecclesiastic, and to Christ's
discipline; because when they are judged, and are under censure, they are said
to be within the Kirk, and not without it, 1 Cor. 5. 12. What have I to do to
judge also them that are without? do not ye judge them that are within? And
these that were delivered unto Satan, as to their present external condition,
remained notwithstanding, as to their external state, the domestics of God,
under the discipline of God's house, and were pressed by the censure laid on
them, to learn to cease from their sinful course, and specially from these
faults for which they were censured and corrected by their excommunication, 1 Timothy 1. 20. Hymeneus and Alexander were given over to Satan, that they might
learn not to blaspheme; that is, that being humbled and brought to repentance
they might return to the acknowledgement of the truth and to a reverent
speaking of holy things, and so the right to be counted brethren and members of
the Church (albeit under censure, restraint and dis-respect till they repented)
was not taken altogether from them, even under excommunication; nor yet were
the private duties of charity, due to brethren in that fearful condition, to
be altogether denied unto them, even when the possession of the former honor
of blameless brethren, was taken from them; for, the Apostle will have them,
albeit excommunicat, to be esteemed still censured brethren, and not looked
upon as enemies, ^ Thessalonians. 3. 14, 15. If any man obey not our word by this
epistle, note that man (to wi^ by putting the censure of excommunication on
him) and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed* yet count him not as
an enemy, but admonish him as a brother; and this is so much the more carefully
to be observed, that the constitution of the visible Church of such and such
members, and the use of excommunication may be the better understood: least the
excommunicat, being over-burdened by the sharpness of the censure, should seem
to themselves altogether excluded from Church-society, and so despair of
returning to the full possession of their privileges, but might know, that the
right of citizens of the city of God, was reserved unto them, and was to be
restored by way of possession after their repentance, and that they were not
cut off from the Christian charity of the brethren, no not when they were lying
under the sentence, that they might so much the sooner return to repentance and
to the possession of their Ecclesiastic honor.

Obj. But here there arises a greater doubt and objection, how, and upon what
reason God does require the condition of faith, which men cannot perform,
except it be given of God, as the Apostle testifies, Ephesians. 2. 8. you are
saved of grace by faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God?

Ans. The equity of the duty required, does not depend upon men's present power
or strength, of whom the condition is required, but upon this ground, that
ability was given to Adam, and to his posterity in him: for, all enjoined
service, and so the duty of believing in Christ, is founded upon man's natural
obligation to obey the moral law; for, by virtue of the first command, Adam
was bound, and we in him, not only to believe the word of God already revealed
unto him, but to believe also every word of God to be revealed, and he was
bound to give unto God the glory of all his attributes, not only of these which
already did show forth themselves in his works, but also of these attributes,
which as yet did not put forth themselves in actual exercise: for as it cannot
be denied, that man was bound to give God the glory of his avenging justice,
upon his threatening to inflict the punishment of death in case man should sin,
albeit he could not see the execution of it before he fell; So also it is
manifest, he was bound to give God the glory of his goodness and mercy, albeit
no object of showing mercy was yet to be found: and that partly, because it was
his duty to give the glory of all perfections unto God, whereof mercy is one;
and partly, upon the experience he had of Gods manifested goodness in his
creation, and Gods making a covenant with him about eternal life, upon so
easy and equitable terms: upon the same ground, even after the fall, Adam was
bound not to despair, nor fly, nor hide himself from God, from whom it was
impossible he could escape.

It cannot then be reasonably denied, but man by the law of nature, is bound to
give credit to God when he speaks, and bound to trust in God when He offers
himself as a friend and a father to him, and when God bids him seek his face,
he is bound to obey him, and seek his face, and to follow after more and more
near communion with him.

It is true indeed, that Adam in his integrity, could not formally and actually
believe in God as a Redeemer: partly, because this mystery was not yet
revealed; partly, because he, not having yet sinned, had not need of a Redeemer
or of remission of sin; but yet, the power and ability of believing in God,
according as God should let forth his will, and the power to adhere unto God,
and rest on his goodness and good will, was given to man in his creation: for,
this perfection was a part of the image of God, wherein man was created, even
as the habit of showing mercy on the miserable (though such an object was not
to be found, while man continued in the state of innocence) was a part of that
original holiness in him; and if this ground hold not, sinners by their
sinning once, should make themselves free to sin for ever after, and exempt
themselves from all the duties of the moral law, upon this pretense, that they
were unable to give obedience to it, which is most unreasonable. And, 2.
Because the hearers of the Gospel esteem themselves able to perform the
condition of the covenant of grace offered, and to believe in Christ, yea and
to give credit, or not, to what is preached unto them, as they see reason; is
it not equitable then to put all men to it, who judge themselves able to
perform what is required; to the end that after experience, and trial taken of
themselves, they should either acknowledge their natural inability to believe
in Christ, and so go seek of God the gift of faith, or else be destitute of all
excuse, if they shall not do what they conceive and profess themselves able to
do?

Thirdly, it is equitable to crave faith from them who are able to promise
morally the obedience of faith, and are able to use the external means leading
unto true faith; for, the Lord Himself followed this way in his covenanting
with the Israelites, Exodus 19. where the Lord propounds the condition of the
covenant, and promises to be their God, if they should hearken to His voice,
verse. 5. 6. the people did accept the condition, and undertook to perform it,
verse. 7. 8. and upon these terms the covenant was made with them morally, in
an external way, which did bind the obligation fast upon them.

Fourthly, by preaching of the covenant of grace, God does ordinarily bestow
grace, and grace for grace, on the redeemed in a time acceptable; and in
craving the condition, the Lord gives grace to accept the condition, and to
perform it; and this course is very suitable to Gods sovereignty or supremacy,
suitable to His wisdom and his justice, and suitable to the freedom of his grace:
for, it becomes the absolute supremacy of God, and the liberty of His most
holy* will, to send the Gospel only to whom He will; it becomes his wisdom,
where ever He does send the Gospel, to make offer of grace indifferently to all
the hearers, whether elect or reprobat, that all may be tried, whether they
please to receive the offer or not; It becomes his justice to withhold grace
from such as refuse the offer of it; and it becomes his wisdom, mercy* grace,
truth and justice, both to exact from the elect, for whom Christ did satisfy,
the performance of the condition of the covenant, and in the mean time, by the
offer of grace, to make them sayingly to believe, using the command of
believing in Christ for a fit mean to beget faith: hence it is, that saving
faith is given only to the elect; which faith therefore, is called the faith of
the elect, Tit. 1. 1. Hence it is, that the elect are called heirs of the
promises, Gal. 3. 29. and children of the p^omise, Heb. 6. 17. partly, because
they are the children promised to be broughin to Christ, Isa. 53. 10. partly,
because by the promi^ses they are regenerat to a new life, and by believing in
Christ, they obtain righteousness and eternal life: for, 1. Pet. 1. 23. they
are called begotten again, not of corruptible seed, but of the incorruptible
seed of the word of God.

Quest. If it be asked, since faith is so necessary, what is the object of
faith?

Ans. We answer, the truth of God revealed in Scripture, or God speaking in
Scripture, and promising eternal life upon conditions holden forth in these
promises: among these promises, some pertain to the covenant of works, such as,
Gal. 3. 12. do this and live: and, Matthew. 19. 17. If thou will enter into life,
keep the commandments; and sundry other particular promises of blessings, both
spiritual and temporal annexed unto the promulgation of the Law; which
promises do serve to encourage them to make good their undertaking if they be
able, as they conceive they are, and to humble them when they shall find by
experience, that neither threatening nor promises can make them to fulfill that
law. Beside the promises annexed to the covenant of works, there are other
promises, which pertain to the covenant of reconciliation, and tend to the
making men embrace the covenant of grace, and to continue therein, such as
these which are propounded in the Gospel, for giving unto the believer all the
sure mercies of David, and the benefits purchased by Christ. And of this sort,
some are more general, some more special* some of them belong to this life,
some of them to the life to come: for, true godliness comprehending faith and
the fruits of it, has the promises both of this life, and of the life to come:
of all these promises, the foundation and fountain is the covenant of
Redemption (whereof we have spoken, Chap. 4.) wherein Christ promises to the
Father to do his will, and the Father promises to Christ as Mediator and head
of the Church, in favors of the redeemed, that he shall see his seed and be
satisfied, and the pleasure of* the Lord shall prosper in his hand: upon this
covenant of Redemption, all the promises, made to the Church, do depend,
whether they be absolute promises, whether conditional promises, whether
qualified promises, which are like unto conditional. Absolute promises we call
(for example) such as do promise absolutely the taking away the heart of stone
and the conversion of the Elect, and their perseverance and salvation, Ier. 31.
31, 32. etc. and 32. ver. 40. Such are the promises of gathering, edifying
propagating and perpetuating of the Christian Church to the worlds end, as
Math. 16. 18. Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it. Which sort of promises, do serve to move men to
come and embrace Christ; and after men have fled to Christ, in whom all the
promises are Yea and Amen, the believer may make application and comfortable
use of all the precious promises of righteousness and eternal life, set forth
in the Gospel. Conditional promises are such, as make offer of Christ and
reconciliation to the hearers of the Gospel, upon this condition, that in the
sense of sin and fear of wrath, they ^lye to Christ as the only and sufficient
remedy of sin and misery. Qualified promises like unto conditional, are these
that have in them some qualification of the person who is already a believer,
and do seem to make that qualification or designation of the believer to be a
condition of the blessing promised therein: which promises, if they be well
considered do pre-suppone the qualified person, to whom the promise is made, to
be both a believer and also to be evidently endued with the named quality; as
for example, Math. 5. Blessed are the merciful, the peacemaker, the meek, the
mourners, the poor, the sufferer of persecution for the Gospel, or for Christ,
etc. which virtues, if the person be not a believer in Christ, do as yet
signify nothing in him, nor do not entitle the man to this Gospel-blessedness;
and being the designations of believers, they give the persons endued
therewith, encouragment to go on and increase in that grace and all other
graces, that they may thereby more and more give evidence of their being real
believers: Such also are the promises which are made to the confident waiters
on God, rejoycers in God, lovers and fearers of God, etc. In which promises,
grace for grace to be derived out of the fullness of Christ, is promised to the
believer. Some promises design fit persons to enter in covenant, and do invite
them to come to Christ, Such as are, come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden, Math. 11. 28. And Ho! every one that thirsts, come to these
waters, etc. Isa. 55.

And besides these promises which contain the condition of the covenant, made
to them who embrace the condition, and do already believe, such as is, they
that believe in me, shall not perish, but shall inherit eternal life; there
are also promises conditional, serving to make men who profess faith in Christ
to be real and steadfast in the covenant wherein they are at least outwardly,
and solemnly entered, such as, Ioh. 15. 7, 10. If ye abide in me, and my words
abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you, and if
ye keep my commands, ye shall abide in my love, etc. And, Ioh. 12. 26. If any
man serve me, him will my father honor; and, Ioh. 14. 21. he that loves me*
shall be loved of my father; and I will love him and manifest my self unto him.

Obj. Seeing it is certain, that the condition of the covenant of grace, is not
the doing of one or more works, but faith receiving Christ offered, without
respect to our works, as any part of the condition; and seeing the condition of
the covenant, is not the having, or exercising of such and such virtues, but
the receiving of Christ through faith unto righteousness and eternal life, by
the man who has renounced all confidence in his own works; how comes it to
pass, that such conditional promises are made to them that are endued with,
and do exercise, such virtues?

Ans. Albeit the endeavor to work good works, or the exercise of such and such
virtues prescribed by Christ, cannot be the condition of the covenant (for then
no man could close covenant with Christ till first he shall find these virtues
in himself, and have given proof of his constant exercise thereof) yet such
conditional promises are made use of after a man has closed covenant with
Christ by faith, as conditions required in a true believer, to evidence the
sincerity of his faith. And that because many make pretense of their faith in
Christ, and yet do turn the grace of God into wantonness, and do no ways set
themselves to new obedience unto God law, and are no ways careful to bring
forth fruits suitable to professed repentance, but are indulgent to their
vicious and fleshly lusts, and in effect do renounce all endeavor to exercise
good works in stead of renouncing a carnal confidence in good works: Therefore
God does put the endeavor to exercise Christian virtues on all professed
believers, as a condition distinguishing a sincere believer from an hypocrit,
least any man should please himself, because he is externally in the covenant
of Grace, while, it may be, as yet his faith is but a dead faith, not working
by love: Against which sort of pretended believers James (chap. 2.) disputes.
Such conditional promises are directed toward them that are outwardly already
in covenant, and do serve for these several uses.

First, that such as both profess faith in Christ and are endeavoring the
duties required in such conditional promises, may acknowledge, that they have
obtained of the Lord grace for grace, grace to believe and grace to bring forth
the fruits of faith.

Secondly, that the honest hearted may be encouraged te set upon these duties,
and may hope to be furnished for them, out of the rich fountain of Christ's
grace, John, 1. 16.

Thirdly, they serve to make such as believe in Christ, when they feel the
in-lake of any such commanded duty, or the bitter root of any vice in
themselves, to humble themselves in the sense thereof, and to fly more
earnestly to Christ the Redeemer, that first they may be covered with his
righteousness, and then from him receive the power of the holy Ghost, to bring
forth good fruits, as he has promised, Ioh. 15. 5. If ye abide in me, ye shall
bring forth much fruit.

Fourthly, they serve to make believers in Christ subject themselves to the
order of the operation of the holy Ghost who gives grace for grace, and
works one grace before another in his own order, as the foresaid promises do
import

Fifthly, they serve to stir up believers in Christ, to the love and exercise
of such and such virtues, in the hope of the promised reward.

Sixthly, they serve to move believers to join one virtue to another, for
certifying themselves of their own calling and election by their growth
therein, 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. 12.

Last of all, they serve to make these who are destitute and void of such
qualifications, and are careless to have them, manifest to themselves and
others, that they are blind, and cannot see a far off: and that they have
forgotten that they were in baptism* ecclesiastically purged form their old
sins, 2 Pet. 1. 9.

Obj. How can this offer of grace to all the hearers of the Gospel, and the
solemn making of a covenant with all that profess they do accept of the offer,
stand with the doctrine of election of some, and reprobation of others, or,
with the doctrine of Christ's redeeming of the El^ct only, and not of all and
every man?

Ans. The election of some and reprobation of others, was made clear of old by
Gods making offer of grace unto, and covenanting with, one nation only, and not
with any other. Psa. 147. 19, 20. He showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes
and his judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any nation, an^ as for
his judgments they have not known them.

2. And the offer of grace to all hearers of the Gospel, and covenanting with
all that profess to accept the offer, do consist with the election of some
only, as well now as of old when God made a covenant external and conditional
with all Israel, of whom the great part were not elected to life, and of whom
it is said, albeit they were in number as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of
them only were to be saved Isa. 10. 22. For, by this course, God was not
frustrat of his purpose and fruit of his covenanting with the mixed multitude
of Israelits; for, the Elect by faith obtained righteousness and life, but the
rest were blinded, Romans 11. 7.

3. This common offer of grace to all the hearers of the Gospel and the making
of a moral covenant with all that do profess that they accept the offer, may
stand with the doctrine of Christ's redeeming the Elect only, no less now, then
of old, when Christ did make offer of grace to them that were not his sheep,
Ioh. 10. 26. and did receive sundry in among his disciples in external
covenant, who did afterward forsake him, Ioh. 6. 66. but yet he did save, and
does save all his Elect sheep whom the father has given unto him, Joh. 10. 65.

And however this doctrine sounds harsh in the ears of many, when they hear
of any reprobat or not elected, or when they hear that Christ did not lay down
his life for all and every man, but for the Elect only, and proud men cannot
submit themselves to the truth; yet this doctrine, is found to be most true:
for, Christ the Redeemer, teaches us, Math. 22. 14. that many are called and
few are chosen. And the Apostle teaches us the same, for ( Romans 9. 15.) he
cites Moses to prove the point; I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion; and, ver. 18. God
has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom ^e will he hardens. And the
Evangelist ( Ioh. 12. 37, 38, 39, 40.) teaches us, that there is a number, to
whom God has decreed not to give grace to believe in Christ, albeit they shall
hear him preached unto them, from Isa. 6. 9, 10. but to the Elect only, ver.
13. And, chap. 53. 1. he teaches, that few shall believe in Christ, yea, none
save the Elect, to whom the arm of the Lord shall be revealed. And our Lord
Jesus teaches the same, Ioh. 6. 37, 44. that all the Elect shall come to him,
and that no more then the father shall powerfully draw unto him, can come unto
him.

Obj. But there is another forged way of propounding this covenant which sundry
learned men hold forth, who have made many disciples and followers of their
opinion, because of the seeming plausibleness of their doctrine: wherein they
teach, that Christ Jesus has died not only for all sorts of men, but also for
all and every man, as well for them that perish as for them that are saved; and
that albeit he has not purchased righteousness and life eternal determinatly
to any man, yet he has purchased by this universal redemption, power to every
man's free will, to believe in Christ and persevere in his obedience, without
any special operation of the holy Spirit in one more then another. And this
power of man's free will, wherewith every child of Adam they say is born, they
call by the name of universal grace, albeit in effect it is nothing but
universal unrenewed nature, common to every man.

Ans. We answer, how learned soever the teachers of such doctrine seem to be,
yet in this doctrine they are not taught of God: Over such men's learning and
wisdom, Christ does glory ( Math. 11. 25.) saying* I thank thee, O father, Lord
of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them to babes: even so Father, for so it seemed good
in thy sight. Therefore of such doctrine we say, that it is false, and contrair
unto Scripture, how plausible so ever it seem to proud sinners, yea it is a
mocking of Christ, and an hinderance of men's repentance and conversion unto God.

1. Their doctrine is contrair to Scripture, because contrair to the covenant
of Redemption wherein the Father and the Son Mediator, are agreed upon the
persons to be redeemed, to wit, the elect only, given unto the Son to be
redeemed; and agreed upon the price of their Redemption, to wit, the obedience
of Christ, even to the death of the cross; and agreed upon the graces and
gifts to be given to the elect, to wit, all saving graces, as faith,
repentance, perseverance, and whatsoever belongs to righteousness and eternal
life; and agreed upon the means and way of gathering in the redeemed, out of
all tongues and kindreds and nations, prudently and prosperously, as is proven
from Scripture, Chap. 4. and shall be more confirmed in the next following
chapter.

2. Their doctrine it mocketh Christ, because it charge Christ with folly in
His making covenant so, as neither Gods justice nor man's common wisdom, would
allow, to lay down the price of his blood, and not be sure who should be saved
by his blood, to pay as much for Judas as for Peter, to redeem all and every
man, and yet put the disposing of the benefit of Redemption, and fruit of his
death out of his own hand, into the hand of men's free will, to make of it
something or nothing as they pleased; to buy a possibility unto men to save
themselves actually, without the special grace of the holy Ghost, and to cut
himself off from having the glory of the actual conversion of sinners, as far
as he is from the blame of men's remaining in sin and infidelity; for, they say
he has purchased alike power to all and every man's free will, to believe or
remain in infidelity as they please; if they use it ill, bear they the blame;
if they use it well, they have the praise. They make him to lay down his life
for all and every man, and to purchase unto all and every one, power to believe
in him, and yet never to purpose to make offer of the Gospel to the thousand
part of men. These and many more blemishes they cast by their doctrine upon the
wisdom and power, and grace of our Lord Jesus, who is infinitely wise and holy
in all his doings.

3. This doctrine is a great hinderance of men's repentance and conversion unto
God, and to the exercise of all holy duties; for, whosoever believes this
their doctrine, he cannot renounce nor deny his own wit, worth, and ability,
that he may come humbly unto Christ and follow him, but he must stand to this
conceit of himself, which this doctrine teaches him: yea, such a man cannot
say to God in humble and hearty prayer, open mine eyes, that I may behold the
wonders of thy Law, and teach me thy statutes; he cannot in earnest say with
David, incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness: for, he
has (in his conceit) this power of free will in himself, by common gift to
every man, he cannot heartily thank God (if he seem to himself to do any good)
for giving him both to will and to do of his good pleasure; for, this he has
in his own hand, as this deceitful doctrine persuades him.

Obj. But some there are who maintain the decree of Redemption, and covenant
between God and Christ (which in substance, is one with the decree) to be
absolute, concerning the powerful and invincible conversion, perseverance and
salvation of the elect; but concerning the rest of the world, they tell us of a
conditional decree of saving every one who shall believe in Christ Jesus,
which does make some difference from what is said before.

Ans. There is indeed an offer to be made to all the hearers of the Gospel, to
whom God in his providence does send his messengers, who are appointed to make
offer of peace and reconciliation through Christ, upon condition of hearty
receiving it, even to such as the Lord knows will reject the offer
altogether; against whom, his sent messengers, are to shake off the dust of
their feet, for a witness against them, Matthew. 10. 13. 14. 15. which
accordingly was done by Paul and Barnabas, Acts, 13. 46. 51. and our Lord made
offer of himself to his covenanted people the Jews, who did not receive him,
Ioh. 1. 11, 12. and this is to be done according to one of the articles of the
covenant of Redemption, concerning the prudent way and manner of Christ's
singling forth his own elect, from the rest of the world; But this does no
ways import, or infer, an universal conditional Redemption or any
conditional decree of God: for, there is a vast difference between a
conditional decree of God, and a decree for bringing about Gods purpose, by
offering peace unto men upon a condition. A conditional decree presupposes,
that God is not resolved what to do about them to whom he shall make offer of
peace upon condition, but that he does suspend the determination of his own
will, till the offer be made, and the man has refused or accepted of the
condition propounded unto him; which sort of decree cannot be in God, to whom
are known all his own works, and all men's works from the beginning, Acts, 15.
18. and who does all things according to the determinat counsel of his own
will, Ephesians. 1. 11. But a decree to offer peace, upon condition of believing in
Christ, is a wise mean both of hiding and executing his own secret decree, and
putting the persons to whom he makes the offer unto trial; that after the
drawing forth of the natural enimity and backwardness, which is in all men to
come unto Christ, till they be drawn by God, He may have mercy on whom He will,
and take the refuse at the hands of others for the glory of His justice and
grace, according as He has determined in Himself. The one way determines man,
as God wills; the other way determines God, as man wills. Moreover such a
conditional decree concerning all the rest of mankind, beside the elect, is
inconsistent with the Scripture, and the way of Gods dispensation toward the
most part of mankind: for, it was not Gods purpose to make the offer of grace,
upon condition of believing in Christ, to all and every man, Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
He shows his word unto Jacob, His statutes and His judgments unto Israel, He
has not done so with any nation. And as for His judgments they have not known
them. This same does Moses insinuat, Deuteronomy. 4. 7, 8. and for his dispensation,
experience in all ages shows, that the grace of the Gospel, is not offered to
all and every one, and so they cannot be said to refuse the condition, who
never have the offer of grace upon condition; for, our Lord gives us ground so
to reason, speaking of them who should refuse the offer of the Gospel, Job. 15.
22. if I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin, (to wit, the
guiltiness of rejecting the offer made in the Gospel) but now they have no
cloak for their sin. Wherein also he gives a reason wherefore the offer is
made to them, whom he knew would refuse the offer, to wit, that they may be
rendered inexcusable, and be without the cloak or pretense of this allegiance,
that if they had gotten the offer, then would they have believed and repented:
for, this is the pride of Adams posterity, they conceive they can believe and
obey God, if he shall be pleased to reveal His will to them. And this is
suitable to the covenant of Redemption; which, because it was not made for the
saving of all and every man, therefore it was not Gods purpose to reveal his
Gospel, and make offer of his grace to all and every one, but out of all sorts
of men to call effectually the elect, sending the Gospel where they live, or
bringing them to the place where the Gospel is preached, that the predestinat
might be of purpose effectually called, and justified and sanctified and saved,
Romans 8. 28, 30. and because the elect and predestinat were to live in the civil
society of the rest of the world, it was agreed and decreed, that the offer of
the Gospel, should be made to all indifferently where God should send his
messengers, because God had determined to bring about the salvation of the
elect, so wisely and holily, as none of the hearers of the Gospel should be
stumbled, or hindered from embracing the offer made to all the hearers
indifferently, without letting any man know of his election, till he have
received Christ offered to him and other self-condemned sinners, or declaring
any man reprobat in particular, to whom he makes offer of grace.

Obj. But except we grant an universal redemption and the universal grace (as
they call it) of the power of free will to all and every man, how shall we
satisfy our selves about Gods dispensation toward them, who live without the
Church, strangers and aliens from the commonwealth of Israel?

Ans. As for the elect among them, either they shall be brought to the hearing
of the Gospel where it is preached, or the Gospel shall be sent unto them where
they do live; and for the rest, the Lord deals with them on the terms of the
covenant of works, the power of keeping whereof, albeit they have lost in Adam,
yet they are not loosed from the obligation and penalty of violating thereof,
and even they have not laid aside the proud opinion of their ability to follow
virtue, and ^shew vice as they please. And the course which God follows
concerning them, the Apostle shows us, Romans 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. As many as
have sinned without the written law (says he) shall perish without the law,
etc. for, when the gentiles which have not the law (to wit, the written law
given to the Church) do by nature the things of the law; these having not the
law, are a law to themselves.

Obj. But if the doctrine of redemption of the elect only unto life, be
maintained, and power of free will to believe and obey the Gospel, be not given
to every man, specially of these that have the offer of the Gospel, and that
without any special operation of the holy Ghost, how can it be said, that God
deals justly, in earnest and fairly, with miserable sinners, when he exhorts,
requests and obtests all that hear the Gospel, to come to Christ, and persevere
in obedience of the faith, when he knows that none of them have power to
believe or obey, and that to many of them he has no purpose ever to give grace
to repent and believe that they may be saved?

Ans. First, what can the patrons of the power of men's free will, speak against
the justice and goodness of God* when they hear his complaint against Israel,
Psalm. 81. 8, 9, 10. etc. Hear O my people, and I will testify unto thee O
Israel, if thou will hearken unto me, there shall be no strange God in thee,
neither shall thou worship any strange god; I am the Lord thy God, which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt; open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it;
but my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me, So I
gave them up to their own hearts lust, and they walked in their own counsels.
What can they say against Gods justice and fair dealing, when he, having drawn
forth to light, by his long continued preaching of his word, the obstinat
enimity of the reprobat multitude against him, opened up his decree against all
that sort in the sad message committed to Isaiah, Chap. 6. 9, 10. Go and tell
this people, hear ye indeed, and understand not; see ye indeed, but perceive
not: make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert and be healed, verse. 13. yet there
shall be a tenth part, the holy seed, (to wit, the elect) shall be the
substance thereof? And of this prophecy use is made, when the multitude of
misbelievers was like to obscure the glory of Christ, Job. 12. 37, 38. to 42.
they heard the offer of grace preached by Christ himself, and saw his manifold
wonders, yet they believed not, neither could they believe, because God had
rejected them* as John does prove from the prophecy of Isaiah.

Secondly, Is it not fair dealing, when the Lord professes, that his word
shall be preached, and his wonders manifested (for the elects cause, albeit
they were but as a tenth part) to a cursed and reprobat multitude, who should
hear and see without his blessing, and in his dispensation, does in effect as
he has professed? As it is a reasonable answer of a husband man and Gardener
to his child, asking him, why he beats the whole sheaf and waters all the
Garden, seeing the sheaf is most part straw and chaff, and the garden full of
weeds, to say to his child, that he beats the sh^af, that he may sever the corn
from the straw and chaff, and that he waters the ground, where herbs and
weeds do grow together, that he may make both to come up above ground, and
after that, may pull out the weeds, and foster the herbs for the masters use?
So it is a reasonable answer to such as cavil against the preaching of the
Gospel, to a mixed multitude of elect and reprobat, to say that the Gospel is
preached to both, for the conversion of the elect, and bringing to light the
hatred of the reprobat against God, and the offer of his grace.

Thirdly, we grant the Lord knows men's wickedness and inability to obey his
commands, and their natural enimity against him; but he knows also, that all
men by nature are proud and puffed up with the conceit of their own wisdom and
righteousness, and ability, so as they will not acknowledge their sinfulness,
nor be sensible of their misery and danger of perdition, but do entertain a
high esteem and opinion of themselves, and in special this, that they love God
above all things, and that they can do any thing commanded, at least in such a
measure as may reasonably satisfy God, as is to be seen in the example of the
Israelits undertaking, Exodus 19. therefore, God, in His wisdom before he
convert any man, does pull down this false conceit, by putting his ability to
proof by the preaching of the law, to the intent, that as the Lord knows what
is in man, so man may know it also both in his own and other men's experience:
and this is brought to light yet more clearly by the preaching of the Gospel,
wherein albeit God make the precious offer of life and salvation to every
hearer of the Gospel, if he will acknowledge his sin, and betake himself to
Christ; yet no man of himself will either believe or receive the offer, but
will go on in his own counsel and ways, till God by his grace convert him.
This sickness is common both to the elect and the reprobat, but when the
natural perverseness of both is manifested, God comes and makes the
difference of the one from the other, out of his mere grace, by drawing the
elect powerfully to Christ and letting the rest go on to their own perdition in
his righteous judgment. And our Lord does so expound the matter, Ioh. 8. 47. He
that is of God, hears Gods words; ye therefore hear them not, because ye are
not of God.

Fourthly, the Lord professes plainly, that in the dispensation of his word
and works of providence, he intends the trial of men, and the discovery of
their hearts to themselves and to others; and what fairer dealing can there be
then this? for, Exodus 16. 4. He tells them, that he will rain down Manna upon
them, to prove them, whither they will walk in his law or not: and, Exodus 20.
20. He tells them, he will give them his law and preaching of his word, to
prove them, that his fear might be before them: and, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. that the
dispensation of his providence toward them, all the forty years in the
wilderness, was to humble them, and to prove them, to know what was in their
heart, whether they would keep his commands or not: and, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.
that he would suffer false prophets to arise among them, to prove them, and to
try whether they would love the Lord their God with all their heart. And to
this same intent, we are advertised, that Christ should be not only a tried
stone, but also a stone for trial, set for the ruin of some, and raising up
of other some, Isa. 28. 16, 17. and, 8. 14. compared with Luke, 2. 34, 35. for,
by this manner of dispensation* the Lord makes manifest, that both the elect
and reprobat are concluded under sin and unbelief of themselves* and that no
man can come to Christ, except the Father draw him, that he may have mercy on
whom he will have mercy. And this manner of probation of men by a common offer
of grace unto all, is a part of that prudence, whereby Christ, by his
conditional promises and exhortations, and the preaching of the Gospel to all
hea^ers, makes all these that are outwardly called, to be without excuse, and
fisheth forth the elect out of the sea of sin and misery, and out of the
society of those that perish: of which prudence, Isaiah speaks, chap. 52. 13.
Behold, my servant shall deal prudently and prosper, and be extolled, and be
very high.

Wherefore this wisdom of God in converting the elect, without giving cause of
stumbling unto any of the rest, is rather to be admired and praised, then to be
disputed against, as we are taught, Romans 11. 33, 34, 35, 36. O the depth of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out?

Obj. But for all this, the carnal wisdom of proud men is such* as neither is
it subject to God, nor indeed can be, but stands in hostile enimity against
him, and will not be quiet, but when it hears what is said, Romans 9. 18. that
God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens,
will say, as it is, verse. 19. why does God yet find fault? for, who has
resisted his will? this doctrine, say they, does hinder men's repentance
altogether.

Ans. We answer with the Apostle, verse. 20. Nay but O man, who art thou that
replyeth against God? whether do thou compear procuratour for the reprobat
and for Satan the enemy of God, to quarrel and dispute with God anent his
righteous decrees? If thou will avow this, we leave thee and all such proud and
presumptuous misbelievers of plain doctrine to reckon with your Judge. But if
thou speak only for thy self, we shall let thee see, that this doctrine shall
not hinder thee from repentance. If then thou shall say, I will not dispute
against God, but do desire earnestly to be satisfied about my self, for I
believe, that many are reprobat and few are chosen; and my fear is, that I be
found of the worst sort, and do not know how to rid my self of my doubts and
fears. For answer, we shall deal with thee in a friendly manner; and, first, we
put thee in remembrance, that God has served an inhibition on all men, not to
meddle with the secret counsel of God, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The secret things belong
to the Lord our God, but these things that are revealed belong unto us and our
children for ever. Therefore do not hearken to this suggestion, but go about
thy duty. We ask then, first, art thou convinced of thy sin and ill deserving?
If thou say, I am a sinner, and cannot answer for one of a thousand of my by
gone sins, for which God may justly, and I fear he shall in effect reject me,
we answer unto thee, it is to good purpose that thou are so far convinced of
sin, as to judge thy self worthy of death, and utter exterminion from his
mercy: mean time be comforted thus far, that thou art not of the number of
those who confide in their own righteousness, nor of the number of them who
trust in their own strength, or power of their free will.

We ask again, does thy by gone life displease thee? and would thou have thy
sins forgiven, and thy self reconciled with God? does Christ, offering himself
in the Gospel, please thy soul, when thou hear from his word, that he
craveth nothing of thee, save that thou welcome his offer, and consecrat thy
self to him, that so in him thou may have righteousness and sanctification
and salvation? If thou answer, that the searcher of hearts knows thy hearty
desire to be reconciled to God in Christ, to live before him hereafter as a
reconciled child, there is good hope of salvation for such a one as thou art.

Thirdly, we say, seeing thou have heard the law convincing thee of sin, and
have believed Gods word so far, why do thou not believe him also, when in the
Gospel thou hear his offer and call unto all self-condemned sinners, to come
unto Christ, and rest their weary souls upon him? who has excepted thee from
the embracing of mercy offered in Jesus Christ? look therefore what his word
says to all sinners flying for refuge unto Christ, who is the hope set before
sinners, and leave him not, whatsoever be thy fears; for, he that hungereth and
thirsts for righteousness through Christ, shall be satisfied.

CHAP. VII.
For a further clearing and confirmation of the doctrine about the three
Covenants, from Jer. 31. and Heb. 8.
THe prophet Jeremiah gives us a short compend of the former doctrine anent
these three covenants, chap. 31. verse. 31. etc. whereof the Apostle gives a
clear commentary, Heb. 8. verse. 6, 7. etc.

As to the covenant of Redemption, it is here presupponed to be past, as the
Apostle, expounding this place of Jeremiah, gives us to understand, while he
shows us, that the covenant of grace was no other ways purchased, then by
the Mediation of our Lord Jesus, transacting about the covenant of Redemption
with the Father. And that he may give us to understand this,

1. Christ is called the Mediator of a better covenant, Heb. 8. to wit, of the
covenant of Grace.

2. The covenant of Grace is designed by the name of a Testament, which gives
us to understand, that Christ the Mediator, did not obtain the making of this
covenant on a less price then the laying down of his life, that all the
benefits contained in these better promises, might first be his goods, to
dispone upon, as he pleased; and that he being resolved to die, did make his
Testament, and leave them all in legacy to the redeemed, his heirs and
assigneys, designed from eternity.

3. The Mediator making his Testament, is called Jehovah, not a mere man, but
God to be incarnat, making an unchangeable Latter-will or Testament, which of
necessity required the death of the Testatour, that it might be ratified, Heb.
9. 15, 16. and the death of a Testatour not a mere man, but the Son of God to
be incarnat and to die, who had life in himself, that he might lay down his
life, and take it up again.

4. The goods which he purchased according to the covenant of Redemption, and
left in legacy to his heirs, are all and every blessing which do belong to
godliness and life eternal, as remission of sin, and writting of the law in
their hearts, etc.

5. The redeemed, and designed heirs, are not all and every man, but the elect
only, these that were to be saved only, and who were to be effectually called,
and endued with the saving knowledge of God, who from the least to the
greatest, were all of them to know the Lord: not such as were the reprobat
fathers, nor their unbelieving children, but the chosen society of the Israel
of God and of Christ's family, the house of Judah, which is the tribe of Christ;
for, the Apostle does extend these promises unto the covenant between God and
the elect, to be gathered under the Evangel unto Christ, out of Jews and
Gentiles.

As to the covenant of works, it is certain, first, that God made a covenant of
grace in substance, and upon the matter with the fathers that were brought out
of Egypt, as we may gather from the consideration of the parties and articles
of that covenant: for, albeit God repeated the covenant of works, and declared
the force of the law, for binding the curse upon all transgressors thereof;
yet he did press the law on them in order unto their reconciliation, by the
sacrifice of the Lamb of God, to be in due time offered up, and did teach them,
that Christ was the end of the law, for righteousness to every one that
believed.

2. It is certain, that in the framing of this covenant of grace, between God
and the visible Church of the fathers, God did make the promises of
righteousness and eternal life and spiritual blessings, under the vail of
temporal types, upon conditions more hard and difficile in appearance, then
the new covenant does require: for, this the Apostle shows to us plainly,
Heb. 8. 6.

3. It is certain, that the un-believing Fathers did not take up, nor
understand the covenant of Grace, but turned it over in a covenant of Works,
which is manifest by comparing the words of Jeremiah and the commentary
thereupon by the Apostle: For, Jeremiah says, that they did transgress the
Covenant, albeit God did show himself a husband unto these un-believing
Fathers; that is, they changed the covenant of Grace in a covenant of Works of
their own framing, and transgressed that Covenant also. And the Apostle says,
they did not continue in that covenant, because they changed it to themselves
in a covenant of Works, according to which Covenant God did deal with them:
for, in stead of being a husband to them, he exacted of them the penalty of the
broken covenant of Works, and Lorded it over them, and did not regard them.
Heb. 8. 6. For, they sought after the righteousness of works, and not to have
righteousness by faith; and therefore did he despise them, and dealt with them
after the tenor of the covenant of Works. And it is observable, that the words
of Jeremiah do comprehend the Apostles meaning; for, the words may bear both,
that God was a husband unto them* to wit, in making a covenant of Grace with
them; and that he dealt with them as a Lord over them, by exacting of them the
penalty of the broken covenant of Works, and of the rejected covenant of Grace.

As ^o the covenant of Grace, the Apostle speaks of it in express terms,
first, by Gods promising that he would make a new Covenant with the house of
Israel and Judah.

Secondly by his setting better promises before them then these were which were
made to the Fathers in the wilderness.

Thirdly, by his giving no other cause of bestowing so great blessings on them,
but his own good will and pleasure.

Fourthly, by his requiring no other condition of them but says, that they who
feel in themselves, the want and need of the promised blessings, and are
convinced of their own unworthiness, might give credit unto God that makes the
promise, and so embrace the promises, and apply them to their own use.

As to the external dispensation of the Covenant, it is certain, first, that it
was common to all that were externally called, to all the members of the
visible Church: for, the covenant made in the wilderness with the elect Fathers
and reprobat, with the believers and un-believers, with those that rejected the
covenant of Grace and the offer of Righteousness by faith, and with those who
looked through the vail afar off to Christ coming, and were saved, was one and
the same.

2. It is certain, that the external form of the covenant of Grace, was more
obscure and veiled over by the types and figures of the levitical ceremonies
before Christ came; but after his coming, it was propounded in clearer and
better promises.

3. A day is set, to wit, the fullness of time, when these shadows and typical
figures should be abolished, and the grace of God should be set before his
people, to be looked upon with open face.

4. And yet, the grace of God was not so hid and obscurely propounded to the
Church before Christ's coming, as it could not be taken up by the children of
God; for in the midst of the shadows and dark typs the starlight of gracious
promises did shine, and the doctrine of the new Covenant, was in substance
holden forth by the Prophets; and one instance thereof does appear in this
place of Jeremiah.

As to the internal covenant of Grace, first, these things which are promised
in that Covenant, do declare in what state God does find men whom he does
convert and draw into covenant with himself; for, when the Lord takes in hand,
that he will write his law in their heart, that he will teach them himself to
know him, by the teaching of his Word and Spirit; and that he will forgive
their sins, he pre-supposeth, that lawless rebellion did reign in them, with
blindness of mind and hardness of heart; and that the Elect, by nature, are
without law, without God, without faith, before he reform them according to the
Articles, or tenor of the covenant of Redemption.

2. Albeit, by nature, the law be written in men's hearts, as to the knowledge
of sundry moral duties, and so far as is sufficient to make them inexcusable
for their contraveening these sparks of light, Romans 1. ^0. and, 2, 14. 15. Yet,
the writing of the law, here promised is spiritual and supernatural,
inlightning their minds by the light of Gods Spirit, and renewing their heart;
and, in effect, the thing promised is actual conversion of them.

3. And seeing conversion is here promised by Christ the Testator absolutely, he
has taken in hand absolutely to effectuat it: for, it is not said, I will put
my law in their heart if they please to suffer me, but determinatly, I will put
my law, I will write my law in their heart and inward parts, that is, I will
make them willing who were averse, and obedient to my law who were rebellious.

4. Christ, the Testator, does in all this, not satisfy himself by promising
the illumination of the mind and the inclining of the heart, for a time; but
promises also to make a solid and permanent work of it, by making them
persevere, which is imported in the words I will put, and I will write it; for,
to write it, is as much as to fix and ingrave it, that it may remain.

5. The chief head of the Covenant, and which in substance does contain all
blessings, is set down in these words, I will be their God, and they shall be
my people: for, by this promise, right is granted unto the true heartconvert
and confederat, first, unto God himself, then unto all his benefits, whereof he
has need, in order to righteousness and eternal life: for, they whose God the
Lord is, they do live, and shall live for ever, as Christ says, God is not the
God of the dead, but of the living, Matthew. 22. 32. And all particular promises,
what are they else but explications of this great and first promise, and
applications thereof to his childrens cases in particular?

Gifts of the Spirit are promised here, and induements whereof disciples have
need, whereof pilgrims going home to that heavenly city have need: yea, the
Spirit himself is promised to them, who is to remain with them to the end of
their life, as a directer and leader, They shall all know me, says the Lord,
that is, as Christ does interpret it, They shall be all taught of God, Joh. 6.
45.

7. The Lord shows here, that he will deal with men, in their regeneration
and reconciliation, as with reasonable creatures, by preserving and not
destroying them in their simple naturals, by maintaining and not over-turning
the liberty of their free will; I will make a Covenant, says he, with the
house of Judah. Now a Covenant is a free and voluntar Contract.

8. He shows, that he is Lord and Over-ruler of man's will, who can turn it
about as he pleases, and that he is not hindered nor impeded to execute and
bring to pass, whatsoever he has purposed to do, by the variable contingency
or differency of man's will, but can work upon the will of man, and by the will
of man, what pleases him; and by second causes, whether working freely and
contingently, or by a natural necessity, can wisely, holily and powerfully
bring about his own purpose in his set time; the days come, says he, wherein
I will make a covenant with the house of Israel. Wherein he takes upon him the
effectual work of covenanting, promising not only for his own part, but also
for the elect of Israel and Judahs part; for, his promise is, that it shall
come to pass, that by inclining their will unto reconciliation, they shall
willingly consent unto a covenanting with God: for, he says, I will make a
covenant with them; he says not, if they will, but absolutely, I will make
them close a covenant with Me heartily.

9. The party to be converted and to enter in covenant, is not all men, nor
every society, but the Church, Gods own family; not every nation, but Gods
people, chosen out of all nations on the whole earth, I will make a covenant
with the house of Israel: as it is also cleared, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7* 8.

10. The Church of Christ under the Gospel, as the Apostle looks on this
place, is comprehended under the name of Israel and Judah; partly, because
Israel has the priority of all other people in Gods covenant; and partly,
because all the Christian Church of the Jews and Gentiles, is comprehended
under the name of the house of Judah, which is Christ's tribe, whereof he came,
who is the prince and head of all believers and confederat persons, reconciled
to God; and partly, because the Israelits or Jews, have this prerogative above
all other people and nations on the earth, that of that race of people, the
posterity of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, there shall be in all ages some elected
persons till the great bulk of the now scattered people turn Christians, and
till the end of the world, Romans 11. 5.

11. No age, old nor young, no sex, man nor woman, nor any external difference
of men that can be put between one and another in this life, does exclude any
man from the benefit of this covenant, or commend a man to God that his person
should be respected of God, but all and every one whom God shall externally
call, may safely accept the offer of grace, and join themselves to Jesus
Christ; for, the grace of God here, is extended unto all degrees and sorts of
men, from the least to the greatest.

12. In the mean time God knows his own, man be man, both great and small,
and with the same love, does embrace them all; for, the promise is, that all
those elect who are known to God, shall know him from the greatest even to the
least.

13. The great obstacle which may be supposed to exclude any from coming in to
God through Christ, is here removed; to wit, the greatness and multitude of
bygone sins, cast up against the in-coming of some when they are called: The
mercy and grace of Christ the Testator, takes this doubt out of the way,
saying, I will forgive their iniquity, and their sins I will no more remember,
Jer. 31. 34.

14. This promised remission, the Lord will not have limited nor abridged,
neither by the number of sins, nor grievousness thereof, nor kinds of sins, but
he purposes and promises to take away all iniquity by forgiveness, and to
forget their bygone sins, ver. 34. And confirms this by repeating the
promise of not casting them off who shall acknowledge him, ver. 37.

15. From this promise the Apostle ( Heb. 10.) draws this consequence, that
under the Gospel, or new covenant, there is but one offering for sin; which
offering cannot be repeated, in regard that full remission thereby is
purchased: For, ( ver. 14.) he says, by one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified, and this he proves from the words of the
covenant, ver. 15, 16, 17. whence he concludes, ver. Now, where remission of
these are, there is no more offering for sin.

16. If any shall ask for the cause of so rich mercy and grace covenanted, he
shall find none in man at all. The only cause is set down here, to wit, the
will and good pleasure of God, I will forgive their iniquity, says the Lord,
and their sins will I remember no more, that is, I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy.

17. Because the Lord our God and Mediator, is here making his Testament,
wherein also he takes upon him to be executor of his own latter will, and to
perform all that is promised, therefore in confirmation, he subscribeth and
sets down his name, Ier. 31. 35. Thus says the Lord; and that his subscription
may be of weight with all men, he designs himself by his stately styles or
titles, taken from his creation and government of the creatures, Thus says the
Lord, which gives the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon
and of the stars for a light by night, which divides the Sea when the waves
thereof roar; the Lord of hosts is his name.

This he says, least the faith of his people should be shaken by their looking
to impediments and difficulties, and that they may gather strength and courage
to go on in the Lords way constantly, when they consider the power of God in
the workmanship and government of the world.

18. Unto his subscription, he adds, both witnesses and pledges of his
promises, ver. 36. If those ordinances depart from before me, says the Lord,
then the seed of Israel (which comprehends the seed of Abraham's faith) shall
cease from being a nation before me forever, ver. 36.

19. Last of all, least any man, in the consideration of the grievousness of
his sin, or of the apparent impossibility of performing these promises, should
doubt, of remission of sins to be granted to the confederat, or of the
perseverance of the true believer, or of the perpetuation of the Church, the
Lord bids his people that come in to him, be confident and quiet, ver. 37.
saying, If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth
searched out beneath* I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that
they have done, says the Lord, Now, both these are impossible, that we can
measure the heavens, or search the bottom of the earth: Therefore it is
impossible, that this covenant and the promises made therein, should fail.

The manner of dispensing the new covenant outwardly and inwardly.
AS to the dispensation of this covenant, both outwardly and inwardly, first,
this promise of a new covenant, is a challenge against the mis believing
fathers, who slighted the offer of grace and followed after the covenant of
works, seeking righteousness by works; which covenant of works, they were not
able to perform and it served unto them only for their condemnation: This the
Apostle does collect from this place of Jeremiah, Heb. 8. 8. He found fault
with the fathers.

Secondly, the Apostle observes the wonderful mercy of God, that while he is
finding fault with the incredulity of the fathers, who lived under this old
covenant, he will avenge this their incredulity, ignorance, foolishness and
ingratitude, by telling them, that he will make a new covenant and give them
that were then living a taste of it, for recovering them, finding fault with
them, he says, the days come, that I will make a new covenant.

Thirdly, this covenant of grace m^de with the Church, is procured by Christ,
to this end, that the covenant of Redemption might be brought unto a real
accomplishment by the covenant of Grace. This observation is grounded upon
this, that Christ is called the Mediator of this better covenant, Heb. 8. 6.
For, he will draw up a clear covenant of grace with his people, that the
blessings purchased unto them according to the covenant of Redemption, may be
applied unto them by this covenant of grace and reconciliation.

Fourthly, the preaching of the promise of this new covenant, is a most fit
mean to draw on and close this covenant of grace between God and his people,
who are the called according to his purpose: This observation is gathered from
Ieremiahs preaching and Paul's preaching of this unto the hearers of the Gospel,
to this very intent and purpose.

Fifthly, in the promising and preaching of this covenant of grace, God will
have all men's opinions, thoughts and conceptions about this mystery, limited
unto, and depending upon, his mouth alone, revealing the same in his Word: This
observation is gathered from the Lords invitation of all men to take heed what
he is to say, and what he is to let forth in this matter, Behold the days come,
says the Lord, wherein I will do such and such things, which now I foretell I
will do.

Sixthly, both the making and way of making a covenant with man, depends
absolutely on God either to make a covenant or not, to make what covenant he
pleases to make, upon what conditions he pleases, and with what persons he
pleases to make his covenant. No man ever preveened God, desiring him to make
a covenant, but God did preveen all men, he preveened Adam once before his
fall, and again by preaching the Gospel in his audience after the fall, he
preveened the fathers in the wilderness, he preveened his posterity, that have
lived or shall live in the latter days, promising to make a covenant with
those who were not come into the world, but were to come long after the promise.

Seventhly, the Lord will have all men to understand, that the end of his
covenanting with men, both in that old dark form, and in the new clear form, is
his own glory: For, he has made all things for himself, even the wicked for
the day of evil. This observation is gathered, partly, from this, that the Lord
brings forth his sovereignty for a reason of his rejecting of the
misbelieving fathers in the wilderness, I despised them, I regarded them not;
I Lorded it over them, as the original may bear. And partly, from this, that
he brings forth his own will and pleasure, for a reason of his showing grace
to their posterity, I will forgive their sins, etc.

8. He shows also, that in his works he does not depend upon man, but that
all his works are known unto him from the beginning, and that it is determined
by himself, what, and how, and by what means, he will do every thing. This may
appear from this, that he does foretell what he is to do about the saving of
his elect, Jews and Gentiles, being no less certain to do what he promised
about the posterity to come, then he was certain of what was past already about
their incredulous fathers.

9. The Lord will have us to know, that laying aside the consideration of his
decrees, it is simply in the power of God to punish sin, in whom he will and to
pardon sin through a Mediator, to whom he will, that is, to have mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and to pardon whom he will pardon. This is collected from
this, that the fathers do sin in the wilderness and justly perish and the
posterity do sin and are graciously pardoned.

10. In all this proceeding, no violence is used upon the will of men, whether
of them that perish, or of them that are saved. The saved do walk freely and
willingly in the way of salvation, as their hearty choice; and these that
perish, walk willingly in the way of perdition. God proceeds with both by a
volun^ary covenant, as this place does show.

11. In them that perish the meritorious and culpable cause of their perdition
is in themselves; but in them that are saved, no cause is found at all, but the
cause is found in Gods grace alanerly. This is collected from this, that the
Lord gives the reason of the perdition of the misbelieving fathers, from their
sins and transgression of covenant, they transgressed my covenant, and I
despised them; and of the salvation of their posterity, no other cause but
this, their sins I will not remember any more.

12. The Lords justice is cleared in the perdition of them that perish, because
he gave precepts and promises, and other moral motives, to hinder them from
sinning, and to move them to keep his ways, albeit he did not effectually
impede their running on to sin according to their inclination, and pronenesse
to follow their own way. This is collected from this, that the Lord says, he
made a covenant with their fathers, and they did break it.

13. It pleases God, not only to give his precepts unto men, concerning their
duty, but also to condescend so far unto them as to open up in a part his
decrees and deep designs about men's salvation, that they, being admitted
somewhat near to the treasures of His wisdom, goodness, justice and mercy,
might be so much the more wise, and the more stirred up to discharge their
duty, and make use of his dispensation. This we collect from his revealing of
the decree of election of the posterity of Israel, and drawing them effectually
into a covenant of grace with himself.

14. The Lord does reveal to the world the doctrine of election unto life, only
in the general, and does not descend to the nomination of them in particular.
This is collected from this, that he does promise to convert and draw into a
new covenant of grace, the posterity of Israel and Judah, without nameing
particularly these that were designed for that salvation.

15. Albeit the Lord keeps up the names of the elect (except of some few)
before their conversion, yet, he gives forth marks and evidences, whereby
after their conversion, they may be known both to themselves and others. This
we collect from this, that He sets down infallible marks of the elect, who are
to be Gods covenanted people or worshipers of God, that they do know God, and
have his law written in their hearts and inward parts.

16. As for the reprobation of any man, the Lord has given no certain mark as
long as they live, (except that malicious and wilful rejecting and opposing of
known Christ Jesus) to the intent that none should dare to exclude, either
themselves or others from repentance and hope of mercy, so long as the day of
Gods long-suffering and patience does last. This is collected from this, that
God does not make mention of the reprobation of these misbelieving fathers,
while they are living, but now long after they are dead; and this mention
making of them, is in general only, and not by nameing them particularly.

17. Albeit in the dispensation of the covenant of grace, for application of
saving mercies, the matter be so wisely carried by God, that both the decree and
covenant of Redemption is kept closs, as to particular names, and yet it is
effectually made out in the applying of grace to individual persons, as the
agreement is made between God and Christ Mediator; yet, the covenant of
Redemption, is made this far clear, that it did not pass for the conversion
and salvation of all and every man, by this evidence, that not so much as the
offer of the covenant of grace, and reconciliation shall be made to all and
every nation, far l^sse to all and every singular person: but that the people
and nation of Israel and Judah is chosen out of all people and nations in the
world, comprehending such others as should be called unto their society, and
the fellowship of the olive tree among them, as Psalm. 147. 19, 20. holds
forth. And in this place the whole elect, under the Gospel, are taken up under
the name of this one nation.

18. That the decree of election of some, may both be kept up as to
particular nomination, and yet have certain execution and be performed, the
Lord takes up all his confederats whether in the letter or spirit also, under
the same common name. This is gathered from this, that the misbelieving
Israelits that perished in the desert, with whom God made a covenant and they
did break it, are designed under the common name of fathers, and are taken up
in that covenant under the name of spouse, Ier. 31. 32. and the elect posterity
are taken up under the common name of the house of Israel and Judah.

19. Such as the covenanters are, in regard of their inward estate, such is the
covenant wherein they really are, or such is the covenant in relation to their
persons. Unto the reprobat who do change for their part, the covenant of grace
into the covenant of works, the covenant of grace becomes in effect the
covenant of works, and is rendered void to them, as the Apostle does threaten
the Galatians, Gal. 5. 4. and as did befall the pharisaicall fathers, who are
here declared as instances; but the covenant of grace unto the elect and true
believers, remains still the covenant of grace, from which they do not fall,
nor can altogether fall, as the comparison here between the fathers in the
wilderness and their elect posterity makes evident.

20. The Lord has wisely joined life with the means and way to life and death
with the way to death, and will not have that separated which he has joined.
This is collected from this, that the fathers by not continuing in the
covenant, are despised and rejected of God, and so perished; but their elect
posterity, having the law of God in their hearts, and cleaving constantly unto
the Lord, are saved.

21. The Lord will have this doctrine taught where His word is preached,
concerning the election of some, and reprobation of other some; of Gods
covenanting with some people and persons, and not offering a covenant to other
some; of covenanting with some in the letter, and with other some in the spirit
also, to this end and intent, that men, leaving the searching in particular of
that which God has kept secret in the particular, may follow commanded
duties, repent their sins and flee to Christ offered unto them, and take up his
yoke upon them, and beware that they neither despair, nor yet presume, or turn
the grace of God into wantonness. This we gather from this, that God sends
forth Jeremiah to preach these things, not only to the visible Church of the
Jews going into exile and captivity, but also to all who shall hear this
doctrine from him to the end of the world. And the Apostle, repeating this
doctrine for the use of the Christian Church of Jews and Gentiles, does confirm
this.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the prudent application of divine covenants in general.
HAving spoken of these three divine covenants concerning men's salvation, it
follows now to speak of the application thereof, first, in general, and then
more specially.

In the matter of application, we must, first, look upon Gods effectual
applying and working in the hearers of these covenants, such effects as he has
intended by these covenants to bring to pass: Next, we must look upon the
means whereby he ordinarily does convey and work his intended works in men. And
thirdly, we must look upon the prudent way of use making of these means, both
by Pastors and people for peoples good.

2. As to the first, the Lords effectual application, is a real and actual
bestowing the good of these covenants upon his own, by way of powerful working
on their spirits. Such as are, 1. the giving the grace of understanding of the
Scripture; And, 2. the belief of what is understood; And, 3. the application of
the doctrine of the law, concerning men's sin and misery, to their own
conscience; And, 4. the making them judge themselves according to the law; And,
5. the raising of sorrow in their hearts and fear of wrath; And, 6. the setting
of their eye upon Christ for delivery from sin and death; And, 7. the making
them perceive a possibility and probability that they may be saved: And, 8. to
have an earnest desire after reconciliation with God in Christ; And, 9. the
making of his own to cast themselves over on Christ and to believe on him; And,
10. the making them to consecrat themselves to God in Christ, reconciling the
world of mere grace to himself, not imputing transgression to the reconciled
through Christ; And, 11. the making them to wonder at the riches of the free
grace of God, who in a self-condemned sinner, desirous to be reconciled with
him, requires no personal dignity, no good work, which may commend him to
God, but only that he would receive and welcome Christ offered in the Gospel,
as the only necessary and sufficient remedy against all sin and misery,
requiring no other condition, but that he flee from the curse of the law, and
the wrath to come, unto Christ the Redeemer, who offers himself unto lost
sinners in the preaching of the Gospel, that through him the beleiver may be
justified and sanctified, and saved for ever; And, 12. after wondering raised
in the hearts of his children, the making them cleave closly to Christ, and to
strive against all temptations, which might weaken their faith, and to rejoice
in believing, and to be zealous for the Lords glory, and careful to bring
forth more and more fruits of faith and love, and working such other gracious
works of his Spirit in his children, as may more and more mortify sin in them,
and perfect the image of God in his new creature. This divine, magisteriall and
effectual application of real blessings, belongs to God only, and is the
end of all ministerial application, which is of the external means appointed
of God, to be made use of by men, the blessing whereof must be left to God to
bestow, on whom, how, and in what measure, and in what time it pleases him, as
the Apostle does show unto us, 1 Cor. 3. 6. I have planted, and Apollos has
watered, but God gives the increase.

3. The external means, which do serve unto the foresaid divine operations,
are, 1. The doctrine of life and salvation, set down in the Scripture, to be
heard and read by all men, and meditat upon with prayer for a blessing; And, 2.
sent ministers, to whom God has committed the word of reconciliation, by whose
ministry disciples may be made unto Christ out of all nations; And, 3. the
administration of the Sacrament, whereby they with their children are baptized,
and gathered together in several Churches, and put under the government of
such Church Officers, as his Testament has appointed; And, 4. these Churches
joined together in the most edifying way of mutual communion, and
strengthening one another in true doctrine, pure worship and discipline, which
Gods providence does make way for, that the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus may
continue and grow in the world, and all his ordinances may be exercised
publicly and privately to the best advantage of the Church, for perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edifying of the body of
Christ, as the Apostle requires, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13, 14.

4. In the use of these external means, and specially in the application of
these three covenants, prudence is required, both in P^stors and people, to
which intent and purpose these following considerations may serve.

1. The remedy of every sic^ness of the conscience, must be grounded on the
doctrine of salvation set down in Scripture; which doctrine (...), be known and
believed by the porty (...), before he can receive benefit thereby: And (...) a
prudent application of wholesome and saving doctrine may be made, of necessity
the party diseased must be acqu^^ared with the doctrine to be applied unto him,
before he can make use thereof to his advantage: for, experience teaches us,
how hardly gross ignorants can be convinced of sin, add how hardly such can be
comforted, when their conscience is wakened with the terrors of God, because
they neither know from the Word of God, the cause of the terror and anxiety
wherein they are, nor can they be capable of the remedy of their evil, except
they, first, be catechized in the heads of saving doctrine, h^ld forth in the
Law and Gospel, which instruction can hardly be given or received in a short
time; and howsoever, a prudent Pastor must make use of time as it is offered,
yet when death is near to the party to be instructed, how little is it that can
be expected to be done?

2. The order of applying saving doctrine, does not begin at the application
either of the covenant of Redemption, or at the covenant of Grace, but he that
will follow a right order, must begin at the law and covenant of works, under
the yoke whereof we are all born by nature, children of wrath. And if a man
apply that covenant and law to his heart, and subscribe his own dittey and
deserved condemnation, then may he turn up his soul to Christ Jesus the
Redeemer, and fly to him for refuge, and accept the offer which he makes in
his Gospel of a new covenant of grace for pardoning of sin and reconciling unto
God in himself the person who is fled unto him, and for sanctifying and saving
of him; which covenant, when a chased soul does consent unto, and lays hold
on Christ offered for relief from sin, wrath, death and hell, then may he
ascend by faith unto the covenant of Redemption, and apply to himself with Gods
allowance all the saving graces purchased by Christ, by that covenant, to all
that fly unto him and believe in him.

3. This order of making use of these three covenants, many do not follow, but
they begin at the covenant of Redemption, and will either be satisfied about
this, whether they be elected or not, given to Christ to be redeemed or not,
(which is a secret and not to be inquired into, save in Gods order as we have
shown) or else they will not enter upon the use-making of these means which God
has appointed to bring a man to repentance and faith in Christ. This is a
tentation of Satan, which if they yield unto, it shall lead them either to
resolute profanity with Cain, or to anxious desperation with Judas.

4. There are some also, who make leap-year of the covenant of works, and do
take no notice of their own natural sinfulness or wrath due to them, and lying
on them by nature; but neglecting this order, do start a race, and run to a
presumptuous avouching of their faith in Christ, and will thrust in themselves
in the number of the elect, given before the world was, unto Christ to be
redeemed and saved, pretending their believing of the Gospel, when they have
not believed the doctrine of the law, and so do turn the grace of God into
lasciviousness and wantonness, and go about the satisfying and fulfilling of
their own lusts. Wherefore it is necessary, that every man who seeks to be
saved, and has resolved to follow Gods way to attain unto salvation, do begin
first, at the covenant of works, and examine himself according to the rule of
the moral law, how he has behaved himself in obedience unto the first and
second table, and having sound a dittey great enough, that he judge himself and
pass sentence on himself as guilty and worthy of everlasting wrath for his
sins. Secondly, when he is convinced of sin and deserved wrath, and of his own
utter impotency to deliver himself, then let him flee to Christ and lay hold on
the grace offered in the Gospel, applying the same to his burdened conscience,
according to the tennor of the covenant of grace, fully revealed in the Gospel.
And, thirdly, when he has in earnest consented unto the covenant of grace and
reconciliation, and has laid hold on Christ, with unfaigned faith, seeking in
him remission of sin, and renovation of life, being resolved by the grace of
Christ, to use the means appointed of him for that end; Now it is time and not
till now, to look up unto the covenant of Redemption, and there to read his own
name, as it were, written in the book of life, and to acknowledge that the
measure of repentance and faith in Christ bestowed on himself now in
experience, has flowed from that fountain of Gods love and free grace through
Christ.

Except this order be kept, a man cannot warrantably, and with confidence and
comfort, make application of these covenants. Hence it follows, that it is a
preposterous and perilous course which some do follow, and press others to
follow, that presently upon the hearing of the Gospel, every man should
believe, that Christ has died for him: for, Christ calls no man, warrandeth
no man to come to him, except he, first, do acknowledge his sins, and himself
to be worthy of wrath, condemnation and hell for his sins, and to be utterly
unable to save himself by any mean, save by Christ: for, ( Luke, 5. 32.) Christ
says, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners unto repentance. Neither
does Christ require of any man, to believe himself to be of the number of
Christ's sheep for whom he laid down his life, except he come by faith as a lost
sinner to him, and submit himself to his doctrine and discipline, and pastoral
care over him: for, ( Ioh. 17. 9.) Christ says, I pray not for the world, but
for these thou have given me out of the world: and no man shall know, that
himself is given of the Father to Christ, till first he come in the order
foresaid unto Christ, and when he is come to Christ, resolves to abide with
him, then may he say, the Father has given me to Christ, and drawn me to
Christ: for, this is the mark which Christ gives, Ioh. 6. 37. All that the
Father has given unto me, shall come to me. And again, verse. 44. No man comes
unto me, except the Father draw him.

3. There is an order al^o to be observed in the application of the graces
offered in the Gospel; for, in the Evangel, first, Christ himself is offered,
as the only and sufficient remedy against sin and misery; and next, unto the
person that receives Christ heartily, all Christ's benefits are promised to
come to him by Christ, and are to be found in and through Christ, such as are
Justification, Adoption, the indwelling of the holy Ghost, love, joy, peace,
gentleness, bounty, fidelity, meekness, temperance and other Christian graces,
Gal 5. 22. for, no man has right unto Christ's benefits, before he be a
believer in Christ. But so soon as a man, in the foresaid order, is fled unto
Christ, and has laid hold on him by faith, straight way a door and entresse is
opened unto him unto the rich treasure of grace, and right is given to him unto
all the benefits of Christ; for, all the promises are yea and amen, not before
a man come to Christ, not to a man without Christ, but they are all yea and a
men in Christ.

4. Therefore they wrong both God and their own selves, who when they come unto
the throne of grace, do prescribe unto God another order of working, then he
has set down in his word, craving, in the first place, consolation and
sensible peace in their conscience, felt in their hearts; and that God would
work some such saving graces in their heart, which the reprobat cannot
counterfit: which directions, if God will take off their hand, and bestow his
graces on them sensibly as they prescribe unto him, then they will stand
obliged to continue in the faith of Christ; but if they find not their
directions obeyed, and their petitions in their order granted, then with grief
of heart they begin to complain, and to pretend that they dare not approach
unto God or Christ, so long as these petitions are not first granted and felt
to be granted.

This temptation does invert and overturn the order of Go^s calling: for,
Christ does not call unto him well-doers, or these that do found their faith
upon their own good behavior, and lean to their own works, which they desire
to find in themselves, before they fasten faith on Christ; but Christ does call
sinners in their own sense and acknowledgment, who renounce all confidence in
their own works, past, present or to come; He calls such as are lost in their
own sense, and do feel themselves utterly unable so much as to think a good
thought of themselves, that they may be clothed with the imputed
righteousness of Christ, and endued with the spirit of sanctification by him;
and Christ's will is, that they who believe in him, abide in him, and suck by
faith out of him (as the branches do suck sap out of the tree) grace to bring
forth fruits more and more abundantly: for, this is the order which Christ does
prescribe unto his disciples, Ioh. 15. 5. He that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit: for, without me ye can do nothing.
Whosoever therefore will not believe in Christ or do think it is not lawful to
approach unto him, till first they find in themselves amendment of life and
evident fruits of saving faith, they do in effect change the condition of the
covenant of grace, and do suspend their faith in Christ till they find works to
build upon, when it were their duty, the more they feel their barrenness, so
much the more straightly to lay hold on Christ and hold him fast, and ply him
with earnest supplications to make good his promise to them who do abide in
him, Ioh. 15. 5.

5. It is necessary to press every man, who does believe his justification by
faith, that he be careful to observe the moral law, or ten commands, as the
perpetual and unchangeable rule of good works prescribed of God: for, Christ
came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it, Matthew. 5. 17. He has indeed
unto believers in him, dissolved the covenant of the law, not only by his
doctrine, teaching them, that by the works of the law no flesh shall be
justified in the sight of God, because by the law, is the knowledge of sin
gotten, but no absolution from sin, Romans 3. 20. But also by absolving every
believer in him, that walks not after the flesh, but after the spirit, from
all condemnation, Romans 8. 1^ Mean while he has not broken the yoke of
obedience of the law from off the believer, as he has broken off the yoke of
the covenant of works; but by the contrair, he prescribes to them who come unto
him for remission of sin, that they take on his yoke upon them, and bring forth
works of new obedience, Matthew. 11. 29. and this is the order which the Apostle
does prescribe, Tit. 3. 8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will
thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful
to maintain good works: these things are good and profitable unto men.

6. The moral precepts of the law are so to be pressed, that the hearers,
whether un-converted or converted, may, by them, whether in some measure obeyed
or disobeyed, be driven to Christ, that the law may ever, in some sort, be a
pedagogue unto Christ: for, before conversion, sin must be made manifest by the
law, and the merit of sin committed, must be shown forth, that the man to be
converted may see himself in a lost condition, and that he must certainly
perish, except he flee for refuge to Christ the Redeemer, that by him he may
have remission of sin.

And after a man's conversion, the believer must, by the precepts of the law, be
convinced of his duty and inability to perform obedience, except, by grace,
power be communicated unto him from Christ both to will and to do. And when he
has gotten grace to give obedience in some measure, yet must he examine his
best works by the rule of the commands, and acknowledge the imperfection of his
service, that he may be more and more humbled in himself, and glory only in the
imputed righteousness of Christ, and withal give unto Christ the glory of any
good thing which he has in any measure done well.

7. The threatenings also all of them, must so be applied in general, as both
converted and un-converted may be forced to run to Christ, who only can deliver
the un-converted from guiltiness and wrath, and death eternal deserved by sin;
and who only can deliver those who are converted from the deserved punishment
of their sins, and from the execution of the sentence which the law
pronounces; and who only can make them eshew and hold off the way which God
has cursed.

And it is easy to judge how much cause of humiliation the godly shall have,
by daily comparing their actings with the law, and how dear and precious Christ
must be to them, who gives unto them, as many deliverances from death, as they
commit sins, and do fail of their obliged obedience to God.

8. A sinner already convicted of sin and impenitency, and hardness of his own
heart, and who is grieved for the same, must not be skarred nor deterred from
going unto Christ, till first he attain such a prescribed measure of contrition
as he conceives his sins do call for; which measure, un-skilfull Physicians do
rigidly exact of sinners, who are desirous of repentance, pretending for their
rigidity, their fear, lest if such sinners should be so easily admitted unto
Christ, the work of repentance should be marred in them, and presumption should
have way and be fostered in them: this fear is needless, because it belongs to
Christ alone to give repentance, and he came to call sinners (convicted of sin
and destitute of repentance in their own estimation and sense) unto repentance,
that he may give them repentance. We grant that there is a danger, lest a
sinner, lightly touched with the sting of the conscience, do not well weigh the
weight of his sin and the merit of it, and that he go to Christ with his lips
only when his heart is far from him; but, on the other hand, there is no less
hazard, left he who is destitute of repentance in his own sense, and not
permitted to go to Christ to have it, may either be driven to despair, or
conceive, that by his own pains on his own heart, repentance must be wrought
before he go to Christ, whom God has exalted with his right hand, to be a
Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance unto Israel and remission of sins,
Act. 5. 31.

We must be wary therefore, lest a burdened conscience in any measure, being
excluded from going to Christ till he be in such and such a measure humbled,
set himself so upon bodily exercise of ordinances, without daring to go to
Christ, as that he put some merit in effect, upon his bodily exercise which he
uses, to bring himself unto contrition, or else turn desperately careless, and
leave off all using of means.

We need not fear, that instantly upon a sinners coming to Christ, he shall
find too soon consolation, and so not be humbled as need were: for, Christ is
only wise, and can prudently deal with the sinner coming unto him; he has
eye salve to give his proud merchant, to let him see his blindness, poverty and
misery, as well as gold and garments to the poor and naked: but if any be proud
and rich in their own conceit, and approach toward him without sense of sin, he
can suspend them from comfort, till first he rebuke and chasten them, and keep
them off from felt access a while, till they be truly humbled, and thirst in
earnest after pardon and imputed righteousness.

9. As the narrow way to the kingdom of heaven must not be made straiter then
God has made it, So neither must the way be made broader then God has made
it, and reignies loosed to men's lusts, as if believers sins were either none,
or but light ones: for, God is not a favourer of sin, and whosoever do turn the
grace of God into wantonness, undoubtedly they are ignorant both of the Law and
of the Gospel. Wherefore the Law and the Gospel must be so tempered, that on
the one hand, none who would be at Christ, and through him at mortification of
their sinful nature, be discouraged; and on the other hand, that no man,
boasting of his profession of faith, be strengthened in his iniquity: for, this
is the true sense and intent of God, both in his threatenings and promises, that
none despair, hearing threatenings, but repent and live; and that none presume
to sin, upon hearing his gracious promises, but walk in fear before him, Ezekiel.
33. 10, 11, 12. to v. 20. and Christ does blot out from the number of the
saved, all them who break off and make void any of the precepts, and do teach
men so to do, Matthew. 5. 19.

10. Because God does make use of the same arguments in his Word, both for
moral swasion and for effectual operation of saving faith, and bringing forth
fruits of new obedience; therefore the force of God's arguments and inducements
(as occasion is offered) must so be opened up, and sharpened and pressed, that
the hearers, being soundly convinced of the holiness, equity verity and
necessity of the Lords commands, may at least be morally persuaded to yield
unto them. And to this end, that hearers must be exhorted, that they call to
mind and weigh such and such arguments unto duties, that by reasoning with
themselves, they may prevail by Gods bl^ssing to believe the Word of God; So
did Paul, directing his speech to the governor Felix, brash the castle of his
conscience with this engine, that he near by took it in, Act. 24. 25. and so
did he deal with Agrippa, whom he near-by persuaded to become a Christian, Act.
26. 28. and this was his endeavor to persuade all his hearers to believe the
truth he taught, 2 Cor. 5. 11. Knowing therefore (says he) the terror of the
Lord, we persuade men. And the same Apostle has taught all Christ's disciples
to exercise the faculty of reasoning, in the matter of strengthening their faith
and purpose of obedience, that having set before them the arguments which the
Word of God does furnish they may sum up the truth in conclusions drawn
therefrom, and by holy reasoning, tie themselves to believe and obey the Word
of God, Romans 6. 11. Likewayes (says he) by reasoning, reckon ye your selves to
be deal unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And gives
an example of this reasoning, 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15. The love of God constrains
us, because we thus judge, etc.

11. Because the Lord diverse ways, according to his own wisdom, exercises
men, that sometime by his long-suffering patience he leads them unto
repentance, sometime also by his word and rods, he does drive them thereunto;
therefore let the use of all exercises, all temptations and afflictions, and
the use of all benefits and divine dispensations of providence, be carefully
made use of, that men may so look upon Gods bounty and long-suffering on the
one hand, and upon their own sins and ill deservings on the other hand, as they
may be led and constrained in love to seek after so gracious a God, and to flee
for refuge unto Christ, mourning for their provoking of justice so often against
themselves; and in whatsoever condition, of prosperity or adversity, to submit
themselves to God, however he shall be pleased to dispose of them.

12. The doctrine of reprobation must not be determinatly applied to any
particular person, how wicked soever he shall for the present appear; neither
must the suspicion which any man may have of his own reprobation be ^ostered,
because particular reprobation of this or that person, is among the secrets of
the Lord, not to be meddled with, whereof a man may not give out sentence before
the Lord has revealed his own decree. But on the contrair, all the hearers
must be warned and pressed to be wary to entertain any hostile thought of God,
or to foster suspicions of him, as implacable, but rather think of him as their
faithful Creator; just indeed, yet merciful, long-suffering and bountiful,
both to the kind and the un-kind, as they shall find, if they will seek him:
for, Satan will press this temptation hard enough, and foster the suspicion
which he has suggested against God, in the minds of them whom God has
afflicted, albeit he get no assistance by any imprudent and un-just application
of the Lords Word, unto this or that particular person to conclude their
reprobation.

13. The scope of all doctrine must be this, that sinners may be humbled in the
sense of their unrighteousness, indigence, infirmity and unworthiness; and
being humbled, may be led unto Christ, believe in him, and be more and more
glued unto him, and grow in the love of him, and rest their souls upon him, as
God, one with the Father and holy Spirit, worshipping him in spirit and truth,
endeavoring according to their vocation to advance his Kingdom in themselves
and others. And to this end, let neither on the one hand his incarnation, nor
humiliation in the days of his flesh, wherein he was in paying the promised
price of our Redemption, derogat any thing to the estimation of his person, who
is one God with the Father and holy Spirit, God over all blessed for ever; Nor
on the other hand, his Majesty make sinners stand off, or be afraid to make
their adresse to him; but, by the contrair, that the personal union of the
divine and humane nature in him, and his clothing himself with the offices of
Prophet, Priest and King, may allure all sinners, who hear of him, to come to
him as Media-tour, who will not deal with them who come unto him as a judge
against them, but as an advocat, Surety, and intercessor for them, and who will
save to the uttermost every one that come unto God through him, Heb. 7. 25.

14. For trial of a man's regeneration and coming rightly to Christ, and
growing in grace, the exercise of these three duties are necessarily required,
to wit, 1. The exercise of repentance, or the entertaining in himself of the
sense of his natural sinfulness and infirmity to do good, and of the power of
inherent corruptions, whereby he may be made more and more to renounce all
confidence in himself, and walk humbly before God.

2. The exercise of faith, or the daily renewed employing of Christ for grace,
and actual help in all things, as his case requires.

3. The exercise of love, or the endeavor of new obedience, flowing from love
to God and his neighbor, through Christ.

CHAP. IX.
Of the more special application of divine covenants, for removing the
impediments of regeneration.
WE have spoken of the prudent application of divine covenants in general, it
follows that we speak of the curing of the sicknesses of the conscience
concerning regeneration more specially. Some of these sicknesses, do tend to
hinder regeneration, that it be not wrought at all, whereof we shall speak God
willing in the rest of this first book. Other sicknesses, do tend to obscure
the work of regeneration begun, and to foster questions in the regenerat man
and make him doubt whether he be regenerat or not? or whether he be in the
state of grace or not? and of these we shall speak somewhat in the second book.
And last of all, some cases and sicknesses of the conscience, do tend toward
the deceiving of the regenerat man about his present condition, wherein he is,
without calling his state in question at the first, and of these we shall speak
in the third book.

2. As for the first sort, these cases which impede and altogether mar
regeneration, cannot easily be numbered, because of the multitude of deceits,
whereby the unregenerat are deluded; but it shall suffice for our purpose, to
name some of them only for examples cause; in handling whereof the way of
curing other like cases may be observed.

In handling of these cases, it is not to be expected we should follow any
exact method, or accurat distinction of one case from another; partly, because
many faults may be variously interwoven one with another; partly, because in
all these cases, the same faults are found after diverse ways to put forth
their poison. We therefore, that we may follow the easiest course, shall divide
all unregenerat men, impeding their own regeneration, in three ranks. The first
rank shall be of those who eshew so far as they can all examination of their
own conscience, least it should pronounce sentence of their state and disquiet
them. The second rank shall be of those who do judge themselves indeed
according to the law of God, but after examination do despair of any remedy.
The third rank shall be of those, who make a slight examination of themselves,
and upon some slight pretense give our sentence of absolution of themselves
which God will not allow.

3. As to the first rank, to wit, of those that eshew all examination of their
own conscience, we shall name only seven sicknesses, or impediments hindering
their self-examination and passing sentence on themselves. The first is gross
ignorance of their natural sin and misery, and of deliverance to be had
through Christ, and of the duty required of them that are delivered by Christ.
The second is a false religion, or damnable error in judgment about the matters
of salvation, and Gods worship: In which error, so long as a sinner does lie,
he cannot be humbled for the damnable course he is in, or put question about
his way. The third is dissembled unbelief and atheism, covered over with gross
hypocrisy, which under hand does reject the rule of examination. The fourth is
the brutish stupidity of the cauterized conscience. The fifth is a vain
pretense of fear to examine themselves, least it drive them to desperation. The
sixth is a lazy delaying of examination from day to day. The seventh is
immoderat care for things of this life.

4. Concerning all these impediments hindering self-examination, these three
things are observable in general, 1. albeit all or some of these evils may fall
upon the reprobat, yet are they not their proper maladies; for, some of the
elect before their regeneration, may lie for a time under one or more of these
evils. Wherefore the Pastor, hoping the best of all, because he knows not the
marks of reprobation, must deal with all his hearers to guard them against all
these evils; that the elect, whom God will bless with the faith and obedience
of his commands, may be saved.

Secondly, we must distinguish between a voluntary examination of the
conscience, whereunto the godly do in their best condition set themselves
daily, and a forced examination and wakning up of the conscience whether the
sinner will or not. This sort of examination, may come either by preaching of
the Word, an example whereof we have in ^elix the Governor, who at the hearing
Paul's discourse of virtues and vices, fell a trembling, Act. 24. 25. Or this
wakening of the conscience may come by affliction, whereof we have an example
of Ioseph's brethren, whose consciences did lie sleeping securely under the
guilt of distressing their brother Joseph, but by affliction at length were
wakened, Genesis 42. 21. The Pastors part here is, not only to exhort men to a
voluntair examination of themselves, but also by the sword of the spirit, must
labor to open the apostums of proud sinners, discovering unto them, as
occasion serves, their wickedness, and denouncing the wrath of God against
them, if possibly the Lord shall give them repentance, as he did to the hearers
of Peter, Act. 2. 37.

Thirdly, let not a Preacher be too solicit and anxious about the success of
his labors, when he has to do with obstinat sinners, whose consciences cannot
be wakened, neither by challenges nor threatenings, nor exhortations: But after
he has used means publicly and privately, let him commit the matter unto God,
who will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.
It may suffice him, that all Christ's sheep will at length hear his voice. Only
let not the Pastor despair utterly of any man, but even toward those that are
excommunicat, let him follow such a course as may reduce them unto repentance*
as the Apostle gives direction, 2 Thessalonians. 3, 14, 15.

For removing of the first impediment of self-examination.
BUt that we may speak more particularly of the cure of these seven evil
diseases, for removing of the first impediment, to wit, gross ignorance; it is
not needful to say much of catechetick instruction: seeing in all Churches, it
is presupposed there is some form of a Catechize, wherein the rudiments of
saving knowledge are set down, by way of question and answer, for the use of
children, and of the ruder sort come to years. Only, we offer to those that
intend the holy ministry, this overture, for disposing and preparing people,
for a more easy up-taking of some formed Catechize: Because most part of
formed Catechises, are somewhat larger then they can be read at one time, or
being read can be explicat any other way then by parcels, so many questions and
answers at one time, and so many at another time, which how hardly it can be
all explicat to the whole congregation, in a long time, experience may bear
witness; therefore it may serve to good purpose, if so many of the ruder and
ignorant sort, as may well be gathered together into one place at one time, the
Pastor should profess before them all, that he purposes to hold forth unto
them a short sum of saving doctrine in six or seven heads of doctrine, so that
in the space of an hour or thereby, before they dissolve their meeting, they
may, if they be attentive and willing to learn, have some measure of found
light and understanding of the grounds of true religion.

After which preface used, let him so shortly or plainly as he is able, speak
something, first, of the creation of the world by God the Father, God the Son,
and God the holy Ghost, the only one true God in three persons; and something
also of the creation of Adam and Eve our first parents, according to Gods
Image, in wisdom, holiness and happiness; and something of the covenant of
works made between God and them, including their posterity, the sum of which
covenant is this, Do this and live, but if thou sin, thou shall die.

Secondly, let him speak somewhat of the breach of the covenant of works by our
first parents, in whose loins we are all made guilty of death according to the
tenor of that covenant.

Thirdly, let him speak of the remedy provided in the counsel of God, before
time, but revealed timously after the fall of our first parents, to wit, the
covenant of Redemption, between God and God the Son designed Mediator, Christ
Jesus our Lord, the sum whereof is, Genesis 3. 15. the seed of the woman shall
tread down the head of the serpent, etc. That is to say, it is agreed in the
counsel of God, that the second person shall be born of a woman, and suffer
for the sins of the elect, and destroy sin and death, the works of the devil.

Fourthly, let him speak of the covenant of grace and reconciliation between
God and believers in Christ, the sum whereof is this, whosoever do
acknowledge their sin and fly to Jesus Christ for relief from sin and wrath,
shall not perish, but have eternal life.

Fifthly, let him speak of the two seals of this covenant, to wit, Baptism and
the Lords Supper, whereby the covenant, with the benefits held out therein to
all believers, is sealed.

Sixthly, let him speak of the necessity of amendment of life and bringing
forth of good works for glorifying God, and probation of the sincerity of their
^aith.

Last of all, let him speak of the day of Judgment when Christ shall come in
the clouds, and perfect to all his elect and believers in him, all his promises
of righteousness and eternal life, and cast all the wicked and unreconciled
into the fire of hell. The same course may be taken with ruder ignorants in
private, whose conscience is wakened with terror. After that about the space
of an hour the Pastor has spoken to all these heads shortly, and repeated
again, and inculcat at some other few meetings, till the people have somewhat
understood the business, then he may draw forth these seven heads in some few
questions, taking answer of the people in their own words as they have
conceived the purpose.

These grounds being laid, the Pastor shall find by Gods blessing some desire
and appetite raised in the people after more knowledge of these grounds, and
hope put in them to overtake a formed Catechize, and to have it by heart as may
be: To which end, the people must be encouraged by promises on the one hand,
and stirred up by threatenings on the other hand, such as are, Ioh. 17. 3. and,
2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. and other like places.

Now when the people or any ignorant before, is begun to understand these seven
grounds, they must be pressed to make use thereof; and that, 1. they should
acknowledge their sins and deserved judgment, according to the covenant of
works, which curses every sinner for every sin. 2. That they should fly for
refuge to Christ according to the covenant of grace. And, 3. that every one who
is fled to Christ for grace and mercy, must take on his yoke and endeavor new
obedience of his holy commands, by his grace and furniture.

For removing of the second impediment.
THe second impediment of self-examination, which is an unrenewed man's
infection with some deadly error in religion, and this is not easily removed:
for, the conscience that is deceived by error, absolveth the sinner from the
crime, whereof the error makes him guilty, how grievous soever it be, and
therefore so long as he lies in the error, he securely contemns all
accu^ations and threatenings for his error and erroneous practice, till he be
convinced of his error. And usually four causes do concur to obdure him in his
error. The first is the cunningness and malice of the devil, who when he
cannot altogether obscure and suppress all the articles of saving doctrine, nor
banish the Scripture out of the world, he uses by his emissaries (of old
destinat to this damnation) to spread doctrines of devils in the visible
Church, whereby so far as he can he may detain men in their sins.

The second cause is, the wisdom of the flesh, which is enimity to God, and
therefore very bent to defend every lust whereunto men are inclined, and to
sight against the truth of God contrair to their lusts.

The third cause is, the multitude of these who consent with the perverted
conscience, and avouch the same error.

The fourth is, the righteous judgment of God, who upon such as receive not the
truth in love, sends powerful delusions, and efficacy of error, that they
may believe a lie, and so be damned, who have not received the truth in love,
but have pleasure in unrighteousness.

2. But because the Pastor cannot know any man's reprobation in particular, and
therefore must take the best course he can for every man's salvation, who is
under his charge, if the erroneous person cannot be content to fall upon
Christian conference, in private with the Pastor, it seems not expedient to
fall flat at the first upon the error wherewith he is infected, but to hold
upon agreed unto principles, and from these grounds, lay open the merit of
these sins, whereof the erroneous party will grant himself no less guilty,
then other men will be ^ound to be, and labor to convince him that for these
common sins, no ransom can satisfy Gods justice save the perfect obedience
which Christ gave to the Father, even to the death of the cross, in name of
all that flee unto him for the benefit of Redemption. If the erroneous party
can condescend to cast himself wholly on Christ's mercy, offered in the Gospel
for pardon of acknowledged sin, then at another time the conference may be
further followed, and the danger of the error may be laid out before the
erroneous, and he no more urged for the time, but that he would consider what
has been told him, and that he would by prayer for Christ's cause, beg light
from God in the point questioned; And so go on with him in all meekness and
evidence of love to his soul, as the Lord opens a door for using of all means
that may reclaim the party erroneous.

3. But if the error be likely to infect the flock, let the Pastor openly
refute the error or heresy, and that not only by hinting at some arguments
against it, but of set purpose once at least, solidly showing how contrair it
is to the word of God, and what are the fearful consequences thereof, that it
may become in the sight of the judicious, no less vile and odious then gross
transgressions against the second table of the law; which sort of sins is more
hated of natural reasonable men, then sins against the first table: for,
natur^s light is sharper sighted in the mutual duties of man to man, then in
the matters of God and Religion, wherein a man has no light at all in special,
save that which is by revelation of Scripture. The true intent and meaning
whereof, if a man be ignorant of it, or shall mistake it, the conscience
runs headlong (without the least secret check) after the error and darkness
which men naturally love more then truth and light.

For removing the third impediment.
THe third impediment of self-examination, to wit, infidelity, dissembled and
covered with gross hypocrisy, whereof the man himself is conscious, and
studieth to hide, and delights himself in his cheating of others, of all
evils is most hardly cured: Of this sort of hypocrites are they, who think they
can give a reason of all their ways to any man. And because they respect the
laws of the kingdom, wherein they live, more then the Scripture, therefore they
cover over all their avarice and cruelty with practice of law, that beholders,
think what they please, can say nothing against their following of the civil
law: for, such men fear not God, and are not afraid for his judgment. And
albeit they largely commend the piety of holy men, before some auditors to whom
they conceive their speech will be plausible, yet under hand, and among such as
themselves are, they do but laugh and scorn all such piety, as puts men in
hazard of any worldly inconvenience: for, in those men's eyes the simplicity of
the godly is fool^shnesse, and their faith in God, in their estimation, is
madness, especially if for defense of the truth of Religion they suffer
persecution. These hypocrites the Psalmist calls unwise and foolish, Psalm. 14.
1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God; and, verse. 6. You have
shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge. Such men as
these, albeit they faign themselves to be holy, yet in heart they are haters of
all true saints, in whom the sparks of grace and solid Religion does appear:
for, so says the Lord of them, Psalm. 14. 4. They eat up my people as they eat
bread, and call not upon the Lord. They have a form of godliness, but in their
deeds they deny the power of it; for, they believe never a word of what is
preached of things spiritual, revealed in the word of God: No wonder therefore
that they will not examine themselves, nor receive any accusation from their
own consciences for any sin of this sort, which concerns godliness.

2. The causes of such men's hardening of their heart, may be four; the first
is, the measure of worldly wisdom granted to them and others like themselves,
above common people, with the conceit whereof they are so puffed up, that they
care for nothing save this present world, they acknowledge no other holiness,
but civil observance of humane laws, as if Scripture and all Religious
exercises were to be referred to this only end, that men, living according to
the laws and customs received, into the Societies they live into, should study
to make the best they can of this present world. And this worldly and carnal
wisdom, is called, Psalm. 1. the counsel of the ungodly, because all ungodly
persons do think it shall be more safe to walk in the ways of their wisdom,
then to be hemmed in by the laws of God.

The second cause of their obduration, is carnal confidence in their worldly
prosperity, which they hope always to enjoy, and that by the principles of
their own wisdom, Psalm. 10. 6. he has said in his heart, I shall never be
moved, I shall never be in adversity.

The third cause, is the stumbling block of the cross and affliction, wherewith
they perceive the godly usually to be exercised. Upon which offense they
stumble the more readily because they judge, that the greatest part of the
affliction of the godly proceeds from their own imprudency, and do ascribe
their own prosperity to their own wisdom, wherein they are so lifted up in
their own estimation, that they despise all men in comparison of themselves,
Psalm. 10. 5. As for his enemies, he puffs at them.

The fourth cause is, the not observing, the slighting and despising of Gods
Judgments, concerning which they do not give credit unto God when he speaks,
and therefore do not make use of the operation of his hands, Psalm. 10. 5. Thy
judgments are far above out of his sight.

3. Albeit there be very small hope of the conversion of any such, because they
cannot abide free dealing from any man in private, for to give them any
admonition, is to them a reproach, and they cannot endure it, and nothing can
cut them at the heart more then that any man should suspect them of hypocrisy
and atheism; yet because no Pastor may despair of any man or judge him a
reprobat, so long as the long-suffering patience of God inviteth him to
repentance, therefore the Pastor must deal with such men in the general in his
sermons, that from the Scripture he may convince them of their ignorance of
Gods ways and of their atheism.

To which end and purpose, first, he must point such men forth in their colors
as the Scripture does describe them, yet so as he hold himself in general in
dealing with all such persons without particular description of any man by
particular circumstances, whereby such a man one or more of the auditors may
appear to be picked out and shot at.

Secondly, he must denounce gravely and with compassion the heavy Judgments of
God against them.

Thirdly, he must pull the mask of civil honesty off their face, and let them
know the righteousness of Christ imputed to humble sinners flying to him, to be
the only garment to hide nakedness, if possibly the hearer may conceive hope he
may be forgiven his former hypocrisy, and be allured unto Christ.

Fourthly, let him often against such persons make use of the Apostles
admonition, 1 Cor. 3. 18, 19. Let no man deceive himself, if any man among you
seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise,
for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: for, it is written, he
takes the wise in their own craftiness.

Fifthly, let the Pastor observe the occasion, if at any time it shall please
God to lay calamity on such a man; and then let him wisely labor with all
meekness and tenderness to awaken up his conscience to take notice of the
sparks of wrath, least he perish in Gods displeasure, if he do not humble
himself before God and draw in to Christ; upon which condition let him make the
fairest offers of grace and mercy that the Gospel can yield to him, if possibly
the Lord may give him repentance and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.

For removing the fourth impediment.
THe fourth impediment of self-examination, is the stupidity and senslesness of
the conscience, past feeling, as it were, burnt with a hot iron. This disease
may be seen in b^^otted Epicures, given to their brutish lusts, who are so
carried on after their furious beastly affections, that they have no more power
over themselves then beasts, and such monsters of men by frequent sinning have
extinguished all sense of sin; for, albeit by nature there is some remainder of
light in fallen man, whereby the work of the law may be found written in their
heart, as far as to make them inexcusable, when they do contrary to it; and
albeit there is le^t in the natural man some natural power of the conscience to
vex him that rebelleth against it, to restrain him thereafter from doing the
like, yet some have so sold themselves to the lust and wantonness of their
flesh, that they will not hear any admonition or check of the conscience which
might make any remorse, but do run madly after all sort of uncleanness,
corrupting themselves as brute beasts.

The like disposition may be seen in openly profane persons, who not only in
their deeds have denied the power of godliness, but also renounce the
profession of all form of godliness, and shamelesly foam forth their
ungodliness, as an open rotten grave casts forth the stink thereof. Of this
sort are these, who when they do blaspheme, will not be reproved. Psalm. 12. 4.
Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? and who as dogs do trample
under-foot all holy things and rent them who reprove them, and who insult over
the godly in their affliction, saying with David's enemies, where is their God?
and who openly scorn all religion like these desperate scoffers, 2 Pet. 3. 4.
saying, where is the promise of his coming. Such as these are practically
atheists, and in some sort also in their minds; for, albeit they have some
natural principles of a Godhead imprinted on them, yet they smother all
knowledge of God and belch out their own shame against God and religion and all
the godly.

2. Of men's falling unto such a fearful abomination, four causes may be
rendered. The first is, the man's violence used against his conscience
frequently in committing of grievous sins wittingly, and from the slighting of
the admonitions of the conscience arising up to the contempt of all accusations
which the conscience can lay in against him, and at last boldly rising up
against the conscience, as it were, to be avenged of it, for rebukeing him, by
committing these same sins most frequently, for which he has been oftnest
reproved by his conscience. The second cause may we reckon the devil, who
thinks it too little to allure men to sin, and harden their heart in it, and
spoil them of all sense of their sin, except he also draw them to renounce God
and bark against him, and become like the devil himself, so far as he can drive
them. The third cause we make the holy justice of God, giving over the man who
contemns the light and checks of his conscience, unto a reprobat sense, that
being deprived of common use of reason and judgment, he may run mad in his sin
like the devil: for, if God did punish the heathen so for this sort of sinning,
Romans 1. 28. what wonder he punish, seven times more, them, who thus rebel
against the light of holy Scripture? yea, these that do not come to this hight
are punished, by giving them over to strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. The
last, but sinless, cause, is the deep wisdom of God, who suffering such
wretches to fill up such a measure of sin, does make manifest to all beholders,
the power and poison of in-born sin in man, and draws forth to light the
natural enimity of man against God, the seeds whereof is in all men, and could
hardly be believed to be incident to men, except it were by experience seen and
found in some men.

For remedy of this evil, it is too little that such a monster should be driven
from all Church-society, and given over to Satan; it is the part of the
Magistrate to bind beasts and mad devils, and punish them as it becomes the
bearer of the sword to do for avenging of evildoers. But, if the Magistrate do
not his part, yet, let the Pastor do what in him lies; for, albeit the
Scripture gives small hope of the recovery of such vile monsters because of
the stupidity of their conscience, that cannot be wrought upon by man, yet
seeing such evils have been found, even in some elect, as Manasseh and some of
the Corinthians before their conversion, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. and because
experience has often found, that some of this sort going to public execution
by the Magistrate, have been converted and saved by faith in Jesus Christ; a
Pastor should not altogether despair of such vile men, but essay what may be
done by conference, especially when God sends calamity on them, or the
Magistrate executs justice on them for any crime, if possibly such miscreants,
being convinced of their perverseness, may repent and fly to Christ, the
Redeemer of such as fly unto him.

For removing the fifth impediment.
1. THe fifth impediment of self-examination, is a false fear of no small
danger to their souls, if they should ripe up their conscience for by-gones;
for, seeing, they feel themselves quiet, they think it were unprofitable and
dangerous to trouble their own peace. Such persons will tell you, that their
faith is surely set on God, and that they never had any doubt or suspicion of
Gods love to them, and therefore dare not trouble themselves with
self-examination, first, because all Sermons bid them firmly trust in God.
Secondly, because they know, if they should trouble themselves with
self-examination, they might soon weaken their faith, as they conceive.
Thirdly, because they know the subtilty of Satan, as they say, to whom if a
door were op^ned by search of their old ways, they fear he should over-charge
them with accusations, and drive them to desperation, as (say they) it has
befallen sundry, who after wakening their consciences, never rested till they
put hand in themselves, not being able to bear the torment of their conscience.

There are other some, who, nill they will they, are drawn before the tribunal
of Gods Judgment, and their conscience begins to stir against them, which so
soon as they do perceive, incontinent they interrupt the process. Such a one
was the heathen Governor Felix, Act. 24, 25. who after hearing, for a little,
Paul's discourse of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come, did tremble,
and therefore desired Paul to forbear for the time. Of this sort also are they
who do withdraw themselves from Church-meetings, and hearing of public
Sermons, lest they should be troubled with the serious speeches of a faithful
Pastor. Some are also of this sort, who take the course that King Saul did
take, and call for a minstrel, or for merry company to suppress the voice of
their barking conscience, or do by some such way divert their conscience from
entering in judgment with them.

2. The causes of this evil in the un-regenerat man, may be found these four,
(besides others more particular) First, ignorance of the duty of
self-examination prescribed of God, Ps. 4. 4. or a voluntar mis-kenning that
such a duty is required of all. The second cause is a fixed purpose to go on
securely in their old ways. The third cause is, the sense of the sweetness
they imagine they do find, and have found of a long time in the carnal rest and
sleep of their conscience. The fourth cause is a persuasion, that they could
not rid themselves out of the grips of their conscience, nor endure the blind
blows, which conscience, set down on the tribunal, should inflict on them;
which sorrow and vexation they conceive they cannot otherwise eshew, but by
throwing down their conscience from the bench that he enter in no process
against them.

3. When the Pastor has to do with such a man, his first care must be, that
this blind fear may be drawn forth to the light, by showing him, that this his
flying from the light and hiding himself in darkness, is to no purpose, and
that there is no place for him to fly unto and hide himself from God.
Secondly, let him press the decree of God, that all men must once die, and
then come to judgment: wherein he cannot miss perpetual condemnation and
endless torment from an angry Judge; except he now judge and condemn himself,
and fly to Christ the Mediator while it is to day, while Christ is exercising
his Mediatory-office, and is inviting all sinners to repent, and calling all
weary and heavy laden to come unto him. Thirdly, let the Pastor show to those
fearful persons, that this their tear is groundless; for, if they mind to
draw in to God, they need not fear to confess all their sins and fly to his
grace, which if they do not, the sleep which they love to lie into is deadly,
because God has said, There is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 48. 21. Fourthly,
let him press the precepts for self-examination and judging our selves, Ps. 4.
4. and trying whether we be in the faith or not, 2 Cor. 13. 5. except they
would choose to be judged of God without mercy. But seeing here we speak to
Pastors, or to such as aim at the holy Ministry, we need not insist, but with
the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 17. pray the Lord to give his servants wisdom and
prudence in all things.

For removing the sixth impediment.
THe sixth impediment is, a lazy and sluggish putting off of the duty of
self-examination from time to time. And many are guilty of this sinful solly,
who will grant, that it is a duty lying on them to set their conscience on work
for trial of their state or condition, but like ill debtors, who, promising to
pay as often as they meet with their creditors, do notwithstanding put off time
and delay the work from day to day; Such men's disposition in spiritual things
is well resembled in the description of the sluggard, Prove. 6. 10. How long
will thou sleep, O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep? Yet a
little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. So
shall thy poverty come as one that travaileth, and thy want as an armed man.
And, Prove. 26. 14, 15, 16. As the door turns upon his hinges, so does the
slothful man upon his bed. The slothful hides his hand in his bosom, it
grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth. The sluggard is wiser in his own
conceit, then seven men that can render a reason. Such are our lazy d^layers of
examination, of whom we speak, they cannot endure to be at pains to search
their ways or commune with their heart: But, so long as God suffers their
conscience to sleep, so long they put off the duty of searching themselves and
lie still in security, esteeming it a torture to have their sluggish sleeping
any way interrupted by any person.

2. Of this evil disease, five causes may be given; The first is, the abhorring
of all pains in spiritual duties, how profitable so ever diligence might prove.
The second cause is, the bewitching sense of sweetness they conceive they feel
in this their idle carriage. The third is, the deceit of the sluggards heart,
still promising to follow his purpose of amendment of life from day to day, and
yet, albeit deceived a thousand times, he does give credit to his own false
heart. The fourth is, a false opinion which the sluggard entertains of his own
spiritual abilities, as if he were sure he could repent at any time; and that
if any sickness or appearance of death should befall him, he would then
undoubtedly make his reckening with God and crave pardon, and so be saved, and
in such pleasant dreams he counts himself a much wiser man then many who do
put themselves to daily toiling and vexation, by keeping their conscience on
the rack-stock, when with less misery they might follow his sluggish way of it.
The fifth, but sinlesse, cause, is the Lords lengthening of prosperity to the
sluggard, which although it should lead him to repentance, yet he becomes
hereby more and more drunken, and ^ulleth himself over in a deeper sleep.

3. This sickness is not easily cured, except the Lord take up a rod and rouse
the sluggard out of his sleep. But, as for the Pastors part, he shall do well
in private if the sluggard confess his fault, and howsoever, to set an edge on
the law in public, that all such sluggards may apprehend the real danger their
soul is into by delaying their repentance, because the indurance of this
brittle and frail life is most uncertain; for, the fool knows not whether the
very next following night after admonition is given to him, his soul shall be
taken from him. Secondly, he must know, that the longer he delay, the number of
his sins and the hardness of his heart, and the wrath of God against him, do
daily grow to a higher measure. Let the sluggard then be convinced of his
madness, if he shall delay for an hour, by acknowledgment of his sin and
flying to Christ, to vomit up the deadly poison of his sweetest sins, and to
have the hot burning wrath of God against him extinguished. Thirdly, let the
deceits wherewith he beguileth himself be laid open and refuted, and an offer
be made unto him, whether he will choose, that his conscience be tormented for
ever in the society of unclean devils, after a short while sleep in sin in this
life, rather then while he has time, while Christ offers himself Mediator in
his Gospel, while he may have the sweet fellowship of the Saints, he will choose
to put his conscience to it, and acknowledge his sins and fly to Christ, that
he may have peace with God and so be saved for ever.

For removing the seventh impediment.
THe seventh impediment of self-examination, is the too earnest care for
earthly things, and the man's involving himself in the affairs of this life:
for, there are many who do not refuse the duty of trying their own spiritual
state and condition, who notwithstanding of this conviction of their duty, do
spend all their time in the businesses of this world, wherein they are so
involved and carried headlong, that they pass perfunctoriously all exercises
of religion, and do neither wait for the direction of Gods Word, or of their
own conscience, about what they have to do, nor call themselves to account for
what is past, done or not done. Of this sort ar^ these, of whom Christ does
speak, Luke 14. 18. who being invited to a free supper, answered, some of them,
I have bought land, another, I have married a wife, another, I have bought a
yoke of oxen, etc. and so sought to be excused, for their not coming to the
marriage, all pretending their earthly affairs, as a just reason of their
slipping of the invitation given them. Of this sort of men speaks Christ,
Math. 13. 22. He that received seed among the thorns, is he that hears the
Word, and the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches chock the
word, and he becomes unfruitful. This sort of men are complained of, Ier. 8.
6. I hearkened and beard, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? Every one turned to his course, as the
horse rusheth into the battle.

2. Of this evil, four causes among others may be given, first, inordinat
concupiscence of earthly things, which eats up all the time and travel,
which the love of things spiritual does call for, and, as it were, spurreth the
man to the immoderat pursuing of things temporal. The second cause is, the
beguiling of the conscience under the pretense of seeking what is lawful and
necessary for a man's well-being in this life, as if a man's spending of his care
and pains, and time in earthly business, in it self lawful, were sufficient
excuse for neglecting things spiritual and heavenly; or, as if it were not
required of all men that hear the Word of God pointing out the way of men's
salvation, to prefer that one thing necessary before all commodities of this
earth; for, what can it avail a man to gain the whole earth, if he lose his own
soul? The third cause is, the deceitfulness of riches, which every man
naturally is inclined to pursue too eagerly, and which many pragmatick busy
men do attain: for, God uses to recompense every man's diligence in a lawful
occupation with a sort of external reward of the same kind with his work: This
success and rewarding of men's industry and pains, by increasing busy men's
riches, earthly-minded men, do interpret to be the special blessing of God,
and an approbation of their immoderat pursuing after things earthly, wherein
they are much mistaken; for God never ordained any man's civil calling to be a
hinderance of the spiritual welfare of his soul, and if any man neglect his
soul and pursue worldly riches, if he obtain them, what can be said? but verily
he has his reward, and cannot look after the fruit of pains taking in
spiritual matters which he neglected. The fourth cause is, a light estimation
of the Word of God, and of matters concerning salvation which by reason they
fall not under sense and present possession, but are offered to us in promises,
and are not bestowed for the present, therefore many are less careful for
things promised after this life, and do follow the more eagerly after such
things whereof they can take hold in this life.

3. The way to cure this malady, so far as pertains to a Pastor, is, that
both in public sermons and private conferences, he give unto things lawful and
to the following of a man's civil calling the own room and time, and wisely let
men know the subordination of all civil affairs unto the welfare of their
souls, and so to lay open the peril of men's souls, when they are following too
too eagerly their civil vocation, as in the mean time he do not condemn men's
diligence in their callings, but that he give directions for such a wise
moderation of every man's care about things of this world, that the precious
excellency of the soul, and the infinite worth of eternal life be first and
above all earthly things provided for, and that in the using or conqueshing of
riches no prejudice do come to his own salvation, which is not possible a man
shall do, if he do not daily examine his own conscience carefully, and keep it
in a tender disposition, resorting to Christ upon all occasions for pardon of
daily sin and keeping him, that if riches increase, he may not set his heart
thereon, but may be forthcoming to the duties of charity toward others as his
power shall be, and opportunities shall be offered.

CHAP. X.
Concerning them that are like to despair.
WE have spoken of the first sort of them who do hinder their own regeneration
by abhorring, declining, delaying and shifting off of the examination of their
consciences. The second sort or rank of those who hinder their own conversion,
is of such as after the wakening of their own consciences, whether voluntary or
by compulsion, do despair of all remedy offered unto them in the Gospel of
grace in Christ, and renouncing the counsel of God, do follow the counsel of
Satan and their own heart.

2. We distinguish a volountary examination of the conscience from a compelled
and enforced examination thereof, as was hinted at in the former Section; for,
it is one thing to say of a man, he has voluntarily examined himself and found
out his dittey and deserved judgment, and to say of him, he is forced to
examine himself and in himself to receive sentence according as his ways have
been: for, there are many who will not judge themselves, yet after are forced
unto it against their will: These are said to judge themselves voluntarily,
who, by a free act of their will, do enter themselves to be judged of their own
conscience, and do go about the work either slightly and per^unctoriously, or
^^^ictly and exactly according to their knowledge of the ^ule: But a compelled
examination is ever more exact and strict and joined with the chastisement of
the sinner for neglecting or slighting or delaying of examination, Psalm, 50.
21. This distinction is holden forth to as by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 31, 32.
If we would judge (...) selves, we should not be judged: But when we are
judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world. Both these sorts of examination have a blessing following upon them when
Christ is (...) unto after examination: but if Christ be not fled unto, then
desperation may follow upon both slight and serious examination, both upon
voluntary and enforced examination.

3. We do not take desperation here for every dissidence of Gods performing of
promises, or of Gods making good of his gracious offers, but for diffidence to
obtain reconciliation with God, or to find mercy through Christ the Mediator.
Neither do we call by the name of desperation every diffidence to obtain mercy
and reconciliation, cast in man's mind by the tempter Satan, and yielded unto
for a time under the sense of Gods wrath; for, at some sits, the diffidence
will be found in renewed Saints, as in Ionab, chap. 2. 4. Heman the Ezrait.
Psalm. 88. 16. David, Psalm. 116. 11. who seemed to themselves for the time to be
cast off, but but did swim out of this deep by faith. Neither do we take
desperation for every short or long eclipse of hope, wherein a distressed soul
seems to its self to despair, yea, and may possibly utter and profess they do
despair, and in the mean time will not renounce the use of the means, whereby
they do get, or recover hope: Such was the condition of Heman the Ezraite,
Psalm. 88. 14, 15, 16. Lord why casts thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face
from me? I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up, while I suffer thy
terrors, I am distracted. He thought he was cast off, yet for all that he went
on daily praying for the sense of mercy and found it, and was directed by God
to acquaint the Church unto all generations with his long and sad exercise. But
we take desperation for a prevalent impression made by Satan upon the spirit
of a man, that God will not show him mercy, and so fixed in him, as the man
resolves not to deal with God any more for mercy.

4. Of this properly called desperation, there are two sorts, one which we may
call careless and secute desperation, another which we may call anxious and
tormenting desperation. Cains desperation in his last resolution, was of the
first sort, and Judas desperation was of the other sort. We call that a
careless secure desperation, when a sinner, being convinced of his gross and
many sins, either believes not Gods Word or conceives God implacable and
irreconciliable, and to have destinate him to destruction according to the
sentence of the law, pronounced against such sinners as he knows himself to
be, and so does harden and obdure himself against all threatenings, and goes
on in his own ways, resolved to take ease and pleasure in the world, so long
as he lives, and not to make himself miserable before the time; Such was the
desperation of carnal Israelits, Isa, 22. 13. who, hearing the threatenings of
the Prophets concerning the just Judgments of God to come upon them, when they
should have humbled themselves in prayer and fasting, in sackcloth and ashes,
and sought mercy from God, they did set themselves to make good cheer, and to
feast one another, saying, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Of
this sort were also these in Ezekiels time, chap. 33. 10. Thus ye speak,
saying, If our sins and transgressions be upon us, and we pine away in them,
how shall we then live? They do not deny that they are loadened with iniquity,
they doubt nothing of the righteousness of the threatened Judgment; but,
comparing the justice of Gods Judgment with their sins, and laying aside all
thought of a remedy from Gods mercy, they flatly despair, as if there had been
no remedy provided in the Word of God for them, or as if the threatenings had
been pronounced, as sentences pronounced absolutely, without exception of their
repentance.

5. The causes of this evil, are specially these three; the first, is gross
misbelief of Gods Word, contemning all threatenings, as but the words of an
angry prophee stirred up to vent his passions against people. The second, is
the perverseness of corrupt nature, so hardened with the custom of sinning,
that the conscience not being terrified with Gods threatenings, is nothing
moved with inward accusations, which they know to be just; whereupon they
resolve neither to seek for mercy, nor care for reconciliation with God, not to
shed with their carnal pleasures and sinful lusts, but will go on in their own
ways, and take their hazard. The third, is a false persuasion, that it is
impossible they can be reconciled to God, arising partly, from the vileness of
their former life and grosseness of their sins, partly, from the ignorance of
the Gospel, and of the rich grace of God offered to the worst of sinners, who
shall forsake their former ways and fly unto Christ; and partly, arising from
the ignorance of the scope and end of the law, which is appointed to be a
pedagogue to lead and draw men unto Christ, after their conviction of sin by
the law, how grievous soever their sins have been.

6. The remedy of this sort of secure desperation is very hard, and in some
incurable, namely these, who do not believe the threatenings and go on still in
unbelief; or, do believe the threatenings, but are so wedded to their lusts,
that they will not change their course and manner of sinful carriage, come what
may come, but resolve to eat and drink and be merry while they live: Concerning
whom the Prophet Isaias says, chap. 22. 14. It was revealed in mine ears by
the Lord of hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you, till ye
die, says the Lord of hosts. The best ground of hope is of such, who, through
ignorance of the end of the law and offer of the Gospel, have taken up a false
persuasion of their desperate estate. Now because the Pastor has no warrant to
read the decree of any man's reprobation in particular, his care must be in
private and public, to waken epicures, and all besotted in their sins, out of
their deadly sleep; laying before them, from Scripture, the unextinguishable
fire of hell, and the torments of the damned to be endured for ever by the
impenitent and unbelieving sinner on the one hand; and on the other hand,
making offer of remission of sin and reconciliation to all who shall forsake
their former vitions ways, and be content to embrace Christ Jesus for their
righteousness, sanctification and salvation. And to this end, let him certify
all his hearers, that threatenings are not intended of God to drive any man to
desperation, but to lead all to repentance, that they may be saved, and that
the exception of repentance and faith in the Redeemer, is to be understood in
every threatening, for so the Lord has made a plain commentary upon all his
threatenings and all his promises also, that he be not for ever mistaken, which
is this in sum, that by his threatenings he does not intend to make any man
to despair, but to repent and turn to God; and that by his promises he does not
intend, that any man should presume to sin, or turn his grace into wantonness,
as is at large set down, Ezekiel. 33, from ver. 10. to ver. 21. and, chap. 18.
from ver. 21. to the end.

Of anxious tormenting desperation.
ANxious and tormenting desperation is when a sinner, from the apprehension of
his guiltiness of irremissible sins, and fear of inextricable woeful misery,
wherein he has thrown himself, does cast away all hope of relief to be had,
and so is tortured and vexed within himself without rest. In this sort of
desperation, the miserable man having wrestled a while, does either turn
himself to a carnal temporary consolation in this world, and makes choice of a
careless and secure desparation, that he may be rid of present anxiety, or
else he resolves to dispatch himself by some sort of self-murder, counting it
more easy to die by his own hand, than to live and endure the tormenting
vexation of his own mind.

2. As for that sort of anxious desperation, which after the sore byteing of
the conscience once wakned, falls back again in carnal security, it is most
perilous, and gives very small hope to the Pastor, or faithful friends who
perceive the man after fearful wakening of his conscience, to have fallen back
to his old ways, and turned careless of the means of salvation: for, such a
man, is of set purpose and resolvedly wicked. Such was the desperation of Cain,
who, after a whiles lamentation and houling for the curse pronounced upon him
by God, plucked up his heart, departed from the society of the Church, where
God gives his presence, and goes into the land of Nod, or voluntary
banishment, and gives himself over to building of Cities, Genesis 4. 13, 14. Such
also was the desperation of Esau, who, when he saw he was excluded from the
spiritual blessing of the birthright, laments a little, and then turned himself
toward the earthly blessing, and sought all his consolation in it, Genesis 27. 34,
38. yet such men must be dealt with, if God possibly may bless the means.

3. As for the other sort of anxious desperation, except it be cured by Gods
blessing of the means used, it draws on voluntary and deliberat self-murder.
We put a difference between brute self-murder, and voluntary or deliberat
self-murder: for this beastly brute self-murder, may befall mad persons,
furious, melancholious, distracted persons, or such as are beset by some evil
spirit, in whom the faculty of reasoning is so impeded, that without the use of
reason, or common sense, they are carried to destroy themselves some way. Such
persons can hardly be called voluntary and deliberat self-murtherers, because
they are neither able to observe and discern their own condition, nor their
danger, wherein they are, nor any circumstances which might hinder them from
the mischief; and therefore it cannot properly in this case be called
desperation, because the miserable person is not so much capable of reason as
to consider the grounds and motives of hope or despair.

But voluntary self-murder, proceeds from properly called desperation,
because the wretch, after deliberation, how to escape from misery lying on and
coming on, when all reason of hope seems to fail him, he casts away any
further inquisition after the remedy; and out of apprehension, that he can be
in no worse case after his death, then he presently feels, and that he can no
other way be rid of his present torment then by death, wittingly and willingly
puts hand in himself: In this voluntary self-murder, sometime the sense of
wrath for sin committed, does predomine, as in Judas the traitor, his
desperation and self-murder: sometime the apprehension of more worldly misery,
more bitter then death, does predomine, as in King Saul, who choosed rather to
fall on his own sword, then fall alive into the hands of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 31. 4. and in Achitophels hanging himself, when he foresaw what misery
should come upon himself, when his counsel was not embraced by Absalom, 2 Samuel
17. 23.

4. To speak of self-murder in general, requires a Treatise larger then our
purpose does permit; it suffices us to speak a little to it, as the temptation
thereunto, and desperation of finding Gods mercy is a hindrance of
regeneration. To this end, where any fear or suspicion of any intention toward
this fearful sin, does appear, all meekness should be used by all that have
interest in the person suspected, that may serve to save the vexed party from
such a mischief; God must be in-called and requested for relief unto the
patient: Physicians should be called, and more Pastors then one, if they can be
had, the soul in danger must by friends, be watched and waited on, in a prudent
manner night and day, that he never be alone. If the person be capable of
reason, he must be dealt with freely to confess his temptation and purpose
toward this sin, the causes moving him must be inquired after; and if they be
other then sense of sin and fear, or feeling of Gods wrath, then course must be
taken to make the party sensible of sin and to fear Gods wrath, and to
consider, that if they give way to that sin they are tempted unto, they do no
less, in effect, then cast themselves in hell, where the justice and wrath of
God shall lie upon them without hope of ease or ending of their everlasting
torment, from which fearful destruction, they may be preserved both in soul
and body, if they shall acknowledge their sin, and fly to God in Christ
offering grace and pardon of sin and delivery from hell, and right unto heaven,
promised to all and every one who shall embrace Jesus Christ for their
redemption. And for these, whose vexation is mainly from the conscience of
heinous sins, and felt wrath of God pursuing them, the grace offered in the
Gospel must be cleared unto them and inculcated; if they can be moved to give
reasons of their fear and to propone their doubts, who knows what blessing
may follow on their free dealing, and from faithful answers from Scripture
returned unto them? Conferences of experimented Christians may with profit be
made use of in the patients audience, whereby the party may receive both
increase of knowledge and some beginnings of comfort. Among other means, godly
persons, who have in their own exercise had experience of such temptations, and
have gotten victory by flying unto Christ, may serve much by their conference
to encourage them. In some of those tempted souls, tokens of good hope will
shortly appear; in others, it may be, none can conjecture what shall be the
event, till the time declare it, whether justice or mercy was intended of God;
for, both in the elect, who are cured of this disease, and in the reprobat who
perish in their sin, the same symptoms may appear; if the anxiety and
expressions of the one and the other be compared. Therefore, care must be had
of every one under such temptations, whatsoever the event may be and the Lords
blessing waited for in the use of the means. Scripture shows us how hard
exercises Gods dear children have been under. Beside many other Saints, we
shall only name two witnesses, the one is Heman the Ezrait, that precious soul,
not much inferior to Solomon in wisdom, 1 King. 4. 31. of whom no man could
say he was a weak brain and hypochondriack or melancholious person, whose sad
exercise stands registrated ( Ps. 88.) for many man's comfort. The other
witness shall be Job. whose perplexities we read in his dispute with his
friends, and how he tasted of this bitter temptation also, Job 7. 13, 14, 15.
When I say my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint, then thou
skarest me with dreams and terrifies me with visions, so that my soul chooses
strangling. Behold there is a very sad exercise of the most holy and righteous
man on earth; there is a sore temptation even unto self-murder, but how is
this temptation overcome? first, he does not hide his temptation, but opens
it up in the worst shape: this gives the temptation vent, he will not conceal
it, nor be Satan's secretar in this; and this is one mean to weaken the
temptation. Then he presents it before God, and pours out his complaint
unto the Lord, and this gives him the victory. So let all souls tempted unto
desperation do, and cleave to God in Christ, and they shall be victorious also.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning them that absolve themselves without warrant.
THe third rank of those that impede their own regeneration, remains to be
spoken of. Of this kind are all they, who, after they have slightly exmined
themselves, and are convinced of sin and of deserved death, if they were dealt
with in rigor of justice, do unwarrantably absolve themselves, deceiving their
own conscience by a fallacy, false sylogisme or captious reasoning, and from
the conscience, as from a blinded or seduced Judge, do draw forth a sentence of
absolution to themselves which God does not allow. All such persons do either
lay down some false principle or ground for absolution of sinners; or, if they
lay down a true ground, they make wrong application of that ground to
themselves, and so beguile themselves miserably.

The first sort.
SOme do grant themselves to be sinners, but do persuade themselves, that God
is so merciful as he will not destroy any man for sin: which principle being
once laid down, no wonder such men go on in their own way and sing a requiem to
their own souls. Of this sort of men the Lord does speak, Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19.
showing, that he makes his covenant with his people, lest there should be among
you, says he, a root that bears gall and wormwood. And it come to pass, when
he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying,
I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my own heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst. It is possible, few shall be found so impudent, as that
they dar, in express terms, profess this their mis-belief of Gods justice;
yet, they are not a few who foster this error in their heart, who having, as it
were, made a Covenant with death and hell, are far from fearing to perish in
their sins. In this sort are all they to be ranked, who conceive, that all the
threatenings in the Scripture are given forth, to the intent, that men, being
bridled by terrors, might compose themselves to a more humane and social life
among others; who, lest they should seem Atheists in word, do cry up Gods
mercy, bounty and love to man, so as they make small reckoning of the Lords
truth and justice, even as if the justice of God in punishing rebels, could not
consist with his mercy to the penitent, or as if the end of creating man, could
not be obtained, if obstinat sinners be destroyed.

2. The main cause of such error, is an obstinat purpose to walk after the
counsel and imagination of their own heart; and because they cannot quiet their
conscience in following their own ways, except in promising to themselves
impunity in their sinning, they presume confidently to go on in their own ways
against all threatenings, and so do blow their consciences blind. Such profane
presumption, although it deserves to be beaten with a rod, rather then to be
reasoned with, yet let the Pastor deal with the presumer, as he ought to do
with other desperate like sinners; and in the first place, let him propose for
remedy of this evil, what the Lord does speak against such a person, Deuteronomy. 29.
20. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in
this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under
heaven. And as he finds this work upon him, So let him deal with him.

2. Some are near of kindred to such persons, who do not reject all
threatenings, yet do think in their heart that none are in danger except gross
flagitious and notorious sinners; but as to themselves, they conceive because
they are not the worst of men, they are without the reach of divine justice,
especially if their conversation be according to humane laws so regulated as
they have the reputation of honest neighbors. With such men Christ deals (
Luke 13. 1, 2, 5.) when word came concerning the Galileans whose blood Pila^
mixed with their sacrifices, Christ says to them, Suppose ye that these
Galileans were sinners above all Galileans* because they suffered these things?
I tell you, nay, but except ye repent you shall all likewise perish. This is
the remedy prescribed by Christ to such men.

3. Some there are who hope to be absolved before God, and do absolve
themselves in their own conscience, by their good works and obedience done to
the law: Of this sort was Paul before his conversion, who, till the time that
the spiritual light of the law brake in upon his mind and killed the conceit of
his own inherent righteousness, was no mean man in his own eyes. Romans 7. 9.
Such was the rich young man in the Gospel, who said to Christ, that he had
kept all the commands from his youth up, till Christ did prove him a covetous
Idolater, who put a higher price on his riches then upon Christ and the kingdom
of heaven: Such were the Pharisees, who, by their obedience to the law (such as
it was) doubted nothing to absolve themselves, and that God should absolve them
also. But that the met-yaird should be no longer then their cloth, or the law
of further extent then their imagined possible practice, they admitted no
metonymie or figurative speech in the law, whereby under one branch of a duty
commanded, all duties of that kind are comprehended, and all faults contrary to
the duty are forbidden. As for example, they counted not the sixth command to
be violat, except the man did take away his neighbors life, nor the seventh
command broken, except by gross adultery and violation of the marriage bed;
nor the eighth command transgressed, except another man's goods were openly or
privately taken away, whose mistake Christ does correct, Matthew. chap. 5. and 6.

2. Such men as those are far from repentance, far from humbling themselves
before God and seeking remission of sin through Christ; for, they are ignorant
of the righteousness of the Gospel by faith in Jesus Christ, and of the way of
coming to ability for doing any acceptable work by faith in Christ, and
therefore they go about to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10. 3. and
9. 31. 32. The false ground which they do lay for their own absolution, is
this, they think to be justified by their works, against which ground, the
Apostle has pronounced condemnatory sentence, Romans 3. 20. By the deeds of the
law, shall no flesh be justified in Gods sight; for, by the law is the
knowledge of sin.

3. With this sort we may join these, who not only come short of the obedience
due to the law, but also are in conscience convicted of many transgressions of
the Lords law; yet, they conceive that God will not exact of them, or of any
man who is about to obey his law, more then the man can in the common infirmity
of flesh overtake, and do persuade themselves, that God will be satisfied with
all them, in whom is a willingness to obey the law: their false ground which
they lay, is this, that God will accept a man's will for the deed: And to this
purpose they do abuse the Scriptures, Isa. 1. 19, If you be willing and
obedient, you shall eat the good things of the land, And, 2 Cor. 8. 12. If
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted, according to that a man has,
and not according to that he has not.

4. But here is their error, whereupon they purchase from their conscience
misinformed an unwarrantable absolution; first, they lay down for a ground
that they must be justified by works. 2. Because they know they do come, and
shall come short in obedience, they turn the condition of the covenant of
works, into other terms then God has appointed, and make the will of a man to
obey the law so far as he is able, to be the condition of the covenant, which
God disclaimeth. 3. They deceive themselves in this, that what is spoken to
converted believers in Jesus Christ, already justified by faith, aiming at new
obedience, they do apply to themselves, lying under the curse and covenant of
works: for, it is true indeed, when God is dealing with those that are already
justified by faith in Jesus, and have renounced all confidence in their own
works, and fled unto Christ, and have taken on his yoke, the Lord does take in
good part the first fruits of the new creature, and does much esteem the tender
fruits of the spirit, as the places cited ( Isa. 1. and 2 Cor. 8.) do show. But
when the Lord has to do with the proud natural man, the unrenewed man, the man
that is not humbled for violation of the covenant of works, he deals with him
according to the rigor of the law, according to the condition of the covenant
of works, pronouncing his curse against that man, for every sin, till the
sinner be humbled and slye to Christ.

5. With the former we may join all these, who believe they may wash away their
sins, partly by bearing such afflictions as are laid on them by God in this
life; partly, by their tears, prayers, fastings, pilgrimages penances and
scourging of themselves; and partly, by their almsdeeds and other good works,
do believe they shall make amends for all their misdeeds; and what they cannot
perfect in this life for the matter of good works, they will take assignation to
the supererogation and superfluity of the merits of Saints, made over unto them
by the Pope; And what for the matter of suffering is not endured in this life,
they will take upon them to endure in an imaginary purgatory and place of hell
after this life, and so (poor souls) they think they may absolve themselves at
least from the sentence of everlasting condemnation by such poor shifts as
those. But the truth is, so long as they rely upon their own sufferings and
satisfactions they deny both the necessity and the worth of Christ's sufferings;
and so long as they have confidence in their own works, or works of other men,
they reject and disclaim the covenant of grace, and yet, behold how proud they
prove themselves to be, Isa. 58. 3. when they plead with God, saying, wherefore
have we fasted, and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and
thou take no knowledge?

6. Last of all, unto the former sort we join these who please themselves in
the composition of righteousness by works and righteousness by faith, thinking
to save themselves under the shelter of the one righteousness, or of the
other, however God shall deal with them. Such were the Seducers and seduced
amongst the Galatians: for refuting of whole error, the Apostle (as it were)
traveled in birth till he brought them to take up the right frame of Christ's
way of salvation,

7. The cause of all such men's deceiving of themselves in a false absolution of
their conscience, is their ignorance both of the righteousness of the law and
of the righteousness by faith: for, such as think their sins are so few and
light, or their lives so innocent, or their good works they have done so
weighty, and their purpose to do yet more good works, to be so holy, or their
pains taken in religion so considerable, or their sufferings resolved upon, so
great, and thereupon do absolve themselves, consider not that the law, or
covenant of works, does require perfect, personal obedience to all Gods law,
under the pain of Gods curse, growing in Items as the law is oftener
transgressed, till they fly in to the perfect ransom of Christ's obedience. And
as for the righteousness of faith in Jesus, they consider not, that his
righteousness will not be bestowed upon any who do not renounce all confidence
in their own or others works, and betake themselves altogether to the only
grace of Christ; they consider not, that if the worth of any work be relied
upon, the bargain of free grace is spoiled, and clear marred; for, if it he by
works, it is no more of grace; and if it be of grace, it is no more of works;
for, these two are so opposite one to another in the matter of man's election and
justification, that they can no more consist together as causes p^ocuring or
moving God, then contradictory sentences can be both true, as Paul teaches,
Romans 11. 6.

3 A third sort of self-deceivers and unwarranted self-^b^olvers, we reckon all
persons poisoned with deadly herefies, who, being drawn away from the doctrine
of Christ, set down in the holy Scriptures turn after some false christ and
false religion of men's or their own devising, giving unto their Idol, what
worship, what service, what employment, what power they please, and making
their own conditions of peace with God as they think good; some denying the
eternity of the Godhead of the true Christ; some the reality of his assumed
humane nature; some evacuating so far as they can his three offices, and the
fruit of his execution thereof; all of them promising to themselves salvation
in another, then in the true Christ described to us in Scripture, who is
Creator, up-holder and Governor of all things, very coeternal God with the
Father and holy Spirit, in the fullness of time made man, ever-living Prophet,
Priest and King to his Church, both before his incarnation and constantly
since, the way, the truth and the life, made of God unto true believers in him,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, who walk, among the
golden candle-sticks, and searches the ways and hearts of every man, as he
holds forth himself in these Epistles unto the seven Churches of Asia, Revel.
chap. 2. and 3. Of this danger of mistaking the true Christ, and embracing a
false in his room, he himself does carefully fore-warn his Disciples, Math. 24.
4, 5, 24, 25, 26, Take heed that no man deceive you: for many shall come in my
name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

The proper remedy of this evil, is this, let every one that has an ear, hear
what the spirit speaks to the Churches, not only in these seven Epistles, but
also in all the rest of the holy Scriptures, which are the expressions of the
holy Spirit; but, if any man receive not the truth in love, set down by the
Lords Spirit in the Scripture, his punishment is set down by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians, 2. 11. and for this cause, to wit, because they received not the love of
the truth that they might be saved, God shall send them strong delusion, that
they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

1. The fourth sort of absolvers of themselves without Gods warrant, are these
who pretend unto true religion, and deny the power of it; of whom some are
couvinced of their duty to repent their sins and to forsake their lusts, and to
endeavor a reformation of their life; and this they do promise to themselves,
and purpose seriously to do (as they think) only they cannot presently, and at
once, break off the course they are upon, but do hope by little and little to
come forward, and at length that they shall wholly give themselves to religious
exercises, and a holy life; mean time they conceive, they may come in among the
true converts and young beginners, albeit they come not up the length which
they intend, but are unde the power of some beloved lusts, which they cannot
rid themselves of, but do hope they shall betime overcome them. Such men do
miserably mistake the matter, first, in that they think their purpose of
repentance and a new life bred in them by conviction of their duty, to be the
very grace of regeneration and begun sanctification. Secondly, they conceive
that the lusts which do reign in themselves are common to them and all other
regenerat persons, of whom few or none (think they) want their own gross
faults. Thirdly, they conceive they can repent more seriously when they please,
and will repent after a whiles following of their beloved lusts, as if
repentance were not a saving grace of the holy Spirit, whom they do daily
provoke by their vileness, but a work in the power of every man's free will,
being once convinced of his sin. Fourthly, they do not consider, that by the
delay of repenting and turning from all sin unto God, their heart is daily more
and more in Gods Judgment, hardened, and God provoked to punish their voluntary
impenitence with judicial hardness of heart, that they shall never repent. Such
men our Lord compares to the disobedient Son, who promised to his Father he
would go work in his vineyard, and went not, Math. 21. 30. Such men are they,
who know the well of the Lord, but do it not, and therefore worthy of double
punishment, Math 12. 47. The ^^medy of this evil Christ gives. Luke 13. 24,
25, 26. Strive to enter at the strait gate; for many ^ say unto you, will seek
to enter in, and shall not be able, M^n know not how soon God may shut the
door, therefore men had need while it is to day, not to harden their hearts.
psalm. 95. 8.

2. Other some are, who being of a civil life, profess and do persuade
themselves, that they indeed do repent and believe in Christ, and by faith in
him do certainly expect salvation freely of his grace. If you pose any such
men, whether they do indeed believe in Christ, they shall presently answer,
that they firmly do believe in him, and that they never doubted but he is their
sweet Savior who died for them. If you press them to speak in earnest from
their heart, they shall presently be ill pleased with the question, and ask,
what cause of suspecting the sincerity of their faith and repentance can be
justly alleged? or, what cause has any man to suspect them, or doubt of Gods
favor toward them in Christ? In whom should we believe (say they) if not in
Christ? Is there any other Savior of sinners beside him? If a man please to
try the truth of their faith by their repentance, they shall forthwith affirm,
that they repent day and night, and have just cause so to do; for, in many
things we sin all, and why then should we not always repent? If they be asked
of their love to God and their neighbor, they shall answer after the same
manner. Such men are these, of whom Christ speaks, that they will confidently
come to him and call him Lord, Lord, and yet be found no ways careful to do
the Lords will, but servants to their own lusts.

3. Such men do deceive themselves, first, by framing to themselves such carnal
notions of faith and repentance, and of the love of God and of saving hope, and
other spiritual graces, as in their fantasy they conceive they do practice,
which conceptions are not grounded upon the Word of God. Secondly, they esteem
the assent of their mind unto the truth, commending these duties unto men, as
good as the performance of them: and they do take the sentence of their
conscience concerning the equity of such duties, for the sentence of their
conscience bearing witness of their practice and obedience of these duties;
and while their conscience says why should not I do so? they take that for as
good, as if it had said I do so: but saving graces go deeper then civil
carriage, and to commend the duties of repentance and faith in Christ is not
enough, except they be put in practice also, in daily sorrow for sin and hatred
of it, and flying to Christ daily to be washen and more and more sanctified.

4. Some there are, who, when they have heard that a man is justified by faith
in Christ only, without the works of the law, do imagine a faith, which needs
not to bring forth any good works at all; and so they take off the justified
man from all necessity of following good works, as far as they take off good
works from being the cause of justification, and do open a door to themselves
to live after their own will in the lusts of their flesh, conceiving, that they
who believe in Christ are fred, not only from the covenant of the law, but also
from the command of the law, against whom our Lord does speak, and does cut off
such libertines and turners of the grace of God into wantonness, from the
kingdom of heaven, Math. 5. 17, 18, 19. And the Apostle, to guard against this
self-deceit, ( Heb. 12. 14.) commands to follow holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord.

5. Some there are, who pretending to esteem well of the offer of the Gospel,
and of the duty of following the means of making them partaker of the
marriage-supper, do yet think themselves excusable, when they have much ado in
their worldly callings, albeit they prefer the care of their family and
provision for their things out-ward, unto the main work of their entertaining
communion with God; yea, they conceive, that God will allow them in so doing,
as Christ does insinuat in the parable of the ghuests invited to the feast,
answering the invitation with I pray have me excused, Luke 14. 18, 19. This is
a rise evil in great personages, rich persons and such as are much imploved in
earthly affairs; such men deceive themselves, first, in laying down this ground
with themselves, that their earthly affairs, the necessity whereof does, first,
and most sensibly appear, must in the first room be cared-for, and that the one
thing necessar may be followed after, as their civil and earthly affairs may
permit. Secondly, they reckon gain to be godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5. for, they
cannot be persuaded when gain may be had, that God requires of any man to slip
the occasion, or to put his worldly goods in hazard, by defending or following
matters of religion. Thirdly, they think themselves so wise, as they can well
enough serve two Masters, God and covetousness, albeit when it comes to the
proof, they will be found to serve, not God, but their own lusts. This error
our Lord refuteth and gives warning to beware of it, Matthew. 6. 24. And, Luke
21. 34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeting and drunkenness and cares of this life. No wonder then, that
such men profit not by the Word of God, but remain fruitless, because they are
by our Lord compared to the ground that receives the seed among thorns, Mat.
13. 22. He hears the word, but the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness
of riches, choaks the word, and he remains unfruitful.

6. Some there are, who, having received a sufficient measure of gifts, whereby
they may promove the kingdom of Christ, and be profitable to the society they
live in by making use of their gifts, do pack up all their duties in a
sequestration of themselves from all business, conceiving this way to be
fittest both for God's service and their own salvation. Whereupon, they betake
themselves to a private life in some obscure corner, choosing rather to live as
Monks and Eremits, then to appear in public and make use of their gifts, with
the hazard of toyling themselves and tossing of their estimation among
beholders of them. And this their resolution is backed with a pretended
purpose, to spend their time in reading and prayers, without provoking any man
to hatred or emulation against them; thus they conceive they shall provide best
for their own ease and safety: and if withal, they apprehend that they are not
fitted with gifts, which may be profitable to others, and do think, what they
have bestowed upon them by God, to be scarce sufficient for the carrying of
themselves on in the course that tends to happiness, then they conceive they
are well excused, if they let all public works alone, without putting forth
their finger to help what they see amiss. We do not deny, but sundry godly
persons, in the heat of persecution, have been forced to lu^k in a wilderness
among wild beasts during the time of the danger, of whose fellowship the world
was not worthy; neither do we deny, that age and infirmity of body may make men
unfit for all public employment; But, the fault we tax is of such men, as
being able, in Church or State, to do service to God and the society they live
in, do, for the love of their own ease, hide their talent, and not make use
thereof for the benefit of others; for, if a narrow search be made of such men's
resolution, the fear of outward trouble in the world, a declining to fight the
fight of faith, impatience to be at any pains, and a desire to keep the
estimation of their parts from the hazard of men's censure, and love of their
own fleshly ease, will be found the fountain of their resolution. But, here we
deal with none but such as the Apostle and Christ does speak against, to wit,
such as in some honest employment, for the common utility, refuse to be at
pains and work, and therefore are not worthy of their bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
And let us hearken to Christ's judgment of such men, whom the world admireth
for most holy Moncks in the parable of the talents, he takes up the lazy
lubbart, of whom we speak, under the reckoning of a k^avish servant, who
because he had but one talent (which amounts to no small sum) went away and
hid it in the earth, Mat. 25. 26. Thou wicked and slothful servant, says he
etc. and, ver. 30. cast the unprofitable servant into outer darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The remedy is, that men of parts and abilities do not yield unto their lazy
humor nor to their discouragements, which may foster their temptations to
idleness, but study rather to live in the sense of their obligations to God,
and to improve all that they have received from him, for his honor and the
welfare of his people: and to this end, it is fit they should hearken to the
counsel of judicious friends, rather then lean to their own judgment
over-swayed with temptations, lest the Lord deci^her them, and lead them forth
with the workers of iniquity, Ps. 125. 5.

7. Some are very like, in all externals, to the true converts, so far as can
be observed by beholders: for, they profess the true religion with others,
they seem to have consecrat themselves unto Christ, they associat themselves
unto, and haunt the company of these who are in best esteem, and join
themselves always with the reputed godly, they seem ready prepared to bear
Christ's cross, and to go forth out of the city after him bearing his reproach,
and to be waiters upon his second coming, yet inwardly they were never renewed,
they are not troubled with the sense of sin and sinfullnesse, they do not in
earnest, or seriously, seek after Christ's righteousness and remission of sin
through him, nor worship God in their spirit. These are described to us in the
parable of the foolish and wise Virgins. Matthew. 25. the foolish were in company
and outward fellowship of religion with the wise, their outward conversation
was without scandal, as was the behavior of the wise; they had lamps of
profession as the wise, and were not suspected by themselves or others to be
unsound, they went forth in profession waiting for the coming of the Lord, as
the wise did; and last of all, no other infirmities were found in them, then
such as the wise Virgins were subject unto also, they all fell asleep now and
then, nothing could be outwardly found to difference them from the wise
Virgins; which external likeness, as it deceived the beholders of these
foolish Virgins, So also it deceived themselves; neither shall this personal
difference be openly manifested, till the Judge, the searcher of hearts, shall
come and separat the goats from the sheep, and the hypocrites from the unfeigued
believers. The remedy is, that every one who pretend unto holiness externally,
search their own hearts, and inward sinfulness, daily, and fly to Christ in
earnest, that their nakedness may be covered and their affections made
spiritual, seeking after things above, and that by faith in Christ they may be
filled with the unction of the holy spirit, for bringing forth true fruits of
faith.

8. Unto the former, we may join such, as for their eminent gifts above the
common sort of pious people, and their abilities to conset, discourse and
dispute of matters of religion, seem to themselves and to beholders also,
eminent Saints, especially if they appear sharp censurers of others, and
z^alous against every least degree of sin in others, but most of all, if they,
for their enduements, be fitted, and called to pray in public and preach the
Gospel to others, and withal do live without scandal, they doubt nothing but
they are high in Gods estimation, as they are set up in reputation among the
godly in the visible Church. Now that such gifted men may deceive themselves,
and pass sentence in their own favors for their own absolution from any
challenge, which may condemn them, our Lord does fore-warn us, Matthew 7. 21. 22.
telling us, that not only many private professors of the christian Religion,
and seeming zealous worshipers, crying Lord, Lord, may deceive themselves and
miss heaven, but also Preachers of the Gospel, yea and Prophets, yea and men
endued with the gift of doing miracles and casting out of devils in Christ's
name, not a few shall be disclaimed by Christ and condemned by him in the day
of judgment. If it be asked, what can be their mistake, and the cause of
Christ's rejecting of them? we answer, Such men deceive themselves, 1. because
both they and beholders also think them holier, then they who are inferior in
place and gifts unto them. 2. They compare themselves with those they live
among and not with the law of God. 3. They put not due difference between
common gifts and saving graces. 4. They consider not, that to whom much is
given, much will be required of them; and therefore, after trial they will be
found pust up with the estimation of gifts, induements, employment and success
which they have had, as if these were the undoubted evidences of their
regeneration, and of Gods special love toward them; they will be found men
void of repentance and far from humble walking. in the sense of their natural,
habitual and actual sins; they will be found void of all fear of wrath, which
might drive them, in the acknowledgment of their blindness, poverty and
misery, unto Christ the Redeemer and justifier of sinners; and they will be
found void of all care of, and endeavor after, new obedience, conceiving, that
the exercise of their gifts and success in their employments, are sufficient
holiness and evidence of the holy Ghosts dwelling in them and working by them;
for, otherwise, Christ will never disclaim them who have fled to him in the
sense of their sin, and haunted him as their refuge, in the fear of deserved
wrath, and studied by faith in him to be furnished to bring forth the fruits of
the Spirit, which he has promised to them that abide in him.

It is one thing to be justified before God, another thing to be reputed
righteous by men, and esteemed so by a man's own self; it is one thing to be
endued with the knowledge of divine mysteries, another thing saveingly to
believe them and have them written in their heart; it is one thing to teach
others the way of salvation, whereby the hearers may be saved, another thing to
apply saving doctrine to themselves and make right use of it; it is one thing
to cleanse the outer side of the plater, and reform the man's outward carriage,
another thing to be inwardly renewed; it is one thing to teach repentance and
mortification of lusts, another thing by he Spirit of Christ to mortify
inbred pride, and the love of the world, vain glory and other carnal lusts.
The course which Paul followed, is the only safe way, though he was a man most
laborious in the work of the Lord, yet he lived most sensible of his natural
corruption and the body of death; he did not trust in his holy life but in
Jesus Christ Romans 7. 24, 25. he so made use of faith in Christ, as he did not
neglect the means of mortification of his sinful nature, 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep
under my body, and bring it under subjection, lest that by any means, when I
have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway.

The fifth and last sort of self-deceivers, by absolving of themselves without
the Lords allowance or approbation, are temporizers, who, for their temporary
believing, temporary repenting, temporary motions of their affections, and
temporary amendment of their manners, do seem to themselves and others also,
true believers. This sort, however it be in sundry cases coincident with one or
more of the former four self-absolvers, yet, because our Lord, in the parable of
the sower of seed, (Matthew. 13. 21. and, Luke 4. 17) does put a difference
between the stony ground and the other sorts of ground, we shall give it a room
by it self, specially because it may have the own proper considerations.

Temporizers then, we call such, as upon temporary motives, from temporary
principles for temporary ends, do embrace the Word of the Lord readily, but
slightly, and do as readily and lightly pass from it upon temporary motives,
in special, when persecution arileth for the Word, Mark 4. 16. when they have
heard the Word immediately, they receive it with gladness, and afterward, when
affliction or persecution arises for the Words sake, immediately they are
offended. Lightly they take up truth delivered, and lightly do they pass from
it again; they have no root in themselves or solid believing of the truth, for
the truths cause; but what pleases others, pleases them, and what displeases
others, does displease them, in the matters of religion; the way of God set down
in Scripture, when they hear it, they can say nothing against it, yea, they
think it good to hear the Gospel, and the largeness of Gods grace, and because
it shows unto them, a possibility of their salvation, they receive it with a
sort of natural gladness, which sort of believing does endure for a time, to
wit, so long as the way of others among whom they live, and the laws of the
country, and prosperity and good estimation with others goes along with the
profession of the truth received; but when the wind of another doctrine
blows, and does carry with it power to trouble and persecute them who will
not receive it, by and by they are offended, and renounce the truth
controverted, because it draws trouble with the profession of it: for, such
persons suppose, that gain, ease and applause are very godliness. It is true,
sometime the true believer may be surprised with a sudain tentation to renounce
the profession of truth in some point, for fear of death, as Peter's example
does show us; but true faith recovereth strength, and arises after a fall, and
endures persecution for that truth, as temporary belief does not, but fails
altogether: And the temporizers repentance failleth also, because it arises
from natural principles, and is for natural motives and ends. Such was the
repentance of Saul in weeping and justifying David for sparing his life, 1 Samuel
27. 21. Such was the repentance of the carnal Israelits Psalm. 78. 36. and the
humiliation of Ahab; and such is, their amendment of life, all nothing but
temporary, and which does not continue, as Hosea (chap. 6. 4.) shows, O
Ephraim! what shall I do unto thee? O Judah! what shall I do unto thee? for thy
goodness is like the morning cloud and like the early dew that passes soon
away.

Neither is it any wonder, that unrenewed men may attain to something like unto
faith and repentance and outward amendment of manners, if we consider that
humane writings find so much credit with men as not to be called in question,
but believed to be true; for experience testifies, that their affections are
moved sometime with delight, and sometime with indignation and pity, not only
when they read Histories, but also when they read very Fables and fained
Romances which they know to be such, and yet they cannot command their
affections in reading of them: May not then an unrenewed man give as much
credit to holy Scripture, and be affected with the holy history thereof,
without any change made of his perverse nature, the wisdom whereof is enmity
against God, and cannot subject it self either to his law or Gospel? Secondly,
if we consider what the power of a natural conscience can work upon the
affections, by just accusations, or excusations, for raising grief and joy
therein, whereof not only Scripture, but also heathen writers do bear witness,
we need not doubt, but the natural conscience may have the same power in a
temporary believer. Thirdly, if we consider what the precepts of moral
Philosophy has wrought upon the Scholars of Socrates and Aristotle and other
heathen Masters, for the outward framing of them unto seeming virtues, we need
not doubt what the precepts of the moral law may work upon a temporary
believer, for putting a luster on his life as was to be found in sundry
Pharisees without conversion and renovation of the inner man toward God.
Fourthly, if we consider what delight is found by Scholars in the
contemplation of these things which Philosophy does treat of, we may easily
persuade our selves, that more delight may be had in contemplation of what holy
Scripture does hold forth, without making the man a new creature. But when unto
the natural man's foresaid seeming perfections, knowledge of the mysteries of
religion and the gifts of preaching and prophesying are superadded, which are
but movable gifts, common to renewed and unrenewed men, and far from being
saving graces, what wonder the natural man and temporary believer be puffed up
with a high estimation of his own worth and hope of being received by Christ
the Judge, and yet be found at last to have deceived himself, and unwarrantably
absolved himself by his own deluded conscience, as Christ gives warning, Math.
7. 21.

Quest. But, what? can a temporary believer want coming up all the length that
is now spoken of and supposed to be endued with so many seeming good things,
whereunto many saved Saints do not attain?

Ans. Every saved Saint is beaten out of self-estimation, for any thing in
himself, beaten out of confidence in any thing he does or can do, and is
humbled in his heart by the law, the spiritual perfection whereof being
understood, kills his natural pride, Romans 7. 9.

2. Every saved Saint is chased for refuge to fly to Christ, to his
righteousness and the riches of grace holden forth in him, and every saved
Saint is a new creature aiming more and more to follow the course of new
obedience and drawing virtue from Christ by faith to please God and worship him
in spirit, Phil. 3. 3. So that his purpose and endeavor in some measure, is
like unto that of David, Psalm. 71. 10, 15, 16. saying, I will hope continually,
and I will praise thee more and more, my mouth shall show forth thy
righteousness and thy salvation all the day; for I know not the numbers
thereof, I will walk in the strength of the Lord God, I will make mention of
thy righteousness, even of thine only. But the temporary believer, reckons
not for his debt and deservings with the law, he is not humbled in the sense of
his sins and sinfulness, and inability to satisfy the law by himself, he has
not the root of repentance in him; for immediately upon the hearing of the
Gospel, he receives the Word with joy, without godly sorrow for his sins, Luke
8. 13. The temporary believer, is ignorant of the righteousness of God by
faith in Jesus Christ, and goes about to establish his own righteousness,
upon the bottom of his own blameless conversation, privileges of the visible
Church, common gifts of the Spirit, and success with prosperity: all which,
because he is not justified by faith in Christ, do not advance him above the
state of the workers of iniquity, Math. 7. 21, 22, 23.

The symptoms and ordinary signs of this malady of unwarrantable
self-absolution, are these, 1. all of this sort, are well pleased with their
own ways, they are not daily humbled in the sense of short-coming in duties,
and chased to Christ's righteousness, which may hide their nakedness. 2. They
are all secure and fear no wrath, but put the evil day far from them. 3. They
cannot be induced to any accurat examination of their own life, ways,
condition or estate. If any man insinuate any suspicion of hypocrisy in them,
or if their own conscience begin to question their sincerity, they cannot
endure it. 4. Albeit they say unto Christ Lord, Lord, yet they make little use
of his office of mediation, of his power and virtue for illumination,
humiliation, healing and helping on to salvation. 5. They look more to the
seeming good things in themselves for strengthening their carnal confidence,
then they take notice of the evil of a body of death in themselves to drive
them to Christ, the only deliverer from it. 6. Yea, they all serve some Idol,
lurking in their heart, they yield obedience to some reigning lust which they
will not forsake, for which cause Christ foretells, that he will declare them
to be but workers of iniquity, Math. 7. 23.

The causes of this evil, are, 1. the ignorance of the law and the utter
inability, yea, averseness of nature to be subject to it; the knowledge
whereof might make men live all their days in a loathing of themselves and cut
off all hope of obtaining righteousness by the law. 2. The ignorance of that
dear-bought righteousness of Christ, and of the riches of his grace, offering
to impute his satisfaction to every self-condemned sinner who shall fly to him
and accept his offer. 3, The ignorance of the necessity of the bringing forth
the fruits of faith, in love, and study of new obedience and sanctification, by
the furniture of Christ, without which no man shall see God. 4. The taking of a
presumptuous dead faith, in stead of that true justifying faith which lays
hold on Christ and works by love. The taking of a vain groundless hope for
that lively hope, which purifieth both the heart and external conversation
also. 5. The comparing of themselves either with the worst sort of vile
sinners, or with such as are like to themselves, or with the Saints in their
gross failings not judging themselves according to the law.

The use to be made of this doctrine is, first, to stir us up to take notice of
that power of the soul called conscience, which God has put in every man to
observe all the man's words, deeds and intentions, and to compare them with the
law and will of God, so far as it is informed and to accuse or excuse, condemn
or absolve, smite or comfort the man as it finds cause, that we suffer not
our own conscience to sleep, but set it on work whilst it is time, that we may
know how all matters do stand between God and us.

Secondly, that we inform the conscience well from the Scripture, not only
concerning the law and covenant of works, whereby we may know how guilty we are
of manifold sins, and how impossible it is for us to be justified by our works,
or to escape condemnation, but also concerning the Gospel and covenant of
gracious reconciliation by faith in Jesus Christ and concerning the covenant of
redemption, whereupon the covenant of grace offered in Christ is grounded

Thirdly, that we make due and orderly application of these covenants, that the
conscience may always be furnished with matter of humiliation, and held on in
the exercise of repentance, and not only kept from desperation, but also may
be furnished with grounds of good hope to be saved, through the grace of our
Lord Jesus who has purchased remission of sins and imputation of his
righteousness to every humbled sinner flying to him for grace.

Fourthly, that being ingrasted in Christ by faith, we, by way of
thankfulness, study in the furniture of his Spirit, to live holily, justly and
soberly; and that whatsoever measure of sanctification we attain unto, we
beware to fall back to that deadly error of seeking justification before God by
our works, whereunto we are naturally inclined: for, upon this rock the flour
and most shining professors in Israel after the flesh, made shipwreck of their
salvation, Rom, 9. 32. Israel which followed after the law of righteousness,
has not attained unto the law of righteousness, wherefore because they sought
it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. And, Romans 10. 3. for
they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.
Unto this error of seeking righteousness by our works, after entering in the
way of justification by grace, we are all naturally inclined; for, the covenant
of works is so engraven in all Adams children, do this and live, that hardly
can we renounce this way of justification, and howsoever it be impossible to
attain righteousness this way, yet hardly can we submit our selves to the
righteousness by faith in Christ, which not only the experience of Israel
after the flesh makes manifest, but also the experience of the Galatians lets
us see; for, they having once outwardly renounced justification by works, and
embraced the covenant of gracious reconciliation by faith in Jesus, did turn
about for a time, to seek justification by the works of the law, and were on
the way of falling from grace and communion with Christ. And the experience of
Papists does show the same; for, whatsoever they profess concerning faith in
Christ, yet they abhor justification by Christ's imputed righteousness and do
blaspheme that way as a mere conceit of men and a putatitious or only imaginary
righteousness, and do seek to establish their own righteousness, and to be
justified, not only before men, but also before God, by the merits of their own
and other men's works and sufferings; the imputation whereof they can tell for
money, in the midst of their blaspheming the imputation of Christ's
righteousness. What can be said for a thief, condemned to die for his faults,
and redeemed by a potent man, upon condition that he should be the domestic
servant of the redeemer, to work his work all his lifetime, and live upon his
allowance, and so never be necessitated to steal any more? if the ransomed
thief should after steal his Masters goods, and make himself a stock-purse
whereupon he thought he might live, and loose himself from his redeemers grace
and live upon his own finding, were he not worthy, upon the finding out of his
thifts and other faults, to be left in the hands of justice, to die according
to his deservings? And what could be said for a tennent, laboring a parcel of
ground of his Lands-lord, for a yearly farm-duty, by his own miscarriage
falling to beggary, if he should be taken in to the free table of his
Lands-lord, and trusted with the same parcel of ground to be labored for his
Masters use, if he should intervert the fruits of that ground, and being weary
of his Masters bounty and grace, should seek to be fired of his Masters
service, and to labor the ground for himself, for payment of rent? if upon the
finding out of his thift, and not payment of his rent, he should be cast in
prison, did he not deserve to be dealt with according to justice, who would not
live by grace? So may be said of the man, who shall turn from justification by
free grace, to seek justification by his works.

The fifth and last use of this doctrine is, that to the intent we may not
absolve our selves without Gods allowance, we study to make our calling and
election sure, by endeavoring to walk in the sense of our unworthiness and
ill-deserving, and renouncing all confidence in any thing without Christ, to
rely on him for righteousness and life-eternal, and by faith in him draw
spirit and life from him, for furnishing us unto new obedience: for, he is the
justified man, approven of God, who has no confidence in the flesh, and
rejoiceth in Jesus Christ, and worshipeth God in the spirit, Philip. 3. 3.

THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of considerations to be pr^^sed.
HItherto the sicknesses of the Conscience of the un-regenerat man are spoken
to, and this was needful, to the end, that we might show how Regeneration is
either altogether kept off, or hindered from growing where it is begun. And
because many of these sicknesses, which destroy many of the sons of Adam,
cleave to the regenerat man, and though they do not reign, nor altogether
prevail over him, yet do molest and vex him, and hinder his comfortable walking
toward his everlasting blessedness: Now we come to speak, first, in this Book,
of these cases of the conscience of the man regenerat, which do brangle, and
bring in question his state in grace, and make him doubt whether he be a man
translated out of the state of nature, out of the kingdom of Satan, or not.
And next, of these cases that concern his condition in the state of grace in
the following Book.

As to the first sort of cases, which concern the regenerat man's state, some
considerations must be premised, for making particulars afterward more clear.

1. In the question of this, or that man's regeneration or his being in the
state of grace, it is all one to question whether he be born again, or be
effectually called, or endued with saving faith, or be a justified man, or be
reconciled to God, or be an adopted child? And in the answer of this question,
let it be proven, that he is any of these, and it is proven also, that he is
all these: for, albeit these denominations, in their formal conceptions in the
abstract, may be distinguished, yet upon the matter in the conceit they fall
upon the same individual person altogether, because it is impossible to prove a
man to be regenerat, but he must be proven also a true believer in Christ, a
man reconciled to God, a man justified and an adopted child

2. It is necessary therefore, for proving a man to be regenerat, to know the
right description of the regenerat man which is given by the Apostle, Phil. 3.
3. We are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Jesus Christ, and have no confidence in the flesh. Wherein the Apostle holds
forth the truly regenerat circumcised in heart. 1. He is not sinlesse, but so
sensible of his sinfulness, as he has no confidence in himself, nor any thing
else in himself. 2. He is not free of accusations or tentations and doubts, but
he flies to Christ for righteousness. 3. He is not an idle and unfruitful
branch, but a worshiper of God in spirit and truth. 1. He is burdened with sin.
2. He comes to Christ for relief. 3. He puts on Christ's yoke, Math. 11. 28,
29. If a man have these three properties jointly in him, he is a regenerae man,
and may defend his interest (in the state of grace) and right to righteousness
and eternal life through Jesus Christ.

3. Divine operations and saving graces which accompany salvation, such as are
faith, repentance unto life, hope, Christian love to God and men for Gods
cause, effectual vocation, justification, reconciliation, adoption, go together
in time by Gods gift, but one of them goes before another in order of nature;
for, effectual calling goes before faith, and faith goes before hope, and
before charity or love. Again, these graces which are given to the redeemed
child of God jointly, in respect of time, do not show themselves in their
evidence alike soon in time, nor do they equally manifest themselves when they
do appear in time. And so the evidences of repentance may be discerned in not a
few converts, before faith in Christ do show it self in them clearly. So also
love to God and his Saints oft-times may be discerned in a regenerat man,
before he himself dare affirm any thing of his faith in Christ.

4. Albeit there be many regenerat persons, who for the present time cannot
perceive in themselves any undoubted signs of their conversion; yet it is
certain also, that there be many, who, to their own unspeakable comfort, are
assured of their regeneration, and that they are translated from death to life,
and that they have received the spirit of adoption and earnest of eternal life,
as is pointed out in the experience of the Ephesians, chap. 1. 14. And this is
certain also, that all who are fled to Christ for refuge, should by all means
labor to make their calling and election clear and certain to themselves, 2
Pet. 1. 10. And to this purpose we are commanded to examine our selves, and try
whether we be in the faith or not, whether Christ by his Spirit be in us or
not, 2 Cor. 13. 5. for otherwise, except a convert know certainly the
blessedness of his own state, and that he stands in grace and favor with
God, it is not possible for him to give hearty thanks to God for the change of
his state, from being an enemy, to be made a reconciled subject and child of
God. It is not possible for him to rejoice in the Lord, or set cheerfully
himself to serve God, or comfortably call on God, as a father to him in Christ:
Wherefore, all who in the sense of their sins and fear of deserved wrath are
fled for refuge unto Christ, should deal by prayer earnestly with God, that he
would graciously grant unto them his Spirit, by whose operation in them, they
may know the saving graces which he has freely bestowed upon them, of which
gift of the holy Spirit the Apostle does speak, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

5. The knowledge of a man's own regeneration, has many degrees of clearness
and assurance, by reason of the variety of conditions wherein a man truly
converted may be: For, many doubts may arise in the man regenerat, which may
darken his sight, and hinder the assurance of saving grace granted unto him,
whereof sundry causes may be found, and in special these four among others. 1.
In a man illuminat and renewed by the holy Spirit, there remains a great deal
of ignorance, much doubting mixed with faith, by reason of unskilfulnesse of
the convert to examine and discern this blessed change made in him, where
through that comes to pass in many young converts, which will be seen in
infants, who have a soul indeed, but do not know or perceive that they have a
soul till they come to some years of discretion; yea, many sound Christians,
are oft-times at a stand about their regeneration, and know not what to make of
their faith or repentance, especially when they feel the power of the body of
death, the strength of natural corruption in themselves, and great
indisposition for any spiritual exercise; they are forced with the Apostle to
cry, miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me? Romans 7. 24. mean time for
weakness of their faith, they are not able at the first to wrestle against
discouragment, and to come up unto the Apostles thanking God through Christ. 2.
By the tentation of Satan oft-times the persuasion of holy men is darkened, so
as they cannot see the evidences of their own regeneration clearly: for, Satan
sets himself to vex the Saints who are delivered from his kingdom and bonds,
whom albeit he know that he cannot destroy them, yet he will not cease to
trouble them, that at least he may make them some way unfit for Gods service
and mar their cheerfulness in his service; and because he fears harm from
them unto his kingdom, by their dealing with the unconverted to repent their
sins, and to turn unto God, therefore he finds them work at home in their own
bosom, and puts them to defend themselves and to forbear to invade his
subjects, till they be settled themselves. 3. Ofttimes the Lord is offended by
the sins of the regenerat, and specially by their gross transgressions, for
which his Spirit being grieved, does for a time cease from comforting them, and
does not bear witness with their spirits, that they are the children of God,
as he has formerly used to do. 4. Oft-times the Lord by suffering doubts to
arise in their hearts, uses to try and exercise the faith of his children, and
thereby to stir them up to the pursuing of the duties of piety and
righteousness more vigorously and sincerely, that after victory obtained over
these tentations, they may be more confirmed in their faith, and more diligent
in his obedience.

6. It may come to pass, that while the true convert does most doubt of his
own regeneration, that the work of Gods special grace may be observed in him
and clearly seen by others more experienced in the ways of God, and endued
with the spirit of discretion. The reason whereof is, because howsoever the
weak convert, and child of light, walking in darkness of tentation and
desertion, cannot discern his own blessed state, yet there may appear, and be
perceived in him, such signs and undoubted evidences of saving grace, that the
prudent beholder of him under his sad exercise, may in the judgment of
discretion and charity, declare his righteousness, and him for his state to be
in grace and favor with God. In these two disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24.
saving faith was not extinguished, albeit they were driven to suspect
themselves to have been mistaken, when they once believed that Christ was the
promised Savior; for, in that same time, there appeared in them evident tokens
of their unfeigned love to Christ: for, while they are troubled with suspicion
of their being mistaken about Christ, they are very sad and sorrowful, and
were regrating the sufferings of Christ, and were gathering what arguments they
could for supporting their faith, whereby their dying faith might be supported
by conference about this matter, laying forth their doubts and tentations one to
another.

7. The precise time of begun regeneration, is not always observed nor known,
either by the regenerat man himself, or by beholders of his way, as experience
makteh evident in many, who from their infancy are brought up in the exercises
of true religion, in whose conversion no notable change can be observed. In
those the words of Christ in part are verified, the kingdom of heaven comes
not with observation. Such persons when they begin to examine themselves,
whether they be regenerat, whether they be in Christ, and at what time they
were converted, they can neither determinatly condescend upon the time of their
conversion, nor can they confidently speak of their conversion, till after
sundry trials and experiences they can gather proofs of their sincerity from
such signs, effects and marks of the work of saving grace in them, as may prove
that Christ has dwelt in them of before.

8. Albeit regeneration be of the same kind, spece and definition, in all the
regenerat, yet it does admit sundry accidental differences, when the conversion
of such and such persons is compared: for, some do not stay long in the straits
of regeneration, or new birth, but within a short space of time they are both
wounded and healed, are both casten down and raised up again, are both slain by
the Law and quickened by the Gospel: Of this sort we have a past proof in some
thousand converts, Act, 2. who by one sermon or two were converted to the faith
of Christ and fellowship with the Church. On the other hand, experience of many
does show, they have been under the spirit of bondage a long time, before they
could receive the consolations of the Gospel, Heb. 2. 15. Some in the beginning
of their conversion are handled very tenderly, and afterward fall in hard
exercises of mind, as we may see in David, who in his youth, while he was
keeping his fathers sheep, did pass the time in holy songs, and playing on his
harp, but afterward he was more sharply exercised, and much afflicted from time
to time with the sense of divine wrath. Some in sorrow and much weeping do
follow Christ, and study to promove his kingdom: such a one was Timothy, whom
the Apostle exhorts to admit a larger measure of consolation allowed unto him
by the Lord, that he might be the more cheerful and courageous in the warfare
whereunto he was called, 2 Timothy 1. 4. Another of this sort was Heman the
Ezrahit, who ( Psalm. 88.) declares, that from his youth up he was so kept
under terror, as he was ready to die under discouragment: And in the experience
of this holy man, we have a proof of what was holden forth in the preceding
consideration, to wit, that regeneration may be begun in a man, and well
promoved before either himself or others can well discern it: for, of them who
are kept under the law and spirit of bondage, it is hard determinatly to
judge, before faith in Christ begin to appear in them, whether their exercise
be the special work of the holy spirit of regeneration, or not: for as it may
come to pass, that the spirit of fear and bondage may for a time work, and go
no further then to convict a man, and not go on to convert him, So also it may
come to pass, that there be some wrestling of faith lying under-foot in the
midst of terrors, not perceived for a while; of which wrestling none can well
give out sentence, that it is a wrestling of saving faith, before faith get
some victory over tentations, and break forth in some evident effects. In which
case it is very needful warily and circumspectly to apply the doctrine of the
Gospel, so as the afflicted soul may be supported with hopes of a gracious
out-gate; for, the work of the law, humbling the sinner, is a fair call to come
to Christ, and a messenger sent by Christ to bring him up, Gal. 3. 24.

9. Albeit the regenerat man, in respect of the state of his person, by
standing in grace and favor with God, fixed and unmovable as the Apostle does
show us, Romans 5. 1, 2, 3. partly, because the love of God manifested to the
believer in Christ is unchangeable; and partly, because the covenant of grace
through Christ is an everlasting covenant, Isa. 55. 3. and partly, because the
saving gifts and calling of God are such, as God will never repent him to have
bestowed them, Romans 11. 29. yet in respect of his condition the regenerat man,
is subject to many changes in his life and conversation, in the disposition of
his mind and affections, and in the exercise of his gracious habits, and in the
sense and observation of the grace of God in him and favor of God toward him:
for, it may come to pass, yea, and oft-times does come to pass, that men who
are regenerat, and in the state of grace, which is a notable good state, may be
in a very evil condition, in a miserable and deplorable disposition of heart,
as befell the Church of Ephesus, Sardis and Laodicea. And it may be also, that
regenerat persons, after their consciences are wakened, and they do perceive
the miserable and sinful condition of their affections and conversation, that
no small doubts arise in their hearts whether their state in grace be real or
not, which doubts will evanish, when after the renewing of their repentance,
the^r condition is changed to the better: for, Christ pre-occupieth this
tentation, speaking, to the Church of Sardis and Laodicea, counselling them to
strengthen the thing that remains, which was ready to dye, and not to doubt
of his love toward them, Revel. 2. and 3.

10. These tentations whereby the regenerat man is troubled, and tempted to
doubt whether he be in the state of grace, should be distinguished and
discerned from actual doubting; for, there may be a temptation unto doubting,
without a yielding unto the temptation, as we see in Christ our Lord, whom the
devil durst tempt to doubt, whether he was the Son of God, but his holy heart
could not admit such a temptation. And the Apostle ( Ephesians. 6. 11, 12. etc.) does
warn the Saints, that our adversary Satan uses to throw fiery darts at all the
children of God; which fiery and poysonable darts, the regenerat man should not
meddle with nor finger them, but by the shield of faith, with all speed, quench
and extinguish them. But when a probable reason is joined with the temptation,
and the temptation does appear to be very reasonable, and when there is a fear,
that the tentation shall be yielded unto, except the scruple be removed, then
let the temptation be examined and brought to the form of a reason or sylogism,
that the strength of it being tried to be null, it may be rejected; or let the
temptation be communicated to a prudent friend or Pastor, who may discover the
sophistry of the temptation; for, if the temptation shall be slighted and not
discussed, albeit it lie quiet for a time, yet it will return again and raise
more trouble and vexation to the conscience, then it did before.

11. In answering of doubts and temptations tending to weaken faith, it is
needful to observe and ^shew an usual stratagem of Satan, whereby he does
multiply and heap together a number of doubts; and after he has suggested one
doubt, presently does suggest on the back of that another, and after that
another, whereby he marreth the answering of the first doubt, which from the
Word of God, either immediately, or by some faithful Friend or Minister, is
offered for solution thereof: by this mean, Satan endeavors that the mind of
the afflicted person may, at one time, both be turned off from taking notice of
the answer offered, and be taken up wholly with the consideration of the new
suggested doubt, So that the answer to the new doubt has no place, because the
afflicted party does not take heed thereto. In this case, both the party
afflicted, and the party offering consolation, must hold to the first doubt,
and not suffer any other new doubt to have place, till a satisfactory answer be
given to the first doubt, and after that, let every objection, moved by the
party afflicted, be answered one after another in order.

12. Seeing every doubt, whereby the regenerat person is troubled, does tend
either to weaken faith in Christ, or to hinder the bringing forth of the fruits
of faith, let no answer to any doubt of this kind be esteemed sufficient,
except it lead the afflicted person unto Christ, teaching him to humble himself
before God; and being brought low in his own eyes, to lay hold by faith on
Jesus Christ, the only Redeemer, and relief from sin and misery; and after
laying hold on the Physician, to request for the remedy of that evil which has
moved and given strength to the doubt: for, Christ is the end, both of the Law
and of every spiritual exercise: for, the enjoining of such and such moral
duties, whereby un-skillfull Physicians use to over-charge diseased
consciences, commanding the afflicted party in the first place, to go about
such and such duties, and the exercise of such and such virtues, as may remove
the evil which gave ground to the doubt, can never avail the diseased person,
except he be led first unto Christ for remission of sin and acceptance of his
person, that in him, power to do these duties may be obtained, and by his
Spirit, moral precepts may be quickened; for, if these precepts be pressed upon
the diseased without Christ, they can do no more but detain the afflicted in
self confidence, and make him hope in vain, that he may or can by his own work
overcome the evil felt in him, or that he can by himself, attain to that good
which he conceives necessar for loosing of his doubt; but let him go to Christ
for remission of sin, and then for strength to go about the duty.

13. Because almost in all cases of conscience which pertain to the state of
the regenerat man, some grace or Christian virtue is pitched upon and called in
question, whether it be in him or not, heed must be taken that evangelick
graces, virtues or actions, be not weighed in the balance of the moral Law and
covenant of Works, wherein nothing has weight which comes short of absolute
perfection of personal obedience; for, in the strict judgment of God and the
conscience, according to the law of Works, no mere man, nor any action of man,
can stand, Ps. 130. 3. for, there are so many imperfections and blemishes in
the Saints and their best works, being compared with the perfect rule of
righteousness by the Law, that whatsoever luster or appearance of good may be
in a work, it is blecked and made to hide it is face before the Law: but, let
the tender buds of new obedience and fruits of faith, be examined by the grace
of the Gospel, which judges of the begun obedience of the believer in Christ,
according to the sincerity and uprightness of the man aiming at conformity to
the Law, how short soever he come of his aim, and of the spiritual perfection
of the Law, and it will be taken for new obedience. It is true, the Evangel
requires, that a man fled to Christ for justification, and reconciled to God
by faith in Christ, should set himself to work the works prescribed in the
moral Law, for the glory of God, and should aim at the exact obedience of all
the Commands; yet, the Gospel does not reject a good work for the defects,
imperfections and blemishes thereof, but accepts and takes in good part the
first fruits and buds of new obedience, and does foster the tender and small
beginnings, that they may grow and increase. And the reason is, because the
Gospel does not teach us to seek the justification of our persons before God by
works, but by faith in Christ, and then teaches us to seek the justification
of our faith before men in our own and others conscience, by the sincere
endeavor of new obedience. And therefore,

14. While we are about the cure of the wounds of the conscience and
strengthening of faith, we must on the one hand take heed, left we foster
presumption, and hinder either the exercise of repentance, or doing diligence
in following duties: for, Christian graces do not impede, but help and
strengthen one another, if they be real and kindly* because they must flow from
the same fountain of the spirit of sanctification, and do run toward the same
end, which is the glory of God: and on the other hand, we must take heed lest
we press the exercise of repentance, as it were out of our own strength, or
the practice of duties, so as we hinder the exercise of faith in Christ* who is
that exalted Prince to give repentance, and is the author and finisher of
faith. Let us so cry up the imputed righteousness of Christ, that we neglect
not to press the regenerat man (freely justified by grace) to bring forth the
fruits of faith, and to follow hard after the growth of sanctification, without
which, no man shall see the face of God; and let us so extol the covenant of
Grace, and freedom of the believer from the covenant of Works, that we neglect
not to keep up the authority of the moral Law and the commands thereof, as the
perpetual rule of new obedience, the use whereof is very profitable, in the
whole course of a Christian life, to hold forth the duty of believers in
Christ, and to show unto them, by their short-coming in duties, the poison and
power of corruption remaining in the Saints, and to make them sensible of the
necessity of flying daily to that imputed righteousness by faith in Christ,
and of drawing strength from Christ to bring forth more abundant fruits,
whereby Christ shall be more and more precious in our eyes, and be acknowledged
absolutely necessar for our justification, sanctification and salvation.

15. When question is made concerning Christian virtues and operations of the
holy Spirit in us, the order of Gods working held forth to us in Scripture, is
carefully to be marked by us: which is, that sense of sin should go before
faith in Christ; for, the Law is a pedagogue to Christ, for, he came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9. 13. And faith in
Christ goes before the fruits of faith, and the fruits of faith before the
sensible approbation of them, and approbation of the fruits by Scripture goes
before the sensible fealing of the believer, and the quieting of the conscience
in its approbation of what the Scripture approves; for, after we have
believed, we come to be sealed, Ephesians. 1. 13. Now, for the not observing this
order, many real Christians do make unto themselves a very un-comfortable life,
for, albeit they be convinced of sin, and humbled in the sense of their own
inability to help themselves, and are fled to Christ for pardon and help, and
do lead a life blameless, yet do they unhappily suspend the acknowledging of
the work of faith bestowed upon them, and do disquiet themselves, so as they
cannot rest on Christ, but do quarrel the reality of their faith, till they
shall feel and perceive, with approbation of their conscience, such and such
fruits of faith in themselves, and that in such a measure as they have
fore-imagined to be the necessar evidences of faith; yea, and they refuse to
account themselves persons justified, because they cannot perceive such mature
fruits in themselves, as they conceive must not only be, but be acknowledged
also to be, in the justified person, before he can lay hold on justification.
Such persons do, in effect, invert the order which they should observe; for,
when it were their part to fly unto Christ the only Mediator, because they
come short of new obedience, and because they are laden with sin, that in him
they might have God reconciled to them, and by his Spirit, pouring in of his
grace in their souls, to make them more holy, they take another and contrary
course, by suspending their faith upon their works, and do exact of themselves
works before faith, and so do weaken their own faith, and hinder it to bring
forth such fruits as they do require. It is reason indeed, to prove our faith
by our works, and it is just, that such a faith be accounted dead, which is not
accompanied with the purpose and endeavor to live holily, justly and soberly.
But it is against all reason and equity to condemn weak faith, accompanied with
the purpose of a new life, as if it were no faith, because it has not as yet
brought forth so fair and fully ripe fruits as the weak believer would. It were
their wisdom, when they perceive such impotency to do what is good, and such
strength of the body of death in them, to fly unto the Redeemer so much the
more, and in him to seek remission of sin, and strength to bring forth good
fruits, and to be sucking juice and sap out of him, as the true Vine: for, if
we come to him and abide in him, we shall bring forth much fruit, Job. 15. 4,
5. For, faith in Christ, in order of nature, goes before good works; for only
they who come to Christ and abide in him, do bring forth abundant fruit, and
not they, who upon the apprehension of their want of fruits, do loose or
slacken their grip of faith, and upon discouragment, are ready to depart from
the living God.

16. The like wisdom is required in dealing with the consciences of men
concerning the preparatory dispositions of such as may confidently come unto
Christ to be justified, sanctified and saved; for albeit it be true, that all
that come to Christ, ought to come in the sense of their sin and acknowledgment
of wrath and death deserved for their sins, ought to come with contrition of
heart, with godly sorrow for their sins, and a humble renunciation of all
confidence in themselves; yet must not such persons, as do not satisfy
themselves in the measure or sincerity of such preparatory dispositions in
themselves, be kept back, or debarred from coming to Christ, because they not
only want, as they conceive, both the humiliation and sorrow of heart for sin,
and fear of wrath, required in such as have access unto Christ, but also do
perceive in themselves such blindness of mind and vanity thereof, such
stupidity of conscience and stubbornness of a proud heart, as is not fit (as
they conceive) to be received by Christ, or fit to be comforted by him; such
persons I say are not to be forthwith debarred from coming to the throne of
grace; for, oft-times sincerity of conviction, compunction and humiliation is
to be found in such as are displeased with their own short-coming in such
preparatory dispositions, more then in many others who make a fairer show and
profession of their godly sorrow and humiliation, and are well pleased with
themselves in that respect. We must be wary also while we require sorrow and
humiliation, and other like preparatory dispositions in them who may come unto
Christ, least we secretly import and insinuat a sort of merit to be in such
dispositions, so as if he that does not perceive himself thus qualified, could
expect no good at Christ's hands, except he have in his hand such preparatory
dispositions as if it were a price of purchasing adresse to Christ. But let us
hold this fast, that the more poor and empty a man be in his own eyes, he ought
to draw the more near unto the riches of grace in Christ, because in him only
are to be found all the treasures of every saving grace, and preparatory
dispositions for receiving thereof; he is that exalted Prince, who gives
repentance unto Israel, Act. 5. 31. he is the author and finisher of faith,
unto whom all they, who in the sense of their want of repentance and faith, do
sigh in themselves, ought, and safely may come, that they may have from him a
more ample measure of faith and repentance. Neither need we in this case be
feared, least any such person go or be sent too soon unto Christ, and that the
teacher of this doctrine be found to foster presumption, and to offer untimous
consolation; for, it is one thing to direct a man to go to Christ, for supply
of whatsoever good is wanting in him, and another thing to warrant a secure
sinner to lay hold on the consolations of the Gospel, which God has reserved
in his own hand, to be dispensed in due time and order, to the truly humble
penitent. The Lord knows how to deal with such as come unto him; he can hold
an unhumbled supplicant praying and knocking at heavens door without giving him
a comfortable answer until he be humbled, and so prepare him by humiliation
for consolation in due time.

True it is, that many draw near to Christ with their lips while their hearts
are far away, and remain senseless of their evil estate and condition, and are
far from the earnest desire of the remedy which is to be had in Christ: and
therefore it is, not without cause, that Pastors in their sermons require the
sight and sense of sin, and hunger and thirst for righteousness in them who
come to Christ, and desire to profit by their coming to him: for, albeit it be
free to God, without antecedent preparatory exercises, to fall in upon man's
heart suddenly, and at one sermon both convince him of sin, and lead him in to
Christ, as he has sometime dealt with a multitude, when Peter was preaching,
Act. 2. yet it is not free for men to neglect their duties, when they are
advertised that the order of Gods working ordinarily, is, to take a time for
information of their mind concerning their natural misery, and his gracious way
of delivery, and for a time to work on their hearts by the law, before he give
them the felt fruits of the Gospel. Mean time this must be remembered, that no
man, displeased with his disposition, as not fitted for mercy, and who does
regrate that he is a stupid sinner, and so hard-hearted that he cannot repent:
should be kept off, and debarred from going to Christ, till he discern in
himself the contrition and humiliation of heart which he would have: for, this
were as much as to say in effect, that before a sinner may go to Christ, he
must seek, not from Christ, but out of his own strength and abilities to work
up his own heart to the sense of sin and humiliation of heart, and other such
like dispositions, as ordinarily go before the act and discerning of saving
faith; for, if even Simon Magus, discovered and found out to be in the gall of
bitterness and bond of iniquity, was exhorted to pray that God would forgive
his sins, and remove the perverseness of his heart and save him from deserved
wrath, Act. 8. 22. How much more are they to be encouraged to go to Christ for
relief from these evils which they feel and fear, in whom not only this gall of
bitterness does not appear, but also some appearances may be marked, by wise
beholders, of a begun work of grace in them, albeit the man himself cannot
perceive so much for the time?

17. Seeing it is certain, that God does prevein by grace every converted man's
actions, before the man do actually turn himself to God, and that the Lord
uses to open the eyes of the man whom he is converting, to see such and such
evils in himself before these evils be taken away; and seeing it is Gods usual
way by preventing, to give some measure of the good to be prayed for, that the
man may pray for more good upon the receipt of some measure of that good already
bestowed; therefore all they who desire to approach to Christ, must be taught
to make, observe and take notice of the least degree of good bestowed upon
them, of the smallest beginnings of illumination, of the meanest degrees of
conviction for sin, of the least measure of estimation of Christ and his grace
wrought already in themselves, and to thank the Lord for so much eyesalve as
has opened their eyes to discern their own blindness and misery, and Christ
to be the remedy of all the evils they do see; and after they have marked what
is bestowed already on them, and have bl^ssed God for the gift, they must be
exhorted to request the Lord to make out and perfect the begun mercy, that they
may be sure of their own real conversion; for so does the new convert pray,
Ier. 31. 18. Convert me, and I shall be converted; and the humble soul, Cant.
1. 4. draw me after thee, and we will run after thee. And this we speak not, as
if any unconverted man could in the sense of his sin and misery sincerely and
heartily seek after Christ, or for more grace from him. But because some that
are converted, do not perceive that they are converted, we frame our speech to
their estimation of themselves, that they may be edified who are brought unto
Christ, by the draught of effectual calling, and have not as yet received the
gift of the Spirit to perceive these things which are freely bestowed upon
them, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

18. As it uses to be in the sickness of the body, So it falls out in the
sicknesses of the conscience, that as there are some sicknesses simple, and
other some complicat, when more sicknesses concur together; So in the
conscience, there are some simple, some complicat ill cases. Simple and single
cases of conscience are these, wherein the diseased soul is troubled with one
doubt only for the present: as for example, when the party afflicted, is
doubtful only of the will of God toward him, and not of his power: such was
the case of the Leper, Matthew. 8. 2. Thou can make me clean, if thou will.

Complicat and involved cases, are, when many evils concur together, and the
conscience is troubled with many doubts. In which case many questions may offer
themselves in a throng together, which the afflicted party cannot well
distinguish, and thereupon is driven to darkness and confusion of mind. In
this case the Pastor, or prudent christian friend, must observe some order,
beginning with the most perilous doubt, that it may be first solved: which
doubt being answered in the first place, let him fall upon the answering of the
rest of the doubts in order. As for example, if the party be afflicted with
tentations unto desperation, let him be cleared and led by the hand to see and
acknowledge a possibility of salvation by Christ, and then a probability and
appearance that it shall be, by an argument taken from his present exercise,
which puts an earand in his hand, and so a warrant, to go to Christ; and so
piece and piece let him be dealt with to accept the general offer of grace in
Christ and to believe in him. Now that such may be the exercise of the child of
God, appears, Psalm. 42. 7. Deep calls unto deep, at the noise of thy
water-spouts, all thy waves and billows are gone over me. And Psalm. 77. 7, 8.
will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favorable no more? Is his
grace clean gone for ever? and will he be favorable no more? etc. At last he
discovers his duty to believe in God, and concludes against himself, that
his giving so far way to the tentation was his infirmity.

19. We must distinguish worldy sorrow, and hypochondriack-passions and
perturbations of mind, from cases of conscience, and spiritual exercise in the
wrestlings of faith, that for a natural disease and distemper a pertinent
remedy may be called for from the bodily Physicians; and to such as are under a
spiritual exercise, the doubts of their conscience may be prudently loused. In
such a case, when both the bodily distemper and spiritual exercise are joined,
circumspection is necessary, that proportionable remedies be used by the
Physician and the Pastor or prudent friend, that bodily medicine and spiritual
consolations may be each in their own time and order wisely made use of: and
because it uses to fall out, that exercise of conscience and distemper of
bodily humors are oftentimes joined one with another, let it be sufficient,
that a word is casten in here for advertisement.

20. In curing cases of conscience, it is not sufficient to louse some one
doubt or other, but after satisfaction given to the parties afflicted
concerning the present case, which has troubled them, they must learn to
observe other causes, which may trouble them afterward, wherewith for the
present they possibly are not troubled, and must be directed to acquaint
themselves, with Christ, that in him they may have relief from every sin, and
every sort of misery; and to that end and purpose they must consecrat and
devout themselves to him, to depend upon him in all things, and at all times,
whatsoever way he shall be pleased to exercise them: for, whosoever do come
unto Christ, must come of set purpose to abide in him, and never depart from
him, but to live in him, and draw grace after grace out of his fullness; grace
to mortify sin, grace to renew the acts of faith and repentance daily,
according as they find new guiltiness contracted, and weakness in themselves
to do commanded duties: for, except the do so, they shall easily slide back
from their begun sanctification, and furnish matter to Satan for raising of new
doubts in their souls and new tentations unto sins, wherein they have not
fallen before: therefore must they keep the habits of faith and repentance in
actual exercise daily.

21. In dealing with a troubled conscience, let not the comforter, whether a
Pastor or a prudent friend, trust to his abilities, or arrogat to himself above
what is due to him, but let him keep his eye upon the Lord and in his heart be
praying to God to bless the Word in his mouth, giving glory to God expressly,
if he perceive the afflicted party laying hold on Gods Word delivered by him.
And let him also teach the afflicted to lift his eyes to the Lord, when the
Word of consolation is dispensed to him by the Minister or prudent friend, that
God may have the glory in his consolation, and no more ascribed to the
instrument then is due: For, the Minister may sow the seed and plant, and
water, but God only can give the increase: men are ready to fail in this point
and mar the blessing, for God is a jealous God, and will not give his glory to
another.

22. In case the expected consolation be not found, or the doubt propounded be
not solved so soon as is desired, let the afflicted be exhorted, that he make
not have in seeking comfort, but patiently submit himself to Gods will in
exercising him for a while, and humble himself under his mighty hand, in
meekness waiting for clearness and comfort in due time; for, affliction is
sent to work patience, and patience to work experience, and experience to work
hope, which shall not make the patient man ashamed: and it is far better for a
soul to lie for a time in the bonds of affliction, till it be daunted and
subdued, then before patience has had the perfect work, to seek to have its
foolish wishes granted unto it: for if once a soul heartily submit it self to
God, or strive to submit, and patiently wait on, consolation will be found not
far off.

23. In regard the work of the holy Ghost, working the conversion of a man, may
begin before it can be marked, it is the part of him who medleth with the
afflicted conscience, to deal tenderly with the afflicted, and so to temper his
speech, as he may both further repentance and faith, pre-supposing the parties
exercise may prove a begun work of grace; for, it is better so to judge in
charity of Gods dispensation, then to foster sinister suspicions of the party
afflicted, which may readily break forth in some unhappy expressions to the
hurting of the patient, and hindering his profiting by what may be said beside.

24. Because we have to do in this Book with the weak believers, who, in the
sense of sin and deserved wrath, are fled or flying unto Christ, with a purpose
of amendment of life, but do fear they are not, or shall not be admitted into
that kingdom of our Lord Jesus, for this and that pretended reason: therefore,
it will be to purpose in comforting them, to make use, as of other Scriptures,
so in special of these two passages; the one, 2 Cor. 5. 19. the other, 1 Cor.
1, 30. the one serving to convince them, that they are already in the state of
grace, and of the number of believers in Christ, how strongly soever they are
assaulted with fears, doubts and suspicions, that it is otherwise; for, in
this passage, 2 Cor. 5. 19. the Apostle summeth up the whole Gospel in few
words, holding forth, first, that the fullness of God in three persons, was in
the second person of the Godhead the Mediator Christ Jesus, and is, upon the
work of reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their transgressions
unto them, that receive the gracious offer of reconciliation tendered through
Christ in the Gospel. Secondly, that God in Christ ^ath committed unto his
Ministers the word of reconciliation that they, with authority, may offer
reconciliation and friendship with God unto the hearers of the Word of the
Gospel. Thirdly, that the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, are sent forth
and directed as Ambassadors, to exhort and request m^n, in Gods name, and in
the name of Christ God Mediator manifested in the flesh, to be reconciled unto
God. Fourthly, that so many as do consent unto and embrace the gracious offer
of reconciliation, are reckoned to be believers, even all they who do
acknowledge their natural enimity and sins against God, and do welcome the
message of reconciliation, (sent by the Ministers of the Gospel) and do engage
themselves to hold fast this Covenant, aiming to walk as reconciled children
and servants unto God, uprightly laying forth their burdens and desires before
him daily: all these (I say) are believers in Christ, and may assure themselves
of reconciliation; for there is no more in the Apostles and Ministers
commission required, for entering of the humbled sinner into a covenant of
friendship, save this, we request you in Gods name, and in the name of God
incarnat, Jesus Christ the Mediator, we beseech you be reconciled to God, v.
20. Now we judge, that humbled sinners fled to Christ, and purposing to amend
their lives by his grace, will not be found unwilling to accept this offer of
reconciliation, but will declare their hearty consent to this offer; and so may
be convinced, that a covenant is closed between God and them, and that God has
given unto them saving faith, how weak soever it seems unto them; for, the
consenting unto, and accepting of, this offer, is the condition required for
entering in covenant, and the proper act of saving faith. Fifthly, the Apostle
holds forth the ground-right of this covenant, and reason whereupon the
sinner, fled to Christ, may be assured of justification: because in the
covenant of Redemption, past between God in three persons on the one hand, and
the second person of the Godhead as M^dia^o^ and perfect Redeemer by
price-paying on the other hand, it is agreed, finally ended and decreed, that
Christ's satisfaction, made for the imbracer of this offered reconciliation,
shall as certainly make the believer judicially righteous and justify him, as
Christ was judicially made sin or a sacrifice for the sins of the redeemed:
for, God, says he, v. 21. has made Christ to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Therefore, as Christ the
only Mediator, by accepting the covenant of Redemption, had the sins of the
redeemed imputed unto him, (albeit there was no sin at all, nor could be in
him) and was punished for them unto the death of the cross; So, the humbled
sinner, by flying unto Christ, and accepting the offered covenant of
reconciliation, has Christ's satisfaction imputed unto him, (albeit he can see
nothing in himself but a mass of inherent sin) and shall not enter into
condemnation, but be brought to life-eternal, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Both the covenant of Redemption made with Christ in the Redeemers name, and the
covenant of Reconciliation made with us through Christ, are of Gods making, and
so must stand, and cannot be dis-annulled for ever.

The other place, 1 Cor. 1. 30. holds forth the right which God has made to
the believer, unto the unsearchable riches of Christ, whereunto the weakest
believer, fled from sin and wrath unto Christ, as the refuge and perfect remedy
from both, may claim, namely wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption by him: and that by covenant and decree registrat in this and other
places of Scripture, as judicially declared and adjudged unto all and every
believer in him; So that they may and should make use of Christ, as made unto
them wisdom to direct them, justification to justify them, sanctification to
perfect them piece and piece in holiness, and redemption to support them
under, and deliver them from, all bonds of misery.

For the better understanding of this rich passage, we shall take it up in four
sentences pronounced from the holy Spirit by the Apostle; in every one whereof,
these three things are insinuat and imported, first, our need of Christ; 2. his
engaged help and supply; and, 3. our duty to lay hold upon and make use of him,
according to the right and interest in him, made unto every believer.

The first sentence is this, Christ is made unto us wisdom, which imports,
first, that not only we are by nature blind and ignorant of our sin and misery,
blind and ignorant of the way of salvation and right manner of serving God, but
also after that we are illuminat by grace, and made in some measure to know our
last condition and to fly unto Christ for delivery, we are compassed about
with much darkness and foggy mists of doubts, errors and mistakes, and have
need to be in every step of our way directed and powerfully taught by Christ's
Word and Spirit, to know what is that good and acceptable will of God.

Secondly, it imports, that as Christ is the treasure of all wisdom and
knowledge who has revealed in the Scriptures the whole counsel of God
concerning our salvation; So he is judicially made over unto us as anointed
Prophet to his Church, to make known unto us the way of life by his Word and
Spirit.

Thirdly, it imports our duty to receive him as the great gift of God, and to
give up our selves to his teaching, to employ him and depend upon him as
Prophet appointed to us for direction by his Word, what to believe and how to
live before God. Whereupon the weakest believer may trust in him for guiding
them in the use of the Scripture and exercise of the means appointed by him
unto salvation; because he is made of God unto us wisdom, and intimation
thereof is made by his Apostle.

The second sentence is this, Christ is made of God unto us righteousness:
which presupponeth, first, that we are by nature destitute of righteousness,
condem^ed as unrighteous by the law, and unable to deliver our selves from
condemnation, and when we are fled to Christ and delivered from condemnation,
that we are not able to stand in that state, but by our daily sins wherein we
fall, do deserve to be condemned as unrighteous.

Secondly, it imports, that Christ is not only righteous in himself and able to
satisfy divine justice for our sins, but also has undertaken to pay, and
actually has paid the price of our redemption by his obedience unto the
Father even to the death of the Cross, and has taken on him the office of
high Priest to apply unto us absolution from our sins, make us accepted and to
be dealt with as righteous, and to keep us in that blessed estate by his
intercession.

Thirdly, it imports our duty to lay hold on Christ our Cautio^er, by virtue of
our right and interest in him, granted and intimat unto us, and so to rest on
him, that whatsoever Satan, Conscience, or Law violat by us, shall say, we who
are f^ed from sin and wrath to him, may oppose this sentence of our absolution
registrat here, Christ is made unto us righteousness judicially, by the decree
and decree of God.

The third sentence is this, Christ is made unto us of God sanctification,
which presupponeth, that in the justified believer there are remaining still
the relics of sin inherent, from which we are not able of our selves to
deliver our selves, but have need of divine power to mortify sin in us, and to
repair the image of God by increasing holiness in us.

Secondly, it imports, that Christ the Mediator, the holy one of Israel, has
not only paid the price of our redemption for removing of our guiltiness and
saving us from condemnation, but also has undertaken to the Father to write
his law in our heart, and at last to present us perfect without spot or
blemish, for which end, he has taken by appointment the threefold office of
Prophet, Priest and King.

Thirdly, it imports, that it is our duty to lay hold upon this rich gift and
right intimat unto us judicially from God, and whatsoever commanded duty we are
to go about, we do it in the name of Christ, sucking by faith, sap and virtue
from him to bring forth good fruits holy and acceptable to God through him:
Because Christ, the second person of the Godhead incarnat, is made unto us,
and judicially intimat from God to us, our sanctification.

The fourth sentence is this, Christ is made of God unto us redemption: which
imports, first, that we who have fled from sin and wrath unto Christ, and are
justified by faith, and begun to be sanctified, are yoked in a warfare with our
sinful flesh, the world and Satan, being subject to many miseries in this
life, and to death natural and the grave. In which warfare we are not of our
selves able to stand, nor to deliver our selves from the miseries whereunto we
are subject, except by divine power we be supported, brought through and saved.

Secondly, it imports, that Christ not only has paid a satisfactory price for
our redemption, and is able to deliver us from all sin and misery against the
power of whatsoever adversary; but also, that he has undertaken the work, and
has by compact with the Father, obliged himself to deliver us powerfully from
all sin and misery and to overcome to our behoove all our enemies and tread
them underfoot, and that he is judicially established in his kingly office, and
made over to us for our assurance by decree intimat to us.

Thirdly, it imports our duty, that by virtue of the right and gift of Christ
God-man, made over unto us by Gods decree now intimat, we should rely by faith
on him, as the pledge of perfecting our salvation thoroughly, and fight out our
battles, against all adversar powers and all miseries, in his strength,
rejoicing in his victory over all our enemies; for, God has made him unto u^
redemption.

CHAP. II.
Wherein the regenerat man's doubt of his being in the state of grace, by reason
of his felt unworthiness, is answered.
THese premised considerations, may serve for the more easy solution of doubts
and particular cases wherein the regenerat man may be troubled about his being
in the state of grace. For which end, it is needful also, by way of example,
to propound some usual questions in particular: the answering whereof, may
serve to answer all questions, which do arise from the like original: For,

1. Howsoever it be certain from Scripture, that the regenerat shall no^
pe^ish, and that their state in grace is unchangeable, and that their
perseverance in the faith is established by Christ's undertaking to make them
persevere according to the charge given unto him from the F^ther. Ioh. 6. 39*
40. yet, it i^ true also, that every regenerat man is no^ clear about his
regeneration, and many regenerat persons have only a conjectural opinion that
they are regenerat, who are not come up as yet to an assurance and persuasion
of their blessed estate. And the number is not great of these who always, or
any long time together, do enjoy that serenity and tranquillity of conscience,
that they can confidently triumph, and glory with the Apostle, Romans 5. 3, 4. 5.
because of desertions and tentations, raising doubts in their conscience,
concerning their estate, oft-times holy persons are disquieted. With such
persons, while they are in that case, a Pastor or a prudent friend must deal
so, as he would deal with the infirm, and with them who think themselves not
converted, because the same remedies will serve to strengthen a weak believer
and to draw a soul, sensible of sin, and under the pangs of the new birth, unto
faith in Christ.

2. But let us come more particularly to examine the doubts of some that are
regenerat, and their pretended reasons for their doubting. Some are so sensible
of their own unworthiness, that they question if themselves, or any like unto
themselves, can be in the state of grace, mean time their carriage is such a,
becomes a Christian, blameless: I Feel in (...) (says ou^) such strength of
inward corruption as does d^file every best action I go about; I see what
holiness is required in those that approach unto God, that I do utterly loath
my self, as unworthy to be admitted into the fellowship of God or Christ the
holy one of Israel: yea (says another) I think it no small presumption to draw
near unto Christ, or count my self among his Saints and followers.

This for a short time was the case of Isaiah, when in a vision he saw the
glory of Christ in the Temple, and heard the Seraphims proclaim him th^ee holy,
Isa. 6. 5. Woe is me (said he) for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean
lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, for mine eyes have
seen the King, the Lord of hosts. This also was the case of Pe^er, who in the
sense of his own unworthiness, wakened up by the shining of the glory of
Christ's Godhead in the miraculous tack of fish^s, Luke 5* 8. falling down at
Christ's knees, he cries depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man: which
is as much as if he had said, I am utterly unworthy to be admitted unto
fellowship with thy holy Majesty. The like also was the case of the Publican in
the parable, Luke 18. 13. out of which case, after some wrestling of says, he
comes forth toward God, yet standing a far off, nor daring to life up hi^ eyes
to heaven: wherein is pointed out to us the sense of his unworthiness,
hindering him to approach confidently to the throne of grace.

3. For removing of this doubt, five or six considerations may be represented
to the party afflicted, with this proviso, that the sense of his unworthiness
be not discharged, or diminished, but wisely entertained in him rather; for, it
is not to be presupposed, that any man can esteem himself so unworthy and far
from meriting any good at Gods hand, as he is indeed: But yet his doubt, how he
dare or may draw near unto Christ because of his felt unworthiness may be
solved. 1. If he consider the nature and offer made of the covenant of grace,
whereby these that are sensible of their own unworthiness, are so far from
being debarred from the covenant of grace, that the covenant of grace does not
admit any person to be received into it, but such only who do renounce all
confidence in their own works and worthiness, and do fly unto the offer of
the free grace of God in Christ: for, our Lord has said, Mat. 9. 13. I came
not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance: And the promises of the
Evangel, are made to the poor in spirit, to the hungry, and thristy for the
righteousness of Christ, which only can satisfy a hungry soul, Mat. 5. 3, 6.
yea, the sense of unworthiness is in effect that self-loathing whereof Ezekiel.
speaks, chap. 36. 31. which sense of unworthiness, may be seen in Job, as a
special act and evidence of his repentance, Job. 42. 6.

Secondly, let him consider, that because by reason of sin, no worthiness can
be found in us, therefore God has freely loved the world and provided grace in
Christ, that all that fly to him, may out of his fullness receive grace for
grace, Ioh. 1. 16.

Thirdly, the three sold office of a Mediator, wherewith Christ has clothed
himself, does obviat and meet the doubts of the humbled soul under the sense of
unworthiness: for, albeit he be ignorant and slow to understand and believe
the revealed will of God, about men's salvation, and his prescribed service;
yet, upon (...) flying to Christ, he has Christ offered and given to him for
his wisdom, a Prophet able to inform him, to open his eyes, and persuade him to
embrace by lively faith all saving doctrine. Albeit he be exceeding sinful and
worthy of condemnation, yet he has Christ a^ Priest made of God unto him
righteousness and sanctification, upon his flying to him for refute from sin
and wrath, undertaking also powerfully to sanctify him, by mortifying his
corruptions, and perfecting at last the Image of God in him. And albeit he have
the world and his own flesh, and the power of all principalities and spiritual
wickedness, with many miseries in this life to wrestle with; yet, he has
Christ Jesus as King, made of God unto him redemption, upon his flying to
Christ for refuge against all his enemies; So that he may be sure to be found
among them whom he has redeemed by price-paying, and for whom he has
undertaken powerfully to sustain them in all this warfare, whatsoever misery
they may be in, and at last to bring them out of all sin and misery to a
perfect rest in everlasting glory. And to what end has our Lord taken on the
office of a Mediator and Redeemer, if not to open the eyes of the blind that
fly to him for eye salve, to cover the naked, flying unto him, with the
precious garment of his imputed righteousness, and to enrich the poor, needy
and unworthy out of the store house of his unsearchable riches of grace? Rev.
3. 18.

Fourthly, let him consider the constant course of grace and practical
dispensation thereof in all ages toward all the converted. Are not all they to
whom the Gospel comes, in the state of corrupt nature, when God comes to
convert them? For, never was there any person called unto the state of grace,
but he was found in his sins and in the state of lost sinners by nature: none
but children of wrath and enemies by nature are reconciled; none but they, who,
by the law, are condemned, are justified; none but they, that in their own
sense are lost, do obtain salvation; for, Christ does plainly tell us, I came
to seek and to save them that are lost. Did he ever reject any that fled unto
him, because they were unworthy? No; for it is said, Ps. 9. 10. They that know
thy name will trust in thee; for thou never forsook them that sought thee. And,
( Ioh. 6* 37.) he says, These that come unto me, I will in no case cast out. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
(...), has he called us.

Fifthly, let him consider the worthiness of Christ's person and merits, who,
(because he being God and man in one person, has paid a price of infinite value
for redemption of sinners who fly unto him) is worthy, for whose cause, the
unworthy sinner, flying to the throne of grace, should be received in favor,
and made fit for eternal life by the sanctification of his Spirit.

Sixthly, let him consider, that if he stand a-back from Christ, and do not
fly unto him, how unworthy soever he think himself, he remains under wrath and
the condemnatory sentence of the law, Ioh. 1. 8. but, let him rather remember,
that he is warranted by a command of God the Father, to fly to Christ, 1 Ioh.
3. 23. This is his commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son,
Jesus Christ, and love one another as he has commanded us. And therefore, let
him say of his own soul with the Centurion, speaking of his servant to Christ,
(Luke 7. 6, 7.) I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof; but say
the word, and my servant shall be healed. The word is said frequently in
Scripture, let the afflicted rest himself on it.

CHAP. III.
Wherein the regener at man's doubts, arising from the multitude and weight of
his sins against the Law and the Cospel, and against the light of his
conscience, are answered.
AS in the pangs of the new birth, this doubt has much weight to keep a soul
a-back from imb^^^eing Christ and receiving pardon through him; So after a man
is regenerat, and made quiet in his conscience, when through sad affliction and
sore temptation, these wounds of his conscience begin to bleed again, his
pardon and peace is called in question. Of this exercise there are three
degrees: the first is, when sins against the law are mustered, and led in an
host against a soul; which was the case of the afflicted Psalmist for a time,
till by faith he over-came the doubt, Ps. 40. 12. Innumerable evils have
compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold on me, so that I am not
able to look up: they are more then the hairs of mine head; therefore my heart
fails me.

The second degree is, when beside the man's sins against the Law his sins also
against the Gospel, against Christ and the means of salvation, do arise in
battle against him, and do drive him to cry out, with these not yet converted
sinners, (Act. 2. 37.) men and brethren, what shall we do?

The third degree is, when the regenerat man, for some gross sins against the
light of his conscience, is given up for a time to be scourged with the
temptations and accusations of Satan, as if he had sinned against the holy
Ghost, and no more mercy were reserved for him; and this was the case of the
Prophet Jonah* when being guilty and conscious to his late rebellion against
God, he is pursued and apprehended by God, and casten in the sea, he falls in
a ^it of desperation till God gave him victory by faith, Ion. 2. 4. Then I
said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again to thy holy Temple:
which was the trysting place of God with sinners in a Mediator. This was also
the case of David for a time, after that his conscience is wakened by the
message of God sent unto him in the mouth of Nathan the Prophet, when he found
the spirit of consolation withdrawn from him, and the wrath of God breaking
his bones and consuming the marrow thereof, Ps. 51. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Make me
to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice,
etc.

2. In answering this doubt, we must proceed sutably to each degree severally.
In curing this case in the fi^^t degree, let the afflicted admit all the just
aggravations of his sins against the Law, which the conscience does press:
for, by extenuation of sin, neither is Gods justice glorified, nor the
conscience satisfied; and consolation or hope of remission of sin must not
arise from the few number o^ lightness of sins, but from the multitude and
largeness of Gods mercy: and therefore, we must not cut short the reckoning
with the Lords law, nor must we diminish the weight and estimation of our evil
deservings; but course must be taken, that by the sense of guiltiness, the
judgment of the afflicted person be not so confounded and perplexed, as if his
case were desperate, and possibility of salvation were passed; but rather let
the afflicted humble himself under the mighty hand of God, who alone can
destroy and make alive, and who usually brings down to death and brink of
hell, and brings back again, and who alone does work wonders.

This doubt then arising from the multitude of sins, may be loosed, first, by a
fresh consideration of the infinite excellency and worthiness of Christ Jesus,
God manifested in the flesh, and of the incomprehensible value of the price of
redemption, paid by him for all who fly unto him: for, the Father has
declared himself satisfied by him in behalf of the redeemed, for whom he did
offer himself, Matthew. 3. 17. saying, This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased. And (Heb. 7. 25.) ^his is he, who is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God by him. Secondly, by consideration of the
infinite largeness of God^ bounty, grace and m^rcy, wherein he has set no
bounds to himself in pardoning and abolishing the sins of those that come unto
him, how gross and grievous soever they have been, Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted
out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins, return unto
me, for I have redeemed thee. And, (Isa. 1. 18.) Come now and let us reason
together, says the Lord, though your sins be as sca^^et, they shall be as
white as snow, though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wool. And
(Matthew. 11. 28.) Come unto me says Christ, all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.

Thirdly, by the consideration of the many examples and experiences of the
mercy of God manifested in the pardon of heinous sinners, both in the old and
new Testament, set down in Scripture, of set purpose to invite such as are
troubled with the sense of their manifold sins, to come unto Christ the
Mediator, or to God in Christ reconciling the world to himself, by not imputing
sins to them who embrace the offer of grace and reconciliation tendered unto
them in the Gospel.

As to the second degree wherein the doubt is augmented by the addition of the
sins against the Gospel, unto the sins against the Law, by despiseing or
slighting the means of salvation offered in the Gospel; true it is, that the
despising or slighting of the offer of grace in Christ, cannot be sufficiently
aggreged, because the sins of Sodom and Go^orah will be found lighter, being
laid in the balance with the contempt of the Gospel, Matthew. 10. 14, 15. yet,
notwithstanding, when God is entered in reckoning with a sinner, and is begun
to challenge him for his sins against the Law and the Gospel also, and has by
his terror humbled the man, there is mercy insinuated unto that person in the
bosom of the threatening. Wherefore the soul born down with the sense of
ill-deserving by his sins against both Law and Gospel, must be exhorted to
humble himself before God, and fly in unto Christ, who of set purpose (...) he
might answer this doubt, has declared, that whosoever speaks a word against
the Son of man, it shall be for^iven him, to wit, if he repent this injury done
to Christ, Matthew. 12. 32. and he stands knocking at the door of lukewarm
Laodicea, with an ofter of coming in to them, and supping with them, that shall
open to him, notwithstanding they have slighted him long in their
senslessenesse of sin, nakedness and misery.

As to the third degree, wherein the afflicted does suspect, that he has
sinned against the holy Ghost, because he has sinned against the light of his
conscience, and di^ement of the holy Spirit, let the afflicted consider, that
the sinning in actual gross out-breakings against the light of the conscience,
is indeed a high provocation of God to his face, for which the offender is to
be humbled all the days of his life. Secondly, let him learn to glorify God^
Justice, who has made a proud rebel to be scourged with scorpions, and sore
bitten with the remorse of a slighted and contemned conscience.

Thirdly, let those particular transgressions, objected to be done against the
light of the conscience, be examined with their motives and circumstances: and
out of the bitter rod of Gods correcting the offender, that he should not
perish with the world, let the afflicted take up the Lords love in judging him,
that he may not be condemned. As also let the Pastor, or the prudent friend,
who goes about to comfort the afflicted, carefully observe if the afflicted be
grieved for grieving of the holy Spirit, if he desire and long after the
consolation of God, whom he has offended, if he purpose to walk more
circumspectly afterward, and eshew the snare he has taken into, or what other
evidences of repentance can be seen in him, whereof use may be made to assure
the afflicted, that he has not sinned unto death. Because the sin against the
holy Ghost, as it is described unto us in holy Scripture, is either a malicious
refusing and opposing wittingly and wilfully of Christ Jesus, after that the
Spirit of Christ has convinced the person, that Christ is the Redeemer; and
this was the sin of some Pharisees, desperate, professed, and irreconciliable
enemies to Christ, Mat. 12. 24. to 33. or, it is a total apostasy from Christ
after they have known him to be the Redeemer, joined with a malicious oppugning
of the christian Religion, as it is set forth, Heb. 10. 26, 27. to 32. and
whosoever falls in this sin, he neither repents him of it, nor desires to
repent or be reconciled with God.

And therefore, let the humbled and afflicted penitent, longing to be
reconciled unto God through Christ, and to find the sense of his favor granted
or restored, not suspect himself any more guilty of this sin, but let him make
use of the offer of grace in the Gospel and of the example of penitents
mentioned in Scripture. Who knows how soon the Lord may take the penitent in
his fatherly embracements and comfort him abundantly? Mean time, till the
sensible comfort be given unto him, let him hold fast the promises made to them
that fly unto Christ.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein is solved the doubt of the regenerat man, raised by his suspicion,
whether he be elected or not.
IT comes to pass sometimes, that a sinner lamenting his sins, and seeking
liberation from sin and misery, does call in question whether he be regenerat,
because he has a deep and fixed suspicion, that he shall possibly be ^ound not
among the Elect, and by consequ^nce be found a reprobat: of whom if ye ask a
reason why he says so, he can give no solid answer, only he will tell you he
can perceive no certain signs and evidences of his election: yea, that he
finds nothing in himself, but that which may be found in reprobats, and that
he is afraid he be found one of that number, and that this suspicion has
taken deep root in him, that he cannot rid himself of this doubt and fear.

2. This case, we must confess, is very dangerous, except it be timously
cu^ed; for, here faith is taken as it were by the throat, and the ground of
hope is like to be razed. The suspicion of Gods decree is daily fostered and
augmented, and the afflicted person, not only doubts of Gods good will to
him, but is tempted unto desperation: By this means the command of God to
believe the promises and consolations of the Gospel, seem to him to be offered
to him all in vain: the hope of success, or profiting in the use of the means
appointed by God, is undermined, so long as this suspicion is entertained; yea,
all the exercises of religion become burdensome, out of a fear he shall follow
the exercise thereof to no purpose; and so the duties of religion, are
oft-times left undone, or cast off for a time, if the tentation grow strong,
and continue with him without cure or comfort; thus he stands upon the border
and precipice of some sort of desperation, if his fear and suspicion be not
removed in some measure.

3. For cure of this case, the Pastor or prudent friend, as in all his
conferences with the afflicted, So here in special, must seriously pray to
God, that he would bless the means of information and consolation, which he is
about to use for the satisfying of the afflicted.

To this end therefore, first, let all the reasons whereby the afflicted
pretends to make his reprobation probable, be resumed and refuted as
frivolous all of them. And certainly, they cannot but be found frivolous,
because God has not given any certain evidence or sign of reprobation, so long
as a man is alive, except that sin unto death, the sin against the holy Ghost,
in a malicious refusing, rejecting and hostile opposing of Jesus Christ
wittingly and willingly: for, as to final unbelief and impenitency, no man can
pass sentence upon any person, that has heard any thing of the Gospel, so
long as breath is in him; for, God can convert a soul to himself in the pangs
of imminent death, as he did the thief on the cross.

All the evil which the afflicted can say of himself, cannot prove him a
reprobat, the hight which his reckoning can rise unto to fortify his own
suspicion of himself, is only to give appearance that he is (...) regenerat;
mean time we pre^uppone the afflicted person under this tentation, to labor
under the sense of manyfold sins (which do furnish strength unto the tentation)
and to be hungry and thirsty for righteousness, and to be desirous to draw
near to God in Christ, if he could be delivered of his suspicion of Gods
purpose and affection toward him. And therefore his christian friends are
bound in charity to expound this his hunger for righteousness, and thristy
desire of reconciliation through Christ, to be a begun work of gracious
regeneration, and so also a hopeful sign that he is elected.

Secondly, after refutation of his pretended reasons for his suspicion and
fear, this suspicion must be set before him as a strong tentation of Satan,
and a soulmurthering lie, thrown as a fiery dart at him, (such as the Apostle,
Ephesians. 6. makes mention of) of set purpose to beat the shield of faith out of
his hand: Wherefore he must be exhorted to resist the Tempter, and that so much
the more, as Satan out of envy and malice does slander God, and the begun work
of grace in the man, and all to vex the soul of him whom he cannot keep in his
snare.

Thirdly, the giving so much way to this wicked suggestion, must be represented
to the patient as an act of ignorance and folly, yea an act of iniquity and
injury unto God, and to his own soul: for, what a madness is it to pry in upon
the secret counsel of God, and to neglect his revealed will set down in
Scripture? what presumption to intrude our selves upon his secret decrees, and
to cast behind our back his open commands given to us? To refuse obedience to
Gods ordinances given to us for our salvation, except he shall first^^ll us
what is his purpose about us in particular? To open our ears to the false
suggestions of the devil a liar, and murderer from the beginning, and stop ou^
ears from hearing the voice of God speaking to us in Scripture? Wherefore, let
the afflicted under this temptations take heed to what is said, De^t. 29. 29.
The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but these things that are
revealed belong unto us and our children for ever, that we may do all the words
of this Law. Let the Lords Command be first obeyed, and then the decree of God
concerning the believer in him, shall be timeously revealed: for, his promises
are agreeable with his decrees, and his promises are offered to us, that
thereby his decrees may be brought on unto a just and gracious execution.

Fourthly, let the afflicted call to mind, what benefits the Lord has
bestowed upon him from his infancy, and in special, that he has offered, and
does continue to offer, Christ Jesus unto him, if he will receive him for
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption; and upon this ground he
is bound to give unto God a good construction in every sort of dispensation
toward him, and look upon God as his friend and father.

CHAP. V.
Wherein the regenerat man's doubting of his regeneration, because he finds no
power in himself to believe in Christ, is answered.
SOmetime it comes to pass, that the renewed man, after a long time standing
in the stare of grace, falls in doubt about the work of grace in himself,
because when God does change his dispensation toward him, and brings him to
trial by trouble, wherein he is found weaker then he expected, he begins to
suspect whether the former work of grace has been found or not, and his reason
is, because he finds by experience often repeated, that in straits and
difficulties when he would most exercise faith and believe in Christ, he is
found least able to do it; yea, he finds it no less impossible to observe
the whole moral Law, then solidly to believe in Christ: hence arises anxiety
in the soul of the afflicted, while he neither dar depart from Christ, nor yet
is able to approach unto him confidently. In this case many new doubts and
temptations do arise, which weaken his faith yet more, and hinder him in the
exercise of religion and discharge of duties, not a little.

That this sometime may be the case of some converted, the experience of the
Saints, set down in Scripture, makes evident, Ps. 30. 7. Lord, says David, by
thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong; thou did hide thy face
and I was troubled. And in his prayer, (Ps. 61. 2.) while his mind was
overwhelmed in him with perplexing thoughts, he finds in himself no strength
or ability to deliver himself or put forth acts of faith on the Mediator, as he
would have done, but prays, that while he is now exiled and driven far off
from the tabernacle and ark of the Covenant, he may be raised up to believe in
him who was signified by these tipes, to wit, Christ the Rock of all Salvation:
which Rock of salvation, he perceives to be a higher mystery then he can
discover or ascend upon, without the hand of divine power. And therefore says,
from the end of the earth, will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed,
lead me to the rock that is higher then I. Yea, the godly afflicted Hebrews
fell in this sickness, whom the Apostle exhorts to take courage unto them,
Heb. 12. 12, 13. Wherefore lift up your hands which hang down, and the feeble
knees, and make straight paths for your feet.

2. For answering of this doubt, the afflicted person must be convinced of his
infirmity and sinful dissidence, because being called of God to the exercise
and trial of his faith in Christ by whatsoever sort of trouble, he has been
discouraged and fainted, which did not become a soldier of Christ, and that
for no other pretended reason but this, that he could not give such a proof of
his faith as he should have given and hoped to give, before he was put to trial.

Secondly, he must consider how far he is mistaken in leaning to his own
strength, in the exercise of his faith; of which self-confidence, the more a
man is emptied, the more speedily he shall be furnished, if being emptied he
fly to Christ for supply. This was the experience of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9.
10. who was made weak in himself, that the strength of Christ might be made
perfect in his weakness; and therefore he resolved to make use of the strength
of Christ in all his felt infirmities, and that he did, with good success. For
when I am weak, says he, then am I strong. Whose example we must resolve to
follow.

Thirdly, after search, it will be found, that the person afflicted, under the
notion and expression of I cannot believe, has, in effect, this meaning, I
cannot find such a full assurance of faith as I would be at; or, I cannot find
such a sense of the approbation of my ^aiah as can satisfy me and persuade me
that I do believe really in Christ. And so it is another thing, and another
gift of the Spirit he is seeking, then what he pretends to seek: for, the
sense and feeling of approven faith, and full assurance of faith, is not given
to every believer, but to him that sights the fight of faith, and in his
trials, adhereth closely to Christ and to his truth, when he is tempted to sin,
as the clause in the close of the seven Epistles to the Churches of Asia does
teach us, Rev. 2. 3. To him that overcomes, I will give to eat of the tree of
life, to eat of that hid manna; I will give him that white stone, and a new
name written thereon, which no man knows, save he that receives it.

Fourthly, the afflicted must be instructed or put in mind to distinguish
between believing in Christ, and the knowing that he does believe in Christ, as
may be learned from 1 Ioh. 5. 13. These things I writ to you, that believe on
the name of the Son of God, that you may know, that you have eternal life; and
that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. He must distinguish between
true (though weak) saying faith and strong faith. True saving faith is in that
person, who, being pursued by the Law, does fly for refuge to lay hold upon
Christ the hope set before us. The man that dwells in this city of Christ,
and makes use of Christ as the only remedy against sin and misery, as he is
offered to us in the Gospel, has right unto that strong and well-grounded
consolation spoken of, Heb. 6. 17, 18, 19. True and saving faith is in that
person, who acknowledging himself a child of wrath, heartily receives the Lord
Jesus Christ, as he offers himself to us in the Gospel; for, such a person
has the right and privilege of a child of God, and may reckon himself among
believers in Christ, Ioh. 1. 12. As many as received Christ, to them gave he
power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. True
and saving faith is in that person, who, being convinced of his enimity against
God, does answer the request of God in Christ* in the mouth of his Ministers,
with a hearty consent unto the covenant of grace and reconciliation offered to
all that hear the Gospel, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and has committed
unto us the word of reconciliateon. Now then, we are Ambassadors, for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye
reconciled unto God: for he has made him (that is, Christ) to be sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
Therefore, let the afflicted answer thus. I receive the offer, and do consent,
upon these terms, to be reconciled to God, Lord help my unbelief; for, thou
have said, seek ye my face; and my soul answers Thy face, O Lord, will I
seek, hide not thy face from me, Ps. 27. 8, 9. He that upon these terms, does
fly to Christ, and resolves to adhere unto him, needs not doubt but he is
received in the state of grace: for confirmation whereof, let the fruits of
faith outward and inward, which may be observed by the afflicted himself, or by
his comforter, be called to mind, and let him rest and go on in the course of
obedience of the Gospel.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein the doubt of the regenerat man, concerning his being in the state of
grace, arising from his apprehended defect of humiliation and sorrow for sin,
is answered.
SOme regenerat persons will be found, who mourn indeed for their sin, and do
acknowledge, that they deserve death for their sins, do confess they stand in
need of Christ, do thirst for his righteousness, do desire earnestly* to be
united unto him by faith, do follow the exercise of Religion, and do endeavor
to keep their consciences undefiled in all things; and yet for all this, do not
only doubt whether they be renewed, but also do esteem it a presumptuous
rashness in them to approach unto Christ, or to cast themselves over on him by
faith, before they be more seriously humbled, before they feel a more hearty
sorrow and grief, before they feel the pangs of the new birth more sharp,
before they be more pressed with the burden of their sins, and do feel in
themselves the spirit of fear and trembling and bondage in a higher measure.

From whom, if you ask a reason of their doubt, they shall answer, that they
are not yet called to come unto Christ, because these are only called to come
unto Christ who are weary and laden in the superlative degree, and are so born
down with the weight of sin, as they cannot be more, and not despair; for so do
they interpret that saying of Christ, Matthew. 11. 28. Christ is sent only to the
contrite and broken in heart, who sit in the dust, under the spirit of bondage,
that is to say, as they take it, to them who are under grief unspeakable, as
they expound, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. So in their opinion, Christ came to save only
those who in their own sense are lost, that is, who are on the brink of
desperation: wherefore, in respect they are not gone down deep enough as they
think into this gulf and hell of anguish and sorrow, they dare not approach or
look toward Christ.

Mean time they lie daily mourning and weeping, and will not grant that their
grief is worthy of the name of grief; which sorrow they cannot dissemble or
hide, but do bewray it in their countenance, habit, walking and frequent
sighing, and will profess, that they can hardly think they have right to eat
or drink of Gods creatures, and were it not for fear of adding yet more sin to
the former, they would not eat or drink at all: ofttimes they chatter as
swallows and sigh as the turtle dove, and oft-times their bowels sound out as
if their parents or children or nearest relations were dead, and yet for all
this do not satisfy themselves in sorrow, but do complain that they are stupid
and senseless of their sinful and miserable condition, wherein they do lie
bound: and though they do confess, that sometimes they mourn, yet they allege
their mourning is but like the early dew, or morning cloud, that goes soon
away. All the while it is in vain to offer to the afflicted consolation in
Christ, because (says he) I am not one of the mourners in Sion whom he will
comfort: and in this their mistake, they do confirm themselves by another
error, saying, that the measure of repentance and sorrow should answer unto the
measure of sin; my sins, says he, go far beyond the sins of others.

This and the like objections they cast in, whereby they do obstruct their own
way unto Christ and keep themselves aback from him, till they be satisfied with
their own prescribed measure of sorrow; which case indeed deserves much
compassion: for, who would not commiserat their case, who, being in a very
miserable condition, dare not seek relief from their own misery which they do
feel, and all because they are not yet more miserable? and when they are asked,
cannot determine what measure of affected humiliation they would stand at as
sufficient:

2. In the cure of this case, as much must be yielded to the afflicted, as
reasonably can be: and first, it must be confessed, that it is the duty of all
who approach unto Christ, to come in the sense of sin, and acknowledgment of
their miserable condition, and that the due deserving of their sin, is
everlasting death.

It must be confessed also, that the measure of compunction, contrition and
lamentation for sin, may possibly be exceeding great, as we see in the
experience of Heman the Ezrait, Psalm, 88. 11. I am afflicted and ready to die
from my youth up; while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. And David, Ps.
38.

This also further must be yielded unto him, that the operation of the spirit
of conviction by the law, does ordinarily and of its own nature go before the
spirit of adoption or the operation of the spirit of the Gospel, according to
the covenant of grace, so that no man can in earnest embrace Christ as a
Physician, as Mediator and Savior of his soul, except he be sensible of his
disease, acknowledge his natural enmity against God, and his own lost
condition, being by nature under the curse of the Law.

Secondly, when these things are agreed upon, the afflicted person may be posed
concerning the measure of the sorrow for sin, whether it must be the same in
every convert, to wit, in that extremity and superlative degree, which he does
miss and desiderat in himself, and how long that sorrow in this eminent measure
must continue? By this question he cannot choose but be at a stand, and unable
to answer with Scripture-warrand; for, the Scripture does indeed require
serious repentance, but the measure of sorrow and sadness, it does not
prescribe: for, Matthew. chap. 3. v. 2. 6. many upon the hearing of John Baptist
preaching, were convicted of their sins, and did confess their sins in the
general, and forthwith were baptized by him. And, Act. 2. 37. 41. three
thousand souls at the hearing of one sermon of Peter, were convinced of their
sin, pricked at the heart, repented, and fled to Christ for grace; were
converted, baptized and entered members of the Christian Church, all in one
day. Again, the afflicted may be posed with another question, seeing he
desiderats such a measure of sound hearty sorrow in himself before he can make
his address unto Christ, out of what fountain minds he to draw this sorrow?
of himself he has it not, and from Christ by his grounds he cannot seek it:
for he says, for want of his imagined measure of sorrow for sin, he dare not
approach unto Christ, because as he alleges none are called to come unto
Christ, except such only as are in a superlative degree weary and laden, and
so full of the spirit of heaviness, that he must be at the point of
desperation near by. But the Scripture does teach us, that Christ is that
exalted Prince to give repentance unto Israel, in what measure of sorrow he
pleases; and that therefore, such as are convinced of and in any measure
sorrowful for offending God, should run unto Christ, that he may give them a
better measure of repentance.

Thirdly, the evils and danger which accompany and follow upon this practical
error, may be represented unto the afflicted; for, first, by this his error he
gives way to Satan's tentation, who when he perceives the sense of sin begun
in the afflicted by Gods mercy, and that the afflicted cannot now be hindered
from repentance, nor be kept in his former snare, does change himself as if
he were an angel of light, and sets all at naught the measure of sorrow
which the afflicted has already, and shows unto him, how unanswerable the
proportion of his sorrow is unto the multitude and heinousness of his sins,
and so spurreth him on to mourn more and more, that if it be possible he may
distemper and distract him, or make him pine away and perish in his sorrow,
without faith or consolation in Christ: this is one evil.

Another evil is this, the affectation of such a degree of sorrow, smells of
seeking some sort of expiation of sin, and compensation of the pleasure taken
in sin, by suitable sorrow for it: unto which practical error, we are by nature
too too prone: for as by nature we strive to be justified by works according to
the covenant of works, written in the children of Adam; so when we see our
selves come short of the righteousness of works, we go about (as is to be seen
in Papists) to supply the defect of works, by some one sort or other of our
sufferings and satisfactions for sin, in special, that by sorrow and tears in
abundance, we may wash away the guilt and pollution we have contracted by sin.
And in this course we run on naturally, after wakening of the conscience, to
exact penance and punishment on our selves, till the deluded heart say, it is
enough. And then, as if all were well, the deceived sinner rests himself:
which deceit of the heart, the oftener it has place and prevails, without
being observed, it is the more dangerous.

A third evil, following on this practical error, is, by it the free grace of
God and merits of Christ, are greatly obscured, and both the man's consolation
and sanctification are marred: the loss that the afflicted sustaineth on the
one hand, and the drawing on of new guiltiness by such a course on the other
hand, is covered under the vizard of humiliation.

A fourth evil follows this error, which is this, the afflicted person, so
long as he continues in this mistake, he gives way to the tentation, and does
of set purpose foster his own misbelief, that he may thereby foster and augment
his own sorrow, and afright himself with dreadful imaginations what shall
become of him, that he may augment his affected heaviness of spirit, and make
the fountain of his tears run the more abundantly.

A fifth evil is, the afflicted so long as he suspends his going to Christ,
because he has not mourned sufficiently for sin, he fosters another fault
unawars, to wit, a purpose to lay down any more sorrowing for sin, if once he
had overtaken his imagined measure of sorrow, and had his access so made unto
Christ. This deceit of the heart, is brought to light in the practice of some
Antinomians, who allow themselves once to mourn for sin, that their mourning
may make way for faith in Christ; but after they apprehend they have once
repented, and casten their burden on Christ, and do number themselves among
believers, they scorn to mourn any more for sin, they harden themselves against
all remorse of conscience, and do reject secret challenges as groundless, and
make themselves merry with their own fancy, and reckon all penitents to be
under the spirit of bondage: which evils, if the afflicted person would
perceive to follow upon his error, which as a net is spread before his feet to
keep him from going to Christ, and following the course and exercise of
repentance all the days of his life, he would take heed better to his steps.

4. The afflicted must be informed, or called to mind concerning sorrow for
sin, that it is not commended from the quantity or measure of it, but from the
quality or sincerity of it. Now sincere sorrow for sin, is best discerned by
the hatred which the mourner has against sin, by the mourners humiliation of
himself before God, by his abhorring himself both for his sin, and for the
hardness of his heart under sin, by his purpose to strive against all sin, by
his flying in unto Christ for relief from sin, by his entertaining and renewing
of godly sorrow after he has believed in Christ according as he finds the
inherent roots of sin to be springing up in him. This is indeed sincere and
godly sorrow, which causes repentance never to be repented of.

5. Fifthly and last of all, the afflicted must be exhorted not to linger any
more but fly to Christ, and let him be humbled so much the more as he is not
so humbled as he should and would be; let him call to mind, that Christ came
not only to comfort mourners for sin, but also to call sinners unto repentance:
for, Christ has not put such a measure of sorrow, whereof we are speaking, to
be the condition of the covenant of Grace, he does not fell his precious wares,
nor his gifts of grace, for the price of men's tears; but let him remember, that
whosoever is so destitute in his own sense of all good, as he finds neither the
sense of sin, nor repentance nor faith, nor any other good thing in himself,
which may commend him to God, but by the contrair, much evil of all sorts, and
yet comes to Christ, is no doubt the poor in spirit, whom Christ has
pronounced blessed, Matthew. 5. 3. and that the sense of his sin and misery, in
the measure which he has of it, is the evidence of eye salve already bestowed
upon him, to encourage him to buy of Christ all the riches which he holds
forth to the poor in spirit, Revel. 3. 18.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein the Christians doubt, whether he be regenerat, because he finds not
his righteousness exceeding the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, is
answered.
THere are some regenerat persons, who, in the sense of their sins and
acknowledgment of their unworthiness, and inability to help themselves, are
fled unto Christ, and have given over themselves to him by faith, and are
endeavoring to bring forth fruits suitable to repentance, who for all this,
fall a doubting whether they be renewed, whether their faith be true and saving
faith; and the reason which they give of their doubting, is, because the
reformation of their life, whereunto they have attained, appears unto them
not to exceed the righteousness which may be found in some Pagans, or in
Scribes and Pharisees, of whom Christ has said in the Evangel. Matthew. 5. 20. I
say unto you, that except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.

This doubt is followed with grief, anxiety of mind, and fear least all virtues
in them be found nothing but counterfeit: and this case, except it be speedily
cured, cannot choose but draw after it heavy and hard consequences.

For curing whereof, we must confess, that many Pagans and Infidels may be
found in humane Histories, who from the principles of nature and civil
education, have led a more innocent and blameless life, than many who glory in
their Christian profession, for whose conviction and condemnation* Pagans and
Infidels shall arise in the day of judgment, and be brought forth for a
witness against many called Christians, and who shall be beaten with fewer
stripes, than many who are counterfeit Christians, and do disgrace the
profession of Christian Religion.

But we have here to do with these that are indeed regenerat, and endued with
saving faith, who endeavor to be holy, and do lament their imperfections, and
do not give over the use of the means, whereby they may profit in holiness,
albeit with grief and fear they go on heavily, suspecting they meet at last
with disappointment, and be excluded from the kingdom of heaven, for their
coming short of Scribes and Pharisees in the point of righteousness.

2. In this case, first, the complaint of the afflicted, concerning the
imperfections of his life and fruits of faith, in as far as it is true and
just, must be admitted, granted and confirmed, and the afflicted must be taught
upon this consideration to be seriously humbled in the presence of God, that he
may profit in self-denial, and more and more renounce all confidence in his own
works or inherent righteousness. To which purpose, let him consider yet more
the body of death and original sin, not yet thoroughly mortified in him; let him
look upon and acknowledge, in his present case, the bitter roots of infidelity,
and inclination to depart away from the living God, even then when he is most
called, and has most need to draw near and adhere unto him: upon the sight and
consideration whereof, he shall perceive a necessity daily to renew the acts of
repentance and faith in Christ.

Secondly, let the necessity and timeous use-making of the imputed
righteousness of Christ, be showed unto him: which righteousness, if the Lord
had not set before us for a refuge, what should become of us in the examination
of our works, and felt imperfection of our inherent righteousness? And here
the afflicted must be exhorted, in the sense of his own un-righteousnesse, to
run always toward Christ, to have his nakedness, hid by the garment of
Christ's imputed righteousness, and exhorted to apply and embrace more and more
straightly the righteousness of Christ our Cautioner, who is judicially by the
Father adjudged to the believer fled unto him, for righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.
30: But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made unto us wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. And here let the friend,
comforter of the afflicted, insist, that he may consider the value of the
ransom paid for us, and of the righteousness purchased unto us, for the only
garment able to hide our nakedness.

Thirdly, let the afflicted person understand, that it is righteousness with
God to be displeased with his children, when they esteem little and make little
use of the dear bought righteousness which Christ has purchased, and that in
wisdom and righteousness, Christ does not increase the inherent righteousness
of those who slight him in the matter of his imputed righteousness; for, we are
not justified by the perfection of inherent righteousness, which in this life
is impossible, but by the perfection of Christ's righteousness imputed unto the
believer in him.

Fourthly, when the Pastor or prudent friend perceives the afflicted now
convicted of his mistake and error, and to be brought to acknowledge, that the
justification of a sinner does come by the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ alone, without respect to the works of the law; and that the justified
man must set himself to bring forth good fruits in the gracious furniture which
Christ has promised to the believer. Now, I say, let him enter upon the
comparison of the righteousness of the penitent believer in Christ, with the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and then shall it be clear to the
afflicted person, that the righteousness of the weak Christian shall far
exceed the righteousness, not only of Pagans, but also of Scribes and
Pharisees of the highest pitch, and that for three reasons; the first is this,
the Pharisee cutteth short the interpretation of the law, unto the measure of
his own external obedience, lest the law whereby he seeks justification
should condemn him; but the Christian acknowledges in all things the
spirituality and perfection of the Law, and does not reject any duty which the
Law does command, but finds himself bound to obey the Law in all things, and to
aim to be perfect as his heavenly Father is perfect. The second reason is,
because the works which the Pharisee or Scribe does, are all counterfeit and
corrupt, in regard they arise from the strength of the natural man, and are
done for his own glory and carnal ends, and not for the glory of God; but the
works of the Christian, exercising faith in Christ, proceed from the power of
the spirit of Christ in him, and are done to the glory of God by him. The third
reason is, because the righteousness of works which the Scribes and Pharisees
did affectat, is altogether impossible, and makes void the grace of God: for,
if righteousness be by works, it is no more of grace, it overturnes that
heavenly way of justification by faith in Christ: for, the righteousness of
the Pharisee by works, cannot consist with the righteousness which is by faith
of grace; but the righteousness and justification of the Christian by faith in
Christ, is possible and ready at hand, to every one who renounceth all
confidence in his own worthiness, and slyeth unto Christ for grace: and this
is a most perfect way of righteousness, which depends upon the obedience and
satisfaction of Christ imputed to the believer in him. Which righteousness
only can stand in the judgment of God as perfect, which only does open the
fountain whereby the power of the holy Ghost runs down upon the man
justified by faith in Christ, to enable him to bring forth the acceptable
fruits of new obedience.

By this comparison, it does easily appear, that the righteousness of the weak
believer in Christ, does far exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees: and thus may the afflicted be solved of his doubt, arising from
comparison of his righteousness with the righteousness of the Pharisees.

3. If these grounds of satisfaction, laid before the afflicted, do not
satisfy, but his wounds do break up and bleed afresh, let us examine his
reasons. O! says he, what I have been aiming at in the way of new obedience, I
suspect is not accepted of God, because I find not these fruits of the Spirit,
which the Apostle speaks of as evidences of a new creature, Gal. 5. 22. love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness and
temperance; the defect and little feeling of these fruits, does argue, that God
does not approve my works.

For answering of this doubt, let us remember, that it is pre-supposed and
found by experience, that some that are afflicted with this doubt and
suspicion, do not cease to follow duties howbeit heartlesly, do live blameless
in an evil world, and so are not idle nor unfruitful: only this does trouble
them, that they find not the peace of conscience which they did expect, they
miss joy in God, consolation in their prayers, patience in affections,
cheerfulness and alacrity in following their calling; they do not find sensible
approbation of their work from God, as they did promise to themselves and did
expect. Hence flow their tears, lamentations and complaints of themselves, and
suspicions of the reality and sincerity of their faith, and all without just
cause: for, as in bodily sicknesses, sometime more maladies then one are
complicat, and to each of them respect must be had for perfecting the cure; So
in this case, more practical errors do concur, and each of them must be
deciphered and removed. We shall condescend upon four; The first practical
error of the afflicted, is the suspending of his faith upon a tacit condition,
that such and such effects be produced, and that Gods sensible approbation of
his diligence and works be felt, as if there were no warrantable act of faith
for laying hold on Christ, except after a certain time and trial taken whether
it shall produce such or such fruits or not. And here three deceits do concur;
The first is, a faith with a secret reservation, if such fruits follow, is by
suggestion of the tempter, thrust in, in the place of absolute believing
without reservation, and in effect, is a trying of God, in stead of trusting,
in him; for through temptation, the afflicted tacitly craveth a condition to be
performed by God, that when God performs the prescribed condition, then the
man's faith after that may rest upon him, other ways not: for when a sinner
comes to Christ, he should speak to this sense. O Lord, my God, seeing it has
pleased thee to reveal thy self to me, a blind impotent sinner, running toward
hell, and have offered thy self to me for a Savior, in whom I may have wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. Behold, O Lord, I heartily
receive the grace offered, I embrace thy Word, and thy Self offered to me in
thy Word, and do give up my self wholly to thy government, that thou may repair
in me the lost Image of God, and powerfully carry me on unto salvation. Instead
of saying thus* and closing absolutely the bargain with God in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, the tempter would have the poor afflicted man
to speak, as it were, to this sense. O Lord, the condition whereupon thou do
offer to be my God and Savior, does please me well, but because I fear I may
deceive my self in performing that condition, I require another condition of
thee, that thou would, first, let me see the fruits of faith in me, which if
I shall find within sometime hence, then will I count my self a believer, and
will rest on thee: but if I find not such fruits as may evidence true faith in
me, I must pronounce my says, either no faith or a dead faith, which has a
name of faith, but neither power nor life in it. For, faith without works is
dead, as James says, chapter 2. 26.

Now, what is this else in effect, then to make a new condition in the covenant
of Grace, and to promise upon this condition, to believe on Christ, if God
shall do as the sinner gives him direction? that is, if God shall make him
bring forth the fruits of faith first, when it became him absolutely to embrace
Christ, that he might both be forgiven of sin, and enabled to bring forth
fruits of faith?

Another fault is here also, which is this, the afflicted person does require
mature fruits from a weak faith, from a faith that is not settled and fixed, but
suspended on a condition, which is no less unreasonable, then if a foolish
Gardner should require fruits of a young tree lately planted, yea before the
roots of it were well settled in the ground; yea, and would not let it stand in
his garden, except, it should first bring forth fruits, whereby it might
evidence it self worthy of pains taking on it.

A third fault is this, that the afflicted, in this case, does pre-suppose,
that true faith is posterior to the fruits of true faith, both in nature and
time: for, if he will not believe in Christ, till after he perceive and feel in
himself the fruits of faith, upon this ground he can never believe till he
first find the fruits of faith in himself, which is nothing else in effect,
then to imagine, that the effect must go before its cause.

Unto this threefold self-deceit, we offer this one remedy in general, that the
afflicted person in the foresaid case, humble himself before God in the sense
of his barrenness, and so much the more as he finds small or no fruits in
himself, let him fly to Christ and fasten himself the more on his imputed
righteousness, and cleave unto him by faith, without delay, that he may draw
virtue and furniture from him to bring forth good fruits; for, this is the only
way to make him bring forth fruits in abundance, as Christ does teach us, Ioh.
15. 5. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit:
for without me, ye can do nothing. He, and he only, can make a good tree of an
evil imp, and cause it bring forth fruits answerable to the nature of the true
vine wherein it is ingrafted. And seeing Christ in the Canticle, chapter 2. 13. does
make no small account of the green figs and tender grapes, let not the
afflicted despise the day of small things.

4. The second practical error in the afflicteds foresaid case, is this, the
afflicted person has imagined in himself, that such and such fruits would
presently follow upon his receiving the offer of Christ, as that he should
forthwith be skillfull in the knowledge of the mysteries of salvation, able to
pray eloquently, made cheerful in singing songs of praise unto God, ready and
expedit to every good work, and that he should feel constantly an
un-interrupted peace in his conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost; but after
that by experience he has found, that he cannot so much as enter upon any good
work without a fight with Satan and with his own corrupt nature, and other
impediments, and withal he does feel the peace of his conscience and the joy
of the holy Ghost withdrawn, hereupon he begins to suspect the whole work of
Gods grace in himself, and that he remains in the state of nature unrenewed.

5. For removing of this error, let the afflicted know, that the hopes which he
has conceived at the hearing of the Gospel, shall not be disappointed (albeit
according to his childish fore-conception they come not to pass) for in a time
due and acceptable, God shall perform all his promises and bring the believer
(fled unto him) on upon his way, till he put him in full possession of fredom
from all sin and misery. But yet this felicity is brought about, not all at
once, but piece and piece, and not without conflict with the enemies of our
salvation, and not without use of the means appointed of God. Wherefore let
the afflicted be exhorted to take courage unto him, as becomes a soldier of
Christ, and let him go on in the ways of the Lord in hope and patience, being
assured that whatsoever God has promised, he will surely perform, in that
manner, measure, order and time, and by his own appointed means as he has set
down in his holy Scriptures.

6. The third practical error of the afflicted in the foresaid case, is, that
he does not judge rightly of his own faith, nor of the fruits thereof: for of
his own faith he judges no otherwise than of the faith of another man,
whileas there is a diverse way to judge of my own faith then of another man's
faith; for because I cannot reach to the internal acts of the soul of another
man, therefore I must judge only by the outward effects, according to the rule
that James gives, chap. 2. ver. 10. Show me thy faith without thy works, and I
will show thee my faith by my works. Yet of my own faith I may judge, not only
by the external effects of it (which in the first closing with Christ, are not
yet observable possibly) but also by the internal act of faith which the holy
Spirit who knows the heart does reveal unto me, by making me not only heartily
to embrace Christ offered in the Gospel, and love him, but also can make me
reflect and turn back mine eye upon his own gift and grace in me, according to
that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 12. we have received the Spirit of God, that we
might know the things freely given to us of God.

Again the afflicted does not judge rightly of his own fruits of faith,
according as the truth is, and as the Lord in his Word does judge; he should
distinguish between the sincerity of the work and the perfection of it (a work
may be done uprightly, and yet be imperfect) he should distinguish what is Gods
part in the work, from that which is wrong and corrupt, flowing from the
remainder of sin in him. These things he does confound, and does so fix his
eyes upon the defects and imperfection of his work, that he sees nothing but
what is wrong, when it is his duty both to observe what is wrong, that he may
be humbled, and cast away all confidence in his work, and to observe also what
is good and right in his work, proceeding from the grace of God in him, and so
praise and thank God for it in Christ, who will not quench the smoking flax,
Isa. 42. 3.

7. For remedy therefore of this error, let the afflicted, first, look upon the
acts of his faith both internal and external, both on the elicit acts of faith
and the imperat acts (as they are called in the Schools) and let him judge of
both according to what is right and equitable, that whatsoever be the measure
of new obedience, it may be differenced from the mixture of infirmity, defects,
or corruption. And let him not judge of his work according to the suggestions
and calumnies of Satan, who always condemns so far as he can, what is good
in Gods children; or if he cannot condemn it, does labor to have it abused.

Secondly, let the afflicted observe the due order both in doing his duties and
in judging thereof: for of necessity he must, first, put forth an act of faith
and love on Christ, before he can pass judgment on it, and let him first do
the work commanded to the believer, and then pass sentence, that he may be
strengthened to do more duties, and so to present them to God to be washen,
accepted and amended in his following service.

Thirdly, let him carefully look unto the end which he should propose to
himself in judging of his acts of faith and obedience: for the end of judging
our selves and our works, should be to confirm our faith in Christ, when we
find any thing done according to the rule, and to ^lye to Christ for pardon and
grace if we conceive all is wrong after we have examined matters.

6. The fourth practical error, is, that the afflicted first suffers his
faith to be wounded and weakened by Satan's tentation, and then to be drawn
forth to the field to give a proof of the strength of his faith in some
difficile duty, before the wound of faith be bound up or healed; for, it is a
great disadvantage to enter the lists with Satan about the fruits of faith,
whether they be sincere or not, when faith is wounded, yea, faints, and is
brought in question whether it be true faith or not. Now this is a special
stratageme and wile of Satan, by whatsoever mean he can to hurt the faith of
Gods children, that he may by that mar communion-keeping with God, and cut
off, if he can, the conduit whereby the power of Christ is conveyed to the
believer for making him give acceptable obedience unto God. And certainly, it
is no less difficile, when faith is wrested, and for a time out of joint, to
set about acceptable service, then it is to make a man to set upon his work
when his arms are out of joint.

Therefore, for remedy of this error, let the afflicted, so soon as he finds
his ^aith wounded, incontinent set himself down before God humbly, and
acknowledge his foolishness, want of watching, unworthiness and inability,
either to know how he has grieved Gods Spirit, and made open a door for the
Tempter to fall in upon him, or to repent the sins which he knows might have
provoked God so to exercise him; and next, let him look unto God in Christ
reconcileing the world to himself, and lay hold on the horns of the altar, on
the throne of grace for strengthening his faith, that he may find help for the
present need, and thereafter also to walk more wisely: for, this is the
counsel which Christ does give to the corrupt Church of Sardis, Revel. 3. 2.
Strengthen the thing which remains and is ready to die. Thus may the
afflicted recover strength of faith and ability to resist Satan, and furniture
for bringing forth unquestionable fruits of faith.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein the regenerat man's doubt, whether he be in the state of grace, arising
from his unquietness of spirit, is answered.
THis case is incident to many dear children of God, and may befall Champions
in time of sad affliction, as we see in the Prophet, Ps. 42. 11. and 43. 5. why
art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? But even
in time of outward prosperity, or when no great affliction bodily lies on,
many, who in the sense of their sinfulness have fled to Jesus Christ, and have
taken his yoke upon them, are troubled with doubtings, whether they be of the
number of true believers, whether they have rightly come unto Christ, whether
they have been well accepted of him; and for their doubting they can give no
other reason, save this, I cannot be quiet, nor rest in assurance, that I am in
the state of grace; if they be interrogat, what they think of the evident signs
of their regeneration which have been and are to be seen in their conversation
since they began in earnest to seek the face of God in Christ? They will
possibly not altogether deny Gods work in them; but yet dare not lean weight
upon these signs, because they do find these signs also brought in question,
whether they have been or are kindly and sincere; mean time they are about to
do that which is acceptable to God in the course of their calling, albeit with
more heaviness and less alacrity then b^cometh persons reconciled to God in
Christ.

2. This disease will be found complicat and made up of more mistakes and errors
then one: and therefore is to be the more narrowly considered: because it is no
small hinderance of a comfortable christian conversation, which God does allow
on his children; for in the party troubled with unquietness, we presuppone, I^
there is a serious sense of sin, and purpose to do better. 2. An unfeigned
embracing of the covenant of grace and reconciliation in Christ Jesus. And, 3.
an honest, though weak, endeavor to bring forth the fruits of new obedience:
and yet notwithstanding the person is not quiet, but walks heavily and is
discouraged, by reason of his uncertainty, whether he be in the state of grace
or not: yea, he is cast down and disquieted, because he is disquieted, and
cannot get a reasonable answer from his conscience when he asks of it, why
are thou cast down and disquieted within me?

3. The mistakes and errors, whence this dissatisfaction and unquietness does
flow are many; but we shall condescend upon eight or nine only. The first
error, and cause of unquietness is, or may be this, that the party afflicted,
albeit he have the habits of saving grace in him, and does by Gods grace put
forth these habits in actual exercise, yet he does not reflect upon, nor turn
his eye to observe, the operations of Gods holy Spirit in himself, nor the acts
of saving grace, which the holy Spirit has made him put forth, of which if he
take not notice, they are to him for the time as if they were not; and so no
wonder he be disquiet, while he perceives not in himself that which might make
him quiet: For example, when the sense of sin is raised up in a man's spirit by
the holy Ghost, if he do not observe that this is one of the operations of the
holy Spirit convincing the world of sin, or if he do not turn back his eye on
this operation, and upon his own act, stirred up thereby, to subscribe the
sentence of the law against himself, no wonder that he doubt of his conversion,
till he see the footsteps of God the converter of him, from the love and
approbation of sin, unto the hatred of it; and when he is ^l^d to Christ the
only Redeemer from sin and misery, and has laid hold on him according to the
covenant of grace offered in him, if he do not look back on this operation of
God drawing him to Christ, and upon his own act of coming unto Christ, by the
draught of Gods Spirit, what wonder he do not reckon himself among believers,
albeit he be in Gods account one of that number? And when the holy Spirit has
kindled in him not only a purpose of new obedience, but also a begun endeavor
to live holily, justly and soberly, if he do not observe and acknowledge these
operations of Gods Spirit making him to bring forth these acts, what wonder
that this mistake and inconsideration do open a door to disquietnesse and
doubting, whether he be in the state of grace or not?

4. For removing this cause of disquietnesse, the afflicted person must beware
that he pass not sentence of Gods dispensation toward him, according to the
tentations and suggestions of Satan, nor yet according to the opinion which
his Pastor or friend may have of him, judging somewhat uncharitably of him,
upon sinister suspicions: neither let him stand to the suspicions of his own
incredulous heart; but let him consider what the Word of the Lord has said of
the person in whom these three, grace^ do concur, to wit, 1. the sense of sin
and inability to help our selves; 2. flying unto Christ for relief from sin and
misery; and, 3. some measure of upright purpose and endeavor to serve God in
new obedience; for of such says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 3 We are the
Circumcision or true Israelits, who have no confidence in the flesh, but
rejoice in Jesus Christ, and worship God in the spirit. Let him therefore
esteem the discovery of his sinful and wretched estate in himself to be the
very fruit of the eye salve and work of the Spirit bestowed on him by Christ,
and let him esteem his hearty consent given to the covenant of grace and
reconciliation, to be the undoubted act of saving faith. For, hearty consent to
the offer of grace in Jesus Christ, presuppones, first, that the person sees no
standing for him by the law or covenant of works, but is beaten from all
confidence in himself, and made to believe and subscribe the righteous sentence
of the law against himself to the praise of Gods truth and justice. Secondly,
it imports the man's believing the testimony which God has given of Christ
Jesus, to wit, that God has made a gift of life eternal to the soul that
hungereth and thristeth for righteousness, and that this life is in his Son;
yea it imports the man's receiving and embracing of Christ offered in the
Gospel. Thirdly, it imports, that the consenter to the covenant of grace as
he has renounced confidence in his own works, So he has given up himself to
God, to live by the grace of Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Now if the
afflicted shall reflect upon these two operations of the holy Ghost, making him
humble in the sense of sin, heartily to receive Christ Jesus for his relief,
and withal do observe an unfeigned purpose and begun endeavor to live more
holily and fruitfully by the grace and furniture of Christ, howsoever he labor
under many infirmities, not only is he undoubtedly a new creature, but also by
observing the foresaid evidence thereof, may conclude, that God has begun a
good work of grace in him, and so shall this first cause of disquietnesse be
removed.

5. Another cause of disquietnesse is, or may be this, if the afflicted, after
examination of the work of grace in himself, being convinced of his blessed
estate and confirmed by present sense of Gods love shed abroad in his heart, do
not hold fast his estimation of Gods work in himself longer then the sensible
comfort thereof remains with him, but either does retreat his judgment of his
blessed estate, or does not defend his right, does not resist Satan by being
steadfast in the faith, no wonder his disquietnesse and dejection of courage
return upon him.

6. For removing of this cause of disquietnesse, let the afflicted consider,
that spiritual consolation, and sensible feeling of Gods favor, is granted to
Gods children to make them steadfast in the faith of Gods grace toward them,
when sensible comfort is withdrawn, and when they are put to the trial and
exercise of their faith, under trouble and temptations. And therefore, when the
affl^cted, once being made clear of his interest in Christ, and of his keeping
on him the yoke of Christ, does find a change in his condition, let him
presently humble himself before God, in acknowledgment of the power of the body
of sin in himself, and of whatsoever evil fruit it has brought forth, whereby
he has procured the change of his own comfortable condition; and let him (...)
the acts of his repentance and of his (...) in Christ, striving against all
temptations for the (...) once given to him, and disputing for his right and
interest unto Gods grace in Christ, that he may with patience obtain the
victory over his temptation, and be able, not only with D^vid to charge his own
soul to trust in God, the help and health of his countenance, Ps. 42. and 43.
but also to glory with the Apostle, and to say, 2 Timothy 1. 22. I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day. And so may the second cause of
disquietnesse be removed.

7. A third cause of disquietnesse is, or may be, this, if a sincere convert,
finding himself come short both of his purpose and hope of making progress in
the course of new obedience and reformation of heart and conversation, shall,
in (...) of being more humbled and beaten more out of confidence in his own
strength and works and in (...) of laying (...) hold on the imputed
righteousness (...), discouragement, and so open a (...) calling his own
conversion in question. In this case, the (...) of the true convert is
augmented, by reason of the conscience of his sincerity in his couversion,
wherein he renounced the love and service of all sin, renounced all confidence
in his own worth or works, did fly unto the grace offered in Christ, and
received him heartily, and purposed ^onestly to serve God thereafter in
newness of life, which makes him say in himself, I can never put repentance
from dead works, and faith in Christ, and purpose of new obedience more
sincerely in exercise, then I have done; and now, seeing I come short of my
purpose and hope of profiting and can never more sincerely repent of sin or
believe in Christ then I have done, have I not just cause of doubting of my
estate and of discouragment and disquietnesse.

8. For removing this cause of disquietnesse, let the afflicted consider first,
that there is a great difference between purpose and practice. A holy and
sincere purpose o^t times comes short in practice; for, the Apostle says,
Romans 7 18. To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I
find not. The inlake here is of strength to perform, and not in the sincerity
of the will and purpose.

Secondly, let him consider, that there is a difference between the consent of
a well-informed conscience to the discharge of holy duties, and the practical
coming up of the not well-reformed heart, unto the actual discharge of those
duties; for oft-times the heart is like a deceitful bow, that disappointeth
the archer; therefore, let not the afflicted deny the sincerity of his purpose,
but let him be humbled for the corruption of his heart, which has not answered
his purpose and expectation.

Thirdly, let not the afflicted think, that he has so fully renounced all
confidence in his own works as he conceived: we may be clearly convinced not to
lean to our own righteousness, and so more easily in our judgment renounce all
confidence in our good behavior; but the dregs of the sin of misbelieving Jews
is not easily purged out of us, wherein they went about to establish their own
righteousness, and did not submit themselves to the righteousness of faith,
Romans 9. and, 10. 3. As he therefore, who denies, that he leans his weight on
his staff and yet falls to the ground when his staff does slide, is found to
have leaned more weight on his staff then he pretended; So he is found to have
leaned too much weight upon his own works, who is cast down, because his
performances are not answerable to his purpose and hopes. Humbled indeed he
ought to be, and to lament his misery under the body of death, but not be so
dejected and discouraged, as to loose or s^cken his grips of the covenant of
Grace; especially when he does consider, that the Lord, by this experience of
his own weakness, is teaching him thereafter to have a more high estimation,
and make better use, of Christ's imputed righteousness, and to lean less to
his own purposes, and promises, and inherent righteousness, that so he may
draw more ability from Christ by faith, to bring forth better fruits: for
without me, says Christ, you can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5.

Last of all, let him neither say nor think, that he cannot put forth any act
of repentance or says, or purpose of amendment of life, more sincerely then he
has done; for, no man has attained such a measure of sincerity in the
discharge of any act of saving grace, but there is room for him to receive a
greater measure both of activity and sincerity in acting, then he has attained
already: but rather let him examine more narrowly, and find out the corrupt
inclination of the heart to lean to its own inherent righteousness, and
difficulty of subjecting it self wholly to the righteousness of ^aith, and
sanctification through faith in Christ; for, this does the Apostle teach us to
do, Philip. 3. 12, 13, 14. he did not think himself already perfect, but
reached himself forth to those things which were before him, pressing toward
the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. And the end
of the pressing of the Law is, that sin may be the more clearly discovered;
that as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through Christ
Jesus our Lord, R^m. 5. 20, 21.

9. The fourth cause of disquietnesse is, or may be, this, if the true conv^rt,
being frequently convinced of the manifold deceits of the heart, for this cause
shall begin to call in question all the work of grace in himself: which
inconvenience does flow from his not putting difference between the true
consent of the heart unto the covenant of Grace and acts of holiness, in so
far as the heart is renewed on the one hand, and the doubting or hesitation of
the heart, in as far as it is not purged from the relicts of incredulity and
backwarddesse unto godliness on the other hand; or, because he puts no
difference between the effects of renewing grace, and the effects of
in-dwelling sin in himself, both of them putting forth their power in the self
same actions: for, if this difference shall not be observed, and sentence so
given, as that which is in the renewed man be absolved and commended, and that
which flows from indwelling sin be disallowed and condemned, without prejudice
to any good, which shall be found in the renewed man, it is impossible that the
conscience can be quiet, or that any good action of the Saints can be approven,
by reason of sin in us; for, the evil which we would not, shall be found in us,
as is clear in the Apostles censure of himself, Romans 7. 15. to 20.

10. For removing this fourth cause of disquietnesse, let the afflicted learn
so to observe the inlakes and sinful imperfections and pollutions of his best
works, as he observe also that which is good in his actions, that of the good
he may make thankful confession unto God, and pray for the increase thereof;
and of the inlakes and pollutions of his works, he may make confession also,
and be humbled for them, and fly to the unsported righteousness of Christ, and
to the founta in opened up in his house for sin and uncleanness, Zech. 13. 1.
This wisdom is taught us in the example of the father of the child possessed
with a dumb and deaf spirit, crying out and saying with tears, Lord, I believe,
help thou my unbelief, Mark, 9. 24. he maintains the begun work of faith in
himself, and confesses the evil he found in himself, and flies by prayer to
Christ to help him.

11. The fifth cause of disquie^nesse is, or may be this, if the true convert
suspen^ the absolution of his own faith and fruits thereof from being
hypocritical and counterfeit, until he find himself freed from disquietnesse,
and do enjoy peace and tranquillity of mind, which he does apprehend should
always accompany sound, sincere and unfeigned faith, and on this ground he
esteems that faith only to be true faith, which has overcome all doubtings,
and now being victorious, brings peace and quietness with it; and that faith
which is tossed, or troubled with doubtings, he thinks may justly be
suspected of unsoundnesse, as if tentation to doubting, were a sufficient
reason to make a question of the sincerity of believing: or as if it were a
sufficient reason for a man to call his faith in question, whether it be true
faith or not, because Satan calls it in question: for if this were a
sufficient reason to question a work or act of grace in a man, no work of
grace, nor no point of true religion, should be holden for sound and true,
because Satan never cease to calum^iat and quarrel the truth, both of Gods
Word and working, for he was so malicious and impudent as to question Christ,
If thou be the Son of God, Mat. 4. 3.

12. For removing of this cause of disquietnesse, let the afflicted consider,
first, that the assaults of the enemy do neither diminish the worth, nor the
estimation of faith; for, faith fighting, is no less solid and sound in the
time of battle, then it is after victory, standing victorious. 2. Let him
consider that we are called to a warfare, not only against flesh and blood, but
also against principalities and powers and spiritual wickednesses Ephesians. 6. and
that we may not promise to our selves, freedom or exemption from Satan's
throwing fiery darts at us, ^o long as we live, as the Apostle does warn us,
Ephesians. 5. Let him consider thirdly, that objections and questions, moved
against the converts faith, are rather a token of the sincerity thereof, then a
reason for bringing it in question: for, the Pirat Satan can discern well
enough between an empty vessel and a ship loadened with precious wares, and
uses to set upon the rich ship, that he may spoil it, if he can, of that most
precious faith, and not trouble himself to molest a secure presumptuous person,
lest he should waken him, by such means, out of his dream, and chase him unto
God. But as for a man that is already fled from him and turned to God by faith
in Christ, he will not fail to follow the chase, that if he cannot bring him
back, yet he may vex him and dog him at the heels till his entry in heaven.
Fourthly, let him consider, that the Lord uses to suffer Satan to trouble the
believer with suggestions to waken his faith, of set purpose to teach the
believer to fight his battles, and by frequent exercises to be purified more
and more, like gold or silver put oft-times in the furnace, yea, and that the
wrestler may be made valiant in fight, Heb. 11. 34. whereupon the afflicted
must be exhorted not only to take courage and to despise the malice of the
adversary, but also to rejoice when he does meet with manifold tentations (as
we are charged, Iam. 1. 2.) because of the fruit following by Gods blessing on
such exercise. And to this end, let him put on the whole armor of God, that
when he has resisted and overcome one tentation, he may stand and resist
another, Ephesians. 6.

13. The sixth cause of disquietnesse, is, or may be this, if the true convert
do not distinguish, but confound, the peace he has with God, and the peace he
has in his conscience; if he do not distinguish but confound peace with God
and rest from assaults of the (...); if he do not distinguish, but confound,
peace of mind, and peace of conscience; if he do not distinguish and put a due
difference between these sorts of peace, he cannot choose but be disquieted, by
susp^^ting his peace, with God, because he has not rest nor peace from Satan's
assaults; he cannot eshew disquietnesse, when he conceives that his peace with
God is dissolved, when trouble arises in his own conscience. And no wonder he
be disquieted when he apprehends every perturbation of his mind to be a
breach of peace with God, or with his own conscience.

14. For removing of this cause of disquietnesse, the afflicted must consider,
first, that peace with God, does follow immediately upon an humbled sinners
flying to Christ, and embracing the offer of reconciliation with God in Christ,
when, in the mean time, the conscience possibly may be going on pursuing the
convert with challenges for all sort of sin and guiltiness; for he that is
fled to Christ by faith, is justified, and being justified by faith, he has
peace with God, granted, decreed, pronounced in his favors, and registrat in
the Court-book of the Evangel, albeit possibly the absolved convert, has not
drawn forth the extract of the decree, nor considered it, when he has read
it, nor applied the same to himself according as the general sentence gives
him warrant.

Therefore, the humbled sinner, fled unto Christ, and engaged heartily to his
service, must not take heed so much to what his sickly, and not clearly
informed conscience does say, as to what God, who is greater then the
conscience, and gives order and rule to the conscience, does say to such a
poor soul fled unto Christ.

Secondly, let him consider, that his peace is not ^arred with God, by Satan's
warring against him; for, peace with God, stands well with war against all
spiritual enemies: and therefore the less rest he has from Satan's trouble
and molestation, let him be the more confident of his peace with God, whose
battles he is fighting against Satan.

Thirdly, let him consider, that perturbation of mind, does neither hinder
peace with God, nor peace of conscience: for the mind and thoughts of a man,
for many reasons may be troubled and disquieted, when peace with God and peace
of conscience are settled and established: for, when the mind is troubled, and
tempted to anxiety, the Apostle shows how to remove the perturbation of the
mind, and setle the peace of conscience also, Phil. 4. 6, 7. Be careful, says
he, or anxious, for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanks giving, let your requests be made manifest to God, and the peace of God
which passes all understanding shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ
Jesus. And in his own experience he lets us see the difference of perturbation
of mind, from peace with God and the conscience also, 2 Cor. 7. 5, 6. When we
were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every
side, without were fightings, within were fears; nevertheless, God that
comfort these that are cast down, comforted us in the coming of Titus: So
also, 2 Cor. 2. 12, 13, 14.

15. The seventh cause of disquietnesse, is, or may be this, if the true
convert be either ignorant or forgetful of the way of obtaining, maintaining,
repairing and recovering the true peace of God in himself, and of the change of
Gods dispensation toward his children which is common; through many
tribulations God does bring his own to heaven. Sometime he shows them his
countenance in a comfortable providence, sometime he hides his face, but does
not change his love toward them, Psalm. 30. 7. Thou hidest thy face, says
David, and I was troubled, but here was his wisdom, he went the straight way to
recover his peace, I cried to thee, O Lord, and unto the Lord made I my
supplication, and his mourning was turned into dancing, Psalm. 30. 7, 8. to the
end. But many weak converts are not so wise, who by their inconfiderat courses
do cast themselves in fears, jealousies and suspicions, both of Gods love to
them and of their own interest in him: when they miss felt consolations they
fall to quarrel their right. And if they resolve to have their condition
helped, they prescribe their own time, way and measure, and nothing can
satisfy them till they recover possession of lost sense, with the Spouse,
Cant. 2. 5. Stay me with stagons, comfort me with aples (says she) for I am
sick of love. It is true, sometime God does coudescend to their passionat put
suit of comfort, but their not believing, in the mean time, and their hasting
to have their condition altered, before patience has wrought the perfect work,
is not to be commended or approven.

16. For removing this cause of disquietnesse, let the afflicted consider,
first, that the Lord neither shows his loving countenance to the weak
disciple, nor hides it from him, but out of love; he neither corrrecteth nor
comforte^h him, but out of love; I am the Lord and change not says he sensible
3. 6. Therefore you sons of Jacob are not consu^^^d. If he give consolation
sensibly, it is to confirm their weak says, by (...) experience of the fruit
of believing in him, and if he withdraw his consolation, it is that he may
exercise their faith, and train them to bel^^ve his Word without a sensible
pawn for it: And therefore, for removing, this cause of disquietnesse, by all
(...) let the afflicted beware to mis-construst the Lords d^aling, but let him
strive against all suggestions of Satan. or (...) own misbelieving heart, and
entertain friendly (...) of God; for a true friend, or father when they give
them beter, will take it for no small (...) or fatherly affection to (...)
Physicians and (...) from their Patients, (...) potions, when they (...) and
carve and (...) they are exponed to aim at the (...), much more should every
man, whatsoever dispensation of God he meet with, give a good costruction of
his working.

Secondly, let him consider, that the Lord has his own way and order of
working; first, he discovers sin and misery and weakness in the creature,
and after that he discovers his grace, mercy and power in Christ to relieve;
first, he humbles, and then lists up; first, he wounds, and then he
heals; first, he smites, and then binds up; first he brings down to
death, and then restoret^^unto life, H^s. 6. 1. and, Ps. 9. 3. and therefore,
let the afflicted be h^mbled under the sense of apprehended ca^ses of hi^
disquietnesse, and seek of God the restoring of wha^ is lost or wanting, and
the healing of the wound in^^^ted, in due order. Now Gods order is this, he
will, fi^, have the Law magnified, and his Justice acknowle^ed by all afflicted
sinners, even by them who are in th^tate of Grace, and are not under the
covenant or cuse of the Law, to whom notwithstanding the Law mus^till be a
pedagogue to lead them to Christ; and w^n the Lords Justice is acknowledged,
and all fretting ^d murmuring against his dealing stopped, then come^, in the
next place, the discovery of grace in Christ^ for, since the fall of Adam, God
has always been i^ Christ, going about to reconcile the world to himself not
imputing their transgressions to them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. And when God has drawn
the sinner by faith to the Mediator Christ, God incarnat, then there is a
matrimonial contract made betwixt God in Christ reconciled and the believer,
and an union between Christ and the believer in a judicial manner; and so the
believer is made to have a right unto Christ's person, according to that of the
Spouse, Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. And by this means also,
the believer is made to have right unto Christ's purchase and benefits, and to
communion with him and his Saints, as the Apostle teaches us, Romans 32. He that
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with
him also freely give us all things? And after right given to the believer, in
due time the Lord gives and renews the earnest-penny of the inheritance,
Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom also ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise, who
really renews the believer and gives him peace, joy, consolation, strength
and other gifts of grace, with an ebbing and flowing thereof in the sense and
feeling of the believer, as may best^erve the good of the believer, and glory
of God ^gracious dispensation: and therefore,

Thirdly, let the afflected person, whatsoever crossedispensati^n he me^ with,
whatsoever distemper of soul he (...) into, v^a^soever grace or measure of
grace he miss^^ or co^^eth short of, seek his relief in Gods order; (...) is to
say, let him justify the Lords wisdom and j^ice, humble himself under his
mighty hand, renew^e acts of repentance in humility, turn his face to (...)
Christ by the renewed acts of faith in him, lay h^d on his right unto Christ's
person and benefits, that ^^may ^om to the sensible feeling of what he has
right ^to by the covenant of Grace. And whatsoever dects, transgressions,
temptations unto discouragment and ^isbelief, do brangle his confidence, let
them humble himself indeed, but so as they do not drive him from that Covenant,
but be made use of as spurs, and forcible motives to lay the faster hold on
Christ and his infinite grace contracted in that Covenant.

17. The eight cause of disquietnesse, is, or may be this, if the true convert,
daily lamenting his own sinfulness, and daily troubled with suspicion of his
own blessed estate, by reason of his felt mani^old corruptions shall meet
either with the calum^ies of men, or co^forters like Job's friends, who in
stead of healing his wounds in his affliction, shall foster his suspicion of
his estate by uncharitable censure of the poor man's complaint of himself; in
this case, if the aff^cted do not maintain his righteousness by ^aith in
Christ, as Job did, and his upright endeavor to please God, which is manifest
by his daily godly grief for his short coming in his aimed-at holiness, no
wonder he be disquieted.

18. For removing of this cause, let the afflicted consider and distinguish
what is right in him, and what is wrong, and beware to confound these. For
example, 1. This is right, that he does not lean to the worth of his own works,
nor is pussed up with a vain conceit of himself before God. 2. That he is
sensible of his sinful imperfections and corruptions, and of the bitter root
of original sin in him. 3. It is right in him also, that he aims toward
perfection, forgetting what is behind, and pressing toward the mark and prize
of his calling. But this is wrong in him, 1. that he fostereth suspicions
unjustly of his own blessed estate. 2. That he does not observe the work of
Gods grace in himself so carefully as he observes his imperfections and
corruptions. 3. That he does not so much the more make use of Christ's imputed
righteousness, as he finds the imperfection of his own inherent
righteousness. 4. That he measures Gods estimation of him, according to the
estimation he has of himself, when indeed God in Scripture does show no less
approbation of him in his wrestleing, then he does in the time of his victory
and quiet condition. 5. That he does not observe the difference of the way he
does walk into which is good, from the flidings, imperfections, errors and
mistakes in particular actions and passages in that way. 6. That he does lay
more weight oft-times upon the judgment of mistaking spectators of his course,
then he has reason to do, and does not take heed to the sentence of the Lord
in the Gospel, concerning the poor in spirit, the contrite, the meek and lowly
disciple. These things let the afflicted consider and make good use thereof,
for his encouragment in the way of new obedience.

19. The ninth cause of disquietnesse is, or may be, this, if the true convert
be not acquainted with living by faith; for there are many honest and
tenderhearted converts, who, in the sense of their sins, are fled unto Christ,
resolved never to depart from him, and careful to lead a blameless life, who
notwithstanding, whenever they meet with changes of dispensation, with
variety of temptations, fresh feeling of the power of sin in themselves, or any
cross bodily or spiritual, are disquieted and cast in suspicion of their
state: and albeit they neither will give over to follow after Christ, nor will
God suffer them to perish, yet they make themselves an uncomfortable and
miserable life, by their leaning to present sense and feeling, when they should
remember the saying of the Apostle (2 Cor. 5. 7. we walk not by sight but by
faith) they are cast down, do mourn and complain, because it is not with them
as they would, and are most part malcontent with their lot, frequently
regrating unto God their wants and imperfections, and seldom are they praising
or thanking God for what they have gotten of him.

20. For removing this cause, let the afflicted, first, consider what the
Apostle speaks to the afflicted Hebrews, Heb. 10. 36. ye have need of
patience, that when ye have done the will of God ye may receive the promise;
for yet a little while, and he that will come, shall come, and will not tarry.
Now, the just man shall live by faith, says he.

Secondly, let him consider, that to live by faith, does require these six
duties, 1. That we renounce our own corrupt reason and sense, lest we count
that to be our life which may be seen or felt, or that which may be altered and
changed, but reckon that to be our life, which is hid with God in Christ, and
shall be revealed at the glorious coming of our Lord. 2. That the covenant of
grace, and rich promises of the Gospel be esteemed of us as our meet and drink,
whereby our hearts may be sustained in all adversity, and our hope upholden in
patience through the comfort of the Scriptures. 3. That we make use of all Gods
benefits bestowed upon us by virtue of that new right made unto us in Christ
for being partakers thereof. 4. That in all our actions we implore and seek our
strength from Christ, and give him thanks for the measure whatsoever he
bestows. So did the Apostle live, Gal. 2. 20. The life which I now live in
the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God. 5. That we rejoice and glory
more in Christ Jesus in the midst of trouble, then we grieve for our troubles
whatsoever, whereby as with a sharp pinsell, he is drawing in us the lineaments
of his own Image and conformity with himself; So did the Saints, Romans 5. 3, 4,
5. Last of all, to live by faith, requires that in every condition we should
keep faith and a good conscience in Christ Jesus, and esteem our selves blessed
of the Lord, albeit we be tossed with troubles immediately sent from God to
exercise us, albeit we do fall in manifold tentations, be assaulted with
doubtings, and persecuted unjustly by men: for, it should and may suffice a
believer in Christ, if he be not distressed, albeit he be troubled on every
side; he must not despair albeit he be perplexed; he shall not be forsaken,
albeit he be persecuted; he shall not be destroyed, albeit he be cast down, 2
Cor. 4. 8, 9. Upon these and the like grounds, the Apostle lived a comfortable
life, Phil. 4. 12. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound,
every where and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be
hungry, both to abound and suffer need; I can do all things through Christ who
strengthens me. Thus must Christian soldiers live in the midst of their
toyling, in warfare, in want of many things, in watching and running hazard of
life, in hope of victory and promised glory, holding up their hearts by faith
in Christ.

And these things which we have spoken in explication of this case, are not
intended to hinder the tender hearted believer from praying, and endeavoring
by all means, that the face of the Lord may shine upon him, and that he may be
filled with the joy of his Spirit; for we are charged to seek his face and
strength continually, Psalm. 105. 4. But all our speech does drive at this
mainly, that the afflicted in his discouragment and unquietness, meekly submit
himself to the will of God, howsoever he be exercised, always going on in the
way of God according to his vocation, through honor and dishonor, through
good report and evil report, looking unto the promises which are made to him
that endures to the end. And what is spoken here of living by faith, must not
be abused to softer negligence in well doing or bringing forth fruits of faith
in every condition, or to hinder the daily exercise of repentance, or to
require of a Christian a stoical stupidity under trouble; but the thing we aim
at, is, that the Christian in all cross dispensations and vexations, endeavor
by faith to be of good courage in the Lord, and endeavor to draw virtue from
Christ to bring forth fruits, giving glory to him, whatsoever measure he shall
bestow more or less, because it is Christ who is made unto us wisdom and
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, and in him alone shall the soul
of the afflicted have rest, Matthew. 11. 24.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein the converts doubt, arising from his uncertainty as what time he was
converted, is solved.
THere are some true converts, who after they have past a good part of their
journey to heaven, begin to halt and make slow progress, by doubting whether
they be walking in the true converts footsteps, or whether they be converted
at all, or not. The reason of their doubting, arises from this, that in
conference with sundry of the Saints of their acquaintance, they have observed,
that every one of them could design the time of their conversion, and from that
time can reckon their age in Christ: Or, from this is their doubt arisen, that
in the Treatise of some modern Writer, they have read, or from the Sermon of
some well esteemed Preacher they have heard some such doctrine, whereupon the
true convert falls out with himself in saying, I was bred and brought up in a
godly family, I have followed the exercises of religion; after hearing the
heads and sum of christian Religion, I have embraced the truth; I seemed to
my self to believe in Christ, and entertain the exercise of repentance, and to
endeavor the amendment of my life; I love these whom I see to live holily, and
I do hate the ways of the profane, but because I cannot tell when or what day
or year I was really converted, as I know sundry of the godly of my
acquaintance can do; therefore I doubt whether my conversion be begun or not,
but mean time, though I will not turn off the way I have been following, yet I
go on halting and heartlesse till I be cleared of my doubt.

2. For removing this doubt, we must yield this far to the afflicted, that many
indeed deceive themselves, who being civilly educated, and from their bairn-age
accustomed with the exercises of religion; are nothing beyond the foolish
virgins, and do rest satisfied with their own and others opinion of themselves.
If such persons be questioned, when they began to repent, or believe in Christ;
it is true, they cannot design the time when they were unconverted, but have
still been pleased, and are pleased, with their own estate, and in effect were
never converted. But it is no less true on the other hand, that there are some
who indeed are renewed, in whom, piece and piece, without any notable change,
faith and repentance, and a holy conversation, have grown with the growing
knowledge of the Gospel, and will of God therein; of whom it may be truly said,
the kingdom of heaven comes not with observation; of whom it is said, Mark. 4.
26. So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and
should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up,
he knows not how.

But to solve the doubt, it matters not whether a man know or not know the day
of his conversion, provided he be indeed regenerat and made a new creature.
Wherefore the afflicted may be of good courage, if after serious examination of
his own conscience, he be humbled frequently in the sense, not only of his
actual sins and short-coming of his duty, but also in the sense of his original
and in-dwelling corruption or body of death; if, as he does indeed loath
himself, and renounce all confidence in his best works, so he seriously embrace
the imputed righteousness of Christ, and in his strength, by faith in him,
does endeavor to live holily, righteously and soberly, (albeit joined with
many imperfections) he may conclude, he is regenerat: for, if these three be
joined in him in any measure of honesty, he needs not be anxious what day,
month or year the holy Spirit began to work these things in him. Only let him
give all diligence to grow in humility, faith and new obedience, and to hold on
this way, whatsoever doubts or impediments he shall meet with; for, the Apostle
exeemeth such a man from the number of hypocrites and unconverted, Phil. 3. 3.
We, says he, are the circumcision, or the Christian converts, who worship God
in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

CHAP. X.
Wherein is solved the converts doubt of his regeneration, arising from his
apprehension, that the beginning of the change of his life, was not from the
sincere love of God, but either from terror or self-love, which he conceives
to be but carnal.
SOme true converts are, who can design the time of the change of their way
from sin to Christ, and to a holy life, whereof they have not only the Church
they live in, but also their own conscience witnesses; yet after a considerable
time, do fall in suspicion, whether that time of their change was the time of
their effectual calling; some of them bringing no other reason of their
doubting, save this, that they were never much troubled with the terrors of the
Law, but most part allured to draw near to God, and to eshew the way of sinning
by the love of eternal life. Other some, doubting of the soundness of their
conversion, because the ^error of God and fear of condemnation and hell
prevailed more with them, for changing their course, then the love of God and
true holiness did; and both the one sort and the other do conceive the chief
rise of their change to have been natural or carnal, self-love, fearing harm,
and loving life.

2. For removing of this doubt, we grant, that there are many, who after some
notable delivery from death, or some notable benefit received, or after some
sharp rod of chastisement for their sin, have changed their outward way of
living, left off gross vices, and led a more civil and blameless outward
life, and yet have neither seriously repented them of sin, nor seriously fled
in unto the grace of Jesus Christ offered in the Gospel, neither knowing what
saving faith is, nor careful to know it; but of such we do not speak here, for
we are speaking of the true convert and renewed man, who in the sense of sin is
fled to Christ, in the sense of his unworthiness makes the grace offered his
refuge, and in the sense of indigence, looks up to Christ and seeks supply
of him in all things, and by the holy Spirit is striving against sin,
endeavoring in some measure of sincerity to bring forth the fruits of faith
and repentance; and yet for all this, he doubts of the sincerity of his own
conversion, for the reasons foresaid. To this soldier and wrestler we say (as
before we said to him that doubts of his conversion, because he cannot design
the time of his conversion) it is not material by what way, or means or
motives, a man is brought unto Christ, provided he does come and indeed adhere
to Christ; it is all one whether the rise of the man's turning from sin to God,
was love alluring, or terror driving him, whether a benefit or a sharp rod,
whether fear or hope did at the first beginning of his change, move him to seek
God; provided, God manifested in the flesh Christ Jesus the Redeemer of
sinners, be now his beloved Lord, and precious in his eyes: for, he that is
most sweetly allured to come to God, and without much fear is converted, who
possibly after serious conviction of sin and deserved death, is not kept long
at the door of mercy, but forthwith is admitted to the throne of grace, and
tenderly entertained by the Spirit of consolation, may fall in hard exercises
afterward. This is evident in the experience of the Prophet David, in whom his
brethren, living in the same family with him, did not perceive any signs of a
sorrowful or heavy heart, as his brother Eliab's words do show, 1 Samuel 17. 28.
I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thy heart. Thus did Eliab judge of
David's cheerful carriage, whereof also we have some evidence, that David was
of a ruddy and beautiful countenance, and for some years of his youth, did
pass the time pleasantly, serving God with his songs and harp while he was
feeding his sheep in the wilderness: now none can justly question his
conversion all this time, or his sincerity in this service, yet afterward he
was otherwise exercised: for oft-times he felt the power of the Law upon his
spirit, and was tossed with the terror thereof, and made to mourn and weep
heavily. Such does Job's condition seem to be in his youth, as it is described,
Job 29. but afterward in the trial of his faith, what a conflict with
temptation he had, the sacred History does testify. Therefore, there is no
reason why any, in whom these evidences of a true Israelit are found in any
measure, should suspect the sincerity of his regeneration, because he has been
gently handled in his conversion: for it may come to pass, that the same
person may fall in fiery trials and so hard temptations, as he may fall in doubt
of his conversion, in regard of the sad afflictions inward and outward whereby
he is exercised. In which case he will be found to be mistaken no less then he
was mistaken in the former case and condition; for, some dear children of God
may possibly, both in their conversion and most part of their life, be
exercised with the terrors of the Law, and yet retain fast hold by faith on
Christ's grace in their deepest afflictions: For instance, we offer that
precious soul Heman the Ezrait, who came near unto Solomon in the point of
wisdom, 1 King. 4, 31. and yet how bitter his afflictions of spirit were, the
88. Psalm bears witness, specially. v. 13. 14, 15. But unto thee have I
cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee. And why castest
thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? I am afflicted and ready to
die from my youth up: while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted, etc. And
therefore, there is no just cause, that any, in whom the evidences of faith and
repentance may be found, should call the sincerity of his own conversion in
question, how hardly soever he seem to be handled of God: for whosoever is
joined to the Lord Jesus, and will neither suffer himself to be driven from
him, nor yet will endure sin to remain in himself uncontrolled, is certainly a
true convert. As for these, who for some temporal cause, are come to Christ (as
many did come in the days of his flesh) that they might be delivered from some
temporal evil, or obtain some temporal benefit, and for that cause do doubt of
their conversion or sincerity thereof; they need not dispute much about the
occasions of their first seeking after God, provided that they have learned
what Christ's grace is, and do seek righteousness and salvation in him; for, we
read in the Evangel, that sundry, that they might be cured of leprosy, palsy,
blindness, etc. came unto Christ, who afterward came and adhered to him by
faith, as the only Redeemer and Savior of their souls from sin and misery.
Wherefore, in such doubtings, let not the afflicted trouble himself, nor call
his conversion in question; but let him give all diligence to strengthen his
faith, and to increase in holiness, making his calling and election sure by
well-doing: for, if he do this, he shall neither be found idle, nor unfruitful
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus, as the Apostle promises, 2 Pet. 1. 8.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein the converts doubt of his being in the state of grace, arising from
heavy afflictions and grievous tentations, is solved.
SOme true converts sometime fall into great suspicion^ of their regeneration,
of their effectual calling, and of the love of God unto them, and that because
they meet with sore outward afflictions, and are assaulted also possibly with
horrible inward tentations which do befall them unexpectedly, and are ready to
swallow them up; for whereas, after diverse conflicts in their conversion, and
peace of conscience following after these sad exercises of mind, they hoped to
have enjoyed Gods peace still after, they do meet possibly with sad calamities
which they did not foresee nor fear, and being yoked in conflict with more
fearful tentations then ever before, which they find themselves unable to
overcome, they seem to themselves, to have just cause to call in question all
the former work of grace in themselves, and to doubt of their regeneration, and
of their reconciliation with God. Of this sort, some who lived in great wealth
and outward prosperity, do fall in so deep poverty, that they are neither able
to sustain themselves nor their families, but are forced to live on the private
charity of others, or openly to beg. Other some do fall in heavy sicknesses,
yea, in uncouth diseases, which but rarely do befall any, which seem to be
evidences of the wrath of God. Other some do fall in horrible tentations, and
are troubled with blasphemous suggestions against God and the holy Scripture,
and the way of the Saints, which as fiery darts do stick fast unto them, and
disquiet them continually. Other some are tempted unto heinous sins and to such
wickedness against themselves or others, as nature does abhor, to which acts
of wickedness they find themselves so powerfully solisted, as they fear God
has decreed to give them over, and that they shall be overcome with the
tentations; some after one way, some after another way, by one sort or other of
vexation, are tossed, so as they suspect God is pursuing them in wrath and
dealing with them otherwise then with any of his children. Whereupon oft-times
they break forth in sad complaints, and misbelieving suspicions, saying, if God
loved me he would not deal thus and thus with me; if I were a true convert, and
reconciled with God, he would not thus pursue me; my case is not the case of
the children of God, for any thing I know, and other such like regrates and
lamentations are uttered by them.

2. For solving this doubt, we neither esteem such exercises, and tentations
proper to the regenerat man, or a token of regeneration; neither do we deny,
that such exercises may befall true converts: for, all sorts of afflictions and
calamities are common to the good and evil, to the godly and the wicked, so
that by those troubles and miseries neither the love or hatred of God can be
certainly concluded; but thus much may be said in reason, if these calamities
do befall a man, while he is walking in his own sinful ways, then are they
undoubtedly to be interpret as evidences of Gods wrath, at least fatherly
anger, against the afflicted, and to be esteemed as forewarnings of more and
more heavy calamities to come upon him, yea, and final perdition also, if he
do not repent.

3. In which case the afflicted shall do well to humble himself before God, and
give a good construction of Gods purpose in sending on him such calamities, in
regard when he might forthwith have destroyed the sinner, he has sent forth
these sad afflictions to waken his conscience, and to warn him to fly from the
wrath to come, least he perish utterly.

4. He shall do well also to consider with himself, and to acknowledge, that
such a bitter potion was necessary, in so deadly and desperat-like disease, as
his soul was lying into: for, what should the Lord do unto those who despise
the worth of their own souls and of eternal life, and do seek their felicity in
vain and perishing pleasure, profit and honor? what shall he do with those
whom he will not suffer to perish with this evil world, but break their Idols
in pieces and put themselves to grief, who vex his holy Spirit?

Wherefore let the afflicted read his sin in the rod wherewith he is beaten; if
he be deprived of temporal goods, or earthly comforts, which he has abused to
the hazard of his own soul, let God have the glory of his justice and mercy
also, in that he by cutting off earthly things from him, is sending him to seek
things spiritual and everlasting in heaven, where Christ is at the right hand
of the Father, Col. 3. 2.

If he be vexed with tentations unto blasphemies, and such horrid fearful sins
which even nature does abhor, let him consider, that misbelief of threatenings
and promises are no less in effect, than real asserting of blasphemies, and
that entertaining of sinful lusts which fight against his soul, is in effect a
defiling and destroying of his own soul; by which afflictions and tentations,
if the afflicted take not warning and repent, he may justly fear these
calamities and tormenting tentations are but the beginnings of sorrows.

But if these calamities and fearful tentations befall a man walking in the
ways of God, who is a believer in Christ, who has casten his anchor within
the vail, and studieth in any measure of uprightness to please God, let not
such a man be afraid; for, God is not pursuing him in wrath, as Satan his
adversary suggesteth, but as a most wise and loving father is trying, and
training his faith, and bringing forth the evidence of grace bestowed upon him,
to the praise of his own name, shaming of Satan and edifying all beholders of
this man^ exercise: Wherefore let the afflicted comfort himself in the Lord,
and be strong in the faith of holy Scripture, which is granted to the Church
for upholding of believers in patience and hope of the promised reward: for
even Job, the holiest man on earth in his generation, was both sudainly
surprised with a multitude of concurring calamities, and also deprived of all
consolation from God and man for a season; for at once he was spoiled of all
his goods, deprived of all his children, tempted by his wife to despair,
despised by his servants, judged to be a hypocrit by his most entire godly
friends, stricken by Satan with an unusual plague of botch-biles; and how far
the Lord did hide all comfort for a time, the history of his complaints make
evident. Yea, our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, has sanctified in his own person,
the hardest exercises of this sort which his children can fall into; for albeit
he could not be defiled with sin, yet he was tempted of Satan unto most
abominable sins, in special he was tempted to cast himself down from the
pinnacle of the Temple, which was to kill himself; he was tempted to fall down
and worship the devil, which O how horrible blasphemy is it? yea, for a time
power was given to Satan, albeit not to hurt Christ, yet to carry his body
from one place to another, as we read in Matthew. 4. and therefore let this be
for consolation to such of Gods children as are vexed with vile and blasphemous
tentations, and solistations to abominable sins, Heb. 2. 18. for in that our
Lord himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted.

4. But if the afflicted insist and say he is so put to it by Satan's
tentations to commit sin against his light, and is ready to succumb, because he
neither has strength in himself to resist and stand out, nor is their
appearance or hope of Gods assisting him in his conflict, because God seems
to have not only deserted him, but also to have given him over in the hands of
an unclean spirit to be vexed.

Unto this tentation we answer, first, that the dearest of Gods children have
been exercised after this manner, for even to the Apostle Paul (2 Cor. 12. 7.)
there was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, to keep him from pride: which tentation was so strong and violent, that he
could not resist it by any strength in himself, but was forced to fly unto God
by prayer and beg strength from Christ to bear him out against the tentation
and to be delivered from the power of it.

Secondly, let the afflicted under this exercise put a difference between the
sin of Satan the tempter of him, and his own sin under the tentation; for, the
fiery darts of Satan, and suggested blasphemies are Satan's sins, and not
properly the sins of the afflicted to whom these wicked tentations are not
pleasant, but are his greatest affliction. It is true indeed, that tentations
unto sin in some measure draw on some degree of pollution oft-times in sinful
men, because it is not with us as it was with Christ; for when the prince of
this world came to tempt him, he had no stuff of his own in Christ to work
upon; but when he comes to sinners, he finds our corrupt nature and
inclination to yield to his tentations, as his own materials to work upon,
ready to be kindled by his fiery darts; and yet must we still distinguish the
sin of Satan suggesting and tempting, from the suffering of the poor afflicted
child of God, who is vexed, with the tentation: for if the afflicted shall own
the tentation as his own sin, and confound Satan's part, and his own part in
that exercise, he is in danger to be swallo^ed up in the sense of the sin which
is not his own but Satan's.

Thirdly, the afflicted must put difference between sin and troublsome
exercise: for God is the author of trouble, whereby he is about to try,
exercise and train the faith of his child, to reach him patience, and hope
under his trouble; but Satan is the author of the sin, whereunto he does tempt
the afflicted, and shall be punished for it.

Fourthly, let the afflicted wisely observe Satan's drift, and wiles to drive
him unto sin one way or other by these his horrid and bitter tentations; for
though he prevail not with his grosser tentations, to cause the afflicted
commit or consent unto that wickedness which he suggesteth by his fiery darts,
yet he in some measure prevails oft-times by new tentations following on the
back of the other; for when he has troubleed the soul of the afflicted child
of God with these terrible tentations, then he bears in upon the mind of the
afflicted, that he has acted or consented to these vile blasphemies, and
solliciteth him to impatience, under this trouble, and to doubt of Gods love to
him, and of his being in the state of grace, and to suspect he is not one of
the elect, and to fear that God will not deliver him from these evils whereunto
he is tempted. Now, these latter tentations oft-times prevail so far with the
afflicted, as he hearkens unto them, yields unto them in some measure and
suspects Satan's false alledgance to be too true. And so these acts of
unbelief, impatience and discouragment, become indeed the sins of the
afflicted, because they are not so resisted, disclaimed, abhorred and sorrowed
for, as the first sort of tentations were, which do most vex the afflicted.
These wiles of Satan the afflicted must beware of, least he continue in, or
foster these ordinary sins, whereinto, that Satan might cast and catch him, he
did lay his net in these extraordinary tentations.

Fifthly, let the afflicted after he has perceived Satan's wiles and malice,
and his own foolishness and weakness, look upon the Lords wise purpose, who
by suffering his child so to be exercised, is calling him to a deeper
acknowledgment of his original sin, that he may be humbled yet more before God,
and loath himself yet more, and have Christ's righteousness imputed to the
believer in higher estimation. Upon which consideration, let him so press the
removing of the troublesome tentation, as in the mean time he submit himself
unto God, and patiently endure the trouble, and put repentance and faith, hope
and love to God in exercise, following his external vocation as he is able,
least Satan take advantage of him if he be idle; and withal let him have such
a care of his bodily health as he may be fitted the better for Gods service in
his calling: for we are not our own, but Christ's, who has bought us with a
price, and are bound to glorify God both in our bodies and spirits, which are
the Lords, 2 Cor. 6. 19, 20. and therefore, whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever else we are about, which is lawful, we ought to do it in his name,
and so to glorify him, 1 Cor. 10. 30.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein is solved, the converts doubt of his conversion, arising from the
power of his corruption manifesting it self more after his entry upon the
course of new obedience, then it did before he began to repent.
SOme converts being yet but young soldiers in the Christian warfare, when
they find the corruption of their nature breaking forth more powerfully then it
did before they did engage their heart to serve the Lord, do readily fall in
deep discouragment and sad suspicion, that the renewing grace of God was never
bestowed upon them, whatsoever were their purposes, promises, and beginnings to
mortify their lusts and affections. And we must confess, that this is no
small tentation: for, they who have renounced the service of their lusts, and
have consecrat their life to Gods service, when they find their lusts prevail,
and like to reign in them, no wonder they suspect their state in grace; for (2
Pet. chap. 2. ver. 20.) it is told to us, If men after they have escaped the
pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter endis worse
with them then the beginning: for, it had been better for them, not to have
known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from
the holy commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened unto them,
according to the true proverb, the dog is turned to his own vomit again, and
the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.

2. This condition indeed is perilous, when after profession of repentance, sin
does recover its strength again, and prevail over the whole man, and show forth
its victory over him in the gross pollution of the external man: But most of
all is it perilous, when the overcome and inslaved sinner, lies still in his
sin, senseless and secure, and does please himself in his pollutions; for,
whatsoever he may be, the holy Ghost points him forth among the unregenerat as
a dog or sow. If such a man after a time shall repent and bewail his condition,
and set himself to the seeking of God in Christ, and to draw grace out of
Christ to mortify his lusts we shall not pronounce or determine of his former
estate, whether he was before that time regenerat or not, but for the present
case of his repenting, he is on the way to evidence his regeneration more
clearly then before: only let him take heed to humble himself in earnest before
God, and to repent more seriously, that so he may confirm himself, and go on in
the course of faith and obedience of the Evangel, strengthening his brethren as
Peter was commanded to do by our Lord, Luke 22. 22.

3. But if corruption of nature do not break forth to defile the whole man, but
inwardly stirs and striveeth to bring its old servant into bondage again;
unto which tentations albeit the afflicted do not succumbe, yet he is shaken
and staggers in his faith, doubting of his state, and of the sincerity of his
conversion, because he finds the power of sin in him more vigorous, then he
had found it before the change of his old conversation. We do not deny, but
this case is readily incident unto such as are lately converted, from formality
in religion, and fair civil carriage before men, to true repentance and inward
holiness beseeming Christians. This case because it may have sundry causes,
does require also sundry cures.

4. First, this case may befall a young convert, who because he has not as yet
gotten the experience of his own weakness, is somewhat puffed up in the
conceit of his own strength, and is more confident then he has reason, that
the sincerity of his purpose, shall bear down and overcome all his spiritual
enemies, so often as they shall oppose his holy resolution. In this case, what
wonder is it, that the Lord by a new proof of the man's weakness, let him see,
that it is not in him that wills or in him that runs, but in God that has
mercy? to the intent his pride may be broken down, and that he being humbled in
himself, may learn not to trust any more to himself, but to God, to Christ who
by his Spirit makes his children to mortify sin in themselves, as the Apostle
teaches us, Romans 8. 13. saying, if ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the
Spirit, ye shall live.

Therefore the afflicted in this case, must beware to fret, or murmr, or
entertain suspicions of Gods grace in himself, but rather let him, after
experience of his own weakness, humble himself and renew the exercise of
repentance, and resolve in the use of the means to lean to the strength of
Christ who does help his soldiers in their conflict against sin and Satan,
either by giving them the victory quickly, or else sustaining them in the
conflict by his grace, as he did the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 7. to whom Christ did
not grant the victory, till he, despairing of his own ability to stand out
against the messenger of Satan, did humbly beg deliverance from the tentation,
and then he gave him assurance, that the assistance of his grace should prove
sufficient to sustain him in the conflict, and to deliver him in due time.

Secondly, this case may fall out by the mere malice of Satan, who does set
himself to vex the young and ^ender convert, lately taken out of his dominion,
to the intent he may make him repent his coming out of Egypt, if it be
possible, and by leading out against him a new army of temptations, may move
him to despair of the victory, and so bring him back to the flesh pots, and
taking on again the yoke of bondage if he can.

2. And here consideration must be had, of Gods wise and holy permission, who
suffers Satan to put a young convert to so hard trials, that in the
weakness of his own child, he may make evident his great power, in upholding
his young soldier against the forest assaults of Satan; and his wisdom, in
breaking by this mean the strength of in-born corruption, raging against the
work of grace in his child.

In this case, let the afflicted remember he is called to give a proof of his
faith and sincerity, that he may acquit himself manfully, and not be afraid of
the power of temptations but bear out stoutly, resisting Satan, being
confident of the victory and of tramping Satan under his feet shortly; yea,
pre-suppose with inward temptations, external persecution be joined, let the
Lords soldier follow the example of the godly Hebrews, whom the Apostle does
exhort to prepare themselves, after spoliation of their goods, to meet with
grievous affliction, under hope to overcome, Heb. 10. 32. 36. and, 12. 4.

3. This case may fall out, not so much from the growing power of corruption,
as from the growing light of grace, discovering sin more clearly then before
regeneration: for he, who before regeneration, was lying dead in sin, did not
feel the weight of sin at all, or was sensible only of gross out-breakings,
but when the clearer light of the Law does come, opening up the dens and caves
of natures corruption, out of which come forth legions of sinful motions, and
amongst these, sundry monsters of unperceived wickedness, are discovered to
the young convert, what wonder he be afraid, and cast in many doubts and
suspicions? For, if even the Apostle Paul himself, out of the sense of inherent
sin, and of the bonds thereof, wherewith he did find himself bound, was
compelled with tears to cry out, Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? Romans 7. 24. what wonder is it that a novice in
Religion do tremble when he sees and smells the dunghill and filthy stable
of his own unclean heart?

In this case, all the comforts which the Gospel does furnish are to be
ministered to the afflicted, hope is to be fostered in him of victory over all
those evils; the wisdom of God is to be set forth before his eyes under this
exercise, wherein the Lord has brought to light the latent corruption of
nature, of set purpose, that he might yoke his young soldier in combat with
it, and give him the victory by the holy Ghost, over not only those evils which
do trouble him for the time, but also all other sins, and so promoveth the
mortification and abolition of the whole body of corruption in him.

4. The fourth cause is, or may be this, that the afflicted has not such
estimation of the imputed righteousness of Christ as is requisite, but with the
slighting of Christ's satisfaction and righteousness purchased to the believer
by Christ, goes about to establish his own righteousness, whereupon the Lord
discovers his short-coming in sanctification, which in this life is
imperfect, and should indeed be followed after carefully, but not be rested
upon. It is indeed natural unto us, to seek to have perfection in our selves,
for our own glory, and not to follow the way prescribed to us of God, for
perfecting of us unto the glory of God, as may be seen in the flower of Israel
after the flesh, Romans 9. and 10. Now the order of God is, that we should be
first justified by faith in Christ without the works of the law, that is, God
will have us in the first place to confess unto him our sins, and renounce all
confidence in our own works before, in, and after our conversion, and to
renounce all confidence in our own worthiness or our own strength, and betake
us to that righteousness, which by the obedience and satisfaction of Christ is
purchased unto us, and offered in the Gospel to be accounted ours of mere free
grace: In the second place, God will have us, being clothed with Christ's
imputed righteousness, to approach unto the throne of grace, that by faith in
Christ, we may receive the power of the holy Spirit in a larger and larger
measure for increasing our sanctification more and more. And in the third
place, he will have us, as we profit and grow in holiness, to give the thanks
and praise and glory thereof unto God in Jesus Christ, who both justifies us
and sanctifies us by his own Spirit; and in as far as we come short in the
measure of sanctification which we aim at, he will have us to be humbled in our
selves, and lay faster hold on Christ who justifies us, that he, by his
Spirit, may more and more sanctify us,, and that because Christ is made of God
unto us, not only our righteousness, but also our sanctification, as the
Apostle teaches us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Now, when any man breaks this order, and
seeks justification by Christ, but sanctification by himself, as it were; and
when he finds sanctification not to grow as he hoped it should, does not fly
in to the garment of Christ's imputed righteousness, which alone is able to
hide his nakedness, Rev. 3. 18. but in stead of humbling himself in the
exercise of repentance, is ready to call his justification and conversion in
question, and to cast it away, as it were, what wonder is it, that God, being
justly offended, because the righteousness of Christ is not in due estimation
and precious in that man's eyes, does not grant unto him a better measure of
sanctification, especially while he is contending to have his own prescribed
measure of sanctification, with the prejudice of that divine righteousness
which is by faith in Jesus Christ, and will not, as a humble penitent, hold
grip of Christ's righteousness, except he obtain such a measure of
sanctification and freedom from wrestling with sin, as he has resolved to find
in himself before he can stand to his interest in Christ for justification?
What wonder is it, that God suffer sin in the afflicted to put forth its power
more then before, that he may teach his young convert and soldier, ignorant of
his duty and of Gods order of proceeding with his children, to be more wise,
and to adhere more closely under the sense of his sinfulness, unto the
righteousness of Christ, unto which he did fly and was forced to fly in his
conversion? As also, that he may teach his child, that sanctification must be
drawn out of no other fountain then Christ, out of whose fullness we must
receive grace for grace, and who by faith applies to his redeemed ones his
imputed righteousness, and by faith applies and works in them sanctification
purchased unto them in the covenant of Redemption?

5. Wherefore, for remedy of this mistake, first, let the afflicted, when he
perceives and feels the power of sin to be more then he conceived he should
have found in himself after his conversion, let him (I say) forthwith humble
himself before God, acknowledge his natural uncleanness, and utter inability
by his own strength to resist sin, and being humbled at the heart, let him
bless God, who of his free grace has prepared and freely granted unto him a
righteousness purchased by Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 21. with which being clothed, he
may stand before the Tribunal of grace absolved. Next, let him earnestly and
daily pray, that he may both hold fast grips of that righteousness of Christ
by faith, and out of the same fountain of Gods glorious grace in Christ, study
to increase in sanctification, and piece and piece to mortify and abolish the
corruption of nature* Thirdly, let the afflicted use the ordinances and means
appointed of God for mortifying of sin and reparation of the Image of God in
him. And fourthly, let the afflicted, in the use of appointed means and
ordinances of God* by faith look unto Christ, that out of him he may suck sap,
and the furniture of his Spirit, to bring forth good fruits: for, without him
we can do nothing; but if we abide in him, we shall bring forth abundant
fruits, Joh. 15. 5.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein is solved the converts doubt, whether he be in the state of grace,
arising from his comparing of himself with the hypocrit and unregenerat In
those perfections they may attain unto.
SOmetime a true convert, when he perceives how far specious hypocrites may
make progress in the way of righteousness, with how many virtues they may be
endued, with how many gifts they may be adorned, how-like the foolish virgins
may be unto the wise, and how far temporary faith may carry a man, especially
when it is busked with spiritual common gifts, how many glorious professors of
the true christian Religion have made apostasy, how many ways men do deceive
themselves and may possibly further and further deceive themselves (of which
self-deceivings somewhat is spoken in the end of the former book) what wonder
is it, the weak convert stagger, and fear least he also deceive himself,
especially when he sees nothing in himself which may not be counterfeit?

2. For lousing of this doubt, wherein many have been pusled, we must yield to
the afflicted, that there are many indeed, who do deceive and destroy
themselves with their vain thoughts; which because it does very frequently come
to pass, it should stir up all men to be circumspect and wary least they
deceive themselves in the matter of their salvation, and for that intent to
examine themselves whether they be in the says, 2 Cor. 13. least they be
beguiled, and so perish. And because tender faith is easily hurt, all their
fear must be turned into a holy carfulness, to be found sincere and serious
in the use of the Lords ordinances, least Satan beguile them on the right hand
or on the left. And for this end, we offer advice to the afflicted to discern
things that differ, and first to distinguish gifts, common to hypocrites and
true converts, from saving graces or benefits accompanying salvation: for,
learning, and skill to govern great matters, and eloquence and understanding of
deep mysteries, and revelation of things to come, and the gift of working
miracles, and the gift of preaching the Gospel, may be granted unto the
unregenerat for the use and edification of the Church. The observing of this
difference shall teach the afflicted to esteem well of all the gifts of God,
which may serve for humane society, or to edify the Church, but not to look
upon them as evidences of regeneration, for they are nothing in comparison of
saving graces; for, if he shall study to humility and repentance toward God and
faith toward Jesus Christ, and love to God and his Saints, and to a holy life
by the grace of Christ, in any measure, let him esteem more of them, then of
all these common gifts how glorious soever they seem. As also let him put a
difference betwixt the judgment of charity concerning other men's estate, which
contents it self with probabilities, and the judgment of certainty and real
verity, concerning his own estate, which proceeds from the operation of the
holy Spirit, bearing witness to our spirits, that we are the children of God,
and revealing unto us what things are freely given to us of God, to wit, among
other gifts, giving unto us eye salve to make us know, that we are blind, poor,
naked and miserable, with grace leading us to buy without money or price from
Christ, gold tried in the fire, and garments to hide our nakedness, which is
the righteousness of Christ imputed unto us. In the judgment of charity
concerning other men's estate, we see nothing save what is outward, and cannot
pierce into their hearts, which God only can and does search; but concerning
our own estate, we may know certainly, if we search well, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12.
Wherefore that the afflicted may overcome this doubt, let him leave unto God
the judgment of the hearts of these hypocrites and apostats, which were never
humbled in (...) sense of sin, nor seriously believed in Christ; but to
satisfy himself concerning his own estate, let him study to discern the power
of sin in himself more and more, and daily be humbled before God in the sense
of it. And the more he discern the loathsomeness of sin in himself, let him the
more heartily embrace Christ offered in the Gospel and consecrat himself wholly
unto him, that in his furniture, drawn by faith out of Christ, he may bring
forth good fruits and add one virtue to another, and so shall he be sure, that
he has passed the perfection of the unregenerat, and is a true subject of the
kingdom of God effectually called, and elected of God unto eternal life, 2
Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8.

CHAP. XIV.
Wherein is solved the doubt of the true convert, whether he be in the state of
grace, because some godly persons look upon him as an hypocrit.
SOme true converts, do suspect themselves not to be true converts, because
some of the godly of their acquaintance (whose judgment otherwise is not to be
lightly rejected) not only do suspect them to be hypocrites, but by words spoken
of them and behavior toward them, declare their judgment of them.

2. This tentation does not a little afflict the weak in faith, who of
themselves are ready to call in question their own conversion, and when they
perceive their own suspicion of themselves to be as it were confirmed by the
suspicion and testimony of some Saints (howsoever rashly judging other men's
hearts) no wonder the tentation of Satan, questioning whether they be the
children of God, grow strong against them.

By this stratageme Satan uses to assault the strongest in faith, and to vex
them at least, as we may see in the exercise of Job, whose faith was mightily
assaulted when his godly friends mistook his affliction, and condemned him as a
wicked hypocrit. The like we see in the exercise of the Prophet, Ps. 38. 11.
when his friends stood aloof from his plague.

3. For strengthening the afflicted under this tentation; first, let him
examine himself so much the more acuratly, because of the suspicion that the
godly have of him: after which examination, if he find any measure of sorrow
for sin in himself, and of faith flying to Christ for relief, and of endeavor
to live holily, righteously and soberly, albeit joined with much infirmity and
manifold imperfections, let him not cast away his confidence, but rather
strengthen what he finds of the Lords gracious work in him, although it seem
to him ready to dye.

Secondly, let him consider whether this exercise and affliction be a
correction from God, chastising him for his rash judgment of others, whom
possibly he has wounded with such rash suspicions of them; but whether he find
this or not, let him not despise this exercise, but be humbled before God in
the acknowledgment of the relics of hypocrisy in our corrupt nature, and
fly unto Christ (in whose mouth there was no guile) that he may be clothed
with his righteousness head and feet; and let him study unto more and more
sincerity, that he may approve himself to God, and to discreet Judges of his
conversation, and let him not alienat himself altogether so far as in him lies
from them, by whose suspicions his faith and good name has been wounded, but
in humility and charity toward them, in the constant following of piety toward
God and righteousness toward men, labor to commend himself to all men's
consciences.

And in so doing he needs not stand for the rash judgment of any man: for by
so doing Job was victorious over this tentation in his conflict with his
friends: and it is sure, that men may be deceived in their judgment of other
men's estate; for, first, the ignorance of another man's heart, makes the Judge
to judge what he knows not. It is true, God has granted unto his children
liberty according to his Word to judge of the actions of other men, and from
their actions to judge of their condition and temper in relation to those
actions; but to judge of their state who outwardly do what is right, does not
belong to men, but to God who has reserved to himself the searching of every
man's heart, and only knows who is the upright and who is the hypocrit, who is
the wise and who is the foolish virgin, the outward conversation of both being
like one to another. Again, to know another man's manners, ingine, inclination
and way of his life, does require long conversing with him, comparison of his
actions one with another, and a prudent conjunction of all signs of his inward
disposition, before a discreet charitable judgment can be had of him. And
whosoever do judge rashly of other men's hearts, do not well know their own
heart, or of what spirit they are in judging: for many presume too much to
justify their own condition and state, and make themselves to be as rules and
paterns unto others, and so become too too rigid censurers and severe judges of
other men's conditions and state, except they find it like to their own. And if
there be any dissimilitude of manners or discrepance of judgment, or contention
about any matter, then partiality hinders a right judgment one of another, and
affection marreth reason many times that it cannot discern what is right.

Therefore let the person afflicted with this tentation, turn himself to God
who searches the reins, and let him humble himself in his sight, renewing the
exercise of repentance and faith in Christ, and let him apply to himself what
the Scripture does pronounce of these who in the sense of their sin do fly to
Christ Jesus, that in him they may have remission of sin and amendment of their
life: for so did the Prophet in the whole Psalm. 17. when he had to do with his
uncharitable friends and kinsfolk, and so let the afflicted do.

CHAP. XV.
Wherein the converts doubting of his being in the state of grace, so often as he
does not feel the sense of his reconciliation with God, is examined and
answered.
SO^e true converts are, who indeed are endued with the saving graces of faith,
hope and charity, and give evident proof of the in-dwelling of the holy Spirit
in them, and do rejoice now and then in God their Savior, when his love to
them is shed abroad in their heart, but when a cloud comes over their eyes,
and they do not feel the warm beams of the Sun of righteousness shining in
their soul as they before have felt, they are assaulted with doubting if any
saving grace be in them at all, and do entertain these tentations ofttimes, so
far as to suspect and express in words, that there is no solid faith in
themselves, no lively hope, no christian charity, no mortification of sin, no
purity of heart, and such like; if when they are thus tempted and tossed they
lay hold on Christ, as in their first conversion, and find the sensible comfort
of the holy Spirit by the word of the Gospel applied unto them, then all is
well, their doubting is overcome for the time, they rejoice and praise God: But
if the Lord shall delay, for his own wise ends, to renew their sensible
consolations, and to renew the earnest-penny of their inheritance, forthwith
they begin to doubt again, and to hearken to Satan's suggestions, and to
suspect that their former feelings were but temporary, and not the special
operations of the holy Spirit, and at length break forth in many sad
complaints. And, in a word, they do not maintain the work of saving grace in
themselves longer then the sun shine of spiritual felt consolations abides
with them. And albeit their exercise be no ways so hard as was the Prophets,
Psalm. 77. yet they fall out in the same complaint which the Prophet expresses,
ver. 7, 8, 9. Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no
more? is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?
has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies.

2. For clearing of this case, two diseases may be perceived in the afflicted
which is here described. The one is this, the afflicted sets himself to live
rather by sense then by faith, and does put his faith on work of set purpose
that he may obtain or recover consolation shortly; but if his desire be not
shortly granted, he makes not use of the formerly felt consolations to
strengthen his own ^aith when consolation is withdrawn: The other sickness is
this, the afflicted does not take up the nature of saving graces, nor perceive
the beauty thereof, except in the sunshine of sensible divine approbation
thereof, he does not take up the right definition or description of saving
graces: for, says is to him nothing, if it be not a full persuasion; except he
can pour forth tears always, he thinks he does not repent; except he find a
joyful expectation of Christ's coming in glory, he thinks his hope not lively;
and so of charity and patience, temperance, righteousness and holiness, if he
do not find them in some eminent measur as they may near^by stand before the
law, the afflicted of whom we are now speaking, thinks he has nothing of
saving grace in him. We grant, that this sickness is very rare* and few they
are that are troubled with it; yet where it appears, it must be speedily
cured, but with great circumspection cured; for the earnest desire he has of
feeling the sweet sense of the joy of the holy Ghost, must not be disallowed,
but commended to him, and he taught to cry as it is said, Cant. 2. 5. Stay me
with flaggons, comfort me with aples, for I am sick of love, yet with holy
submission unto Gods will for time, manner and measure. 2. He is also to be
commended, that in his trouble he goes to God in Christ, not altogether
without faith which he puts forth in active exercise thereof by confession
of sin, by supplication and otherwise; but here is he to be reproved, that
while he is actually exercising faith, love, hope, etc. he reckons all he
does to be nothing, no faith, no hope, etc. because it is not in such a
measure as he would. 3. He is to be commended, that he does aim at the highest
degrees of faith, love, hope, patience, mortification of sin, and practice of
holiness, and all commanded virtues; but here he fails, that he counts all
as naught, when consolation and sensible approbation of what he has is not
felt; for here he despises the day of small things, and unthankfully
mis-regardeth the lower degrees of these saving graces, which notwithstanding
are bought to the redeemed by the same price wherewith the highest degrees are
bought, to wit, with the precious blood of Jesus Christ.

3. Wherefore let the afflicted consider, first, that the will of God revealed,
requires of us, that we walk by faith, and under the sense of our sinfulness
and afflictions whatsoever, hold fast the covenant of grace in Christ Jesus,
and by adhering unto him hold up our heart* and entertain spiritual life in us.
Secondly, let him consider, that this way of living by faith and dependence on
the word of Gods grace, does please the Lord well; for, without faith it is
impossible to please him; and thus living by faith in him, does give more glory
of truth, grace, mercy and constancy unto God then when we suspend the
glorifying of him, till we find the sense of consolation from him: for if we
believe in God, only because we find the consolations of his Spirit, our faith
in that case is weak, and leans more upon the pledge and sensible evidence of
his truth bestowed upon us, then upon his promise without a pledge: for, no man
will refuse to give credit to a man upon a pawn, but God is worthy to be
credited upon his word without a pawn, yea, when his dispensation seems
contrary to his promise. Thirdly, let him consider, that the Lord uses to give
sensible consolations not only to help our faith, in the time of consolation,
but also to help our faith when the consolations are withdrawn from us, and we
are put to hard exercise: wherein it is our duty to glorify our God for his
truth and grace, whereof we have sometime had confirmations by felt
consolation, and patiently to wait till he restore unto us the joy of his
Spirit: for if in the want of sensible consolation we shall put aspersions upon
the Lords work and graces bestowed upon us, and call them in question, we shall
be found in so doing more careful of self-satisfaction then to do the duties
which God requires of us. Fourthly, let the afflicted learn so to describe and
define every saving grace of faith, repentance, hope, love and mortification of
sin, as the description may take in the meanest measure of those graces; for,
it is hard to say, that there is no sound faith where there is not a full
persuasion; for the hungry looking of a trembling sinner unto Christ, must not
be excluded from being an act of faith; it is hard to restrain the exercise of
repentance to the sheding of tears, for many other signs of repentance may be
found where these are seldom, such as is the hatred of sin striving against all
tentations unto it, and flying from all occasions which may ensnare the
believer in Christ in trespasses. Fifthly, let the afflicted distinguish
between faith and sense of joy, both are Gods gifts, but the grounds of faith
whereupon we are commanded to rest our selves should be rested on constantly,
whatsoever dispensation of joy or grief we shall meet with: and this is our
perpetual duty, but sense is at Gods free dispensation to give and withdraw and
restore at his pleasure, and is a movable benefit, which, the Lord, as his
wisdom sees expedient for our good, does give and continue, withdraw and
restore, diminish or augment. And therefore the afflicted is bound by duty
still to believe and rejoice in believing. And to have the joy of sense also he
may lawfully study, but ought not to suffer his faith to be weakened by the
want of it, as the Prophet does teach us, Ps. 42. 11. and, 43. 5. and, 88. Last
of all, let the afflicted be posed upon his conscience if he dare condemn his
flying to Christ in the sense of his sins as no act of faith, or if he dar deny
his hunger after renewed consolation, and beholding of God with joy as
reconciled in Christ, to be an act of love to God and of communion with him?
Therefore, let him confess with the Psalmist, Ps. 77. 10. This my doubting is
my infirmity, I will remember the years of the right hand of the Lord.

CHAP. XVI.
Wherein is solved the true converts doubt of his regeneration, because he
seems to himself not to grow in grace by the use of the means appointed for
his growth.
SOme true converts are brought to suspect their own regeneration, because in
the using of the means leading to sanctification and salvation, sundry complain
and say, I do not perceive the Lords blessing on my pains and diligence; I grow
not in the knowledge of things spiritual; my faith does not grow by hearing nor
reading of the Word of God, nor by meditation of it; I do not prevail in
wrestling against my inbred sin and corrupt nature, neither by prayer nor
fasting: and therefore, what shall I judge of my state, but that it is like I
am not converted and renewed? For, if I were indeed converted and reconciled
with God, I conceive it should fair otherwise with me then it does.

2. In this case the true convert is in hazard of growing slack and careless in
the use of the means, and to grieve the holy Spirit, by prescribing unto him
and limiting of him unto such a measure of profiting in the use of the means,
and making him know how far he had profited and advanced in the course of
sanctification. Yea, there is danger, lest in this case the convert not only
become cold-rife in the exercises of piety, but also turn loose in his
conversation, and follow the allurements of the world, having so far hearkened
to the temptation, as to think it in vain that he has washen his hands in
innocence; as ( Ps. 73.) befell the Prophet.

3. For removing of this doubt, the afflicted has reason to check himself for
hearkening so far unto the temptation, as to join with hypocrites in his
complaint, Isa. 58. 5. Wherefore have we fasted (say they) and thou ^^st not?
wherefore have we afflicted our souls, and thou ^ikest no knowledge?

But because nothing does more trouble the afflicted then his suspicion of his
own hypocrisy, let the causes be searched from which his suspicion does arise.
One of them may be this, that in the use of the means, the eyes of the
afflicted are more and more opened to perceive the power and poison of his
natural corruption more clearly then he perceived before. And this deciphering
of sin more and more, does hinder him to see the growth of his light and the
growth of his hatred against manifested sin, joined with the overturning of his
own high imaginations and native pride. Another cause may be this, that the
true convert has promised unto himself, in the use of the means, more and
greater benefits spiritual from God, then he does by experience find, which
because he does not find, he thinks he has not profited. A third cause may
be this, that the Lord is about the purging of him from practical errors, such
as are the high estimation of his own diligence in the use of the means, as if
there were some sort of merit annexed unto the works prescribed to the convert
by the Lord, or as if the use of the means had in them some force and efficacy
in producing such effects in him as the convert has expected; or, as if the
Lord had obliged himself to bless, sensibly, diligence in the use of the
means, to the diligent man's satisfaction.

4. Therefore, first, let the afflicted continue in his diligence, and bewar of
the foresaid practical errors; let him humble himself before Christ, that he
may draw more virtue out of him by faith, and by so much the more as he ^indeth
sin himself, and not profi^ing in the use of the means, let him lay the faster
hold on the covenant of grace, and on Christ offered therein, for giving
righteousness and sanctification. Secondly, let him set upon the exercise of
every duty with prayer, that he may follow the duty in Christ's name with his
eye fixed on Gods grace; and after the discharge of the duty, let him look to
Christ, that from him, he may have the blessing: for, without Christ we can do
nothing acceptably, nor with profit. Last of all, let him not esteem lightly of
the effects of his diligence, as if he did no ways profit; but when he has
rightly considered matters, if he find the least fruit following his using of
the means, let him give the glory of it to God in Christ the giver thereof, and
humbly put up his lamentation for his short-coming in duties unto God by
prayer: for, this is the way to make progress in faith and repentance, and
humility and submission of his will unto God in the use of the means, and let
him thank the Lord, that from day to day he is kept from scandalous
out-breaking.

CHAP. XVII.
Wherein is solved the converts doubt, whether he be regenerat, because he
seems to himself to follow religion and righteousness from the common
operation of Gods working by moral swasion, and not from the special operation
and impulsion of the holy Spirit.
THere are some true converts, who have profited so far in the amendment of
their life, and conforming their conversation unto the rule of Gods Word, that
the yoke of Christ is become easy to them, and their delight is to be
frequently about the exercises of religion and works of righteousness, and yet
sometime they are troubled with suspicion, whether the work of regeneration in
them be solid, because any thing they do, may be done, as they conceive, by
temporary believers, in whom no sound renovation of corrupt nature will be
found. I find nothing in me (says one) of the effectual motion of the holy
Spirit, but all by way of moral swasion, by imitation of others, by education,
as may be found in the unrenewed disciples of moral philosophy: for as they by
frequent actions do acquire habits, wherewith being endued, they discharge
moral duties more easily and with delight; So, I by discharging acts of
religion, and acquainting my self with them daily, do seem to my self to have
acquired a facility and delectation in religious actions and works of
righteousness toward my neighbors.

2. This case we grant is very perilous, and subtilely colored by Satan to
deceive and weaken the true convert; for, it is true, what power has been seen
in moral philosophy among Pagans, to put a luster on men's civil conversation,
must be also granted to Theology among professed Christians, because divine
threatenings and promises, for procuring outward reformation of a man's life, are
more apt to prevail with a man, then all moral philosophy; and it is true
also, that education by parents, and imitation of good men, is of great force
morally to persuade a man to the following of the outward duties of religion,
and to a civil conversation. Wherefore it is no wonder to see a true convert
doubt of his own regeneration, when he compares external duties discharged by
himself, with the external duties discharged by others whose heart he cannot
see, but must judge charitably of them, and yet can neither be clear
determinatly to affirm all such to be true converts, nor to affirm himself to
be a true convert, so long as he suspecteth, that as some others reformation,
So also his own reformation, may prove no better then from moral swasion,
which may be ^ound in a man unregenerat.

3. For lousing of this doubt and strengthening of the faith of the true
convert, let him examine himself, whether in the conscience of his natural
sinfulness, and sense of his own unworthiness and inability to deliver
himself from the power of sin, wrath and misery, he has fled, and from time to
time does fly to Christ according to the tenor of the covenant of grace, to be
justified, sanctified and saved by him, and does follow the exercises of
religion and righteousness in obedience to the commands of God. If his
conscience answer him, that so he does, then, first, let him look upon his
doubting of his state, as the subtle tentation of Satan; and that he may be
strong against this tentation, let him renew the acknowledgment of his sins and
sinfulness, of his weakness and unworthiness and renew also his consent to
the covenant of grace in Jesus Christ and his purpose to obey the commandments
of God in the strength of Christ: for, by this means he shall gain the entry
into his refuge where-from Satan was drawing him, by furnishing doubts and
weakening his faith. Secondly, having casten his anchor within the vail, and
settled his faith on Christ Jesus, let him now maintain his former course, so
far as truth will suffer, that his former course of life, in following with
delight the exercise of religion and righteousness, did proceed from the holy
Spirit; and let him consider, that it is not a sufficient reason to call in
question the infused habits of saving grace, because supernatural habits,
infused immediately by the Spirit of Christ, are entertained, augmented and
confirmed by frequent acts and daily exercise, no less then natural or moral
habits are, which are acquired by exercise: And this is clear from Scripture,
wherein are many exhortations to put faith, love, repentance, patience, etc. in
frequent exercise, that these gracious habits may grow strong, as the Apostle
Peter does speak, 2 Epist. 1. chap. ver. 5, 6. etc. Thirdly, let him put a
difference in judging of his own conversation and the conversation of others*
of whose principles and ends of outward godly carriage, he cannot judge, as he
can do of his own: for, a man in nature unregenerat, or a temporary believer,
may make profession of true religion, and outwardly go on in a blameless
conversation, with this opinion, that by his works he shall please God, and
procure salvation to himself. But the true convert shall be found a renouncer
of confidence in his own works, a man sensible of his own sinfulness and
imperfections, who has fled and resolves still to adhere to Christ for
righteousness and salvation through him; the finding whereof in any measure
after examination, may solve the converts doubt: for, a man in nature, cannot
so hate sin and follow holiness, as to renounce confidence in his holiness,
and slve unto Christ for righteousness. Fourthly, let the afflicted convert
consider, that the Lords dealing with his children both by moral motives, and
by effectual persuasion unto the obedience of faith, may and does very well
concur and agree together, neither is the special operation of the holy Spirit
with any reason to be suspected, because he sweetly leads on his child, by
way of counsel, (without the child's observation of any notable impulse) making
him to overcome strong tentations unto sin, whereunto he is naturally inclined:
for, the more victorious grace is over corruption, the efficacy of the Lords
grace is the more conspicuous, and that obedience is most pleasant to God
wherein corrupt nature makes most opposition. Therefore in this case here
presupposed, let him stand to the defense of his faith in Christ, and go on
cheerfully in the way of righteousness against Satan's tentation soliciting
him to doubting and discouragement; which counsel if he follow, he shall find
by experience, that he has made use of the shield of faith, and gotten the
victory not without the special operation and impulse of the holy Spirit.

CHAP. XVIII.
Wherein is solved the true converts doubt, whether he be regenerat, because he
finds not self-denial in the measure which is requisite in converts.
SOme true converts are found, who having for a time enjoyed p^eace of
conscience, have called their conversion in question by occasion of hearing or
reading some sermon of some zealous Preacher pressing the marks of true and
sincere conversion, and making self-denial and loving of God for himself, the
main marks of conversion, and without circumspect and wise difference put by
him betwixt legal perfection and evangelical sincerity, pressing self-denial
and the loving of God abstractly, further then any Saint does attain unto in
this life. Whereupon some tender souls, do fall in question with themselves,
whether they be among the true and sincere converts, because they know that our
Lord requires self-denial in every person who will follow him, and does
condemn them all for unbelievers who seek glory of men, and not the glory which
is of God: And because the Preacher possibly has made the loving of God for
his benefits, to be too too mercenary, and has pressed without respect to
benefits, that God must be loved for himself, therefore the weak convert
begins to be troubled, as if he were not a true convert at all, saying, what
shall I think of my self and of my following of Christ, seeing I feel so little
of self-denial in me, seeing I have loved Christ for my own good, and many a
time in my best actions I have sought the commendation of men in my heart, and
I have been ill pleased when I did not obtain it?

2. For solving of this doubt, we grant that every man who will follow Christ,
is bound to deny himself: And true it is, there is nothing more difficile then
to forsake our own carnal wisdom, and estimation of our own worth, works and
abilities how small ^oever. Neither is there any more dangerous evil, then in
the discharge of Christian duties, to seek or accept our own glory and the
applause of men: for he that in this point does foster his natural corruption,
certainly does not in so far favor these things which are Gods, but serves
his own flesh. Therefore, because the relics of this and all other sin do
remain in the regenerat, the Lord by variety of exercises sets his children
daily to learn this lesson over and over for mortifying their corrupt lusts. It
is their duty therefore, when any spark of this evil of self-seeking does
appear, to cast themselves down humbly at Christ's feet and confess the sin,
lest some spark of wrath break forth upon them from the Lord. For, the end of
this exercise, yea, and the reason of the Lords not removing fully in-dwelling
sin, is to humble us, and send us to Christ, least if he should otherwise deal
with us, we should grow proud, and not make such use as becomes us of Gods
free grace and Christ's righteousness imputed to the believer; mean time we
must not yield to Satan's tentation, colored with pretense of Scripture, as if
Christ had discharged us to seek any good from him to our selves. or to love
him for the good which he has purchased to us, and which he from time to time
bestows on us: for, when Christ requires of us to deny our selves, he
requires indeed the renounciation of our own carnal and corrupt lusts, and
confidence in our own wisdom, worth and works. But he does not require of us to
renounce the sanctified love of our own well-being, or the seeking our
sanctification, consolation and salvation in him alone; for, the love of God
and of his glory, is the main end of all our desires; and the seeking that God
would glorify his own grace and truth in his promises to us by sanctifying,
comforting and saving us, is a subordinat mean unto Gods glory: yea, the more
we seek our righteousness, consolation and salvation in God, through Christ,
the more we glorify God, and do say in substance of God, that he is the
fountain of all felicity, and that he is good and faithful to grant all good
things to such as believe in him and do seek grace for grace from him.

3. It is true, that we should love God above all things, and love him more
then our selves, and love him though he should slay us; but it is true also,
that the more we love him for any cause, the more we esteem of him, the more we
magnify and glorify him; and what is love to, and seeking of, God, but the
acknowledgement of our own emptiness and his allsufficiency? and what is our
seeking communion with him, but a refounding of our selves into the fountain
whence we have our being, that he may be glorified in our being, and fully
well-being? And so our spiritual love of God for himself and for the goodness
which is let forth in doing good to us, is not mercenary love, but is the
acknowledgement of his perfections and of his grace to us, to whom he will be
our God in Christ, even all in all to us in him. As for seeking of men's
applause, whenever, whether upon receiving of any benefit, or discharge of
any duty, the corrupt lust of vain glory does mix it self (which cannot but
obscure and hinder the shining of his glory, which should be aimed at in all
things by us) incontinent upon the first motion of this our sinful corruption
perceived, let out sin be humbly acknowledged and confessed unto God, the
searcher of the heart, and let supplication in our spirit be made unto him, to
pardon our sin, and mortify the bitter root of this and all other evils in us.

CHAP. XIX.
Wherein is solved the doubt of the true convert, whether he be indeed
converted, arising from this, that he knows no child of God so hardly
exercised as he is.
SOme converts are, who by the light of the Law of God are brought to the
acknowledgment of their sin and misery, and by the doctrine of the Gospel are
brought to seek their relief in Christ, and have taken on his yoke and
submitted themselves to his discipline, and yet fall in question, whether they
be converted, because they do find such inequality in their conversation, and
such changes in their condition, and variety of tentations, as they can find no
example of the like in Scripture; and where it pleases them to be free with
their Pastor or confident Christian friend, do fall out in questions, if ever
they have read in Scripture any like unto them, in such and such particulars as
they please to condescend upon; and if their Pastor or Christian friend shall
give them some example in the Scripture, of Gods children so exercised, they
are ready to find such differences between the case of the godly in Scripture,
and their case, as they cannot receive satisfaction. And if possibly it be told
them, that their ca^e is not singular, but such as has befallen sundry of
their Christian acquaintance in this present age, yet they cannot receive
satisfaction for all this, but still do insist, that their case is not like to
any of the godly. Whereupon they foster the suspicion of their not being
converted.

2. This ground of judging of men's conversion by the manner of Gods exercising
of them, so as other converted Saints have been exercised before them, and of
judging the man to be unregenerat, who is otherwise exercised then they know
any convert to have been exercised, did deceive the friends of Job, who in Jobs
face avowed this their error, Job, 5. 1. Call now, say they, if their be any
that will answer thee, and unto which of the Saints will thou turn? that is,
name any example of any upright man who has been dealt with by God as thou
art? and what Saint or holy man can thou name, to whom thou can compare thy
self and say, such a man has suffered such things as I do?

This doubt does arise from this error and mistake; the afflicted does without
ground suppose, that express examples of every particular case of the Saints
is set down in Scripture. It is true, there are examples of many cases which
may befall the godly; but it is not to be expected that we shall find examples
of every particular exercise of mind, wherein the Saints may fall: For as the
Evangehst says, if all particulars were written, the world could not hold or
make use thereof. It is sufficient that the Scripture has set down rules
whereun^o the Saints should labor to conform themselves, and that it has
opened up the causes and remedies of all spiritual diseases, and has given so
many examples as may clear the rule. It is also a mistake to make the
experience of the most exercised soldier a rule for every Saints exercises, or
to think that any man can know the variety of cases which befall the Saints:
for, there are many whose cases are not revealed to any, but laid open unto God
only, by prayer, and are helped by faith in Christ.

3. Wherefore the afflicted must walk by rules set down in Scripture, whether
he find the practices thereof in Scripture or not. Now this is the rule, that
whatsoever evil condition we fall into, whatsoever tentation, whatsoever
pollution has defiled our consciences, we must humble our selves before God,
and fly unto Christ for remission of the guil^inesse, for washing away the
filthiness thereof, for breaking down the power of corruption, and pulling out
the roots thereof; withal praising and thanking Christ, who has discovered
unto us these evils and has made them our affliction, and not suffered them to
break forth to the scandal of others. And whatsoever calamity or temporal
misery we shall fall into, the Scripture has given order unto us, humbly to
submit our selves to Gods dispensation, and to make a good construction of Gods
love and wisdom in exercising us so: for, by this rule Job did walk, defending
his faith in Christ, his living and loving Redeemer, against Satan's
temptations, and his friends uncharitable wrangling disputations, when the
question was about his state, whether he had ever been converted or not,
whether he was a wicked hypocrit or not? and by so doing, he over-came the
temptation whereof we are now speaking.

And let not the afflicted lay it for a ground that by his hearing of the
exercise of another, like unto his condition, he can be cured: because no
example of the exercise of another can be found so quadrant unto his condition,
as he could thereby take satisfaction. For, as in comparing of men's faces one
with another, (such is the incomprehensible variety of the riches of Gods
wisdom in framing them) some difference and dissimilitude will be found betwixt
face and face; So, in comparing of the cases of the Saints, none of them can be
found in all things so like one to another, but some dissimilitude shall be
found between them. Wherefore, the afflicted shall do well, in every condition,
to draw near God, and pour out his heart before him at all times: for, God is a
refuge for us in all cases, Ps. 62. 8.

CHAP. XX.
Wherein is solved the converts doubt, whether he be converted, because he does
not find in himself the infallible marks of regeneration.
SOme true converts sometime are in suspense, doubting whether they be indeed
converted, because they do not discern in themselves the unquestionable
evidences of their conversion; and albeit they have the undoubted marks of
regeneration, to wit, the daily conviction and acknowledgement of their sins,
and do fly daily by faith unto Jesus Christ, and are endeavoring in some
measure of sincerity to bring forth the fruits of new obedience, with respect
to all the Commandments concerning love to God and the brethren, yet they dar
not defend the sincerity of these evidences, because of the discerned
imperfection thereof: for, when they do compare these marks of the new creature
with the rule, they find much halting and short-coming therein. In special,
they find their sense of sin to be but weak, their faith in Christ to be weak,
and their failings and short-comings in the love of God and their neighbors,
to be many, So that they scarcely dar allow these begun saving graces, the name
of saving graces. And among other defects, they reckon their not feeling of the
spirit of Adoption, whereof the Apostle speaks to the converted Galatians,
Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are Sons, says he, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. And, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after
you believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise. Which Spirit of
promise and of adoption, sealing believers, they conceived was known and
discerned in the Apostles time by every believers feeling in himself.

2. For solving of this doubt, something is spoken before concerning the
imperfect fruits of faith, the budddings and blossoming whereof are not
despised by Christ, Cant. 2. 13. and, 6. 12. But that this doubt may be more
fully answered, let us take up the causes thereof, 1. one cause is or may be
this, that the afflicted, albeit, together with the endeavor to lead a
blameless life, he be endued with the grace of prayer, and looks on God as
his father; yet he does not take up this work of God in him, to be the work of
the Spirit of Christ, illuminating his mind about duties, framing his will and
affections unto new obedience, stirring him up to prayer and helping him in
prayer, but in the earnest desire he has to find the operations of the Spirit
in a larger measure of evidence, he does not mark the present operation, but
does slight it as nothing, or does not esteem of it as becomes, and so in his
advertance raises and fostereth doubts in himself, which do keep his faith in
chains: for removing of which cause, let the afflicted observe the operation of
the Spirit of Christ in the meanest degree, for the confirmation of his own
faith, and comfort and thanksgiving unto God, as narrowly as he does observe in
himself the first motions of sin and stirrings of corruption, for his own
humiliation and exercise of repentance; for wrong judgment under pretext of
humility, does not please God. Now it is an act of injustice not to give unto
God the praise of every good thing in a man, especially when the man is found
to be cast down in himself, and to be thirsting in his soul for a more intimat
communion with Christ, as is presupposed in this case.

3. The second cause is or may be this, that the afflicted, albeit he has had
often times sweet and sensible consolation, and confirmation of the promises of
the Gospel, and has thereby been put out of doubt of his adoption for the
time, yet when new temptations do arise (according to what was expedient for
the exercise of his faith) because the same sweetness is not felt, but
heaviness for the while, 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. he forgets the consolations he
has had, or suffers them to be called in question. For removing whereof,
whenever the afflicted is cut short in the point of sense or sensible
consolation, let him then strive to abound in the work of the Lord, and not
slacken his hand in the exercise of religion and of his lawful calling, and
his endeavor to please God in all things: for, seeing the covenant of grace
embraced, is a firm and solid ground for ^aith to fix upon, albeit full
persuasion and victorious consolation were neither at all, or but very rarely
^elt in this life; the afflicted (whom we have to speak to here) has no cause
to stumble, but reason to bless God, who has in any measure, at any time,
comforted him by the Gospel: for, that condition which the afflicted wishes
for, is reserved unto us in heaven, and promises, such as are made to the meek
and merciful, Mat. 5. which qualified promises they look upon as conditional,
excluding them (as they conceive) who do not find in themselves such
qualifications: and partly because they are not clear about their right to
receive the offer of the Gospel, because they want, as they conceive, fitness
in themselves to receive the same, and thus are they oft-times vexed with
doubts whether they be in the state of grace or not.

2. For lousing of this doubt, sundry things are already said, by the way, in
answering other doubtful cases. But because many do meet with this difficulty,
we shall speak a little more particularly to the case; and, first, it is
needful, that the afflicted be confirmed about that which is right in him,
that the thing which remains and is ready to die, may be strengthened: To
this intent we commend the afflicted, that being sensible of sin, and feared
for-wrath, he has fled unto Christ for refuge; next we commend him, that he
has begun to give new obedience to Gods Law, and does purpose to follow on as
he shall be enabled; and thirdly, we commend him, that albeit he cannot attain
that near conjunction with Christ, which he would, yet he neither will, nor
dare forsake Christ, not put himself out of the number of weak believers in
Christ, for he has said in his heart with Peter, Joh. 6. 68. To whom shall I
go? for Christ has the words of eternal life. Hitherto all is right, and the
afflicted must resolve to cleave close to this foundation, because Christ has
said, Ioh. 6. 37. These that come unto me I will in no case cast out.

3. For his doubt arising from the nature of the promises absolute, conditional
and qualified, looked upon by him as if they were conditional, we answer. ^
That these qualified promises, having some mark in them of true believers, are
not exclusive of these believers who find in themselves a defect of the
qualification, but they are inductive unto all believers, to study the
attaining of that qualification, and are corroborative of these belivers who
find in any sensible measure these qualifications: For example, promises made
to the merciful, to the peacemakers, to the upright in heart, do not exclude
these who find themselves short in these graces, and yet are hungry and thristy
for righteousness, yet are poor and indigent of all good in themselves and
daily beggars at the throne of grace for what they want, Mat. 5. for, these
qualifications, found in a weak believer, are signs and effects of sound faith
in them. And we must grant, that of these graces, specified in these qualified
promises, some of them are more eminent in some of the Saints, and other some
of them more eminently seen and felt in other some of the Saints. And in the
same person, one of these qualifications may sometime shine more clearly, and
at another time by some tentation, or mistake, be over-clouded, and not shine
so clearly as before, yet the qualifications are comfortable to all them who
find the same in themselves, and are inductive to make every believer to aim
to excel in these graces, and so to confirm their own faith more and more, as
(2 Pet. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7.) we are exhorted. Again, these qualifications, are signs
of a believer already entered in the covenant of grace by faith in Christ, and
begun to bring forth good fruits, but they are not the conditions of entering
into the covenant; for then none could enter in covenant till first these
qualifications in exercise were sound in them, and that were to dis-annull the
covenant of grace, and to set up a sort of covenant of works; for there is not
another condition of entering in the covenant but faith in Christ only, whereby
the humbled sinner, renouncing all confidence in any good in himself, or from
himself, does betake himself wholly to the grace offered in Jesus Christ in
whom perfect righteousness is to be found. Now unto the man who shall believe
in Christ, all the promises of the Gospel are made, upon this condition, that
he do believe in Jesus Christ; which condition of presuppose the afflicted
should have what he wishes, consolations always running like a river, where
were place for trying, exercising and training of him in his faith? but let him
work and wrestle on, and among hands he shall have as much peace as may suffice
a pilgrim.

4. The third cause is, or may be this, that the afflicted has grieved the
Spirit of God, either by ascribing his gracious operations to some other cause
then grace, or counting his consolations to be but flashes, and like unto
delusions; or, that the afflicted by corrupt communication, or gross offenses,
has provoked God to anger, as befell David, Psalm. 51. For removing of this
cause, whether the sin of the afflicted has been more or less provoking, let
him with David (Ps. 51.) renew the exercise of repentance and faith in Gods
mercy, who only can renew a right spirit in him, or rather restore him to the
formerly-felt consolation and joy of his Spirit, and let him walk more warily
hereafter, that he provoke not to wrath so merciful a father.

5. The fourth cause is, or may be this, that the afflicted, albeit he has
consented to the covenant of grace, and has embraced Christ Jesus offered in
the Evangel, yet he does not set to his seal to the truth of God without an
hink, or fear and suspicion of his right to apply the grace offered; in which
case so long as he doubts, and does not rest his sinful soul on the Word of
God, offering grace to every soul sensible of sin, who shall fly to Jesus
Christ, what wonder the holy Spirit does withold the sealing of the man's
faith? For this is Gods order holden forth, Ephesians. 1. 13. that a sinner should
first six his faith on Christ offered in the Gospel, and after he has believed
(not before he do believe) wait for the sealing of the holy Spirit.

For removing this cause, 1. let the afflicted acknowledge that his hesitation,
doubting and suspicion, is justly chastised of God, because he has not firmly
adhered to the covenant embraced by him, and because he has not given unto God
the glory of his truth without a pawn, and yet does in effect quarrel and
complain, that he does not find these consolations which are given and but
rarely, it may be even to the sound and strong in the faith. 2. Let him for the
confirmation of his faith, hereafter consider well, how strong and solid a
foundation faith has to lean unto* even Gods promise and oath given unto all
that do fly to Christ for refuge and relief from sin and misery, Heb. ^. 17,
18. that the afflicted may with the Psalmist, Ps. 56. 10. sing in God I will
praise his Word. 3. Let the afflicted study to be so fast glewed unto Christ in
every condition and case he finds himself, and go about the exercise of
repentance and faith and new obedience in his calling, submitting himself to
the will of God in every dispensation: which direction if he shall aim to
follow, he shall not want the fruit of his faith, and honest endeavor to
please God: for, Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the
upright in heart*

CHAP. XXI.
Wherein is solved the doubt of the true convert, whether he be indeed
converted, because he cannot confidently apply to himself the promises of the
Gospel.
THere are some true converts, who albeit for fear of the wrath of God for
their sins, are already fled unto Christ, and have hid themselves under the
wings of the propitiatory in the shadow of the Almighty Mediator, and are
already begun in earnest to give new obedience to the law of God; yet from time
to time they fall in fear and trembling suspicion that all be not a sound work
of grace in them; and that partly because they cannot confidently apply to
themselves the promises of the Gospel, whether absolut, such as are made to the
Elect, Ier. 31, 31. or conditional, such as are made to believers in Christ
offered in the Gospel; or qualified promises, such as are made to the meek and
merciful, Mat. 5. which qualified promises they look upon as conditional,
excluding them (as they conceive) who do not find in themselves such
qualifications: and partly because they are not clear about their right to
receive the offer of the Gospel, because they want, as they conceive, fitness
in themselves to receive the same, and thus are they oft-times vexed with
doubts whether they be in the state of grace or not,

2. For lousing of this doubt, sundry things are already said, by the way, in
answering other doubtful cases. But because many do meet with this difficulty,
we shall speak a little more particularly to the case; and, first, it is
needful, that the afflicted be confirmed about that which is right in him,
that the thing which remains and is ready to die, may be strengthened: To
this intent we commend the afflicted, that being sensible of sin, and feared
for-wrath, he has fled unto Christ for refuge; next we commend him, that he
has begun to give new obedience to Gods Law, and does purpose to follow on as
he shall be enabled; and thirdly, we commend him, that albeit he cannot attain
that near conjunction with Christ, which he would, yet he neither will, nor
dare forsake Christ, nor put himself out of the number of weak believers in
Christ, for he has said in his heart with Peter, Joh. 6. 68. To whom shall I
go? for Christ has the words of eternal life. Hitherto all is right, and the
afflicted must resolve to cleave close to this foundation, because Christ has
said, Ioh. 6. 37. These that come unto me I will in no case cast out.

3. For his doubt arising from the nature of the promises absolute, conditional
and qualified, looked upon by him as if they were conditional, we answer. 1.
That these qualified promises, having some mark in them of true believers, are
not exclusive of these believers who find in themselves a defect of the
qualification, but they are inductive unto all believers, to study the
attaining of that qualification, and are corroborative of these believers who
find in any sensible measure these qualifications: For example, promises made
to the merciful, to the peacemakers, to the upright in heart, do not exclude
these who find themselves short in these graces, and yet are hungry and thirsty
for righteousness, yet are poor and indigent of all good in themselves and
daily beggars at the throne of grace for what they want, Mat. 5. for, these
qualifications, sound in a weak believer, are signs and effects of sound says
in them. And we must grant, that of these graces, specified in these qualified
promises, some of them are more eminent in some of the Saints, and other some
of them more eminently seen and felt in other some of the Saints. And in the
same person, one of these qualifications may sometime shine more clearly, and
at another time by some tentation, or mistake, be over-clouded, and not shine
so clearly as before, yet the qualifications are comfortable to all them who
find the same in themselves, and are inductive to make every believer to aim
to excel in these graces, and so to confirm their own faith more and more, as
(2 Pet. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7.) we are exhorted. Again, these qualifications, are signs
of a believer already entered in the covenant of grace by faith in Christ, and
begun to bring forth good fruits, but they are not the conditions of entering
into the covenant; for then none could enter in covenant till first these
qualifications in exercise were sound in them, and that were to dis-annull the
covenant of grace, and to set up a sort of covenant of works; for there is not
another condition of entering in the covenant but says in Christ only, whereby
the humbled sinner, renouncing all confidence in any good in himself, or from
himself, does betake himself wholly to the grace offered in Jesus Christ in
whom perfect righteousness is to be found. Now unto the man who shall believe
in Christ, all the promises of the Gospel are made, upon this condition, that
he do believe in Jesus Christ; which condition of faith in Christ, when it is
now performed, and by the grace of God, the man made a believer in Christ, then
the absolute promises of making a new heart, and of writing the Law of the Lord
therein, ( Ier. 31. 31. and Ezekiel, 11. 19.) and all the promises of saving
graces set down in holy Scripture, do all of them belong to the believer in
Christ, in whom all the promises are yea and amen, as if his name were set down.

4. As to his doubt, arising from his weak and infirm application of the
promises, let the afflicted consider what God has already wrought and is a
working in him by way of application: for, first, God has granted to him the
use of the means with others in the visible Kirk, so that it may be said unto
him in this respect, as it is, Esa. 5. 4. what could be done in outward means
and offer-making of grace which is not done? Secondly, God has drawn more near
unto him, and has illuminat his mind about his sinful state in nature, and
about the way of delivery by faith in Christ, and yet more, has inclined his
heart to accept of the offer of Christ and make answer to the call, as David
did: When thou said, seek my face, my soul answered, thy face O Lord will I
seek, Psalm. 27. 8. Thus God has applied Christ and the promises of the Gospel
to the afflicted, and has made the afflicted to fly unto Christ offered in
the Gospel and to apply him unto himself, that hitherto the afflicted has no
reason to complain of not application of Christ and his promises, on Gods part,
nor yet of begun-application on the afflicted's part. Where* is the^ in-lake
then? I answer, the defect is, first, in the afflicted, who has not duly
considered the passages of Gods gracious approaching to him, and drawing of the
man to himself in Christ; another defect is, that the afflicted upon
groundless mistakes, does not lay claim to Christ and to all the promises of
grace for righteousness and salvation in him, and that because he is not so
clear of his right unto, and interest in, Christ, as he can lay claim
confidently unto the same.

5. For clearing of the afflicted in this his right and warrant, confidently to
apply Christ and all the promises of the Gospel, let him consider, first, the
dreadful sentence of the curse and condemnation of all them that do not
believe on Christ, Ioh. 3. 18. He that believes in Christ, is not condemned;
but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed
in the only begotten Son of God. Secondly, let him consider the largeness of
the Gospel, wherein grace is offered to all and every believer, Ioh. 3. 16. God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. He says
whosoever, without exception, lest any man who desires to believe in Christ,
should doubt that he shall be received and made welcome. Thirdly, let him
mediate upon the wonderful mystery of the incarnation of the Son of God, who,
that he might ransom and redeem his people from sin and misery, has assumed
humane nature into the union of person with his divine nature, and given a
perpetual pawn and pledge of his hearty willingness to reconcile, justify,
sanctify and save to the uttermost every one who shall come unto God through
him: whereunto his mediatory Office, and clothing himself with most sweet
relations of Prophet, Priest and King to all his followers, does hear abundant
witness. Fourthly, let him hearken to the quickening and comfortable
invitations which by his Spirit, speaking in Scripture, he utters in the ears
of all to whom the Gospel comes with a joyful sound; Ho, every one that
thirsts! Isa. 55. 1. to 10. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, Mat. 11. 28. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us, we pray you, in Christ's stead, beye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Rev. 22. 17.
Fifthly, let the afflicted consider what answer he will give to the express
command of God, 1 Ioh. 3. 23. This is his comandment, that we should believe in
the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he has commanded us.
For, this commandment being directed to all the hearers of the Gospel, charge
every one without exception, first to examine seriously their life by the rule
of Gods Law, that thereby they may be convinced of their damnable state in
nature, and made to acknowledge their sin and misery, and inability to help
themselves: Secondly, having examined and acknowledged their natural lost
condition they are commanded to fly to Jesus Christ, that by faith in him they
may be delivered. Thirdly, that having fled to Christ, they should evidence
their faith by love to Christ or God in Christ, and their neighbors,
especially such as are of the household of faith. In which commandment, both
the order of applying Law and Gospel, is set down, and the necessity of
believing in Christ, upon the warrant of this clear command; so that whosoever
is a hearer of the Gospel, and does not in this order fly unto Christ, he is
inexcusable, even the wicked and worst of men. And much less excusable is the
afflicted convert of whom we are now speaking, who already has acknowledged
his lost condition without Christ, and knows that there is no hope of relief,
except by faith in Jesus, and has fled to Christ, and dare not depart from
him, if this man shall stand here and not rely on Christ and rest his soul
upon him confidently, what excuse can he make? If he do object, that his name
is not written in this command, 1 Ioh. 3. 23. it has no force to impede his
faith, for neither is his name written in any of the ten commands of the moral
Law, and yet he finds himself tied to the obedience of every one of them, and
why is he not tied also to this sweet command of the Gospel of grace, as well
as to other commands? this command being given forth as the last declaration of
Gods will, for relief of them who acknowledge that they by the law are
condemned? wherefore let not the afflicted any more pretend the difficulty of
applying Christ and his graces offered in the Gospel, seeing it is presupposed
he has fled to Christ, and dare neither depart from him, nor for the pretended
scruple draw confidently in unto him; but let him check and chide himself for
not haunting Christ, and conversing with him in heaven in that humility and
confidence which the Word of the Lord does allow unto him and commands him to
take up and hold fast.

CHAP. XXII*
Wherein is solved the doubt of the true convert concerning his conversion,
arising from the observation in himself of presumption and security in his
prosperity and of his misbelief in adversity.
THere are some true converts, who albeit they are neither idle nor unfruitful
in the work of the Lord, and in acknowledging of Christ, yet are frequently
called in question about their state in grace; for when their conscience is
quiet, they fall in suspicion that their faith is but presumption, and when
through tentation in adversity they are put to wrestling, their suspicion is,
that then felt weakness of faith in wrestling is but misbelief. And when the
frequent perturbations of their mind, do make them indisposed for any exercise
of religion, a suspicion is raised, that the faith which they seemed to have,
is but dead, because when there is most need of bringing forth fruits they are
altogether unfit and unable to bring forth any fruits. What shall I think of my
estate, faith the afflicted, who when an enemy does not appear am secure, and
when I must enter the combat with the adversary, I faint, and oft-times when I
am called to the exercise of religion, I am confounded, I am stupid and
impotent to discharge any duty therein?

2. That this doubt may be solved, the three causes of his doubting must be
removed. As to the first, which is the suspicion, that his faith is
presumption, we do not deny that carnal confidence in prosperity uses to
assume to it self the name of true faith, and that even true converts, do
sometime deceive themselves concerning the measure of their faith, both on the
right hand and on the left, by judging faith not questioned, to be strong
faith, and ^aith in wrestling to be weak or none at all. We grant also, that
some mixture of presumption will be found joined with true faith, and of
misbelief also. Which evils do lurk and hide their power, till the man be put
to some trial. Wherefor the afflicted has need of discretion, that he may have
a right esteem both of the operation of the holy Spirit, and of the power of
native corruption in himself, for faith must not be condemned for the
imperfections of it, or for the mixture of presumption and misbelief with it.
And to help his judgment, let him observe the nature of prevalent presumption,
and the nature of true faith, which differ one from another in these four
respects, first, presumption is founded upon a false imagination without any
warrant of Gods Word; but faith takes heed to the Scripture, that from the
Word it may give a reason of believing. 2. Presumption is negligent and idle in
the discharge of duties, but faith takes head to the commands of God, and is
diligent and serious in the use of the means. 3. The presumptuous man does not
make question of his estate, but blesses himself, when his way is to be hated,
for he does not examine himself, that he may know certainly in what condition
he is, but he that puts his faith in exercise, does carefully examine his
carriage and condition, lest he deceive himself. 4. The presumptuous man in all
his ways and actions is well pleased with himself, but the believer, because
of the sinfulness he finds in all his actions, is ill pleased with himself
in his best actions many times, and renounceth all confidence in his works,
that he may wholly depend on the grace of God.

3. Let the afflicted therefore who so does look to the Gospel, as he also
makes use of the Law, both in prosperity and adversity, makes conscience of
the exercise of religion and duties of his calling in some measure, and is
never so well pleased with himself but he observes the power of corruption in
himself, let him (I say) not reckon himself among the presumptuous, let him not
esteem his quietness in believing to be presumption.

4. As for his suspicion, that his says is null, because it proves weak in
conflict, let the afflicted beware lest he help and strengthen Satan's
tentations against his faith, albeit he find his faith weak in trials and
assaults, and not answerable either to his own hope or others expectation of
him; yet let him not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, but
let him follow Christ, humbling himself before God because of his defects, and
going about to strengthen that which is remaining. 2. Albeit in some fit of
tentation he slide, as Peter did, and find that he has presumed too much of
his own strength and honest purpose as Peter also did, yet let him not think
that his faith is null, but let him weep with Peter, and turn again by
repentance, and watch better over his own heart for time to come.

5. As for the suspicion he has, that his faith is dead or idle, because when
fruits are chiefly called for, he finds himself uterrly indisposed, unfit and
unable to discharge any work of religion, as comes to pass in the time of
passions, perturbations of mind, and pollution of the conscience: for clearing
whereof, we do acknowledge, that wrath and contention do hinder prayer and
other exercises of religion, as the Apostle does insinuat, 1 Pet. 3. 7. where
he commands husbands to carry themselves discreetly toward their wives, least
their prayers in the family or in secret be hindered; and, 1 Timothy 2. 8. the
Apostle commands men to pray every where, lifting up pure hands without wrath
or doubting. We acknowledge also, that not only wrath, or any other passion or
action which defiles the conscience, are able to hinder the exercise of
religion, and discharge of christian duties at a time, but also it is found by
experience, that any perturbation of mind, albeit it do not defile or concern
the conscience, may in some part hinder the discharge of a religious exercise,
as may be seen when any person is surprised with the report of some notable
damnage, or is possibly wounded by some accident, or terrified by the sight of
imminent danger; yet for all this, none of these things can prove faith to be
dead, but does show the infirmity of a man's mind, the use of whose reason may
be hindered for a time by perturbations and sudain passions; and at the most,
the presupposed cases may prove the weakness of faith, and the interruption of
it in the putting forth it self vigorously for the time, but cannot prove the
deadness or nullity of faith, whih after such passions are past, does set
forward to bring forth fruits in better measure: wherefore let not the
afflicted halt in his way for such tentations, but let him make straight steps
to himself, least that which is halting be turned out of the way; let him
reject these fiery darts and tentations tending to weaken his confidence, let
him humble himself in the sense of inherent corruption, and wash frequently his
conscience at the fountain, which is opened up in the house of David for
purging away sin and uncleanness; let him carry himself the more circumspectly
in all things, because of his frequent experience of Satan's malice, of the
power of sin, and of his own infirmities.

CHAP. XXIII.
Wherein is solved the doubt of a true converts regeneration, arising from some
false rule applied without reason to himself.
SOme true converts, judging their state by some false rule, do not only
torment themselves, but also (so far as in them lies) by pronouncing false
sentences of their own state, go about to extinguish the spunk of piety which
is in them. The false rule whereby they do judge themselves, is strengthened by
a groundless persuasion, that it is a true and sure rule, and ordinarily when
they think or speak of it, they prefix no reason for it, but some confident
asseveration, such as without doubt, it is most certain, and I am persuaded of
it, and such like. If I were regenerat and truly converted, without doubt, I
should be in a better disposition then I am, I should love the Lord more
fervently, I should understand the mysteries of Gods Word more clearly, I
should not be so little affected with the sense of Gods benefits bestowed on
me, I should not go so lightly under the conviction of so many sins against God
as I feel in me, I should be more diligent in the work of the Lord, in my
calling I should walk more humbly and circumspectly in all my conversation, and
such like many expressions. The same course does the afflicted follow in his
examination of the operations of the holy Spirit, and of every Christian virtue
in himself: without doubt, says he, if this were truly as a Christian virtue
in me, there would not be such a disposition as I find in me, my condition
should be such and such as became a new creature, which because I do not find
in me, I have just reason to call in question my conversion. And here is a port
opened for Satan to enter at, and to throw all his fiery darts at the
miserable soul of the weak convert, whence many complaints do break forth, and
thanksgiving for mercies received and for the time enjoyed, is broken off and
cease: And partly through diffidence, partly through murmuring, the Spirit of
the Lord is provoked to wrath.

2. We grant, that this is a dangerous evil not only to the person afflicted,
but also to such as are familiarly acquainted with his condition, because this
disease readily does infect others, as it came to pass in the camp of Israel,
where the murmuring of some, set the body of the army on a mutiny against God:
for, one that is weak in the faith, when he hears such complaints in the
mouth of one whom he judges to be holier then himself, incontinent he falls
on complaining of his own state, saying, that he has more weighty reason to
suspect the soundness of his conversion, then the person has whom he has
heard suspecting his being in the state of grace.

3. Wherefore let the afflicted before he shall vent his suspicion of his
state, examine the rule whereby he has passed sentence on himself, whether he
can make it good from the Scripture: for, it is not sufficient to say, without
doubt, and I am persuaded it is true, except it can be confirmed by the
infallible warrant of Gods Word; and let his friend who shall hear his
complaint, expressly require a reason of his confidence, that such a rule is
clear from Scripture, and that the application thereof is made righteously.
Which if he cannot prove otherwise then Satan does enforce his tentations,
that is, either without Scripture, or by abusing Scripture contrary to the
intent thereof, let him acknowledge his readiness to misbelieve and disobey
the Word of the Lord, and to hearken to Satan's tentations to the weakening of
his own faith, and hindering of his cheerful obedience to the Lords commands:
and because such question-making of being in the state of grace, is oft-times
very inconsideratly uttered, even before them who do not allow the complainers
misconstruction of his state, or if they should allow it, and say to the
complainer, that they believed that suspicion of his state were very just, it
should grieve the complainer more then the doubt it self: Therefore let the
afflicted neither hearken to the suspicion, nor vent it when it is strongly
suggested; but let him humble himself before Christ, because of these defects
and wants of such evidences of saving grace as he would have; and in the sense
of these wants, let him cleave close to Christ for covering his nakedness, and
earnestly endeavor by faith in Christ to be made more and more conform to the
examplar of holiness holden forth in the Scripture.

CHAP. XXIV.
Wherein is solved the converts doubt of his own conversion, because he has
found the deceitfulness of his own heart, and dare not trust it any more.
SOme sincere converts, who uprightly do serve Christ, and adhere unto him by
faith, when they consider the doctrine of the deceitfulness of the heart of
man, and how many are deceived by trusting to the testimony of their own heart,
concerning their regeneration and justification, do begin to call in question
all the work of their own conversion, and do fear least they be found in the
number of the finer sort of hypocrites, who deceive both themselves and others,
having nothing in them but a civil life and form of religion, without the power
of godliness, and do sleep to death in security: of which sort our Lord Jesus
forewarneth, that not only private persons, but also many preachers shall be
found, Mat. 7. 22. of whom we may suppone, that they were not conscious of open
and gross wickedness, but were of a blameless carriage before the world,
professing the Christian faith, and teaching others to believe in Christ, and
doubted nothing but Christ should judge of them as real Saints; to whom for
all that, Christ shall one day say, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I
never knew you. It is certain that such men have been deceived by their own
heart: which when the afflicted does consider, he stands astonished and
trembles for fear, saying with himself, what shall I think of my former
opinion of my blessd state, I fear my heart has deceived me, as others of
greater gifts and better life, have been deceived by their own heart.

2. This is a doubt which has need to be solved; but neither this nor any
other doubt can be solidly and effectually solved by any mean, except the holy
Spirit give a blessing to the means: for, it is certain, that there are many,
who being religiously educat and free from gross vices, do not repent of their
sins, are not touched with the sense of their original sin and corrupt lusts,
but without taking any burden on their consciences for these, do pass by their
time, well pleased with their own estate. Some also there are, who having
fallen in gross and scandalous sins, do find for some time remorse of
conscience for these gross sins, but for their other sins beside those, and
for their in-born corruptions, are not careful, thinking it sufficient if
thereafter they do not fall in such gross faults: The first sort of men, do
deceive themselves, thinking they have little to repent of^ in regard they are
free of gross out-breakings. This last sort deceive themselves also, because
they esteem their natural sorrow for such sins as are gross and scandalous, to
be true repentance, albeit they be not humbled for the fountain of these
out-breakings, to wit, their in-born corruption of nature and filthy
concupiscence, and the daily out-breakings thereof, to the polluting of their
spirits, whereof they do take little or no notice. Many also there are who
deceive themselves, esteeming the outward exercises of religion, and some works
(in themselves commendable) to be sufficient fruits and evidences of their
faith in Christ and of their regeneration, albeit they have not as yet fled to
Christ sincerely, neither ever put a right estimation upon the imputed
righteousness of Christ. Such men, when they should renounce all confidence in
their own works, and in the sense of their sinfulness fly unto the covenant
of grace offered in Christ, that in him they might have remission of sin, and
from him by faith draw strength and ability to bring forth good works, they run
a contrary course; for in the confidence of their own strength they go about
sundry duties toward men, and exercises of religion toward God, trusting in
those works, as if by works they were to be justified. Therefore justly shall
Christ say unto them, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you.
Such were many of the Israelits, who being ignorant of the righteousness of
God, went about to establish their own righteousness. These things when one,
weak in faith does consider, no wonder he be troubled and be afraid lest he
deceive himself and perish as others have done.

3. This is a dangerous disease, and so long as it is not cured, it hinders
much the tender beginnings of the new creature, that it cannot come up to manly
strength, First therefore, let the afflicted wisely examine the course of his
bygone life, lest he either absolve, or condemn himself, rashly; and let him
beware lest he esteem the worse of the evidences of a new creature, and the
fruits of faith, because these that look to be justified by their works, can
produce the like works. Secondly, let the afflicted call to mind whether in the
beginning of the re^ormation of his life, the Law as a Pedagoge did lead him
unto Christ; and whether since that time, the law did daily put him on, and
force him to ^lye to Christ, and to embrace Christ and his righteousness, and
has made him to study obedience to the law, out of love to God, so much the
more carefully, as he perceived himself obliged thankfully to acknowledge grace
granted in Christ to him; for if any measure of the daily exercise of
repentance, if any measure of love to Christ, and any measure of endeavor of
new obedience, be found after examination in the person afflicted, out of doubt
the ground is laid solidly of his salvation, out of doubt he has an evidence
of the work of grace by the operation of the holy Spirit in himself.

4. If in this examination the afflicted be not clear, but the doubt does yet
stick, because of the suspicion he has of the felt deceitfulness of his own
heart, we offer unto him this counsel, that he quickly humble himself before
God, and do ingenuously acknowledge the native perverseness and deceitfulness
of his heart; and for that very reason, let him embrace Christ the Redeemer in
the arms of faith, offering himself to every condemned sinner; and let him
thank God who has deciphered unto him this deceitfulness of his heart, and
offered Christ unto him for the true remedy of this and every other sinful
malady. And in the mean time, let him put a difference between himself and an
hypocrit, in whom the deceit of the heart is neither acknowledged nor seen, but
fostered and defended: for, a close hypocrite, after hearing of the doctrine of
the deceitfulness of the heart, will stand to the defending of his own
sincerity, and will take it hardly if any man labor to convince him of any
measure of hypocrisy: but a true convert, or regenerat person, will not deny
but much hypocrisy may be found in him; and albeit he be sorrowful, that this
deceitfulness of heart has had lodging in him and lurked too long, yet is he
willing and glad to have this evil more and more discovered unto him, and
heartily does he deliver up this traitor to Christ, to be mortified and
abolished by his Spirit.

5. But if the afflicted cannot be quiet and satisfied, still fearing and
suspecting he be found a man unrenewed, and that for the running issue of this
filthy boil, opened up to him by the sword of the Spirit, let him beware that
he pass not permptor sentence against himself, that he do not conclude himself
to be a man altogether in the bond of iniquity; but let him suspend for a time,
the disputation, and do that which is allowed unto every self-condemned man in
the beginning of his conversion, that is, quickly let him fly unto Christ for
remission of sin, let him lay hold on that righteousness purchased by him; and
the more he fears to find God a severe judge, let him the more firmly lay
hold on Jesus Christ the Mediator, who justifies the ungodly by faith: this is
the only solid way to persevere in faith, to overcome Satan, to solve doubts,
to resist temptations, and to cure the wound made by Satan's fiery darts; for,
unto that man, who in the sense of his sins and ill deserving, and inability to
help himself, does fly unto Christ, it shall never be said by Christ, depart
from me, I never knew thee.

6. Now when the person afflicted has of new laid hold on Christ and guarded
the fortress of faith, and repulsed the tempter, who by all means, and
specially by quarreling and questioning the bypast work of grace in him, had
labored to weaken and overturn his faith for by-gones, and for the present
also, lest it should convalesce and grow stronger for time to come; now (I say)
let the afflicted after victory return to the dispute and to the examination of
his state in grace, of his faith in Christ and of his regeneration, and he
shall see all the begun saving graces which were darkened by temptations
clearly appear, and shall perceive the several steps and degrees of Gods grace
toward him in former times, more evidently then he could discern them in the
hour of darkness and temptation. And so he shall return from this battle
strongerin faith then he was before, and more persuaded of the work of the holy
Spirit in him, then he was before the temptation.

CHAP. XXV.
Wherein is solved the doubt of the true converts conversion, arising from his
breach of the covenant of Grace, as he conceives.
THere are some sincere converts, who, albeit they do not doubt but penitents,
flying to Christ, are received in favor with God, are justified from their
sins, and do obtain right unto all the privileges of the Saints; yet, they
doubt whether every sincere convert shall remain in the covenant of Grace, if
possibly they have so far abused grace, as to defile themselves again with the
pollutions which they seemed to repent of before. And this erroneous opinion of
the instability of the covenant of grace, they do apply to themselves; for,
when they have found by experience, the power of sin, as it were not only
rageing, but in appearance reigning in them, as the conscience of their
relapsing in their old sins bears witness. And when they know their nature
so corrupt and ready to sin yet more, they doubt if this condition can stand
with being in the covenant of Grace; and whatsoever they have found of their
being in this covenant, they now fear that they be fallen from grace, because
they have, as they conceive, broken the covenant of Grace on their part,
therefore they apprehend also, that God in justice, being provoked ofttimes by
them, has now at last dissolved the covenant of Grace on his part: for (say
they) it is no reason that God should be tied unto them in covenant, who so
many ways have violated that covenant; but as Adam, by sinning, excluded
himself from all benefit of the covenant of Works, So is it reason, that every
one who have violated the covenant of Grace as I have done, should be excluded
from the covenant of Grace. And here the afflicted does stand as a miserable
man, uncertain what to do: in which condition, horrible temptations and heavy
suspicions of their state do arise, namely, that they are in the condition and
case wherein Esau was, who when he had sold his birthright for a mess of
pottage, found no place for repentance, albeit he sought the blessing with
tears. Now what torment may be in the conscience of the afflicted in this case,
it is easy (for them who at any time have felt the wrath of God) to
conjecture. And this doubt does vex the man most, who is conscious of his often
abuse of the grace of God: for, what shall I do, says he? shall I defile my
self and go and wash, and again defile my self and go and wash, and by this
means augment my own guiltiness from day to day? what is, if this be not, to
abuse the grace of God?

2. That this evil may be removed, we must confess that there are many, who
after some remorse for some sins, raised by a natural and unrenewed conscience,
do weep now and then (as Saul did for his injust persecution of David) and do
think, that by their tears they have washen away their sin, and attained to
some sort of quietness in their conscience for a time, who yet do not cease
from their wickedness, but remain in their natural state strangers from God
and Christ. We must also acknowledge, that some of the regenerat in their
carnal security, falling back in their old sins, ordinarily are sharply
chastised by God; and indeed no wonder is, that such as have once attained to
peace with God, do meet with broken bones, after they have abused the grace of
God, in giving way to their sinful lusts, which was the case of David, Ps. 51.

3. As for those who fall in open gross scandalous sins which defile the whole
man, soul and body both, it is safest for them (whether they were before that
time converted or not) to let alone long disputation, whether they were
regenerat or not before their fearful fall, and to stir up themselves to a
deep search of the wickedness of their nature, that they may be humbled before
God, and in the sense of their in-born sin and gross actual out-breakings,
fly unto Christ for pardon and grace to bring forth better fruits then they
have done.

4. As for these who have not fallen in grievous open transgressions, but in
their wrestling against sin, not obtaining the victory they would, or hoped to
have, do find themselves polluted in their spirits, and put to the worse in
their conflict against their sinful lusts and passions, and that very
frequently; and thereupon they apprehend, that either they were never in the
state of grace, or if they were in it, that they have abused and broken the
covenant of grace; To these we answer, that every transgression of the
commands, albeit it be a violation of the covenant of works, yet is not a
dissolution of the covenant of grace: for, it is one thing to fail in a duty,
which the covenanted party should have done; another thing to break or dissolve
the covenant of grace; for, it is provided in the covenant of grace as a
special article, that God will forgive the sin of his confederat people, when
they confess their faults, and sue for pardon according to the promise of
mercy to the covenanted, Ier. 31, 32: and lest any humble sinner should be
discouraged and not receive this solution of his doubt, let him consider the
words of the Apostle, Gal. 6. 1. expressly set down for their comfort, who,
having resolved to live holily, justly and temperatly, are overtaken in an
offense, and are not purposed to abuse mercy, or turn the grace of God into
lasciviousness; and, 1 Job. 2. 1. These things I write unto you (to wit,
believers in Christ, careful to live holily) that ye sin not; but if any man
sin, we have an advocat with the father, Jesus Christ the just one. And this
article of the covenant, for granting daily remission according to the
necessity of the Saints, makes the covenant of grace perpetual, and to be
daily made use of, as we are directed in the Lords prayer. And in this does the
covenant of grace differ from the covenant of works, which by any one sin is so
violat, as the curse does follow, till the sinner run in to the covenant of
grace in Jesus Christ: And by this doctrine a door is not opened unto sinning,
but the door only is closed to keep in the true convert from desperation, and
running away from Christ, and to help him out of the mire of discouragement
wherein he is fallen, lest he sink in it and despair. Neither is the study of
holiness hindered by this way, or the diligence of the convert slakened in the
duties of new obedience and pleasing of God, but only servile fear in the manner
of serving God, is taken away, and the obligation of love to God (who is found
to be so merciful) is more strictly tied upon us: which love (as it is
augmented daily by new confirmations of faith, and fresh experiences of his
grace to us) does cast out servile fear, as the Apostle teaches, 1 Ioh. 4. 18.

As for the afflicted convert, his fear that he be like Saul, who though he
felt remorse and shame, when all the beholders in his army saw him so
confounded by David's loyal carriage toward him, yet did he not repent this sin
at all, nor amend his life at all; there is no ground to suspect himself to be
like unto him, or to Esau who was solicitous only for an earthly blessing; and
when he could not have the first place in his fathers blessing, contented
himself with what portion in the earth he could have beside. Therefore let the
afflicted labor to understand well the nature of the covenant of grace and the
several articles thereof; and let him consider, that there is no advantage to
be had by excluding of himself from that covenant, but that if he will be
saved, in every condition he must draw near to Christ, and lay hold on him for
remission of sin, and fresh furniture of grace for every duty: for, it is good
always to draw near to him, because he will destroy all them that depart far
from him, Ps. 73. 27.

CHAP. XXVI.
Wherein is solved the true converts d^ubt, whether he be regenerat, because he
finds himself not only far from the measure of holiness which he observes
to have been in the Saints commended in Scripture; but also short of the
measure which some of his acquaintance have attained unto.
SOme true converts are, who in the time wherein they are about to strengthen
their says by all means, do fall in comparision of themselves with other
converts in the matter of their faith, love, endeavor and attainment of an holy
conversation; and finding themselves very short of that measure which not only
Saints commended in Scripture have attained unto, but also short of what sundry
of their acquaintance have gained and given proof of, sudainly are overtaken
with a sad suspicion, that they may be found none of the number of true
converts: as for example, when they read what David says of himself in the
Psalms, and namely in the hundred and nineteen Psalm, they seem to themselves
so unlike the copy he has cast unto them, so far short of that affection to
the Word of God, of that faith, of that diligence, of that sincerity, of that
patience, of that fortitude in afflictions, and delectation in God, which the
practice of this servant of God does hold forth, that they are ashamed to
assume the name of a visible Saint, or faithful servant of God. And for the
same reason, do forbear under this exercise to apply unto themselves the
precious promises made to the faithful servants of God in the Scripture. What
am I (says the afflicted) that I should presume to intrude my self in the
number of the Saints? what am I, that I should apply to my self what is
promised to true converts and sincere servants of God? Were I such a one as
this person, or that person is, I might then, for my consolation, apply
promises made unto such Saints; but now I cannot apply their privileges,
except for conviction of my conscience, that I am justly for my unlikenesse
unto them, secluded from the promises made unto them, and those that are like
unto them.

2. For lousing of this doubt, we must acknowledge, that the comparison of our
selves with the rule of perfection holden forth in the Scripture, is to be
aimed at by all; and the comparison of our selves with the eminent servants of
God, who have attained a great measure of growth in holiness, is very
profitable if it be prudently managed: For, the first comparison teaches us
what we should endeavor to attain, and the other teaches us what may be by
the grace of God attained unto even in this life.

Again, both these comparisons do serve to humble us before God, when we
perceive our selves not only short of perfection, which cannot be fully
attained unto in this life, but also short of these degrees which may be
attained, and have been attained by others in this life, we cannot choose but
think the more meanly of our selves, and put down the sails of self-estimation.

Thirdly, this sort of comparison is profitable to make us more uprightly
renounce all confidence in our own inherent righteousness, and fly for refuge
to the righteousness of Christ obedience and satisfaction imputed unto all
that believe in him, according as the example of the Apostle Paul who renounced
all confidence in his privileges, performances, sufferings and inherent
righteousness, counting them all but dung, that he might win Christ and be
found in him, not having his own righteousness which is of the law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ; the righteousness which is of God by
faith, Phil. 3. 8, 9.

3. But this sort of comparison is dangerous and hurtful, when it tends to
discouragment, when it makes us think little of the measure of Gods grace
granted unto us, when it makes us heartlesse in the course of obedience, and
hopeless that we shall attain unto the measure whereunto the Saints have
attained.

4. Wherefore let the afflicted strengthen the thing which remains and is
ready to die, Rev. 3. 2. let him beware lest he quench the smoking flax, or
break the bruised reed, wherein he has Christ's help to look unto, Isa. 42. 3.
Again, let the afflicted consider, that there are diverse degrees of saving
faith, diverse degrees of the measure of sanctification and growth in grace;
for, some are old men, some young, and strong men, and some babes in Christ,
and that the same duties in the same measure, are not to be expected from the
tender and weak beginner, which are required of the strong and experimented
soldier. 3. Let the afflicted remember, that nothing is given, nor promised,
nor done unto the Saints in Scripture or in latter ages for any merit or
worthiness in them, but altogether of free grace: and so much the more should
this be remembered, as this doubting of the afflicted, arising from comparison
of his condition with the measure of sanctification in others, does presuppone
the contrary, as if God did deal with his children according to the worthiness
of their persons and merit of their good works, which is a false supposition;
for, why does the afflicted cast down his courage and weaken his faith and
confidence in God, but for this very cause, that he counts himself a much
more unworthy man, and of less merit before God then those Saints were, or
are, with whom he has compared himself? 4. Let the afflicted by so much as he
does preceive himself more unworthy, and more sinful then those Saints with
whom he has compared himself, thrust himself the more into the bosom of rich
grace; let him so much the more lay hold on the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, and cover his nakedness therewith, and employ Christ by faith
so much the more, that out of his fullness he may receive grace for grace, and
be made able by his Spirit to bring forth more abundant fruits, and come up
nearer unto conformity with Christ, and the examples of renouned Saints. 5. Let
the afflicted consider, that we must live by rules set down in Scripture,
aiming sincerely at obedience of holy precepts, albeit we have not yet come up
unto the practice of the rule in that measure, which others have attained unto.

CHAP. XXVII.
Wherein is solved the true converts doubt, whether he be in the blessed state
of grace, because he finds himself frequently in an evil condition.
EXperience teaches, that sundry true converts, because they, feeling
themselves oft-times in an ill condition, do call in question their being in
the blessed state of grace, not considering, that the condition of a man,
whether in the state of nature unrenewed, or in the state of grace, may be
comparatively in better or worse condition, and yet his state remain the same.
The multitude of the misbelieving Hebrews, were in an evil condition, at the
one side of the red Sea, when they repented their coming out of Egypt, but in a
better condition when they did sing praises unto God on the other side of the
Sea, and yet for their state, some were, yea most part, still in nature
unrenewed: Moses and Aaron were in an evil condition when their passion
offended God at the smiteing of the rock; but when they did interceed with God
for the people, when wrath was kindled against the host, they were in a better
condition: and both in the one time and in the other they were in the state of
grace, true Saints in Gods estimation. This mistake of the weak in faith, not
putting difference between their present disposition and their state, makes
them judge of themselves to be in the state of grace when their condition is
good, and to be in the state of nature unrenewed when they feel themselves in
an evil condition: when they observe their heart enlarged to run the way of
Gods commandments, then they esteem themselves truly regenerat, and when they
feel themselves sluggish in the work of the Lord, dull in hearing the Word,
flow to believe what the Scripture speaks, when they esteem their ordinary
service to be after a form of godliness, without affection and power, and what
service they do, to proceed from fear of wrath, rather then from the new and
right principles of a regenerat man, then they question all the works of grace
in themselves. What shall I think, says the afflicted, concerning my state in
grace, when I find my condition so frequently not only short of what it should
be, but also polluted with diverse sorts of sins?

2. For answer, we must grant, that the external duties of religion, may be
discharged from fleshly and corrupt principles; for, many do perform commanded
external duties, that they may eshew the reproach of impiety, or that they may
insinuat themselves in the good estimation and favor of the godly, or for some
base earthly ends for which gross hypocrites do whatsoever they do in religion.

Like unto these are all self-deceiving hypocrites, who go about to establish
their own righteousness, miskening that righteousness which is of God by
faith, as if God could be obliged to take their performance for a full,
satisfaction for their former sins, and would look upon their works as
meritorious of eternal life; and therefore because men may deceive themselves,
1. the afflicted shall do well to examine himself whether he has renounced all
confidence in the flesh, or his own works, Phil. 3. 8, 9. and fled unto Christ
for righteousness, with some measure of honest endeavoring to worship and
serve God in his spirit; which if his conscience can witness unto him to be
his way wherein he is walking, then may he be assured that he is a true
convert. 2. And albeit it be true that the imperfections of the regenerat man
do many times obscure his state in grace, yet can they not extinguish the sponk
of regeneration begun in him, or prove the work of grace in him not to be at
all. 3. We grant that the condition of a true convert at sometimes may be so
bad by reason of sinful distemper and fleshly carriage, that many unrenewed
men's conversation shall be found far more commendable, then the present
condition and carriage of the renewed man in his sinful condition: In which
case neither God nor his own conscience, nor any that fears God can speak any
thing but wrath to him, till he repent and turn to God for mercy in Christ; yet
the afflicted penitent convert, lamenting his bad condition, is in better case
then any unrenewed man can be into: for, the very grief and perplexity which he
finds because his condition is so often ill and sinful, proves his good
affection toward God, and his earnest desire to walk before God unto all
well-pleasing, in all things and at all times.

3. But if the afflicted shall insist and object, that the fear of Gods wrath
and judgments, ordinarily is a main motive which sets him on to do the
duties and service which God requires of him, and not the love of God, the
felt in-lake whereof, does make him go on halting and heavy in the ways of
God. We answer, that albeit the fear of Gods wrath and judgments looked upon
alone, does not prove regeneration, yet it may well consist with regeneration:
because God does not for naught join with his precepts, fearful threatenings
of judgments against those who shall transgress his commands, that they may be
as a spur in his childrens sides to press them to their duties, and as a
bridle to curb and check their vicious inclination unto sin, which lodges in
all men by nature. And this motive is evident in the experience of the Prophet,
Ps, 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments. 2. It may be that the afflicted, lately converted unto God, be not
free as yet from the spirit of bondage, but be kept in some measure under the
bonds of servile fear, God so disposing, for the humbleing, exercising and
training of his child lately entered in his holy warfare; in which condition
his fear is commendable, when it arises from the conscience of his sinful
short-coming in Gods service, and of the prevailing of his corruption against
the begun work of renovation. Wherefore, let the afflicted go about the
discharge of commanded duties in his christian calling, and particular station
wherein God has placed him, in what condition soever he shall find himself. 2.
Let him compare his present condition, which he does count an ill condition,
with the bygone better conditions whereof he has had possibly experience
frequently; and when he calls to mind the comforts he has had, and the
enlargement of heart to run in the way of Gods commandment, in hope of a change
of his present condition to the better, in hope of finding renewed blinks of
the Lords countenance, let him humbly wait on God in the use of the means
appointed* till the day star arise in his heart, praying with the Psalmist,
that God would quicken him according to his loving kindness. 3. Let him cleave
the more closely to the covenant of grace and the righteousness which is by
faith in Jesus Christ, withal giving thanks unto God for the grace bestowed on
him, for the giving unto him eye salve to see his blindness, nakedness and
misery, and for making sin odious and grievous unto him in any measure, and for
drawing him to Christ to be his refuge in his worst condition.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Wherein is solved the doubt of the true convert concerning his regeneration,
because he finds the power of the body of death in the pollution of the
imaginations of his heart, vigorous and powerful.
THere are some true converts, who albeit they be cleansed from the pollutions
that are in the world, and have their conversation blameless and without
giving scandal unto them they live among, yet frequently are troubled with
doubting of their state in grace, because they feel in themselves such a power
of inbred corruption of their hearts, as can hardly consist (as they conceive)
with regeneration and saving says, because, James, chap. 3. ver. 11. makes
the question thus, does a fountain send forth at the same pl^ce sweet water and
bitter? etc. unto the end of the Chapter. This doubt the afflicted wrestles
with, and says with himself, what shall I think of my self, whose heart is so
polluted, that it casts forth continually dirt and mire? how shall I reckon
my self among the Saints? how shall I incrude my self among the justified, who
find so little evidence of the work of sanctification in me? For, faith should
purify the heart from this pollution, whereof I do justly complain.

2. For solving of this doubt, many things are already spoken which serve for
the curing of this case, and comforting the afflicted in this condition; but
because one and the same doubt, does diversely present it self now in one
shape, then in another, and does vex the afflicted in sundry ways, we shall
answer this doubt proposed as it is set down.

First therefore, let the afflicted examine himself whether he may with some
measure of honesty say with the Psalmist, Ps. 66. 18. I do not regard
iniquity-in my heart. I do not so delight in sin, but that sin is still my
affliction and my daily grief. Secondly, let him examine himself, whether the
power of corruption does break forth in words and deeds or not, or if it do
burst out in some passionat fits, whether he does open the sluice and give it
way, or whether he sets himself to oppose the out-breaking of sin, and is
humbled for what does break forth. Thirdly, let him examine whether he flies
to Christ to wash him, and help him against the power of sin, or not. If after
examination he can in any measure of honesty join with the Apostle in his
lamentation, and recourse unto Christ for delivery, Romans 7. 24, 25. he may be
assured, he is in the state of grace: For, there is a vast difference between a
man's being sold unto sin by his native corruption captivating him, and a man's
setting of himself unto sin, as a voluntary servant of sin; for, a renewed man
may be in sundry cases a captive to sin, and is a fighter against sin; But a
man selling himself to sin, is a slave voluntarily suffering sin to reign in
his mortal body.

Let the afflicted therefore comfort himself, because in him there is a
perpetual conflict between the flesh and the spirit, between his native
inclination to sin, and the new creature, or inclination to holiness. Neither
let him by mis-understood Scripture formerly cited, vex himself; for, his faith
is indeed upon the work, and the way of purifying his heart; first, because he
does fly to the blood of Christ, which cleanses him from all sin, in respect
of remission granted. Secondly, there is a constant endeavor to be more and
more holy, and to draw virtue by faith from Christ to bring forth good fruits,
well-pleasing unto God. Thirdly, he is about to mortify his lusts by the
Spirit of Christ, and to purge out the leaven of all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, albeit he cannot purge it out all at once, or wholly in in this life.
And fourthly, because albeit his doubting of his estate in grace be not
allowable, yet it does bear witness that the remainder of pollution in him is
his grief, affliction and vexation. So also that other Scripture, James, 3. 11.
which faith, that out of the same fountain proceeds not salt water and sweet,
is not to be understood so as if no rotten speech could possibly proceed out of
the mouth of a regenerat man at any time; for James does witness, that in many
things we sin all, in thought, word and deed: But the meaning is, that he that
bridleth not his tongue, his religion is vain, and nothing but a presumptuous
boasting of that which is not real and in truth, and that it is inconsistent
with regeneration, that out of a man's mouth, pretending to bless God, cursing
of men who are made after the similitude of God, should flow forth as waters
flow forth from a running fountain without controlment.

CHAP. XXIX.
Showing how to quench the fiery darts of Satan, and resist his sinful
suggestions whether of shorter endurance or of longer continuance.
SOmetime on a sudain Satan casts a fiery dart of tentation unto some sin,
as his messenger seeking to prepare the lodging for him: which tentation he
does so furiously press, as if he would not be refused, or could not be
resisted; and possibly may so bear-in his tentation, as the convert may be
afraid that Satan shall prevail, finding himself, as it were, overpowered and
unable to bear out in such a case, as the Apostle had experience of, 2 Cor. 12,
7, 8, 9. who found himself, as it were, buffeted and abused by the messenger of
Satan, and unable of himself to resist him. The remedy whereof is, that the
afflicted with the Apostle be humbled in himself, in the sense of his in-born
sinfulness and inability to overcome tentations. 2. That he fly to Christ the
captain of militant soldiers, and do pray unto him instantly to help to bear
out in the conflict, and to be rid of the Tempter. 3. Let him hold fast the
faith of promised grace, and wrestle on so long as it shall please God to
exercise him so.

With such a tentation Job also was exercised, which so far prevailed as to
make carnal and corrupt nature speak for it. The tentation was very fearful,
and no less then self-murder, Job, 7. 13, 14, 15. When I say my couch shall
ease my complaint, then thou scarrest me with dreams, and terrifiest me with
night-visions, so that my soul chooses strangling and death rather then life.
The remedy whereof is, with Job to fly to the Redeemer, and fix faith upon
him, and to present the tentation unto God by prayer and humble lamentation,
striving against the suggestion, and never to give over relying on God, as he
did.

2. Sometime Satan when he cannot find instruments to charge the convert with
hypocrisy, and a course of wickedness, as he found in Jobs trial, by his
uncharitable friends, he uses immediately to fall a railing against the whole
course of the work of grace in the convert, and charge him falsely with deep
guiltiness, as calumniators use to do in their furious flyting and slandering
of such as they hate, hoping how false and groundless soever the calumnies be,
that yet something shall prove likely and probable, and so fasten something
upon the innocent. In which case, let the afflicted lift up his mind to the
Lord, and pray him to rebuke Satan. 2. Let him humble himself in
acknowledgment of his natural corruption, and having fled to Christ for
righteousness, let him take the shield of faith for quenching that dart. 3.
Let him as he is enabled contemn these devilish slanders of Satan, and set his
mind on some better employment then to dispute with so impudent and restless an
adversary; for we have other business to go about, then to take notice of the
dogs barking at us: but if it please God to continue that exercise from day to
day, let the afflicted in patience submit himself to God, and direct his speech
and thoughts unto God only, not answering directly such a Shimei at all. It is
not safe to direct our speech to Satan at all, but let us say to God, the Lord
rebuke Satan.

3. Sometime Satan falls on with suggestions, blasphemous against God and
all the grounds of religion, and fathers all these blasphemies on the afflicted
as his proper sins. In which case, let the afflicted be humbled before God,
because of original sin, whereof Satan makes use, as of something of his own
in us. 2. Let him renew the grips of faith on Christ the Mediator in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwells, reconciling the elect world to himself, not
imputing their sins unto them. 3. Let not the afflicted look upon these
blasphemies otherwise then as Satan's malice against God, for so they are
indeed, and not the sins of the poor soul vexed with such suggestions. 4. Let
the afflicted beware of discouragments, misbelief or weakening of his faith in
God, of impatiency and fretting under this sad exercise: for, there is more
cause of fear from Satan's second subtle tentations then from his gross
suggestions, whereby at the back of the former gross blasphemies, he goes
about to draw the afflicted to the suspicion of the former work of grace in
him, and of Gods love unto him. His wiles in this case are much more dangerous
then his violence in his furious lyon-like assaults: for he may more easily get
the consent of the afflicted to some sits of misbelief and impatience or some
other sins, then to admit or consent unto any of these gross blasphemies
suggested.

4. Sometime when the young and tender convert, is reading or hearing in
Sermon, the sad sentences of God against such and such sins, which do reign in
the wicked, Satan flies on him with a false application, saying, thou art the
man, and does not a little disquiet the weak in faith. In which case, let the
afflicted consider, that whatsoever is spoken in or from Scripture of the
maledictions of the law, are spoken against them that are under the curse of
the law and covenant of works, 1 Timothy 1. 8. who have not repented their sins,
nor fled to Christ, nor are aiming at reformation of life and sanctification,
but these curses are not spoken against the righteous, that is to say, against
such as in the sense of their sinfulness do loath themselves and are fled to
Christ for refuge, and have taken on his yoke upon them, already justified, and
begun to be sanctified.

5. Sometime Satan does abuse the Scripture and put a wrong sense upon it,
that thereby he may wound these that are weak in the faith: For example, it is
written, Romans 14. 23. whosoever doubts, is damned if he eat. But thou (says
Satan to the young and weak convert) have done many things whereof thou did
doubt whether they were lawful or not, yea thou have eaten the Supper of the
Lord with doubting: therefore thou art damned. Again it is written, 1 Cor. 11.
29. He that eats the sacramental bread of the Lord, or dinketh of the cup of
the Lord unworthily, eats and drinks his own condemnation: but thou, says
Satan have eaten the bread and drunken the cup of the Lord unworthily, for
thou know thou art very unworthy: therefore thou have eaten and drunken thy
own condemnation. In this case and such other like, let the afflicted convert
inquire of the Pastor, or some faithful Christian better acquaint with
Scripture, concerning the sense of the words of Scripture, which seem to make
against him, that the words being well understood, the doubt may be dissolved.
As for example, these foresaid abused Scriptures, do only declare the sentence
of the law against him that does what he doubts to be lawful, but does not
exclude him from mercy upon the acknowledgment of his sin, and flying to the
mercy offered in Christ Jesus. And by eating and drinking unworthily, we must
not understand that every one, who finding himself unworthy, flies to the
grace offered and sealed in the Supper of the Lord, eats unworthily, for, so
no man should eat worthily, for all worthy communicants, in the sense of their
unworthiness, must and do fly to free grace offered in Christ; but the
meaning is, that these do eat and drink unworthily, who profane the Sacrament,
and put no difference betwixt this holy banquet of the Lord, and a common
supper; yea and even this sin of not discerning the Lords Body, does not
exclude the man from mercy: for, the Apostle, for remedy of this sin, exhorts
these who are guilty to judge themselves, that so they may not be judged by
God, who pardons the penitent, 1 Cor. 11. 31. And so let the afflicted, for
strengthening of his faith, know, that every Scripture which speaks against
sin, does drive the guilty man unto repentance and faith in Christ, without
whose grace, sought after and embraced, there is no salvation.

6. Sometime Satan, the adversary of all converts, does assault the faith of
Gods children, when he finds them under some present guiltiness lately
contracted, or under trial of their faith, as under desertion and
disconsolation, or some miserable condition, whereof he takes advantage to
suggest to the child of God, that his faith is but fantasy, that God neither
loves him, nor can love the like of him. In which case, let the afflicted
humble himself before God, and fly to him in Christ offering reconciliation;
let him, 1. resolve firmly to adhere to the covenant of grace offered to
self-condemned sinners through Christ. 2. Let him observe his present condition
to be the day of his visitation, trial and probation what use he will make of
Christ in his difficulties and straits. 3. Let him in the use of Gods worship
wait for the day star of divine consolation promised to those that wait on the
Lord, Isa. 49. 10. 11, and Hos. 6. 3. and Isa. 40. 31. And last of all (lest we
insist too long in reckoning the innumerable wiles of the crafty serpent) let
every convert consider, that there is no time while we dwell in the tabernacle
of this body of death, wherein we may be secure from Satan's insinuations and
crafty suggestions, or his more discovered and open assaults; that there is no
business we can go about wherein this crafty hunter shall not dig a pit or lay
a snare to entrap us, no affliction nor difficulty, wherein he shall not study
to keep us back from making Christ our refuge, our helper and deliverer: and
that therefore we must take heed to obey the warning of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.
10, 11, 12, 13. Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord and in the power of
his might; put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against
the wiles of the devil, and so forth to the end of the Chapter.

CHAP. XXX.
Wherein are some mixed cases spoken of, whereunto the true convert is subject,
and so may fall to doubt of his conversion or interest in Christ.
THere are, beside the cases whereof we have given some examples and instances,
other cases also, which we may call mixed cases, the causes whereof are partly
natural, partly spiritual, wherein the true convert may be afflicted with both
bodily and spiritual distempers; melancholious humors abounding in the body,
and Satan, busy to stir himself in these distempers to the weakening the faith
of the convert, may take advantage to vex the child of God.

2. These bodily distempers are common both to the unrenewed and to the
regenerat: for, God has not exeemed his children from diseases of the body;
for, the righteous and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God; no
man knows either love or hatred by all that is before him: all things come
alike to all, there is one event, (or accident which may befall) to the
righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean;
to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is
the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears an oath, Eccles. 9. 1, 2.
Saul the King of Israel in his melancholious fit, may (by the instigation of an
unclean spirit, changing himself into an angel of light) fall on prophesieing
in the midst of his house, while he is about to murder David, 1 Samuel: 18. 10.
and experience has showed, that some lying in gross sins, who while they were
themselves and in their wits, were found very rude and ignorant in matters of
religion and things divine; but sometimes sudainly falling in a melancholious
ex^asie and rapture, they could rehearse a number of passages of Scripture, and
seemed to pray, and to bring a number of arguments in their praying, as if they
had been wrestling with God for mercy, of which Scriptures or words of prayer,
they had neither sense nor memory, when they came to themselves, after the
melancholious ecstasy was over, which sit lasted sometimes an hour, sometimes
two or thereby; all which time they neither did hear nor see the witnesses
sitting by, and beholding the spectacle. On the other hand, experience has
showed how far Satan may abuse and has abused the fantasy of some holy
persons, in the height of sharp fevers and frensies; and what speeches against
God and their own souls, by his instigation they have uttered. We have an
example in Job, who in his hot fever and painful boils, like a man
distracted, cried out, that God was turned an enemy to him, that he did shoot
all his arrows against him, whereupon in his distemper he cried for death, and
cursed the day of his birth most bitterly. Of which expressions when he is
challenged by his uncharitable friends, and judged to be nothing but a wicked
hypocrit, he excuses himself, that when he spoke these words he was not
himself, but in a roving distemper, Job. 6. 26. Do ye imagine to reprove words,
and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind?

3. But our purpose here is not to discourse of melancholy in general, nor what
may befall in common to the godly and the wicked in melancholious fits: for
this does require a larger Treatise, and the concurrence both of Physicians and
Divines. We purpose only to speak to what the true convert is obnoxious unto;
and when we speak of mixed cases, wherein both the distemper of the body and
brain do concur with the temptation of Satan, we do not take notice of any
light distemper of body and mind, which suddenly comes and is soon removed,
or which the private diligence of the child of God, in the use of the means may,
and uses to overcome. Neither do we meddle with phrensies and madness, which
so bereaveth the man of the use of common reason, that he cannot understand or
make use of wholesome advice and counsel from the Scripture, or rightly
conceive truth when it is told unto him (for in such a case the Physician only
is to be called to deal with the diseased, not excluding the prayer of the
Pastor and Christian friends for him) But we are to speak concerning more
moderat distempers wherein the afflicted may lay forth his tentations, and
propound the reasons which seem to fortify his doubts and to dispute of them
and receive reasonable answers to his objections, as they are offered unto him.
And in a word, such a condition of the man's mind as makes him ready to hear
and follow the advice, both of the Physician and the Pastor, as his need
requires. Now it is not our, that the imagination of these who are of this
middle sort of distemper, does ordinarily fain to its self sad and terrible
things, and being fired with melancholious humors and tentations of Satan
mixed therewith, uses to represent to its self Gods hot displeasure, death,
condemnation and hell, as it were, before their eyes; so that it is no wonder,
that for the the time they doubt whether they can possibly be in the state of
grace. But in special, this seems most heavy unto them, that their conscience
in the mean time does write bitter things against them, and double upon them,
the deserved sentence of condemnation, casting up the particular sins (possibly
repented of, and pardoned) as meriting rejection from God. And here mainly is
the stick.

2. In discerning and curing such cases, there is great need of wise
circumspection: For, first, information must be had of the afflicted's
condition so far as his friends and familiars can furnish. 2. The cure of his
wound must be tenderly gone about, as the Chyrurgian uses to do, when he is to
deal with the aple of a man's eye. 3. Whatsoever seem at the first, it shall be
safest for the comforter of the afflicted, not to speak peremptorily of the
man's state or condition, yea, nor to judge within themselves determinatly about
him. 4. But it shall be sa^est to hear the afflicted patiently, to lay out his
own condition more or less confusedly, in more or fewer speeches, as he is able
to express it. 5. What is further to be searched after, by prudent
interrogations, let it be pumped up so far as conveniently may be. 6. So soon
as his condition is clear to the Pastor, or friend who is about to help him,
let the speaker unto him, recollect in few words his condition as he conceives
it, and take up his doubt in a word as shortly as may be, that the afflicted
may perceive, that his case is well taken up by the Pastor or Christian friend.
For oft-times here is the cure marred, when the afflicted conceives that his
case is not rightly apprehended, or what is spoken, is not spoken to purpose.
7. Whatsoever his case seem to be, Christian compassion must be showed to the
afflicted, and his affliction estimat no less then the afflicted conceives of
it, but made possible for God to cure it. For even our Lord in the resurrection
of Lazarus, groaned in his spirit, in compassion toward the mourning friends,
before he gave them the full consolation. And surely, compassion does well
become a Physician: for, it is an addition to the affliction of the afflicted,
when the beholder comes to him, to think little of his pain. 8. Whether the
afflicted seem to be a convert or not, let him be exhorted by his present
exercise to humble himself before God, and confess his original and actual
sins to God, and fly to the grace of reconciliation, and remission of sins and
consolation holden forth in the Gospel to every self-condemned sinner, through
Jesus Christ our Lord; for, Christ is the end of the law for righteousness;
when the conscience is burdened, and the rod is heavy, the curse of the law,
and the rod of correction do drive the man to fly unto Christ and take his
yoke upon him: And this course is wholesome and safe whatsoever be the afflicted
man's estate, whether he be converted or not.

5. And as for that special stratageme of Satan, whereby he bears in the
sentence of condemnation on the afflicted, and fiteth his fantasy with the
continual ingemination, and inculcating of this fiery dart, crying over and
over again blasphemous words, charging the afflicted with the sin thereof, and
pronouncing sentence against him, saying, thou art condemned, thou art a
reprobat, and such like; the afflicted man must be informed, 1. that such
peremptory sentences are not from the Lords Spirit, speaking in the Scripture,
but from the false accuser of the brethren; for, God pronounces not
condemnation, but remission of sin to every one that flies to Christ. 2. That
he must put difference betwixt Satan's part in the sinful suggestions and his
own part in rejecting of them, abhorring them and grieving for them. 3. That he
must put a great difference between his imagination (or fantasy) and his
conscience, between the voice sounding in his fantasy, whether he will or
not, and the sentence of his well informed conscience approving, or disallowing
what is offered unto it to be chosen or refused* consented unto, or
dis-assented from, by the conscience judging according to the rule of Gods
Word: for, a sentence of words may be suggested to the fantasy, repeated and
obtruded upon the fantasy a thousand times, which the conscience may and
should refuse, and reject a thousand times. We know by experience, that a
sentence of words may, by often repeating in the ears of a parret and other
birds, take such an impression on the fantasy of the bird, that it shall
repeat vocally the words one by one and pronounce them disstinctly, as if that
sentence had been the work of its own invention: So also we see, that by
frequent repetition of any whistle or song, the fantasy of some birds may be
so beaten and informed, that they shall chant the same song over and over
again, and make it as if it were its own. Now fantasy and imagination being a
thing common to man and beast, it is certain, that the fantasy of a man, may
be wrought upon, and stamped with the like impression. And this much, as
experience teaches us, does befall men: for when a certain song or toon is
sung in our audience, and is often repeated, our fantasy before we be aware,
uses to repeat and same song or toon, or quietly whisper the notes and measure
of the song or toon: And after our judgment has observed this work of the
imagination, we can hardly stay our imagination or fantasy, while we are
about other serious thoughts from its secret sowthing of the measures and notes
of the song: for, fantasy will not be ruled by the laws of reason, more then
the outward sense of seeing can be hindered from observation of what it sees,
whether pleasant or displeasant. What wonder is it then, that Satan who has
great influence on men's imagination, does make so deep impression on it by
continual iteration, that the afflicted seems to himself to own those
blasphemous suggestions as his own thoughts, and as the voice of his
conscience, and yet they are indeed nothing but Satan's whistling, and false
sentences pressed on the man's imagination? And put the case, that his deluded
mind should take them for the justly deserved sentences of the conscience, yet
are they only the voice of the conscience ill informed, not judging of the
matter according to the rule of Gods Word, which ^oth not impute Satan's
suggestions to the soul afflicted by them, and mourning for them. And so much
for solving of the doubts of the true convert concerning his state in grace and
regeneration.

THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Concerning some premises.
WE have handled some examples of those cases of the conscience of a regenerat
man, wherein his state whether he be converted or not, is brought in question.
Now, follow some examples of those cases which concern his condition. In which
cases, albeit the state of the convert, be not at the first brought in
question, yet his conscience may be deceived, and miscarry for a time to his
detriment. Of which cases that we may speak the more clearly, some
considerations must be premised and taken along with us.

1. A man's sta^e and his condition sometime are taken in a larger sense
indifferently for the same thing, as when we say that all the regenerat are in
a blessed state or good condition, and that all the unregenerat are in a
miserable state or in an evil condition: But when we put difference betwixt
these two in a more strict sense, a man's state is that relation of his person
wherein he stands either as a child in grace, or as a child of wrath. In
which sense every convert is said to be in the state of grace: and every
unregenerat person is said to be in the state of wrath, judicially declared
such in Scripture.

But the condition of a man is his present moral disposition in order to his
exercising of virtue or vice, better or worse. In which sense the renewed man,
or true convert, is said to be in a good condition, when he is going about the
duties of religion and righteousness, as becomes a renewed man; and said to
be in an ill condition when he is otherwise disposed, and exercised for the
present. And in this sense an unrenewed man, is said to be in a better or worse
condition for the present, in comparison with other unrenewed men, or with
himself at another time. In which sense, Mark, 12. 34. Christ speaking to the
Scribe who answered him in all things discreetly, says, thou art not far front
the kingdom of heaven. The condition for the present of this Scribe, was better
then his fellows, and better then his own at another time, and yet his person
was in the state of wrath, because he was not entered in the state of grace, or
in the kingdom of heaven, howsoever he was not far from it. In this more strict
sense the judicial state of the man's person is fixed so long as the judicial
sentence of the Judge (binding the unconverted to the curse that is pronounced
in the Law, or in the Gospel lousing the converted from the curse) does stand.

But the moral disposition and the condition of the man, whether in the state
of grace or nature, is variable and changeable to the better or worse, in
comparison with others, or himself at another time. Whence it is, that one and
the same person may be in a better or worse condition, his state remaining the
same, to wit, good, if he be renewed, and evil if he be still in nature
unrenewed.

2. But here we are about the condition of the renewed man only, which may be
better at one time, and worse at another time, as his disposition and ca^^age,
in order to the duties of religion and righteousness* falls out to be better
or worse, according as his actions and behavior are more or less conform to
the revealed will of God, and as his conscience does its duty more or less
commendably. Sometimes his conscience upon good grounds speaks good to him,
while he studieth to walk before God unto all well-pleasing, and then he may
say with the Psalmist, Ps. 26. 12. My foot stands in an even place, in the
congregation will I bless the Lord.

To this good condition we need not say much, because there is no present
disease which calls for cure of this case. Only it is for the child of God in
this case necessary to observe diet and exercise to maintain his good
condition, and to watch over his heart and ways, that he may continue and go
on therein. All that we have to deal with, is the ill condition of the true
convert, when his conscience does deceive him, or does not discharge its duty:
for, in this case only remedy and cure is called for.

3. As that condition wherein the convert is best pleased with himself, is not
always the best; So neither is that condition wherewith he is worst pleased,
always the worst: But that is the best condition, wherein the holy Spirit does
most bear down the power of sin, and advance the work of sanctification of the
man; and that condition is the worst, wherein sin most prevails. And as the
goodness of a man's condition, is is not to be estimat by any eventual
accident, but by its own nature and proper effects. So the illness of a man's
condition, is not to be estimat by any eventual accident, but by its own nature
and proper effects, as God in the Scripture gives grounds of judgment of a
good or ill condition: for otherwise, by the default of the renewed man, the
best condition may degenerat in a very ill condition. As when a man does abuse
divine consolations, and after receiving of the renewed earnest of the
inheritance, from the holy Spirit, grows carnally secure, and negligent in
his duties, or when after some gross pollution of himself in body or soul,
having grieved the holy Spirit, he does not humble himself as became him, but
by Satan's suggestion of wicked thoughts against God and his former work in
him, does fall in suspicion of all former gracious operations of the holy
Spirit in him, and mis-calleth all these former experiences; and in his
tentation esteems and names them, among Satan's delusions, or else at least
suspecteth and fears they shall prove no better then such. On the other hand,
the worst conditions of the renewed man, by the wisdom, mercy and power of God
may be turned to advantage in order to Gods glory, and the renewed man's
salvation, as the experience of the Psalmist does show us, Psalm. 116, 3, 4. etc.

4. An evil condition is so called, either, 1. in respect of the evil which the
convert not only feels really, but laments it seriously; or, 2. in respect of
the converts estimation only, who laments his good condition without cause; or,
3. in respect of a real evil, which the convert lamenteth not at all, but
lies under it securely. Of the first sort is the condition of the convert when
he sees his own blindness, nakedness and misery, the hardness of his own
heart and the deceitfulness of it, and does fly for remedy thereof to Christ
the true Physician, to cover and cure all his diseases. This condition is evil
only in respect of felt evil, but in respect of the converts making the right
use of the discovery of these evils, and flying unto Christ for relief
therefrom; it is a good condition, because the diseased convert carries
himself well and wisely in this exercise. Of the second sort is the converts
condition, when his faith is put to trial by manifold afflictions and
tentations, and he conceives himself to be in a very evil condition: wherein he
ought not to afflict himself, but to judge this condition to be a good
condition, according to the Apostles exhortation, Iam. 1. 2, 3. My brethren,
count it all joy, when ye fall in diverse tentations, knowing that the trial of
your faith works patience. Of the third sort is the condition of the convert,
who when (for example) he feels himself unapt and unable to pray, or praise or
discharge any duty heartily, does not trouble himself with this his ill case,
but either layeth-by the doing of the duty, or does the work negligently and
perfunctoriously, and pleases himself in so doing for a time. This condition
is evil indeed, both in respect of his spiritual diseases, and of his sinful
slighting the duty of seeking relief thereof.

5. For rectifying the judgment of the conscience in any or all of those
conditions, first, let difference be put between the sinful diseases and
distempers of our spirit (which are evil indeed) and the discovery thereof unto
us, which is a benefit in it self, and a gift of eye salve bestowed by Christ
upon us, and the right use of that discovery by flying unto Christ, which is
yet a greater blessing, even the work of God drawing us to the Savior of souls
the remedy of every evil. Secondly, let difference be put between tentation, or
trial of faith, and yielding to tentation under affliction. The observation of
tentation offered to make us depart from the truth in trial, is a matter of
joy, but yielding is a sin, and matter of sorrow indeed. Thirdly, let difference
be put between grief of mind, or heaviness in affliction, and anguish of
conscience for sin committed: For, a man may have a grieved mind, and a quiet
conscience at one time. Fourthly, let difference be put between our sinful
sickness of indisposition to spiritual duties, for which we should be humbled,
and Gods dispensation for the time, partly chastiseing us with a less and more
sparing measure of ability for these duties, and partly teaching us thereby to
make better use of Christ's offices for pardon of sin, for helping and healing
our infirmities, then we have made. Fifthly, let difference be put between Gods
part and Satan's, the worlds and corrupt natures part, and the part of the new
creature. Gods part is ever wise, holy, just and gracious, tending to bring his
children unto a good and better condition; Satan, the worlds and the flesh or
corrupt natures part, is to procure and hold on, and make worse an evil
condition; and the part of the new creature, is variable, as it falls forth in
the battle against the flesh, which lusts against the spirit, and it against
the flesh, so that neither of them have the victory always, till the warfare
be ended* and grace be crowned with glory, for and through Jesus Christ our
Lord: These differences being observed the conscience may discern between a
good or evil condition so much the better.

6. One and the same convert may observe in himself, if not all, yet the
vicissitude of the most notable changes of a spiritual condition, as may be
seen in some, especially of his Ministers, of whose exercises he is to make use
for the consolation of his afflicted people; which Ministers may say with the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 6. Whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and
salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings, which we
also suffer; or, whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and
salvation.

7. Sundry converts may be diversely disposed and exercised about the same evil
or spiritual disease: for one, under the observation of his evil case, may
wrestle against it, and not call his own blessed state in question; another,
under the same disease, may fall in question and doubt, whether he who is in
such a condition, may be a true convert or not, and his person in the state of
grace or not; yea one and the same convert, in the beginning of his ill
condition, while he first enters in conflict with his evil condition, may for
a time look upon himself as a true convert, notwithstanding of his present ill
condition; but afterward when he finds his evil condition to remain, and not
likely to be removed, he may fall in doubt about the state of his person,
whether he be a true convert or not. In which case let him make use as is said
in the former Book.

8. The variety of changes of the conditions of the true convert, arises from
the variety of the causes thereof. As for example, 1. sometime in the warfare
between the flesh and the spirit, the new creature prevails, sometime corrupt
nature: and both of them prevail sometime more, sometime less, whence
vicissitude of changes of condition cannot but follow. 2. Sometime Satan's
temptations, setting on in his assaults more or less furiously, or more or
less subtly, do make diversity of conditions, as Satan is more or less
wisely resisted. 3. Sometime the Lord hides his countenance from his child
more or less, sometime in adversity, sometime in outward prosperity, as his
wisdom finds it meet for the welfare of his beloved children.

9. Sometime the conscience does discern an evil condition, and does give forth
a right sentence about it. In which case, let use be made of the ordinar remedy
of sin and misery. As, 1. let the afflicted search into the causes which have
procured his evil condition, as the Lord after prayer shall furnish light. 2.
Let him acknowledge his sin and ill deserving, and the Lords holy, wise and
righteous dispensation. 3. Let him grow in humiliation, and in diffidence of
his own wisdom, ability and righteousness. 4. Let him renew the exercise of
his faith in Christ for pardon of sin, for mortifying the roots of it, and for
letting forth his helping hand for ability to make him watch over his own heart
and ways, and to bring forth good fruits.

10. When the converts conscience fails in right judging of its own ill
condition, 1, it either takes an ill condition to be good, (and in this case
it is silent and says nothing, but lies secure and well pleased without
cause) or, 2. it judges a good condition to be altogether bad, or at least not
so good as it is indeed; or, 3. it does not distinguish a good or ill condition
simply, from a condition partly good and partly evil; or, 4. it stands in doubt
what to judge of the man's condition, being uncertain what to pronounce of it
till light dispell the mist and confusion wherein it lies for the time. Let us
instance some cases and examples in every one of these four kinds.

CHAP. II
Wherein is handled, the case of such as are fallen from their first love, and
are well pleased in this case. The first rank shall be of some cases, wherein
the conscience of the convert is deceived, by judging the man's evil condition
to be good enough.
IT comes to pass sundry times, that the renewed man seems both to himself
and others also, to go on in bringing forth external fruits of new obedience,
when in the mean time his love to Christ is much abated and cooled toward him,
in comparison of the fervency which in his first conversion he had: whence it
comes to pass, that his works in his calling are discharged without that eye
and affection toward Christ, which sometime he carried toward him; for, in the
beginning of his conversion, when remission of sins, reconciliation with God,
and the blessed change made in his state through Christ, was green and fresh in
his present sense, how dear Christ was unto him, cannot be expressed; but this
fervor oft-times does cool, when his wonted estimation of Christ is not
entertained, as appears in the Galatians, who at their conversion were
carried with such a measure of love toward Christ, that if it had been
possible, they would have plucked out their own eyes and given them to the
Apostle Paul for Christ's cause, Gal. 4. 15. and yet this love did soon cool,
both toward Christ and the Apostle. It comes to pass also oft-times, that the
renewed man, contenting himself with the seal of the holy Spirit, and the
consolation which once he felt, resolves to go on in the discharge of
Christian duties in his calling, and either does not observe this cooling of
his love to Christ, or lays it not to heart, but pleases himself, in this
condition, as sufficient to carry a converted man to heaven. And so usually
three faults do concur in this sickness. The first is a notable defection from
aiming at the measure felt in his first love at his conversion: for we speak
not here of daily distempers which the convert does mark and mourn for, and is
about to have healed by bringing his wounds unto Christ to be cured in the
exercise of faith and repentance daily. The second is the not observing of this
decay of love, or the man's ignorance of his duty to entertain communion with
Christ in the sense of his daily sins, wants and wounds; for the removing and
curing whereof, Christ is to be loved daily no less then at the man his first
conversion.

The third is, the man's being well pleased with this condition so long as his
conversation is blameless, whereof we have an instance in the condition of the
Ephesians, Rev. 2. whose labor in the work of the Lord, zeal against
hypocrites, patience in troubles for Christ's cause is commended by Christ. But
he reproves them, first, because they had left their first love, and did not
only come short of the measure of their first love, but did not lay to heart
this sin, did not repent it, or take course to have that measure recovered;
thou have left, or laid down, thy first love, that is, 1. thou have remitted
and come short of that measure of love which formerly thou had. 2. Thou have
not been displeased with thy self in this thy defection. 3. Thou have laid
aside the care of recovering the measure of thy former love. This condition is
very dangerous, as is manifest in the experience of the Galatians, who falling
from their first love, did cast themselves open to superstitions and errors,
and in danger to be cut off from Christ, by their defection from the faith of
the Gospel once received. The reasons for which we say this defection in love
is dangerous, are three; the first is this, the greatest measure of love to
Christ and rejoicing in him is less then his excellency and merit at our hands
does deserve. If therefore we shall slide from our duty in aiming to hold up
this measure of love to him, which we have once attained and cease to grow
therein, (because his new mercies are daily letten forth upon us from day to
day) in effect, we judge our first love has been too too vehement, and so
Christ is lightly esteemed of, as if he were not still to be loved withal our
mind, heart and strength. The next reason is this, when love to Christ, to his
Ordinances and sanctified ones, begins to relent and cool, incontinent the
external exercises of religion and righteousness begin to fall short of this
principle of love, and to go on more and more slowly, and so piece and piece to
decay: for, as when a tree is smitten in the root, it may retain for a time
green leaves, but after a time it withers, and neither ^eareth ripe fruits nor
leaves: So also in the exercise of plety and righteousness, if love toward God
our Redeemer, and delection in his service and obedience inwardly be
diminished, it may readily come to pass, that the very outward works, yea and
the profession of duties due to Christ, be taken away also: and this is the
judgment wherewith Christ does threaten Ephesus I will come upon thee, and
remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent, Rev. 2. 5. The
third reason is, because Christ, who is altogether lovely and love it self, the
very Son of the Fathers love, is a jealous God, and cannot long endure not to
be met with love from them to whom he has manifested his love. Therefore he
does make have to correct this slighting of his love, and to manifest his wrath
against these that lie still well pleased with themselves under this condition,
I will come unto thee quickly (says he) and remove thy candlestick, Rev. 2. 5.

2. That the conscience of the true convert, who is lying in this condition, or
is declining from his former measure of love, may discharge its duty more
easily and solidly, it is needful that the man, being convinced of his fault,
first consider, how reasonable it is that he should return to his first love,
or formerly felt measure of it: for, the forgiveness of his manifold sins,
wherein he lay before his conversion, for the translating of him from darkness
to the glorious light of Christ's Kingdom, should never be forgotten; the proof
which he has gotten by his conversion, that Christ has loved him and given
himself for him, should be always called to mind with hearty affection; the
great need of Christ wherein he stands for renewed pardon of sins, for
furnishing him with his Spirit to mortify the deeds of the flesh, and to bring
forth more ripe and abundant fruits of new obedience, should bind him to abide
and grow in his love. Secondly, let him consider how useful and profitable
unto us, is fresh, green and growing love unto him; for, love to him, makes us
frequently to think of him, frequently with delight to speak of him, to seek
after more and more near-communion with him, to have our conversation with him
in heaven, where he sits at the right hand of the Father, and to live in
heaven, where our love is, more then where we sojourn in this world. Love makes
us love what he loves, and hate what he hates; love sharpens our desires
after God in Christ, kindles and inlarges our affection toward him, as the
beginning of the 63. Psalm* does make evident. And if the Lord shall seem to
withdraw himself* love makes the true convert follow hard after him. Ps. 63.
8. Love makes ^old to encounter all difficulties and troubles which may meet
(...) in the course of following after him; much water cannot quench love; in
Gods service, love keeps a man (...), strong and stout against his enemies, in
(...) patient* in profession sincere, in pursuing duties (...) all conditions
submissive, and after evidencing of his affection with the Psalmist, ( Ps. 116.
12.) to ^ay with the same Psalmist, What shall I render to the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? Ps. 116. 12. Thirdly, (...) convert who is begun to cool in
his love to Christ, (...) to remembrance what a felicity he felt when he
entertained love to Christ, when the loving kindness of the Lord was better to
him then his life, and sin was more formidable then death, when Gods
Commandments were not grievous but the joy of his heart, when Gods Word
seasoned and sanctified his bitterest afflictions. Fourthly, let him consider
at what a loss he is of many spiritual comforts, whereof he has deprived
himself, and in how many sins (of omission at least) he has fallen, since his
declining from his first love, and what miseries he has drawn upon his own
spirit at least, if not also temporal chastisements joined therewith: and after
comparison of his condition when his love was servent, with his present
condition since his fall from his sometime-measure of love, let him humble
himself before Christ and fly in unto his rich grace, as a true penitent, and
let the fear of wrath, in case he set not himself to recover what he has lost,
hold him up to his duty; for, this is the remedy which Christ himself does
prescribe, Rev. 2. 5. 7.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the converts sinful conniving at, and tolerating of, the errors
and transgressions of others.
THe Law of love toward God and our neighbor, lays a tie on us to procure
and promove the welfare and good of all men, according to our place and
power, and to hinder the provocation of God and sins of our neighbor,
according to our place and power. And to this end, the Lord has said, Levit.
19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. ^ains answer to God, saying,
Am I my brothers keeper^s does not beseem the child of God: and yet some of the
Lords renewed children in some cases, do seem to themselves to have done their
duty sufficiently, if they for themselves profess the truth, and do in their
own personal carriage, what they conceive to be right, albeit they toleart
others to profess, teach and practice what is false and dangerous, and
pernicious to themselves and others. This fault may befall not only Magistrates
and Pastors, Parents and Masters of families, Children and Servants, but also
be found in all and every one, who do defend or excuse such an ungodly and
dangerous toleration which may provoke God to wrath and ensnare many in a
course of sin. The pretenses, excuses and deceits whereby men delude themselves
in this sin, are the same which the Patrons of loose and licentious toleration
of every error in religion do make use of, to wit, that men's consciences must
be free in the matter of religion, and no ways be urged to use all means which
may give them right information, and restrain their expression and practice
which may infect, pervert or ensnare others among whom they live: for, say
they, Gods people must be a willing people, and God only is Lord of the
conscience: and a curbing of men's profession and practice, serves not to make
men religious, but hypocrites also, and such like other pretenses; but no excuse
of this sort can justly hinder any, who is in any place of authority, or power,
or relation, to be active or concur to extinguish the incendiary fire which may
devour the house of God, and Kingdom wherein they live: for, whosoever have
power over others, and do not put forth their power to curb and repress those
who lay a stumbling block before others, do not only not impede the growing
contagion and infection of the body wherein they live, but also in effect do
countenance, protect and promove the spreading of the contagion of error and
wickedness which they do tolerat, yea and private persons, who do not lament
the sins of such as do destroy themselves and infect others, and do not mourn
for the sins of them also who should repress the contagion, do make themselves
accessory to these spreading evils. It is true, many excuses might here be
a^ledged, which we leave to those who have answered the objections of ungodly
toleration: but the truth is, the fear of wordly inconveniences oft-times does
more prevail for giving way to licentious toleration, then the fear of sin and
wrath of God does prevail for dischargeing of duty.

This was the sin of the Church of Pergamus, which did not take order with, and
repress the, seducers of the Lords people and their followers within their
jurisdiction, Rev. 2. 14, 15. I have a few things against thee, because thou
have there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balack to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to
idols, and to commit fornication. So have thou also them that hold the doctrine
of the Nicolaitans; which thing I hate. This was the sin which Christ did
reprehend in the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. 20. I have a few things against
thee, because thou suffer that woman Jesabel, which calls her self a
Prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed to idols.

2. For remedy against this evil, 1. let us verse our selves well in the Law of
the Lord revealed in holy Scripture, that we may know well what are the duties
which God requires of every man in his station, and what vices he forbids,
lest we mistake virtue for a vice, or vice for a virtue. 2. Let us beware of
rash censuring and licentious carping at men's infirmities, as the Apostle James
gives commandment; My brethren, be not many Masters, knowing that we shall
receive the greater condemnation; for in many things we offend all. 3. Let us
earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints, Jude,
v. 3. lest seducers draw away the Lords people from the truth of Christ. 4. Let
every one consider his station, place and power given to him, and prudently go
about the amending of other men's faults and his own also: for otherwise, a
good duty may be marred in a man's hand by imprudent managing thereof. 5. Let a
man resolve to meet with difficulties in curbing false doctrine and scandalous
practices, and as a wise Wariour to behave himself so, as he may obtain the
promises which Christ has promised to the victorious, Rev. 2. 17. 26, 27. For,
it is much better to displease man for his good and others, then to displease
Christ, and make our selves partakers of other men's sin and judgment, and the
true convert will easily make the choice.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the case of the true convert, falling asleep in carnal security
under guil^tnesse of fleshly pollutions, and dreaming himself to be in no ill
condition.
SOmetime the flesh so far prevails against the renewed work of the spirit in
converts, that not only they are overtaken in a fault ( Gal. 6. 1.) but also
are, as it were, taken captive and led away for a time by the lust^ of the
flesh, and nearby recalled unto the servitude of some wicked concupiscence: In
which condition, it is possible they lie sleeping a long time, till God waken
them out of their deadly lethargy. And this condition, alas! is very often to be
found to the dishonor of Christian profession, in these that have begun to
live blamelesly, and have fallen back to the filthy pudle of their old
conversation, whereby they draw upon themselves and their families Gods wrath
and sad ^udgments: Of this disease we find there were not a few to be found in
Corinth, 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21.

2. The causes of this fearful condition are manyfold, and cannot easily be
condescended upon: for, many defects and wicked motions of the heart, do
usually concur with the neglect of duty, and commission of actual sins, against
the di^^ction of the conscience, at least without the remorse of conscience and
true repentance, before this fearful condition fix it self on a man; and of
this sinful sickness, there are sundry degrees. The first is, when the
worship of God and obedience of his precepts is performed perfunctoriously, as
when the confession of sin, is without sorrow for sin or remorse of sin in
particulars; when prayer is made without earnest desire, to obtain the request;
when deprecation of wrath is made without fear of danger; when intercession is
made without sympathy and brotherly affection; when thanksgiving is offered
without estimation of the benefit received; when singing of psalms is
discharged without melody and harmony of the heart, when conference of holy
subjects is not entertained, or discharged slightly, and without reverence;
when the hearing of the Word is without attention of the mind; when the reading
of the Scripture is followed without endeavor to profit thereby, without
observation of the will and providence of God for edification; when the
profession of religion is without zeal and fruits suitable as occasion does
offer: whosoever does rest well pleased with himself in this case, he is
overtaken by this malady.

The second degree is, when this evil goes further on, and does defile the
outward man: as when the tongue is not bridled, the man does not take heed what
he speaks, but lets idle speeches, profane and rotten communication fall out
of his mouth, which do not only not serve unto edification, but serve also to
corrupt the hearer. And he that pleases himself in this case, declares his
religion vain in so far, Iam. 1. 26.

The third degree is, when this evil breaks forth in grievous scandalous
practices, as in the open profession of some error, in making or fomenting a
schism, in contention, emulation, envy, drunkenness, laciviousnesse,
fornication, or such like: for here, dead works do openly appear, and the
garment of Christian profession is openly defiled. This seems to be the
condition of many in the Church of Sardis, in whom, beside the profession of
christian Religion, little spiritual life was to be found. And therefore
Christ, the searcher of hearts, calls them dead or ready to die, Rev. 3. 1,
2. Thou have a name that thou art living, but thou art dead, or in a deadly
condition tending to death certainly to follow, if it be continued in, from
which condition our Lord does except some, who had not defiled their garments,
but so carried themselves as their conversation was answerable to their holy
profession, ver. 4

That this deadly sickness may be cured, 1. it is necessary that the
conscience of such a secure sinner, be wakened both by others and by himself,
and that by setting his sins before his eyes, together with the merit thereof,
and the wrath of God kindled against him, and destruction at hand if he do not
speedily repent him. 2. Heed must be taken of Satan's wiles, that the wakened
and convicted sinner despair not; for in this case there is no small danger of
it, when he who had given his name to Christ, finds himself to be in Satan's
camp and service, and wearing the badge of Satan in giving so public scandal
to the people of God. 3. Whatsoever spunk of faith or hope, or repentance, or
desire of returning unto God, and setting himself against all sin hereafter, is
found iu such a person, must be entertained and fostered, lest that little
sponk be extinguished which is ready to dye. 4. Let him call to mind the Word
of God whereby he was first moved to turn unto God, add to consecrat himself to
the service of Christ, and let him compare his sometime better conversation,
with his late pollutions, that he may be ashamed, and have himself in unto
nearer fellowship with God, from whom he has so filthily and fearfully made
defection. 5. Let him be upon his guard and watch over his heart, lest he be
overtaken again by the tentations of Satan, his own corrupt nature, and the
intising example of the world, lest he perish in his transgression, if he shall
again provoke the Lord. 6. And last of all, let him set before himself the
ample promises which Christ has made to a victorious wrestler of this kind,
Rev. 3. 5. He that overcomes the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and
I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, etc.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the converts pleasing himself in his lukewarm condition.
IT comes to pass sometimes, that the true convert, being as he conceives
sure of his own salvation, becomes negligent in the matter of his
sanctification, and worshipping of God in the spirit, and turns himself about
to his own ease and following of what he thinks lawful: for, because he
conceives he has a sure grip of Christ's grace, and of the gifts and benefits
flowing from him, so as he needs not now to vex himself in the exercises of
religion as sometime he did when he was not sure of his reconciliation with
God; therefore he judges it sufficient, if he do follow the exercises of
religion more coursely, eshew gross scandalous outbreakings, do some works of
alms and charity, as he has occasion, and follow the works of his calling
blamelesly, giving the rest of his time to be spent in worldly cares, ease of
his flesh and lawful recreations. In which condition he pleases himself very
well, as if he had attained the way of Christian felicity both in soul and
body: For he misseth nothing in matters spiritual and necessary to salvation, he
is rich and has need of nothing. Whereupon he troubles not himself to grow in
sanctification, or to set others on work, for adding one virtue to another, if
they trouble not the peace of the Church, or do not disgrace religion by a
scandalous life: If any man in Christ's matters, will be more earnest then his
neighbors, he does not find fault with it, but let him be as diligent as he
pleases, for he resolves not to oppose any man in Christ's service, nor to
press any man to mend his pace in Christ's way, and to say the matter in a word,
he is a lukewarm man, neither a real and feckfull friend to Christ, so long
as helyeth in this condition, nor yet an open adversary of Christ or his ways.
In this sickness readily do they fall, who after that the pains of their new
birth, and difficulties in their reconciliation are past, do imprudently lay
hold upon their liberation from the terrors of the law, and dream of so sweet
rest in their conscience flowing from the Gospel (as if now their enemies being
all put to flight, and their bonds wherewith they were bound, were all loosed,
broken and laid aside) they might compose themselves to security and sleep,
when indeed they should stand upon their watch, and upon their guard, least
some other way the enemy should set upon them, and catch them in new snares and
straits, as the Apostle does fore-warn, Ephesians. 6. 13, 14. This was the
condition wherein some converts in the Church of Laodice^, Rev. 3. 15. 19. were
fallen: for albeit we do not think, that all these who are charged for
luke-warmnesse, were regenerat, yet we cannot judge that all the regenerat and
true converts, were free of this sickness, when we see Christ professing his
love to the lukewarm, and out of love directing his reproof toward them,
whereby he does invite them to repentance, and to return to that sweet
communion with himself, which they did not follow after, for the time. And to
make it appear, that true converts might fall in this luke-warmnesse, he gives
warning to all that have ears to hear, to hearken unto what the Spirit does
speak unto the Churches.

As for remedy of this sickness, this lethargy is hardly cured, except the
patient be first casten in a sever (as it were) by the wakening of his
conscience. To this end let the lukewarm consider with himself, how the
Majesty and excellent worth of Christ has been flighted by this his
luke-warmnesse, wherein he has by his fleshly security made no account of the
spiritual riches of Christ, who has redeemed his own from sin and wrath
everlasting, that they may with full ben^all of aff^^ction serve him. 2. Let
him consider how intolerable this disposition of luke-warmnesse is unto Christ,
who prefers the open hostility of aliens, to the lukewarm condition of
those who profess for him, and has declared he will not comport with them,
but spew them out of his mouth, except they shall speedily repent. 3, Let him
consider how many and sad plagues of heart he lies under if he examine himself
well, which may certify him of the flame of Gods wrath ready to follow on the
smoke of begun spiritual plagues. 4. Let him be speedily humbled before the
Lord for his vain gloriation of self-perfections, and supposed need of nothing,
when indeed he is blind, naked and miserable. 5. Let him lay hold on Christ's
love and care of him in calling him to repentance before further wrath should
break forth, and take the offer of renewed, and more intimate communion with
him, and enjoying these precious promises, laid up for the victorious wrestler
against this sinful disposition: for, this is the proper remedy which the
great Physician prescribes for healing this deadly sickness, Rev. 3. 17, 18.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning such converts as lean unto the props of carnal confidence and
please themselves in this condition.
OFt-times it comes to pass, that true converts, while they conceive that they
trust in Christ only, are found to lean too much on their own worth and
strength, and graces bestowed on them. In which condition, by so much as they
are well pleased with themselves, they do in so far displease God, and do
provoke him to jealousy, and they who are most overtaken with this sickness
are most senseless of it, and are most malcontent, that any man should suspect
them, to be in an evil condition; yea, and they conceive, that no man is able
to convince them of self-confidence, and here they lie over till God bring them
to trial, wherein their mistake is made clear unto them. Their trial
ordinarily comes by some affliction, by some powerful tentation, and by some
degree of felt de^ertion: for, this sickness, as it is contracted by
prosperity, So it is fostered, and hid by prosperity, till the prop of their
carnal confidence be shaken by unexpected adversity. Of which purpose, that we
may speak the more clearly, we shall point forth two sorts of this carnal
confidence, and shall show the difference of those two sorts, by the difference
of these two pillars whereupon carnal confidence is upholden. The one is the
common benefits, which God does ordinarily bestow on good and bad, renewed and
unrenewed persons. The other is, some observable measure of the operations and
fruits of the holy Spirit.

As for confidence in the common benefits of God, sometimes true converts fall
too much in love with earthly and temporal benefits, do seek too much after
them, embrace them greedily when they obtain them, rejoice too much while they
enjoy them, fear too much to loss them, and mean time do not perceive the
excess of their affection about them; and if they be charged as in any measure
guilty in this case, they will not acknowledge their fault, but go about to
purge themselves of this sort of failing, saying, we know our duty, that if
riches increase we should not set our heart thereon, that we should not love
too much our own children, parents, parties, friends and comfortable relations,
that we should not delight too much in prosperity nor glory in the common gifts
and enduments of the mind, wherein ungoldy men may excel, and go far above us;
that we should not affect too much the favor of men, or esteem too much of
being honored of men. They will also readily confess, that they are not far
from the danger of being drunk with prosperity, and falling into the sleep of
carnal security, and leaning too much weight on this weak pillar of
creature-confidence: But for time bypast they are ready to averr, they have
been very cautious, lest they should fall in this fault, and for time to come,
that they hope to watch against all snares of this sort, and so they think all
is well; but when it does please God in his wise dispensation to change their
outward condition, and to turn their external prosperity in adversity; when
God takes away the comfortable benefits which he had bestowed on them, and
brings upon them some sad calamity, incontinent they are in the dumps, and sit
down astonished, they begin to call Gods love in question whereof they boasted
before. Thus their faith discovers its weakness, and the mixture of carnal
confidence with their faith does clearly appear, which before did lurk as
dross does in the gold or silver before it be purified, which does give the
mass a greater bulk without greater worth or price. This infirmity and mistake
the Psalmist did observe in himself, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. In my prosperity I said, I
shall never be moved; thou did hide thy face and I was troubled. This
infirmity of the convert, and his mistake, shall be yet more manifest, if we
shall compare the confidence of the convert in the promises of God for food and
raiment so long as God gives riches, with their confidence when their means do
fail and poverty comes on. The promises of God remain the same in the having
and wanting of riches, but there is a great ods between their confidence to be
furnished when they have riches and their confidence when means do fail, which
confidence now, is very feeble. Wherefrom does this change come let us see?
Certainly it comes from the removing of the carnal props of their confidence:
for when upon the failing of these props and pillars, faith in the promise does
stagger, it is a sure evidence, that they have leaned too much weight on the
means, who mis-believe when the means do fail.

3. For curing of this sort of carnal confidence, and leaning too much on
temporal benefits, let the convert thus mistaken, after his experience felt,
that he has been carnally confident, not be discouraged, as if his confidence,
which he seemed to have placed on God, were altogether vain, and in no degree
spiritual: but let him, first, be humbled before God, and submit himself to the
Lords rod; let him acknowledge the wisdom, justice and mercy of God, who has
removed this prop of carnal confidence, and reduced him from going astray to
depend more on God then he has done. 2. Let him strengthen his faith in
Christ, according to the renor of the covenant of Grace, and that so much the
more as he finds his own unrighteousness, in following and relying on
creature comforts to have been great. 3. Let him set his affections upon things
spiritual, which are above the earth, and to be found in Jesus Christ, who is
at the right hand of the Father, Col. 3. 1. 23. and to loose his estimation and
affection from these things that are on earth. 4. Because this sickness is not
well observed, except in the time of adversity, let the afflicted person
approv^ himself in the point of sincerity of adherence unto God, by his
trusting in God now, when he wants means and creature comforts, as Job did,
who in this condition blessed God for the giving of the benefits, and blessed
God at the removing of them from him, Job. 1. 21. For, by so doing, he shall
learn both to have and want, and in every condition to be content, as the
Apostle was taught, Phil, 4. 12. and this is for the first sort of carnal
confidence.

The other sort of carnal confidence, is that which too much leans to some
apparent measure of the operation and fruits of the holy Spirit, observed by
the convert in himself: and this sickness may be taken up and perceived
chiefly by comparison of the converts stronger confidence of the love of God
toward him, so long as he can find evidenc^ signs of his regeneration, and
work of the holy Spirit (...) himself, with ^is weaker confidence of the love
of God toward him under the cloud of descrtion, or under some powerful
temptation, when these evident signs of his conversion are darkened, or do not
appear so clearly unto himself as they did (...). In which case, his confidence
is greatly weakened, and his faith not a little shaken with doubting. In both
the one and the other condition, the c^venant of Grace stands fixed, and the
promises of the Gospel remain the same, and the convert still adhereth to the
covenant and claims interest in Christ, more or less confident. Whence
comes then this difference between his former confidence which was strong, and
his weaker confidence now in the change of his case, being brought low?
Certainly it proceeds from the smiting of the pillar whereupon his former
confidence was too much fixed: for, whenever the mist is cleared up, and he
finds the livelynesse of the work of grace in himself, his confidence
convalesceth, and returns to it is former strength, as it seems to him; and
when his graces are darkened, he falls in a languishing weakness of faith.

This sickness is so frequently incident to the Saints, that few shall be
found who are not again and again overtaken in it: for, how few are they who
are not much more confident when they find a heart freely poured forth in
prayer, when they enjoy the peace of God in their heart, when the love of God
is shed abroad in their heart, when they find the consolations of the holy
Spirit, when they observe the ^ruits of the holy Spirit in themselves, when the
candle of the Lord shines in their soul, and the tokens of Gods savor toward
them are manifest; and on the other hand, when they find their spiritual
condition changed, when darkness falls on their spirit, when they find
themselves unfit for worship and unable to do service, but most of all, when
they perceive tokens of fatherly wrath against them super-added unto the
foresaid evils; in this case, who is he, that beside the inevitable
perturbation of mind incident to those who are strongest in faith, does not
find a diminution of his former confidence, and a conflict with temptations,
fears, doubts and difficulties? which diminution and abating of his confidence
in his trials and inward exercises, does evidently prove, that in his best
condition he has laid too much weight upon on the mutable disposition of his
soul, and has not so stucken to the Word of Gods grace through Jesus as became
him.

2. That this sickness may be the more easily cleared and cured, it is
expedient to answer some questions, which being discussed, may inform and
edify the afflicted.

Question 1.
THe first question which the afflicted may propound, is this, Seeing the signs
of Gods favor, manifested in the bestowing and continuing of common benefits
and gifts outward and inward, do certainly serve to confirm a man's faith in
God, is it not very reasonable to say, that the signs of Gods wrath,
manifested in the removing of those benefits, do certainly serve to debilitat
and weaken a man's faith?

Ans. 1. Signs of Gods favor, and signs of Gods wrath, are not inconsistent,
because God can carry love and favor to a man, and be angry at him also for
the present ill disposition wherein he is; for, love and fatherly wrath, are
not opposite and inconsistent, but love and hatred are inconsistent. 2. Let it
be granted, that any signs whatsoever of Gods favor, may be made use of by
the convert for strengthening of his faith; yet it must not be granted, that
the taking away of those signs of favor, should be made use of for weakening
of a man's faith: For, many things may encourage a man to do his duty, which
being removed, must not discourage him, or justly hinder him to do his duty. 3.
There is a great difference between the man, who never found any other sign of
Gods favor beside prosperity in common benefits, and the man who, beside
common benefits, has felt a work of grace upon his spirit, bringing him unto
the sense of sin, and chasing him to Christ, and making him to take on his
yoke. The first sort of men, can neither from the having nor wanting, or
removal of common benefits, conclude eh is loved or hated, for so are we
taught, Eccles. 9. 1, 2, No man knows either love or hatred by all that is
before him, all things come alike to all, etc. But a man of this sort has
reason to judge, that the sending on him adversity, and wakening of him out of
a fl^shly and deadly security, does speak more of Gods favor to him, then his
prosperity did. And this other sort of men, who have felt a work of special
grace on their hearts, may make use both of their prosperity and adversity for
confirmation of their faith. 4. Put case that a convert, chased unto Christ in
the sense of his sin, and resolved to bear Christ's yoke upon him, shall find
common benefits taken back from him in fatherly wrath; yet must he not yield to
the weakening of his faith, but rather yet more humble himself, in the sense of
his sins which have stirred up wrath against him; and fly in to Christ, and
lay hold more closely upon his grace because God, being offended, is not
pacified nor pleased, save only by flying in t^ Jesus Christ.

Quest. II.
Q. But what will you say unto them, whose confidence is weakened whether they
will or not, whenever they apprehend God angry against them, and especially
when they feel that God, being provoked justly, removes gifts and benefits
comfortable from them?

Ans. It is not to be doubted, that the confidence of many true converts is
shaken and weakened in this case: but the question is, what shall be said unto
them? We answer, that they must acknowledge, that they have leaned too much
upon these carnal props, the failing whereof makes them to fall. 2. Let them
be humbled yet more because of such sins as have provoked God to change his
dispensation toward them, 3. Let them lean more upon the only rock of free
grace in Jesus Christ offered in the Gospel, for the comfort and relief of all
those, who, in the sense of sin and unworthiness, in the sense of their ill
deserving, and of any measure of apparent fatherly wrath, that hereafter,
however it fair with them, they may rely upon Jesus Christ, who is the only
foundation to build our selves upon, and whose grace is sufficient to help and
uphold them, who have their recourse unto him in every condition, whether it be
adversity or prosperity.

Quest. III.
Q. ALbeit common benefits are not sufficient evidences of Gods favor, yet new
obedience of faith and fruits of the spirit, are sure signs of Gods special
favor bestowed only on the Elect: Seeing then, as these signs when they are
present, serve much for the strengthening of faith, so also when they are
amissing, have as great force of reason to debilitat faith, yea seeing faith
without fruits is dead, may it not be concluded where no fruits are, no faith
is?

Ans. If the question be of the universal want of all fruits of faith, such as
is to be found in all unrenewed men, whose fruit cannot be good so long as the
tree is evil, whose seeming service cannot be acceptable, so long as they
remain unreconciled to God through Christ, let the question be yielded unto.
But we are speaking of the true convert, in whom there is a missing of the
measure of formerly felt fruits, and that in the time present, wherein by some
temptation or trial, their faith is sifted and winnowed. And here indeed there
is a vast difference between them that were never humbled in the sense of their
sins, nor led for relief from sin and misery unto Jesus Christ, and the true
convert, who has renounced the works of darkness, and has fled unto Christ
and consecrated himself to his service, and who is set upon a new course of
life, has brought forth new fruits of repentance, faith, love and hope, and
has felt consolation in this course; and now under exercise of conscience,
looks upon himself as barren ground, does lament his impotency to bring forth
good fruits, and while he is under this exercise, lives in a sad condition,
blameless and free of scandal-giving: great ods between this man, and a man
yet in nature. We grant in the unrenewed man, who is a stranger to the life of
grace and true godliness, the sentence holds, No fruits no faith; but as for
the convert, who has had comfort in Christ, and brought forth good fruits in
some measure, he must not reason from his present dead condition, felt and
lamented barrenness, to the denying of true faith in Christ, or to the
weakening of his says, or marring his confidence further, then to acknowledge
he has leaned too much on his formerly felt fruits, and has not grounded
himself wholly on Christ, and the rock of free grace in him, but may and should
maintain his faith in Christ against his discouragment, that he may be enabled
to bring forth more ripe and abundant fruits.

Quest. IV.
Q. BUt what shall be said to humbled converts, who looking to the holy Law of
God, and finding no fruits, such as should be, do pass sentence in the time of
tentation, upon all their works, as unworthy of the name of the fruits of the
Spirit, and then do dispute against their own faith by the Apostles words, Iam.
2. 20. faith without works, is dead?

Ans. If the conscience do pronounce according to the truth as the matter is
indeed, it cannot be denied but faith without works is dead; and God is greater
then the conscience and knows all things: But when the conscience is misled
by a tentation powerfully pressed in by Satan, in the time of some sad
affliction, and appearance of Gods displeasure, the testimony of the conscience
is not a sufficient proof to infer so hard a conclusion: for, it comes to
pass oft-times, that the convert, who lives blamelesly, and entertaineth the
love and purpose of well-doing in his heart, follows the exercises of
religion constantly, is not negligent in his calling, and is ready upon
occasion offered to let forth the fruits of love to his neighbor, for all this
sometimes walks in darkness, and under desertion, sees no light, as Isaiah,
50. 10. In this case it may be, he set all his works at naught, as no ways
answerable to the Lords Law. I see nothing (says he) but sin in me, I see no
fruit of true faith in me, I feel no operation of the holy Spirit in me, save
the work of convincing me of sin and unrighteousness. In this case we must not
give credit to the afflicted, but convince him rather of his error, and in
special of his leaning too much weight on his works before this sad exercise
fell upon him; for, when a convert maintains his faith in Christ, only so
often, and so long as he finds in himself the fruits of new obedience, but when
he has new experience of the power of the body of death, and finds the
course of good behavior, and bringing forth good fruits to be interrupted in
himself, incontinent he resiles from his confidence, such a man certainly
gives evidence, that he has relied too much on his former felt righteousness
an himself: for he does as if he durst not for sin approach unto Christ, and so
he falls in Peter's case, who looking on his own sinfulness and the
brightness of Christ's Godhead shining in a recent miracle, cries out, Luke,
5. 8. depart from me, O Lord, I am a sinful man: for, Peter in this case did
forget Christ's mediatory office, and that he stood so much the more need of
Christ's drawing near to him, as he was a man convinced of sinfulness. Another
answer we give to this question, the afflicted person must not think, that he
wants altogether the fruits of faith, albeit he find them to be short of the
perfection which the Law does require, albeit he find not the fruits whenever
he would exact them, albeit he find them not in that measure as he has found
them before: For as trees are not to be esteemed dead, or barren, which bring
forth fruits in due season, albeit they bear not fruit in winter, So faith is
not to be esteemed dead, which, as occasion is offered, brings forth the
fruit, at one time, of mercy, at another time, of justice and equity, at
another time, the evidence of zeal, at another time, of love, and other
virtues, albeit when occasion or opportunity offers not, it does not exercise
such and such virtues: yea, albeit sometimes when occasion calls for the
evidencing of such and such gracious virtues, the convert be sometime found
in-laking or short of doing duty, or guilty of doing contrary to duty, faith
must not be counted dead for all that: Because it may come to pass, that faith
may be so wounded, and fall sick and languish, and fall in a swound, that it
cannot bring forth fruits till it be recovered of its sickness, as we may see
in Jonah, David and Peter, whose faith fainted, but failed not altogether: It
is true, they suspected they were cut off, and gone when they were in hard
exercise, but after that they did look up to the mercy of God in Christ, draw
near unto him, and did show themselves alive in the Lord, and to be in the
state of grace. Last of all we answer, that the regrate of the humbled soul of
its barrenness and short-coming of bringing forth fruits as it would, is no
small evidence of life and sense in the inward man: And of such a disposition
it may be said, as it is written, Cant. 2. 13. The figtree puts forth its
green figs, and the vines with the tender grape give a good smell: For he that
is fled to Christ, and laments his barrenness, is a lover of doing good works,
and of bringing forth the fruits of the Gospel.

Quest. V.
Q. BUt how can a man maintain his faith in Christ, who after examination
finds no evidence at all of his conversion, and that all his former life has
been spent in the unfruitful course of corrupt nature; and the matter is so
indeed, he has lived after the course of this world, a stranger to the life of
God and grace?

Ans. Let such a man's examination and sentence of himself stand, being
according to the truth: but this sentence of himself, must not hinder him from
believing in Christ or from flying to him for refuge, for remission of sin, for
reconciliation, and furniture of grace to bring forth better fruits then he
has brought forth before; he has proven against himself, that in time bygone
he has no^ been a regenerat man, has not been a believer in Christ, but he
has not cut off himself from flying to Christ and believing in him for time to
come: for, he must put di^ference between these two questions, whether I have
been of the number of sincere believers in Christ heretofore? and whether I
must now ^lye to Christ for time to come, that I may be found herea^ter, and
henceforth a true convert believing in Christ? His former want of good fruits
altogether, does prove him not to have been a believer in Christ for time
bypast, which is the first question; and the same want of all good fruits
heretofore, does answer the other question for his present duty, and in time to
come, to wit, that now except he will perish, he must fly to Christ and
believe in him. In proving of this assertion, that I have heretofore for such a
space of time been a true convert, I must bring forth the evidence of my faith
by my works, as the Apostle James appoints, show me thy faith by thy works,
and I will show thee my faith by my works. But in proving this other assertion,
to wit, I must now fly to Christ while the offer is made to me of
reconciliation, left I perish; it will suffice to produce, first, my want of
good fruits, and next the commandment of the Gospel, charging me to fly to
Christ for refuge in time, le^t I perish: And so a man must maintain the way of
believing in Christ Jesus for time to come, whether he find he has been a
(...) or a barren branch in time bygone, or not.

Quest. VI.
Q. Seeing the Apostle (2 Pet. 1. 10.) commands us to make our calling and
election sure by well-doing how can it be called carnal confidence which in
part does lean upon good works? For, seeing assurance and certainty of our
effectual calling is not attained unto, but by reasoning from our good works,
that we are called effectually, and are elected, how do not our works support
the assurance of faith concerning our calling and election, and so may be
leaned unto?

Ans. A man may make use of his good works for confirmation of his faith, and
yet not lean his confidence upon his works, but upon the grace of God, who has
called him of his free grace, and made him embrace the offer of his free grace,
and given unto him both to will and to do of his free grace, and made him to be
Gods workman-ship, created of Gods free grace unto good works, wherein he has
made him to walk. Thus grace is by Gods word and working cleared up to the
believer to rest upon, without laying too much weight upon the man's work: but
if a man lay hold on Christ and his free grace, only then, when he observes in
himself such and such fruits of faith, and loses or slacketh his grips of
Christ when he feels deadness and indisposition to good works, justly we may
call this a carnal confidence in his works: for when he ought, with Paul, Romans
7. 24, 25. so much the more to fly in to Christ and his righteousness, as he
finds the body of death powerful in him, and in-born sin strong to hinder
his obedience, he does contrary ways abate of his confidence, languish and
decay in his faith, and look like a departer from Christ, we must say, he
puts carnal confidence in his own works.

Quest. VII.
Q. BUt seeing it is impossible to persuade me of the truth and sincerity of
saving faith in me, except I do observe in me, and can bring forth my good
works to prove the reality of faith in me; how is it possible that I should not
lean weight on my good works, seeing the proof of my faith is by my works, which
proof if I have not, I am at a stand, I cannot prove my self to have been a
true believer in Christ, I cannot persuade my self that I have been and am a
true believer in Christ?

Ans. 1. The observation of the fruits of faith in me is not the only proof of
my believing in Christ; for, the very act of embracing the offer of
reconciliation made to me in the Gospel, and flying unto Christ for a refuge,
when I am chased by the Law, by the conscience, and felt wrath pursuing me for
sin, may be clear to me by its own light and scriptural evidence, albeit (it
being possibly the very instant of my conversion) I cannot produce any fruits
or evidences of my conversion past; or else what shall be said of malefactors
on the scaffold presently to be put to death, and possibly not wakened in
conscience before, not fled to Christ before? What shall be said of sick
persons near unto death, who being self-condemned, do betake themselves in
their last agony unto the grace of God in Christ offered to self-condemned
sinners in the Gospel? 2. I must put difference between a reason to prove that
I have believed, and a reason why I may and must now believe. The reason to
prove that I have believed, is from the effect to prove the cause thereof, to
wit, faith to be in me: but the reason why I may now, and must believe, is from
the cause to infer the effect that should be in me: the cause of believing in
Christ, is Gods command to self-condemned sinners; which command I must now
obey left I perish, and so if I find fruits, I prove I have believed, because I
feel the love of God shed abroad in my heart, and that I love God who has
freely loved me; and here I reason from the effect, to prove that the cause of
this fruit, to wit, saying faith, has preceeded and is gone before. Again I
prove that I should believe, because the offer of the Gospel and of free grace
in Christ's, made to all self-condemned persons, renouncing confidence in their
own worth or works, is made to me, with a command to believe in the Son of God,
Christ Jesus; for which cause, I may and ought to cast my self upon his grace,
who justifies the ungodly, flying to him, without the works of the Law. 3. I
must put difference between my having fruits of faith in me, and my observing
and finding these fruits in me: for, a true convert may have both faith and
fruits; and for the time, being under trial and temptation, may be so darkened,
that he can see nothing in himself but sin, and apparent wrath pursuing him for
sin, as may be seen in Jonah in the belly of the fish, Jonah 2. 4. and, David,
Ps. 51 9, 10. 4. I must put difference between my persuasion, that I have been
and am a true convert and a sincere believer, and my persuasion, that I have
right, reason and good warrant to believe in Christ in my lowest condition:
howsoever then I find my self emptied of all signs of saving grace in me for
the time, yet my persuasion, that I should in this sad condition fly to Christ
and believe in him, does serve to make me consent heartily unto the offer of
the covenant of grace in Christ, does serve to make way for my justification,
and loses all doubts and objections of Satan tempting me to mis-believe, and
to run away from Christ and the offered mercy in him. 5. And last of all, I
must put difference between making use of good fruits brought forth by me, for
confirmation of my faith, and my putting confidence in, or laying weight on,
these good fruits: for, many true converts do here fail, and do not mark the
mistakes; for when they find love to God and his Saints, with fear and holy
reverence, and such other like signs of grace in their hearts, and outward
fruits thereof in their life, then they do believe in Christ and rejoice in
him: but when at another time, they find hardness of heart, profanity and
perverseness of a wicked nature in themselves, they are like to quite their
interest in the covenant of Grace, and to stand aloof from Christ like
strangers, when they should most be humbled and creep in to him for remission
of sin, and hiding of their nakedness by his imputed righteousness. And what
is this in effect else, then in the first place to lean on their works and holy
disposition, as if there were merit in them, and then after in the next place
to believe in Christ who has furnished them those fruits? whereas they should,
in the sense of their sin and unworthiness, first, fly to Christ, and firmly
adhere to him by faith, that out of his fullness they may receive grace for
grace, according as we are taught to do by Christ himself, Ioh. 15. 5. He that
abides in me, and l in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without
me, you can do nothing.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the case of the convert in some point of doctrine deluded, and
pleasing himself in this condition.
TO speak of delusion and bewitching in the general, requires a large
Treatise. It shall suffice our purpose to speak of it, as it has place in the
point of doctrine and practice erroneous: Which we describe thus, Delusion is a
powerful operation of a lying Spirit, whereby he obtrudes to men some noisome
error in doctrine or practice contrary to true doctrine, fairded over with
sophistical deceits, and does persuade inconsiderate souls effectually to
receive the error for truth, and to defend and spread it in their rash zeal:
For explication of which description, we say, 1. delusion is a powerful
operation of a lying Spirit, wherein Satan in Gods judgment is permitted to
put forth his power in lying effectually. Therefore in all his effectual
delusions, there is a concurring righteous judgment of God in loosing reins to
the rempter, that by delusion, one sin in one degree, may be punished by a
following sin in a higher degree. No wonder therefore that a lying Spirit do
work more effectually when he is not restrained by the powerful hand of God.
2. We say, that delusion is in some dangerous error tending to the damage of
the Church, and hazard of souls. And this we say not, as if we did think, that
any sin does not draw with it, the merit of death (for the wages of every sin
is death) but because Satan is not so busy, to spread and foment such errors,
as are less perilous, as he is active in such errors which do most tend to
pester the Church and divert the professors of religion from the path way of
saving doctrine. And to this purpose he essays all means, that he may obscure
and darken the truth, and devise and spread abroad the most pernicious errors.
Mean time he is not idle in sowing and spreading lesser errors, that he may
stir up contention and jangling in the Church, whereby precious time, which
should be spent for mutual edification, may be idly wasted in needless
disputes, and men's minds may be prepared to receive grosser errors. Thirdly, we
put some difference between errors in doctrine and errors in practice, albeit
there cannot be one error in practice, whether it be in the external worship or
government of the Church, or in outward conversation, which being stiffly
maintained, has not some error of judgment and doctrine joined with it, or
else it should not be contrary to sound doctrine; yet there may be an error in
doctrine and judgment of the mind, when in the outward practice the error may
lie hid, and men of contrary judgment may consent and agree in the same
practice. Fourthly, we presuppose the errors, whereof we are speaking, to be
colored and covered with fair pretenses, and to be found deceitful sophistry:
For otherwise a disciple of Christ could not be easily ensnared, if the error
were seen in its own colors, if it were demonstrat unto him with sound reason
to be contrary to sound doctrine and pernicious to the welfare of the Church,
and to men's souls. For in this case, every ingenuous and honest mind, would
keep off from the error as from a deep pit: But Satan sets forth the error,
as if it were no error but most consonant to wholesome doctrine, and profitable
for men's souls and the Churches good. And by plansible pretenses, sets out the
error so as it may seem lovely and worthy to befended, and spread abroad by all
means. Fifthly, in this delusion we are speaking of, we presuppose, that in the
person deluded there is a persuasion (stronger then any probation which he
has) can support: For there the efficacy of error does specially appear, when
the lying Spirit, by probable conjectures, appearance of advantage and
sophistical disputation, does persuade the deluded soul, that the error is as
sure as if by divine oracle it were revealed and declared to be a truth. How
this can be, and how Satan works this persuasion, it is not to our purpose
to make inquiry: For, lying Spirits have their own way, unknown to us, whereby
they insinuat and suggest their errors unto men. It may suffice us, that the
Scripture has taught us that Satan can form objections against our faith,
Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, 12. and throw them at us as fiery darts, and work strong
persuasions in unstable or ignorant souls. Such was the persuasion of the
Galatians, which the Apostle avoucheth to have been procured not by God who had
called them, Gal, 5. 8. Sixthly, we presuppose in a powerful delusion a
bastard and misled zeal, making the deluded man ardently to defend and promove
the error which he has embraced: For, this is Satan's main endeavor, when he
has leavened with error one or more in a Church, to make all the use of them he
can to leaven the Church with the same error.

And to the intent this matter may be the more usefully spoken of, three
questions must be answered so briefly as may be. The first question is, whether
such a powerful delusion may befall a true convert? We answer it is possible,
and experience proves it: that it is possible, we learn from the Apostles
fear, 2 Cor. 11. 3. I fear least by any means as the serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtility, So your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
which is in Christ, He was feared also for the Colossians, lest they should be
deluded, Col. 2. 4. This I say, lest any man beguile you with intising words.
And ver. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit,
after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. Wherein it is clear, that this sort of delusion may befall the Saints.
Now that it has indeed and in experience befallen some true converts, it is
evident by what Christ says to the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. 20. I have a
few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel, which
calls her self a prophetess to teach and to seduce my servants to commit
fornication and to eat things sacrificed to Idols. And the Apostle shows the
matter evidently to have befallen the Galatians, Gal. 3. 1. O follish, or mad
Galatians, who has be witched you, that you should not obey the truth*
Secondly, that this delusion drew deep, and was very dangerous, appear, Gal.
1. 6. I marvel that you are so soon turned from him that called you into the
grace of Christ unto another Gospel. And, Gal. 5. 2. they were in danger to
lose all benefit by Christ; and, ver. 4. in danger and on the way to fall from
grace. Thirdly, the Galatians did err both in doctrine and practice; in
doctrine, because they sought to be justified by the works of the Law, Gal, 5.
4. In practice they erred, Gal. 4. 10, 11. ye observe days and months, and
times and years, I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in
vain. Fourthly, their error was fairded with the pretense of the truth, which
made them greedily embrace the error: for, Gal. 4. 9, they turned themselves
back to Mosaical rites and ceremonies now abolished under the pretense of
sometime commanded duties. And, ver. 21. they desired to be under the Law, and
so run themselves under the curse. Fifthly, their error was not by a light
opinion held by them, but by a full persuasion, wrought in them, not by Christ,
but by a lying spirit, Gal. 5. 8. Sixthly, this bastard, and unhallowed zeal
was evidenced both in the seducing teachers, and in the misled Galatians, Gal.
4. 17. They zealously affect you, but not well: yea they would exclude you that
you might affect them, that is, draw you away from the society of Christ and
his true Apostles, that you might be their affectionat disciples. And as for
the Galatians, deluded by Satan, by their means, they turned their ardent
affection toward the Apostle almost in hatred against him, Gal. 4. 15, 16. Am I
become your enemy because I tell you the truth?

Hence it is clear, that true converts are subject to this evil, and ready to
fall in it except they watch carefully, and earnestly deal with God to keep
them from deceivers: for, many young converts are like lambs and sheep, very
simple, and being lately turned unto the course of holiness, they are easily
taken with every appearance of piety, whereof if they do apprehend any seeming
signs in seducers, they suspect no guile in wolves clad with sheeps skins,
wherethrough they are overtaken unawares, and moved to separat from the society
of the Saints by the fleshly authors of division, who by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 17, 18.

Quest. 2. As for the second question what are the effects and marks of such a
delusion? We answer, there is a delusion active wherein Satan and his seducing
instruments do set themselves on work to delude, and there is a passive
delusion in the party deluded by Satan and his instruments. The effects of the
deluding or lying spirit, and the marks of delusion in the party deluded do
concur; for, the effects of Satan's powerful delusion do appear in the party
deluded as signs and evidences of the effectual delusion: These effects and
signs albeit they be many, we shall content our selves to specify some of them.

The first and chief effect and sign of delusion, is, the rejecting of a point
of true doctrine, and the avouching of a false error contrary thereto. This we
call the first and principal sign, or mark of delusion; because except this
sign be found, other signs albeit they point forth a perilous condition, yet
without this effect and sign be joined, they do not prove delusion in the
strict sense wherein we take it here. This sign the Apostle does point at in
the Galatians, Gal. 3. 1. O foolish Galatians! who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the truth? where he challenges them for rejecting the truth
and obedience unto it.

The second effect and mark of delusion, is a bastard persuasion whereby the
person deluded lays hold on a most false error, as if it were a most solid
truth, and without hink or doubt rests upon it, as if it were a divine truth:
This sort of persuasion we call a bastard and illegitimat persuasion, 1.
because it is not wrought by the Spirit of Christ: for which cause the Apostle
makes the Galatians persuasion not to be right and legitimat, Gal. 5. 8.
Secondly, because this persuasion neither leans upon upon Gods Word rightly
understood, nor upon any firm reason deduced reasonably from the Scripture.
Thirdly, because this persuasion of the deluded that his tenet is true, is
stronger then his persuasion of many articles of his faith, for which he has
clear Scripture; and yet this persuasion of the deluded is not so strong when
it comes to trial, as weak faith well grounded is, which when the force of
tentation and persecution comes, is more able to bear out, then the deluded
man's persuasion wherein he glories. Upon which ground, the Apostle does not
doubt but the Galatians, beign true converts, shall renounce this false
persuasion, and return to the truth which they had forsaken. Last of all, we
call this a bastard persuasion, because it draws its original and strength,
not from clearness of Gods revealed truth, but from the agreement which the
error has with some carnal affection, whereunto this error does service, for
which respect, carnal and corrupt reason is easily drawn to maintain it
pertinaciously.

The third effect and sign of delusion, is, the causing division and schism in
the visible Church needlessly; and this effect does readily follow on the former
two: for where error in doctrine, and in the rule of practice, gets up the
head, it falls out inevitably, that the defenders of the truth and spreaders
of the error, shall fall in contention and division. In which case, the Apostle
does exhort the Romans, howsoever they should pity the misled multitude, yet
carefully to mark the causers of the division, Romans 16. 17. I beseech you
brethren, mark them which cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them; which presupposes they deserve
excommunication if they be obstinat.

The fourth effect and sign of delusion, is foolishness or a sort of madness,
which appears partly in the inconsiderat embracing of the error, and partly
in the defending and promoving of it: for, if the error in it self be
considered, it is a falsehood and deceit; or if we look to the hasty receiving
of it, when no sound proof can be had of it, it is foolishness; or if we
consider the damage which follows the defending and spreading of it, which
the party deluded did not foresee and guard against, it is a madness, and
cannot but be so: for, a false doctrine, albeit at first it may carry the
appearance of piety and prudence, yet when it is compared with Scripture and
rule of right reason led by Scripture, it is found nothing but vanity,
falsehood, cosening and deceit, as the Apostle does insinuat concerning the
errors which in his time were sprouting forth in the Church, Col. 2. 23. which
things have a show indeed of wisdom in will worship and humility, and neglecting
of the body, not in any honor, to the satisfying of the flesh, that is, they
are not worthy of any estimation, for they serve only to satisfy fleshly
corruption of nature, as he observes in the authors of Angel-worshiping, of
whom he averreth, that they intrude themselves into those things which they
have not seen, vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind, Col. 2. 18. And he calls
the Galatians foolish, or mad, for their embracing of the error, Gal. 3. 1. and
for hasty embracing of it, Gal. 1. 6. I marvel that you are so soon removed
from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel: for
there are many who after much time spent, and pains taken, upon them by
faithful Pastors, do not come up to the understanding of the heads of the
doctrine held forth in the Catechize, and proofs given thereof by Scripture,
and yet will very readily embrace an error, and seem to themselves so well to
understand it, and to be able to argue for defense of it; whose folly and
madness may be seen in this, that they do not consider the bitter fruits of
their error; to make a schism in the Church they think nothing of it; to rent
the body of Christ they care not for it: and for this very cause, the Apostle
reproves the Corinthians* that falling in contest and contention among
themselves about the excellency of their teachers, they rent the Church, the
body of Christ, did despise his dominion and government, and gave his glory
unto men, and did not regard the lamentable consequences of the schism; no not
when they were admonished and rebuked by the wiser sort of their brethren, 1
Cor. 1. 11. and, 2 Cor. 10. 2.

The fifth effect and sign of delusion, is the pride of the deluded, and vain
gloriation in their error: for, the Corinthians gloried in men, and made it a
matter of praise to themselves to have such and such men heads of their
schism, 1 Cor. 3. 21. and upon this ground did despise and contemn one
another. And the Apostle gives this mark of Schismatics and Sectaries, 2 Timothy
3. 2. Men (says he) shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, etc. and the followers of the false Prophetess Iezebel, did despise the
Orthodox as ignorant dolts, incapable of the high mysteries and spiritualities
of the Gospel, which indeed were nothing but the deep^ of Satan's delusions,
Rev. 2. 24.

The sixth effect or sign of delusion, is rash, preposterous and bastard zeal:
This the Apostle did mark in the mis-believing Jews, Romans 10. 2. They have a
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, says he. This preposterous and
rash zeal is far more fiery and hot then true zeal in the godly: for, the error
for which the deluded do strive, is the native brood of corrupt nature; and
therefore it has corrupt reason and affection stout for it, and no wonder that
corrupt nature be strong to defend and advance its own birth. But true zeal is
much more moderate; partly, because it is carried on with knowledge and
prudence, does fear to offend God by yielding to passions, and has to strive
against corrupt nature which cloggeth and hinders every grace in the convert,
and this amongst the rest. 2. This preposterous and bastard zeal, does render
the deluded person too pertinacious in the defense of the error wherewith he is
overtaken, that rather then he will quite his error, he will embrace another
error to maintain the former error for which he does contend. And this comes
to pass, partly, by a sort of necessity, and partly, by corrupt willfulness.
Partly of necessity, I say, because one absurd error being received, draws
after it many other errors: for, it is impossible to defend one error in
religion, but by broaching and maintaining more errors. I say partly, by corrupt
willfulness, because when the deluded person finds himself in dispute
entangled, so as he must either renounce the error which he has embraced, or
receive and maintain another error which follows thereon, he chooses rather
to embrace the error which follows upon his first error, wherein he was first
ensnared. 3. Holy zeal loves every truth, yea loves other points of truth, as
much as it loves that particular doctrine of truth which discovers the error;
neither will it suffer a believer, for the defense of any point of doctrine, to
pass from another truth; but preposterous and bastard zeal is contrair: for,
if many points of truth come in comparison and competition with the error which
the deluded man has drunken in, he will mis-regard them all rather then
forsake his error, albeit he profess other truths to be more precious and
necessar then his erroneous tenet. A proof of this we have in the Pharisees,
who made the great things of the Law of none effect, for upholding of their own
traditions, Mat. 15. 6. And the same power of delusion may be seen among
Papists, who will not so hotly pursue or punish so severely the breach of Gods
commandments, as they do pursue and punish the neglect of superstitious
ceremonies. 4. Preposterous and bastard zeal, is very busy to spread and
propagat an error, by all means, venting false doctrine, And such men's speeches
do spread as a gangren, 2 Timothy 2. 17. and a little leaven of this kind is ready
to leaven the whole lump, Gal. 5. 9. In which case Christ advertised and
exhorted his disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, whereby they
were about to leaven the whole Church. And this furious zeal, as experience
has taught, does spare no pains or labor to draw on more and more to the
profession of the zealots errors, as may be observed in Pharisees who compassed
sea and land to make proselyts, Math. 23. 15. 5. This bastard zeal of deluded
persons, carries them to have respect unto, and estimation of, them that
embrace their error, and to seek respect and estimation from them who are
overtaken with their error. This was evident in the schism of the Corinthians,
of whom some did choose to be called such men's disciples, other some did choose
to be called the disciples of another man, and all did glory in their leaders,
1 Cor. 3. 5. 21. And on the other hand, the heads of the schism did glory in
the multitude and excellency as they conceived of their disciples. This the
Apostle observed in the seducers of the Galatians, and in them that were
seduced by them, Gal. 4. 17. They zealously affect you but not well, yea they
would exclude you (from communion with God and us his Apostles) that you might
affect them. 6. This bastard zeal of the deluded, does drive them to disdain
and contemn all them who oppugn their error, yea and to hate them, as
experience did show among the Corinthians: for so soon as schisms did arise in
Corinth, dissentions also did arise, 1 Cor. 3. 3. and 2 Cor. 12. 20. and of
this ^vil the Apostle does complain, Gal. 4. 16. Am I become your enemy,
because I tell you the truth? And this much may serve for our purpose
concerning the effect and signs of delusion.

Quest. 3. The third question is, what are the causes of delusion? For answer,
the causes are many and various; for some causes are principal causes, some
subservient, some meritorious causes, and some promoveing and helping forward
of this evil: And which causes and instruments, God does so overruled in his
justice, power and wisdom, that he turns all to his own glory, and welfare of
his Church: This we learn from the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Now (says he) the
Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith, giving head to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, speaking lies
in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with an hot iron, forbidding to
marry, and to abstain from meats which God has created to be received, etc.
Where, first, he foretells, that there shall be a departing from the doctrine
of the Apostles, whereof he gives an instance of that which might seem
furthest from suspicion of delusion, to wit, a putting of a religious restraint
upon the use of things lawful in themselves, as marriage and meats. The
authors of this delusion, 1. he points forth to be lying spirits, and men
seduced by a lying spirit. 2. The way of seduction he foretells, shall be by
lies spoken in gross hypocrisy. 3. Left any should wonder how this could come
to pass, that any man against his conscience should dare to speak lies, he
points at the cause procuring, to wit, the stupidity and senslessenesse of the
conscience, they have their conscience seared with a hot iron. And, 2 Cor. 11.
14, 15. speaking of deluded seducers of the people, Such are false apostles
(says he) deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of
light. Where among sundry ways of deceiving, he points forth one of Satan's
stratagemes, to tempt men to make a show of piety and counterfeit appearance of
holy zeal, and to pretend the authority of God, to delude the simple. By which
delusion, whosoever are insuared they are ready to put on the same coat; for,
being deceived, they deceive others, pretending Scripture, that they may fight
against Scripture; and pretending holiness and piety, that they may hinder in
others the true exercise of holiness.

As to the causes of ready embracing of errors, 1. there is propension
abundant in the natural corruption of the heart to lay hold on any error
offered, Ier. 17. 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, who can know it? Another cause is pointed forth by Christ, Mat. 22. 29.
You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. A third cause is
the want of mortification; for the Apostle does reckon heresies and schisms
among the works of the flesh; and in particular, 1 Timothy 6. 10. The love of
money is the root of all evil, which while some have coveted after, they have
erred from the faith. And concerning the instruments of delusion and division
in the Church, the sentence of the holy Spirit does stand sure: for he knows
the evils of the heart perfectly, Romans 16. 18. They that are such, serve (...)
our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good ^ords and fair
speeches, they deceive the hearts of the simple. Of such men Jude speaks,
ver. 20. These are murmu^rs, complainers, walking after their own lusts, etc.

As for passive delusion in seduced people, the Apostle prophesies, 2 Timothy 4.
3, 4. The time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts ^all they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and
they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall (...) turned unto
fables. In which words he holds forth the meritorious and adjuvant causes of
passive delusion, their lusts, their turning away from sound doctrine, their
itching ears, and desire to hear flatterers, who by false doctrine may foster
them in their lusts, and making choice of such men to be their Pastors. From
this sort of teachers Christ fore-warneth his disciples to keep off, Mat. 17.
15. Beware of false prophets which come to (...) in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening ^olves, ye shall know them by their fruits. Their
outward behavior and conversation will not decipher them, for they will seem
innocent and harmless lambs, but their doctrine which is the fruits of their
teaching and the proper work of the ministry, shall find them out: But the
meritorious cause of this giving men over to be deluded, is plainly set down, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 10, 11. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, for this cause God shall send them strong delusion. This
judgment, albeit it pursues unto the death only the reprobat, yet whiles in
some degree for a time, it may over-take the elect and renewed persons, because
some of them, sometime are found to give way to their lusts, and not to take
head to the truth which by Gods blessing might kill these lusts, therefore God
in his justice suffers them to be infected with a contrary error, and to eat
the bitter fruits of their folly, that being corrected they may repent, and for
ever fall out with their carnal lusts and reject the error whereby they were
infected: for God in his wisdom and justice, most holily and powerfully, does
so rule the whole exercise of his el^ct, that truth shall have no loss, but be
the more cleared, and no elect soul perish, as Christ gives assurance,
speaking of the efficacy and power of delusion by the doctrine of false
christ's, Mat. 24. 24 There shall arise false Christ's and false prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders, in so much that (if it were possible) they
shall deceive the very elect. This is also manifest by what the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. where he declares, that God has decreed to permit heresies
to arise, that both the truth oppugned by the heresy, and the true converts,
may be made the more manifest: for by this means, the lusts and wickedness of
some, is brought to light; some are chastised, some perish justly, some have
their weakness and folly discovered, by being tainted with error for a time,
and in their recovery out of the heresy, the grace and power of God is made
more evident* and in these who shall suffer for refusing or resisting heresy,
God shall make manifest (for stopping the mouth of Satan and all ^alumniators)
that truth is more precious to his sincere ^isciples, then goods, or lands, or
liberty or life, or whatsoever can befall them in this mortal life for
ad^ereing to truth; and of this many martyrs are sufficient proofs in all ages:

The remedy of this fearful condition.
ALbeit this delusion draws the reprobat when they are over-taken with it,
unto certain perdi^on, as the Apostle (2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11.) expressly does
^^ach; and albeit this fearful plague be hardly curable, when it falls on
the elect: partly, by reason of the deep roots of carnal lusts in them, which
open the way unto error; partly, by reason of the subtle sophistry of
seducers, whereby honest souls are in^ngled; partly, by reason of new
tentations suggested against returning to the truth wherefrom they are ^lidden;
and partly, by reason of the difficulty of coming forth from the bonds of
temporal judicial hardness of heart, whereby God has chastified his child
for harboring such lusts in himself as made way for the error: yet the cure of
delusion is not desperate, for the Apostle gives good hope of possible and
certain recovery out of it: for, Gal. 5. 10. I have confidence in you (says he
to the ensnared Galatians) through the Lord, that you will be no other ways
minded, but he that troubles you shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be.

1. For preveening and curing of this evil, the Apostle commands Pastors to
hold forth to all sound doctrine, to preach the Word and to be instant upon all
occasions, in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 6. and 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.

2. Let the deluded person be disputed with, that by arguments drawn from
Scripture he may be convinced, as the Apostle dealt with these who denied the
resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. and with these who sought to be justified by works
among the Galatians.

3. Let the deluded be exhorted to examine accuratly his own conscience, how he
stands affected to his own carnal wisdom and earthly lusts; for if he be
proud in the conceit of his own wisdom, power or holiness, or any gift he has
received, or be led by the lust of the eye, lust of the flesh or pride of life,
and come to God by prayer to solve his doubts, or to teach him the right way,
he shall receive such an answer as Balaam received, and such as the Lord
threateneth to give, Ezekiel. 14. 2, 3, 4. etc, for he has by his lusts deceived
his own conscience, and made it a flatterer of himself when it should have been
a grave counselor being well informed.

4. Let the deluded person be exhorted to be humbled for the sins which he
grants to be in himself, and fly to Christ for pardon, pity and help against
his own known corruptions, making use of all Christ's offices in the sense and
acknowledgment of his standing in need of the benefits thereof daily; for if he
do not repent known sins, but go on in them against the light of his
conscience, how shall he expect that God shall give him light in his doubts, or
errors, who makes no use, or an ill use, of the light he has? and if he be in
a course of grieving the Spirit of the Lord, and make no use of the grace that
is offered in Christ, how is it possible that he who does not follow Christ,
should eshew to walk in darkness?

5. And last of all, let the party deluded consider how from time to time, and
most evidently in this time wherein we live, God has punished the lusts and
sinful practices of professed Christians, with giving them over to their own
hearts lusts, and letting them not only walk in their own counsels, and in the
imaginations of their own ill hearts, but also in his justice, sending to them
strong delusions, and false teachers to authorize their errors, and hold them
on in the way to perdition. What wonder to see God for the light esteeming of
baptism bestowed on men in their infancy, and the not making use thereof for
mortification of lusts and sanctification of life by faith in Jesus Christ, to
let loose phanatick Anabaptists, to teach men to renounce their baptism? What
wonder to see men's loose-living in the service of their sensual lusts, punished
with letting loose antichristian Antinomians, who turning the grace of God in
wantonness, do avouch whatsoever they do, it is no sin, and that they are not
bound to keep the law, which Christ professes he came not to dissolve, but by
the contrary to establish it? What wonder to see men's carnal confidence in
their own wit, worth, strength and ability, works and merits, punished with
letting loose lying spirits to harden them in their error? And what wonder to
see God punishing the abuse of the Gospel, and refusing to receive the truth in
love with giving men over to the spirit of Antichrist and strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. The patrons and propagators of such errors and delusions are called
by the Apostle, ministers of Satan and false brethren, 2 Cor, 11. 16.
deceivers, 1 Timothy 4. 1. and men who were of old ordained to this condemnation.
From whose contagion and punishment, let every misled soul pray to God to be
delivered.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the converts conscience, mistaking vice for virtue, and pleasing
himself in this condition.
THis case differs from the case of delusion, which we have taken for erring
in the matter of Religion, whether doctrine or worship, pertaining to the first
table of the Law; but this mistaking conscience is in the practice of duties of
the second table, when the doctrine of the duty is confessed, but in practice
and action, vice is practiced under the notion and pretense of virtue, and the
man is pleased with himself in so doing. Whereof it shall suffice to give three
instances.

The first instance.
THe first instance wherein a convert may be for a time mistaken, is, when a
man pleases himself in ^igardly parcimony, and narrow scraping together of
money to the hinderance of spiritual duties, under pretense of frugality and
diligence in his calling, etc. Whereby he persuades himself, that his practice
is so far from sin, as it is rather commendable and worthy to be imitat, for he
conceives that according to Gods command he is not slow in the work of the
Lord, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11. that he is working
with his hands that which is good, Ephesians. 4. 18. that he is providing for the
necessity of his family, for which if he should not provide, he should be worse
then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. If the matter were found so to be after
examination, true it is, frugality, diligence in a lawful calling, and
provision for a man's family, are commendable; but here is the deceit of the
heart found, when anxiety is found in stead of moderat carfulness; when
hasting to be rich is found, in stead of moderat diligence in his calling; when
love of money and avarice is found, in stead of honest provision for a man's
family. We grant also, that this mistake is not easily discerned by beholders,
but yet the convert himself, after examination, may discern it, when he looks
upon the effects, signs and concomitant evils, such as are felt impediments,
and hindrances of a spiritual disposition: for, this covetousness of things
earthly, whereof we are speaking, does mar the study and endeavor for things
spiritual, and diminishes the fear of sinning in the matter of gain, and takes
up the time due for spiritual exercise. In this case, carnal joy in the getting
gain, is a sign and evidence of a deceived heart, and so is also wordly grief
for want of success, or for not getting expected and desired gain, a proof of
this mistaking.

The causes of this evil, are the too great fear of poverty, an over-high
estimation of riches, a diffidence of Gods providence, a doubting of Gods
promises to furnish his own with food and raiment, and things necessary for
this temporal life: which diffidence Christ does expressly discharge, Mat. 6.
24, 25. But for a remedy of this evil, the person guilty cannot seek after, nor
embrace it so long as he is not convinced of his sinful condition; wherefore,
for clearing a man's mind in this point, let him examine himself whether in
following gain his heart be oft-times surfetted and overcharged with the cares
of this life, and made frequently indisposed for prayer and religious
exercises, whether he be too much taken with gladness when he gains, and
grief when he suffers loss and worldly damage, whether he uses, for hope of
gain or fear of life, to lie and flatter, or dare deal injustly in his
bargains, whether he finds himself slow unto exercises, of religion, but
prompt and ready for secular affairs? whether he spend the time heavily in
religious exercises, and is weary of them, but can pass the time pleasantly in
the affairs of this life? If he find himself convinced by shrewd signs of this
evil, let him humble himself in Gods sight, fly unto Christ for fastening his
bargain for righteousness and eternal life through Christ; then let him not
cast off his diligence in and faithful discharge of his lawful calling, but
by a religious disposition of mind, and observance of all religious exercises
seasonably, temper and moderat his diligence in secular affairs, and depend
upon God more then he has done for the success of his labors, and take from
God loss or advantage as he gives it, so as he may be found in prosperity and
adversity submissive unto God and ready for the discharge of charity and
equity, as occasion shall offer.

Another instance.
THere is another instance, wherein a convert may be mistaken, to wit, when a
man pleases himself in in the prosecution of private revenge, that he may pay
home to such as have wronged him in the matter of his credit and reputation, or
in his goods, or bodily harm done to him or his friends: for, this ungodly
disposition he may pretend possibly, a care of following retributive justice,
wherein he may seem to himself to come short, except he should watch for a
recompence-giving to the person injurious; he may possibly pretend a dutiful
respect to public peace and welfare of the commonwealth, of the society
wherein he lives, wherein he may seem to himself to come short if he should
suffer the person injurious to him to go away unpunished; he may pretend also
his own safety and security for time to come, whereof he may seem to himself
careless except he make it evident, that whosoever does him wrong shall be
made sensible of his injury done; he may pretend that the glory of God
requires so much, that sins should be punished, the avenging whereof, if it
should be delayed longer then occasion of revenge should offer, or till the
Magistrate should take notice of it, no punishment should fall upon the
injurious at all; and last of all, he may pretend the good of the party
injurer, who by feeling the smart of his wrong done may be led to repentance,
and made to learn by his suffering the recompense of his injury done, to carry
himself more equitably toward his neighbors in all time coming. All these
pretenses may bear weight in the corrupt inclination of a convert, and may
harden him in his sinful course of seeking a private revenge on the person who
has injured him. And his corrupt inclination may be observed by himself, 1. by
the stirring of his passion and wrath against the injurer, whenever he does
see the party injurer or call the injury to mind. 2. By dissimulation and
hiding from all men the sense he has of the wrong received, till he find an
occasion offered to be avenged on him. 3. By a stop made in his own prayer for
remission of sins, by his conscience telling him, he could not subscribe the
condition put in the prayer for remission of sin by Christ, which is forgive us
our sins, as we also forgive them that sin against us.

The causes of this sinful condition are, 1. corrupt and unmortified carnal
self-love, with a too high estimation of himself in pride, which makes the
injury seem so much greater as he has a higher estimation of himself. 2. A
defect in his christian love, meekness, long-suffering, patience and pity,
which should have their exercise specially in cases of provocation of our
unmortified affections. 3. The oblivion of the commands of God, and of the
manyfold sins daily committed against him, whereof if there were a due
estimation had, the fountain and course of carnal revenge, should soon be
stopped, that private and carnal revenge should not break forth.

When these evils are found out and acknowledged by the convert in himself, the
main remedy thereof is in and by Christ, who has died for us when we were his
enemies, Romans 5. 8. and for whose cause greater sins against God, are daily
forgiven to us, then are the injuries done unto us by men. 2. In this case
also, the grave admonition of the Apostle should not be forgotten, Ephesians. 4.
26, 27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath; neither give place to the
devil: Giving us to understand, that if wrath, which draws with it the desire
of revenge, shall lodge all night with a man, the devil will lodge with it
also, stirring the man up to pursue a revenge whenever he finds opportunity.

A third instance.
A third instance of this possible mistake of a convert, may be found, when he
pleases himself in his carriage too much for his own carnal satisfaction in
meat, drink, apparel and recreations, and here he may be hardened by sundry
pretenses which he may have for his excess in the use of things otherwise
lawful. As, 1. that what he spends upon himself is of his own means. 2. That
his recreations are lawful and allowed unto him of God. 3, That in all this he
has a care of his health. 4. That he does not spend more upon himself then his
rent and ability may well bear. 5. That God has said, by the mouth of a wise
King, that this course which he does follow in allowing on himself, is the gift
of God, Eccles. 5. 19. And last of all, that he might seem justly a nigard, if
he did not well to himself when he is able so to do; and here are pretenses
abundant. But if after examination of a man's own self, he shall find the
abundance of earthly things weakening his desire after things spiritual, or
shall find the sense of his in-born corruption laid over to sleep in his
prosperity, or shall find his flesh wax wanton against the spirit, and to
prevail in the conflict: or shall find his compassion toward the poor and
afflicted to grow cold, and his delight in things spiritual much diminished, or
shall find too great a share and portion of his time bestowed upon his body,
and but little time bestowed upon the care of his soul, a wakened conscience
may easily convince the convert, that matters are not so right with him as he
supposed.

The remedy of this evil, is not for a man to turn unto another extremity, and
to a contrary vice, as if there were no place for a wise moderation, or as if
at sometimes a more liberal use of the creature were not allowed unto men, or
as if a spiritual disposition of a man's spirit, could not consist now and then
with any banquet or festivity: for, it is plain from Scripture, that there is a
time to ^east, and a time to fast, a time to labor and a time to be refreshed,
both in body and mind after labor. In which prudence, the Apostle had not a
little advanced, when he says, Phil. 4. 12, 13. I know both how to be abased,
and I know how to abound, every where and in all things I am instructed, both
to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and suffer need: I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me. But here is the remedy, 1. that
distrusting our selves, and fearing the snares which Satan lays for us in
all things we have our conversation with Christ, and set our affections on
things which are above, as the Apostle gives direction, 1 Col. 3. 1, 2. Next,
that we watch against the lusts of the flesh, least at any time our hearts be
su^fetted with meat or drink, or any thing which is pleasant to the flesh, Luke
21. 34. Romans 13. 14. For we are not debtors to the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, Romans 8. 12. but are bound so to care for our bodies, so as our souls
have no loss thereby; for, the lusts of the flesh do fight against our souls, 2
Pet. 2. 11. And to this end, let the admonition of the Apostle be well
remembered, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. This I say, brethren, the time is short, it
remains that both they who have wives be as though they have none, and they
that weep as though they weept not, and they that rejoice as though they
rejoiced not, and they that buy as though they possessed not, and they that use
this world as not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away.

Many more instances might be given, but these may suffice our purpose, who mind
only to give some taste of cases of conscience in some examples, which may give
light unto other like cases as they fall in.

CHAP. IX.
Of the case of conscience, dealing treacherously under pretense of liberty of
conscience.
PRevarication or treacherous dealing, is strictly taken, when for a bud or
bribe the conscience does betray the cause which it should defend: and it is
borrowed from the unfaithful advocat, who for a bribe does sell the cause
which he pretends to defend, and give over the plea of his client, and falls
in to the adverse party. Such is the man whose affection to some lust and
worldly advantage, does blindfold his conscience and moves it to speak
contrary to its duty, and mean time does pretend he is only following the light
of his conscience, for whose liberty he ought to dispute; the matter may be seen
in an example or instance one or two: King Saul receives a command from God to
slay all the Amalekits and destroy them and their beasts; when it comes to
execution, Saul conceives it shall be for his honor to spare Agag and reserve
him for a triumph, and that it should be for his advantage to spare the fattest
of the cattle, whereof the people might make use for sacrifice; So advantage
and honor do solicit him. The peoples consent who followed him, helps on
his resolution to spare Agag and the fattest of the cattle: fear to offend the
people whom he had drawn on to consent unto his mind, concurreth to the giving
forth his decree, contrary to Gods command; and so his conscience being
bribed, fails against the command of God. In which resolution and practice
Saul does please himself.

The like treachery in Saul falls forth in the matter of the Gibeonits: The
Gibeonits preserved from Ioshuas time, did grow in number to the detriment of
the Israelits as he conceived, the oath of a covenant sworn for sparing their
lives stands up on the one hand to hinder him from slaying of them, the
advantage which his kindly subject might have by killing them and possessing
their lands and goods, stands up to intise him to kill them, on the other
hand: Saul being taken with the bait of advantage and honor from the people of
Israel, for whom he was zealous, inclines his conscience to mis-regard the
oath of the covenant, partly because it was given without Gods counsel and
consent, yea contrary to his positive command, discharging a covenant with the
Canaanits; partly because the Gibeonits deceived Joshua and the elders, and
fained themselves not to be of the number of the Canaanits, but men of a far
country; partly because many years had interveened between the day of Joshua's
covenant with them and his time, and it seemed unto Saul very unreasonable,
that a rash and unadvised oath should be still in force from generation to
generation; and partly also because the form of the civil Government was now
changed, whereby Saul conceiving himself not to be obliged as successor to the
Judges, but as King ordained at Gods special direction, as free a Monarch as
any in the world, and not bound by the oath of the rash swearing Judges and
Elders in Ioshuas time, does treacherously seduce his own conscience, and
falls upon the off-cutting of the Gibeonits by the sword. How many are they
who by such intisements, having deceived their own hearts, and for worldly gain
or glory, or for eshewing of damnage, do embrace errors in religion, and follow
that course which most serves to satis^ie their own lusts, or is most
applauded unto of them who are in power? From which sort of treacherous dealing
nothing can divert, and draw back the man to repentance, except the Lord partly
by disputation, and partly by Church Censures and civil punishments, shall
discover unto them their treacherous dealing in selling the truth and betraying
their conscience for base ends, and so bring them to repentance.

In this case, such as are pretended maintainers of liberty of conscience, but
in effect patrons of licentious living after their own lusts, put in their
objections.

1. Obj. It is necessary for me, says one, to do what I do, and to think what
I think; I conceive I have reason for me and am persuaded that what I do and
profess is lawful, and that that is not lawful whereunto censures and
punishments tend to draw me.

Ans. What necessity can be pretended for a deliberat man's actions and
profession except a moral necessity of doing duty and of not sinning? Natural
necessity he cannot allege for the justifying of deliberat sinful actions:
For if he pretend original sin and native corrupt inclination to sin, it is no
excuse for sin, but a granting himself a sinner by kind, by natural inclination
and custom; or, if he pretend a civil necessity, it is either for hope of gain
or fear of wordly loss, and that is but a base reason to move a man to do what
is in it self sinful. If conscience be pretended, and that he cannot without
sin do what is against his conscience, he must know that a conscience
misinformed cannot warrant a sinful tenet or practice: for except a man
renounce the error which he has embraced, both the error is his sin, and the
profession and practice according to the error, does make his sin double; if he
pretend, that except he do as his conscience diteth unto him, he sins,
because the conscience is the rule of a man's actions, he must know, that the
conscience is not the absolute rule of a man's actions, but the Word of God must
be the rule of his conscience and of his actions also. Because if he put his
conscience in the place of Gods Word, and not in subjection and subordination
thereto, he must justify the murderers of the Martyrs, of whom Christ gives
warning, that they who kill his servants shall think (to wit in their
conscience) that they do unto God good service, Ioh. 16. 2. If he pretend, that
upon this ground, liberty of conscience is altogether destroyed, if men living
under civil and ecclesiastic Government, must renounce the light of their
conscience and give obedience to men's commandments, he must know, that he is
mistaken, and that the true liberty of the conscience stands in the following
Gods Word, and doing service unto God. Neither does sound doctrine tie any man
to renounce the liberty of his conscience, but to renounce the error which has
blinded him, and to renounce his lust which has opened the door unto the error
which has misled him, lest both he perish in his sin, and the society wherein
he lives be infected with the error, and fall under the wrath of God. If he
pretend, that neither the will of a man, nor his conscience can be compelled:
For, the nature of the conscience and will, is to determine freely what the man
shall do; and the Lords people must be a willing people, Ps. 110. 3 He must
know, that albeit the will and conscience cannot be compelled, yet the carnal
lusts which have seduced the conscience, may be crossed and curbed by
ecclesiastic censures and civil punishments, that the conscience and will,
being better informed, after the discovery of the deceitfulness of their
lusts, which did mislead them, they may freely disclaim the error, and their
unhappy venting thereof* If he pretend, that God is the only Lord of the
Conscience, and no man may take upon him that power to prescrib unto, and
command another man's conscience* let him know that God indeed is the only Lord
of the conscience, and because he is Lord, therefore has he appointed his
Ministers to teach men the truth, and to press the disobedient members of the
visible Church with censures; and has put the sword in the Magistrates hand to
see his will done, and to punish such as refuse to give obedience to his
commands, that so obedience may be procured to God the only Lord of the
conscience, In which case albeit the acts commanded by the will and conscience,
are curbed and restrained, yet the will and conscience, is not compelled, but
is brought to a better determination of its own elicit acts, that having
obtained a clearer light about its duty, it may command the outward man to say
and do what is right. If he pretend, that religion is not to be propagat and
pressed by force, but by the word preached, and heresies are to be rooted out,
not by the sword but by the power of truth holden forth to the heretic, let
him know, that there is a difference between propagation of religion among
Pagans, or people not under the charge of the civil Magistrate, or Church
Judicatories, and the preservation or purgation of religion among them that are
within the visible Church, and under the power of the civil Magistrate.

For albeit the only way to bring religion in request among heathen nations and
strangers to the covenant of promises, be that way which the Apostles did
follow, preaching the Gospel to all, and receiving such as embraced the Gospel
into Church Fellowship, yet the Magistrate, having civil dominion over heathen
Idolaters, may after information of them by the Preachers of the Gospel, break
their Idols and abolish them, and restrain them from doing contempt unto the
true Religion, or abusing of the Sabbath, as the fourth command of the moral
law does give warrant; yea, and may compel them to use the means whereby they
may be instructed in the true Religion. Again, let him know there is a
difference between dealing with Pagans and strangers from the commonwealth of
Israel, and dealing with these who have given up their names unto Christ, have
entered in covenant with God, and by baptism have consecrat themselves and
their children unto the faith, worship and obedience of God, and do profess
the christian Religion, and yet go about by their errors and practices to
corrupt and over-turn the true Religion and says of others among whom they
live: for, such may and should be not only instructed by Sermon, con^^rence and
dispute, but also punished by the civil Magistrate for their deceiving of the
people, and troubling the flocks of Christ, Deuteronomy. 13. and Romans 13. If he
pretend, that Church Censures and civil punishments can serve for nothing but
to make men dissemblers and hypocrites in the matter of religion, which is most
odious in the sight of God and wise men, let him know, that every hypocrit
shall bear his own iniquity: Ecclesiastic censures and civil punishments
concern the words and deeds of the outward man, that they may be ordered so as
Religion and the peace of the Kingdom may not suffer detriment. If any man say
and do that which is right in hypocrisy and dissimulation, the society wherein
he lives is safe; but for his hypocrisy let the dissembler answer to God for
it. And yet it is not to be presumed, that all who by censures, and fear of
civil punishments do forsake error and embrace truth, are dissemblers and
hypocrites in so doing, because they are means appointed of God for curbing and
reclaiming erroneous persons, wherewith he gives his blessing when it pleases
him: for by censures and civil punishments, the allurements which have enduced
them to error are cut off, such as are applause of men, vain glory, worldly
advantage, sensual pleasure, and such like, wherein the erroneous have been
taken as in an evil net, which being broken, the ensnared captive may come
freely off his error, and embrace the truth, and take in good part the censures
and civil punishment which drew him out of the snare into the right way: As we
are assured by the prophecy of Zechariah, chap. 13. 6. And one shall say (to
wit, to the converted sectary) what are these wounds in thine hands? Then he
shall answer, those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. But
whether by those means the erroneous be reclaimed heartily or in dissimulation,
respect must be had to Gods commands and his peoples good, by curbing of vice
and error, according as God has given power to the Church and to the civil
Magistrate, Romans 13. 3, 4. who is appointed the minster of God for the peoples
good.

If he shall object, that he who charge him for his error, is no less
subject to error, then he whom he charge, yea, that Governors ecclesiastic
and civil are no more exeemed from the danger of erring, then private persons,
yea, that the determinations of Synods and Councils are not infallible, yea,
that he is persuaded the error he is charged of, is no error, but not persuaded
of the truth which the reformers of him pretend unto. Let him know that the
force of his objection does assert, that truth and righteousness is settled
upon the mis-perswaded sectaries part, and that the Church and Magistrate who
^indeth fault with him, has nothing to persuade them of the truth, which they
do press upon the sectary, and so cannot condemn or punish him; but he must
know, that it is one thing to say one may err in the latitude of a possiblity
indefinit, another, to say one does err in such a particular wherein he has
the light of Scripture and reason clear for him. The sectary will not deny he
may err, but he will maintain that in such one or other article of his
profession he does not err. Shall he maintain his plea, that he does not err
in such a point of error? and shall not the Magistrate and Church maintain their
plea, that they do not err in punishing such an obstinat erroneous person?
Christ has committed the keys of doctrine and discipline to his Church, that
private persons may know Christ's will by the ministry of the Church, except he
will be holden for an heathen or publican, Mat. 18. 17. He has also committed
the power of the sword unto the Magistrate, who does not bear the sword in vain,
Romans 13. And therefore let the Church and Magistrate do their duty, and let
erroneous persons cease to stumble the Lords people by their error and
practice, and suffer themselves to be brought in order by such as have
commission and power to move them by censures and civil punishment thereunto.

If still he will insist and allege, that by this means a Christian by
censures and civil punishment, is compelled to sin against his conscience, let
him know, that a scandalous sectary or licentious libertine, is not compelled
at all to sin, but to say and do that which is right and to hearken to the Word
of God rather then to his own erring conscience; for the scandalous sectary,
schismatic or heretic lies in a twofold sin, the one is in his spirit,
believing and embracing an error, the other in his external words and deeds
corrupting the minds and manners of Gods people. If after conference and
disputation, the sin of his misled mind cannot be taken away, yet the
correcting of him by Church Censures and civil punishment may restrain and bind
him up from troubling, and infecting others with his leaven and ill example;
and so his sinning externally is cut off, and he made in so far to cease from
evil: wherein he does not sin in so far, because sin is not every transgression
of the ditement of the conscience simply, but the transgression of the law, and
ditement of the conscience speaking according to the law, is a sin. It is true
indeed, that whosoever does judge the ditement of his conscience to be the Law
of God, and yet does the contrary, must by interpretation of his deed be holden
guilty of sin, because he who by fear or hope can be moved to do contrary to
the ditement of his erring conscience, in effect does profess he may be moved
by hope or fear to do contrary to the ditement of his conscience well informed.
Mean time it is expedient, not only for the good of the society of Gods people,
but also for the good of the erroneous person himself, that he be curbed and
hindered, by these that have lawful power, from doing yet more harm, and
restrained from following the course of sin and filling up the full measure of
sinning, which he was about to do.

CHAP. X.
Of such as do please themselves in a condition not pleasing God, because they
conceive they can pray well under any condition.
SUndry there are, who think their souls to be in a good case and condition,
when they can pray much, and that with freedom of spirit, when possibly they do
not watch over their hearts, nor ways as becomes them.

This sickness even converts are subject unto sundry times, but it may be most
clearly seen in those, who put a sort of worth and merit in effect, upon their
religious exercises, as we may see in many Israelits in Isaias time, chap, 58.
They did reckon themselves among them that did seek God daily, who delighted in
his ways and did approach unto him, ver. 2. yet because God did not grant
their petitions, they fell on chiding him, ver. 3. Wherefore have we fasted
(say they) and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our souls and thou
take no knowledge? The history also of Korah, Dathan and Abiram is notour,
wherein we see what esteem Korah and his accomplices had of their own holiness,
and of their access to God in their prayers that they durst hazard and lay
their lives in pawn, that God should make them as welcome when they came with
their cenferes to pray before him, as Aaron and Moses, yea and more welcome
then they.

Such a sort of deceit is that whereby some fanatics, enthusiasts and
heretics do foster themselves in their own folly, and imagine they are no
small men in Gods account, because they find a sort of eloquence in their
prayers, which they conceive God would not give unto them, except he were well
pleased with their persons, prayers and ways; and that the true convert also
is subject to this sickness, appears by this that Moses in charity judged
many who countenanced the conspiracy, to be godly persons otherwise, and
therefore exhorted them to forsake the unhappy society of these wicked men. And
sure it is, that sundry of the sons of Korah did repent and fly from the
company of the obstinat transgressors, for it is clear that all the sons of
Korah did not perish, Numb. 26. 11. and frequent mention is made of the
posterity of Korah in the Chronicles and Psalms.

But we need not insist much here, seeing experience teaches, that many go on
confidently in maintaining schism and error, persuading themselves of the
goodness of their course and condition, because their prayers do flow
according to their wish from day to day. And many are, who if they find fredom
in prayer, for any particular concerning themselves or others, do assure
themselves that it shall come to pass which they pray for: And if their
spirits be straightened in praying for sp^^itual and promised graces, they fear
they shall not be satisfied in the particular they pray for.

For remedy of this self-deceit, men must know, that it is one thing to pray
much, and another thing to be heard and their prayers and persons accepted. The
Jews are told by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 1. 15. that albeit they put up many
petitions, the Lord will not hear them, because their hands were full of blood.
2. Carnal affection may easily creep in and stir up a fervency of prayer, Iam.
4. 3. you ask and obtain not, because you ask amiss, that you may bestow what
you pray for upon your lusts. 3. Saints may pray earnestly for that which God
is not minded to grant unto them, as Samuel prayed for Saul, that he might be
continued King, 1 Samuel, 16. 1. And David may pray for the life of Bathshebas
child and not prevail. 4. On the other hand prayers put up from a straitened
heart in a sad condition, may prove no less pleasing unto God then when the
supplicant does find most enlargement of spirit, and fredom of prayer. How often
did the P^almist cry out of the deeps, when his spirit was overwhelmed within
him, when darkness and the cords of death did straiten him, as Ps. 61. 1. is
holden forth? And the Apostle ( Romans 8.) gives us to understand, that the
spirit of the convert may be so straitened by afflictions bodily and spiritual,
that they are not able to set their words in order before God, yea, nor have
clear notions of their necessities and desires, but in stead of an oration, do
sigh and groan unto God. Wherefore if a man shall in the sense of his sins and
wants, have his daily recourse unto Christ, and be careful to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit, praying for what is promised, with submission to God what
measure and at what time he pleases to give, he may be sure his person and
prayers are acceptable, as we are taught, 1 Ioh. 5. 14, 15. This is the
confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will,
he hears us; and if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know
that we have the petitions that we desired of him.

CHAP. XI.
Of the converts esteeming the peace of God to be but a carnal security.
WE have brought forth some examples of the first sort of the conscience
erring, by esteeming an evil condition to be a good condition. Now let us look
upon some examples of a conscience erring, by esteeming a good condition to be
an evil condition. Of the which sort this shall be one.

Sometime some converts do mistake the peace of God granted unto them after
hard exercise, and do esteem the quietness of their conscience, to be nothing
else but a carnal security and sleepy disposition of the conscience. To which
case that we may speak the more clearly, we do not deny that many are, who
indeed fall in a carnal security and please themselves therein, conceiving they
have the peace of God and a blessed quietness of conscience. Such persons have
no doubt nor suspicion but all is well with them, for they do not examine and
compare their condition and ways with the Word of God, but sleep sweetly in
their carnal security and negligence of spiritual duties, like to these
lukewarm Laodiceans, Rev. 3. Of such we do not speak here. 2. Again we do not
deny, that true converts are in danger to suffer the peace which God has
granted unto them, to degenerat unto a carnal security. For easily may a
convert after consolation divine fall in a sleep, as the Spouse did in the
Canticle, 5. 2. But we are speaking of the case of a convert, watching unto
duties, who after no small vexation in his conflict with the tentations of the
devil, with the terror of the law and sense of divine wrath, has gotten the
victory by faith in Christ, and has obtained peace with God graciously
granting his petition; we are speaking here of these converts who after the
Lord has granted peace unto them through faith in Christ, dare not enjoy their
peace, but do suspect that their peace is not sound, and at length do count and
call it carnal security; and so do breed themselves new troubles of mind. The
pretense and seeming reason whereby they do deceive themselves is this. When
God, say they, seemed unto us angry with us, when we found no peace and were
wrestling under the sense of sin, and in doubt whether such as we should find
mercy, then we did pray very earnestly, night and day, then we were diligent in
hearing and reading of the Word of God, and were painful in the exercise of
all duties of religion and obedience. But now we find our selves much cooled
and slackened in all these duties, whereupon we justly suspect the peace which
we now do find, to be nothing else but a carnal security of a sleeping
conscience. By this mistake all thanksgiving for the peace granted unto them is
well-near suffocat and extinguished. Their former condition under doubts and
fears, is judged to be better then their present condition, they wish their
former fears may return, rather then they should continue in this condition,
wherein their tears are dried up, and their former diligence eaten up. Hence go
they on to lay forth their complaints before their intimat acquaintance,
concerning Gods dispensation and dealing with them, because the spirit of fear
and reverence toward God, the spirit of grace and supplication is much
diminished and near-by quenched in them. By which complaints they do not only
breed trouble to themselves, but also make heavy the hearts of their godly
friends, and do tempt them to fall into the like complaints and to grieve the
Lords Spirit.

2, This mistake does arise, partly from the not considering and esteeming of
the gracious gifts of peace, and other graces bestowed upon them, and partly
from a wrong comparison of their former and present condition. For, first the
afflicted person takes no notice of the evidences of a new creature in
himself, he does not consider how great a benefit is bestowed upon him, when he
fears to offend God, fears to be shut out from society with him, and
earnestly desires to be sure of his favor in Christ: he has not a due
estimation of having peace with God and war with sin in himself, joined
together; to be freed from the torment of the conscience condemning him
according to the law, and withal a desire and delight in the obedience of the
Gospel joined together. 2. He does inconsideratly exact of his conscience, that
his soul should be in the same disposition before peace be granted, and after
that it is bestowed, or that his affections should be stirred up one and the
same way in both these cases: for before peace is given he cannot choose but he
must have sorrow, heaviness of heart, unquietness, fear, and such like other
sad affections. But after that God grants peace, these perturbations are
quieted, tormenting fear cease, lamentations are restrained, tears are washen
away in a good measure, and in their place, do thanksgiving to, and praises of
God succeed, and every duty do call for their own place in a pacified mind, so
that the man's body be not neglected as before, but care had of keeping health,
for inabling to do what is required of him in his calling toward every one with
whom he lives: For, now his condition being changed, why should not his
affections, and the effects depending on them be changed also? Who can
reasonably exact the same duties of a man in a fight, which he may require of
him when he has gotten the victory? who can expect the same carriage from a
man when he is sick and when he is in health? Does not the Apostle say, Iam. 5,
13. If any man be afflicted let him pray? Is any merry, let him sing Psalms.

3. For remedy of this evil, 1. le^ the afflicted examine himself whether this
peace has had a conflict of conscience and faith under the sense of sin and
fear of the wrath threatened in the Law, going before it or not? 2. Whether this
peace has followed upon flying to Ch^^st by faith, unto whom he did cleave in
his sad exercise? 3. Whether this peace has followed after prayer and
supplication made to God for it, that he might without fear of his enemies
serve God all the days of his life? 4. And last of all whether his heart still
inclines and endeavors to give obedience to the commands of God, and to be
grieved for his shortcoming therein? If these things do concur which beseem a
convert, let him persuade himself his peace which he has censured for carnal
security, is the solid peace of God mistaken by him. And therefore, 1. let him
no more suspect the gift of God, but hold fast the Word of God, which faith of
the soul chased to Christ, has laid hold on, that being now justified by
faith, he may have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. For, God does not give to his
supplicant carnal security for peace, a stone for bread, and an adder for fish.
But, 2. let him observe the wiles and malice of Satan, who cannot endure that
the soul fled from him to Christ should have peace, or in the enjoying of it
bless God for his gift of grace. And, 3. let him study to make use of this
peace granted to him, going on in the obedience of Gods commands cheerfully,
and to be ready for new conflicts and assaults from Satan, and not be afraid
of being deprived of the peace of God, while he by faith in Christ is yoked in
battle against sin which he sees in the world and feels in himself.

CHAP. XII.
Of the case of a convert, taking some acts of justifying faith to be high
presumption in his person.
THis case is like the former. Some true converts are, who have fled to Christ
for remission of sin and delivery from ^erdition, and have applied the promises
made for sanctification and consolation, and full salvation after this life, in
such a measure as does suffice them for encouragment to wrestle with
difficulties, wherewith with they may meet in their way to heaven. But when the
highest and most excellent privileges of the Gospel are presented to them, and
come to be made use of, such as are, sitting together with Christ in heavenly
places, E^hes. 2. 6. being coheirs annexed with Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 17. So
esteemed of, and loved by Christ, that they who touch his Saints, do touch the
apple of his eye, Judging the world and the damned Angels, 1 Cor. 6. 3. and
such like other privileges, they are at a stand, and dar not apply these
privileges for fear of high presumption.

2. Neither must we wonder that a soul should fall in this exercise, and yet
adhere to Christ as a convert and true believer: For, when a sinner for fear of
perdition is chased to a Savior, and dar not loose his grips lest he fall in
the pit, he may seem to himself to be in good case if he get in to Christ,
albeit he do not thrust himself upon such high privileges, and join himself
with Abraham, and the Patriarchs and Prophets. Like unto Mephibosheth, who
judged himself to have found grace enough at David's hand, that his life was
spared, but trembled when he was priviledg'd to come to the Kings table, who,
in his own eyes, was like a dead dog for his unworthiness, as he judged of
himself. Or like the prodigal in the Gospel, who in his own eyes was not worthy
to be counted a child of the family, but content to be as one of the hired
servants in his fathers house. And true it is, that the wonderful largeness
of the promises of the Gospel makes the true convert, lately come forth of the
slavery of sin and Satan, to stand so astonished, that he dar not take to him
so glorious titles, privileges and consolations as the Scripture does allow
him: yea, when he would lift up himself to believe the glory promised, he can
no more apprehend the infinite love and grace of God propounded and adjudged
unto him, then he can measure the heaven with his span, or comprise in his hand
the great Globe, and round of heaven and earth. From such a consideration was
it, that Peter did at first utterly refuse to suffer Christ to wash his feet;
and that Martha, in the beginning of her conference with Christ, could not
think of so great a benefit, as the resurrection of her brother Lazarus before
the day of judgment.

2. The convert in this case, does wrong to himself and to the Word of God, and
to the liberality and rich grace of God; for, so long as he suffers himself
to be born down from embracing, as safely he may, the rich allowance of God
upon a soul reconciled to him by ^aith in Christ, he not only cuts himself off
from that measure of joy of the holy Ghost which he may have, but also gives
occasion and advantage to Satan, to brangle and call in question, whether the
man has indeed believed in Christ at all, or whether he has laid hold on
Christ for righteousness and salvation by faith un^ained; for, if it be
presumption for a self-condemned sinner, flying unto Christ by faith, to lay
hold upon the benefits which Christ has prepared, purchased and offered unto
him upon this pretended reason, that these benefits are so hudgely great, and
the man so small and unworthy in his own eyes, why may not Satan, with as
great reason, (if there were any weight in it) call it presumption for such a
man to lay claim unto Christ, who is greater then all his benefits, and so beat
him off from faith and confidence in Christ the great gift of God, made of God,
to poor sinners fled unto him, wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and
redemption?

3. Wherefore, to help the convert in this condition, let him consider, he does
well to be feared for presumption, for it is a fearful evil: but, let him
remember to put due difference between presumption, and true faith and
confidence; for, 1, presumption is proud and pu^t up with self-conceit, but we
pre-suppose the convert to be humble and laid low in his own eyes, in this
condition we are speaking of. 2. Presumption is secure and negligent in the
discharge of commanded duties; but the convert we speak of, is about the use of
the means, and in some measure diligent in discharging commanded duties in his
calling. 3. Presumption lays hold upon promises not made to the presumptuous,
and troubles not it self with precepts and threatenings; but the convert in
this condition we are speaking of, regards both precepts and threatenings, and
is so far from putting forth his hand, without a warrant, unto promises, that
he stands aloof from laying hold on more promises, then he conceives necessar
to save his soul from hell. 4. The presumptuous promises to himself felicity,
albeit he walk in his own ways, and turns the grace of God into
lasciviousness, encouraging himself to sin because God is merciful; but this
convert^ shows sin, and follows the way which may lead him to the
possession of all promises. Therefore, 1. let the convert in this condition
remember, that Christ and all his benefits are so joined together in the grant
of grace, that he may confidently say, with the Apostle, Romans 8. 32. that seeing
Christ is given to the believer flying unto him, it cannot be but God with him
will give all things also. 2. Let him consider, that it is a dangerous matter,
not to give credit unto Gods faithful Word holden forth in one promise, as
well as in another: For, seeing he is worthy to be believed in the first
promise, of receiving into favor a sinner flying to Christ, why shall he not
have the glory of truth and grace in the rest of the promises, which belong to
the accomplishing of the full glorification of the man reconciled. 3. And last
of all, let the convert in this condition consider, how near he draws to a
popish error in this practice; for, Papists do measure the gifts of God unto
men, by the man's merit and well-deserving, and not by mere grace only, and upon
this ground do reckon it presumption for any ordinar Christians to be assured
in this life, that God will guide them with his counsel, and at their departure
out of this life, immediately receive them into glory. For, if the convert,
being chased by the law to lay hold on Christ (who is the end of the law for
righteousness unto every one that believes) shall stand aback from laying
hold on the highest privileges of Saints, and the greatest promises made to
justified souls, because of his own unworthiness, does he not say in effect,
if I were more worthy and like in holiness unto such and such Saints, I could
be more confident to lay hold on these high promises: which ground, if it be
once holden, it makes the reason of the man's confidence to be his own
well-deserving, and not the mere and only grace of God the free promiser
thereof, and so the way of salvation by grace should be undermined and
over-turned: which is absurd, because the Apostle, Ephesians, 2. 8. says, that by
grace we are saved through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of
God. Therefore let not the humbled convert think it presumption to lay hold on
Christ and the fullness of all promised grace in him, how large soever it be.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the condition of the convert, fearing that the joy of the holy Ghost which
he has felt, be found only to be either the joy of speculation, common to
temporal believers, or a mere delusion.
OF this sort also is this case, wherein the convert does suspect, that the joy
of the Spirit which he has felt at some times was either a joy of speculation
or contemplation only, such as Philosophers may find in their study of humane
learning, or else a delusion of Satan also. This case may fall upon the true
convert in the time of affliction and felt desertion, when not only the sense
of consolation is withdrawn, but also sorrow and heaviness have seized on his
spirit, when the sharpness of affliction takes up the whole soul, and sorrow
does fill the heart. At such a time the memory of bypast joy is greatly
darkened, and the sense of present grief inflameth the whole man. For as it
falls forth in a man's body, that both sweet and sour liquor, do affect the
sense of tasting most, when they are presently felt, but when they are past,
the memory of them does affect the imagination only, and that but lightly in
comparison with present sense. As the sense of a fiery coal does otherwise
affect us when it touches our flesh, then the memory of the pain we have felt,
does move us when the pain is past; So it is in the passions of the soul, for
joys spiritual shine for a while, when they are lately raised up in the soul,
but after a time they are darkened, and in some sort worn out, especially when
grief does arise, then they are swallowed up with sorrow, or are well near
forgotten, or lightly esteemed and rejected: My soul refused comfort, says the
Psalmist, Ps. 77. 2. Such was David's condition, Ps. 116. 11. when he said in
his haste all men are liars: at which time, whatsoever joy he had felt, in
believing the promises made to him by Samuel or other Prophets, he counted all
to be but deceiving of him and delusion.

This mistake is strengthened ordinarily by Satan's tentation and wicked
suggestion, watching upon all occasions to traduce and slander all Gods words
and operations. The complaint of Jeremy savours of this malicious suggestion,
which the Prophet lays out before God to be rid of it, Ier. 20. 7. Thou have
deceived me, and I was deceived. Yea, oft-times it comes to pass, that our
old man and corrupt inclination takes part with Satan, and when occasion does
offer, scorneth all the spiritual affections of the new man, as Ishmael mocked
Isaacs devotion.

2. This evil except it be speedily and solidly cured, not only casts the
convert in a miserable condition, but also calls in question his state,
whether at all he be regenerat, reconciled and in the state of grace: for, if
the joy of the holy Spirit granted to the supplicant praying to God in Christ,
for confirmation of his faith, granted to the mourner for sin, that he may be
comforted, shall be esteemed as the effect of speculation only, then the
comfort of the earnest-penny and first fruits of the spirit is lost, the
confirmation of faith by that consolation is enervat and weakened; thanksgiving
formerly offered for the comfort sometime felt, is recalled, and the testimony
of Gods Spirit, speaking according to the word in oft-repeated experience, is
laid aside. And so the afflicted soul shall seem to himself in worse condition
then when he was lying in his sins, because he shall seem to himself to have
lost his labor from the time that he renounced his sins. Wherefore it is
necessary, that this sickness be speedily cured, lest it prevail.

3. For remedy of this evil, let the afflicted lay aside the dispute for a time
whether his joys and spiritual experiences of the Lords working in him, have
been real, as they sometime seemed, and let him turn his eyes upon his present
miserable confused condition, let him take a new view of his sins and
unworthiness, let him observe Satan's malice, power and wiles to weaken faith,
and what need now he stands in of Christ Mediator, Redeemer Surety and
Physician by office, after a new discovery of his sinfulness; and let him look
upon the riches of the grace of God offered in the Gospel to every hungry and
thristy ^oul flying to Christ for refuge, and let him say to God, Lord there
was never a time wherein I had more need of Christ for righteousness and
salvation, behold I fly unto thee, I welcome and embrace Christ offered in the
Gospel, and heartily do consent unto the covenant of grace through him, and do
accept, embrace and rely upon remission of sins through him, and the
imputation of his satisfactory righteousness, made over to such as fly unto
him, or else I should perish utterly, and do give up my self to thee, that thou
may write thy law more powerfully on my heart. By this means the confidence
of the afflicteds interest in the covenant of Grace shall be more fixed and
made sure to him, and Satan disappointed of his design to cast the afflicted
by his tentations in mis-belief, and separation from Christ.

4. Thus when he has renewed the grips of faith in Christ, let him now enter
the lists, and dispute the solidity of his former felt experiences, by
discussing the objections which did weaken his estimation of the former felt
joys of the Spirit. One objection against them was, because they were of short
endurance, and therefore seemed not solid. The answer may be this, The short
staying of the joy of the Spirit is no proof against it, as not true joy; for,
it is sufficient earnest of the promised salvation, if when the Word of God in
the Gospel speaks peace to the man fled to Christ he finds the Word
believed to be confirmed to the believer by peace and joy, albeit the sense of
it remain but a short while; After you believed, says the Apostle, you were
sealed with the spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 11. As it is not sufficient to
prove, that wholesome water given to a feaver-sick person is not a wholesome drink,
because the cooling refreshment by it, endures but a short while; So it is not
sufficient to prove, that consolation and joy given to a sorrowful sinner,
seeking favor through Christ, is not solid and true joy, because it stays
but a short while. It is sufficient, that it has stayed so long as was
needful; for, after the word of promise was believed, the joy was sent to ease
the afflicted souls present grief, and to give him earnest, that full and
lasting joy should be given in due time unto him. When the messenger has done
his commission, let him return to his master. As the sheet let down in the
vision from heaven to Peter, after it had served for Peter's instruction, it was
taken up to heaven again, Act. 10. The Spouse in the Canticle knew by
experience, that her spiritual joys would not last long, and therefore
charge the daughters of Jerusalem that they waken not her beloved till he
pleased.

5. Another objection is this. If my joy had been solid (says the afflicted)
it should have brought forth better fruits then it has done; but joy
spiritual, as I then called it, did degenerat into a carnal security, and I was
not the more holy by it. To which objection the answer may be this, the blame
of this is not to be laid on spiritual joy, but upon the abuse of this mercy,
by ingratitude for this gracious blink of felt favor, negligence in the use of
means to entertain this sense, by sleepiness of conscience and other sins, and
namely the laying too much weight upon this sense, and not fixing the heart by
so much more upon the word of promise when felt consolation may be withdrawn,
is a just cause; for, spiritual joy is not given to any to build upon its
continuance, but to make the convert hold the confirmed word of promise so much
the faster, when for the exercise of faith, comfortable feelings are withdrawn.
The spouse in the Canticle after a feast of this kind, falls a sleep, and
gives slight entertaining to the Bridegroom when called upon by his word, for
which she is chastised, by his withdrawing of his comfortable presence, Cant.
5. 1, 2, 3. etc. But let us put the case, that the felt joy of the spirit were
not abused, yet is it not unusual for God to withdraw consolation, and to send
trouble and anguish on the soul of his dear child, to try his faith and train
him on to hold the word of his grace, in the hardest condition he can be into,
as he did exercise Job, and Jeremy the Prophet, Ier. 20. and the Psalmist, Ps.
77. In which condition, to suspect that the consolation and joy of the spirit,
speaking to the heart by his word, is not his gracious operation, or is a
delusion, cannot but exceedingly grieve the Lord, and give him cause to
chastise this suspicion with desertion.

6. But how may I know, says the afflicted, that my joy was solid and was
indeed the gracious operation of the holy Spirit? For answer, 1. If this joy
was given to him when, or after, he was lamenting his sins, and fearing wrath
deserved, and flying unto Christ offered in the Gospel, he has reason to
reckon that joy to be such as the Word of the Gospel does promise and approve.
2. If during the time of his sweet feeling of peace and joy through Christ, he
found his faith in God, and love to Christ confirmed and strengthened, if the
Word of the Gospel was in more estimation with him, if his heart was enlarged
to bless, praise and thank God for manifesting himself in Christ reconciled,
if the purpose of following after holiness was renewed in him, he has no
reason to suspect his joy and comfort. 3. If after the removing of this sweet
feeling he is going on in the study of holiness, believing in Christ, how
heavy in heart soever he may be, by affliction and tentation, he may be assured
his sometime felt joy of the Lords Spirit was solid, and his present suspicion
thereof to be an evidence of his infirmity, and of a tentation from Satan.
This was the way how the Psalmist wrestled out of his sad condition, Ps. 77.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the converts suspecting, that his zeal for God and against the sins of
others has been fleshly severity and imprudent temerity
IT comes to pass, that they who love God sincerely, and cannot endure the
out-breakings of the wicked, do sometimes transgress the bounds of moderat
zeal, and being overtaken in some miscarriage, for which being rebuked by their
friends, or by them in power censured or civilly chastised, do in stead of
moderating their zeal in time coming, grow more slack and remiss in their
zeal, suspecting themselves inclined to unreasonable severity and rashness,
and ready to be esteemed haters of men's persons by those among whom they live,
as in some bygone experience they have already felt. And upon this occasion
the tentation of Satan falls on, tending to extinguish the fervency of true
zeal required in all true converts.

And here there is danger lest true zeal grow cold, and the convert become
lukewarm, both in curbing sin in others under his charge, and in pursuing
duties in his own person. In which sickness he may be the better pleased with
himself, by so much as his friends and others do commend him for his moderation
and prudence, as they shall call it.

2. As to the remedy of this evil, there is no doubt, but that may befall true
zeal, which is common to other virtues, of which there is none so perfect, but
some in-lake or excess may be observed in them. And therefore, as it is
without reason to go back from pursuing duty in the exercise of other virtues,
because imperfections therein are remarkable from time to time, So is it
without reason to grow lukewarm in zeal which may render a man loathsome unto
Christ, Rev. 2. 3. Wherefore let the convert take heed what the Lords Word does
require of him in his calling, and labor to discharge his duty toward others,
so as he may be found both zealous and prudent, that in the expressions of his
zeal against sin, meekness and love to the offender may be manifested. 2. To
this intent, let the convert carefully take heed to entertain these three
properties of commendable zeal, which are, 1. The fear of God. 2. Humility of
heart. 3. The love of his neighbor: for, the fear of God will not suffer the
convert to depart from his commandments; Humility of heart will make the man
modest in his expressions; and the love of his neighbor will make him mix
meekness and compassion toward sinners with his zeal against offenses. This is
the right seasoning of zeal, which the Apostle calls the zeal of God
according to knowledge.

CHAP. XV.
Of the converts suspecting his aiming at circumspect walking, shall be found
in him scrupulosity.
SOmetime it comes to pass, that the convert, being under hard exercise
before his consolation, does put on the whole armor of God, and studieth to
walk circumspectly for a while, but after a time he becomes somewhat weary of
the yoke, suspecting he has given too much way unto scrupulosity, whereupon he
becomes more remiss and slack in his watchfulness and diligence, laying
aside the armor of God, as David laid aside the armor of King Saul, wherewith
he was not accustomed.

For satisfying himself in this course, I presuppone he makes use of three
pretended reasons. The first is, because it is impossible for any man to attain
to such circumspection in his carriage as becomes him: for, it is no less
then to aim at perfect obedience of the law, which the Apostle has declared to
be impossible, because of the weakness of the flesh, Romans 8. 3. The next
pretended reason is, because this bending of a man's spirit makes the
conscience unquiet, that a man cannot enjoy the peace of God granted in the
Gospel. The third pretended reason is, because it does restrain christian
liberty in many things lawful, so as a man can neither make use of recreation
of body, or mind without scruple; and here we must beware on the one hand lest
we give way to any degree of mis-regarding the law, which is the error of the
Antinomians; and on the other hand, lest we ensnare the conscience of converts,
and hinder them in the lawful use of what God does allow unto them.

2. For remedy of this evil, let the convert know that there is a necessity of
aiming at circumspect walking. This duty is indispensable: for, if a chink be
opened here in the vessel for the least entry of water, it may ere long fill
and sink the whole ship: for, the command stands unmovable, ^h^b. 12. 14.
Follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. And, 1 Pet. 1. 15. As he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in
all manner of conversation. And, Mat. 5. 48. Christ has said, Be ye perfect,
as your father in heaven is perfect.

This ground being laid, let us examine these three pretended reasons. As to
the first, albeit the attaining unto the perfect obedience of the Law in this
life be impossible, because of the infirmity of corrupt nature; yet, the aiming
at the perfect obedience of Gods Commands is both possible and profitable, and
he who aims at perfection of obedience in this life, shall attain it fully in
the life to come. It is one thing to give perfect obedience unto the Law, for
in many things we do sin all of us; another thing to endeavor, according to
the measure of grace given, to obey the Law perfectly. For, God, who has
loosed converts, fled to Christ, from the convenant of Works or the covenant of
the Law, he has not loosed his subjects from obedience to the Lawgiver, he
has not abolished the ten Commands, he has not loosed the duties of the
redeemed and converted souls, but by receiving them in favor through faith in
Christ, he does augment their obligation to serve the Lord their Redeemer, so
much more cheerfully and carefully, as the grace is large in forgiving them
their sins, and translating them from the slavery of sin and Satan, into the
kingdom of Christ.

Again, albeit it be true, that it is impossible to attain perfect obedience
unto the Law, yet there is great advantage to be had by circumspect walking and
aiming at perfect obedience: for, this, 1. does glorify our heavenly Father,
when we strive to be conform to his will and to have respect to all his
commands. 2. This endeavor adorneth the Gospel and profession of our most holy
faith, whereby we lay hold on the grace of free justification, that we may
become the servants of righteousness indeed. 3. This endeavor bears
witness of our since^ desire to serve God with all our heart, albeit we attain
not to the perfection of obedience in this life. 4. This endeavor gives unto
us daily, new matter of humiliation, when in our aiming at our duty, we come
very short of our mark we shoot at. 5. This endeavor and short-coming, for all
we can do, makes us despair of seeking justification by works before God, and
to esteem highly, and make use by faith, of Christ's satisfaction for us imputed
to us for righteousness, which is a garment able to hide our imperfections and
nakedness. 6. This endeavor to walk circumspectly, puts us to the exercise of
all christian graces, and to strive with others and with our selves, to perfect
holiness in the fear of God.

3. As for the second pretended reason, that this endeavor, to walk
circumspectly, may make the conscience unquiet, it puts a foul aspersion on the
holy precept of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16, 17. who has declared this to be
a man's wisdom, and so a good mean of making his conscience quiet, and to
establish in it the peace of God: For, by this endeavor, to walk
circumspectly, believers in Christ are assured, that they are without the reach
of condemnation, because they walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,
Romans 8. 1. Secondly, this endeavor is the evidence of a good conscience, which
accompanyeth true faith, and in a manner, does guard the conscience from just
challenges which might trouble the same. Thirdly, by this endeavor, the
believer is, by a holy necessity, forced to cleave closse unto Christ, to
converse with him in heaven, that the pollution of daily sin may be washen
away, by new application of Christ's expiarory sacrifice to the believer, and
that Christ may let forth more strength to him to walk in the way of commanded
duties, and so the convert may stand in the grace of God. Thus the peace of
God, offered and covenanted in the Gospel, is preserved in him, so long as this
endeavor, to walk circumspectly, is entertained.

4. As for the third pretended reason against circumspect walking, as if by it
Christian-liberty shall be crossed and cut short, it is a false pretense; for,
the contrair is true, that Christian-liberty is not hurt, but helped and
preserved, by circumspect walking: for, this is true Christian-liberty, to have
allowance of the use of the benefits which God does bestow with his blessing,
so far as may serve our welfare; seeing it is not a point of
Christian-liberty, licentiously, by intemperance, to abuse Gods benefits, and
turn them to our own hurt. Wherefore, let our heart be all day in the fear of
God, that we may, in lawful manner, make use of lawful things; neither does
the study of holiness make recreations of body and mind unlawful, but
restrains immoderat and untimeous use of things lawful. All that Christian
liberty grants unto us, is, that whether we eat or drink, or what lawful
thing else we do, we do all for the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. that is, so as
we may be strengthened and set forward, to glorify God in Christ in necessar
duties. As for the manner and measure to be kept in the use of things lawful,
prudence must be asked of God, who will direct us in this as in other Christian
duties.

CHAP. XVI.
Concerning the converts suspicion, that his softness of heart is nothing but a
natural disposition to weep upon any occasion.
When the Lord has taken away from the sinner a heart of stone, and has
given unto him a heart of flesh, so that he dar not any more harden himself
against the threatenings of Gods Word, but does tremble at the hearing thereof,
as speaks Isaiah, 66. 2. and in his prayer does pour forth his heart
ordinarily with tears, he may (as experience has taught) fall in a suspicion
of this ordinar or frequent melting of heart, as if it were nothing else but a
childish or woman-like temper of body and spirit, and no evidence of contrition
for spiritual causes, which the Scripture requires and commends in the
penitent.

2. In this case there is danger on either hand, if the convert be not wary and
circumspect in this condition; for, on the one hand he is in hazard of making
light account of the work of God, who has taken from him the heart of stone,
and given him an heart of flesh. On the other hand, he is in hazard of laying
too much weight on his tears, if once he be satisfied about the suspicion he
has of his own tears, and made clear, that they were proofs and evidences of
his sincerity in his prayers to God.

That there is a danger on either hand, experience has taught; for, some
sincere converts, having entertained the suspicion, that their tears in prayer
proceeded from the soft temper of their natural complexion and disposition of
spirit, have resisted their inclination to mourn, and striven against letting
forth of tears so far, that they have become so dry for a long time, and have
prayed more perfunctoriously then before, that when just causes of grief and
tears were given unto them, they were not able to bring forth one tear for
easing of their grieved heart. On the other hand, experience has taught, that
some, looking upon the expressions of the Saints in Scripture concerning their
tears, have laid so much weight upon their tears, as they have numbered, in a
manner, all the drops of their eyes, and from the less or more quantity of
them, made reckoning of their own better or worse condition, and of Gods
acceptance of their prayers less or more.

3. This tenderness of heart, and easiness to be moved unto tears, for
spiritual motives, is a rare gift. Few they are, who with sense of the body of
death and original sin bearing them down, do lament their natural sinfulness
in their best condition with Paul, Romans 7. 24. Few shall be found so
affectionat, to the glory of God and salvation of peoples souls, as to pour out
tears both in secret and openly, for promoving thereof, as the Apostle did,
Act. 20. 19, 21. and, 2 Cor. 2. 4. Few like Timothy, whose heart was so tender,
that the Apostle could not but observe his tears, and remember them, 2 Timothy 1.
4. Yet, we doubt not, that from age to age sundry be, who by the grace of God
have this constantly melting heart, according to the measure of Gods free
donation, some with tears, some without tears. And therefore, if there be found
in such mourners, an honest endeavor to walk circumspectly, let not the
suspicion, that their tenderness is but natural weakness of spirit or bodily
complexion, be entertained. Only let the giver of the grace of a tender heart
be relied upon, and not their tears, as if they were any more then witnesses of
their honest affection in spiritual exercises; for, such prayers may prove
sincere and acceptable to God, both when they cannot mourn, and also when their
heart seems withered, hard and dry.

CHAP. XVII.
Concerning the converts suspicion, that all his devotion is but lip-labor
which is not joined with a tender and melting heart, and with Gods sensible
approbation.
AS some are suspicious of their condition, because of their ordinar
tenderness and melting of heart; So other some are suspicious of their
condition, because they find not their heart tender and soft in their devotion.
All converts do agree in this, that God must be worshipped in spirit and truth,
and that it is not acceptable worship to God, if a man draw near him with his
lips, when his heart is far from him: whereupon, every convert, when he is
mindful of his duty, goes about to worship God with understanding and inward
affection of heart, to confess sin, deprecat wrath, ask of God things
necessar, interceed for others, give thanks to God for his benefits, and praise
him for his works and working, so as his affections may be conform to his
expressions, and the conscience may approve both his words and his hearty
affections, and God may, with his peace and consolation, approve the worshiper.
But some converts are, who, albeit in sincerity they worship God, yet they
count all their devotion to be but lip-labor, except they find their
affections wakened up and their heart tender, and some vigor of spiritual life
in their exercises, and the sense of Gods approbation of their worship, by
giving sense of his peace and consolation to them in their worship. Hence
oft-times does suspicion arise, without just ground, that they are deserted of
God, that he is displeased with them; and this suspicion being entertained,
does send forth complaints, and brings on coldrifenesse in prayer and
discouragement.

2. This unjust suspicion of the grace of prayer, the Lord does oft-times
chastise by withdrawing peace and comfort, and order in prayer and of words
also, that he who complained that his devotion was but lip-labor, because he
sound not such measure of affection as he would have had, nor that consolation
which he wished to have, shall find himself in worse taking after his
complaining, then he was in at first, when he began to suspect his condition.
It is true, that confusion of mind, and want of words to express the case
wherein he is, may fall on a convert, by reason of afflictions and manifold
temptations, and yet he may be free from this suspicion of Gods affection and
acceptance of his person and prayers; as the Apostle does teach us, Romans 8.
26. Likewayes, the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us,
with groanings which cannot be uttered. But when this cutting short of the gift
of prayer, in any measure, does follow after suspicion of Gods respect and good
will toward the complaining and discouraged convert, it is a fatherly
chastisement from God, threatening the convert with a greater measure of
desertion and heavier temptation, except he repent his folly and return to God,
whom by his suspicion and misbelief he has offended.

3. For remedy of this evil, these five things must be distinguished by the
afflicted convert; 1. the labor of the lips, or formality in prayer or
devotion; 2. prayer in faith; 3. prayer with felt and observed affection in
prayer; 4. prayer approven of God; 5. prayer with the sense and feeling of Gods
approbation.

As to the first, the labor of the lips, or formality in prayer which the
Scripture does condemn, is when a man prays with his mouth for things
necessar or lawful and is about the external work of devotion, wherein he
pleases himself, and does rest upon the work wrought without affection of
heart or faith, as we see, Is. 58. 1, 2, 3. and this is not the case of the
convert of whom we are speaking; for, because he esteems his devotion to be but
a formality, he is displeased with himself and is unquiet.

As to the second, prayer in faith, is when the convert misseth freedom of
speech, and answerable affection to his speech in his devotion in prayer,
praises, thanksgiving, intercession, etc. yet, because the duty is commanded,
he does offer it up to God with hope of acceptance, and yet is displeased with
himself, and humbled in the sense of his coldrife affections, which is the duty
of the convert of whom we are speaking, but the not esteeming this his devotion
through Christ acceptable, is his fault.

As to the third; prayer or devotion with felt affection in discharging it, is
when the convert pours out his heart unto God with fredom of speech, and yet
cannot be quiet, because he does not feel any sign of Gods approbation of him
and hearing of his supplication, and this was the case of the Psalmist in
sundry Psalms. But this is not the case of the convert we are speaking of; for,
he complains of the hardness of his heart and want of affection, and does
weaken his own faith, which is his fault.

As to the fourth; prayer approven of God, is when the convert does offer his
devotion to God in sincerity, and prays for what is promised, in hope to be
heard and answered in due time. And this prayer or devotion is approven by God
in Scripture, whether the convert be satisfied with the measure of answerable
affection to his words, or not, as the Apostle testifies. 1 Ioh. 5. 14, 15.
And this should be observed by the convert, of whom we are speaking, for
rectifying his judgment and quieting of him, albeit he neither find his
affection moved as he would, nor find consolation from God as he would.

As to the fifth; prayer or devotion, with the sense and feeling of Gods
approbation, is when God not only approves the converts prayer and devotion,
by his Word in the Scripture, but also by his Spirit does sensibly comfort the
supplicant, and sends him to his calling with joy. So did he deal oft-times
with the Psalmist David, and so did he comfort Samuels mother, in, and after
her prayer, 1 Samuel 1. This is the thing which the convert we speak of would be
at, and which would satisfy him if he could come to it.

4. This condition is the sweetest to the supplicant, and much to be desired,
with submission to Gods dispensation whatsoever it be, but it is not the only
condition acceptable to God, as we see, 1 Ioh. 5. 14. 15. This is the
confidence which we have in God, that if we ask any thing according to his will
he hears us, and if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask we know we
have the petitions that we desired of him. And that the matter is so, may be
perceived in David's condition at sundry times; for, Ps. 119, seven or eight
times he prays, Quicken thou me according to thy word. He finds in himself
much deadness of spirit, yet he continues meekly praying to be quickened in
the service of God.

5. Wherefore, so often as the convert is displeased for any defect he finds in
his devotion, let him, 1. humble himself in the sense of his imperfection, and
betake himself so much the more to the intercession of Christ, and lay hold
more firmly upon the satisfaction made by the Mediator, and draw by faith
grace for grace out of his fullness, and let him in faith and sincerity worship
God, and live holily in his conversation and not be afraid that his devotion
shall be esteemed of God to be but lip-labor. 2. To this end, let him rightly
construe Gods dispensation, and consider that his gifts are wisely given forth
for the good of his people: for, sometime he gives to will that which is good,
without ability for the time to effectuat what the convert wills; he may give
a willing heart to pray affectionatly, and not for the time grant ability to
pray as his child would, Romans 7. 18. Sometime he may give no more but to sigh
and groan, without ability to express the confused desires of his heart, Romans
8. 26, 27. Sometime he will suggest words, and make the supplicant in sincerity
of faith present the words put in his mouth, Hos, 14. 1. 2. Sometime he will
grant to the supplicant to bear out much disputation in his prayers, without
sensible consolation, Ps. 77. Sometime he will grant the supplicant a loosed
heart in prayer and abundance of tears, and yet seem for a time not to regard
them, Ps. 6. Sometime he will grant confidence and consolation to the
supplicant, as, Ps. 6. and many other Psalms. And certainly, the variety of
divine dispensation to his children cannot be told; in all which, he requires
of his supplicants meek submission, and perseverance in prayer, with confidence
to find a good answer at last: for, if his child do not accept well of the
measure which is bestowed on him, he may readily find the measure he complained
of, more scant, and confusion of mind without words to fall upon him, and if
yet he shall not wisely submit himself to Gods exercising of him, he may fall
in harder trouble and questioning of his state in grace, and be tempted to
restrain prayer till he cease complaining, and fly for refuge to Christ the
Mediator, and come to a better estimation of the measure of presence with him
when he began to complain.

CHAP. XVIII.
Concerning the converts looking upon the sight of his faith, as if it were the
failing of his faith.
SIncere faith in Christ is the special grace of God, given to the elect only;
which grace, the more we do exercise it, the more we please God: for, without
faith it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11. 6. This saving grace the Lord
takes pleasure to put it unto trial and exercise, that thereby he may train
it on, and foster and increase it, and bring it forth to light, both for his
own glory and for the commendation of his children, as is told us, 1. Pet. 1.
7. In which exercise, the true convert is oft-times much mistaken, and does
mis-construe his condition. The reasons are, 1: the faith of young converts is
very imperfect, knowledge is many ways darkened, and the application of
promises is very weak. 2. When Satan by his tentations obscures the truth,
which should strengthen faith, the convert finding himself in the mist, may be
at a stand, till his sight be cleared up and he freed from the tentation. 3.
The sincere convert, in the conscience of his own imperfection, and
consideration of the deceitfulness of the heart, is wary and suspicious, that
he may be easily deceived, and take historical or temporal faith for true
saving faith, and so does readily lay hold on Satan's suggestions against the
sincerity of his ^aith. 4. In the conflict, which his faith oft-times has with
mis-belief, strengthened by Satan's tentations, he finds himself now and then
foiled by yielding unto the suggestion of Satan; as David's experience teaches
may befall both the elder and younger soldiers, Ps. ^^6. 11. I said in my
haste, all men are liars, meaning Samuel and other Prophets, who promised to
David in Gods name he should be King. 5. In the fight of faith, some infirmity
is always manifested, and the convert is forced to acknowledge, that his faith
is not so strong as he supposed it to be before the fight, whereupon he is
ready to suspect his fight in faith to be a fainting and decaying in faith. 6.
Sometime the convert by giving way to sin, does grieve the holy Spirit, and
provoke him to withdraw his comfortable testimony, which he gave in former time
to the convert, which brings him into suspicion of the sincerity of his
faith, which seemed to himself sound and unfeigned before.

2. This case is both troublesome to the convert and dangerous; for, till it be
cured, it grows like a rageing fever, and sets upon the vital power of
justifying faith, and at least hinders the exercise thereof not a little.

For remedy whereof, let the afflicted convert put difference between an infirm
faith, and felt infirmity in faith fighting: for, albeit the convert, in the
conflict of faith against tentations to mis-belief, do feel infirmity, yet is
not his faith to be accounted infirm simply, because whatsoever infirmity he
feels in his fight, yet his fighting against tentations proves his faith to be
so much the stronger, as he resists mis-belief and cleaves closer to Christ.

2. Let him consider, that the Lord suffers his child to be exercised with
tentations, of set purpose to humble him, and empty him of all confidence in
his own wisdom, righteousness and strength, that he may gather strength in his
fighting, by Scripture, holden up to God in prayer, and so wax valiant in
fight, as believers have been helped before, Heb. 11. 34.

3. Let the convert put difference between faith and a settled persuasion: for,
settled and full persuasion excludes all dubitation for the time, But saving
faith may may be where doubting is and unbelief is felt; as the father of the
possessed child in his prayer to Christ makes manifest, Lord, I believe, says
he, help my unbelief.

4. Let him put difference between dubitation suggested, and faith striving to
overcome dubitation: for, dubitation bewrays infirmity of faith, but striving
against dubitation, does evidence life and vigor in faith to be present, and
is acceptable service to God.

5. Let him put difference between the doubting of the truth of the promise and
the weak griping of it; for he that doubts of the truth of the promise, is, (
Iam. 1. 6, 7.) like a wave of the sea, and can expect nothing, But he that
lays hold on the promise, with a trembling hand, and striveth to hold it fast
against doubting, may expect to obtain.

6. Let him put difference between his suspicion of the failing of his faith
and the right judging of it: for, in the mean time of his fighting and fear of
failing, he goes on in exercise of faith, fearing to succumb, yet resolute not
to depart from Christ: In the love and estimation of whose grace, he goes on
and grows, longing for the victory and for a nearer felt fellowship with him;
which if he did observe and consider, his judgment should be rectified.

Last of all, let him put difference between a hasty apprehension of the
failing of his faith, and a fixed opinion that his faith is but fancy: for, a
strong soldier may be surprised on a sudden (as David, Ps. 31. 22. and Ps.
116. 11. and Jonah, 2. 3, 4. do furnish instances) who shortly after did gather
their courage and entered the lists afresh, and became victorious against their
tentations unto misbelief.

Therefore let the wrestler be of good courage; for, nothing can prove the
sincerity of his faith more then his wrestling against distrust, and his
looking toward Christ through all the clouds which hinder his sight, and his
sorrowing for his unbelief, for his weak holding grip of the covenant of grace,
and for his inability to glorify the truth of the Gospel, and rich grace of
God offered in Christ: Especially when he considers, that the Spirit of
Christ commends the exercise of faith, with variety of temptations, for a
matter of great joy, Iam. 1. 2, 3.

CHAP. XIX.
Concerning the converts straitning his charity toward others, more then he did
at the first time of his conversion, conceiving his former larger charity, was
unwarrantable folly.
ALl converts must agree to Christ's saying, Ioh. 13. 35. By this shall all men
know, that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another. No man doubts
of this his duty in general; but sundry make question about the exercise and
expression of their charity: for, some conceive, that their former charity (in
the matter of judging of others, and in the matter of affection to others, and in
the matter of actual expression of their charity) has been ill bestowed toward
unworthy and ill-deserving persons. And this they reckon to have been folly;
and therefore do resolve to dispose of their judgment, affection and good
deeds more prudently then they have done, that their charitable estimation,
affection and expression actual, shall be drawn forth toward the worthy and
well-deserving disciples of their acquaintance, thus they condemn for folly
what was right indeed. The main pretenses of reason for their resolution, are
two. The first is, because they perceive many whom they judge wise and godly,
to exclude from the number of believers, or disciples of Christ, all in whom
the evident signs of regeneration do not appear, and so do think they may draw
the circle of their charity in strait and narrow bounds, and may shun to keep
Church Fellowship in the pure Ordinances of Christ with any, save approven
visible Saints. The other pretense is, because they have found themselves
oft-times deceived by those, of whom sometime they have entertained good
thoughts, and no small estimation.

1. As for the first pretense, it belongs to the question of the constitution
of visible Churches, whether it be founded upon visible Sanctity or evidences
of Regeneration, or upon visible entering in the external covenant of Grace,
and profession of subjection to the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ. Of which
question, there is enough written by learned and godly men, and and in this
place it does not fall in conveniently to be disputed.

2. Concerning the other pretense, of being oft-times deceived by sundry, such
as were unworthy of respect; we grant, that there are many hypocrites who
pretend to be Saints, and worthy to be blamed in that respect: and it is no
wonder, that the charity of many wax cold, when so many speak vanity, every man
to his neighbor, Ps. 12. 2. for this our Lord foretold, Mat. 24. 12. Because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. Yet, it is not
justifiable to cut charity short, because of men's ill-deserving; Rivers of
tears, says David, run down my eyes, because they keep not thy Commands. Here
is love to Gods glory, and pity toward perishing ^ouls; such mourners were
spared in the day of Gods wrath. Ezekiel. 9. 9.

1. Ob. But some may say, the same Psalmist did hate the wicked and profane.
Ans. 1. But he did so with a perfect hatred, not with a carnal and corrupt
hatred against their persons, but with a spiritual and sincere hatred, tending
to the abolishing of their vice and safety of their persons; for which end, the
Psalmist presents his affections to be examined of God, and teaches men, by
his example, to purify their hearts in hating sinners. 2. (...) ca^e, that God
did reveal unto the Prophet the reprobation of some enemies of God, for whose
perdition he prayed in sundry Psalms, that the justice of God might be
ministered, and the Church preserved from their malice. This his practice is
not to be imi^a^ by them who know not of what spirit ^hey are and cannot
justify before God the integrity of (...) ^earts in the particular.

2. Ob. But, put case, says one, that I am a civil Judge, shall my charity
hinder justice and cutting off malefactors, man-slayers, or others suchlike?
Ans. Not; for, charity to the malefactor may stand with the love of Justice and
the Commonwealth, when the malefactor is adjudged to death. For, when Joshua
was to destroy Achan, he exhorted him to repent and give glory to God, that his
soul might be saved, Ios. 7. 19. Likewayes, the Prophets, when they denounced
the destruction of Cities and Nations, had melting hearts in compassion toward
them who were condemned by God, Is. 16. 11. Ier, 48. 36. and Christ our Lord,
charity it self, weeped for the misery of Jerusalem, destinat justly to
destruction, Mat. 23. 37.

3. Obj. But, (says he) a special regard must be had toward believers in the
exercise of charity, Gal. 6. 10. Ans. It is true; but the Apostles words are,
As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them that
are of the housheld of faith. Which household consists of all them, who by
profession have subjected themselves to the doctrine and discipline of Christ,
and are members of the visible Church.

4. Ob. But (says he) as all that are of Israel, are not the Israel of God,
Romans 9. 6. So all that are in the visible Church, are not of the household of
God. Ans. Who has made thee a Judge either to discern who are elect, who not?
or to discern what shall become of this man or that man, whereby thou may
abandon charity toward him? God has given to us his Spirit, says the Apostle,
that we may know what saving grace he has given to our selves, but not to know
what he has bestowed on others. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. God, who only searches the
secrets of all hearts, has reserved the judgments of men's hearts to himself,
and he alone can discern who is the hypocrit, and in whose heart there is no
guil.

5. Ob. But (says he) the judgment of charity i^ not blind, but should be
according as the truth is; otherwise, I shall esteem a man a true convert, who
is not regenerat, and so deceive my self. Ans. The judgment of charity,
concerning other men's inward estate and condition, is not one always with the
judgment according to verity; for, the rule of the judgment of charity, is
equity and commanded duty, reserving the judgment according to verity to God.
For this distinction the Apostle gives ground, Phil. 1. 6, 7. in charity
judging all the Philippians to be sincere converts; he says, his speech and
estimation of them was according as was meet for him to think. Now equity
required, that he should judge the best of them all, albeit he did not know the
hearts of them all, as he says, 1. Cor. 13. 7. charity believes all things,
hops all things, endures all things. But, for the judgment of other men's
estate and condition in grace, according to verity, he does forbid men to judge
before the time, 1 Cor. 4. 3. 5. Romans 14. 4. Iam. 4. 12. And, 1 Pet. 5. 12. the
Apostle, speaking in charity of Sylvanus, says, he is a faithful brother, as
I suppose. 2. If we see it our duty to show charity to our neighbor,
whatsoever he be, our charity is not blind, but clear-sighted.

6. Ob. But (says he) men's profanity, wickedness and atheism, may clearly be
seen; for, the Psalmist says, The transgression of the wicked says within my
heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes, Ps. 36. 1. and Christ,
speaking of false Prophets, Mat. 7. 16. says, Ye shall know them by their
fruits.

Ans. What the Prophet says by the Spirit, and what Christ says, is true; and
we grant, that men's ill deeds and corrupt doctrine, do be wray their naughty
inward disposition: but what serves this to justify thy rash judgment of thy
brother, that there is no saving work of grace in him, because they cannot
perceive the evident signs thereof in him, in whom possibly thou cannot find
any reigning vice, or open out-breaking scandals? What does this serve to
hinder expressions and fruits of charity toward open sinners, so long as God
waits patiently on their repentance? It is one thing to be wary, lest we be
infected with the contagion of men's ill manners or corrupt doctrine; another
thing to cut them off from being the objects of our charity.

7. Ob. But we are forbidden (says he) to have fellowship with sinners who may
intise us to sin, Pro. 1. 11. and to make friendship with an angry man, Pro.
22. 24.

Ans. This wariness may consist with charity: for, albeit we cannot be
partakers with evil workers, or enter in needless familiarity with those with
whom we cannot converse and be free of damnage from them, yet we may not
exclude them from the object of our charity, or carry our selves so toward
them, as they can take no good from our hand: for, so long as we live in the
world, we must follow peace with all men and holiness, Heb. 12* 14. 1 Cor. 5.
10,

8. Obj. Albeit it be true, that we must in common duties of civility and
humanity, prudently behave our selves, yet we must carry otherwise to
professed Christians, if their conversation be grossly scandalous; for, with
such we are forbidden to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11.

Ans. This place pertains to the exercise of the key of discipline, and
execution of the censure of excommunication judicially pronounced by the
Church; as, ver. 12. following, does declare. And this, as it does not cut off
natural duties of parents, or children, or parties married one to another, So
it can well consist with charity toward the excommunicat, who, in order to his
salvation, should be thus dealt with, that he may be humbled and brought to
repentance: And so does the Apostle give warrant; for when he has given order
to excommunicat such as walk disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14, 15. he subjoines, for
keeping charity to the excommunicat person, saying, Count him not as an enemy,
but admonish him as a brother.

9. Obj. But I (says he) have been mistaken and deceived oft-times when I
esteemed charitably of some, loved them dearly, and bestowed not sparingly on
those who proved afterward unworthy of such respect and dealing.

Ans. Our Lords words may satisfy this objection, promising whatsoever is done
to a disciple, in name of a disciple, shall not want a reward. Thou therefore
needs not count thy self deceived in this respect. But, if thou by rash
intruding thy self, to judge better or worse of the man's inward condition, has
deceived thy self, be more wise in time coming. For remedy of this evil, 1. let
not the convert, mistaken in the point of charity, be feared to be mistaken and
hindered from exercise of his charity, because he knows not the sincerity of
the man's profession: There are relations enough between him and the party
toward whom charity is to be exercised, such as bonds natural, civil,
ecclesiastic and spiritual, obliging to the duty. 2. Let him be sparing in
judging of his neighbor, even within himself, and far more in expressing his
judgment of him to his prejudice. 3. Let him rather judge this, that he lay no
stumbling block before his feet, which may hinder him in a good, or harden him
in an evil course, Romans 14. 13. Let him not be rigid and censorious in
aggreging every sinful infirmity in his neighbor, for this is forbidden, Iam.
3. 1, 2. In a word, let a convert beware to alienat any man from making use of
his charity, whether by injust suspicion of him, or inhumane dealing with him,
or imprudent speeches of him, but rather let his whole carriage toward all in
every case be such, that a patent door may be for mutual giving and getting
good one by another.

CHAP. XX.
Concerning the converts mistaking his condition, because of felt in-lake in
his charity and love to God and men.
HItherto we have spoken of two sorts of the converts mistaking of their
condition, and have given some instances of their being well pleased with
themselves in an evil condition; and some instances of their being displeased
with themselves in a good condition. It follows, that we give some instances of
a third sort of mistaking in the converts complaining of his condition, as if
it were altogether evil, when indeed his condition is partly good and partly
evil; and the first shall be of those who do lament their condition, because
they cannot be affected with the sense of their sins, nor with the sense of
Gods benefits and favors bestowed on them, as they should, cannot be affected
with the sense of threatened judgments as is required, and cannot be affected
with the sense of the miseries and mercies dispensed toward others, and cannot
come up to the obedience of the Apostles precept, to rejoice with them that
rejoice, and to mourn with them that mourn, which does so afflict them, as they
reckon this their condition altogether evil, and are near unto discouragment,
because of their apprehended hardness of heart.

2. For remedy of this evil, 1. let the convert consider, that the hardness of
heart whereof he complains, is not that hardness of heart which the Scripture
calls hardness of heart: For, the Scriptures do not charge any man of this
sin who lamenteth his sinfulness, but those who do not acknowledge their sins,
and go on in them when they hear them reproved, mis-regarding what God says,
commands, commends or threatens. Mean time we do not deny, but those
in-lakes whereof the convert does complain, are sinful defects of duty, and
inclinations of corrupt nature unto hardness of heart. But we deny, that this
defect lamented, is charged in Scripture for hardness of heart. 2. Let the
convert consider the difference between the evil whereof he complains, and
the good gift of God pointing out that evil unto him, and making him to
dis-allow it and lament it, and he shall find his condition not altogether
evil, but such as he has cause to be humbled in himself for it, and also to
bless God for discovering this defect, and making him lament it. 3. Let him
consider, that his lamenting his coldrise affection to God and his small
compassion toward men, is good and commendable; for this lamenting the defect,
bears witness of his will and desire toward the duty, and in effect is a
part of the exercise of repentance, and of begun renovation of his heart. 4.
Let him consider, that there may be made good use of this condition, both for
the exercise of humility, because of felt defects of needful graces, and also
for the exercise of faith in Christ, by application of his imputed
righteousness, which hides the nakedness of felt defects, and drawing virtue
from Christ to sanctify and renew the heart more and more. 5. And last of all,
let the convert under the sense of this defect in his affection, study to bring
forth the effects of those affections, that is to say, let him go about to do
the work of a lover of God, in having respect to all his commandments, and to
do the work of a compassionat affection toward men in misery of soul or body,
and so what seems to him in-laking in his heart, shall be found forthcoming in
his hand and actions for the greater glory to God and edification of his
neighbor.

CHAP. XXI.
Concerning the converts despising of his own exercises of religion, because of
his felt vanity of mind therein.
ALI true co^verts do agree in this principle, that God should be worshipped in
spirit and truth, and that the more a man strive to be sincere and upright in
his worship, the less can be comport with the sin which does hinder his
worship. When therefore a true convert does perceive in himself so great levity
of his thoughts, that in the very time of hearing Sermon, praying to God* or
singing of Psalms, his mind runs out to think of naughty and profane things,
impertinent, idle and foolish matters, unworthy of his thoughts at any time, but
most untimous and sinful in the time of divine service, he is so displeased
with his condition, that he condemns all the service and devotion he is about
for the time, and cast it away as altogether polluted; and if he find this
sickness from day to day cleaving fast unto him, he falls in discouragement,
and in question with himself, whether it be better to break off at least in
secret, such ragged worship, or to go on to offer the sacrifice of a fool unto
God: for, so he does esteem of his devotion, thus leavened, with vaiging and
vanity of his mind.

In this case, the convert does not only mis-regard what is right in his
devotion, or divine service, but also by fretting, discouragement and
mis-behaviour of his spirit, is ready to augment his sinful condition, and to
provoke the Lord to be wroth with him indeed.

2. For remedy of this evil, let the convert judge wisely of his condition,
that he charge not himself with guiltiness more then he ought to do, and that
he may take a right course to be free of guiltiness, and healed of this
sickness where guiltiness is found. And to this end, 1. let him put
difference between vaiging of mind with interruption of worship, and the
natural course of his fantasy and understanding, which may consist with the
continued acts of worship; for, as the eyes of a man, running to some place,
cannot choose but see every visible thing in his way, and yet runs on
without staying till he come to the place he aims at; So the fantasy and
understanding, cannot choose but take up, and discern whatsoever is offered
unto them in time of prayer from the outward senses, or from the memory, and
yet make no interruption of prayer, such is the natural agility of a man's mind;
and therefore this natural course of imagination or fantasy, must not be
charged as guiltiness upon the worshiper, who follows on the work of worship
notwithstanding. 2. Sundry suggestions may be cast into the converts mind by
Satan to mar his worship, which must be charged on Satan chiefly, and the
worshiper not always made guilty thereby. 3. When the worship indeed is
interrupted, and the mind falls off from the work of devotion, or divine
service, and enters upon discourses about vain, vile, or impertinent matters,
let the convert not only acknowledge guiltiness here, but also examine, if
this his vaiging of mind in prayer and divine service, be not also a
chastisement from God for his not acknowledging of God in his affairs, and and
for loosing reins to his mind to roave all the day, which justly meets him at
night in his devotion, as a rod on his back for his voluntar vaiging from God
in his former walking.

3. These considerations being premised, and the sins which have drawn on this
evil being discovered, and the power of indwelling-sin perceived, and the power
of Satan's temptations noticed, and the Lords chastiseing rod justified, and
his own culpable infirmity acknowledged; 1. Let him humble himself and fly to
the rich grace of God offered in Christ, and lay stronger hold on the
satisfaction made by Christ, imputed to all believers in him, that guiltiness
may be, by free pardon, removed. 2. Let him pray for more assistance of the
holy Spirit in all the exercises of religion, and expect a gracious granting
thereof, in Gods wise dispensation, of the measure of his grace in the use of
holy Ordinances. 3. Let his heart be in the fear of the Lord all the day long,
making him lift up his eyes from time to time to God in the midst of his
lawful affairs, how mean so ever. 4. Let him gather his thoughts before every
religious exercise, by way of preparation, lest he take the name of the Lord in
vain, by rash and unreverent rushing in upon divine Service. 5. Let him thank
the Lord for granting him grace to see his sinful vaiging of mind, and to be
displeased with it, and to confess it. 6. Let him be comforted in the Lord,
who gathers the ragged and scattered honest desires of supplicants, and
takes away the iniquity of the service of his clients, as our high Priest,
bearing, in his appearing for us, as it were, on his forehead, Holiness unto
the Lord.

CHAP. XXII.
Concerning the converts discour agment for felt want of ability to do the
duties commanded, whereunto his renewed will is very bent.
SUndry true converts, finding a will to do that which is good, but not finding
power how to perform that which is good, do fall in disquietnesse and
discouragement when they should go and seek to make good use of their
infirmity, and go to Christ for remeed, as the Apostle did, Romans 7. 18.

The cause of this evil is, the relicts of corrupt natural inclination to seek
to be justified by works, and to have in our hand ability to do the good which
we would do; for, albeit the convert be forced to seek reconciliation with God
by remission of sins in his conversion, yet in his course toward heaven and
salvation, he desires to have a storehouse and treasure of strength in
himself, to be made use of as he wills. For, it seems to him, in his carnal
wisdom, a poor shift to be, in every good action, put to beg supply from Christ
by prayer, and to stand waiting on in a dependence on Christ, till furniture
come from heaven unto him. Which furniture of strength, because our Lord does
suspend to give, till his infirm and humble child hold up his heart as an empty
vessel to receive influence from him, according to his wise pleasure, the
inconsider at convert does trouble himself and falls in a distemper.

2. This case is not altogether evil as the convert does take it; but this much
is right, that he looks upon the Law as holy, spiritual and good, that he
desires earnestly to obey it, and that he loathes himself for his felt
unconformity unto it: Yet, this is wrong in him, that he does not humble
himself, but is cast down and discouraged that he does not make Christ his
sanctifications as well as his righteousness, that he does not consider of the
furniture to be brought unto him from heaven by faith in Christ, and that this
grace is nearer and more ready to serve his turn, then if it were in his own
hand.

3. Therefore let him renounce more and more all confidence in his own
righteousness, with the Apostle, Phil. 3. 8, 9. let him thank God in Christ,
in whom an out-gate is to be found in all difficulties, Romans 7. 25* let him
trust Christ for supply in all service, in whom if a man abide, he shall bring
forth much fruit, and without whom he can do nothing, Ioh. 15. 5. For, if he
depend on Christ in his emptiness and weakness, he shall find by experience,
that when he is weakest, then is he strongest.

CHAP. XXIII.
Concerning the converts imprudent censure of himself for felt ingratitude.
SOme converts sometime, do pass rash sentence against themselves for
ingratitude, namely when after receiving some notable benefit, for which they
had made earnest supplication to God, and for which, before the receiving of
the benefit, they had obliged themselves by vow to a thankful acknowledgment
of the favor prayed for, they find themselves come short of their purposed,
promised and hoped-for chearfulness^ and alacrity in praising and thanking the
Lord; whereupon they not only fall in heaviness, but also in a sort of
indignation against themselves, and quarrellous complaining of their condition,
and by this means, are so far from performing their vows, that by their
imprudence they do involve themselves in no small guiltiness: and for this
distemper of mind and indignation against themselves, they conceive themselves
to have just reason; partly, because they find their rejoicing in God, and
thanksgiving to him, for the benefit received, nothing answerable to their
earnest praying for it; partly, because the benefit received seems to them to
have lost much of the estimation it had before they did receive it; partly,
because they find even that small measure of joy, at the receiving of the
benefit after some few days, to grow cold and likly to evanish. Hence does
suspicion begin to get footing in them, that for their ingratitude the Lord is
angry with them, and has bestowed the benefit on them, not in mercy but in
wrath, and so they fall in the guiltiness of ingratitude more and more.

2. For removing of this evil, five practical errors must be removed, which
ordinarily concur in this sickness. The first is this, the afflicted, in his
promising unto God to be thankful, will be found to have had too much
confidence in his own strength; trusting, that in his resolution, his heart
could not but melt in the sense of the mercy granted. And this appears by his
indignation against himself, when he finds, that in his resolution his heart
has deceived him; as if he had expected the benefit from God, and the
thanksgiving from himself; whereas he should have distinguished these two
benefits, to wit, the gift prayed for, and the thanksgiving for it, and should
have depended upon God for bestowing of both: for, the grace of thankfulness
for a benefit asked and received, is greater then the benefit prayed for; which
if the afflicted had considered well, he should have humbled himself before God
for his not performance of his duty, rather then fallen in a proud quarrelling
for his inability to be thankful.

3. The second error is an unequal comparison between the desire he had to
obtain the benefit, and the rejoicing in God for the benefit received; for, the
desire to obtain the benefit, oft-times has in it a great measure of natural
and carnal appetite, and seeking of some part of self-perfection; but the
rejoicing in God, which the convert purposed to offer for the benefit, is
spiritual. And we are much more inclined to seek these things which pertain to
the commodity of this life, then to perform spiritual duties; So that it is not
to be wondered at, when our desires, in part natural, are not followed with
equal affection spiritual*

4. The third error is, when the convert does not put difference between the
estimation of the benefit, and the joy in God for bestowing of it, but
measures them with the same line, not considering that estimation is the act
of the intellect and judgment, and that joy is the act of the affection; and
both of them in this case exercised about diverse objects: the estimation
respecting the benefit it self, the affection of rejoicing in God who did
bestow it, respecting the giver of the benefit. Now the estimation of, and
delighting in, the benefit, may be less or more, while the estimation of Gods
goodness, in bestowing of it, remains the same. And therefore, the convert
should not charge himself for lake of estimation of God and his gifts, albeit
he feel much variety in the respective motions of his affections.

5. The fourth error is, when the convert counts all the estimation of, and
thanksgiving for, the benefit, temporal or spiritual received, as nothing,
because it is not answerable to the worth of what is received, or to the
kindness of God who has granted it: which reason, if it were of weight, there
should be no acceptable thanksgiving from any Saint on earth, during this
present life; for, it is impossible that any measure of thankfulness from men
should be found answerable to the causes of their thankfulness, whether
manifested in temporal or spiritual benefits. And therefore, upon this
consideration, the Psalmist, Ps. 116. 11. cries our, What shall I render to
the Lord, for all his benefits toward me?

6. The ^ifth error is, when the convert takes it for an evidence of an
unthankful mind, if the fervor of praising God, once kindled after the fresh
receipt of the mercy, shall after some time, seem to cool or decay; which if it
were true, no room should be left to any holy affection, except only to the
expression of joy for benefits received. But the truth is, that one duty must
so be studied, as other duties have their time and place also; for, we are
commanded to rejoice and tremble also, to rejoice with them that rejoice, and
to mourn with them that mourn. Again we must acknowledge, that some expressions
of thankfulness becomes the convert upon the fresh receipt of the benefit,
which are not required to be always afterward continued. We read of the
impotent criple restored to his limbs by Peter, Act. 3. 8. and that for joy, he
leaped and cried out; but no man would require of him that he should always
thereafter have daunced and cried out, and yet he might be found among the
number of thankful receivers of favor from God.

7. These errors then being removed, let the convert, 1. with the Psalmist, Ps.
103. charge his soul to bless God at all times, and to remember all his
benefits, and not forget any of them, and to confess his obligation to God,
which in the Scripture, and specially in the Psalms, is put for blessing,
praising and thanking God; for, the word that signifies in the Original to
confess and praise, or thank, is oft-times one and the same. 2. Let him beg
grace to be thankful for benefits no less earnestly, then he does beg the
promised benefits themselves. 3. Let him put the sacrifices of thanks and
praise in Christ's hands, by whom the calves of our lips are made acceptable
unto God. 4. Let the convert comfort himself, that in the life to come, he
shall be taken up with praise and thanksgiving to God for ever and ever.

CHAP. XXIV.
Concerning the converts imprudent censure of himself for his felt impatiency
in bearing lesser troubles, after his patient bearing of greater troubles.
SUndry converts, when greater troubles do assault them, do humble themselves
in the acknowledgement of their inability, and pray unto God for patience and
strength to bear their burden. But when lesser troubles surprise them, they
are foiled and overcome by their passions. For example, in the smaller pains of
body, loss of goods, injuries done to them unexpected, by word or deed; and
here they fume and fret, and break forth in some expressions of impatiency.
Whereupon, when they reflect, they are so far from humbling themselves and
making right use thereof, that their indignation at themselves, and their
fretting is increased so much the more, as the cause of their impatiency was so
small, as common reason found in heathens has overcome, and therefore should
have been more easily digested by Christians. This mis-carriage uses oft-times
to be past-by, without any fruit further then to acknowledge their infirmity.

2. But the true cure of this evil, is in discovery and removal of the causes
thereof, which are three, 1. Carnal confidence of the convert in his own
strength, as able to overcome lesser troubles. 2. Neglect of duty toward God in
his rencounter with smaller provocations of passion; for, men in great troubles
and weighty crosses, use to fly unto God by prayer to help them to bear the
same, but when they meet with lesser crosses, they oppose their own strength
unto them, and puts not up the matter to God, and so their infirmity is
manifested. 3. Gods wise correcting his child for miskening of him in lightest
matters.

3. Therefore let the convert afflicted in this case, acknowledge his failing,
and be humbled at the sight of his passionat infirmity, and bless God for
bearing down by his rod carnal self-confidence. 2. Let him learn of David, Ps.
141. 3. not to trust in his own strength in any thing, but depend on God for
setting a watch before his mouth, and keeping the door of his lips, and mainly
for keeping his heart from inclining to any evil thing. 3. Let him make more
use both of Christ's open fountain for washing away sin and uncleanness, and of
his assistance to mortify the deeds of corrupt nature by his Spirit: for,
otherwise the convert may look to be oftener foiled in this kind, and oftener
to be corrected for not watching over his passions.

CHAP. XXV.
Concerning the converts mistaking his case for want of such a submission unto
Gods exercising of him, as be would have.
SOme true converts, sometime esteem themselves guilty of rebellion against
God, because they cannot submit themselves in bodily or spiritual chastisements
unto Gods dispensation, as they would. The pretended reasons of their hard
sentence against themselves, are three, 1. because they find in themselves
fretting and murmuring against the Lords dealing with them. 2. They find
themselves far from humbling themselves under the mighty hand of God. 3.
Because they find in themselves still unquietness after they set themselves to
submit; which endeavor to submit, they conceive should have brought forth
quietness of mind, if it had been real, and sincere submission indeed. And
these thought^, when they have weight, make way for many suggestions of Satan,
and do draw on more and more unquietness and guiltiness withal.

For remedy whereof, 1. let it be considered, that in this exercise a
difference must be put between Gods part, the flesh, or corrupt natures part,
the new creatures part, and Satan's part.

As for Gods part, by his chastisements and exercising of his child, he brings
to light the perverseness of corrupt nature in his child, to humble him and
drive him to Christ. The part of flesh or corrupt nature, is always to strive
against the work of grace and the new creature, and it cannot be submissive
unto God, Gal. 5. 7. but must be mortified, Romans 8. 7. The part of the new
creature, is not to consent to the fretting and murmuring of the flesh, but to
oppose it, to yield unto Gods dispensation, and to be grieved for the power of
corrupt nature, and therefore not the new creature but corrupt nature should be
condemned. Satan's part is, still to take advantage of every hard exercise, and
to suggest wrong thoughts of God and his work, in the child of God.

Secondly, let a difference be made between the con^lict of corrupt nature
against the work of grace, and the victory of the corrupt nature; for, corrupt
nature may fight, and not prevail, but be kept from reigning in a man, how
much soever it rage.

Thirdly, let a difference be made between the victory of corrupt nature in
some conflicts, and its victory in the war; for, corrupt nature may prevail in
sundry conflicts, and yet loss its labor in the close of the war, wherein
grace is made perfectly victorious through Christ, in hope whereof, the child
of God must renew the combat against nature and not faint.

Fourthly, let a difference be put between submission of mind and quietness in
mind. Submission may be sincere, when pain of body makes the convert to cry,
when affliction makes him a man of sorrow and grief; yea, when corrupt nature
does fret and murmur, provided that the convert control and condemn his corrupt
nature, and suffer it not to break forth in words of impatiency, but prays to
God to help him to bear the burden and endure his exercise with patience.

Fifthly, let a difference be put between the sinfulness of corrupt nature and
the trouble which does stir it up, and the sorrow which the convert has in the
observation of both; for, the sin is the work of the flesh and Satan, the
trouble and affliction is the work of God, the sorrow for sin felt, is the work
of Gods Spirit also; and the sorrow for pain, loss, shame, or any sort of
trouble, is moderat and sanctified when the convert offers himself willing to
endure it, so long as God shall be pleased to continue it. Last of all, let it
be considered, that a wrestled-for submission, pleaseeth God no less, then a
victorious submission does please the convert, because in wrestling against
corrupt nature, the convert testif^eth his will to please God, his glorifying
of Gods wisdom, justice, power and love, how ever the Lord deal with him. After
which wrestling, the Lord does give submission victorious, and quietness with
it.

CHAP. XXVI.
Concerning the converts mistaking of his condition because of tentations.
GOds children oft-times are not only heavy and grieved because of tentations
(which the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 6. presupposes to be ordinary, and in some
respects needful) but also fall in a mistaking of their condition, as if it
were altogether evil and displeasant unto God, because they perceive themselves
many ways polluted in their conflict with them. Which pollutions, albeit they
cannot be denied to be pollutions, and should not be excused, or extenuat, yet
should not darken or obscure the grace of God in a convert striving against
tentations, and lamenting his pollutions contracted by occasion of them.

2. These tentations, that they may be the more clearly discovered, we shall
divide them in three sorts. 1. some of them are directly from God, in a wise
and holy manner, for trial and exercise of faith, hope, charity and other
graces, and do not in any way tempt men to sin. 2. Some are from the flesh and
the world, alluring or inducing men to sin; which two we join together, because
concupiscence or the flesh, or corrupt nature, joyneth it self with the world,
and these two help one another, and therefore are joined together by the
Apostle, 1 Ioh. 2. 16. All that is in the world is the lust of the eyes, the
lust of the flesh and the pride of life. And when men are tempted by their own
lusts, the world does furnish objects, allurements* and inducements to sin. The
third sort are, the tentations from Satan, who beside that he is not idle to
take advantage of concupiscence and the worlds inducements, so is he chiefly
busy to throw his fiery darts against the convert, and to solicit men to such
sins as the convert does most detest and abhor.

As for the first sort of tentations from God, they are ordinarily by
afflictions bodily or spiritual, wherein oft-times the converts do not observe
the Lords purpose and will revealed in Scripture, or are forgetful of the
admonitions and consolations which they have heard from Scripture, which was
the case of the afflicted Saints, Heb. 12. 5. and so they are more vexed then
they should be; and, ( Ps. 42. 11.) dejected and disquieted, and do suspect
that God is angry with them and with the way they walk in, Heb. 12. 12, 13.

Of this sickness, there may be three causes, 1. the bitterness of affliction
for the present time wherein it is ^elt. 2. The sense of bypast sin which the
afflicted does suspect God is pursuing, and making hi^ possess the sins of his
youth, Job. 13. 26. The third, is the observation of in-born corruption,
discovered unto the afflicted much more then in prosperity.

4. For remedy of this evil, let the afflicted convert persuade himself from
the Word of God, that in all the afflictions of Gods children, the Lord does
intend the trial and exercise and increase of faith, and other grace, bestowed
on them. And upon this consideration, the afflicted should rejoice in this
exercise, Iam. 1. 2, 3. Secondly, let him remember, that with the trial of
faith, there is always a discovery of infirmity and corruption of nature in
the afflicted: As in the purifying of gold, both the good metal and the dross
are discovered, which as he should acknowledge, that he may be kept from
fretting, So must he still remember, that the Lord does intend the trial of his
faith, that he may be constant in believing on Christ, the only help and relief
from sin and misery. Thirdly, in whatsoever condition he is in, let him
endeavor to go on in patience, experience and hope, which shall never make him
ashamed, for this does the Lord teach us, Romans 5. 3, 4. and Iam. 1. 4.

As for the second sort of tentations, from the concupiscence of the flesh and
from the worlds allurements and terror, let the convert afflicted follow the
same course which is prescribed in the remedy of the tentations of the first
sort.

As for the third sort of tentations, which are from the devil tempting men to
atheism, or blasphemy, or despair, or self-murder, and such like, which even
nature does abhor, whereof something is spoken elsewhere, 1. let the afflicted
convert put difference between the devils sin in tempting to vile sins, and his
own seeming feeble resisting, wherein albeit he thinks himself polluted, yet
his not yielding testifies his dissenting from those fearful sins whereunto
Satan does tempt him. 2. Let him put difference between the consent of his
unmortified corrupt nature inclinable to every evil, from the lust of the
spirit which fights against the lust of the flesh, which hinders the
adversary from getting the victory. 3. Let him put difference between the
sufficiency of Gods grace upholding him in the conflict, and the full victory
against the messenger of Satan buffetting him: for, God uses to susspend the
victory for a time, and yet make his grace sufficiently uphold his soldier
till the victory be given, as Paul's experience, 2 Cor. 12. teaches us. And
indeed, it is a pleasant spectacle to the Lord to look upon his weak child
striving against the flesh, the world and Satan, and standing out by faith in
Christ against them all. 4. Let him consider, that by these tentations of
Satan unto vile sins, God can, and does mortify sin, and make his child
watchful and strong against both the sinful inclination unto these and all
other sins. In the mean time, let him beware of a more slye and subtle
tentation, which Satan uses to slide in at the back of these ugly and gross
tentations; which is this, when he has pressed with all violence these fiery
darts and vile suggestions upon the convert, he charge the afflicted soul
with a giving consent unto them, and like a scolding calumniator impudently
bears guiltiness upon him, and all to make him apprehend his condition to be
worse then it is, and to suspect, that God, by this exercise, is pursuing him
in wrath; and this tentation is not readily observed by the afflicted convert,
but yielded unto more then to the gros^e tentation. Therefore, in the last
place, let the convert guard against this tentation which brangleth his faith,
and lay the blame, with the Apostle, on corrupt nature, whatsoever guiltiness
is found, Romans 7. 17. Now, then it is no more I that does it, but sin that
dwells in me; a speech beseeming a man free of out-breaking and prevailing
corruption, and striving against all inward motions of corrupt nature. And for
remedy of this and other evils, let him renew the acts of his faith in Christ,
laying hold upon the covenant of Grace, that he may more confidently draw near
unto God reconciled in Christ, and so no more doubt of Gods good will to him,
notwithstanding of his hard exercise under tentations: for, thus Satan shall
not only fly from the first tentation, being resisted, but also be
disappointed of the success he expected in questioning the coverts condition
and weakening of his faith.

CHAP. XXVII.
Concerning the converts mistaking his condition when he does observe some
degrees of Gods deserting of him.
TO speak of the sorts and degrees of Gods deserting a soul, requires a large
Treatise, and the case and cure thereof is already publicly set forth by a
learned and godly Preacher of the Gospel. It shall suffice, for our purpose, to
speak of it only so far as it concerns the converts mistaking his condition
when he apprehends himself deserted, whether the desertion be real or
apparent only, and falls into suspicion of Gods love to him, or that God is
displeased with him, because he finds not such lively influence of Gods
Spirit as he has found, and such assistance of his gracious presence as he did
expect in discharge of religious duties, or exercises wherein divine providence
has yoked him. The Scripture and daily experience do furnish instances of sad
complaints of the Lords hiding his face and withdrawing or withholding of
light or peace, or consolation, or strength and ability for spiritual duties,
etc.

2. For remedy whereof, 1. let the convert remember, that God does not leave a
believer fled to Christ for relief from sin and misery, always and for ever,
but for a short time, and that he keeps love to them constantly, albeit he do
hide the tokens of his love sometime, and dispose of the acts of his love, as
he sees sit for the advantage of the work of grace in them. Let him put
difference between desertion and the gift of discerning of the desertion: for,
albeit desertion be of it self a sad visitation, yet the sight and observation
of it, testifies Gods presence with his child, giving eye salve and light; and
thereby does not only teach that wound to be curable, but also that the
Physician is begun the cure of it, by pancing and lancing the wound. 3. Let him
not count it a desertion, when God in any service whereunto he puts his child,
emptieth him of all conceit of his own ability, that he may open his mouth wyd
and be filled: for this emptying of the convert, is the very fitting of him for
fresh supply from Christ to go about the service in Christ's strength and
furniture, which the Apostle felt by experience, 2 Cor. 12. 10. When I am weak,
says he, then I am strong. Poverty of spirit, and hunger and thrist for
righteousness, are not to be counted desertions. 4. Let him observe the
degrees of Gods presence, no less then the degrees of his absence, as the
Psalmist did when he recollected himself, Ps. 73. 23. after the tentation which
troubled him was overcome. Nevertheless, I am continually with thee. Thou
hold me by thy right hand, and ver. 26. my flesh and my heart fails, but
God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever. 5. Let him put a right
construction upon Gods dispensation, believing always, that God does what he
does for good to his afflicted subject; whether he draw forth, by his
desertion, the latent-corruption of the heart, as he did to Ezekiah, 2 Chronicles.
32. 31. or whether to prevent out-breaking of corruption, as he did to the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 7. 8, 9. or whether to exercise his faith, love and
patience, and to sharpen his prayer, as he did to the Psalmist frequently. And
therefore, let him, in the observation of whatsoever degree of desertion,
humble himself before God, fly in more closely unto Christ, and patiently wait
upon the change of his conditon, in the use of the means, and following the
duties of his calling as the Lord shall enable him: for, this is the counsel
of the Lord, Isa. 50. 10. Who is he among you that fears the Lord, that
obeys the voice of his servont, that walks in darkness and has no light?
let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. And this much
suffices for instances of the third sort of the converts mistaking his
condition.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Concerning cases, wherein the convert is in doubt what to determine about his
condition.
IT rests, that we speak of the fourth sort of cases of the conscience of the
convert, wherein he is at a stand, and in doubt what to determine of his
present condition.

2. In these doubtful cases, the convert is not properly deceived, as in the
former ranks of cases it is presupposed of him; because in this sort of cases,
the convert does not positively determine the question wherein he is fallen,
but stands in doubt what to resolve upon.

3. Cases of this sort pertain to the mind and judgment of the convert, and if
his judgment be cleared by loosing of the question, incontinent he is satisfied
and quiet.

4. It is necessar for the converts clearing, that he form the question
rightly; and to this end, 1. let him consider his case and condition in
himself, so accuratly as he can. 2. Let him ingenuously lay forth the question
or doubt he has, before his Pastor or Christian friend, acquainted with cases
of conscience, and ask their judgment what to think of, or what to do in, such
a case. The reason why he must examine narrowly his own condition, before he
speak of it to another, is partly because otherwise his doubt or question may
prove frivolous and unworthy of an answer; partly, because the convert, after
examination of his case and prayer unto God, may find satisfaction to his
doubt; and partly, because, if his doubt remain, the question may be the more
clearly propounded, and so receive the more clear and speedy answer for his
satisfaction.

5. Of this sort of questions, we shall propound some examples and give some
resolution unto them, whereof use may be made when such like questions shall
occur.

The first question shall be, concerning confusion of mind.
IT comes to pass sometime, when a convert is upon examination of his own
estate or condition, that such a mist and darkness falls on his mind, and
such a crowd and throng of thoughts within him, that he can discern nothing but
mist, multitude of thoughts, and darkness and confusion. The question is, what
shall he think or do, for removing of this confusion of thoughts and darkness
of mind?

Ans. This case befalls converts frequently, and therefore had need to be the
more carefully cured: Which cure, that it may the better go on, let the
afflicted renew the examination of his former behavior, and see if he can find
out the meritorious cause thereof in himself; for, this case oft-times is the
castigation of the afflicted, for his former negligence and omission of duties,
or slight discharge of religious worship: yea, it may be found possibly, that
the afflicted has been so careless in keeping his heart in the fear of God,
that he has involved himself too far in earthly and thorny affairs, or has
exceeded in the use of things lawful, or by some corrupt communication, has
grieved the Lords spirit, and so has drawn on some desertion and withdrawing
of illumination from him.

2. This case may also fall out, from some present perturbation of mind and
passion, whereby his reason is so taken up for the time, that it cannot
discharge its duty: as comes to pass usually in anger or fear, or grief, or
some such like passion as may be seen, when a man is injured by his neighbor,
or does meet with some damnage, or is put in fear of some imminent evil coming
on him, or finds sharp pains of body, or some such like cause perplexing him.
The question is, what shall he think of this condition?

Ans. If the afflicted shall examine how he is fallen in this case, and shall,
in consideration of his weakness, be humbled before God by prayer, he shall
not want clearness of mind, and directions from God what to do and how to
behave himself, in ordering of his conversation aright, Ps. 50. 23. for, the
Lord gives wisdom liberally, to all that ask it of him in faith, Iam. 1. 5. and
this his present condition gives him an errand to God.

The second question is, concerning the convert, who most part walks heavily.
THere are some true converts, who after examination of themselves, cannot
deny, but their heart is toward the ways of God in their calling, and that as
they find the imperfections of their service, so they are forced to renounce
all confidence in their own righteousness, and to fly to the righteousness
of Christ, as the only true garment able to hide their nakedness; yet, they
are for the most part heavy in their spirit, seldom they rejoice, but many
times they weep; and howsoever they maintain confidence in Christ for the state
they stand into, yet, when they consider their ordinar heaviness of heart,
they doubt what to think of this their sad condition.

Ans. This condition, if well considered, is very useful, albeit not always
comfortable; for, the Lords dispensation toward such a person thus exercised,
is well tempered and wisely mixed: for, he neither suffers the heavy in heart
to cast away his confidence in Christ, nor to be idle and unfruitful in his
vocation, nor to glory in his own works, or put confidence in them, but so
keeps him up to the duty of more and more esteeming of Christ's
righteousness, and drawing of strength from him by faith, that he goes on in
his course uprightly, albeit not fed as he would be by the consolations of the
holy Ghost.

2. For remedy whereof, let him quiet his mind; for, after examination of his
own natural inclination, he shall find the reason of the Lords dispensation
toward him, sparingly giving unto him such measure of consolation as he would
have, to be this, least he should abuse the same, and lean more to the sensible
feeling thereof then to the word of faith: and therefore, however he find
heaviness of heart through manyfold tentations, let him hold on his way in the
obedience of faith, he shall after a whiles patience and wrestling, meet with
as much peace and consolation as may suffice a pilgrim, walking from strength
to strength till he appear before God in heaven, where all tears shall be wiped
away from his eyes. Mean time, let this ground be holden fast, that God mixeth
the cup of his own children as he finds it fit for their edification.

The third question is, concerning the converts, who for not looking on their
original sin and the out breakings thereof, are in doubt what to think of
their former condition.
SOme converts are, who after a quiet possession of peace enjoyed in a
blameless conversation among men, and in the exercises of religion uprightly
before God, after examination of their condition more narrowly, do find, that
the conscience for a long time has been silent, and has not changed for the
motions of original sin* but suffered them to go on securely under the
guiltiness of the daily sprouting forth thereof. In this case, as they dare
not cast away their confidence in Christ, nor their holy purpose of walking
uprightly before God; So they cannot justify the silence of their conscience,
which has suffered the motions of sin (although not consented unto) to go away
without challenge or reckoning made for them, and here they are in straits, and
doubt what to judge of their own condition.

Ans. In this case, the silence of the conscience is not to be excused: And the
peace of the convert albeit it may be sound, in order to the converts state in
grace, yet the condition wherein he is, is not good, but mixed with much
security; for, to make the condition of a convert to be good, it is not only
required, that his conscience be kept free from gross pollutions, but also
that he be daily aiming at mortifying of sin, and that to this end, he daily
give an account unto God of his wandering and vanity, and of the observed
out-sproutings of the bitter root of original sin, that he may, after his best
behavior, perceive a necessity of that prayer, taught us by our Lord for daily
remission of sins, and so may daily have the answer of God from the Evangel,
saying, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven unto thee: For, there is a
twofold absolution of the convert, one is in order to his person, which Christ
calls the washing of the whole man, the other is in order to his daily
imperfections and blemishes of his conversation, which Christ does call the
washing of the feet. By virtue of the first sort of absolution, the child of
God, flying to Christ, is judicially declared free from condemnation; by the
other, the believer, making use of the fountain opened up in Christ, is exeemed
from his acknowledged uncleanness. This is clear from Christ's words, Ioh. 13.
10. Mean time we confess, that the motions of sin in our mortal bodies are so
innumerable, that no man can overtake them, yet must they be counted for an
heap at least, as David does teach us, Ps. 19. 12. Who knows the errors of
his life? cleanse me from my secret sins. And this same lesson does the Apostle
teach us, Romans 7. 24. Wretched man that I am, says he, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ. Wherefore, let
the convert go on in his formet godly and righteous behavior and conversation,
not mis-regarding the sproutings of original sin, but giving account thereof
unto Christ, as said is, that he may glorify that righteousness of Christ by
faith, and enjoy peace with God, not only in order to his state, but also in
order to his condition daily.

The fourth question is, how the convert may know and be certain of his
justification.
When the true convert hears the different opinions of Theologues,
concerning the act of justification of a believer, some saying, that it is an
act of God immanent, whereby he wills the absolution of the believer; some
saying, that it is an act of God emanent and transient from God upon the spirit
of the believer; some saying it is the sentence of the Judge, absolving the
believing sinner from the curse of the law. The believer here possibly is at a
stand, and knows not how to answer the question till his doubt be loosed.

For the satisfaction of the convert, first, we may safely say, that it is not
material whether the convert be able to take up the quiddity and formal notion
of the act of justification, provided he be a believer in Christ and know that
the believer in Christ is justified before God, and that being justified by
faith, he has peace with God, and can apply these truths unto himself, in the
exercise of repentance and new obedience. But if possibly, the convert cannot
be satisfied till his doubt be answered, let him consider, that he must
distinguish between justification actively taken as it proceeds from God, and
justification passively taken as it is terminat on the justified man; as it is
taken actively, these four things are to be distinguished, 1. Gods eternal will
and decree, to absolve from sin and wrath every believer in Christ. 2. Gods
actual revealing in time this his gracious pleasure in the Gospel. 3. Gods
judicial application of this general sentence to the believer in the point of
his conversion, whether the believer perceive his absolution or not for the
time. 4. There is a sensible intimation of this sentence unto the believer,
joined with peace and joy, which the Apostle calls the shedding abroad of the
love of God in the heart, Romans 5. 5. and the sealing of the holy Ghost stamping
the heart with holiness, Ephesians. 1. 13. The first three makes the absolution of
the believer certain, whether the believer thinks so or not; but the fourth,
which is the sensible intimation of this sentence, does make the believer both
sure and joyful.

As justification is taken passively, four things may be distinguished in the
believer justified. The first is, his actual receiving of Christ, offered in
the Gospel for a perfect remedy of sin and misery. The second is, the Lords
judicial settling of the general sentence of absolution upon the believer, as if
he had spoken to him by name, as he did to the Apostles, Ioh. 15. 3. Now are ye
clean through the word I ^ave spoken unto you, that is, you are clean from the
guil^ of sin by my absolving of you. The third is, the believers observing, in
a reflect act of his conscience, that he has fled to Christ for absolution,
and therefore justified indeed. The fourth is, the feeling and observing of the
testimony of the holy Ghost bearing witness with his spirit, that he is a
child of God absolved from sin and wrath. The first two of these, to wit, the
act of faith, receiving of Christ and of the right made by Christ to the
believer in him of his absolution, may be in, and on the believer without the
other two, to wit, his observation of the act of faith, and the felt intimation
of this worl^ of grace by the holy Spirit.

2. For solving of the doubt then; as justification is actively taken, as
proceeding from the immanent act of Gods eternal purpose and decree to justify
the believer, it is no more the actual justification in this life, of which we
are speaking, then the immanent act of Gods eternal purpose to raise the bodies
of believers in Christ, and to glorify them in soul and body, can be called
the actual resurrection of their bodies, and glorification of both soul and
body in this life.

But the transient act of justification in a judicial way, which is the Lords
judicial sentence of absolution of the believer, declared by his Word, set down
now in holy Scripture, it is indeed and formally the believers justification,
and is judicially terminar upon every believer in the act of his conversion,
whether the believer does clearly perceive his own conversion, or be in
suspicion of his being reconciled and justified.

And this may be made to appear, if we compare the condemnation of the
unbeliever with the absolution of the believer fled to Christ, Ioh. 3. 18. As
he that believes not in Christ is condemned already, because the curse of the
law and condemnation, pronounced in the Scripture by God, the sovereign Judge,
stands against him so long as he does not believe in the only begotten Son of
God: And this sentence stands fast, whether the unbeliever take notice of
this sentence or not, whether he do apply it to himself or not, do find grief
for it or not: So the believer in Christ is relaxed from condemnation and
absolved, and has right unto eternal life and begun possession of it, albeit
for the time of his infancy, tentation, trembling and fear, it be not so,
albeit he does not perceive the blessed change of his state, nor does lay to
heart, as he might, the words of Christ judicially pronouncing the sentence,
comprehending him as certainly as if his name were expressed, Ioh. 3. 18. He
that believes on him, is not condemned, and ver. 36. He that believes on the
Son has everlasting life, and Ioh. 6. from ver. 37. to 41. Hence we conclude,
that the formal act of justification of a man fled to Christ, is to be found in
the written sentence of the judge absolving every believer and the man we speak
of.

There is another transient act of God, in an actual revelation of
justification, wherein the holy Ghost opens the eyes of the believer to
behold and perceive the gift of says already bestowed on him: Of this speaks
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 12. And after that the holy Ghost has pointed out his
own grace, bestowed on the believer, he follows his work, by giving
remarkable peace and joy as earnest of life everlasting, whereof the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye also trusted, after ye heard the word of
truth, the Gospel of your salvation: in whom also, after ye had believed, ye
were sealed with the spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance. Therefore, he that desires to have the intimation of his
justification, after flying for refuge unto Christ for relief of felt sin and
feared wrath, must read his absolution in the Gospel, as well as he has read,
before that, his condemnation in the law. Unto which sentence of absolution,
let him hold fast in his daily endeavor after sanctification.

The fifth question is, how to satisfy the convert who finds himself pursued
for his sins after remission believed, and is brought in question what to judge
of his case.
MAny converts have fallen in Jobs case, and seemed to themselves to possess
the sins of their youth, Job, 13. 26. For, after conversion and felt
reconciliation, they find the sins they did repent of, and did believe to be
forgiven through Christ, objected to them afresh, pursued with sharp
accusations, and signs of wrath joined therewith. Their reconciliation and
righteousness through Christ, they purpose to hold fast; their old
guiltiness, and sentence of their conscience writing bitter things against
them, they cannot deny: The pinch is here, either the remission they did
believe is null, or the challenge is unjust, do they reason with themselves;
the nullity of their remission they dare not admit, and the just ground of
challenge they cannot deny, and the doubt what to think of this case they
cannot shun, not seeing, how these things can consist and stand together.

2. For answer to this doubt, these four things must be distinguished, and how
they may all consist one with another, must be timously considered. The four
things to be distinguished are, 1. the reconciliation of a convert with God; 2.
the remission of the reconciled man's sins freely gifted unto him by God; 3. a
renewed bitter accusation raised by Satan against the re^iled convert; 4. The
holy and wise dispensation of God, permitting and ordering these renewed
accusations of his child by Satan, for the trial and exercise of his faith and
growth of his repentance, and other good ends.

Now for the consistence of these four, we need not doubt, but the accuser of
the brethren can cast up to us forgiven sins, and bear upon us that they are
not forgiven. Neither need we doubt, but God in wisdom and love to his
children, may suffer Satan to renew accusations against them, and so order
that matter, as neither Satan shall prevail, nor his child suffer damn^ge by
the means: for, there is a great difference between Satan's renewing of
accusations for sins forgiven, and Gods making null the remission granted, the
Lord can suffer the one to be, but the other he will never suffer to be: for,
when a true convert grows negligent, and falls in such sins after
conversion as he lived in before conversion, no wonder Satan be permitted to
call his former conversion in question; yea, the Lord may justly cast up to his
child his former faults, to humble him and shame him from going on, albeit he
does not disannull the formerly granted remission.

3 When thanksgiving for remission of sin, granted for Christ's cause, begins
to cool in the heart of a convert, what wonder the Lord not only suffer, but
also present the vilen^ss^ of by past sins to make the convert sensible of the
remission, and to cause him renew the acts of repentance and godly sorrow for
his sins bypast, as, Ezekiel. 16. 63. and 36. 32. Then shall you remember your
own evil ways and your doings which were not good, and shall loath your selves
for your iniquities and abominations.

When the convert ^roweth remiss in watching over his own heart and ways, and
is in danger of falling back into these sins which he had repented of before,
what wonder the Lord by remembering him of his natural inclination and former
ways, do warn him of his danger to make him preveen his fall?

4. Wherefore, let the convert maintain the solidity of former remission of
sins, and make good use of his former sins which went before his conversion,
and let him follow the example of Paul, who did not suffer his former si^s go
out of his mind, but did renew the confession of them upon all occasions for
his own daily humiliation, for the edification of others, and for magnifying
the glory of the grace of God, and yet for all this, did not suspect the
remission of sins received: For, by this means the convert shall preveen
accusations, and stop Satan's mouth, and make his accusations have no force. By
this means, the convert shall possess firm and stable confidence of Gods
unchangeable grace and mercy, and of the stability of the remission of sin
granted.

The sixth question is, of a convert casten, not only in an uncertainty for the
time of his conversion, but also in a doubt whether he be elected or not, and
knows not how to do in this case.
SOme converts fall in Heman the Ezrait his exercise, whereof we read, Ps. 88.
especially, ver. 14. 15 While I suffer thy terrors I am distracted, says he.
Counsel has been offered by some to the afflicted, to follow the practice and
experience of some eminent Theologues, who being brought to such straits with
good success, have submitted themselves to God, to save them or destroy them
as he pleased; after which submission, they have felt the mavelous sweet
embracements of Gods loving kindness, making them sure both of their
conversion and election. Whether to follow this example and experience of some
notable Saints, is the doubt, wherein the convert is not clear, and knows nor
how to carry himself toward God in this case.

2. For answer to this question: It is free for God to comfort a soul casten
down, when, and how, he pleases; it is free for God to pass by the infirmity
and error of a terrified soul, coming to him not in the wisest way prescribed
to him, and to look to the necessity of the man's consolation, and not to his
way of seeking of it. But, howsoever it pleases God to comfort some
extraordinarily, yet this is not the duty of the afflicted to come with such an
unrequired submission unto God: for, it limiteth the Lord, in a manner, either
to comfort the man speedily, or suffer him upon apparent refusal for the time,
to despair: For, Gods order is to bring the sinner under the sense of sin and
acknowledgment of deserved wrath for sin, and then to charge him to believe in
the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and after believing in Christ, to seal the
believer with the stamp of holiness and the earnest-penny of the inheritance,
which is peace with God, and joy in the holy Ghost shed abroad in his heart.

3. Wherefore, as for the conversion of a man straightened in the pains of the new
birth and fear of everlasting wrath, and tempted to suspect that he is not
elected: It is a more safe way to lay aside all disputation about Gods decree
(because secret things belong to the Lord) and to look to the Lords command,
and to his own duty of flying unto Christ: So for the recovery of a convert,
fallen in Ionahs case, and made to suspect, that he is a reprobat cast off of
God, it is a more safe way not to dispute for the time, either his election or
conversion, whatsoever suggestions may be cast in by Satan, then to offer unto
God an absolute submission to be saved or destroyed as he pleases, and then to
lie in sorrow till God give an answer of consolation: for, God does not require
such a submission, but calls for an act of faith and obedience; for, God has
declared in his Word, that he delights not in the death of a sinner, but that
he should repent and turn to God and be saved. Secondly, in this submission the
heart will be found deceitful, which neither will nor can submit to be
destroyed. Thirdly, this offer of such a submission as this is, [Lord, I know
not whether thou have chosen me or rejected me in thy decree, but I submit my
self to thee absolutely. If thou will destroy me, thou shall be found to be
just, and I do confess so much unto thee; but if thou will save me, I shall
proclaim thy grace] such a submission, I say, is but in effect, a tempting of
God speedily to reveal his secret counsel, either by consolation, if the
submitter be an elect, or refusal of consolation, if he be a reprobat. The only
safe way in the foresaid case, is to be humbled before God, and fly to Christ
by prayer, (as Heman did, Ps. 88. and as Jonah did, who choosed to look again
to his holy Temple, where the Mediator sat upon the mercy seat between the
cherubims) and not suffer such a thought as reprobation. Thus did Heman, Ps.
88. 13, 14. But unto thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall my
prayer prevent thee. Lord, why castest thou off my soul, why bidest thou thy
face from me. Let the command of God to every self-condemned sinner, to believe
in Christ, prevail against all temptations to the contrair; 1 Ioh. 3. 23. This
is his commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ.

The seventh question is, how to satisfy the convert, doubting whether it be
b^tter to forbear or go on in the outward exercise of religion, (at least in
private) when he finds an indisposition of mind unto it.
SUndry converts, when they perceive the unfitness of their spirits to offer
immediate worship to God in prayer, praises or thanksgiving, especially in
private, do fall in doubt with themselves, whether it be better to delay the
offer of their worship, till they find themselves well disposed for it, or to
go on as they may, albeit they apprehend their lips polluted, and their hearts
far away from God. Their fear on the one hand is, lest they should pollute the
worship and take Gods name in vain; on the other hand, they fear lest they fall
in the guiltiness of omit^ing a prescribed duty. The question shall be, what
the doubting convert should determine and do?

2. For answer, this case is spoken unto before, 2. Book, Chap. 17. in as far
as the convert determines not, and does not what is right, but goes wrong and
pleases himself in his bad condition. But here we speak to this case, as the
convert is in doubt only, and desires to be kept from deceiving himself. In
which case we say, that as it is the converts doubt, so we must confess, that
this case of indisposition and un^itnesse for spiritual exercises is very
frequent, and is ordinarily and oft-times a chastisement of us, drawn on by our
selves, because we do not watch unto prayer, we do not study to keep our hearts
in the fear of the Lord all the day long, we do not foster that tenderness of
conscience which might furnish us matter of humiliation, and of thanksgiving to
God upon observation of our faults against God, and of Gods favors daily and
hourly remarkably running toward us. Hence it is, when our ordinar time of
secret worship does come, we find our vaiging minds hardly called home from
their wandering, our conscience challenging us for our loose and uncircumspect
walking, our affections dull and dead, and all the powers of our souls taken as
with a palsy, that we cannot bestir our selves in worship as we should and
would. Therefore, in this case, let the convert be humbled and confess his
fault, and take with this chastisement and ^^ye unto Christ, who hears and
takes away the iniquity of our pollution of holy things; and let him nor defer
his worship till another occasion, but wrestle against all impediments and
follow out the work in hand, blessing God for his pointing out unto him his
wants and weakness, his wandering and vanity of mind, his slipping and sliding
in his ways, and for opening unto him a ^ountain in Christ, for washing his
pollutions and healing his wounds. And that the convert may be encouraged to
aim at, and follow on, this way, let him consider, that the converts worship
may be pleasant and acceptable to God, when the convert is much displeased with
himself in the discharge of it: for, there is a worshipping of God in faith,
without sense and feeling of the hearts enlargement; and there is a worshipping
of God with felt enlargement of heart. The worshipping of God in faith is
pleasant unto God, albeit the worshiper in perplexity and wrestling with
temptations and corruptions, be much displeased with himself. The worshipping of
God with enlargement of heart is pleasant, both unto God and to the worshiper
also, as ( Ps. 119. 32.) David gives us to understand, I will run the way of
thy Commandments, says he, when thou shall enlarge my heart. But when this
enlargement, by sensible assistance of the holy Ghost, is not perceived, the
Psalmist is but a dead man in his own estimation; yet, he does not forbear or
delay to worship God as well in bonds as in freedom; Quicken me, says he,
according to thy loving kindness. Therefore, let the convert in this case, 1.
follow the example of the Psalmist, who (Ps. 5. 3.) resolves to call on God
with his voice, that is, to follow the work of prayer externally, pre-suppose
his spiritual powers were bound up, and he unable to back his pe^itions with
suitable affections; My voice, says he, shall thou hear in the morning, O
Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. And,
Ps. 27. 7. Hear me when I cry with my voice, have mercy also upon me and answer
me. 2. For his encouragement in this case to go on in his worship, let him
confess unto God the truth, as it is presen^ed unto him by his conscience, and
say, O Lord my God, these are my sins which I ought to acknowledge before thee
with tears, which for the present are dried up, etc. These are thy favors and
benefits wherewith I am loaden^d, which I should acknowledge with joy and sense
of thy goodness, etc. but thou Lord delights in truth in the inward parts, Ps.
51. 8. This will be found our reasonable service which the Apostle calls for,
Romans 12. 1, 2.

The eight question is, how to satisfy the convert, doubting what is the sin
which God pursues by long-lasting affliction.
IT falls forth oft-times, when a true convert, being a long time pressed
under some lasting cross or calamity, does inquire after the special causes of
his affliction; and when he cannot be clear what to determine, does doubt what
to think of his condition: for, he acknowledges his sins, common to him and
other converts, to be innummerable; but apprehends that it is some special
sin pursued by God, which is the cause of his affliction, which because he
cannot condescend upon, he is at a stand, and doubts what to think or do.

2. For answer we say, 1. such a case is more troublesome then dangerous; for,
so long as he is observing his sins, common to him and other converts, and in
the exercise of repentance is daily humbled before God for his known sins, he
must not be anxious, albeit he know not the particular sin pursued, as he
apprehends: for, albeit the Lord afflict no man but such as have sin in them,
yet he does not always, in afflicting of his children, pursue unknown sin in
them. For, sometime he afflicts his child to preveen his sinning, hedging up
his way with thorns, lest he should follow after beloved lusts. Sometime he
does afflict him to try his faith, to teach him patience, meekness, temperance
and other virtues, such as are dying to the world, seeking after things
spiritual, compassion toward others in affliction. 2. When the afflicted has
composed his mind to reverence Gods dispensation, whatsoever it is or shall be,
then let him yet again look upon his affliction, and it may be he shall read in
the rod what is the Lords quarrel. 3. Whether he shall find the special cause
of his affliction or not, let him turn all his indignation, zeal and hatred
against the body of death, the bitter root and bulk of actual sins, and watch
diligently over the motions of original sin, or concupiscence in himself. 4.
And let his whole exercise stir him up to have Christ in greater estimation, to
make use of Christ's righteousness imputed to believers, and to invocat his
holy name for the right use-making of his affliction.

The ninth question is, how remission of sin may be said to be granted in
respect of sins to come.
IT is commonly said, that the convert, in his justification, has the
remission of sins bygone and sins to come: whereupon the question is moved,
how this can stand with daily renewed remission of daily sins; on the one hand,
daily renewed remission seems not necessary, first, because we believe, that
remission of all sin, is the privilege of all believers in Christ, and the
abridgement of the special articles of faith set down in the Apostles Creed, as
it is called, holds this forth. 2. Because it is certain, that Christ, in his
death, did complete the payment of the price of redemption from all sin, as 1
Ioh. 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sins. 3. We are said
to be not under the law, but under grace, and so fred from the curse of the
law. 4. Because if daily remission of sin be necessar to be granted, then it
presuppones, that both original sin, and every actual sin flowing forth from it
daily, must be taken notice of, reckoned for, and repented of daily, which is
impossible. On the other hand, the convert sees, that every transgression of,
and disconformity to, the law is sin; and the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 1. 8. speaking of
himself and other converts, says, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. And Christ has taught us, as often as we
pray for our daily bread, to pray also for the remission of sins. The question
is, how the doubt of the convert may be cleared?

2. For answer: We must grant to the convert, that original sin remains in
the believer, and is not only an exceeding sin, as the Apostle calls it, Romans
7. 13. but also is the fountain of all actual sins which does pollute the
conscience, and sometimes also the outward man. 2. We must grant also, that
there cannot be an actual and properly called remission of sins which are not
yet committed: for, no man is guilty of that fault wherewith he cannot be
charged: for, such a remission were a dispensation and license to sin, such as
the Pope grants to his slaves to gratify them, in allowing their vile lusts
for enriching himself with the price of that iniquity. 3. If such an actual
remission of sins were given in justification, the once justified person could
never become a daily debtor by his daily transgressions, contrary to the
declaration of Christ in one of the articles of the Lords prayer.

3. For solving the doubt then, we must distinguish the significations and
acceptions of remission of sin: For, 1. it is taken for remission purchased by
Christ, by virtue of the covenant of Redemption, in favors of the elect, but
not applied unto the elect before the man's conversion, Heb. 10. 12, 13, 14. But
this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the
right hand of God: from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his
footstool. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. 2. It is taken for remission promised by Christ to all that shall
believe in him, to be bestowed on them so soon as they shall turn to him, Act.
26. 18. Thirdly, it is taken for the sentence of absolution, judicially applied
and adjudged to the actual believer, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his
grace. 4. For the actual remission of all sins past before his conversion, Romans
3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood
to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through
the forbearance of God. 5. For a constant right to daily remission of sin, and
access to the fountain opened up in the house of David, (that is, to all the
children of the household of faith in Christ) Zech. 13. 1. In that day there
shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness.

4. So then, the convert has, first, the actual remission of all sins
preceding his conversion, and withal his state, changed from being a child of
Satan, to be a child of God. Secondly, he has right unto daily remission of
sins, as they fall out after conversion; for, Christ, speaking of the remission
had in the time of conversion, calls it a washing of the whole man, Joh. 13.
10 He that is washen needs not to wash, save his feet, but is wholly clean,
to wit, for the state of his person accepted in Christ, and for the application
of his right unto daily remission. Christ teaches all his disciples daily to
pray for it, which Christ calls the washing of the believers feet, Joh. 13.
10.

5. For answer to the objections, made against the necessity of daily renewed
remission of sin, let it be remembered, that the article of our Creed is so far
from making daily remission of sin not necessar, that of necessity it must be
extended, not only to the remission of sins past before conversion, but also to
the right made unto us, for daily remission of the sins which run daily from
the relicts of corrupt nature not fully mortified; for otherwise, the believer
could not have quiet consolation in the daily exercise of renewed repentance
and faith in Jesus Christ. 2. As to the second objection, concerning the
perfect purchase made by Christ of remission bypast and to come; It does prove
indeed, that there is no other sacrifice for sin, nor price of redemption from
sin, save that which was completed on the cross; but it does not prove, that
we must only once make application of this purchase; for, Christ keeps the
full purchase in his own hand, and does let forth the application thereof, as
we stand in need, in his own order and by degrees, till he perfect us in
sanctification and glorification also.

6. As for the third objection, we must not think, that when we are loosed from
the Law as a covenant of Works, we are loosed also from the commands of the
Law: for, the covenant of Works prescribed in the Law, is posterior, both in
order of nature and time, to the natural writing of the Law in man's heart, Romans
2. 15. And therefore, when the covenant of the law of Works is taken off, the
authority of the Law to direct and command all moral duties does remain, and
can no more be dissolved, then the obligation of the reasonable creature to be
obedient to the Creator, can be abolished: and therefore, when the believer
falls in a transgression, he meriteth death and destruction as the wages of
sin. But Christ our Advocat, who lives for ever to make intercession for us,
holds off the execution of deserved wrath, and gives to the believer the grace
of renewed repentance and faith in him, and so saves the believer, 1 Ioh. 1.
9. and, 2. 1.

7. As for the last objection, taken from the impossibility of knowing, taking
notice of, or confessing every sin wherewith we are daily polluted, or from the
impossibility of putting repentance and faith in exercise about every
particular sin; we answer, first, that the children of God, notwithstanding of
this impossibility acknowledged by them, have sought and obtained renewed
remission of their innumerable sins, Ps. 40. 12. and, Ps. 19. 12, 13.

8. Secondly, such as are justified by faith, upon confession of such sins as
they know and do remember, are accepted of God, as if they had confessed all
their sins particularly, because he that has no mind to deny or excuse any sin
in himself, but is willing to open up his heart to God in sincerity, and to
canfesse every particular, if he were able, he has presented a contrite heart
before God, which is a sacrifice acceptable to God, Ps. 51. 8, 9. Ps. 32. 5.
and this much also Christ does teach us, speaking of the Publican who made a
short and general confession of his sins in sincerity, and went home justified,
Luke 18. 13, 14.

Thirdly, it is not impossible for a watchful conscience to observe daily, as
many particular sproutings from the root of in-born sin, as may humble him
daily, and bear down all confidence in his own righteousness, and furnish to
him matter for exercise of repentance and faith in Christ. And this lesson the
Lord did teach his people under the Law, by the twice offering sacrifice every
day morning and evening, that his people observing daily the running issue of
corrupt nature, might daily have their recourse by faith unto the lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of his own people, and hitherto we are directed to
look, Is. 45. 22. and, 1 Job. 2. 1. Mean time, on the one hand, let us beware
to lay any sort of merit upon our daily exercise of faith and sorrow for sin in
our repentance, otherwise we should be found offerers unto God of satisfaction
from us, and not suitors of remission of sins from God; and on the other hand,
let us beware to be discouraged, albeit we do not find daily the renewed
intimation and sense of remission: but as we apply the Law to our selves in the
exercise of repentance, So let us apply the sentence of absolution pronounced
in the Gospel, in favors of every penitent soul that flies to Christ for
refuge.

The tenth question shall be, concerning spiritual dispositions of mind and
qualifications, which may be joined with, or separat from, the special work of
true conversion and saving grace.
THe Apostle, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6, 9, 10. tells us of sundry qualifications which
may be found in unconverted men, and also he tells us of better things which do
accompany salvation, and are sure evidences of regeneration. Of the first sort,
there are, among others, these five. 1. A legal conviction of the vileness of
sin and vanity of the world. 2. A renouncing of unlawful pleasures, joined
with a refraining even from lawful and allowed wordly delights. 3. A natural
desire of salvation and of sanctification, that they may be saved. 4. A purpose
to live righteously, holily and soberly in this present world. 5. An outward
change of manners and conversation, so far as they may be blameless before men.
These and such like qualifications may make a fair show in the flesh, and yet
may be found to be not only in true converts, but also in such as are strangers
from the life of God: such was the Apostle Paul before conversion; such was
Israel, Romans 9. 31. Which followed after the law of righteousness, and did not
attain to the law of righteousness. Who being ignorant of Gods righteousness,
did and going about to establish their own righteousness, did not submit
themselves to the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. Of this sort are such of
the Papists, who go about to be justified by their own works, and do but mock
at the imputation of Christ's righteousness, calling it blasphemously, a
putatious or conceited righteousness; not considering, that the Pope and his
servants do reckon the imputation of the righteousness and merits of men, and
of the superfluity of the Saints righteousness, by reason of their works of
supererogation, to be worth a great sum of money, as they find their merchants.

Concerning these five qualifications, some converts, especially such as desire
to see the evidences of saving grace in those with whom they will join in the
society of Church Membership, may make question what to think, whether they be
saving graces, or common operations of the Spirit.

2. For answer, we must distinguish between a man's judging of those
qualifications in himself, and his judging of another, in whom these
qualifications appear to be; for, a man judging of himself, may attain to a
clear and certain discerning of saving grace in himself, as the Apostle gives
us to understand, 1 Cor. 2: 11, 12. In which case of our judging of our selves,
this much may be said; that if a man find in himself, those qualifications
joined with faith in Christ for righteousness and eternal life, and is seeking
furniture from Christ to bring forth fruits of his faith in new obedience, he
may be quiet and be out of doubt of saving grace in himself: for, unto such a
person, the description of a true convert may safely be applied, Phil. 3. 3. We
are the circumcision, etc. And pre-suppose he has observed these
qualifications in himself, before he has observed his closing with Christ, or
his application of the offer of reconciliation through him, he neither needs
nor should trouble himself or others with questioning, whether such and such
qualifications in him, before his fixing on Christ, were the common or special
operations of the holy Ghost: for, seeing the kingdom of heaven comes not with
observation always, it is hard to determine of the first beginnings of the
working of saving grace by the holy Spirit, because saving faith has in it the
substance of historical, dogmatical and temporary faith. And therefore, when
both saving faith, and historical, dogmatical and temporary faith, may produce
belief of the law, and convince the man of sin, and wrath due for sin, and
produce the belief of the Gospel also, without application of the offer of
reconciliation, how shall a man determine whether these effects were produced
by virtue of dogmatical and temporary faith, or by virtue of saving faith,
until the time that the humbled sinner fly in unto Christ, and seek to draw
furniture from him for new obedience of the law of love toward God and man, and
so put difference betwixt saving faith, and that faith which may be in an
unregenerat and unreconciled man? But, when the man is come up to apply Christ,
and cleave unto him for righteousness and life, and furniture to carry him on
the way unto salvation, it is not his wisdom to dispute whether these five
qualifications were common operations of the spirit or effects of saving faith,
not as yet manifested to be such, before the person did close covenant with God
in Christ, for not imputing his sins unto him, and making solid reconciliation
with him.

3. As for judging of others, when we observe these qualifications, all or some
of them, we must not determine positively what sort of operation the holy Ghost
has in hand; but our part is, according to our place and calling, to help on
the least preparatory qualifications, which may serve to be inductive and
serviceable to beget and foster saving faith in them, even when the sense of
sin and unworthiness is like to drive them from Christ, as it did Peter, when
he cried out unto Christ, Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man. For,
God has not made us Judges of the operations of the holy Ghost in this or that
person, but to be their helpers unto faith when we perceive any good
qualification in them, and helpers of their repentance when we perceive any
out-breaking evil in them.

The eleventh question shall be, of the converts doubting what to think of his
condition, when he finds more freedom of prayer in the presence and audience of
others, then when he prays in secret alone.
IT is not a case unusual, that some converts do find a great deal of freedom
of prayer in the audience of others, more then alone; for, they have
experience, that when they pray in the audience of others in their family, or
occasionally elsewhere, their prayer is more copious then when they are alone,
their style of speech more polished, their words in better order, their
expressions more significant, their notions more sublime, more fervent, more
zealous, then when they are in secret in their closet; which difference, when
they consider, they doubt what the matter does mean.

2. For answer, first, there is a difference to be put between solitary prayer
in secret, and prayer in society with others; for, in secret oft-times the
converts worship is carried on in the sense of his sinfulness, unworthiness
and indisposition presented to God through Christ, with sighs and confused
groans without words; for he studieth most for affection, and not for words,
having no ear to care for but the ear of the searcher of hearts, who knows
his weakness, fears, tentations and wrestling with doubts. But in company, he
studieth most to make use of knowledge, and to express himself so, as he may
carry along the company with whom he prays with consent, that he may edify
himself and them in worship; and in this case, he may find greater fredom
possibly then he finds alone in secret.

Secondly, it is oft-times found, that God (for his own glory, and the mutual
edification of two or three gathered together in his name) does enlarge the
freedom of speech in the speaker.

Upon which considerations, the doubting convert may satisfy himself; only let
him beware least vain glory, or studying to have the applause of such as hear
him pray, do not blow wind in his sails; and in as far as after examination he
finds himself guilty, let him, when he is in secret alone, be humbled before
God for it, and crave pardon through Christ, seeking help and healing of this
wicked inclination.

The twelfth question shall be of the doubt which the convert may have in a
case contrary to the former.
SOme converts do find themselves more enlarged in secret prayer and alone,
then in the company of one or more. In company, says he, I cannot utter my own
private condition without a needless and inconvenient discovery of my present
case to others, and I can hardly conjecture what may be their necessity with
whom I pray, or condescend upon petitions and thanksgiving fit for us in
common. I am taken up also with thoughts of what estimation my hearers may have
of me. etc. But in secret prayer I am freed of that care, I am not feared that
God shall mis-construe my words, or thoughts. I may in secret make a long pause
in my petitions, and fall in meditation upon some passage of Scripture, and
after a while direct my speech unto the Lord: I may express my affections by
voice and gesture, as they fall out, and pour forth my heart to God with tears,
without fear of being esteemed an hypocrit, etc. Mean time I doubt what my
indisposition to pray in company does import, when duty calls for it.

2. For answer, we grant, that God, to some of his dear Saints, whose prayers
in secret he will accept and reward openly, has not given ability to edify
others by way of praying in their audience; to others in regard of age of sex,
to whom modesty and silence is most suitable, he has not given confidence to
pray in name of others, whether more or fewer, as their mouth. But as for these,
to whom God has given ability and a calling, by reason of a charge in the
family, or some occasional exigence, to pray in the audience of others, and yet
notwithstanding they do foster their natural averseness from such a duty, they
had need to examine themselves, whether they be hindered by fear to loss some
of their estimation at the hands of the hearers, if possibly all things should
not be found so well digested and expressed in the prayer, as they would.

The thirteenth question, shall be of the converts doubting what to think, when
he compares his disposition to prayer, and Gods dispensation toward him in
prayer.
SUndry converts, when they compare their own diverse dispositions to prayer,
with the diverse dispensations of God toward them in prayer, they are at a stand
what to think. Sometime (says one) albeit I be very hardly drawn to pray at
all, yet when after wrestling, the conscience of the duty does set me on work,
my prayer goes on as I could wish, light is furnished to me what to confess,
what to thank for, what to seek both for my self and others; whereby I gather,
for the time, that the Lord is pleased with my person in Christ, and has
accepted my prayer. Sometime it fares otherwise with me: for, when time,
place, and leisure for prayer concur, and I am now about to make use of
opportunity, and do fall down before the Lord to speak, on a sudden, I have
nothing to say; matter, words and light do fail me, darkness and confusion
falls on my mind, and my prayer suudry times is stopped, and closes with a
sigh or groan; which dispositions of my heart and dispensations of the Lord
when I compare, I am in doubt what to think.

2. For answer, in the first case, concerning the Lords blessing of the aiming
at duty, the matter is clear and speaks for it self; for, God will have us to
aim at a right frame of spirit when we are about the discharge of any part of
his worship, but not forbear to do the duty, if we cannot reach that fitness
of spirit which we desire; let us strive against all impediments, and God will
help us to fight, will give the victory and reward it for our encouragment to
set upon our duty.

As for the other case of setting on the duty, and missing, of furniture to
discharge it, let us consider, that God in this dispensation is teaching us,
that both the discharge of any duty, and the success thereof, do not depend
upon him that wills, or on him that runs, but upon God that shows mercy;
yea, he teaches us by experience, that to will and to do are two distinct
gifts, the one whereof sometime he will give and not the other, and sometime he
will give both, that we may learn not to limit the Lord in any case, but really
acknowledge that every good gift it from him, that we may aim at our duty and
depend on him for the blessing.

The fourteenth question is, how to solve the doubt of the convert in another
like comparison of his disposition and Gods dispensation.
SOme converts, out of their own experience, may say, I being in a sad
condition of heart, have sundry times diligently used all means to be
comforted, and have wondered within my self, that my pains have produced no
hoped-for effect, but the heart has lain dead, like the child of the Shunamit,
when Gehasi laid the staff of Elisha upon him. At another time I have been
surprised unexpectedly with enlargement of heart, with liberty of speech in
prayer, with peace and joy in the holy Ghost, to the no small confirmation of
my faith, and what to think of this diverse dispensation, I cannot tell.

2. For answer, the doubt may be satisfied, by observation of the Lords grace
and wisdom toward his child; in the first case, he gives grace to use the
means, and suspendeth the sensible fruits thereof, to teach us, 1. that he has
indeed tied us to the use of all appointed meatis, but left himself free to
give the fruits thereof, in what time, and in what measure he pleases. 2. He
teaches us, that whatsoever benefit he does bestow upon us in the use of the
means, he does bestow them, not for the using of the means, but by the using of
the means. 3. He teaches us, that there is no inherent virtue, nor effectual
power in the means, but that the means are the way wherein we must walk, that
we may find the blessing from God in using the means, and not put confidence in
them. 4. He teaches us, whatsoever mean or instrument is made use of, we
should, with Paul planting and Apollo watering, give the glory of the increase,
fruit and success unto God alone.

3. As to the other case, wherein the Lord does prevent his child's using of
means, and gives an answer ere he call, thereby he teaches us the same
lesson, to wit, that what blessing God does give, he does it freely of grace
and not for works. 2. He teaches us, that what blessing we expect in the use
of the means, he will give it, not when we would, nor in what measure we would,
but as he sees it fittest for our good and his own glory, that so we should
neither be frustrat of the fruit of the means using, nor yet conceive the fruit
thereof as a deserved reward of works, but as a gift of mere grace.

The fifteenth question, shall be about the measure of mortification or
sanctification, whether it be growing or decaying.
OFt-times true converts fall in this doubt, not indeed when they are in a
sensible and comfortable condition, for then they seem to themselves to be
growing in holiness; neither fall they in this doubt when their condition is
sensibly evil, as when the power of in-born sin either breaks forth in action
externally, or defiles their spirit at least; for then they seem to themselves
to be decaying. But this doubt arises when they are going on in their ordinary
way of a blameless conversation, without any observable change of their
spiritual condition to the better or to the worse. Then is it, that they seem
to themselves in a dubious condition, and cannot say, whether mortification of
corrupt nature, or sanctification be on the growing hand, or not.

2. For answer to this doubt about the measure of holiness, 1. it is not safe
curiously to inquire, what measure of holiness a man has attained: for, as it
is not good to eat much honey: So for men to search out their own glory, it is
not glory, Prove. 25. 27.

Secondly, it is hard to determine the question; for, God uses to hide from
his children, especially the younger sort, these operations of the holy Spirit,
which may in any sort weaken their endeavor in piety, or softer pride in them,
but he discovers unto them their sinfulness and the imperfections of their
obedience, that he may set forward their repentance and laying hold on Christ
righteousness.

Thirdly, there is such an instability of any good condition wherein any
convert may be, so great variety of tentations, such a vicissitude of victory
of the flesh and of the spirit in their daily conflict, that hardly can any man
satisfy himself in the solution of this question: for, he who thought himself
dead to the lusts of the flesh, and to riches and honor, may shortly find
himself overtaken in the net, and fall soully in the mire, and be found carnal.

Therefore, let him that stands take heed least he fall, let him watch and pray
least he be overcome in tentation, let him study to observe the wickedness of
nature, and imperfections of his best works, that the righteousness of Christ
may be in greater estimation in our eyes, and we may grow in faith and love
toward God, drawing virtue from Christ, and furniture to every good work. This
is the way to grow in holiness indeed, and not to be proud for any thing in
us, or done by us; and this is the way wherein the Apostle did constantly walk,
Phil. 3. 14, 15. 16.

The sixteenth question is, what the convert shall think or do in hard
afflictions.
When the convert does fall in long-some bodily diseases and sad afflictions,
by unexpected and long-lasting adversity, when Satan is permitted to vex him
with sore tentations, when God does hide his face for a long time from him,
when he exposes him unto the cruel persecution of worldly men, he cannot
choose but fall in many doubts and perplexities: for, when God does immediately
afflict him, he readily suspecteth that God is angry at him; if he louse reins
unto Satan to sift him and vex him, if he answer not his supplications,
comfort him not readily, what wonder multitude of thoughts arise in his heart?
The question is, in this case, what shall the convert think or do?

2. For answer. It is true, the Lord uses oft-times, in his deep wisdom and
unchangeable love to his children, to exercise them, as is said, and Satan
will not fail to whisper in their ear, that God does not love them; in which
case, if the convert do not stand fast, in the faith of the love of God through
Christ, in all his tentations, he cannot stand out in the conflict.

Therefore, that he may guard and strengthen his says, first, let him seek
wisdom from God, to expound the Lords dispensations toward himself, by the word
and working of God in his children, set down in the holy Scripture; in
exercising of whom by affliction, he has discovered the corruption of their
nature, the bitter fruits of sin, and promoved the work of the mortification of
sinful lusts that are in the world, to wit, the lust of the eye, the lust of
the flesh and pride of life, and taught them humility, meekness, patience,
temperance and compassion toward others in affliction. Secondly, let him set
his affections on things spiritual, and on our blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ,
who is at the right hand of the Father making intercession for all them that
call upon him, that they may be saved, always remembering, that as the Law is
a pedagogue to lead us and draw us unto Christ, So affliction is a pedagogue to
lead us to the Law, and to Christ the end of the Law for righteousness and
life. Thirdly, let him learn, in examination of his own condition, accuratly to
distinguish the Lords part exercising him with trouble, for trial, and training
him on in the obedience of faith, as for his own glory, so for the good of his
afflicted child; and Satan's part, in cruelty, craftiness and malice, tempting
and and vexing him; and his own part, who has deserved much more affliction
then is come upon him: which considerations may keep him from fretting and
murmuring in his trouble, how heavy soever it be. Fourthly, let him put
difference between sinning and suffering of trouble, that he may choose to
endure affliction, rather then by sinning draw on much more trouble.

3. But if the afflicted convert seem to himself deserted of God, in respect of
the special operations of the holy Ghost, let him be of good courage, he is
not altogether deserted who can observe the decaying of saving graces from the
measure he has found before; he is not altogether deserted, who loves
communion with God, and longs after it, and can go to God and regrat his
desertion as a sad affliction; for, if our loving Lord Jesus Christ has
withdrawn himself out of the sight of his afflicted child, yet has he persumed
his own footsteps with the unction of his own Spirit, that he may quicken and
kindle his child's love and desire toward him. This regrated desertion is but in
part, not altogether, yea, it is not a real but a seeming desertion. The Lord
rests in his love, albeit he hide the effects of his love for a time: He
preserves the habits of saving grace as his own seed in the afflicted heart,
albeit he do not always draw them forth unto action: if he withdraw the sight
of saving graces, yet he augments the estimation of them, and langour to find
the Lord working in him. If the afflicted observe well, he shall see the hand
of the Lord in some part of his works, so that in his hardest condition he may
say, with the Psalmist, Ps. 73. Nevertheless, I am continually with thee, thou
hold me with thy right hand.

4. If it shall please God, with immediate afflictions from himself, to suffer,
not only Satan to fight against the faith and consolation of his child, but
also to super-add a fiery trial of his faith, by cruel persecution for
righteousness, let him still, for all this, be of good courage, because in all
such battles the Lord of hosts shall be with him, who will not suffer his
soldiers to be tempted above their strength, but, with the tentation, will
give an issue, that they may escape, and will furnish strength to them, that
they shall overcome: for, he has laid up a crown of righteousness for all
them that keep the faith, and at last will give it to all that love the coming
of our Lord Jesus. Wherefore, let the afflicted convert humble himself under
one or all these exercises, and not doubt of his condition, seeing it is
agreeable to the Scripture and lot of the Saints.

5. It is true, that all affliction to the flesh, for the present, is a bitter
potion, but yet reached forth to the patient by the hand of our Physician and
heavenly Father. It is a fire, but will not consume the burning bush; it is a
furnace, but will not destroy any metal but dross only; it is a labor, but
shall in due time bring forth the quiet fruits of righteousness; it is a rough
fyle, but the more sharp it be, it shall so much sooner rub away the rust of
the vessel of grace, make the soul of the penitent more bright, and, by the
blessing of God, render him more humble in his thoughts, more fervent in
prayer, mor constant in the faith, more strong to bear whatsoever burden shall
be laid on him, more desirous to grow in all virtue, more careful to keep
communion with God, more innocent in his conversation, more clean in his
conscience, and at last more blessed, Let not then the afflicted convert regard
the labor he is put to, but look to the fruit, reckon the worth of healing,
and not the bitterness of his potion; let him not look to the pain of the
affliction, but to the fatherly love of God chastiseing him, who expressly
has told us, that he chasteneth all whom he loves, lest they perish with the
world; let him not shift the battle, but set his eye on the crown, and go on in
the way of God, how many soever his tribulations shall be: for, as the outward
man by trouble does decay, So the inward man is renewed daily: for, the
Apostle, who who was most acquaint with such exercise, has, for incouragment
of all who are under the cross, said, Our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while
we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen;
for the things which are seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen,
are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18.

The seventeenth and last question, shall be about the relicts of sin in the
Saints in this life.
THe remainder of sin does oftentimes drive true converts to many doubts; for,
when carnal lusts and sinful passions seem to be subdued, and in a good
measure mortified, incontinent, upon the least occasion (as dying ashes when
sulphurous powder is cast upon them) they kindle and are inflamed: and when
their spirit is most willing and ready to do good, corrupt nature stands up
and makes opposition, so that the co^vert cannot do the good he would; yea,
such is the power thereof, that oft-times it forces him to the ill he would
not. In which warfare, being often overcome, he is so weary, that he falls out,
with the Apostle in his lamentation, Romans 7. 24 crying, O miserable man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? and while he searches
how it comes to pass, that such a body of death lodges in the children of
God, and so powerful relicts of sin remain in the justified man, he cannot
satisfy himself, considering, that God does hate sin, and makes the new
creature hate it also; which God could easily take away in a moment, in the day
of the converts reconciliation and justification.

2. For answer to this question; if a reason of Gods permission of the relicts
of sin, to remain in the Saints all the days of their life, be asked after; a
reason superior to the most holy will of God to permit it, can none be given,
nor should it be sought after. But to quiet our minds in this case, these
following considerations may suffice, 1. it is the will of the Lord our God,
our wise and loving Physician, to renew and restore his image in his children
piece and piece, till it be brought to perfection in all the lineaments, parts
and degrees thereof, and to heal our sinful sicknesses and infirmities, not in
an instant, but by little and little, as he sees fit; this way of bringing his
work to perfection by degrees, he kept in the creation of the world, which he
did not perfect in a moment, but in six days: So also, the seed that is casten
in the ground every year, he does not bring forth to maturity, for men's use, in
less time then some months. He does not form infants in the womb and bring
them up to their appointed stature and strength, in less time then a number of
years. And for the relicts of sin, how odious and loathsome soever they are in
themselves, yet he can, in his deep wisdom, make use thereof in a most holy way
for the good of penitent converts: for, as it was fitting, that a difference
should be put between the militant Church on earth, and the triumphant in
heaven, So it is the Lords wise will to exercise his militant children, in
conflicting against sin and misery in this life, that the next life and triumph
over sin, death and hell, may be the sweeter when it comes, and more desired
till it come.

2. Secondly, as the Lord, after sub-duing of the Canaanites, did not forthwith
cast them altogether out of the holy land, but suffered a multitude of them to
live, for the exercise of the Israelites with warfare, and for teaching his
people by their own experience, that the victory which they had obtained over
the Canaanites was not purchased by their sword or bow, but was given unto them
from the Lord of hosts, who led forth their armies and prospered them: So does
he not abolish the relicts of sin in his Saints in this life, after their
conversion, that they may know that the victory which they have received, over
the devil, the world and the flesh, in their conversion, is not to be ascribed
to the power of their own free will, but unto God only. For, if the renewed
convert cannot overcome the relicts of the broken forces of his spiritual
adversaries within him, which his renewed will would most earnestly expel, how
can he give the glory of his victory over the devil and the world in his
conversion, unto the power of his corrupt and unrenewed free will?

3. Thirdly, it is required of all that come unto Christ, that they deny
themselves, take up their cross daily and follow him; and to make them so do,
strong motives are daily furnished from the feeling of the relicts of sin in
our selves: for, how can a renewed convert look upon his own ignorance, errors,
folly and vanity of his mind, perverseness of his will, impotency to good and
propension unto all sin, and not loath himself, and so be forced to fly to
Christ the Redeemer for relief?

4. The remainder of sin being an adversary to all virtues, does furnish work
to all the habits infused by God for the daily exercise thereof, according as
inborn sin does put forth it self to the hinderance of faith, love, hope,
patience, temperance, etc. but in special it serves to bear down pride and to
foster humility: for, this does the experience of the Apostle show, 2 Cor. 12.
7. Least I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelation, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh.

5. Nothing does more manifest the infirmity of the strongest soldiers of
Christ, then the power of inborn sin, brought forth in the conflict against the
new creature; No sharper spur to prayer and imploring of Gods help, then the
felt power of the remainder of sin: this also does the experience of the
Apostle teach us, 2 Cor. 12. 8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that
it might depart from me.

6. How much the endurance of this conflict, with the remainder of sin, does
serve to manifest the greatness of the Lords power, and largeness of his
grace toward his weak soldiers, whom he upholdeth and comfort in this
conflict, the answer which the Lord gives to the Apostles prayer, makes
manifest, 2 Cor. 12. 9. And he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee;
for my strength is made perfect in weakness.

7. We are slow to believe, dull to apprehend and learn that which the Word of
God tells us of the ugliness of the body of sin, the perverse wickedness of
corrupt nature, the filthiness of the flesh, the wiles and deceitfulness of
the old man, and the enmity of our corrupt nature against God. Therefore, in,
and by the frequent and renewed conflicts, now with one lust, then with
another, we are forced by experience to learn the lesson more and more solidly,
and believe the truth of the Lords Word speaking of sin that is in us, and to
engage our selves to prosecute the mortification of sin unto the death.

8. The renewed experience of the power of sin in our flesh, should make us so
much the more vigilant against it, and daily to put on the whole armor of God:
Because we must fight, not only with the flesh, but also with principalities,
powers and spiritual wickedness, which take advantage of the sin that
naturally dwells in us, Ephesians. 6. 11. 12. Put on the whole armor of God, for
we wrestle not with flesh and blood, to wit, only.

9. The conscience of the remainder of sin dwelling in us, serves to move us
to pity, and to have compassion on the children of Adam, and meekly to restore
our weak brethren, who are overtaken in any offense, as the Apostle does teach
us, Tit. 3. 2. Showing all meekness to all men. For we our selves also were
sometime foolish, disobedient, deceived, etc. Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if a man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit
of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted.

10. Last of all, the permission of the relics or sin, to remain in true
converts all the days of their life, does serve to decide the great
controversy between God and men, concerning the way of justification: For, by
nature we cannot admit the righteousness of God, which is by faith in Jesus
Christ, flying to his satisfaction of justice for us, and righteousness
imputed to us thereby: for, by nature, with mis-believing Israel, we
acknowledge no justification, save of, or for works, albeit it be impossible,
Rom, 10. 3. And as they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about
to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the
righteousness of God. So we, even after conversion, and after embracing of
justification by faith, in our conversion, do give oft-times evidence of our
natural inclination to seek after the righteousness of works, for after
examination of our selves, we shall find, that our confidence does flow and eb
as we are pleased or displeased with our own carriage; and when we have most
need to make use of the righteousness by faith in Christ, we forget it or
slight it, do not fly to it, do not adhere to it, do not comfort and
strengthen our selves in conflicts by it (as has oft-times been observed by
us) what then would we do, if our going about to establish our own
righteousness did prosper? or if the power of in born sin did not set up it
self against us, and force us, by the law, either to despair or fly to Christ?
And this our natural inclination, even after conversion, to return and seek
after the righteousness of the law, may be seen in the Galatians, who having
begun in the spiritual way of justification by faith, sought to be perfected by
the fleshly way of justification by works, and did fall in danger of falling
from grace, and excluding themselves from the blessing of the promise through
Christ.

Wherefore, our infinitely wise Physician Jesus Christ takes course, as we have
said, for his own glory and our good, not to repair at once the image of God in
us, not to heal our sinful diseases all at once* but piece and piece, by
degrees, that his righteousness, bestowed on those that fly unto him for
refuge, may be in higher and higher estimation daily, that the fountain opened
up in him, for removing of sin and uncleanness, may daily be made use of, and
the benefit of justification may daily be looked upon as a new gift, that
virtue may daily be sucked out of him for bearing of good fruits, and out of
his fullness we may receive daily grace for grace, and may render thanks unto
our God daily, and bless him for his grace given unto us, as did the Prophet,
Ps. 103. 1, 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul, who forgiveth all thine iniquities,
who heals all thy infirmities; And grow in the love of God, for the remission
of so many sins as escape us daily, as did the woman, Luke 7. 47. who loved
much because many sins were forgiven her; And grow in holiness, without
putting confidence in our works, as the Psalmist did, Ps. 71. 15. 16. My mouth
shall show forth thy righteousness -- I will go in the strength of the Lord
God, and will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only. And the
Apostle gives us his example, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 12, 13, 14.

Wherefore, let the doubting convert make use of these considerations, and long
for the coming of Christ, who shall abolish sin and misery altogether. To whom,
with the Father and holy Spirit, be glory for ever.

Amen.
A TABLE of the Titles of the several Chapters.
BOOK I.
Chap. Page. 1.OF Conscience in general. 1 2. Of cases of Conscience in
general. 7 3. Of Regeneration what it is; and the regenerat man, who he is. 10
4. Of divine Covenants about the eternal salvation of men; and in special, of
the covenant of Redemption; showing, that there is such a Covenant, and what
are the articles thereof. 22 5. Of the covenant of Works. 71 6. Of the covenant
of Grace. 86 7. For a further clearing and confirmation of the doctrine about
the three Covenants, from Jer. 31. and, Heb. 8. 133 8. Of the prudent
application of divine Covenants in general. 148 9. Of the more special
application of divine Covenants, for removing the impediments of regeneration.
162 10. Concerning them that are like to despair. 182 11. Concerning them that
absolve themselves without warrant. 190
BOOK. II.
1. OF considerations to be premised. 215 2. Wherein the regenerat man's doubt
of his being in the state of grace, by reason of his felt unworthiness, is
answered. 241 3. Wherein the regenerat man's doubts, arising from the multitude
and weight of his sins against the Law and the Gospel, and against the light of
his conscience, are answered. 245 4. Wherein is solved the doubt of the
regenerat man, raised by his suspicion, whether he be elected or not. 250 5.
Wherein the regenerat man's doubting of his regeneration, because he finds no
power in himself to believe in Christ, is answered. 253 6. Wherein the doubt of
the regenerat man, concerning his being in the state of grace, arising from his
apprehended defect of humiliation and sorrow for sin, is answered. 257 7.
Wherein the Christians doubt, whether he be regenerat, because he finds not
his righteousness exceeding the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, is
answered. 263 8. Wherein the regenerat man's doubt, whether he be in the state
of grace, arising from his unquietness of spirit, is answered. 274 9. Wherein
the converts doubt, arising from his uncertainty at what time he was converted,
is solved. 292 10. Wherein is solved, the converts doubt of his regeneration,
arising from his apprehension, that the beginning of the change of his life was
not from the sincere love of God, but either from terror or self-love, which
he conceives to be but carnal. 294 11. Wherein the converts doubt of his being
in the state of grace, arising from heavy afflictions and grievous tentations,
is solved. 298 12. Wherein is solved, the converts doubt of his conversion,
arising from the power of his corruption, manifesting it self more after his
entry upon the course of new obedience, then it did before he began to repent.
304 13. Wherein is solved the converts doubt, whether he be in the state of
grace, arising from his comparing of himself with the hypocrit and unregenerat
in those perfections they may attain unto. 311 14. Wherein is solved the doubt
of the true convert, whether he be in the state of grace, because some godly
persons look upon him as an hypocrit. 313 15. Wherein the converts doubting of
his being in the state of grace, so often as he does not feel the sense of his
reconciliation with God, is examined and answered. 316 16. Wherein is solved
the true converts doubt of his regeneration, because he seems to himself not
to grow in grace by the use of the means appointed for his growth. 320 17.
Wherein is solved the converts doubt, whether he be regenerat, because he
seems to himself to follow religion and righteousness from the common
operation of Gods working by moral swasion, and not from the special operation
and impulsion of the holy Spirit. 322 18. Wherein is solved the true converts
doubt, whether he be regenerat, because he finds not self-denial in the
measure which is requisite in converts. 326 19. Wherein is solved the doubt of
the true convert, whether he be indeed converted, arising from this, that he
knows no child of God so hardly exercised as he is. 329 20. Wherein is solved
the converts doubt, whether he be converted, because he does not find in
himself the infallible marks of regeneration. 331 21. Wherein is solved the
doubt of the true convert, whether he be indeed converted, because he cannot
confidently apply to himself the promises of the Gospel. 335 22. Wherein is
solved the doubt of the true convert concerning his conversion, arising from
the observation in himself of presumption and security in his prosperity, and
of his misbelief in adversity. 341 23. Wherein is solved the doubt of a true
converts regeneration, arising from some false rule applied without reason to
himself. 344 24. Wherein is solved the converts doubt of his own conversion,
because he has found the deceitfulness of his own heart, and dare not trust
it any more. 347 25. Wherein is solved the doubt of the true converts
conversion, arising from his breach of the covenant of Grace, as he conceives.
351 26. Wherein is solved the true converts doubt, whether he be regenerat,
because he finds himself not only far from the measure of holiness which he
observes to have been in the Saints commended in Scripture; but also short of
the measure which some of his acquaintance have attained unto. 355 27. Wherein
is solved the true converts doubt, whether he be in the blessed state of grace,
because he finds himself frequently in an evil condition. 358 28. Wherein is
solved the doubt of the true convert concerning his regeneration, because he
finds the power of the body of death in the pollution of the imaginations of
his heart, vigorous and powerful. 362 29. Showing how to quench the fiery
darts of Satan, and resist his sinful suggestions, whether of shorter
endurance or of longer continuance. 364 30. Wherein are some mixed cases spoken
of, whereunto the true convert is subject, and so may fall to doubt of his
conversion or interest in Christ. 369
BOOK. III.
1. COncerning some premises. 376 2. Wherein is handled, the case of such as
are fallen from their first love, and are well pleased in this case. 383 3.
Concerning the converts sinful conniving at, and tolerating of, the errors and
transgressions of others. 387 4. Concerning the case of the true convert,
falling asleep in carnal security under guiltiness of fleshly pollutions, and
dreaming himself to be in no ill condition. 390 5. Concerning the converts
pleasing himself in his lukewarm condition. 393 6. Concerning such converts as
lean unto the props of carnal confidence and please themselves in this
condition. 395 7. Concerning the case of the convert in some point of doctrine
deluded, and pleasing himself in this condition. 410 8. Concerning the converts
conscience, mistaking vice for virtue, and pleasing himself in this condition.
425 9. Of the case of conscience, dealing treacherously under pre^ense of
liberty of conscience. 431 10. Of such as do please themselves in a condition
not pleasing God, because they conceive they can pray well under any condition.
439 11. Of the converts esteeming the peace of God to be but a carnal security.
442 12. Of the case of a convert, taking some acts of justifying faith to be
high presumption in his person. 445 13. Of the condition of the convert,
fearing that the joy of the holy Ghost which he has felt, be found only to be
either the joy of speculation, common to temporal believers, or a mere
delusion. 449 14. Of the converts suspecting, that his zeal for God and against
the sins of others has been fleshly severity and imprudent temerity. 454 15.
Of the converts suspecting his aiming at circumspect walking, shall be found in
him scrupulosity. 456 16. Concerning the converts suspicion, that his softness
of heart is nothing but a natural disposition to weep upon any occasion, 459
17. Concerning the converts suspicion, that all his devotion is but lip-labor
which is not joined with a tender and melting heart, and with Gods sensible
approbation. 461 18. Concerning the converts looking upon the fight of his
faith, as if it were the failing of his faith. 466 19. Concerning the converts
straitning his charity toward others, more then he did at the first time of his
conversion, conceiving his former larger charity, was unwarrantable folly. 469
20. Concerning the converts mistaking his condition, because of f^lt in-lake in
his charity, and love to God and men. 474 21. Concerning the converts despising
of his own exercises of religion, because of his felt vanity of mind therein.
476 22. Corcerning the converts discouragement for felt want of ability to do
the duties commanded, whereunto his renewed will is very beut. 479 23.
Concerning the converts imprudent censure of himself for felt ingratitude. 480
24. Concerning the converts imprudent censure of himself, for his felt
impatiency in bearing lesser troubles, after his patient bearing of greater
troubles. 484 25. Concerning the converts mistaking his case, for want of such
a submission unto Gods exercising of him, as he would have. 485 26. Concerning
the converts mistaking of his condition, because of temptations. 487 27.
Coucerning the converts mistaking his condition, when he does observe some
degrees of Gods deserting him. 491 28. Concerning cases, wherein the convert is
in doubt what to determine about his condition. 493
To the Reader.
BE pleased to take notice, that, Book 3. Chap. 2. Page 383. these words, The
first rank shall be of some Cases, wherein the Conscience, etc. should be
joined with the words following, and of the same Character with them, as being
the beginning of the said Chapter, and no part of the title thereof.

Likewise, in numbering the Pages, thou will find after 256. in the next Page,
235 for 257. Any other mistakes that occur, as in the mis-placing, changing,
defect or superfluity of Letters, Figures or Notes of distinction, be pleased
to pardon, seeing there will be few or none of any moment.

FINIS.

