THE DIALOGUE Between the Pope and a Fanatic CONCERNING AFFAIRS IN ENGLAND,
REVIVED.

LONDON, Printed for John Kidgell, at the Atlas in Cornhill. MDCLXXXI.

Advertisement to the Reader.
THe Dialogue between the Pope and a Phanatick, etc. is a Pamphlet of such a
pernicious design that I am sure all honest men will have the last aversion for
it; and certainly the Author of it, whoever he be, must be a Man of the most
hardened effrontery in the World. It is a perfect resolution to attempt the
change of the present Government, by putting the whole Nation into a Flame,
and, to be sure, nothing less than a Romish Constitution will serve his turn,
that durst to write so impudent a Book, and so scandalously reflecting upon the
King, the Parliament, the Church, and the People of England. This is to lay
open to you the grossness of it, and to show you the subtle artifices he makes
use of, whereby to insinuate himself into the minds of the Easy and Credulous,
and to gain over Proselytes to him: But, though all his aims are to raise heats
and divisions among us, yet, I hope we shall be so wise, as to Counterplot his
Stratagems, and defeat him in his Politics; and the more He, and such
Turbulent Spirits, that are like himself, shall endeavor to irritate and
provoke us by all the ways they can invent, to Clashings and mutinies within
our selves, so by degrees to bring us up to a Civil-VVar again, as in forty
one; I say, the more these things shall be endeavored by men of such ill and
destructive Principles to the good of the State, the more we shall make it our
chief business and Study to live in peace, and in Brotherly Love and kindness
one toward another: This is the readiest way to dash all their designs in
pieces and to keep our selves secure from the effect of their wicked and
industrious malice against us, let us then take up unanimously the saying of
the Poet; Nulla salus Bello, Pacem te poscimus omnes: and be quiet, in spite
of all their vigorous attempts to make us otherwise, holding fast our Faith in
the Established Religion, and maintaining a steady, Loyal, and constant
obedience to the King, whom God Almighty long preserve to rule over us.

I am to inform you that there have been two Impressions of this Dialogue, one
of three sheets and a half, the other of two sheets and a half; and that none
may be deceived, and think I have injured him by misquoting, I must tell you, I
only saw the latter of them and I have followed those figures in directing you
to him: And here, (according to Mr. Hobbes's train of thoughts,) I cannot but
take notice how fast, and how many of such a base Pamphlet as this shall be
bought up, when perhaps several others that are writ with truth and honesty,
and a generous design to do the Nation public service, shall scarce ever be
inquired after. Methinks, it is but an ill omen, and that the Generality of
men's minds want a good Establishment. But if we were but once well settled, and
firmly resolved, junctis viribus to oppose our Common Enemy, we should quickly
see the plotting Jesuit would fly away from us, like a wild Colt in a pasture
at the sight of a Bridle or a Halter.

An Answer to the Dialogue between the Pope and a Phanatick, etc.
Hodg. RAlph, How is it? The Greeting.
How go all squares in this world?


Ralph. 'Troth, not well, I think the Devil's in the shuffling of the Cards.


Hodg. What, because you can get never a Court one to turn up trump yet?


Ralph. Thou say right, I can see never a good Face in the whole pack for me.


Hodg. O ho, Ralph! thou must wait thy time, I warrant thee promotion before
thou dy'st, if thou will observe my method.


Ralph. Why, Ay, That Is it I would be at indeed; but I want your pregnant
parts, and that reaching, diving headpiece of yours. Thou have got a trouling
fancy. Ah Hodge! what a Prince should I be, and I thy Abilities -- thy pate is
just like an old Woman's Leather Chaps, that have lost their grinders, and is
troubled with the Palsy, so far, that it never lies still, but is perpetually
working; and there is always some good coming on it too.


Hodg. Why, ye Rogue you, how do think that is? -- reading, What an e^cellent
th^^^ reading is
reading, reading, man, has gained it -- since this damnable Popish Plot has
been discovered, there have come out so many notable good and bad Books on all
sides, that I vow to thee I am become sublime like a Philosopher; can hold out
pro and con with the best of them, and if I pleased, could make this pass for a
mere sham plot on the Papists part, and effectually turn it over, and cast it
upon the Presbyterians -- Ah, Ralph, The world should see with half an eye,
in faith, they were all in it for Cakes and Ale, had I but once a mind to it.


Ralph. Why, hark you, hark you, Hodge, is not the Popish Plot over yet? I
thought only the Presbyterian was now on foot; we have had no talk of the other
in our parts this I know not how long. ^^ey'd fain ^ssess our ^^ads with (...)
years of (...), etc. to ^^ake us for^^ these of ^^. 80, etc.
-- All our Fears and Jealousies of late have been lest we were running post to
the years of Forty one, and those times; and I Am sure that has seemed to be the
design of most our Pamphlets for these two Months at least.


Hodg. Nay, then I perceive thou understand'st nothing -- why so things should
be carried, you Fool you, if ever people mean to have their Designs take
effect. What! would you have them plot and tell too?


Ralph. No, but as I would not have them such Fools, if they were plotting as
to tell, so neither ought they on the other hand, to be such Villains, such
Devils Incarnate as to hatch and hatch on, and in the mean time by such
confounded lying Anticipations to make us believe they are innocent, and that
those who really are so, are most notoriously guilty.


Hodg. VVhoo! that is nothing with the Papists, -- that man deserves a thousand
Gibbets, and the Eternal Torments of a Spanish Inquisition, that will not lie and
swear, Ay, and damn himself too, if he should be put to it, for the promotion of
any good Roman Catholic Cause. ^^ousands (...) rather ^^sent to ^^nn
them^^^es, than ^^ay their ^^se.



Ralph. O Lord bless us all! you scare me -- why, will any man knowingly be
willing to damn his Soul for the triflle of any earthly Cause in this World?


Hodg. Ay, Ay, there be thousands that will, rather than have their Cause
betrayed -- what a goodly piece of business is it for a man designedly, upon a
public account, and for the sake of Religion, For it is nothing, the Pope can
release them when he pleases
to run his Soul into Hell-sire, when he is sure to be catalogued for a Martyr
and Saint here immediately, and after a little frying with the Devil and so,
not worth the speaking of shall, with the least whistle imaginable of his holy
and merciful Father the POPE, be releast out of those Torments, and sent to
rights up to Heaven, and made a sevenfold more glorious Star in Paradise? O
Ralph, this is the way to gain well in both Worlds.


Ralph. Much good may do'em with their penny-worths, I will never envy them
their imaginary Felicity -- my good Genius make me plain, honest, and simple, I
say, and let them be crafty, intriguing, and be damned, if they will.


Hodg. Thou say well, and like a Christian, Ralph, Downright honesty very
unfashionable now adays.
and though it be an unfashionable thing now adays, this down-right-honesty;
yet I had rather undecently go to Court without my Perriwig, than I would
appear there brave and gallant, and be forced to play the doublets of a
Jonathan and a Judas.


Ralph. I think so, of my Conscience -- but prithee now, why do use that
Unmanly Expression; can no body be a Friend there, unless they are Treacherous
too, and supplanting?


Hodg. Troth, hardly; that design greatness, and as the word is to make any
considerable figure in White Hall.


Ralph. Oh strange!


Hodg. They live by tripping up one another heels. -- He that has the largest
and most mysterious Politic fetches in him, that can Countermine smoothly, and
manage his own private designs with the slyest and most insinuating Artifice
and Address, is most likely to be THE man at Court. How Courtiers are like mere
Peggs.



Ralph. Then Courtiers are just like mere Peggs?


Hodg. For all the World: The One is driven out by the Greater Force of the
other; and he is fast in for a while, till a stronger comes and bolts at him,
and thrusts him out of his place.


Ralph. Good lack! -- but well, as we were talking before; -- must not we
believe the Books that are every day coming out, and proving it to us as plain
as the Nose on our Faces, that the Presbyterians at the least have two Hands
and a Foot in This (that they call the) horrid Popish Plot?


Hodg. I know not, Somewhat ticklish to speak any thing well of Phanaticks.
for it is a ticklish thing to speak the least word that may seem incling to
favor them. They say, they have sucked all their poison from the Jesuits, and
are now grown up to be such Masters in improvement, that they out-shoot their
Fathers in their own principles two Bars and a half.


Ralph. Indeed so they are looked upon, to be most pestilent Enemies both to
Church and State. -- But how far they are concerned in this Plot, methinks, I
cannot yet discover; and, I tell you but so, if they are in it, they are the
Devil and all at managing their designs. -- That they should n't be yet once
trapped all this time!


Hodg. Come, I know not; it may be I may be counted one of their Flock in
having so charitable an Opinion of them as to this matter; but I cannot help it,
and I must say, Not sufficient yet proved to make Persons believe they are in
this Plot.
that nothing has been proved upon 'em yet sufficient to make me believe any
such thing against them: and to tell you truly my thoughts of them at this
present, I do believe, they never, generally speaking, (for you know there are
some bad people of all persuasions, and let them that are so, whoever they be,
If they be, may they all suffer that deserve it.
suffer in Gods name, as they shall be detected;) I say, they never carried
themselves more peaceably, and with greater guard and circumspection over all
their words than now, since the Noise of this most Hellish Plot: But if any of
them can be justly accused for covert evil Actions, in the least tending to the
disturbance of the peace and quiet of the State, fiat Justitia, currat lex; I
wish with all my heart, so impartial am I, not one of the really guilty may
escape their deserved punishment.


Ralph. Why then mark me: Thou art either very obstinate, and hardened in thy
Unbelief, or else have never met with those Pamphlets that I have read within
these few days.


Hodg. I think I am as easy of belief as thou art, of things that may
rationally be believed: And to make it out to thee that I am so; You shall see,
if any body can but half so clearly prove upon the Presbyterians, the third
part of what has been fairly and undenyably proved upon the Papists, witness
their own confessions after trial, of a most Treasonable and bloody design
against the Kings most Sacred Person, and to alter the Religion established by
Law, and to Subvert the Government: I say, if any of all this can be proved
upon them, you shall see I will as readily believe them, as villainous Traitors
as the blackest yet that e're have suffered: But do y' think I Will pin my Faith
upon the Sleeve of every scandalous, idle Pamphlet, that is writ by some of
their kept hirelings for that purpose, only to amuse the World, and, if it be
possible, to set us altogether by the Ears?


Ralph. Is that their design? to divide us among our selves? The main drift of
the Dialogue between the Pope and a Phanatick, concerning the affairs in
England.



Hodg. Yes, yes, that so we might do their drudgery for them; cut our own
throats out of a complying respect to 'em, because we will not put them to the
trouble on it -- This must needs be the very drift and end of that most
pernicious Pamphlet that came out lately, entitled, a Dialogue between the
Pope and a Phanatick, concerning the Affairs in England.


Ralph. The very same Book I was going to speak of to you; I read it Saturday
night last, and it made almost my hair stand an end to see the abominable
things the Phanaticks were there guilty of.


Hodg. The Phanaticks! It Is an aspersing of the whole Church of England.
Why it is a perfect aspersing of all the Church of England, man: And though it
seems to complement her, yet in truth it is only the more foully to bespatter
her with greater fineness and subtlety: In my Judgment it is one of the most
abominable pieces I ever yet read.


Ralph. How can all this be, At the bottom of the Ti-Page.
since it is writ (as he says) by a hearty Lover of his Prince and Country?


Hodg. Ay, ay, the Title Page of a Book may now a days say any thing, that is
only to make it pass more plausibly; what Origin says to Celsus speaking of
the Egyptian's sacred places of Worship, may be very well applied here. Mr.
Blounts Anima mundi. page 6.
When you approach their sacred places, says he, ye shall meet with stately
groves, Chapels and Temples with magnificent Gates; also with variety of
mysterious Ceremonies: But when once you are entered and got within their
Temples, ye shall behold nothing but a Cat, or an Ape, a Crocodile, Goat, or
Dog, whereto they pay the most solemn Veneration. So look upon the first leaf
of the most dangerous Pamphlet that e're yet showed its face to the world, and
you shall find nothing but the smoothest and most delicate flourishes
imaginable; but dipp further into him, and there you shall see ugly Monsters of
Malicious fancy spitting out their loath some Venom to poison and infect the
credulous: These persons very well deserve the same reproof that a late
ingenious and noble writer gave a rigid Praedestinarian, Id. ibid.
affirming that God delighed (as our Author must needs) in the death of
Mankind; Speak worse of the Devilif you can, says he. I am confident none can
speak worse, if not of the King, I Am sure of Parliament, Church, and People,
than this rancorous Dialoguer.


Ralph. Prithee good Hodge, let us take him in pieces a little, and see what
he will make then.


Hodge. With all my heart; but we have had of late so many Drolis come out of
this kind, that I protest I Am quite weary of that Vein, and therefore I Will
betake my self to plain English seriousness, now so much out of mode, and turned
to Redicule.


Ralph. And I Will as gravely lissen, as if I were to pass the definitive
sentence upon your Discourse.


Hodg. And first of all, to speak of the general design of this Book; The
general design of the aforementioned Dialogue.
though to outward appearance it seems only to rail against the Presbyterians
and Sectaries, yet in truth it is a scandalous Libel, levelled at the whole
Circle of the Orthodox Clergy; and, no doubt is writ by a hearty lover of the
Tripple Crown.


Ralph. Of his Prince and Country, you mean.


Hodg. No, No, that is a Sham, I tell ye; you forget, Papists can act all parts
for the better carrying on any wicked designs.
why your great sticklers for Rome, can put on all shapes, act all parts, and
are fit for all employments, and think nothing comes amiss to them, so they can
by any ways promote their own Cause. About two years ago, That Whitebread who
was lately executed for being so deep in the Plot, was a mighty holder forth
among the Quakers, as I have been told. Whitebread formerly a Preacher among
the Quakers.



Ralph. What! will they become all things to all men?


Hodg. Ay, if they see they can gain any thing by the bargain -- But as I was
saying; They Would fain stifle all talk of a Popish, to father a new Plot on the
Presbyterians.
the main design now is to put an end to all further discourse of this most
accursed Plot of the Papists, and to Father a new one on the Presbyterians.
They see that all sober moderate men of what titles or denominations soever,
are fully bent against setting up of Popery, and would all unanimously join in
one body, to oppose and down with it; as they themselves are vigorous one way,
so these push Devilish hard the other, as their common interest does strictly
oblige them; They dare not too much openly asperse the Church of England, for
fear of the Kings utmost anger against them.
and therefore the Only course that is left 'em now is to try to break 'em: Now
as it would be too bare faced publicly in print to desame and cry out against
the Church of England as it is established by Law, and would not only too
notoriously reveal them, but too highly (and justly) incense the King, be a
means utterly to extinguish his Mercy toward them, and to awaken all his Laws,
if not to sharpen them with new ones more severe, against them, they avoid that
Rock, and content themselves with secret whispers at Coffee-Houses, meetings,
and other Clubs, But they get into Coffee-houses; and there rail at 'em to
purpose.
where they will be sure to riggle themselves in and make One; there they will
tell them; Well we see plainly enough which way all things are going now;
notwithstanding all our endeavors, Popery will get the better on us; Alas! our
Bishops, what are they; but mere Romanists at Core, and the leading Clergy?
(and you know they carry all before 'um now, Sad times.
) absolutely Church Papists: What makes them, do you think, stickle so else to
get into Commissions and Justice-ships, but only that they might the more
securely hamstring us? We may even very well shut up our Shops, and betake our
selves to our arms, for trading is gone, and every thing else is sinking as
fast as 't can; we are inevitably ruined and undone, unless Merciful
Providence steps in, and almost works a Miracle for us.


Ral. But hark you, cannot a body easily find out such a Black Dog Underminer.


Hodg. No, no, he lays the dawb of his Hypocrisy so thick, it is impossible
to see through it: he would go near to trick the Devil at his own art of
baldernoing.


Ral. Well, and I suppose this is to enrage the Sectaries against the Church
men.


Hodg. Thou take me right. They print any Lies in the world against the
Phanaticks, to blacken them as much as they can.
Then they venture to print any thing in the World against the Phanaticks, and
rail like the Devil in Hell at them; they care not what damned Lies they
invent, and bespatter them with, to make them Odious: they tell you they are a
hundred times worse than Papists, and especially more dangerous Enemies at this
day; for a Roman Catholic, if he dares but to peep his head out, he is
presently nab'd by some Zealously Officious Justice or other, and sent to
Scurvy durance; whereas these appear like Swarming Locusts, almost covering the
face of the whole Earth, and enjoy all the peace and quietness that any honest
heart can wish for; And always endeavoring to bring them into the Plot.
but yet they cannot cease from Plotting; No, this proud Beast [Hierarchy] must
be brought low: No mess of par-boyl'd Popery, as a very ingenious Gentleman
makes them call the Common Prayer Book, must be endured in God's Sanctuary, the
Calves of Bethel and the High places must be taken away, and the work of the
Lord must go on prosperously in their hands.


Ral. And all this is to stir up Commotion and Rebellion, is it not, Hodge?


Hodg. Yes, Yes, to foment Fears and Jealousies in the people, to stir them up
to mutinies and clashings one party against another, and to embroil the whole
Nation. But I hope God Almighty will so order it that none of these designed
libellous forgeries shall be able to disturb our Unity. And I think, since the
King has commanded us, The King commanded us by the Act of Oblivion to forget
things done formerly.
by his Act of Oblivion, to forget the actions of the late former times, it
would be put a piece of dutiful good manners in us to leave off contracting
our hearts with envy and Malice to each other, by any sharp memory of what has
been unneighbourly or unkindly done heretofore. And therefore not to do so, is
to rebel both against his Person and Example.
For otherwise it is but to rebel against the person of the King, against the
Excellent example and virtue of the King, and against the very Act it self.


Ral. That was a very good Act, to put an end to all Differences and heats
among persons, and to settle peace and love and concord.


Hodg. Ay, The King calls it a Happy Act.
Ralph, so the King thought, no question, when he said, that happy Act was the
principal corner stone which supported this excellent building, that created
kindness in us to each other; and Confidence is our Joint and Common security.
Confidence our joint and common Security.
Therefore, says he further, You may be sure, I will not only observe it
Religiously, and inviolably my self, but also exact the observation of it from
others: and if any person should ever have the boldness to attempt to persuade
me to the contrary, How inviolably the King will observe it, and how angry he
would be with any that shall dare to persuade him to the contrary.
he will find such an Acceptance from me, as he would have, who should
persuade me to burn Magna Charta, Cancel all the old Laws, and to erect a new
Government after my own Invention and appetite.


Ralph. But why does he make the Pope and the Phanatick such Cater-Cozins? I
thought verily they had been the most bitter Enemies one to another that were
in the World.


Hodg. OF my conscience so they are, The Pope and Phanatick bitter enemies to
each other.
the Pope hates the Phanatick, as much, as we say the Devil hates Holy water;
he would damn him and all his Heretical Fry, Souls and Bodies of them, if it
lay in his Power. They are the most termagant Creatures, the veryest Bull-Dogs
that ever yet he grappled with. O, his fingers itch to be at their bloods! and
because he would have the World hate them as implacably as himself does, he has
taken this Course of joining 'em with himself, and has given them ten times the
worse face of the two: all this is nothing but Masquerading, if he could, to
gain over the Church of England men to him, and to make them join in the
Concert, of damning the Presbyterians to the lowest pit of Hell. For if he
cannot distract and break us, he will never overthrow and destroy us.


Ral. What then, you think the sober, All moderate men are pretty well agreed
together.
moderate party of the Church of England, and the peacable quiet party of the
Phanaticks, are in pretty good Intelligence together?


Hodg. If they be not, I Am sure they had need to be; for it is not the Papists
aim, whatever their outward pretensions may be, only to purify the Church from
Enthusiastic Phanaticism, The Papists aim at the Protestant Religion root and
branch.
but it is to cut off the Protestant Religion Root and Branch, so as it is now
established by Law.


Ralph. Why all this while they would fain persuade me, that it was only the
Presbyterian Protestantism that they aimed to root out.


Hodg. You were a blind fool in the mean time then, I say their design is at
Archbishop and Bishop, as well as at Jack Presbiter; English Lawn sleeves and
Circingle men shall meet with no more favor, when once they are uppermost,
than turned up Eyelids, and your endeavoring Saints after a more through
reformation.


Ral. Why then, what will you make of this Dialoguing Pamphlet?


Hodg. Why what I should do, that it is a perfect Mock Cant and Juggle, a mere
trap-stick to bang the Phanaticks about. You see, the very first leaf of him
presents you with his main design, to trouble the Waters of our peace and
quiet, that so he might fish in them the more securely and pass undiscovered.


Ralph. Ay, If the Pope owns he is in this plot, to be sure he will do what he can
to make the world believe the Phanatick is much more so.
but he owns himself to have a small hand in the Plot.


Hodg. Very good; but it is with this proviso, that if he be found up but to
the Ankles in it, he will make the Phanaticks wading as deep as to the Loins. I
can proceed no further, says he, than the first scene of a Plot, but I see
Fate will reserve the last Act to be your part; and then he mentions his
Miscarage in 88. the Powder Plot, and that he should have had no better success
in the late Revolutions, if He had not been greatly assisted by his Holiness
the Presbyterians in carrying on the War.


Ralph. Yes, The thoughts of a High Court of Justice revived.
yes, I remember it; and he extolls mightily his high Court of Justice above
that damned cowardly way the Italians take, of Killing Kings by Poison and
Pistolling.


Hodg. Ah, Ralph, That Is only to fling up more dirt on that party, they are sure
somewhat will stick by it: but yet, methinks, there is one thing worth remarking
in it, and that is, That in all these Treasons the Pope is in to purpose, and he
taxes the Phanaticks but of this last, viz, The Death of King CHARLES the
first; and God knows, that was too much, if it be true that they did take away
his life.


Ralph. Why, do make a doubt on it, Man?


Hodg. I can say nothing to it, for I Am not old enough to make a competent
Judgment of the transactions then: but this I Am sure of, This Nation smarts
deeply to this day for the sin of the 30 Jan. 48.
that the Nation smarts to this day for the sin of the Thirtieth of January in
forty eight.


Ralph. Ay, ay, we have not yet paid the full price for Royal blood.


Hodg. No, so the Papists tell the Churchmen; though if some Reports may be
believed that are in print, I question much if they had not the chief hand in
the Actual beheading of our Kings Father: but however, they have turned it off,
like Crafts-Masters, upon the Presbyterians; as they would fain too this Plot,
but all will not do yet.


Ralph. Why, That Is it so confoundedly vexes them.


Hodg. True; but they do whatsoever they can to get 'em into the trap: Papists
would fain have us fall out among our selves.
Oh! they would fain blow 'em up to a Flame; if they could but once make them rise,
the work was done to their hands; but they find 'em such a company of Restive
Curs that no trick or Malice can move 'em.


Ralph. Oh! they are all enlightened now; and I warrant you for their ever
offering to rise, unless they should see the Papists fall to cutting of throats
once, and then I know not what they might do to save themselves.


Hodg. In troth, Ralph, if we don't look very well to our hits, I know not how
far they will venture to it, for they are as busy Plotting still as ever; and if
they find that none of their Designs will take, who can tell what despair and
rage may push 'em on to?


Ralph. But If they should Kill the King at last, woe be to them.


Hodg. I know where you are, To get the King cut off, they would venture a Massacre.
but, alas! they value not the Parliaments threats a Rush; No, no, if they
could but by any means get the King once assassinated, they would think it worth
the adventure of a Massacre. And though they turn it to the Phanaticks, yet how
daringly and impudently do they talk of another High-Court of Justice, and
quote the late sad and dreadful president for an Instance? and because we have
had some of the Traitors legally tried, cast, condemned and executed,
therefore, forsooth, they would fain insinuate, we should not need to fear any
want of Lawyers to plead for the Commons, Who knows for whom the Scaffolds in
Westminster Hall wait?
and to arraign the King. Horrid! The Scaffolds stand still at
Westminster Hall, and who knows for whom they wait? and so he goes on in such
bloody Parallels, that for my part, This Dialogue very near to Treason, if not
down right Treason.
I dare not repeat 'em, but will say this, that if what he speaks there be not
Treason, one may go to a very insolent height before a man shall reach it.


Ral. Thou do very well, Hodge; for you know, though it is a Common, yet it is
a true Saying, That some Men can better actually steal a Horse, than others may
venture so much as to look on. I should as soon dare to take a Leap from off
the Monument, as be the Author of that damned Book.


Hodg. Then he goes on, and says, though he may remark the hints of Providence,
Eag. 5.
or the signs of the times, yet he fears the event will not prove according to
his fatal suggestions: and how there does he lash upon our Present Parliament,
Ibid.
as being of the same Genius with that of forty one! One would think, were not
he cock-sure that the Parliament should never meet again, or rather, that there
never should be one more, he durst as well have set himself at the mouth of a
mounted Cannon, as have discharged those base, reflecting words upon 'em; when
how is it possible their tempers should be known, when they have not once sat
yet?


Ral. I find, Hodge, you are a shrewd Dog grown.


Hod. Oh, h'has abused the Parliament in I know not how many places of his
Book, he calls them in page 8. the un-Educated Commons of England; and it talks
at a strange rate of this and the last Parliament. Says he, page 9. The very
Burre of Popery will conjure up a Presbyterian Parliament: And in page 13. We
are secured of a House of Commons of our own temper, for we have baffled the
Gentry and Clergy, and are become the grand Electors of England. Vid. page 4.
How does he laugh at our last Parliament, for setting up that pitiful
Scarecrow of a Vote, that, If the King should happen to come to any untimely
death, they would immediately Revenge his Blood upon all the Papists in
England? let me be hanged if I don't stand like a Statue, when e're I think of
his superlative boldness.


Ral. It Is an Audacious fellow; but so they are all indeed: for no doubt he is a
Jesuit, or at best, the spawn and breed of One; but we shall unkennel the Fox
before we have done, and to all discreet and understanding men, make him as
odious as he really deserves to be.


Hodg. I wish some persons, Ralph, would but believe what I could plainly
demonstrate to them concerning them.


Ral. But you must never expect to convert all. -- But proceed.


Hodg. Well, I say this Book is all of an Entire Piece from one end to the
other, wherein the Author makes it his main business to take the Charge off
from the POPE as much as he can, the more thunderingly to Clap it upon the
PHANATICK.


Ral. What, this PLOT?


Hodg. Ay, of Killing the King, Cancelling the Laws, altering the Religion, and
overthrowing the Government. Alas! The Pope a very harmless old Gentleman, the
Phanatick is the Devil.
he makes the Great God at Rome to be as poor a little harmless Devil, as a
Whelp new puppied: But the Geneva Nightcap is the Roaring Lion with him, the
Apocryphal Spawn of Bell and the Dragon, the shame of humanity, the scandal of
Christendom, the Plague of Governments, the Beast and the false Prophet, and
his Numbers are the Locusts that came out of the bottomless Pit, the perfection
of Impudence, Impiety, and Hypocrisy, p. 16. And so indeed he makes him speak
all throughout, just according to this Character.


Ral. But is not this damned Knavery, to rail and bespatter so?


Hod. No, no; Policy to lessen the Reputation of an Enemy.
he that cannot abuse and lie for his Cause, never deserves the honor to be
concerned in one: A Cause, Ralph, is a man's Mistress; and what, wouldn't you
have a man bestir himself bravely for the Conquest? but beside, you know who
says, it is a lawful Policy to lessen the Reputation of an Enemy by any way in
the world. Stratagem is accounted one of the most commendable Excellencies
belonging to War.


Ral. But to write so notoriously false --


Hod. He knows there are Easy, believing Fools enough, let him say what he will.


Ral. But, prithee Hodge, let me ask you; what do think of that cruel
Killing of the Archbishop in Scotland? The Death of the Archbishop in Scotland
discoursed on.
I could never well tell what to make on it, but 'twas hushed up, methought, a
little too soon: And here the Rogue, for ought as I know, speaks the truth,
when he says, He sees a Phanatick may Murder with less Noise, and greater
Privilege than a Jesuit. p. 5.


Hodg. Who! the Case between that Archbishop, and their murder of Sir
Edmund-bury-God-frey here, Not comparable to the killing of Sir E. B. G.
is no more to be compared than Chalk is to Cheese: But I don't love to revive
old stories, or rake in the Ashes of the Dead, or I could tell you what I have
heard of the Former; The former was (as it is thought) some private grudg
but however, he was killed by some private grudg for some Injury that they
conceived he had done 'em heretofore.


Ral. Ha, was it so?


Hodg. It Is thus credibly reported, but I will not assert the truth on it. But the
murdering of that Worthy Knight was such a piece of Villainous Treachery, This
to carry on the Popish plot: Scarce Matchable in story.
that it can scarce be matched in story again; and so all the Judges, and
indeed all England have said on it. And that was done to carry on the more
securely this Hellish Plot; and they showed us by him, how they would have
served us all, from the King to the Cobbler, They Would serve us all so if they
could.
if they had us once but at their Mercy. They are such blood-drawers as will
give no Quarter.


Ral. But yet, let me tell you, they are damnable timorous of the last
Parliament's Vote against them, and they dare not take away the King by
violence, for fear of their own Bacon.


Hod. No, therefore they would fain run us on to the times of Forty One, and so
again: Fain drive us to 41.
do you mark their hints? and all is upon the Phanaticks, as if it was only their
Principles to cut off Princes.


Ral. He Would have the world believe so.


Hod. Ay, you shall hear how he makes the Phanatick speak. When a Prince
devests himself of Royal Power and Prerogative by Concessions, and
Condescensions; or when a Mighty Parliament have beaten or Dethroned the King,
then to destroy him, is no more Regicide than to shoot through the sign of the
King's Head, or stab the Picture of his Majesty, And to get this King to be
brought to to the Bar too.
page 5, 6. To which the POPE complimentally answers, Well, I will say you
outdo the whole world in Politics, if you can bring two Kings to the Bar in
one Age. And the plain English of all this, is only to vizar-mask the business;
and if they can any how procure the Destruction of Charles the Second, (as no
question's to be made on it, but that they had the greatest hand in the death of
Charles the First, then to lay it wholly again on his now seemingly most dearly
beloved Brother the Phanatick, if they should not be able to go on any further;
or else (which they sorely thirst after) to make our streets an Aceldama with
our own gore. And to fill our streets with our own blood.
But I hope God Almighty will defeat all such wicked reaches, or, if it must
light any where, will let it fall upon their own pates.


Ralph. Amen, I pray God.


Hodg. Than to work he goes with a Certain Noble-Gentleman as he calls him,
There Is an unlucky Gentleman, that Cross-bars them in their designs.
a person, it seems, that out-wits them in all their Contrivances, and whom, I
warrant, they wish the Devil had with all their hearts, for his standing in
their way so, and plaguily spoiling all their mischievous intentions. But I
wish we had a hundred of them.


Ral. Prithee now, can tell who it is?


Hodg. Nay, I bar the Dice there, Good Ralph. You know it is dangerous nameing
of persons; but I would he had blurted out this Gentleman's name, (ift had not
been a scandalum) that we might not be put so to the guessing at him, and it
may be miss the mark after all.


Ral. Well, well, but I have a lusty long snout of my own.


Hodg. Keep it to thy self then.


Ral. So I will; but do mind how he squitches the Church of England away
too? Their squitching away the Church of England, under the disguise of
Phanaticks, to make them the more odious.
calling it that Church that is rude to the Saints, and will worship nothing in
Heaven but God, and nothing upon Earth but the King and his two Idols of
Prerogative and Supremacy; those pagan Teraphims, to which, says the Pope, You
and I will never bow; It Is the ruin of this Church, that I do chiefly intend;
and if the King falls in the Quarrel, he dies by accident, page 6.


Hodg. This is the same Haloo still: he would fain set us together by the Ears, as
I have told you, and then he would come swimmingly in, and sweep away the stakes.
But I Am apt to think his design there will not take for all that. Admit all that
he says of the Churches Corruption were true, which You know is notoriously
False; does he think the Phanaticks such Buffle-heads and Buzzards, Admitting
the Church to be in some things corrupt (which must never be granted) yet so
long as it remains entire for substance, it ought not to be forsaken.
as not to know that Gods Ordinances, remaining for substance perfect and
entire, ought not to be forsaken, because of some faults in the Administrators,
or in the way of their Administration. The Administration of God's Ordinances
belong not to the People, but to the Minister; and if he fail in his duty, by
Administering them in a way that is not fit, and it may be not so edifying; it
is my grief, but his Sin. Hophni, and Phineas, were corrupt in their Lives; and
brought in much corruption into the Service of God, and rudeness into his
Worship: Yet Elkanah, Hannah, and many others of the Godly did nevertheless
attend that Worship and Sanctuary, 1 Samuel 1.2. And much Corruption was crept
into both the Doctrine and Worship of the Jews, as also into the lives of the
Administrators in the Church; yet our Savior, though he still cried down their
Corruptions, and would not join in them, yet he never forbad Communion with
them in God's true Worship, but joined with them in all the substantial parts,
and enjoined others so to do. And I hope so we shall all, and never fall to
pieces among our selves, only because some of us cannot come up in all things
to the height of the Church.


Ral. No doubt but we shall; and as for the Furious Zealots, (as Dr. Saywel
says in his Original of all Plots in Christendom, etc. the Epistle to all
true Englishmen) that mingle Religion with secular Government, Such disturbers
of our Peace, are the common Enemies of Man kind.
and go about by violence and bloodshed, to plant their private Opinions, and
overturn Kingdoms and States; destroy men's Lives and Fortunes, Laws and
Government, under pretense of Conscience and Religion; they ought to be subdued
as common Enemies to Mankind.


Hodg. Absolute Dominion and Rule is at the bottom of all; Religion is only the
Gilded bait by which they endeavor to delude People.


Ral. Ay, What, the Religion of the Papists is here.
the Religion of the Papists is to have our Throats, that so they may the more
infallibly possess themselves of our Manors and Lordships. But we are too much
awakened, I think, to be gulled by them at this time o'day. There are Posted
within the Established Church, Page 7.
so many unconforming Ministers now, that we have, as it were, reduced many
hundred Parish-Churches into Conventicles, and their Service and Assemblies
scarce look like the Church of England as to the strictness of it.


Hod. Yes, and you believe him, I warrant? Page 8.



Ral. Why, does he Juggle here too?


Hod. He Juggles every where; he is a great Hocus Pocus man all over. He knows,
a house divided against it self cannot stand, and therefore he puts all his
shoulders to the work of dividing us: He not only distinguishes between
Protestants and Protestants, Their great Work is, to distinguish betwixt
Churchmen, and to divide them if possible.
but between Churchmen and Churchmen; and there he has his high-Ropes and
low-Ropes among them: Oh, says he, ( page 8.) If any high Church of England man,
wen he enters a Cathedral should pay the Homage of Adoration, if there be a
Candlestick or an Eagle of Brass in the Quire, I make the world believe that he
Worships the Brazen Serpent; or if there be at the East end some fine painted
faces with gilded wings, then I persuade my Proselytes, that the bowing that
way, is the superstitious humility or worshipping of Angels, which the Apostle
condemns. And then, Bl. Eaw. L.
if He be a Gown and Cassock-man (which I hope he is not for the honor of the
Clergy,) and any man of the Church be more peaceable and quiet, a less mettled
Cock-Sparrow, and hot-spur, more sober and moderate, than his fierce Worship;
strait he is become a Mushroome, an Unconforming-Minister, a Conventicling
Preacher that gains upon the people with his Spiritual Fancies, well-sounding
words, fine Enthusiasmes and Allegories, those prismes of Divinity. p. 7.


Ral. I find there is a great deal requisite to the right understanding of this
Man; but you scent him perfectly.


Hodg. This, he things, is another successful stratagem to betray and Confound
the Church: Page 7.
But he has a thousand of them; it is almost impossible for the Devit himself
to reach and understand all the Finesses of one that is thoroughly Jesuit-ridden.


Ral. Well, and pray what is his next point?


Hodg. Then he comes full drive to Popularity; Popularity is another great
Stratagem with the Papist.
and (Oh!) what a sweet and excellent thing that is. His first Act to attain it
is a form of Godliness, the only form he values in the world. Page 7.



Ral. Let me be a Jew if I don't believe him now, for I warrant he will never
come a near the power on it.


Hod No, he finds that a dissembled Piety does more abundantly serve his
interest, Which is first attained by a form of Godliness.
(and it is Interest he only drives at) than a strict sincerity, which is
therefore justly called the simplicity of Religion: Page 7.
it wins upon the Vulgar, and the Style and Formality of Holiness, he says, has
done him as much service in England, as it does the Pope at Rome.


Ral. And what is his design with Popularrity? ^ls design ^ith popularity.



Hod. Why Ralph, his design with that, is, to set up the people upon the
ticklish Pinnacle of high Opinion: Oh! Liberty, Property, all is theirs, and
what? Shall they give up their Birthright Inheritances? Raising fears of
Arbitrary Government.
Shall they suffer tamely their dear Privileges to be taken away from them;
and become slaves and vassals to the Almighty Power of an Arbitrary will?


Ral. Prithee, Hodg, thou banters't now. -- Arbitrary Government! Absolute
Power! These are mere Figments, Castles in the Air, the sick dreams of
Extravagant Fancies; -- Why, these sure are never likely to down with the
people.


Hod. Not down with the people? He Would near make use of them then. But he finds,
he says, (p. 12.) This state Mormo of Arbitrary Government does still fright
the populacy of England, for they are unconsidering Animals.


Ral. But not such Totty-heads yet, as to be led by the Nose by him.


Hod. The Monarchy and Church of England, Monarchy, and the Church but one
work, and therefore to be blown up both together.
as they are now Established, he says (p. 12.) are but one work, and stand upon
the same bottom, and therefore his great business is, to get the mine to spring
well, for he knows then, both must blow up together; Now you shall fee what he
does further to effect it.


Ral. Ah! go thy ways for a Cunning Dog; Thou ripp'st him up most gallantly.


Hod. The Phanatick, you must know, He is to speak all the Roguery, to make him
as odious as he can to the Church; Page 8.
and he is to tell you, What with him a High Conformist is.
that the High Conformist is only qualified with little Learning and great
Immoralities, that he is Ignorant and Debauched, a great leaner toward Popery,
Ibid.
and the Church of England is so well a wisher to it, And then the H. Chapter of
Englands Man Character of a Phanatick by him.
that she is advanced within one hours sail of Rome: To answer this, the
high-flown Churchman must retort, that he is an Abominator of all Cant and
Tone, that he is not Seditious, Rebellious, and a Petitioner; but as he lives
under a good and gracious King, so he is not dissatisfied at the present times,
nor has he any despair of better. This makes bandings, fewds, heats, This one
great way to stir up heats and fends, and to weaken parties. Ibid.
and divisions on both sides, and each becomes so much the weaker, by their
Separation; the half-witted Gentleman (as he calls them) are easy and
credulous enough, and he can impose upon them what he pleases, especially in
the fears and jealousies of Popery: so that if he should raise a Report, that
the Pope had by his Conjuring Power of Transubstantiation Transformed an
hundred Thousand men into Rooks and Crows, Page 13.
and ordered, Another way to set the Gentlemen together by the Ears, or else to
make 'em believe nothing of all this Plot.
that flying Army to Randezvouz at Black Heath, and there to shake off their
Plumes and appear in Arms, he is confident there are thousands would believe
the story.


Ral. Ay, I remember it. But what a rank piece of Impudence is this!


Hodg. O! it is nothing with him, so he can but gain his reach, and that is
twofold, to make 'em mad by affronting them thus, and so he hopes upon that
score they will go to Fisty-cuffs, and then he has his ends; or, if that will not do
his business, to make 'em happily incredulous, and believe nothing of all this
Plot, (as a recompense for their already believing so much on it,) until they
feel the effect light upon 'em, and too late to their own cost find, they are
utterly ruined and undone by such insensibility. What high affronts are cast
upon his Majesty.
And for the King, says he, it will not require so much of the black Art to
render this King odious, as it did to sully the Reputation of his Father. page
12.


Ral. Oh Devilish!


Hog. And all this is to set the People against the King, and to make the King
angry with his People, if he can; and that point gained, Goodnight England.
Thus you see, the King and Parliament, the Church and People, I mean, according
to the present Establishment of Constitutions are all as the one single mark at
which he so treacherously shoots.


Ral. Yes, Their aim is at us all, King and Parliament, Church and People, to
put us into a ferment among our selves.
I could not but take notice of his irreverent speaking of the King several
times, especially about his Parliaments.


Hod. Ay, in page 4. he has this unmannerly Phrase, (I almost have a Horror to
repeat it,) the King's bold Proroguing and dissolving of Parliaments: and again
page 14. he says, The King perversely retains that Reprobating Power of
Prorogation and Dissolution, and begins to learn how, and when to use it. Well,
when he has said this of the King, on purpose to insinuate into him, as if this
was the general Clamor and voice of the People, and so to stir him up against
them; then he comes to the people, well, Gentlemen, here is like to be an end of
all Parliaments now, for they will not do as the King would have 'em, and he is
sorely displeased with 'em, and therefore you would as good never expect their
sitting more, unless you could find out some new contrivance or other; and I
know not what that must be, for my part: There Is no course to be taken as I can
think of, except you can distress the King, and bring him into Necessities;
Page 14.
That way perhaps may recover us our Parliaments, for he can have no money
without 'em; Ibid.
and this is to urge the people into an Insurrection, and so into a Rebellion
against their Prince, and then they have us at Forty One again.


Ral. I am sensible now they have planted their Batteries with all the Artifice
and Cunning they could devise, but yet they see nothing can make us take Fire.


Hodg. No, the Nation is resolved to be quiet, let 'em Plot on to the Devil an
they will.


Ral. Ay, ay, and though he says, he has already prepared the people for
Rebellion by Fears and Jealousies of Arbitary Power, Page 12.
yet he will find himself cursedly mistaken.


Hod. In the next place, Next is, the Chapter of Petitions.
he falls upon the Chapter of Petitions, and there he says, though I would not
have the Nation agree in One Common Form of Prayer to God Almighty, Page 14.
(for that would establish Unity, and that is Hell and Damnation to him, If he
can, to make half the Nation for 'em, and half against 'em still to divide as.
and defeats his Stratagems indeed,) yet I will persuade all the Countyes of
England to Combine in One Petition to the King for the Session of a Parliament.
And wherefore is he so Zealous for this, which would very much content many of
the people of England, but only because he sees as yet the King does not think
it fit (and he is the best Judge sure in this Case) for them to meet? So that he
would have them be in the mean time, Tumultuary and Mutinous, Petitioning and
Noisy, disturbing the Peace of his Sacred Majesty, whom (like Hail fellow well
met with him) he terms, Page 15.
the Gentleman at White Hall, in hopes that if the King (may I have his Pardon,
if I use another of this Authors bold Words, only to show his Impudent
Irreverence?) shall affront the leading Petitioners, the whole Association will
be Obliged to take the Field in Defense of Liberty, Property, Page 15.
and Petitions.


Ral. Ay, there is the Point he drives at: bring it but once up to another
standing Army, and he will be your most humble Servant, or what you will.


Hodg. Well, to equipoise this, he sets up another Party, and they Damn all
Petitions to the Pit of Hell for the sitting of the Parliament; and I pray
what is the Reason? Why he tells you, because that unless the Supreme Wisdom of
the King, Page 17.
contrive some more quiet or safer Method of Elections, He must suffer the
Eternal Affronts of Ill-humour'd Parliaments, He says, The King will never
have a Parliament, but what shall be affrontive, and ill humoured to him.
The plain English on it is this, with submission to better Judgments, That, if
this be not, all the other Future will be Affrontive, Ill-humoured Parliaments
to the King, and he must eternally suffer their Affronts, if he cannot find out
a way, to take the privilege of Electting from those people to whom it
hereditarily belongs, and invest himself with it, and make it become a peculiar
Prerogative to him. Whether this be not a persuading of the King to an Invasion
on One of the Fundamental Rights of his People I will not peremptorily
Determine; Therefore, were his Advice to be followed, the people should no
longer enjoy their right, to elect Members, but it should wholly rest in the
King.
But I do think, if the King should in his supreme Wisdom take this Method, the
House of Commons could never be right called the Peoples Representative, and
when ever they should go up to offer him any Bill of Supply, their Speaker
could not say, The whole Commons of England present Your Majesty with so much
Money, The Consequence of that.
etc. as Now it is generally said, upon such an Occasion.


Ral. Why, all this is spoke by an honest Cavalier, Page 16.
Man, One that, as the Pope Damns for a Heretic, his Brother Phanatick
Blasphemes for a Papist, but though the next Successor to the Crown should come
from Rome or Leyden, he would never be a Rebel, nor should all the Power or
Prerogative upon Earth, ever Oblidge him to be either Papist or Presbyterian:
He is a friend to Bishop and Liturgies, decent Rites and Ceremonies in public
Worship.


Hodg. Ay, but he is a Friend to all this of the Author's Make and
Constitution. I believe a Right honest Cavalier, (such as he would fain have
him Represent) would never have mentioned such an Oration, which he says was
made by Mecaenas to Augustus Caesar, wherein he advised him to Assume the
Monarchy, The Oration of Mecaenas to Augustus Caesar cited for this purpose.
but wisely suggested to him, That he should not make his sudden Passions and
single Will, Page 17.
the Laws and Edicts of his Empire, but to provide a Graver Senate, Page 18.
that should be his Grand Council in the Important Affairs of Government, a
Consulting with whom, would add Weight and Solemnity to his Imperial Sanctions,
but then he added this Politic Caution (and this he principally intends, and
hints at by this Story) That he should never grant the People that dangerous
Favor to Elect the Members of this Senate (and it seems our People of England
have had this dangerous Favor a very long time, and I believe would be very
loath to have it taken away from them Now, without some good substantial
Reasons for it) For then, (says he) Your Empire will be exposed to popular
Factions and Tumults; every Election will ferment the Humors of the Populacy,
The Government of Rome, and Ours, not all one.
(But that Government and ours, I hope, were not both alike) and occasion such
Convulsions in the State, that you will never be secure of any Safety at home,
or Glory abroad. The Application I shall not concern my self with.


Ral. No, it is easy enough for any one to make, without your further
Expository Comments. But hark ye, Hodge; Do mind his Closing Touch?


Hodg. Yes, He Would have the Court believe at last a Phanatick Army was coming
upon them.
yes, he would make the Court believe nothing less is coming upon 'em than a
Phanatick-Army: And (says he) if that should prove Tryumphant, nothing can be
expected, but the Extirpation of the Monarchy, Page 18.
and all the Loyal Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry. And nothing, of my Conscience,
at this day, is less thought upon by 'em, as far as any thing can enter into my
Prognostics. We do therefore declare, goes he on (right or wrong, And
therefore he would have them to have to their Arms.
he would have it so; and if he cannot make the Phanaticks, he will pretend at
least, that he is able to make the Cavalier-Party rise; and it is all one to
him, whither begins the Fray; for he is sure, either way to be a Gainer by the
Quarrel) that we will speedily furnish our selves with Arms and Ammunition for
us, and our Dependants: (Oh, Page 19.
this would be Sack and Sugar to him! And upon the first Notice of a Rebellion
(which I hope we all shall do if any should break out) repair to the Royal
Standard.
) And upon the first Notice of a Rebellion, (if it be not of the Author's own
Raising, and Gang of Papists, I think, we have no others to fear at present) we
will repair to the Royall-Standard, etc. Here is Forty-One again just, as it
has been all along throughout his Book: But since he has been so plainly
detected, I hope we shall all as industriously make it our Business to defeat
this his Artifice and Endeavor, in spite of all his Insinuations to the
contrary; But I hope none of these his Artifices shall prevail upon any of us,
to make us Mutiny.
To keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. And There sure can be no
likelihood, (says the Ingenious Dr. Saywell, whom you hinted just now: page
311, 312.) that the Government will be tempted to make any Laws of Indulgence,
or to do any thing, that may look like a Tendancy toward a Compliance with
their Novelties: (as indeed the Papists Tenets are no better.) For the Religion
which they profess, is so linked to a Foreign Interest, that there can be no
Hopes of making any Composition with them, without giving our Selves, and the
whole Nation, to be Vassals and Slaves to a Foreign Power, and without great
danger to our Souls and Fortunes. All the possible Deliberation about them, is,
first to secure our selves as much as we can, But that we shall all endeavor
to be obedient to the Church.
from their Tyranny; and then to take the most effectual Course, to bring over
the Soberest of them to the Obedience of the Church of England: And it is the
Duty of us all, to do what we can, toward the Securing that Excellent Church,
and that pure and primitive Worship of God, which by the Piety of our Ancestors
was first fettled amongst us, and has hitherto been maintained.


Ral. But, Hodge, we forget one thing all this time, and that is, we should
make a third Man come in, and quarrel with us.


Hodg. No, we have talked too Honestly for that: But if we had been such ill
Persons to the Government, as the Pope and Phanatick were, I should have said
nothing, if Mr. Loyalty had stepped in, and reprehended us as we had deserved.
Now, Ralph, for a Closing Sentence, by way of Advice, and thou shall never
repent on it, if thou followest it: Do but Read that Learned Man, Bishop Usher's
Power of the Prince, and Obedience of the Subject, and follow those Rules
Religiously; and I warrant, thou wilt be a made Man for ever. And so, God b'w'ye.


FINIS.

