OBSERVATIONS UPON Religio Medici.

Occasionally Written By Sir Kenelme Digby, Knight

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Lawrence Chapman, and Daniel Friar, 1643.

OBSERVATIONS UPON Religio Medici^.
To the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Dorset, Baron of Buckhurst, etc.
My Lord,
I Received yesternight, your Lordships of the 19 current; wherein you are
pleased to obleige me, not only by extreme gallant expressions of favor and
kindness: but likewise by taking so far into your care the expending of my
time during the tediousness of my restraint, as to recommend to my reading a
Book, that had received the honor and safeguard of your approbation, for both
which I most humbly thank your Lordship. And since I cannot, in the way of
gratefulness express unto your Lordship as I would those hearty sentiments I
have of your goodness to me; I will at the least endeavor, in the way of Duty
and observance, to let you see how the little needle of my Soul is thoroughly
touched at the great loadstone of yours, and follows sudainely and strongly
which way soever you becken it. In this occasion, the magnetike motion, was
impatience to have the Book in my hands that your Lordship gave so
advantageous a character of; whereupon I sent presently (as late as it was) to
Paul's Churchyard, for this favorite of yours, Religio Medici: which after a
while found me in a condition fit to receive a Blessing by a visit from any of
such Masterpeeces as you look upon with gracious eyes; For I was newly gotten
into my Bed. This good natured creature I could easily persuade to be my
Bedfellow, and to wake with me as long as I had any edge to entertain my
self with the delights I sucked from so noble a conversation. And truly (my
Lord) I closed not my eyes till I had enricht my self with, (or at least
exactly surveyed) all the treasures that are lapped up in the folds of those
few sheets. To return only a general commendations of this curious piece, or
at large to admire the authors Spirit and smartnes, were too perfunctory an
account, and too slight a one, to so discerning and steady an eye as yours,
after so particular and encharged a summons to read heedfully this discourse. I
will therefore presume to blot a sheet or two of paper with my reflections
upon sundry passages through the whole context of it, as they shall occur to
my remembrance. Which now your Lordship knows this packet is not so happy as
to carry with it any other expression of my obsequiousness to you; It will be
but reasonable, you should even here, give over your further trouble of
reading, what my respect ingageth me to the writing of.

Whose first step is ingenuity and a well natured evennesse of Judgment,
shall be sure of applause and fair hopes in all men for the rest of his
Journey: And indeed (my Lord) me thinks this Gentleman sets out
excellently poised with that happy temper; and shows a great deal of
Judicious piety in making a right use of the blind zeal that Bigots loose
themselves in. Yet I cannot satisfy my doubts thoroughly, how he makes good
his professing to follow the great wheel of the Church in matters of Divinity:
which surely is the solid Basis of true Religion: for to do so, without
jarring against the conduct of that first mover by Eccentricall and irregular
motions, obleigeth one to yield a very dutiful obedience to the determinations
of it without arrogating to ones self a controling ability in liking or
misliking the faith, doctrine and constitutions of that Church which one
looks upon as their North star: Whereas if I mistake not, this author
approves the Church of England not absolutely, but comparatively with other
reformed Churches.

My next reflection is concerning what he has sprinkled (most wittily) in
several places, concerning the nature and immortality of a humane soul, and
the condition and state it is in, after the dissolution of the body. And here
give me leave to observe what our Countryman Roger Bacon did long ago; That
those students who busy themselves much with such notions, as reside wholly to
the fantasy, do hardly ever become idoneous for abstracted metaphysicall
speculations; the one having bulky foundation of matter, or of the accidents of
it, to settle upon, (at the least, with one foot:) The other flying
continually, even to a lessening pitch, in the Subtle air; And dingly it has
been generally noted, that the exactest Mathematicians, who converse
altogether with lines, figures, and other differences of quantity; have seldom
proved eminent in Metaphysics or speculative Divinity. Nor again the
professors of these sciences, in the others arts. Much less can it be expected
that an excellent Physician whose fancy is always fraught with the material
drugs that he prescribes his Apothecary to compound his Medicines of; and
whose hands are inured to the cutting up, and eyes to the inspection of
anatomised bodies; should easily, and with success, fly his thoughts at so to
wring a Game, as a pure intellect, a Separated and unbodyed Soul; surely this
acute Authors sharp wit, had he orderly applied his studies that way, would
have been able to satisfy himself with less labor, and others with more
plenitude, then it has been the lot of so dull a brain as mine, concerning
the immortality of the Soul: And yet I assure you (my Lord) the little
Philosophy that is allowed me for my share, demonstrateth this proposition to
me, as well as faith delivers it: which our Physician will not admit in his.

To make good this assertion here, were very unreasonable, since that to do it
exactly, (and without exactness, it were no demonstration) requires a total
Survey of the whole science of Bodies, and of all the operations that we are
conversant with, of a rational creature; which I having done, with all the
succinctnes I have been able to explicate so knotty a Subject with, has taken
me up in the first draught near two hundred sheets of paper. I shall
therefore take leave of this point with only this note, that I take the
immortality of the Soul (under his favor) to be of that nature, that to them
only that are not versed in the ways of proving it by reason, it is an
article of faith; to others, it is an evident conclusion of demonstrative
Science.

And with a like short note I shall observe how if he had traced the nature of
the Soul from its first principles, he could not have suspected it should
sleep in the grave till the Resurrection of the body. Nor would he have
permitted his compassionative nature to imagine it belonged to Gods mercy (as
the Chiliasts did) to change its condition in those that are damned, from pain
to happiness. For where God should have done that, he must have made that
anguished Soul another creature then what it was, (as to make fire cease from
being hot, requires to have it become another thing then the Element of fire;)
since, that to be in such a condition as makes us understand damned Souls
miserable, is a necessary effect of the temper it is in, when it goes out of
the Body, and must necessarily (out of its own nature) remain in, unvariably
for all eternity; Though, for the conceptions of the vulgar part of mankind,
(who are not capable of such abstruse notions) it be styled (and truly too) the
sentence and punishment of a severe Judge.

I am extremely pleased with him, when he says there are not impossibilities
enough in Religion for an active faith: And no whit less, when in Philosophy
he will not be satisfied with such naked terms as in Schools use to be
obtruded upon easy minds, when the Masters fingers are not strong enogh to
untie the knots proposed unto them. I confess, when I enquire what light (to
use our Authors example) is, I should be as well contented with his Silence,
as with his telling me it is Actus perspicui; unless he explicate clearly
to me what those words mean, which I find very few go about to do. Such meat
they swallow whole, and eject it as entire. But were such things,
scientifically, and methodically declared, they would be of extreme
satisfaction, and delight. And that work takes up the greatest part of my
formerly mentioned treatise. For I endeavor to show by a continued progress,
and not by Leapes, all the motions of nature; and unto them to fit intelligibly
the terms used by her best Secretaries: whereby all wild fantastic
qualities and moods (introduced for refuges of ignorance) are banished from my
commerce.

In the next place (my Lord) I shall suspect that our author has not
penetrated into the bottom of those conceptions that deep Scholars have
taught us of Eternity. Methinketh he takes it for an infinite extension of
time, and a never ending revolution of continual succession: which is no more
like Eternity, then a gross body is like to a pure Spirit. Nay, such an
infinity of revolutions, is demonstrable to be a contradiction and impossible.
In the state of eternity there is no succession, no change, no variety. Souls
or Angels, in that condition, do not so much as change a thought. All things,
notions, and actions, that every were, are, or shall be in any creature, are
actually present to such an intellect. And this (my Lord) laver, not as
deriving it from Th^ologie, and having recourse to beatifike vision to make
good my tenet, (for so, only glorified creatures should enjoy such immense
knowledge) but out of the principles of Nature and Reason, and from thence shall
demonstrate it to belong to the lowest Soul of the ignorantest wretch whiles
he lived in this world, since damned in Hell. A bold undertaking you will say;
But I confidently engage my self to it. Upon this occasion occurreth also a
great deal to be said of the nature of Predestination (which by the short
touches our Author gives of it, I doubt he quite mistakes) and how it is an
unalterable Series and chain of causes, producing infallible (and in respect
of them, necessary) effects: But that is too large a Theme to unfold here; too
vast an Ocean to describe, in the scant Map of a Letter. And therefore I will
refer that to a fitter opportunity, fearing I have already too much trespassed
upon your Lordships patience; but that indeed I hope you have not had enough to
read thus far.

I am sure (my Lord) that you (who never forgot any thing, which deserved a
room in your memory) do remember how we are told, that Abyssus abyssum
invocat: So here our Author, from the abyss of Predestination, falls into
that of the Trinity of Persons consistent with the indivisibility of the divine
nature: And out of that (if I be not exceedingly deceived) into a third, of
mistaking, when he goes about to illustrate this admirable mysteryby a wild
discourse of a Trinity in our Souls. The dint of wit is not forcible enough to
dissect such tough matter; wherein all the obscure glimmering we gain of that
inaccessible light, comes to us clothed in the dark weeds of negations, and
therefore little can we hope to meet with any positive examples to parallel
it withal.

I doubt, he also mistakenth, and imposes upon the severer Schools, when he
intimates that they gainesay this visible worlds being but a picture or shadow
of the invisible and intellectual: which manner of Philosophising, he
attributes to Hermes Trismegistus; but is every where to be met with in Plato;
and is raised since to a greater height in the Christian Schools.

But I am sure he learned in no good School, nor sucked from any good
Philosophy to give an actual subsistence and being to first matter without a
form. He that will allow that a Real existence in nature is as superficially
tincted in Metaphysics, as an other would be in Mathematics that should
allow the like to a point, a line, or a superficies in Figures. These, in their
strict Notions, are but negations of further extension, or but exact
terminations of that quantity which falls under the consideration of the
understanding; in the present purpose; no real entities in themselves: so
likewise, the notions of matter, form, act, power, existence, and the like,
that are with truth considered by the understanding, and have there each of
them a distinet entity, are never the less, no where by themselves in nature.
They are terms which we must use in the negotiations of our thoughts, if we
will discourse consequently, and conclude knowingly. But then again we must
be very wary of attributing to things in their own natures, such entities as
we create in our understandings, when we make pictures of them there; for
there every different consideration arising out of the different impression,
which the same thing makes upon us, has a distinct being by it self. Whereas
in thing, there is but one single unity, that shows (as it were in a glass,
at several positions) those various faces in our understanding. In a word; all
these words are but artificial terms, not real things: And the not right
understanding them, is the dangerousest rock that Scholars suffer ship wrack
against.

I go on with our Physicians contemplations. Upon every occasion, he shewech
strong parts and a vigorous brain. His wishes and aims, and what he points
at, speak him owner of a noble and a generous heart. He has reason to wish
that Aristotle had been as accurate in examining the causes, nature and
affections of the great Universe he busied himself about, as his Patriarch
Galen has been in the like considerations upon his little World, man's body,
in that admirable work of his de usu partium. But no great humane thing, was
ever borne and perfected at once. It may satisfy us, if one in our age,
builds that magnifike structure upon the others foundations; and especially,
if where he finds any of them unsound, he eradicateth those, and fixes new
unquestionable ones in their room: but so, as they still, in gross, keep a
proportion, and bear a Harmony with the others great work: This, has now,
(even now) our learned Countryman done, The knowing Master White, (whose name,
I believe your Lordship has met withal) in his excellent book, De Mundo,
newly printed at Paris, where he now resideth, and is admired by the world of
Letterd men there, as the Prodigy of these latter times. Indeed his three
Dialogues upon that Subject, (if I am able to judge any thing) are full of the
profoundest learning I ever yet met withal. And I believe; who has well read
and digested them, will persuade himself there is no truth so abstruse, nor
hitherto conceived out of our reach, but man's wit may raise engines to scale
and conquer. I assure my self, when our author has studied him thoroughly, he
will not lament so loud for Aristotle's mutilated and defective Philosophy; as
in Boccalini, Caesar Caporali does for the loss of Livies shipwracked Decads.

That Logic which he quarrelleth at for calling a Toade, or a Serpent ugly,
will in the end agree with his; for no body ever took them to be so, in
respect of the Vntverse (in which regard, he defends their regularity, and
Symmetry) but only as they have relation to us.

But I cannot so easily agree with him when he affirms that Devils, or other
Spirits in the Intellectual world have no exact Ephemerides wherein they may
read beforehand the stories of fortuite accidents: for I believe that all
causes are so immediately chayned to their effects, as if a perfect knowing
nature get hold but of one link, it will drive the entire Series or pedigree
of the whole to each utmost end; (as I think I have proved in my forenamed
treatisfe) so that in truth, there is no fortuitnesse or contingency of things,
in respect of themselves, but only in respect of us, that are ignorant of
their certain, and necessary causes.

Now a like Series or chain, and complexe of all outward circumstances (whose
highest Link, Poets say prettily, is fastened to Jupiters chair, and the
lowest is riveted to every individual on earth) steered and levelled by God
Almighty, at the first setting out of the first Mover; I conceive, to be that
divine Providence and mercy, which (to use our Authors own example) gives a
thriving Genius to the Hollanders; and the like: And not any secret, invisible,
mystical blessing, that falls not under the search or cognizance of a
prudent indagation.

I must needs approve our authors aequanimity, and I may as justly say his
magnanimity, in being contented so cheerfully (as he says) to shake hands with
the fading Goods of Fortune; and be deprived of the joys of her most precious
blessings; so that he may in recompense, possess in ample measure the true
ones of the mind, like Epictetus, that great Master of moral wisdom and
piety, who taxes them of high injustice that repine at Gods distribution of
his blessings, when he puts not into their share of goods, such things as
they use no industry or means to purchase. For why should that man who above
all things esteems his own freedom; and who to enjoy that sequestereth
himself from commerce with the vulgar of mankind; take it ill of his Stars,
if such preferments, honors, and applauses meet not him, as are painefully
gained after long and tedious services of Princes, and brittle dependances of
humorous favorites, and supple complyances with all sorts of natures? As for
what he faith of Astrology; I do not conceive that wise men reject it so much
for being repugnant to Divinity (which he reconcileth well enough) as for
having no solid rules, or ground in nature. To rely too far upon that vain
art, I judge to be rather folly then impie^y. Unless in our censure, we look
to the first Origin of it, which savoureth of the Idolatry of those Heathens
that worshipping the Stars and heavenly bodies for Deities, did in a
superstitious devotion, attribute unto them the causality of all effects
beneath them. And for ought I know, the belief of solid Orbs in the heavens,
and their regularly-irregular motions, sprung from the same root.) And a like
inanity, I should suspect in Chiromancy as well as Astrology, (especially, in
particular contingent effects) however our Author, and no less a man then
Aristotle, seem to attribute somewhat more to that conjecturall art of Lines.

I should much doubt (though our Author shows himself of another mind) that
Bernardinus Ochinus grew at the last to be a mere Atheist: This story I have
but upon relation; yet of a very good hand
when after having been first the institutor and Patriarch of the Capucine
order (so violent was his zeal then, as no former religious institution,
though never so rigorous, was strict enough for him) he from thence fell to
be first an Heretic, then a Jew; and after a while became a Turk, and at
the last wrote a furious Invective against those whom he called the three
Grand-Impostors of the World; among whom he ranked our Savior Christ, as well
as Moses and Mahomet.

I doubt he mistaketh in his Chronology, or the printer in the name, when he
makes Ptolomy condemn the Alchoran.

He needs not be so serupulous, as he seems to be in averring down
rightly, that God cannot do contradictory things, (though peradventure it is
not amisle to sweeten the manner of the expression, and the sound of the words)
for who understands the nature of contradiction, will find Non Entity in one
of the terms, which of God, were impiety not to deny peremptorily, for he
being in his proper nature Selfe-Entity, all being must immediately flow from
him, and all not-being be totally excluded from that effluxe. Now for the
recalling of Time past, which the Angels posed Esdras withal; there is no
contradiction in that; as is evident to them that know the essence of time (for
it is but putting again, all things, that had motion, into the same state they
were in, at that moment unto which time was to be reduced back and from
thence, letting it travel on again, by the same motions, and upon the same
wheels, it rolled upon before.) And therefore God could do this admirable
work, though neither Esdras, nor all the power of creatures together could do
it: And consequently it cannot in this Question be said, that he posed
mortality with what himself was not able to perform.

I acknowledge ingenuously our Physicians experience has the advantage of my
Philosophy, in knowing there are witches. Yet I am sure, I have no temptation
to doubt of the Deity; nor have any unsatisfaction in believing there are
Spirits. I do not see such a necessary conjunction between them, as that the
supposition of the one, must needs infer the other. Neither do I deny there
are witches. I only reserve my assent, till I meet with stronger motives to
carry it. And I confess I doubt as much of the efficacy of those magical rules
he speaks of, as also of the finding out of mysteries by the courteous
Revelation of Spirits.

I doubt, his discourse of an universal Spirit, is but a wild fancy: And
that in the marshalling of it, he mistaketh the Hermeticall Philosophers. And
surely, it is a weak argument, from a common nature that subsisteth only in
our understanding, (out of which it has no being at all) to infer, by
parity, an actual subsistence of the like, in realty of nature, (of which kind
of miscarriage in men's discoursings, I have spoken before) And upon this
occasion, I do not see how seasonably he falls, of a sudden, from natural
speculations to a moral contemplation of Gods Spirit working in us. In which
also I would inquire (especially upon his sudden poetical rapture) whether
the solidity of the Judgment be not outweighed by the ayrienesse of the
fancy. Assuredly one cannot err in taking this Author for a very fine
ingenious Gentleman: but for how deep a Scholar, I leave unto them to judge,
that are abler then I am.

If he had applied himself with earnest study, and upon right grounds, to
search out the nature of pure intellects: I doubt not but his great parts would
have argued more efficacionsly, then he does against those that between men and
Angels put only Porplyries difference of Mortality and immortality. And he
would have dived further into the tenor of their intellectual operations; in
which there is no succession; nor ratiocinative discourse; for in the very
first instant of their creation, they actually knew all that they were capable
of knowing; and they are acquainted even with all free thoughts, past, present,
and to come; for they see them in their causes, and they see them altogether at
one instant: as I have in my forementioned treatise proved at large: and I
think I have already touched thus much once before in this Letter.

I am tempted here to say a great deal concerning Light, by his taking it to
be a bare quality. For in Physics no speculation is more useful, or reaches
further. But to set down such Phaenomena's of it as I have observed, and from
whence I evidently collect the nature of it; were too large a Theme for this
place; when your Lordshippe pleases I shall show you another more orderly
discourse upon that Subject; wherein I have sufficiently proved it to be a
solid Substance and body.

In his proceeding to collect an intellectual world; and in his discoursing
upon the place, and habitation of Angels: As also in his consideration of the
activity of glorified eyes; (which shall bein a state of reft; whereas motion,
is required to seeing) And in his subtle speculation upon two bodies placed in
the vacuity beyond the utmost all-enclosing superficies of Heaven (which
implies a contradiction in nature) me thinks I hear Apelles crying out, Ne
suitor ultra Crepidam: or rather it puts me in mind of one of the titles in
Pantagruels Library, (which he expresses himself conversant in) namely,
Quaestio Subtilissima, Vtrum Chimaera in vacuo bombinans possit comedere
Secundas intentiones. With which short note I will leave there considerations;
in which (if time and other circumstances allowed it) matter would spring up of
excellent Learning.

When our author shall have read Master Whites Dialogues of the world, he will
no longer be of the opinion, that the unity of the world is a conclusion of
Faith: For it is there demonstrated by Reason.

Here the thread of the discourse inviteth me to fay a great deal of the
production, or creation of Man's Soul. But it is too tedious and too knotty a
piece for a Letter. Now it shall suffice to note, that it is not Ex traduce,
and yet has a strange kind of necre dependence of the body; which is, as it
were, Gods instrument to create it by. This, thus said, or rather rumbled out,
may seem harth; But had your Lordship leisure to peruse what I have written at
full upon this point, I doubt not but it would appear plausible enough to you.

I cannot agree with him when he seems to impute inconvenience to long life;
and that length of time does rather impair, then improve us: For surely if we
will follow the course of nature, and of reason, it is a mighty great blessing;
were it but in this regard, that it gives time leave to vent and boil away
the unquietnesses and turbulencies that follow our passions; and to weane our
selves gently from carnal affections, and at the last to drop with ease and
willingness, like ripe fruit from the Tree; as I remember Plotinus finely
discourses in one of his Enneads. For when before the season, it is plucked
off with violent hands, or shaken down by rude and boisterous winds, it
carries along with it an indigested raw taste of the wood, and has an
unpleasant aigrenesse in its juice, that makes it unfit for use, till long
time have mellowed it: And peradventure it may be to backward, as instead of
ripening, it may grow rotten in the very Center. In like manner, Souls that
go out of their bodies with affections to those objects they leave behind
them, (which usually is as long as they can relish them) do retain still even
in their separation, a byas, and a languishing toward them: which is the
Reason why such terrene Souls appear oftenest in Coemeteries and Charnell
houses; (and not, that moral one which our Author gives:) for life which is
union with the body, being that which carnal Souls have straightesh affections
to, and that they are loathest to be separated from; their unquiet Spirit,
which can never (naturally) loose the impressions it had wrought in it at the
time of its driving out, lingreth perpetually after that dear confort of his.
The impossibility cannot cure them of their impotent desires; They would feign
be alive again, -- Iterumque ad tarda reverti Corpora. Quae lucis miseris tam
dira cupido?

And to this cause peradventure may be reduced the strange effect which is
frequently seen in England, when at the approach of the Murderer, the slain
body suddenly bleedeth afreth: For certainly the Souls of them that are
treacherously murdered by surprise, use to leave their Bodies with extreme
unwillingnesse, and with vehement indignation against them that force them to
so unprovided and abhorred a passage. That Soul then to wreak its evil
tallent against the hated Murderer, and to draw a just and desired revenge upon
his head; would do all it can to manifest the author of the fact. To speak,
it cannot; for in it self, it wants Organs of voice, and those it is parted
from, are now grown too heavy, and are too benumbed for it, to give motion
unto. Yet some change it desires to make in the body which it has to vehement
inclinations to, and therefore is the aptest for it to work upon. It must then
endeavor to cause a motion in the subtilest and most fluid parts (and
consequently, the most moveable ones) of it. This can be nothing but the Blood;
which then being violently moved, must needs gush out at those places where it
finds issues.

Our author cannot believe that the world will perish upon the ruins of its
own principles: But Master White has demonstrated the end of it upon natural
Reason. And though the precise time for that general destruction be
inscrutable; yet he learnedly shows an ingenious rule whereby to measure in
some fort the duration of it, without being branded (as our author threatens)
with convincible and Statute madness, or with impiety. And whereas he will
have the work of this laft great day (the summer up of all past days) to
imply annihilation and thereupon interesseth God only in it: I must beg leave
to contradict him namely in this point, and to affirm that the letting loose
then of the activest Element to destroy this face of the World, will but beget
a change in it, and that no annihilation can proceed from God Almighty: for his
essence being (as I said before) selfe-existence, it is more impossible that
Notbeing should flow from him, then that cold should flow immediately from
fire, or darkness from the actual presence of light.

I must needs acknowledge that where he ballanceth life and death against one
another and considers that the latter is to be a kind of nothing for a
moment, to become a pure Spirit within one instant, and what follows of this
strong thought; is extreme handsomely said, and argues very gallant and
generous resolutions in him.

To exemplify the immortality of the Soul, he needs not have recourse to
the Philosophers stone. His own store furnishes him with a most pregnant one
of reviving a plant (the same numericall plant) out of his own ashes. But
under his favor, I believe his experiment will fail, if under the notion of
the fame, he comprehends all the Accidents that first accompanied that
plant; for since in the ashes there remains only the fixed Salt, I am very
confident that all the color, and much of the odor and Taste of it, is flowne
away with the Volatile salt.

What should I say of his making so particular a narration of personal things,
and private thoughts of his own; the knowledge whereof cannot much conduce to
any man's betterment? (which I make account is the chief end of his writing
this discourse) As where he speaks of the soundness of his body, of the
course of his diet, of the coolness of his blood at the Summer Solstice of
his age, of his neglect of an Epitaph: how long he has lived or may live what
Popes, Emperors, Kings, Grand-Seigniors, he has been contemporary unto, and
the like: would it not be thought that he has a special good opinion of
himself, (and indeed he has reason) when he makes such great Princes the
Land-markes in the Chronology of himself? Surely if he were to write by
retaile the particulars of his own Story and life, it would be a notable
Romanze; since he tells us in one total sum, it is a continued miracle of
thirty years. Though he creeps gently upon us at the first, yet he grows a
Giant, an Attlas (to use his own expression) at the last. But I will not
censure him as he that made notes upon Balsacs letters, and was angry with him
for vexing his readers with stories of his Cholikes, and voyding of gravel. I
leave this kind of his expressions, without looking further into them.

In the next place (my Lord) I shall take occasion from our authors setting so
maine a difference between moral honesty and virtue, or being virtuous, (to
use his own phrase) out of an inbred loyalty to virtue; and on the other side,
being virtuous for a rewards sake; To discourse a little concerning Virtue in
this life, and the effects of it afterward. Truly (my Lord) however he
seems to prefer this latter, I cannot but value the other much before it, if
we regard the nobleness, and heroikenesse of the nature and mind from whence
they both proceed: And if we consider the Iourneyes end, to which each of them
carries us, I am confident the first yields nothing to the second, but
indeed both meet in the period of Beatitude. To clear this point (which is
very well worth the wisest man's seriousest thoughts) we must consider, what it
is that brings us to this excellent State, to be happy in the other world of
eternity and immutability. It is agreed on all hands to be Gods grace and
favor to us: But all do not agree by what steps his grace produces this
effect. Herein I shall not trouble your Lordshippe with a long discourse, how
that grace works in us, (which yet I will in a word touch anon, that you may
conceive what I understand grace to be) but will suppose it to have wrought
its effect in us in this life, and from thence examine what hinges they are
that turn us over to Beatitude and Glory in the next. Some consider God as a
Judge, that rewards or punishes men, according as they cooperated with or
repugned to, the grace he gave. That according as their actions please or
displease him, he is well affected toward them or angry with them; And
accordingly makes them, to the purpose, and very home, feel the effects of
his kindness or indignation. Others that fly a higher pitch, and are so
happy, -- Vt rerum poterint cognoscere causas, do conceive that Beatitude, and
misery in the other life, are effects that necessarily and orderly flow out of
the nature of those causes that be got them in this life, without engaging God
Almighty to give a sentence, and act the part of a Judge, according to the
state of our cause, as it shall appear upon the accusations and pleadings at
his great Bar. Much of which manner of expression, is metaphorical, and rather
adapted to contain vulgar minds in their duties (that are awed with the
thought of a severe Judge, sifting every minute action of theirs) then such as
we must conceive every circumstance to pass so in reality as the literal
sound of the words seems to infer in ordinary construction: (and yet all
that is true too, in its genuine sense) But (my Lord) these more penetrating
men, and that I conceive are virtuous upon higher and stronger motives (for
they truly and solidly know why they are so) do consider that what
impressions are once made in the spiritual substance of a Soul, and what
affections it has once contracted, do ever remain in it till a contrary and
diametrally contradicting judgment and affection, do obliterate it, and
expel it thence. This is the reason why Contrition, sorrow and hatred for past
Sins, is encharged us. If then the Soul do go out of the body with
impressions and affections to the objects, and pleasures of this life; it
continually lingreth after them, and as Virgill (learnedly as well as wittily)
says, -- Quae gratia currum, Armorumque fuit vivis, quae cura nitentes
Pascere equos, eadem sequitur tellure repostos.
But that being a State wherein those objects neither are, nor can be enjoyed,
it must needs follow that such a Soul must be in an exceeding anguish,
sorrow, and affliction, for being deprived of them; and for want of those it so
much priseth, will neglect all other contentments it might have, as not having
a relish or taste molded and prepared to the savouring of them; but like
feverish tongues, that when they are even scorched with heat, take no delight
in the pleasingest liquors, but the sweetest drinks seem bitter to them by
reason of their overflowing Gall; So they even hate whatsoever Good is in
their power, and thus pine away a long eternity. In which the sharpness and
activity of their pain, anguish, and sad condition, is to be measured by the
sensiblenesse of their natures: which being then purely spiritual, is in a
manner infinitely more then any torment that in this life can be inflicted
upon a dull gross body. To this add, the vexation it must be to them, to see
how inestimable and infinite a good, they have lost; and lost merely by their
own fault; and for momentary trifles, and childrens play; and that it was so
easy for them to have gained it, had they remained but in their right senses,
and governed themselves according to Reason. And then judge in what a tortured
condition they must be, of remorse and execrating themselves for their most
resupine and senseless madness. But if on the other side, a Soul be released
out of this Prison of clay and flesh, with affections settled upon intellectual
goods as Truth, Knowledge, and the like; And that it be grown to an irksome
dislike of the flat pleasures of this world; and look upon carnal and
sensual objects with a disdainful eye, as discerning the contemptible inanity
in them, that is set off only by their painted outside; and above all, that it
have a longing desire to be in the society of that supereminent cause of
causes, in which they know are heaped up the Treasures of all beauty,
Knowledge, Truth, Delight, and good whatsoever; and therefore are impatient at
the Delay, and reckon all their absence from him as a tedious benithment; and
in that regard hate their life and body as cause of this divorce: such a Soul
I say must necessarily, by reason of the Temper it is wrought into enjoy
immediately at the instant of the bodies dissolution and its liberty, more
contentment, more joy, more true happiness, then it is possible for a heart of
flesh to have scarce any scantling of, much less to comprehend.

For immense knowledge is natural to it; as I have touched before. Truth,
which is the adaequated and satisfying object of the understanding, is there
displayed in her own Colors; or rather without any.

And that which is the Crown of all, and in respect of which all the rest is
nothing; that infinite entity which above all things this soul thirsts to
be united unto, can not for his own goodness sake deny his embraces to so
affectionate a Creature, and to such an enflamed love. If he should; then, were
that Soul, for being the best, and for loving him most, condemned to be the
unhappiest. For what joy could she have in any thing, were she barred from
what she so infinitely loves? But since the nature of superior and excellent
things is to shower down their propitious influences wheresoever there is a
capacity of receiving them, and no obstacle to keep them out (like the Sun that
illuminateth the whole air, if no cloud or solid opacous body intervene) it
follows clearly that this infinite Sun of Justice, this immense Ocean of
goodness, cannot choose but environ with his beams, and replenish even beyond
satietie with his delightsome waters, a soul so prepared and tempered to
receive them.

Now (my Lord) to make use of this discourse and apply it to what begot it; be
pleased to determine which way will deliver us evenest and smoothest to this
happy end of our Journey: To be virtuous for hope of a reward, and through
fear of punishment, or to be so, out of a natural and inward affection to
virtue, for virtues and Reasons sake? surely one in this latter condition, not
only does those things which will bring him to Beatitude; but he is so secured
in a manner under an Armor of Proof, that he is almost invulnerable; he can
scarce miscarry, he has not so much as an inclination to work contrarily,
the alluring baits of this World, tempt him not; he disliketh, he hates,
even his necessary commerce with them whiles he lives. On the other side, the
hireling that steereth his course only by his reward and punishment, does we^l
I confess; but he does it with reluctance; he carries the Arc, Gods Image,
his Soul, safely home, it is true, but he loweth pitifully after his calves
that he leaves behind him among the Philistians. In a word he is virtuous,
but if he might safely, he would do vicious things. (And hence he the ground
in nature, if so I may say, of our Purgatory) Meethinkes two such minds may
not unfitly be compared to two Maids, whereof one has a little sprinkling of
the green sickness, and has more mind to eat ashes, Chalk, or Leather, then
meats of solid and good nourishment; but for bears them, knowing the
languishing condition of Health it will bring her to: But the other having a
ruddy, vigorous and perfect constitution, and enjoying a complete entire
eucrasie, delights in no food but of good nourriture, and loathes the others
delights. Her health is discovered in her looks, and she is secure from any
danger of that Malady, whereas the other, for all her good diet, bears in her
complexion some sickly testimony of her depraved appetite; and if she be not
very Wary, she is in danger of a relapse.

It falls fit in this place to examine our Authors apprehension of the end of
such honest Worthies and Philosophers (as he calls them) that dyed before
Christ his incarnation, whether any of them could be saved or no. Truly (my
Lord) I make no doubt at all, but if any followed in the whole Tenor of their
lives, the dictamens of right Reason, but that their Journey was secure to
Heaven. Out of the former discourse appears what temper of mind is necessary
to get thither. And, that Reason would dictate such a temper to aperfectly
judicious man (though but in the state of Nature) the best and most rational
for him, I make no doubt at all. But it is most true; they are exceeding few,
(if any) in whom Reason works clearly and is not overswayed by Passion and
terrene affections; they are few that can discern what is reasonable to be
done in every circumstance. -- Pauci, quos aequus amavit Jupiter, aut ardens
evexit ad aethera virtus;
Dis geniti, potuere; --
And fewer, that knowing what is best, can win of themselves to do
accordingly; ( video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor; being most men's cases)
so that after all that can be expected at the hands of nature and reason in
their best habit, since the lapse of them, we may conclude, it would have
been a most difficult thing for any man, and a most impossible one for
mankind, to attain unto Beatitude, if Christ had not come to teach, and by
his example to show us the way.

And this was the Reason of his incarnatiod, teaching life and death: for being
God, we could not doubt his veracity, when he told us news of the other
world; having all things in his power, and yet enjoying none of the delights of
this life, no man should stick at foregoing them, since his example shows
all men that such a course is best; whereas few are capable of the Reason of
it: And for his last act, dying in such an afflicted manner, he taught us how
the securest way to step immediately into perfect happiness, is to be
crucified to all the desires, delights, and contentments of this World.

But to come back to our Physician: Truly (my Lord) I must needs pay him as a
due the acknowledging his pious discourses to be excellent and patheticall
ones, containing worthy motives, to encite one to virtue and to deter one
from vice: thereby to gain Heaven, and to avoid Hell. Assuredly he is owner of
a solid head and of a strong generous heart. Where he imployeth his thoughts
upon such things as thoughts upon such things as resoit to no higher, or more
abstruse Principles then such as occur in ordinary conversation with the
world, or in the common tracke of study and learning, I know no man would say
better. But when he meets with such difficulties as his next concerning the
Resurrection of the body, (wherein after deep meditation, upon the most
abstracted principles, and speculations of the Metaphysikes, one has much ado
to solve the appearing contradictions in Nature) There, I do not at all wonder
he should tread a little awry, and go astray in the dark; for I conceive his
course of life has not permitted him to allow much time unto the unwinding of
such entangled and abstracted subtilties. But if it had, I believe his natural
parts are such as he might have kept the chair from most men I know: for even
where he roveth widest, it is with so much wit and sharpness, as puts me
in mind of a great man's censure upon Joseph Scaligers Cyclometrica (a matter he
was not well versed in) that he had rather err so ingeniously as he did, then
hit upon Truth in that heavy manner as the Jesuit, his antagonist stuffeth his
Books. Most assuredly his wit and smartnesse in this discourse is of the
finest Standard; and his insight into severer Learning will appear as piercing
unto such as use not strictly the touchstone and the Test to examine everypeece
of the glittering coin he pays his reader with. But to come to the
Resurrection, Methinkes it is but a gross conception to think that every
Atome of the present individual matter of a body; every grain of Ashes of a
burned Cadaver, scattered by the wind throughout the world, and after numerous
variations changed peradventure into the body of another man; should at the
sounding of the last Trumpet be raked together again from all the corners of
the earth, and be made up anew into the same Body it was before of the first
man. Yet if we will be Christians, and rely upon Gods promises, we must
believe that we shall rise again with the same Body, that walked about, did
eat, drink, and live here on earth; and that we shall see our Savior and
Redeemer with the same, the very same, eyes, wherewith we now look upon the
fading Glories of this contemptible world.

How shall these seeming contrarieties be reconciled? if the latter be true
why should not the former be admitted? To explicate this riddle the better,
give me leave to ask your Lordship if you now see the Cannons, the Ensigns,
the Arms and other martial preparations at Oxford, with the same eyes,
wherewith many years agone you looked upon Porphyries and Aristotle's glearned
leases there? I doubt not but you will answer me, Assuredly with the very
same. Is that noble and Graceful person of yours, that begets both delight
and Reverence in every one that looks upon it? Is that body of yours, that
now is grown to such comely and full dimensions, as Nature can give her none
more advantageous, the same person, the same body, which your virtuous and
excellent Mother bore nine months in her chaste and honored womb, and that
your Nurse gave suck unto? most certainly it is the same. And yet if you
consider it well, it cannot be doubted but that sublunary matter, being in a
perpetual flux, and in bodies which have internal principles of Heat and
motion, much continually transpiring out to make room for the supply of new
aliment; at the length, in long process of time, all is so changed, As that
Ship at Athens may as well be called the same ship that was there two hundred
years before, and whereof (by reason of the continual reparations) not one
foot of the Timber is remaining in her that builded her at the first; As this
Body now, can be called the same it was, forty years agone unless some higher
consideration keep up the Identity of it. Now what that is, Let us examine,
and whether or no, it will reach to our difficulty of the Resurrection. Let us
consider then how that which gives the numerical individuation to a Body, is
the substantial form. As long as that remains the same, though the matter
be in a continual flux and motion, yet the thing is still the same. There is
not one drop of the same water in the Thames that ran down by Whitehall
yesternight, yet no man will deny, but that it is the same River that was in
Queen Elizabeth's time, as long as it is supplied from the same Common Stock,
the Sea. Though this example reaches not hom, it illustrateth the thing. If
then the form remain absolutely the same after separation from the matter,
that it was in the matter, (which can happen only to forms, that subsist by
themselves; as humane Souls) it follows then, that whenever it is united
to matter again, (all matter coming out of the same common Magazine) it
makes again the same man, with the same eyes, and all the same limbs that
were formerly Nay, he is composed of the same Individual matter: for it has
the same distinguisher and individuator; to wit, the same form, or Soul.
Matter considered singly by it self, has no distinction: All matter is in it
self the same; we must fancy it, as we do the indigested Chaos; It is an
uniformely wild Ocean. Particularize a few drops of the Sea, by filling a
glass full of them; then that glass full is distinguished from all the rest
of the watery Bulk: But return back those few drops to from whence they were
taken, and the Glasse-full that even now had an individuation by it self,
loses that, and grows one and the same with the other maine stock: Yet if
you fill your glass again, whersoever you take it up, so it be of the same
uniforme Bulk of water you had before, it is the same Glasse-full of water
that you had. But as I said before, this example fitteth entirely, no more then
the other did. In such abstracted speculations, where we must consider matter
without form (which has no actual being) we must not expect adaequated
examples in nature. But enough is said to make a speculative man see, that if
God should join the Soul of a lately dead man (even whiles his dead corpse
should lie entire in his winding sheet here) unto a Body made of earth taken
from foam mountain in America; it were most true and certain that the body he
should then live by, were the same. Identicall body he lived with before his
Death and late Resurrection. It is evident that samenesse, thisnesse, and
thatnesse, belongs not to matter by it self, (For a general indifference
runs through it all) but only as it is distinguished and individuated by
the Form. Which, in our case, whenever the same Soul does, it must be
understood always to be the same matter and body.

This point thus passed over; I may piece to it what our Author says of a
Magazine of Subsistent forms residing first in the Chaos, and hereafter (when
the world shall have been destroyed by fire) in the general heap of Ashes;
out of which Gods voice did, and shall, draw them out and cloth them with
matter. This language were handsome for a Poet or a Rhetorician to speak. But
in a Philosopher, that should ratiocinate strictly and rigorously, I can not
admit it, for certainly there are no subsistent forms of Corporeal things:
(excepting the Soul of man, which besides being an informing form, has
another particular consideration belonging to it; too long to speak of here)
But whenever that compound is destroyed, the form perishes with the whole.
And for the natural production of Corporeal things I conceive it to be
wrought out by the action and passion of the Elements among themselves; which
introducing new tempers and dispositions, into the bodies where these conflicts
pass; new forms succeed old ones, when the dispositions are raised to such a
height as can no longer consist with the preceding form, and are in the
immediate degree to fit the succeeding one, which they usher in. The mystery of
all which I have at large unfolded in my above mentioned treatise, of the
immortality of the Soul.

I shall say no more to the first part of our Phisicians discourse, after I
have observed how his consequence is no good one, where he infers that if
the Devils foreknew, who would be damned or saved, it would save them the
Labor, and end their work of tempting mankind to mischief and evil. For
whatsoever their moral design, and success be in it, their nature impelleth
them to be always doing it. For on the one side, it is active in the highest
degree (as being pure Acts, that is Spirits,) so on the other side, they are
malign in as great an excess: By the one they must be always working
wheresoever they may work; (like water in a vessel full of holes, that will
run out of every one of them which is not stopped) By the other, their whole
work must be malicious and mischievous. Joining then both these qualities
together, it is evident they will always be tempting mankind, though they
know they shall be frustrate of their moral end.

But were it not time that I made an end? Yes, it is more then time. And
therefore having once passed the limit that confined what was becoming, the
next step carried me into the Ocean of Error; which being infinite, and
therefore more or less bearing no proportion in it; I will proceed a little
further, to take a short survey of his Second part; And hope for as easy
Pardon after this addition to my sudden and indigested remarkes, as if I had
closed them up now.

Methinkes, he begins with somewhat an affected discourse to prove his
natural inclination to Charity which virtue is the intended Theme of all the
remainder of his discourse. And I doubt he mistaketh the lowest Orb or Lembe
of that high Seraphicke virtue, for the top and perfection of it; and makes a
kind of humane compassion to be divine Charity. He will have it to be a
general way of doing good: It is true, he adds then, for Gods sake; But he
allayeth that again, with saying he will have that good done as by obedience,
and to accomplish Gods will; and looks at the effects it works upon our
Souls but in a narrow compass; like one in the vulgar throng, that
considers God as a Judge, and as a rewarder or a punisher. Whereas perfect
Charity, is that vehement love of God for his own sake, for his goodness, for
his beauty, for his excellency that carries all the motions of our Soul
directly and violently to him; and makes a man difdaine, or rather hate all
obstacles that may retard his journey to him. And that face of it that looks
toward mankind with who^ we live, and warmeth us to do others good, is but
like the overflowings of the maine stream, that swelling: above its banks
runs over in a multitude of little Channels.

I am not satisfied, that in the likeness which he puts between God and
Man, he makes the difference between them, to be but such as between two
creatures that resemble one another. For between these, there is some
proportions; but between the others, none at all. In the examining of which
discourse, wherein the Author observes that no two faces are ever seen to be
perfectly alike; Nay no two Pictures of the same face, were ever exactly made
so; I could take occasion to insert a subtle and delightful demonstration of
Mr. Whites, wherein he shows how it is impossible that two bodies (for
example, two Boules) should ever be made exactly like one another; Nay, not
rigorously equal in any one accident, as namely in weight, but that still
there will be some little difference, and inequality between them, (the Reason
of which observation, our Author medleth not with) were it not that I have
been so long already, as digressions were now very unseasonable.

Shall I commend or censure our Author for believing so well of his acquired
knowledge as to be dejected at the thought of not being able to leave it a
Legacy among his friends? Or shall I examine whether it be not a high injury to
wife and gallant Princes, who out of the generousnesse and nobleness of their
Nature do patronize arts and learned men, to impute their so doing to vanity
of desiring praise, or to fear of reproach?

But let these pass: I will not engage any that may befriend him, in a
quarrel against him. But I may safely produce Epictetus to contradict him when
he lets his kindness engulfe him in deep afflictions for a friend: For he
will not allow his wise man to have an inward relenting, a troubled feeling, or
compassion of another misfortunes. That disordereth the one, without any good
to the other. Let him afford all the assistances and relievings in his power;
but without intermingling himself in the others Woe. As Angels that do us
good, but have no passion for us. But this Gentleman's kindness goes yet
further: He compares his love of a friend to his love of God; the union of
friends Souls by affection, to the union of three persons in the Trinity; and
to the Hypostaticall union of two natures in one Christ, by the Words
Incarnation. Most certainly he expresses himself to be a right good
natured man: But if Saint Augustine retracted so severely his patheticall
expressions for the death of his friend, saying they favored more of the
Rhetorical declamations of a young Orator, then of the grave confession of a
devout Christian, (or somewhat to that purpose) what censure upon himself may
we expect of our Physician, if ever he make any retractation of this
discourse concerning his Religion?

It is no small misfortune to him, that after so much time spent, and so many
places visited in curious search by traveling after the acquisition of so many
languages; after the wading so deep in Sciences, as appears by the ample
Inventory and particular he makes of himself: The result of all this, should
be to profess ingenuously he had studied enough, only to become a Skeptic:
and that having run through all sorts of Learning, he could find rest and
satisfaction in none. This I confess is the unlucky fate of those that light
upon wrong Principles. But Master White teaches us how the Theorems and
demonstrations of Physickes, may be linked and chained together as strongly and
as continuedly as they are in the Mathematickes, if men would but apply
themselves to a right method of Study. And I do not find that Solomon
complained of ignorance in the height of knowledge; (as this Gentleman says)
but only, that after he has rather acknowledged himself ignorant of nothing,
but that he understood the natures of all Plants from the Cedar to the Hyssop,
and was acquainted with all the ways, and paths of wisdom and knowledge; he
exclaimeth that all this is but Toil, and vexation of Spirit: and therefore
advises men to change humane Studies into divine contemplations and affections.

I cannot agree to his Resolution of shutting his Books, and giving over the
search of knowledge, and resigning himself up to ignorance, upon the Reason
that moves him; as though it were extreme vanity to wait our days in the
pursuit of that, which by attending but a little longer (till Death has
closed the eyes of our body, to open those of our Soul) we shall gain with
ease, we shall enjoy by infusion, and is an accessory of our Glorification. It
is true, as soon as Death has played the Midwife to our second birth, our
Soul shall then see all truths, more freely then our corporal eyes at our
first birth see all bodies and colors, by the natural power of it (as I have
touched already) and not only upon the grounds our Author gives. Yet far be
it from us to think that time lost which in the mean season we shall
laboriously employ to warm our selves with blowing a few little Sparks of
that glorious fire which we shall afterward in one instant leap into the
middle of, without danger of Scorching. And that for two important Reasons;
(besides several others, too long to mention here) the one, for the great
advantage we have by learning in this life; the other, for the huge
contentment that the acquisition of it here (which implies a strong affection
to it) will be unto us in the next life. The want of knowledge in our first
Mother (which exposed her to be easily deceived by the Serpents cunning) was
the root of all our ensuing Misery and Woe. It is as true (which we are
taught by irrefragable authority) that Omnis peccans ignorant: And the well head
of all the Calamties and mischiefs in the world, eonsisteth of the trouble and
bitter waters of ignorance, folly and rashness; to cure which, the only
remedy and antidote, is the salt of true Learning, the bitter Wood of Study,
painful meditation, and orderly confideration. I do not mean such Study, as
armeth wrangling Champions for clamorous Schools, where the ability of Subtle
disputing to and fro, is more prised then the retriving of truth; But such as
fills the mind with solid and useful notions, and does not endanger the
swelling it up with windy vanities. Besides the sweetest companion and
entertainment of a well tempered mind is to converse familiarly with the naked
and bewitching beauties of those Mistresses, those Verities, and Sciences,
which by fair courting of them, they gain and enjoy; and every day bring new
fresh ones to their Seraglio; where the ancientest never grow old or stale. Is
there any thing so pleasing or so profitable as this?

-- Nil dulcius est, been quam inunita tenere
Edita doctrinae sapientum templa serena;
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare atque viam palanteis quaerere vitae.
But now if we consider the advantage we shall have in the other life by our
affection to Sciences, and conversation with them in this, it is wonderful
great. Indeed that affection is so necessary, as without it we shall enjoy
little contentment in all the knowledge we shall then be replenished with: for
every ones pleasure in the possession of a good, is to be measured by his
precedent Desire of that good; and by the quality of the taste and relish of him
that feeds upon it. We should therefore prepare and make our ^ast
beforehand by assuefaction unto, and by often relishing, what we shall then be
nourished with. That Englishman that can drink nothing but Beer, or Ale,
would be ill bestead, were he to go into Spain or Italy where nothing but
Wine grows: whereas a well experienced Goinfre that can criticize upon the
several tastes of liquors, would think his Palate in Paradise among those
delicious Nectars, (to use Aretines phrase upon his eating of a Lamprey.) Who
was ever delighted with Tobacco the first time he took it? and who could
willingly be without it, after he was a while habituated to the use of it? How
many examples are there daily of young men, that marrying upon their fathers
command, not through precedent affections of their own, have little comfort in
worthy and handsome wives, that others would passionately effect? Archimedes
lost his life for being so ravished with the delight of a Mathematical
demonstration, that he could not of a sudden recall his extasied Spirits to
attend the rude Soldiers Summons: But instead of him, whose mind had been
always sed with such subtle Diet, how many plain Country Gentlemen does your
Lordship and I know, that rate the knowledge of their husbandry at a much
higher pitch; and are extremely delighted by conversing with that; whereas the
other would be most tedious and importune to them? We may then safely conclude,
that if we will joy in the Knowledge we shall have after Death, we must in our
life time raise within our selves, earnest affections to it, and desires of it:
which cannot be barren ones; but will press upon us to gain some knowledge by
way of advance here; and the more we attain unto the more we shall be in Love
with what remains behind. To this reason then adding the other, how knowledge
is the surest proppe, and guide of our present life: and how it perfecteth a
man in that which constituteth him a man; his Reason; and how it enableth him
to read boldly, steadily, constantly, and knowingly in all his ways: And I am
confident, All men that shall hear the case thus debated, will join with me
in making it a Suit to our Physician, that he will keep his Books open, and
continue that Progress he has so happily begun.

But I believe your Lordship will scarcely join with him in his with that we
might procreate and beget Children without the help of women or without any
conjunction or commerce with that sweet, and bewitching Sex. Plato taxed his
fellow Philosopher, (though other wise a learned and brave man) for not
sacrificing to the Graces; those gentle female goddesses. What thinks your
Lordship of our Physicians bitter censure of that action which Mahomet makes
the essence of his Paradise? Indeed besides those his unkindnesses, or rather
frowardnesses, at that tenderhearted Sex (which must needs take it ill at his
hands) me thinks he setreth marryage at too low a rate, which is assuredly
the highest and devinest link of humane society. And where he speaks of
Cupid, and of Beauty, it is in such a phrase, as puts me in mind of the
Learned Greek Reader in Cambridge his courting of his Mistress out of Stephens
his Thesaurus.

My next observation upon his discourse draws me to a Logical consideration
of the nature of an exact Syllogisine: which kind of reflection, though it use
to open the door in the course of Learning and study; yet it will necre shut
it in my discourse; which my following the thread that my Author spinneth,
assigns to this place. If he had well and thoroughly considered all that is
required to that strict way of managing our Reason, he would not have censured
Aristotle for condemning the fourth figure, out of no other motive, but because
it was not consonant to his own principles; that it would not fit with the
foundations himself had laid; though it do with reason, (says he) and be
consonant to that; which indeed it does not, at all times and in all
Circumstances. In a perfect Syllogism the predicate must be identified with
the subject, and each extreme with the middle term, and so consequently, all
three with one another. But in Galens fourth figure the case may so fall out,
as these rules will not be current there.

As for the good and excellency that he considers in the worst things; and
how far from solitude, any man is in a wilderness; These are (in his
discourse) but aequivocall considerations of Good, and of Lonclinesse: nor are
they any ways pertinent to the morality of that part where he treats of them.

I have much ado to believe what he speaks confidently: that he is more
beholding to Morpheus for Learned and rational, as well as pleasing Dreams;
then to Mercury for smart and facetious conceptions; whom Saturn (it seems
by his relation) has looked asquint upon in his geniture.

In his concluding Prayer, wherein he summeth up all he wishes; me thinks
his arrow is not winged with that fire which I should have expected from him
upon this occasion; for it is not the peace of Conscience, nor the bridling up
of ones affections, that expresses the highest delightfulnes and happiest
state of a perfect Christian. It is love only that can give us Heaven upon
earth, as well as in Heaven; and brings us thither too: so that the Thuscan
Virgill had reason to say, -- In alte dolcezze
Non si puo gioir, se non amando.


And this love must be employed upon the noblest and highest object; not
terminated in our friends. But of this transcendent and divine part of Charity
that looks directly and immediately upon God himself; and that is the
intrinsecall form, the utmost perfection, the scope and final period of true
Religion, (this Gentleman's intended Theme; as I conceive) I have no occasion
to speak any thing, since my Author does but transiently mention it; and that
too, in such a phrase as ordinary Catechismes speak of it to vulgar capacities.

Thus (my Lord) having run through the book (God knows how slightly, upon so
great a sudden) which your Lordship commanded me to give you an account of,
there remains yet a weightier task upon me to perform; which is to excuse
my self of presumption for daring to consider any moles in that face which you
had marked for a beauty. But who shall well consider my manner of proceeding in
these remarkes, will free me from that censure. I offer not at Judging the
prudence and wisdom of this discourse: Those are fit enquiries for your
Lordships Court of highest appeal; in my inferior one, I meddle only with
little knotty pieces of particular Sciences; ( Matinae apis instar, operosa
parvus carmina fingo) In which it were peradventure a fault for your Lordship
to be too well versed; your employments are of a higher and nobler Strain; and
that concern the welfare of millions of men: Tu regere imperio populos
(Sackville) memento
(Hae tibi erunt arts) pacique imponere morem.


Such little Studies as these, belong only to those persons that are low in
the rank they hold in the Commonwealth, low in their conceptions, and low in a
languishing and iusting leisure, such a one as Virgill calls Ignobile otium,
and such a one as I am now dulled withal. If Alexander or Caesar should have
commended a tract of Land, as fit to fight a Battle in for the Empire of the
World, or to build a City upon, to be the Magazine and staple of all the
adjacent countries; No body could justly condemn that husbandman, who
according to his own narrow art and rules, should censure the plains of
Arbela, or Pharsalia for being in some places sterile; or the meadows about
Alexandria, for being sometimes subject to be overflowen; or could tax ought
he should say in that kind for a contadiction unto the others commendations of
those places; which are built upon higher, and larger principles. So (my Lord)
I am confident I shall not be reproached of unmannerlinesse for putting in a
demurrer unto a few little particularities in that Noble discourse which your
Lordship gave a general applause unto; And by doing so, I have given your
Lordship the best account I can of my self, as well as of your Commands. You
hereby see what my entertainements are, and how I play away my time, -- Dorset
dum magnus ad alrum
Fulminat Oxonium bello, victorque volentes
Per populos dat jura; viamque affectat Olympo.


May your Counsels there be happy, and successful ones, to bring about that
Peace which if we be not quickly blessed withal, a general ruin threatens
the whole Kingdom. From Winchester house the 22. (I think I may lay the 23.
for I am sure it is morning, and I think it is day) of December. 1642.

Your Lordships most humble and obedient servant, KENELME DIGBY.

The Postscript.
My Lord,
LOoking over these loose papers to point them, I perceive I have forgotten
what I promised in the eight she to touch in a word concerning Grace: doc not
conceive it to be a quality, in fused by God Almighty into a Soul.

Such kind of discoursing, satisfiet me no more in Divinity, then in
Philosophy. I take it to be the whole complex of such real motives (as a soli^
account may be given of them) that incline a man to virtue, and piety; an^ are
set on foot by Gods particular Grace and favor, to bring that work to pass.
As for example: To a man planged in Sensuality, some great misfortune
happens, that mouldeth his heart to a tenderness, and inclines him to much
thoughtfulness: In this temper, he meeseth with a Book, or a Preacher, that
represents lively to him the danger of his own condition; and gives him
hopes of greater contentment in other objects, after he shall have taken leave
of his former beloved Sins. This begets further conversation with prudent
and pious men, and experienced Physicians in curing the Souls Maladies;
whereby he is at last perfectly converted and settled in a coure of Solid
Virtue, and Piety.

Now ithese accidents of his misfortune, the gentleness and softness of his
nature, his falling upon a good Book, his encountering with a patheticke
Preacher, the impremeditated Chance that brought him to hear his Sermon, his
meeting with other worthy men, and the whole concatenation of all the
intervening accidents to work this good effect in him; and that were ranged
and disposed from all Eternity, by Gods particular goodness and providence for
his Salvation; and without which he had inevitably been damned; this chain
of causes, ordered by God to produce this effect, I understand to be Grace.

FINIS.

