A DIALOGUE Concerning the RIGHTS Of Her most CHRISTIAN MAJESTY.

Licensed by Authority.

In the Savoy, Printed by Thomas Newcomb 1667.

IN a short time after the late Queen Mother had paid all the Devoirs and
Civilities which are usually performed on the like Occasions, to the Memory of
the Catholic King her Brother, and the Queen his Widow; She sent for the
Marquis De la Fuente the Spanish Ambassador, and let him know from her own
Mouth, That amongst all the pains of a fatal Distemper into which she was
fallen, she should yet think her self happy, and dye with Comfort, If she could
see a Peace firmly settled between the Two Crowns, so as not easily to be
broken or interrupted. That from this Motive, without any other Interest than
that of the Public Peace, she heartily wished, That Spain would be induced to
give Satisfaction to the King her Son, in certain States and Dominions that
were fallen to the Queen his Wife in the Low Countries; since the refusal of a
Right, so Natural and Legal, would inevitably cause Differences between the Two
Kings: But she required him to write to the Queen her Sister, and to conjure
her in her Name, That she would not lose any opportunity of employing the
little remainder of her the Queen-Mothers Life, which she freely offered, for
the putting an End to an Affair of such Importance to the Estate of the
Catholic King her Son, and generally to all Christendom: Assuring her, That
her Mediation would not be ineffectual with the King her Son, whose Goodness
and Moderation she was so well persuaded of, as to promise her self, That from
her Desires, and his own Inclinations to Peace, he would be induced a little to
moderate his Interests.

The Marquis De la Fuente undertook to write about it, but the Answer he had,
after a considerable space of time, was, a precise Order, to declare to the
Queen Mother (as he accordingly did) That the Queen his Mistress, would not
upon any account whatsoever hear of any Accommodation in those pretensions
which she took to have no appearance at all of reason, and so much the less,
since the late King her Husband had forbid her by his Will, to alienate or
dismember any part, not so much as one single Village or Hamlet of the
Sovereignty of the Low Countries: And although so formal and positive a
refusal, as this was, might from that instant have driven things to a
resentment, yet the moct Christian King instead of executing his rights, was
willing to suspend for some time the design of pursuing them, in the belief he
had, that the Queen of Spain, would take care to be better informed about them,
but at last perceiving that a longer patience might prejudice the interests of
the Queen his Wife; Spain having already taken advantage of it, in exacting a
new Oath from these Estates that were fallen to him, he is resolved to march
and take possession of them, in a posture fit to assure the quiet of such of
his subjects as shall be faithful to him, or to force the Rebellion of those
that shall refuse to acknowledge him for their true and lawful Sovereign, and
at the same time for the informing all Europe of the justice of his Rights, he
has caused to be published a large Treatise, whereof the short discourse that
follows is a faithful Abstract.

A DIALOGUE Concerning the RIGHTS Of Her most CHRISTIAN MAJESTY.
A French Advocate meeting in Brussels with Two others of the same Profession,
one of them a Flemming, the other a German, they had together this following
Discourse. French Adv. I Have frequently heard much talk of the Magnificence of
this City of Brussels, but whatsoever Idea I formed of it, I confess it was not
equal either to the Grandeur or Beauty of what I see


Flem. By your Accent, it is no hard matter to guess you are a Frenchman.


Fren. It Is very true Sir, I am so.


Flem. I wish you may find wherewith to satisfy your Curiosity; I should think
my self happy, could I contribute any thing toward it.


Fren. That you may easily do Sir, in helping me into the Palace, where the
Courts of Justice usually sit, which is the only thing considerable in the City
that I have not seen.


Flem. I am the more willing to undertake to conduct you thither, because I
have as much freedom there as you can desire.


Fren. I am infinitely pleased with the favor you do me, but yet I fear I
shall be troublesome to you.


Flem. Fear not that, for who can be fitter to do this small kindness for you,
than an Advocate in a time of Vacation.


Fren. You are then an Advocate, Sir?


Flem. That Is my Profession.


Fren. You cannot tell me any thing that pleases me better, since it is mine
also.


Flem. I am much pleased with this our happy meeting; but may I take the
boldness to ask you in what Court you practice?


Fren. I cannot but satisfy your Curiosity; It Is in the Parliament of Paris.


Flem. After this Declaration, I am almost ashamed to lead you where you
desire: For (I am told) nothing can compare with the Dignity and Majesty of
that August Parliament.


Fren. Every place has its particular Beauties and Rarities: but, pray Sir, be
pleased to do me the favor you promised me.


Flem. Enter then, since you will have it so; for we are come insensibly to the
Door.


Fren. In truth I should have had reason to complain of you, had you concealed
from me a place where I discover so much beauty. This Tribunal is very
Magnificent, the place it self, methinks, has much of Greatness in it; and I
doubt not, but it appears much another thing, when animated with yours and your
Brethrens Eloquence.


Flem. It Is your Bar, Sir, that is the true Field of Eloquence, and not this
place, where it is confined to too narrow limits; for all Causes here are
discussed by writing, the Advocates never plead: yet I confess, since the
Establishment of Peace between the Two Crowns, the Sciences begin to take their
places: But of late, there is a flying Rumor of War, that somewhat troubles us,
you may probably better inform us of it, since you come from Paris, from whence
we have also this News.


Fren. You surprise me much; for when I came from thence, which was about a
Fortnight since, I can assure you, They were then intent upon nothing but
Peace. Arts, which are the most noble Ornaments of a Peace, flourish there more
than ever: The Sciences are cultivated with singular application. They are
there reforming Abuses crept into Justice, correcting the Disorders in the
Finances, establishing an excellent Polity. Now Manufactures take up and
employ whatever Idleness before corrupted. Trade is encouraged, to take off the
Superfluities of our own, and to supply us with the Abundances of Foreign
Countries. Virtue is now perfecting her Conquest over Fortune, and Honors
begin to be distributed only at the rate of Merit. In a word, The most
Christian King purifies all things by the rays of a Wisdom wholly Divine, and
recalls the happiness of the first Age of the World, which we had no knowledge
of, but only in the Idea. Judge then, Sir, what foundation this noise of War
can have, in the midst of so many Employments of Peace; but do me the favor,
to tell me what Pretext they give out here for this War.


Flem. They say, The King of France would re-enter upon some Dominions, that he
pretends are fallen to the Queen his Wife; by the Decease of their Catholic
Majesty's, her Father and Mother, and of the Prince Don Baltazar, her only
Brother by the first Venture.


Fren. I do not understand that this can be the ground of a War; for if the
Queen be well founded in Law as to her Titles and pretensions, it is not to be
presumed that his Catholic Majesty will refuse his Sister that Justice which
her Blood will require of him; or that the Estates that belong to this
Princess, would forfeit their Allegiance to their natural Sovereign, to support
the Ambition of a Stranger.


Flem. But who shall be judge whether the pretentions of the Queen be well
founded or not?


Fren. Let the Law, let Reason, let the Customs of Places, let Examples and
Practices observed in those Countries.


Flem. In truth nothing can be more just than what you say, since no person
will refuse to a Sovereign, what Nature and the Law gives him; for my part, I
have a great desire to be so thoroughly informed in this business, that I may not
do any thing that might be charged upon my honor and conscience. Do you know
any thing, Sir, of these pretensions?


Fren. I have seen in Manuscript a large Treatise upon that subject, composed
at the most Christian Kings Command, by an intimate friend of mine, who showed
it me.


Flem. I much fear this Treatise finds no free passage in these quarters, but
probably you remember the substance of it.


Fren. I read it with so much pleasure and application, that I remember it as
well as if I had been the Author of it.


Flem. Pray do me the favor to impart some light to me, into an affair of such
concernment to my duty and fidelity.


Fren. Possibly, Prudence might incline me to pray your excuse, for matters of
this nature are very tender, and are not to be discoursed of in all places and
before all persons.


Flem. Let me desire you, that this honest Gentleman in my company may not
occasion your suspicion; when you know him, you will not repent of any
discourse made in his presence; he is one of the best Civilians of Germany, who
understands and speaks your Language very well.


Fren. This will much add to my joy, to give you satisfaction in presence of so
worthy a person; but the clearing of this point which you desire, will require
some time.


Flem. You may be as brief as you please, for amongst persons of our
Profession, you need only touch upon the reasons, leaving the proof of them to
be supplied and justified by farther Argument.


Fren. Let us seat our selves then, if you please, this matter deserves to be
treated on at our ease; and since you desire it, and here is none to over-hear
us, we will rip up the whole business from the bottom. The Title of the Queen,
as I have found by this Treatise, consists either in Money, or Lands and
Dominions.


Flem. What does she claim by?


Fren. The Contract of Marriage between Elizabeth of France her Mother, with
the late Catholic King, and the Customs of the place.


Germ. To me it appears not that she is sole Inheretrix by the first Venture to
the Catholic King.


Fren. It Is true, there remained two Children, this Queen, and the Prince Don
Baltazar, but that Prince dying under age after his Mother, she then remained
sole Inheretrix.


Flem. Is there much due to her in Money?


Fren. At the least Eleven hundred thousand Crowns of Gold.


Flem. It Is a vast sum.


Fren. It Is easily computed there are due Five hundred thousand Crowns of Gold
for the restitution of the Portion, One hundred sixty six thousand six hundred
sixty six Crowns of Gold for the Augmentation of the Portion, One hundred
thousand Crowns in Jewels given and brought along with her; besides the
interest of all these sums for many years.


Flem. Your computation may be good, but the Infanta could have but the moiety
of this sum, the other belonged to the Catholic King, as heir to the Prince
Don Baltazar his Son, to whom it fell in right of inheritance, from Elizabeth
of France his Mother.


Fren. You know Sir, that in Spain the Portion and the Augmentation are so
peculiar to Children, that they mutually succeed one another, excluding Father
and Mother L. 1. tit. 11. de las Dotes, 4 Part. l. 23. and 31. ibidem. l. 15.
Torre.
So that the Catholic King has no pretension to Don Baltazar's part, to the
Queens prejudice, no more than he has to the value of the Jewels, because it
was agreed they should be her own by the late Queen Elizabeth's contract of
Marriage. Besides, supposing farther that he had a right to succeed Don
Baltazar, yet had he lost it by his second Marriage, according to the Law 15 de
Torre, which says, That the Survivor of the Man and Wife that Marries again,
shall be obliged to restore to the Children of the former Marriage, all such
Goods and Estates inheritable as shall have fallen to such person by the decease
of any of the Children of the former Marriage.


Germ. There is nothing to be replied to what this Gentleman has said; for,
besides the Common Law of Spain, and the Law 15. de Torre, cited by him, the
Civil Law disposes in the same manner against the Father and Mother in case of
a second marriage L. Foeminae, Cod. de sec. Nupt. L. Edict. Cod. eod.



Flem. Let us come then to the Estate in Lands, and examine where they lie.


Fren Those Lands to which a Right is pretended, comprehend the Duchy of
Brabant, and its annexes; the Seigniory of Malines, Antwerp, Vpper-Gelderland,
Namures, Limburg, and the places united on the other side the Meuse; Hainault,
Artois, Cambray, the County of Bourgogne, and the Duchy of Luxembourg.


Flem. What ground is there for all these high pretensions?


Fren. The Queen affirms, that by the decease of Queen Elizabeth her Mother,
and the Prince Don Baltazar her Brother, the property of all these Estates is
fallen to her.


Germ. It Is hard to comprehend how these Estates which belonged to the late
Catholic King, should fall to the Infanta by the decease of her Mother and
Brother, who were neither in Reversion or Possession.


Fren. Wonder not at it; this happens by virtue of a certain Right of
Devolution, which is inviolably observed by the greatest part of those Estates.


Germ. This Right is not altogether unknown to me, for we have some Provinces
in Germany that use it; but be pleased, Sir, to let me know after what manner
it is observed and what effects it has amongst you?


Fren. Very willingly; yet I ought first to let you know, that there is a
clause in the Contract of the Queens marriage, by which she is made to
renounce all her present or future Right or Title, which I therefore tell you,
that you may judge whether I have done well to entertain you with the mention of
this Clause, before we enter upon the Title, or whether we should not rather
proceed in the clearing of that.


Germ. The observation is good and sincere, for my part I think it not amiss to
begin with the Renunciation, for it is to no purpose to go about to prove a
Title, where a Man can pretend to nothing.


Flem. I am of the same Opinion; but besides, think it necessary that this
Gentleman take the pains to recite exactly the Clause of the Contract.


Fren. It Is true, things will be the clearer after the examination of that
Clause, of which these are exactly the Terms; [ That upon the effectual Payment
made to his most Christian Majesty of sive hundred thousand Crowns of Gold of
the Sun, or their just value at the several times abovementioned, the
Serenissima Infanta shall rest satisfied, and content her self with the said
Portion, without pleading hereafter any other Right or Title on her own behalf,
or commencing any Suit or Demand, upon pretense, that any other greater Estate
or other Inheritance, Accounts or Actions by reason of any Inheritances or
greater Successions from their Catholic Majesty's, her Father or mother, do or
may belong to ber, either in consideration of their persons, upon any other
Account, Cause, er Title whatsoever.


Flem. Can there be any thing of greater force than this Clause?


Fren. A little patience, and you shall see that nothing can be more weak, not
to say more unjust than this. The Catholic King gives nothing at all in
Portion to the Queen, and yet he makes her renounce her Inheritance. Which
cannot hold good: A Renuntiation does necessarily imply that a Daughter has
her Portion; for when she has it not, she is not to be said to renounce, but
to be disinherited: So the Decretal of Pope Boniface the 8th, which introduced
the practice of Renuntiations, contrary to the Tenor of the Civil Law, which
condemns them, requires that a Daughter that renounces, shall solemnly declare
that she is content with the portion which her Father gives her in order
thereunto Quamvis pactum patris factum a filia, dum nuptui trad^batur, ut dote
contenta nullum ad bona paterna regressum haberet, improbet Lex Civilis: Si
tamen juramento, nec dolo, nec vi praestito firmatum fuerit, ab eadem omnino
servari debebit, cum nec vergat in salutis aeternae dispendium, nec redundet in
alterius detrimen^um. Sex decret. lib. 1. tit. de Pact.
. So true it is that a Portion is the sole ground for a Renuntiation, which in
Spain is so much the more out of doubt, as they have an express Law in the
case, by which, if the Father gives less with his Daughter than the portion
that the Law allots her out of his Estate, the Renuntiation is void L. 11. it is.
e^. de la sexta partida.
. and the Doctors of that Country who have written upon that Subject, add, that
it is so necessary that a Portion be made out of the Fathers Estate, that
though the Daughter become by some other means extremely rich, yet unless the
Father give her a portion out of his own Estate, he cannot cause her to
renounce; because the Portion being a burden, which Nature imposes upon the
Estate of the Father, it is necessary that this Portion be a part as really of
his Fortune, as his Daughter is of himself Filia enim major renuntians
haereditati parernae and futurae recepta dote ex bonis maternis, licet
juramentum praestiterit, poterit ex causa gravissimae laesionis agere ad pactl
rescissionem, etenim nemo negare potest, quin in hoc casu gravissima and
admodum inormis laesio contigerit, nec in hac specie locus est decisioni hujus
capitis, cum in eo tractetur de filia renuntiante haereditati paternae recepta
dote a patre ex bonis ipsius patris. Cou ar. sup. cap. quamvis in sex. de pact.
L. 1. Relect. part. 3. Sect. 4.
.


Germ. This is a Principle, which to me seems well founded; to which I am the
more easily persuaded, since the Emperor Justinian himself has made an
express constitution, importing that the Obligation of giving a Portion does
so naturally affect the Fathers Estate, that he can never acquit himself of it
out of the Estate of any other person, much less can he excuse himself,
whenever he is of ability to perform that Office, or rather Duty of his Blood.


Flem. This Maxim is not (possibly) so unquestionable as you imagine; but
whatsoever it be, I doubt whether it can be here applied to the case in hand. I
always took it for granted that the Catholic King gave 500 thousand Crowns of
Gold in Portion to the Infanta.


French. Pardon me Sir, if I tell you that he never gave her any thing: I grant
you that the Catholic King who owed his Daughter eleven hundred thousand
Crowns of Gold, made a promise to her of five hundred thousand; but in the
Contract he agreed with her, that upon payment of that Sum he would be quitted
for all that was due to her in right of her Mother; now he that pays only five
hundred thousand in lieu of eleven hundred thousand, is so far from giving the
five, that he indeed retains six.


Flem. Is not the Sum of five hundred thousand Crowns of Gold, a very
honorable Portion? what matter is it from whence it proceeds? since it is a
suitable one, and it is the Father that undertakes to pay it.


French. Is it just, Sir, that a Father who is obliged to give a Portion out of
his own Estate, should acquit himself by giving it out of another, or out of
the Daughters own? Pray tell me, do you believe that any Creditor can be
legally satisfied for a just Debt, in paying him out of his own Estate? We know
that the Law which obliges the Father to give a Portion, mentions an effectual
one, raised, and levied out of his own Estate Caput [quamvis] loquitur
derenuntiatione facta illi a quo filia dotemcongruam accepit, cum
renuntiationis fundamentum potissimum est ex receptione portionis congruae.
Berugarius Fernandes. Lib. de renunt. Pater dotavit filiam de bonis uxoris:
nunquid ista filia hibebit regressum ad bona paterna? Respondeo quod sic, quia
ista cum effectu non est a patre dotata. Bald. in l. neque matter. Cod. de jure
Dot.


. For the payment of a Debt to a Daughter is not to give her a Portion: and
generally where there is no gift there can be no Portion, and consequently no
ground for a renunciation. For this reason, all the Doctors that have wrote
upon the Decretal of Boniface VIII. agree that no renunciation does lie but
where the person, in favor of whom the renunciation is made, have a Portion
out of his own Estate; because the Portion being the price, or rather the
compensation of this renunciation, 'twould be unjust that a person should agree
to a renunciation, that pays neither the price nor the compensation. Non ex
cluditur per renuniationem, nisi a successione dotantis; unde side propriis
bonis filia fuerit dotata, non est excluss. Benedict. in Cap. Raynut. in Verb.
Duas habens uxores. Caput [quamvis] debet intelligi qu^ndo filia renuntians
recepit in bonis patris vel matris, illud quod succedit in loco legitimae, id
est Dotem. Nam nihilo percepto esset inhumanum, quod per meram renuntiationem
spoliaretur haereditate paterns, ex cujus bonis nihil percepit, and ^ss^.t
dolus reipsa. Ancharanu^ in Dict. Cap. Quamvis.
. Couvaruvias puts the case of a Father that makes his Daughter renounce,
though he gives no more in Contemplation of the Marriage than was already
fallen to her in right of her Mother; and he resolves that this renunciation is
so unjust, that it neither can nor ought to be put in Execution, of what Age
soever the Daughter be, or what Oath soever she take at the renunciation.
Montalua a Spanish Minister of State, and Berengarius Fernandes putting the
same case, condemn this renunciation as unjust Si filia habens penes patrem
bon^ matern^ renuntiet haereditati p^ternae cum juramento, hac apposita
pactione, ut pater ei det mill aureos pro do^e, erit intelligenda haec
conventio in hunc modum, quod mill ^urei sunt dandi ex bonis paternis, non ex
maternis. Couar. loco sup. cit. Montal. Comment. in leg. fori. lib. 1. tit. 2
l. 28. Berengarius Fernandes dict. loco.
. And truly if it be clear upon all our Principles that an enormous, wrong and
mischief does pleno ^ure annul all contracts wherein it is found, because it
differs not from or amounts to a real fraud which the Laws do abhor. What then
shall we think of that extreme mischief and wrong which a Daughter receives
from her Father when he shall cause her to renounce without giving her a
Portion, since by so doing he unjustly strips her of all her Birthright, and
without giving her any thing of his own, deprives her for ever of all the hopes
of a future inheritance; which if I may so term it, is the chief or first
Appanage that Children are legally born to Limita hanc D^cretalem non habere
locum ubi puella renunciavit haereditati paternae cum juramento, si interveniat
deceptio ultra Dimidium: nam ibi cessat Justitia cum sit evidens iniquitas, and
dolus reipsa ita rescindit contractum sicut dolus ex proposito. Georg. Not. in
Cap. Quamvis de pact. in Sex. Tam gravis laesio non potest absque dolo vero
alterius contrahentium contingere, qui rescindit omnino pactum. Couvar. dict.
loco. Sect. 3.


? And truly Sir, I dare say it is almost as hard a matter to excuse the rigor
of a Father who makes his Child renounce without giving her a Portion, upon
pretense that she has an Estate by some other means, as it is absurd to
authorize an outrageous Cheat in favor of him that did it, because the person
that complains has Estate enough to bear it.


Germ. This is a greater proof then needs amongst persons of our Profession. I
think we need no farther trouble our selves about the Renunciation, but proceed
forwards to prove the Title.


French. I will Sir, if you command me; but this I dare assure you that this
first Argument against the Renunciation is the weakest of 8 or 10. which are to
be seen in the Treatise made by the most Christian Kings command.


Flem. Let us then run through them briefly, that I may be a little acquainted
with them all.


French. A second Nullity is this; the 500 thousand Crowns which were promised
are not yet paid, though they ought to have been within 18 months after the
Date of the Contract. viz. One 3d part on the day of Marriage, another within 6
months next after, and the remainder within a year after the end of the six
months.


Germ. Is it possible that this Portion should never have been paid?


Flem. I grant it still remains due.


French. This only Argument is enough to destroy the Renunciation; for you know
Sirs, that in all our Laws whenever in any Contract there is any term
prefixed, the very day of payment is a sufficient demand it self, and without
any other if he make not payment, the Bargain or Contract is pleno jure
dissolved; for there is this difference between a day prefixed by Law, and that
which is agreed on by a Contract, that the first is only comminatory, but the
last always fatal to the Debtor Trajectitiae pecuniae, ff. de oblig. and act.
L. ad diem. ff. de Verb. oblig. L. 9. sect. vel. ff. de Usur. L. 13. ff. de
Fidei C. Lib. L. Magnam. L. 8. tit. 14. partid. 5. C. de Com. and cont. Empt.

. Spain it self has found this to be so just, that it has made it into an
express Law, which Montalua highly extols the justice of in his Commentaries:
and the Civil Law has so confirmed this Practice by a great number of Texts,
that it absolutely rejects all offers that the Debtors should make after the
Term is lapsed Dict L Trajectitiae, etc. leg sup. Cit.
.


Germ. This Principle needs no confirmation by citations of Law.


French. It ought to be the more carefully observed in matter of Renuntiations,
because when the Father dies without paying the Portion, the Daughter runs a
great hazard in her Fortunes, contrary to the intent and end of Renuntiations,
which were therefore only tolerated, because what the Father gives in money in
lieu of a Portion, is ascertained and independent on any of those accidents
that may disturb the Estate. You know likewise, that by another maxim in Law,
if a Clause happen before its consummation to fall into such a state in which
it could not have taken a beginning, it neither can or ought to be put in
execution L. 4. de de Donat. ante Nupt. ff.
. So that the same reason which would have rendered the Queen incapable of
making a Renuntiation of the Catholic Kings Inheritance, had it been in view
at the time of her Marriage, makes it now impossible to put it in execution,
since our case is wholly the same by the non-payment of the Moneys: Besides,
the Portion not being paid during the life of the late Catholic King, by his
death the Queen is reduced only to a bare promise of a Portion. But we well
know, according to all our Rules, that actual payment and delivery only makes a
Portion; the telling of the Money gives form to the Portion, says the Law, and
not the promise Dotem Numeratio non scriptura dotalis instrumenti facit. L. 1.
ff. de Dot. Caut. non Number. In fructibus a Viro retinendis neque dies dotis
constitu^ae, neque nuptiarum observabitur, led quo primum dotale praedium
constitutum est, id est tradita poffessione. L Dotale. ff. de fundo Dot. 1.


And in another place, it formally decides the point, That he who has not
paid, has not given a Portion, what Writing or Promise soever he has made for
that purpose, because a Portion consists only in the actual payment and
delivery thereof. Gregory Lopez who has commented upon the Laws of Spain,
affirms, That only by the delivery of the portion a Daughter can be said to
have one given her Dos incipit a traditione, non a promissione. in L. 22.4
part. de tit. 11. gl. 2.
. In which point his opinion is conformable to all the Doctors: And amongst
them Bartholus has observed, that two things ought necessarily to concur to
the validity of a Renuntiation; one, that the Daughter be married; the other,
that her Portion be actually paid Et sic requiritur quod fuerit dotata and
dotem recepisset. in L. non sinc Cod. quae liberis.
And Baldus suitable to the same Principles, has said very pertinently, That a
Portion, a Loan, and a Depositum are Contracts, whose Essence wholly consists
in their execution, in that differing from others that are perfected by the
bare agreement only of the parties; for as it were absurd to say that a bare
promise to lend, or to deposite, were a Loan, or a Depositum; so it were as
unjust to pretend, that a promise of a Portion were really a Portion Idem in
contra^u dotis, and ideo traditione secuta perfici^batur contractus. in L.
Juris Gentium.
.


Germ. Had I the liberty to add any thing to these Reasons, I suppose it might
be said, according to the opinion of one of the greatest Civilians of our time,
That a Daughter which has not her Portion paid at the decease of her Father,
has no more a Portion, than if she had never been promised any; her birth
alone being a sufficient Title to make her hope for a portion: the Contract of
Marriage cannot give her more than hopes, especially when she is obliged to
disown all her Fathers Estate for the payment of the Portion promised Non est
igitur Dos si came promisero vel pollicitus fuero, sed si tradidero. Dos sola
traditione constitultur, non promissione. Cujat. in L. ult. God. de Rei uxor.
act. Sect. accedis.
.


French. Without doubt these Nullities overthrow the very foundation of the
Renuntiation, since they are drawn from the default of payment of the Portion,
which is the Basis, and only necessary pretense for all Renuntiations. But if
you consider that the Inheritances which the Council of Spain obliged the Queen
to renounce, were fallen to her at the time of her Marriage, you will be easily
convinced, that such a Renuntiation must needs be void of all appearance of
reason; since there is not any Maxim more constantly and universally received
in things of this nature than this, that Renuntiations are inconsistent with
Estates already fallen, as being absolutely opposite to the very nature of
them: for if it be true (as is before said) that nothing has authorized them
but only the consideration of a present and certain portion in lieu of an
expectation only of an Estate, which the variable Revolutions of Fortune may
defeat; how is that possibly applicable where an Estate is actually fallen? it
consists no more now in expectation, but in an actual enjoyment and possession,
which is no longer to be looked upon, as a reversion after the death of another,
and so renounceable, but as the proper estate of the heir, who cannot alienate
it but by sale, exchange, or donation. So also the Decretal of Bonifac^ the
8th. speaks only of Estates that may fall; And because it is a Law directly
opposite to common Right, we are by no means to extend it beyond the words
thereof, but rather according to all the Doctors to limit and restrain it Add
Decretelem ipsam effroenem esse, and exo^bitantem ut ^a de causa extendi extra
propriamfacti spociem non debeat. Raph. ad L. 38. ff. de Verb. oblig.
. Hence it is that by an unaltered practice where a Renunciation is made to two
inheritances, whereof one is already fallen, the other not; the last of them
which only could have been lawful, is made null by a kind of infection from the
other; so odious have Renunciations of Estates already fallen been always
accounted Quando agitur de Renuntiatione successionis sedulo distingui debent
futura and jam delata. Valet renuntiatio successioni futurae secus in jam
delata. Mol. sup. Council. 29.3. Vol. Alex.
. But more especially ought they to be so esteemed in this conjuncture, where
they would apply it to Estates and Soveraignties which were already fallen to
the Queen at the time when they made her Renounce them; as if things of this
kind could become a matter of humane commerce, in prejudice of that right which
God has only reserved to himself, to distribute by the ways of blood and
nature, of which he is the Author. And this is probably the reason which
induced the Doctors, Palaes Falfissimum est quod Reges possent haeredem and
successorem in regno ellgere quem volunt, omisso filio primogenito velalio
legitimo successore, quod est contra omnia jura and consuetudines omnium
nationum involabiliter observatas. Par. 2. q. 1. Number. 57. and 58.
, Couvaruvias Rex non potest variare leges and conditiones primogeniturae in
prejudicium successorum, nec facere quod alius pro alio succedat.
, and Kinscot to affirm, that there cannot be a greater absurdity then to
presume, that by private Contracts the order of succession to Soveraignties can
be changed; both because it being a matter of Public right, no particular
Agreements can infringe it Ljura sanguinis dereg. juris. L. jus Agnationis ff.
de pactis.
; as also because such power is only in trust committed into the hands of
Sovereigns, who ought necessarily to restore it to such a person as the Laws of
State shall call to the Government. In short, if a Sovereign be permitted to
make his Children Renounce, with how much more truth may it be said that he may
in his Family change the Order of succession to his Dominions, by preferring
the Younger before the Elder, or the Daughter before the Son; since much more
power is required to make them Renounce the Inheritance, then only to change
the Order of inheriting in his Family?


Flem. Let us proceed, Sir, let us proceed.


French. Hitherto Gentlemen, we have showed you several Nullities against Law:
but now you shall see in two Clauses of the Renunciation, Errors against
nature, which I am confident will a little surprise you.


Flem. I impatiently expect these Clauses: for I do not remember that I ever
read any such strange passages in the Contract.


French. One of those Clauses import, that the Queen and her Posterity shall be
for ever excluded from all the Estates which either are or shall ever be under
the Dominion of Spain; so that if the Race of his Catholic Majesty should
fail, Strangers are to be preferred before her and her Issue. The other
imports, that this Princess shall not be excluded from all those rights, but
only in case that she have Children by this Marriage with his most Christian
Majesty: But in case she have none, her right shall be entirely preserved. I
dare once more, Gentlemen, challenge you in all your Readings by any instances
in former Ages, to parallel these two Clauses, if not to say Prodigies.


Flem. What is it that you find so strange in them?


French. Renunciations were not introduced but for the preservation of
Families; and yet by the first of these Clauses, the Father makes use of it
only to the destruction of his Family, in preferring Strangers before his own
Blood. Renunciations were never authorized but in favor to the Male-children,
and yet by this clause it is extended not only in favor to the Daughters, but
to the younger ones in prejudice to the Queen who is the Eldest. Pray tell me,
can a Father more abuse a Renunciation then by making it an instrument to
destroy his own Family contrary to the obligation and nature of all
Renunciations, which are never permitted him but only to preserve it? But
again, what is the meaning of the latter Clause which dis-inherits the Queen in
case she have no Children: but that Spain would turn the blessing which Heaven
might bestow upon this Glorious Marriage into a curse? Certainly Nature which
always tends to the Conservation of the species, cannot without a blush behold
so Exorbitant a Clause, which would prefer barrenness before fruitfulness.
Marriage, which only proposes to its self the birth of Children, cannot endure
the scandal of dis-inheriting a Mother for having Sons and Daughters, which are
the blessings of Heaven. The Canon and Civil Laws, which are so severe against
whatsoever shall touch upon the liberty, honor or fruitfulness of Marriage;
cannot without horror behold a Clause so injurious to the intention and
dignity of Marriages, especially this which is one of the most August and
Renowned under Heaver. Methinks such policy cannot expect other then the
disdain of all the World, which reduces the Illustrious Princess to the hard
choice of mourning all her days a Barrenness, that would hinder her from being
Mother to a King of France, or a fruitfulness by Marriage which would cut her
off from being Queen of Spain: But this also exposes the whole Monarchy of
Castile to Civil and Intestine Wars, which are not like to end but by the ruin
and destruction of that Crown: For supposing the Catholic King should dye in
his minority, at a time when the Queen should have Children by the most
Christian King, and that afterward these Children dye; shall the Queen by
virtue of this Clause go and dis-inherit her younger Sister who shall have
taken possession of the Crown and received their Homages accordingly?


Germ. This Clause does infinitely surprise me.


Flem. Yet it is not without president, since in the year 1615. Anne of Austria
Infanta of Spain made the like Renunciation, by her contract of Marriage with
Lewis the 13. King of France.


French. This example reaches not at all our Case. For Anne of Austria had 4
Brothers of the whole blood, at the time of her Renunciation, viz. Philip,
Charles, Ferdinand, and Alphonso; whereas Maria Theresa our Princess had none,
she being the sole remainder of that bed. Anne of Austria had no estate fallen
to her. Maria Theresa had the inheritance of her Mother, and Don Balthazar her
Brother, which then became hers. Anne of Austria received of the pure bounty of
her Father, the five hundred thousand Crowns of Gold given her for her Portion.
Maria Theresa had due to her in a debt upon account the sum of 500000 Crowns of
Gold promised to her in satisfaction for the Marriage Portion of Queen
Elizabeth her Mother. Anne of Austria received her Portion by way of exchange
for another of the same value made to Elizabeth of France, who was the same day
Married to the Prince of Spain, since King Philip the 4th. Maria Theresa never
received any part of what was promised her. In fine, Anne of Austria renounced
upon a pretention which cannot be found in this case, for there being then a
double Marriage made between France and Spain; the Spaniards who affected much
to have an equality observed between both parties, agreed that Anne of Austria
might be excluded from the Crown of Castile, as Elizabeth of France was from
that of France by the Salique Law, which admits of none but Males. You see then
how much these Instances differ: besides, this example stands alone against the
practice of all former Ages, and against the Fundamental Laws of State; for it
cannot be found either in Spain, England, Scotland, Swedland, or any other
Soveraignties that are inheritable by Females, that any of their Daughters were
ever obliged by their Marriage to renounce their hopes of succession to the
Crown in the Order it should fall to them. Louis VII. and Louis VIII Kings of
France Married with Infantas of Spain, and no such Renunciation ever required.
The 3 Daughters of Ferdinand King of Spain, the 4 Daughters of Philip the I.
the 2 Daughters of Charles the V. the 2 Daughters of Philip II. the 6 Danghters
of Ferdinand I. all of them Infantas of Spain, and Married to Foreign Princes,
never made any Renunciation: so that this one only example is so far from
authorizing this procedure of Spain, that on the other side this particular
instance of a double Marriage then contracted, and the want of an actual Estate
fallen to the person of Anne of Austria, carries with it such an exception as
confirms the justice of all ancient example: besides, that which was never, but
once done, is not to be drawn in to president, especially on this occasion,
where the Renuntiation made by Anne of Austria, being essentially null, can
give them but little advantage, because an Act passed contrary to public
Right, and the Fundamental Maxims of a State, ought not to be drawn into an
Example or Consequence.


Flem. I confess the Example is rare; but is not the happiness of a public
peace, and the Ratification of the Clause by the King of France sufficient
enough to cover the faults that may be found in the Ratification?


French. Such kind of Agreements will rather violate, than establish a peace:
and I may say further, that it is a profanation of it, to make it instrumental
to destroy the Rights of Blood, which are the strongest bonds of Peace and
Union among Sovereigns; But can any thing seem stranger, than to say, that in
favor of a Peace, the Queen and her posterity are to be deprived of all their
Birthrights? And that the Catholic King her Father and Tutor may retain all
that he enjoys of her Estate to bestow it upon his Children by a second Venture?
Pray, be pleased to tell me, what affinity there is between the Peace and
Renuntiation. The Treaty of Peace speaks not one word of it; and the powers
given to the Pleni-Potentiaries for concluding it, speak not in any wise
whatsoever either of the Renuntiation or Marriage. As to the most Christian
Kings Ratification, that might have some consequence, had there been no other
Nullity in the Queens Renuntiation, but only the want of the King her husbands
Authorization of it confirmatur res invalids si ejus perfectioni object solum
dissensus habencium ratum, alioqui si alia obstarent non confir maretur
ratihabitione. Damasc. tr. De Broc. membr. 3. Nu 7 Ratihabitione non valid ^ur
id quod nu lum est. Az lib. 15. tit. 21.
. But can any one think that a Renuntiation made by a Minor, to the advantage
of the Father and his other Children by a second Venier, without any Portion
paid, without liberty, without knowledge, and without Authorization, in the
case of an Estate already fallen to her, which in its own nature is
inalienable, can be made good by the Husbands Ratification? This supposed, the
Decretal has little reason to say that a Renuntiation is void, where the
Daughter has no portion given her. For since every Woman is authorized by her
Husband, by the Contract of Marriage for all the Articles therein contained;
Never any of that Sex can complain of any Renuntiation that can be exacted,
because of the obvious objection of a fo^mal Authorization and Approbation of
the Husband, by the Contract of Marriage. But on the other side, if it be
plain, that an Husband cannot in any manner alienate the Right or Estate of his
Wife, how then can it be possible that the most Christian King can by his
Ratification make the Queen his Wife lose those Estates and Soveraignties which
she her self had not power to alienate? Give me leave to say, that it cannot be
believed without a manifest violence to Reason, that a Ratification of the
Husband is of greater force and efficacy than the Wives personal Renuntiation,
to deprive her of her Rights. But after all this, Spain having since the
marriage of the Infanta obtained that Renuntiation by some private Acts, which
they never yet durst show, who can imagine that his most Christian Majesty has
legally ratified, without seeing them, since according to all our Principles,
and according to the very Essence of a Ratification, such an Act requires a
perfect knowledge Ad hoc ut ratificatio sibi vindicet locum, oporter, ut ille
qui vult hab^re ratum, sciat and cognoseat, and comprober quod factum est
alias. Nemo quod ignorant approbat and ratum hab^t. Lancel. tract. de attent.
cap. 1. Number. 72.
. and that the Act so ratified be presented in a good and sufficient Form.


Germ. I always conceived that the Infanta had made her Renuntiation by her
Contract of marriage: was it not so?


French. Indeed those Ministers that treated of this Marriage in absence of the
parties agreed amongst themselves, that the Infanta should make a Renuntiation,
but it was not drawn till afterward, and in Instruments which France never saw.


Flem. Pray Sir let us stay no longer upon this Renuntiation, but return to the
Title and Pretensions of the Infanta.


French. I am content, though there are several other Arguments behind; but the
minority of the Infanta, the quality of the Father, being the person of his
Catholic Majesty, the agreement made in favor of his Children by his second
Wife; want of power in the Ministers that made that Agreement, and consented to
the Renuntiation, and the nullity of the Ratifications made by the Queen since
her Marriage without the authorization of his most Christian Majesty, are all
of them powerful Arguments, and fully handled in the Manuscript that I have
seen.


Germ. What need have we to insist any longer upon the Renuntiation? This
Gentleman has sufficiently assured you that he rests satisfied, when he
desired you to go on to the Rights themselves: And for my part, I assure you I
have nothing to object, after so many Reasons which you have taken the pains to
show us.


French. Upon your desires I return to the Rights themselves; which consist, as
I told you, in the Duchy of Brabant, with its Annexes, the Seigneury of
Malines, Antwerp, upper Guilderland, Limbourg, and its united places, Namur,
Haynault, Artois, Cambray, Burgundy, and Luxenburg.


Germ. You told us, that the greatest part of these Pretensions were founded
upon a Right of Devolution practiced in several of these Dominions: Be pleased
to tell us the nature of it, and what effect it has amongst you, for the
better handling and clearing of this Subject.


French. By this Right of Devolution, if one of the married persons die, the
Children issuing from that Marriage are seized in property of all the Fiefs
that belong to the Survivor. So that if the Husband survives, he becomes only
Tenant for life to his own Lands, the Property belongs to the Children, though
the Mother had no Title at all.


Germ. Is there no particular Law at all in force concerning this Custom? or
does this Right spring merely from usage?


French. In their Customs or Common Law there are express Texts for it.


Germ. Let us if you please, particularly examine them, and begin with Brabant,
which is the noblest, and most important of all the Dominions.


French. These are the words of the Custom as far as my memory will give me
leave, and as near as I can translate them out of Latin. Si Vir vel Uxor
quibus liberi supersunt, moritur, ad prolem unam vel plures per separationem
thori proprietas feudorum provenentium ex latere Superstitis, devolvitur,
servato superstiti solummodo feudorum usufructu hereditario. Cap. 1. Art. 2.
If a man or woman die, leaving Children behind them, by this separation of
Marriage, the property of the Fiefs, though they come by the Survivor, does
devolve, or [pass to the Child, or Children born by that Marriage] the Survivor
becoming only Tenant for Life.


Germ. Lunderstand it well. But as there are many Laws which have been
abrogated by some contrary Custom, may not this be so too?


French. It Is so far from that, that no Custom is more carefully observed than
this. Kingscot, Chancellor of Brabant, who died in the year 1608. whom we may
justly style the Oracle of his Country, writes, that by the Custom of that
Duchy the property of Fiefs whether patrimonial, or otherwise acquired, do at
the very instant of the dissolution of Marriage, pass to the Children of the
first bed, leaving no manner of pretense to those that shall be born of the
second Consuetudine generali Brabantiae, proprietas bonorum seudallum
devolvitur ad prolem, dissoluto eo Matrimonio, quo stante bons ejusmodi suere
unius vel alterius conjugum, five sint patrimonialia, five acquisits, its ut
proles secundi Matrimonii in successione Parentis, qui Superstes fuit, nihilex
talibus bonis consequatur. Resp. 65. Nu. 1.
.

Christineus, a famous Doctor of that Nation, affirms, that a devolution made
by the death of one of the married persons, does (as it were) anticipate the
succession in favor of the Children by the first Venture, absolutely excluding
those of the second Notandum hic est quod devolutio bonorum quae sit per mortem
alterius conjugum fieri censetur quasi per anticipationem successionis, quoad
proprietatem tantum. In Council. Meklin. tit. 16. Art. 4. in addit.
.

Frederick de Saude, in a Chapter which he expressly made upon the chief
Customs of Brabant, tells us, that in respect to the first Marriage, and in
favor to the Children begotten in it, this Right of Devolution has been
introduced and observed in that Duchy with more than ordinary Religion and
exactness Ob honorem primarum Nuptiarum, and favorem priorum liberorum,
Brabantiae moribus introductum esse, ut matrimonio post morcem alterius
Conjugum soluto, tam Superstitis quam defuncti feuda deferantur communibus
liberis, salvo tamen Superstiti usu fruct. feudorum ab ipso profectorum, sive
ex haereditate sibi obvenerint, sive ex industria quaesiverit. In Cons. Feud.
Gueldriae and Zutphanioe tit. 1. Numb. 1. Sect. 9.
.

The Judgment lately given at the great Council of Malines, in the Count de
Bergues case; and that latter one concerning the Marquisate of Berg. of some
adjudg'd to the Countess D'Auvergn upon the death of her Father, though the
Marquisate came by her Mother, are unquestionable proofs of the practice of
this Right of Devolution: And his most Christian Majesty putting this Case to
one of the most famous persons of your Brethren, but under borrowed names, he
gave his Judgment in favor of the Daughter of the first Bed, against the Son
and all the Children of the second.


Germ. It being so, where lies the difficulty, since that custom is conformable
to Law, and the it is manifest His Catholic Majesty was in possession of
Brabant, at the time of the Dissolution of his first Marriage?


Flem. The difficulty lies in 4 principal points which it will concerns us to
clear, before we proceed further to the business of the Title.


French. What, Sir, are these 4. Difficulties?


Flem. The first is, that the Local Customs cannot be a rule to the
Inheritances of Soveraignties. The second, that the Devolution being not an
actual and effective right, but only a bare expectancy which could not be
completed till the death of the Survivor; the Infanta might make a good
Renunciation. The third, that the Estates of the Low Countries were reunited
into one body by the Pragmatick [or solemn Constitution] of Charles the 5th in
the year 1549. and cannot be enjoyed but by one person, and he a Sovereign. The
4th is, that the Catholic King leaving behind him a Son, though by a second
Venture, he excludes the Daughter of the first from the inheritance in question.


Germ. I confess I did not foresee these Objections, which notwithstanding
appear to be very Solid and Essential.


French. I must give you satisfaction in them, but I believe in truth, they are
rather proposed to try my skill in their solution, then that there is really
any difficulty in them. For I am persuaded, that this Gentleman is better
versed in the Histories of his Country, and a person of greater judgment then
to propose them seriously. The very Records of Brabant inform me, that the
right of Devolution established by the Custom of Brabant, is so exactly
observed in the succession of the Sovereign, and even in regard of the
Sovereignty it self, that about the year 1230. a dispute arising between the
Duke on one side, and his Son on the other; and the question being put whether
the Duke possessing that Duchy in his own right, had not lost the property of
it upon the Decease of the Duchess his Wife, by Virtue of the Devolution; The
Emperor Henry assembled all the Princes of his Court, and after a charge given
in as ample a manner, as a cause so famous could require; at length by the
advice of his Council gave sentence, that the property belonged to the Son upon
the decease of his Mother, although she had no manner of right whatsoever upon
her own account, prohibiting the Duke from proceeding further in it to the
prejudice of his Children Henricus Dei Gratia Romans Rex semper Augustus: omnibus
ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit gratiam suam and omne bonum. Notum
facimus, quod cum Henricus majot filius Illustris principis Ducis Lother.
matram habuerit and illa sit mortua, per sententiam principum in Curia nostra
est judicatum, quod si idem Dux, de bonis quae possider, aliquid alienaret, vel
in manus vellet transfer alienas, dictus Henricus se de iisdem bonis posset
intromittere and occupare licenter ad usus suos and tenere. Datum Fridbergae
an. gratiae 1230. ptox. Dom. post Festum Paschae. 4. Call. Maii. Indict 3.
Bukenheph. de Brahant.
. I have read also in the same Records a letter of 1273* written by the
Emperor Rodolph I. to John Duke of Brabant, in which he strongly confirms the
Virtue of this right of Devolution in the succession of the Dukes; and it
cannot be denied but that the Emperor Charles the Fifth, after the death of
the Empress his Wife, so fully acknowledged, that the property of Brabant was
passed into the person of Philip his Son by this right of Devolution that he
publicly protested, he could neither confirm the Customs nor meddle with the
Privileges of the Country, but jointly with his Son. But if from examples we
proceed to argument in the examination of the power of Local Customs, in
relation to the inheritance of Soveraignties, nothing can be more easily
proved; for there are only three sorts of Laws that can be of use to regulate
Soveraignties. That of a Sovereignty it self, if it have any particular Law to
guide it; The Laws of the Neighboring Kingdoms, or those of the Country. As to
the particular Laws of each Crown, it is certain that where any such are, they
are necessarily obliged to follow them; as in France, the Salique Law; in
Poland, and several States in the Northern parts, their form of Election: But
where no particular Law can be found, I affirm that it is the worst of errors to
pretend, that the succession to a Sovereignty ought not to be regulated by the
custom of the Country, because in such a case they would be obliged to regulate
themselves by the Law and Customs of their Neighbors, which were to offer a
great injury to the Sovereignty; or to affirm that it ought not to have either
Rules or Principles to determine to whom it of right belongs, which would be
the most strange absurdity in the World. For never yet did any Doctors either
of Spain or any other Nation whatsoever, make a doubt of the force and power of
Custom, in regulating the succession of such Soveraignties as have no
particular Law to direct them: Witness Molina. Gatieres and Couvaruvias who
unanimously assure us that the Crown of Spain being the chiefest Majorasque of
the Kingdom, it ought indispensably to conform to the Laws introduced by the
Customs of the County, for the Majorasques Ipsum Hispaniarum regnum verissimum
Majoratum esse ad praecisum ordinem primogeniturae; hoc autem adeo verum est,
ut secure and confidenter dici possit non solum Hispaniarum regnum, verum
majoratum esse, imo regnum ipsum esse caput omnium Hispaniorum primogeniorum,
ab eoque caetera primogenia tanquam a capite derivari, succedendique rationem
accipere, adeo ut si de succedendi ordine in Hispaniae majoratibus contendatur,
ea lis fit secundum leges ad regni successionem institutas decidenda. L. 16.
cap. 20. Nu. 10. Joan. Gat. cap. 4. lib. 10. cap. 14. Nu. 58. and 59. ^ouuar.
Var. resol. lib. 3. cap 5. Nu. 8.
. But that which may deceive the common people in things of this nature, is the
confounding the person of the Sovereign, with the Laws of his Sovereignty;
though they are two things infinitely different. For as to the Sovereign
himself, so long as he lives, his Reason is the very Soul of the Customs; but
as to the Laws belonging to the Sovereignty, vacated by the death of the
Prince, the Custom is then the soul and lise, and that which gives it motion,
by which it passes into the hands of him that is legally to receive it, at a
time when there is no particular Law that can convey it. In a word, you are to
consider that we treat not here of a Sovereignty, as such, but as an
inheritance; not of a Royalty living, but of one dead and without life; which
is not in this case an active power to make Laws, but a Fief, an Inheritance, a
Right, a Succession which ought to have its certain Rules, but cannot have any
other then the general Custom of the Country, where it has no particular Law
of its own.


Germ. They have the same practice in the Estates of Germany.


French. You may say, Sir, if you please, in all the Nations of the world that
are governed by reason. To go on, I doubt not but you were as much surprised as
I was, to hear it objected, that the Queen might make a firm Renunciation of
that which was fallen to her by right of Devolution, it being (as 'twas said)
but a bare expectancy and not a real right fallen to her. For besides that the
Renunciation which she was made to make cannot be justified, as appears by all
the reasons formerly examined; you know that according to the 2d Article of
this Custom which introduces Devolution, the Children that issue from the
Marriage are seized of the property, in the very instant of the decease of
either Man or Wife, and from that very moment the Survivor becomes only a
Tenant for life; so that he cannot have any thing to do with the property, as
was decided by that famous judgment of the Emperor and all the Princes of his
Court in the case abovementioned. And you know too, that all the Doctors that
have writ of it, call this Title, a succession anticipated; which is very
opposite to a simple and bare expectancy.


Flem. It Is a strange thing that you should dispute this point with me, for it
is a certain truth that Children cannot thus dispose of an Estate, nor enjoy it
unless they survive their Father and Mother, and consequently all the right
they have is only a bare expectancy of the thing, in case they are heirs to the
survivour of man or wife.


French. Sir, if you please let us use less partiality and more freedom, your
Custom says, that after the decease of one of the Married persons, their common
Children are made proprietors of the Fiefs of the survivor; It orders further,
that if the Children themselves dye before such survivor, the property of the
Fiefs, that was before lost by right of Devolution, reverts to the said
survivor. All your Doctors agree that by virtue of this Right the Children are
so effectually seized of the inheritance, that the surviving Parent cannot in
any manner dispose of it, no not so much as alter or lessen it: To conclude, it
has been judged in the Imperial Chamber at Spire, that a Father who gave no
other Portion to his Daughter but out of an Estate that was devolved by the
death of his Wife, should not be held to have given her a Portion, because the
Estate did not belong to him, but to the Daughter; and yet in despite of all
these Authorities, you would make us believe that this right of devolution
transfers neither the property of the Fiefs or any thing at all that is real to
the Children by such Marriage. If it be so, you ought to abolish your Customs,
condemn your Doctors, and overthrow all Usage; For though the Children cannot
dispose of, nor enjoy the Estate during the life of the survivor; this does not
make them to be the less proprietors. As it is in matter of Dower or Donation,
made in case the Donee survive; The Children of the Wife endowed and the Donees
are the true proprietors although they cannot enjoy nor dispose of what is
given them, till after the death of the Father or Donor.


Flem. I deny not but Custom, the Doctors and Decree of the Imperial Chamber of
Spire, give the property to the Children of the Survivor. But have you not seen
a Treatise of the Right of Devolution, printed not long since at Brussels?


Fren. Is it not that which was composed by an Officer of his Catholic Majesty
in the Council of Brabant?


Flem. The very same.


Fren. I have read it.


Flem. You have seen then how he proves that the Custom is ill expounded, that
the Doctors are deceived, and that the Imperial Chamber of Spire understood not
the nature and the effects of the Right of Devolution. Do ye not allow him to
be an able man?


Fren. Not only that he is very able, but I add, that he appears to be a very
honest man, for one may discover throughout his work a kind of sincerity, which
is better than all the Learning in the world. Have you observed with what
Ingenuity this Author, who has no small Talent, in avoiding and putting by
difficulties, has spoken of the Devoltuion? He grant it is a Privilege of the
first Marriage against the second Apud omnes quidem Gentes cultiores, est
aliquis honos and praerogativa primarum Nupriarum and liberorum qui ex iis
geniti sunt: Sed nusquam tanta quam apud Brabantos and Vicinas aliquot
Nationes, apud quos dissoluto primo Matrimonio, five secundum sequatur, five
non, liberis ipsius thori obveniunt bone omnia immobilia utriusque Parentis,
etc. Stockm. cap. 1. fol. 1.
He agrees that the Effect of this Right is to seize the Children from the very
moment of the Dissolution of Marriage Devolutio Ratim a soluto matrimonio bona
Superstitis parentis liberis addicit. Stockm cap. 4. fol. 31.
He confesses, that the Children by the second Bed can pretend to nothing in
prejudice of those by the former Liberi primi conjugii excludunt liberos
secundi ab eorundem bonorum successione, etc. Stockm. cap. 1. fol 7.
And he acknowledges also, that a daughter by the first Venture excludes a son
by the second Jus devolutionis quod viget inter privatos adeo benignum est
liberis primi thori, and ita alienum a liberis secundi thori, ut si contingat
unicam superesse filiam ex primo, and masculum ex secundo, filia masculum
omnino excludat a boni^ devolutis, etc. Stockm. cap. 18 fol. 126.
For my part, I see nothing that is more honest than the sincerity and plain
dealing of this man. It Is true, he accuses the Customs, the Doctors, and the
Imperial Chamber of Spire, to be all in an error Fol. 9 12, 13.44.47. and 121.
Annal. lib. 1. fol. 6.
But how could he say less in the necessity imposed on him to speak somewhat in
behalf of the Cause which he was to defend? Or rather how could he more clearly
condemn it, than by confessing that it was manifestly contrary to the words of
their Custom, to the Opinion of their Doctors, and to the Decrees of the most
principal Assemblies of Germany?


Germ. I should much desire to see this Book: for I confess these
Acknowledgments may have some Force.


French. If this Gentleman pleases to take the pains to send for it, I will
show you all these places.


Flem. Do you thus take your advanvantages? You say you think him sincere, and
yet you will not believe him when he tells you that the Custom and the Doctors
were mistaken.


French. Give me leave to tell you again, that I believe he is sincere, it does
not hence follow that he is infallible; or that I ought to prefer his
particular Opinion before the Suffrages and general Opinion of all the States
together assembled: Had he proved by his Book, That the Laws, the Doctors, the
Practice and the Decrees ought to give place to his Judgment, I should have
been far from opposing it; but that he had forgot to do


Flem. Let us go on Sir, what do you answer to the Pragmatick in 1549. which
reduced all the Estates of the Low Countries into one Mass and Body, not to be
possessed but by one person, and that a Sovereign?


French. Excuse me if I tell you that if you had made this Proposition in
public, you would have been disowned by all the States. Since nothing is more
contrary to the H^story, or to the desires of those Provinces. In sum, have you
forgotten that which is so frequently repeated in your Annals? That this
Emperor had indeed a design to reunite into one only Body of a Monarchy all
these Soveraignties, which he intended for the Prince Don Ferdinand, one of his
Sons; but he found such a public and invincible opposition in the spirits of
the people; and on the other side, the diversity of their Laws and Customs
seemed an obstacle of such difficulty to be passed over, that he presently gave
it over. The words in which I read it in the learned and judicious Grotius are
still in my memory, and I believe may be of much use to disabuse you. Charles
the fifth, (says he) resolved formerly to change the state of the Government of
the Country, entertaining the design at that time, when (as the fruits of his
Victory at Pavia) he saw Flanders and Artois freed from the Sovereignty of the
Kings of France; but he found their Manners, Laws, and Vsages so very contrary
to his Design, that he despaired of success, and quitted the thoughts of it,
scarce adventuring to propose it. If you have any scruple remaining after this
Authority, be pleased to remember, That Philip the second, Son to Charles the
Fifth, in the confirmation made by him, of the Privileges of Brabant, says,
That the only Estates which should for ever be united with Brabant, were
Limbourgh, Antwerp, and those beyond the Meuse; and that the same Prince giving
a Portion to the Infanta Isabella of all the Soveraignties which he possessed
in the Low Countries, forbid her to divide or separate them without his
consent; which he would not have done, had they been all united and
incorporated by the Pragmatick of Charles the fifth, in the year 1549. Besides
this Pragmatick speaks not one word in the Enactive part of it, of this Union,
nor is there any Author that ever spoke of it: but on the contrary, we see that
his Catholic Majesty puts all these Titles separately into his own, and has a
peculiar seal for every one of these Estates in particular. So true it is that
he enjoyes them divisively. But whosoever shall read the Pragmatick, will
clearly find that it was made only for the introducing the Jus Representationis
into the Inheritance of the Sovereign, to hinder those States, which for want
of this way of succeding were exposed to frequent changes, from being easily
divided by the difference of their Customs, of which some admitted, but others
rejected this Jus Representationis, which is directly opposite to the Union
alleged; for had there been an Union, it had been to no purpose to introduce
the Jus Representationis to hinder them from the frequent Alterations into
which they might fall should this Jus Representationis cease, whose effect or
consequent cannot be said to be that of collecting and limiting things
separated; Otherwise since the general way of succession in the world is by
this Jus Representationis, all Inheritances would become inseparable. That
which may then most rationally be gathered from this Pragmatick, is that the
succession to Soveraignties is regulated by Custom, where there is no other
particular Law to guide it, since the Emperor Charles the Fifth, to put an end
to the power of Custom in his House, as to the point of Representation, was
forced to assemble all the Estates of the Country, and to make a solemn
Pragmatick for it. I come now to the last Objection, which concerns the
preferring of the Son by the second Bed, before the Daughter by the first; and
since I perceive you hold it for the most specious of all, I intend in few
words to let you see, that in point of Argument, it is of all others, the most
unjust: that in the order of Succession in Brabant it is impossible. And
lastly, that the Custom contradicts and condemns it by most express Articles.


Flem. If you prove all these things, I shall willingly come over to your side,
but I very much doubt you cannot do it.


French. You will not deny, but that the Right of Devolution is a Favor which
the Customs bestow upon the first Marriage, against the second. Doctor Sandeus
has wrote, that this Law was made in respect to the first Marriages, and in
favor to the Children issuing from them In Consuetud. Feud. Gueldriae and
Zulphan. tr. 1. tit. 1. Sect. 9.
. Christineus In Consuetud. Meklin. tit. 16. art. 4. in addit.
says, that second Marriages do so much change and lessen the advantages and
affections of the former, that Custom thought it justice to allow them a
Compensation, by introducing the Right of Devolution: And Kinscot affirms, that
this Compensation is a thing so sacred, and so carefully reserved for the
Children by the first Bed, that thereby the second can have no pretentions to
it, so long as there remains any one person of the first Resp. 65. Number. 1.
. This then being so, can it be thought, that a Right only established in
favor to the first Marriages, in opposition to the second, may be forced away
from the Children of the first Bed, who are seized by Custom, to be bestowed
upon those of the second, against whom it was founded? You must not, by your
Favor, take the advantage here of the Prerogative of Sex; for in matter of
Devolution there is no comparing of Sexes, so as to give the advantages to the
more Noble of them; but the Order of Marriages is there considered; where the
Prerogative is given to the first, against the latter. pray tell me to what
purpose would it have been to grant the Children by the first bed a right to
defend themselves from any prejudice they might receive from a second, if they
should be obliged to render and give it up to the Children by the second? In
fine take this one reason for all, that Devolution being a kind of penalty and
a fence against the second Marriages in favor to the first, it can never be
that the first should be deprived of it in favor of the second, because that
would contrary to Nature turn reward into punishment, and punishment into
reward. I say then that your preference, upon debate, is very unjust. But to go
on, I add that it is morally impossible in the Order of Succession in Brabant:
my reason is, because the Children by the first bed being seized at the very
instant of the Dissolution of Marriage, of the property of all the Fiefs of the
Survivor, the Father is not in possession of the property at his second
Marriage, nor of the Succession at his death, and consequently it is impossible
that a Child by the second bed should succeed him in it. For if we would prefer
the Son by the second bed, before the Daughter by the first, 'twould be
necessary that the Fief were at the Fathers disposal at the time of his death,
because none can succeed to that which belonged not to the deceased: so that
being stripped of the whole property, and becoming only Tenant for life, it is
absolutely impossible that he should leave that to the Children by the second
Marriage, which he was out of the possession of at the time when he contracted
the Marriage from which they issue. But for the better clearing of this
Argument, let us say (if you please) that the Custom having by the right of
Devolution seized the Children of the first Marriage of the property of the
Fiefs which were the Survivors; if we would have the Son by the second bed
succeed, 'twere necessary that the property should again revert to the Father,
and that the Child by the first bed should be disseised; which can only be done
these three ways; Either by the rule of Custom, or by the will of the Survivor,
or by Common Right. But you will not say that the Custom which has given this
Right to the first bed, does deprive it of it to bestow it on the second
Marriage, from which its only meaning and intent was to take it away. It cannot
also be said that the Survivor who was disseised of it, had a power to recall
it from the first bed, and to pass it over to the second; and as to Common
Right we know that all its inclination, as well as all its rules and
ordinances, tend to the favor of first Marriage against the second. Conclude
we then, that your preference is impossible in the order of Succession in
Brabant, and give me leave for a close to show you, that it is condemned by an
express Ordinance of the Custom of the Country. This Custom distinguishing
between Fiefs which belonged to the Survivor at the instant of the dissolution
of the first Marriage, and those which fell to him, or were acquired by him
since his second Marriage; declares by its second and third Articles, that the
Children by the first bed shall leave the property of all Fiefs possessed by
the Survivor at the time of the decease of the other person that was joined in
Marriage; and expressly orders that the Brethren and Sisters of this Marriage
succeed one another therein. This being pre-supposed, is not your preference
directly contrary to this Law? since by it the Son by the second bed, against
the very words of this Text, would hinder the Sister from succeeding her
Brother by the first bed; and you say Kinscot that Great Chancellor of Brabant
has very precisely said, that never any Children by the second bed could make
any demand of the Fiefs whilst any one of the first was living, which is also
confirmed by Christineus and Sandeus, when they tell us, that this right of
Devolution is not to be applied but to such Children as were in common between
the Deceased and the Survivor: But you have the less reason to deny these
truths, since being of that Country, you know that it is the General rule of all
these Customs to prefer the Daughter of the first bed before the Son of the
second; and that indeed that of Haynault, Malines, Namur, and diverse others
have made several express Articles of it.


Flem. It will follow then, that against the order of Nature, as well as
against that of the General Polity of all the world, the Brother must obey the
Sister.


French. Pardon me, for the Catholic King will command in his own Estates, and
the most Christian Queen in hers, and neither of them have Dominion over the
other. I add too, that by your own acknowledgement, this is always the
practice in Brabant, for the Daughter of the first bed by virtue of the right
of Devolution, carrying the Fiefs of the Survivor from the Son of the second;
it often happens that a Brother is possessed of an Estate which holds of his
Sister: But after all, what can you reply to your Histories which tell us that
Isabella of Austria, Daughter by the first bed to Philip the second, enjoyed
all the Estates of the Low Countries, excluding Philip the third, her half
Brother, Son by a second Marriage to the same Kiag Philip the second?


Flem. You cannot find any other President besides this, to justify that ever
any Daughter by the first bed excluded a Son by the second in the possession of
this Duchy.


French. Neither can you find any one that proves that ever any Son by the
second bed was preferred before a Daughter by the first; for never since this
was a Duchy, was there ever but only that one time such a concurrence of a
Daughter by the first bed, with a Son by the second, where you see the Daughter
was preferred.


Flem. The Duchess Isabella was not preferred by right of Devolution, but she
received those Estates from King Philip her Father, who freely gave them to her
in favor of her Marriage.


French. Consult your Annals, and they will tell you that it is true, Philip the
second to give himself the honor of an imaginary bounty, gave to Isabella all
those Estates which belonged to her by the right of Devolution; You will see
also in your Records that all the Orders of the Duchy protested, that this
Donation should not, prejudice their Rights, Customs, and Privileges; and that
notwithstanding this contract, they should look upon Isabella as their natural
and lawful Sovereign Scripto Ordinibus caveat duodecimum cessionis articulum
Belgicarum provinclarum libertati and privilegiis nihil derogatum aut
dettimento fore. Ordines Brabantiae per suum Grapharium sententiam protulerunt,
quae palam pronunclavit Ordines ita censuisse, se Alberto Archiduci
serenissimae Insantis nomine, tanquam Principis legitimae harum provinci^rum
jusjurandum praestituros, si vicissim else jusjurandum praestetur de observandis
patriae privilegiis, and de lis sarciendis quae contra majorum instituta and
auspicia innovata aut abrogata sunt.


. And if your curiosity leads you any further, you may entirely satisfy it in
the History of the Low Countries, written by Grotius; where we read that Philip
II. was willing to give these Provinces to Isabella, not only for the reduction
of the Rebels to their duty; but also by this division to assure them to her
against those troubles, which her half brother might some time or other have
given her, notwithstanding that she was the lawful inheretrix to them Dotem
Philippus Burgundiam cum Belgica dixerat, ut legitimae haeredi adversus fratrem
minorem divisioneconsuleretur. lib. 6. An. 1597.
. Which made such an impression upon all the hearts and spirits of the Country,
that it was at that time that Christineus, Kinscot, Buken, and those other
famous Doctors of the Country enlarged themselves upon the business of the
Right of Devolution, to make it known to their Princess, that it was this Title
of the Law, and not the Kings her Fathers Donation which made her Sovereign of
Brabant.


Germ. This example and these protestations seem to me to be of great strength
to support the right of the Daughters by the first bed, against the Sons of the
second in Brabant: but it may be, Sir, he will tell you of some presidents to
the contrary.


French. That will be an hard matter for him to do, for all the Dukes of
Brabant that had more Wives then one before Philip the second, are Geoffrey the
third, Henry the first, Henry the second, John the first, Anthony of Burgundy
and Philip le Bon: Now it is certain that after the death of these Dukes, either
a Son by the first bed always succeeded in the Duchy, or a Son by the second,
where there were no Children by the first, as was John the second; or a Son by
the third bed, where there were none by the first and second, as was Charles le
Hardi, Son by a third Marriage to Philip le Bon, who left no Children by the
two former.


Germ. I am extremely satisfied as to the Duchy of Brabant in favor of the
Queen, and if her right be as well founded to the other Estates, I think a man
must be very obstinate to deny it.


French. The rest of her Titles are as easily justified, and made out in very
few words, for the Objections and Answers which you now hear are applicable to
all the rest of them.


Flem. Let us proceed then, if you please.


French. The Seigneury of Malines belongs to the Infanta by the same right of
Devolution; The 15. Article of the 10. Title of the Custom is precise in it. Si
vir aut mulier quibus liberi supersunt, relictis feudis diem suum obeat, tum ex
maritis, is qui in vita manet usum fructum habebit in omnia commoda
accidentaris, Patronatus feudales, and in arces feudales, nec non semissem in
obventiones cettas, proprietas corundem feudorum tamen statim ad liberos
devolvitur.
And Christineus in the Learned Commentary which he has published upon it,
formally avouches, that all the Fiefs of the Survivor, whether acquired or
Patrimonial, belong by right of Devolution to the Children by the first bed,
from the moment of the Dissolution of the first Marriage. He adds also, that
this Custom is in this particular more severe then that of Brabant, in that it
gives the Children by the first bed all those Fiefs which fall to the Survivor
by inheritance during his second Marriage, to the prejudice and exclusion of
the Children he has by it, which is not the Custom in Brabant Etiam notandum
venit quod secundum antiquam Mecklin. Constitutionem, and fere per universam
Brabanti am superstes altero conjugum mortuo usufructuarius redditur suorum
bonorum, sive industria quaesita sunt, sive haereditate obvenerunt, little
proprietate statim ad liberos per^inente, qui haeredes futuri sunt, devoluta;
qui si ante eum moriantur, proprietas denuo ipsi cum usu fr. consolidatur, and
id propter spem rediturae haereditatis, haereditarius ille usufructuarius
appellatur; atque hinc est, quod proprietariis non liceat, quamdiu in vita est
usufructuarius eam proprietatem vel vendere vel oppignera^e, vel ullo denique
color onerate, uti colligi potest ex generali statuto and consuetudine
Brabantiae and particularibus etc. In Consuetud. Mecklin. Tit. 16. Art. 24.
Number. 25.
As to Antwerp, which is one of the chief Fiefs of Brabant, the Infanta has a
claim by 3 Titles. The first is that by the Custom which introduces the
Devolution. The second is the Union of that Marquisate, with the Duchy of
Brabant, made by Philip le Hardi Duke of Burgundy, and some time since renewed
by a Solemn Act of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, where he declares it to be
inseparable from Brabant In perpe^^^^ Antuerpia and quicquid ad eam pe^ti nere
often di poterit, civitatibus communique Brabantiae provinclae conjuncta
man^b^t, etc. En. 1549. Dans la reception de Philippes If. pour prince de
Brabant cap. 40.
And the third is an usage which has inviolably establishe, That all the Fiefs
holding of Brabant in what part soever situated, either within or without the.
Duchy, be regalated as to their succession by the s^u^al Custom of the Duchy.

Upper Guelderland does by an express Article admit of the right of Devolution,
and after the example of Malines, prefers the Children by the first bed, before
those of the second, even in such Fiefs as were not fallen till after the
second Marriage Quorundam locorum usu, apud Brabantos videlicet superiori
Gueldria atque alibi ex primo matrimonio suscepti liberi, posterioribus, tam in
feudo, quam in allodiis immobilibus praeferuntur. Fredericus Sand in Gall.
Cons. fond. tr. 1. tit. 3. Sect. Number. 3.
We see in Sandeus's Commentaries upon this Custom, a solemn Decree of the
Imperial Council, which judged it thus on the Baron de Tantaimbourg's side,
against the Children by the second bed, who sued for Fiefs which were fallen in
their time.

The Queens Title to the County of Namur is so clear, that it will be proof
sufficient to give you two Articles of the Custom, which establish it. The
79th. introduces the Devolution in favor of the Children by the first Bed
Quand deux Conjoints apporicront biens ^eels en marriage, and l'une des dicts
Conjoints termine Vie par la mort, delaissant enfans procre^^ d'eux, la
propriete des biens succeders and se devoluers par and inconrinent apres ledit
trespass advenu ausdirs enfans, sauf au furvivant son usufruit en iceux.
and the 82 orders, That the same Children shall succeed in all Immoveables
that are enjoyed in time of Marriage, whether descending, or acquired during
its continuance, excluding the Children by other subsequent Marriages Les
enfans dupremier lit succederont aux biens immcubles apport z^en marriage
E'cheus ou acquis pendent iceluy Marriage par Pere and Mere a l'exclusion de
enfans d'^utres Marriage subsequens, and semblablement les enfans du second
lit, succederont es biens escheus, acquis ou appr^ez comme dessus, audit
second Marriage l'exclusion des premiers.
. I suppose there is not any one but will easily draw the Consequences from
these two Articles, and judge that the County of Namurs, having formerly
belonged to the late Catholic King during his first Marriage, is now by an
entire Right fallen to the Infanta who is issued from that Marriage. Come we to
the Duchy of Limbourg, which is joined to that of Brabant by so ancient and
straight an Union, that in the opinion of all the Country they make but only
one Sovereignty, and have only one Seal, and one and the same Chancellor,
notwithstanding the other Estates have each their particular ones; and in truth
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and the Prince Philip his Son, in imitation of
their Predecessors, solemnly protested in the year 1549. that the Duchy of
Limbourg, and the places beyond the Meuse, should for ever remain inseparably
united to the Duchy of Brabant Provinciae nostrae Limburgensis and
Transmosanae in perpetuum conjunctae manebunt cum P^ovinc^a nostra Brabantia,
neque unqu^m ^b ea divelli poterunt, etc. En l2 Act de reception de Philippes
II. Chapitre 12.
.

For this cause the Title and the Pretension of the Queen upon that Duchy,
does necessarily draw in that of Limbourg, which cannot be separated from it.
As to Haynault, most assuredly it is a Sovereignty independent, or in
Freehold, which according to the voice of the People, and all the Records of
that Estate, acknowledges no Supreme Lord but only God and the Sun Comes
Annoniae vulgo ^icitur ^nere suam ditionem a Deo and Sole, id est, a nemine
Mortaliam, Cap. 3. Nu. 9. Fol. 12. lib. de feud.
And it is upon this account that the Queen founds her Title to this County; for
by an express Article of the Custom it is said, that Patrimonial Free-holds
shall belong to the Children of the first Marriage, and not to those of a
subsequent one. Les alleux patrimoniaux appartiendront aux enfans du premier
marriage, si'z ou filles, and non aux enfans du marriage subs quent, mais s'ils
esch^o^ent col^acerallement durant un second ou troifi^sme Marriage, ils
appar^iendront aux ensans desdits marisges respectivement, le mes^ e^^'
observera a l'esgard des alleux aquis, les quels ^ppatiendront aussiaux filz
and filles de Chacun Marriage ou vidui^e d'iceluy auqu^l ^s ^its acquests seront
saits, ou a leur generation, Art. 4. Chap. 105.
.

If nevertheless Spain should contend against the credit of all History, as
well as against the certainty of proofs, that it i^ a Fief, and not a
Sovereignty independent, or in Freehold, the Queens Right would not be lessened
or weakened by it; because every Fief that is acquired, does by the disposition
of the same Custom belong to the Children issuing from that Marriage in which
it is acquired, though they be Daughters to the exclusion of those Children
which issue from other Marriages, though Sons Tous Fiefs acquis par pere ou
mere, constant chacun Marriage ou V^du^re d'iceluy appartiendront and escheront
aux enfans du Marriage ou Vidui^e en tell order que cy devant a este dit. Art. 3.
Chap. 91. Quant aux fiefs escheus en ligne collaterale, ou acquis en premier
Marriage, encores que filles dudit premier Marriage le pere n'en pourra fair l'
Allienation de tant d'enfans, que fills, que filles duront succeder es fiefs
acquis ou escheus collater allement constant chacun Marriage. Act. 9. Chapitre
92.




But granting that the late Catholic King came by that County in the time of
his first Marriage, as being Heir to the Infanta Isabella his Aunt, or as a
Donee from Philip the II. his Grandfather, who had given it to Isabella upon
her Marriage, on condition that if she died without Issue, it should return to
the King of Spain then living. It is certain that both in one and the other
case, it was truly an Acquest made by his own person: For presupposing it came
to him as being Heir to his Aunt, the Custom declares all collateral
Successions to be Acquests Art. 7. Chap. 92.
. And if it be his as Donee of Philip his Grandfather, the same Custom says
that all Donations in directo are Acquests, unless they are made to the Child
as to the rightful and next heir, and that neither the Father nor Mother were
in their life time possessed of them Art. 1, and 2. Chapter 93.
which cannot be said of the late Catholic King, who was so far from being
possessed by that Donatary, or from being considered as the rightful and next
Heir, that he was not born in a long time after, since Philip the Third his
Father was not so much as married at the time of this Donation, and
consequently you see that every way the County of Haynault belongs to the
Queen. That of Artois cannot be disputed with her without manifest injustice
against the rule of the Custom of the place; which imports that if the Survivor
marry again, the Children by the first Marriage shall carry all the
inheritances which were possessed by Parents, during that first Marriage, the
Exclusion of those by the second Quesile Survivant des deux Conjoynts ayant
enfans de son Marriage ait convole en d'autres Nopces, don't seroient issus,
d'autres enfans, iceux enfans d'icedluy dernier marriage ne peuvent demander
aucun droit par le trespass dudit survivant des heritages don't il a post e
durant son premier Marriage.
. But of all other Customs, that of Combray is favorable to the Infanta, which
formally orders that the Children by the first bed are so fully seized of the
property of all fiefs, from the instant of the Dissolution of Marriage, that
the Survivor cannot do any act of a proprietor without the free and express
consent of all the Children together Homme ou femme ayant enfant, ou
enfansvivans du premier marriage brise and sepa^e ne peut valablement vendre,
changer, donner, ni autrement aliener ses heritages tant fiefs que main fermes,
ni autrement disposer, si non du libre consentement, competence and Devoir de
Loix actuelles and personelles de tous lesdicts enfants, etc.
. As to the County of Burgundy, the males and females sharing equally without
any distinction of the nature of the Estate, or of the Order of the Marriages;
the three Children left of both Beds by his Catholic Majesty, ought to divide
it equally, every one taking their third part. And for the Duchy of Luxemburg,
the Son by the second bed is to have an entire Moiety, and the Queen with her
half Sister the other half, that is, either of them a fourth part of the whole,
because the Custom gives the Son a portion double to that of the Daughter Quand
des filles ont freres ou soeurs, chacune fille n'a que la moitle autant quel'un
des freres. Art. 9.
This, Sir, is an Abridgement as far as I can remember of the Treatise, which
was shown to me upon the rights of the Queen: If any thing has escaped me, or
the proof be not strong enough, you are not (if you please) to blame any thing
but by memory or weakness.


Flem. We are so far from believing that you have forgotten any thing, that by
the manner of your discourse I should rather think you to be the Author of that
Treatise; for it is a very hard thing for any one to be so full and knowing in
another man's work.


Germ. I would to Heaven all the City had heard as much as we have now done
upon this subject, which is of such importance to its peace, honor, and
fidelity.


Flem. I could wish it with all my heart, for to speak truly, I find my self
extremely disabused, and am troubled that others are not so too.


French. I hope that will be so shortly, by the Treatise which the most
Christian King ordered to be composed, only out of an intent to instruct and
draw them out of their Error.


Flem. In what language is it written?


French. The Original is in French, but the most Christian King has ordered it
to be translated into Latin, for the farther spreading of it; and I can assure
you the translation is excellent.


Flem. I much fear that this work will not pass so far as us; but I am resolved
not to leave you till you have promised me one favor.


French. If it lies in my power, you may be assured of it. What is it?


Flem. It Is Sir, that you will order this Conversation of ours to be printed
with all the Texts of the Customs, and Authorities in the Margent. You ought to
do this for truths sake, and if I durst whisper it in your Ear, you ought to do
it for our August Princesses sake.


French. How am I ravished with this your Declaration! it is true, I owe much to
that sacred name, and I promise you, that from this very evening I will so
order my affairs as to give you satisfaction.


Germ. So sweet and worthy a Conversation cannot have a more pleasing End. We
hope, Sir, in a little time to see the effects of your promise, and at parting
we conjure you to advance the work with a diligence suitable to the merits of
the subject, and the warmth of our zeal.


FINIS.

