A BRIEF EXPLICATION Of the last Fifty Psalms, From Ps. 100. to the end.

BY DAVID DICKSON.

Professor of DIVINITY in the COLLEGE of EDINBURGH:

COL. 3.16. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom teaching
and admonishing one another, in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.

Imprimatur,

EDMUND CALAMY.



LONDON, Printed by T.R. and E. M for Tho. Johnson at the golden Key in S.
Paul's Churchyard. An. Dom. 1654.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE EARL OF Cassills, Grace and Peace through Christ
Jesus.
My Right Noble Lord,
ONe of the special motives of my resolution, to follow this work in parcells,
was the apparent hazard, that if in this time of trouble, and of my old age, I
should have delayed to put forth some part of it, till all had been ready, the
whole might have been miscarried, or marred by some passage of providence,
which might have befallen me. But seeing it has pleased the Lord to spare my
life, and my health, and my liberty in his service, as I wanted not the example
of grave Authors before me to divide the whole Book of the Psalms into three
fifties; and to dedicate every part to several persons: So I judged it good
thrift to take occasion thereby, to testify my bound duty and respect, to so
many of the Noble friends of Sion, as I could overtake, and that with a mind
to honor all the rest, who have put their shoulder to the work of settling
Religion, and the Kingdom of Christ among us: whose labors, albeit they
should have no other fruit in our time, then the right stateing of the question
between us and all adversaries of the true doctrine, worship, and discipline of
Christ's house, as it is set down in the Confession of faith; in the directory
for public worship, and in the Rules of Government of Christ's Church, drawn
forth from Scripture warrant; yet even that much is worth all the expense of
whatsoever is bestowed, by any, or all the Lords worthies, upon Religion. And
howsoever the Lord does claim, and call for the whole glory of this work to
himself alone, by staining the pride of the glory of all instruments whereof
he has made use about it (as now appears) lest the glory due to himself in
all and every one of the passages of promoting the same should be ecclipsed,
yet will he never utterly reject this service, nor disallow the upright
endeavors of his servants therein; but will in his own time, and way, both
advance it, and bear witness to his faithful servants in and about it,
wheresoever he has a mind to keep house, or to Reign as King in Sion. Yea,
he will also make it known to the world, that as on the one hand, he will not
want a visible Kingdom in the world, (though not of this world) so on the
other hand, that his Kingdom shall be so far from hindering the civil
Government of Magistrates, where it has place, that by the contrary it shall
be a chief prop, and pillar of every Kingdom, where it is received.

In this number of upright promoters of the Kingdom of Christ, Your Lordship
has been always looked upon all the time of our late troubles, as one very
eminent: and I since my first admission into your Lordships acquaintance, have
observed your constant care and endeavor, as to know what was the right
indifficile questions, so also to hold it fast according to your power, after
you had discovered it. Which as it may be your Lordships comfort, so is it your
commendation, and all men's duty to do the like, especially in this dangerous
time, wherein sins practiced, and not repented of, are so severely and justly
punished, by Gods giving over the impenitent to the open professing and
defending of their unrepented faults; for God in justice and wisdom, has
suffered the hedges of his Vineyard to be broken down, and the holy discipline
of his house to be so set at naught by all sorts of persons, that every spirit
of error, having open way to come in at the breach, he might thereby try and
exercise all his people, who stand in Covenant with him by Profession and
reclaim or punish such as live in error: And no wonder that he so should do,
for when there is so little use made of the holy Ordinances of Religion, when
the Scriptures are either not read, or not esteemed of, when the form of
godliness is separated from upright endeavor to feel and show forth the life
and power of it, when the grace of the Gospel is turned into wantonness, and
men are become so much the more bold to sin, as they do hear much of the
mercifulness of God, when every divine truth is either not believed at all, or
received only with humane and temporary faith: when Christ is looked upon by
many only as a man, and not as God manifested in the flesh, not as the eternal
Son of God, who from everlasting was with God, and was God, Co-worker in the
Creation, with the Father and the Spirit, when Christ is confessed to be
Christ, but not employed as Mediator; or (as if men had need of him) not made
use of in his Offices; when many do cast open their souls unto, and seek after
another spirit then the Spirit of truth, the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, who
according to the Scriptures, both wounds and heales the consciences of
believers, and sanctifies the heart and conversation of all them that come to
God through Christ. In this time (I say) when these and many other ungodly
practices of men, walking after the imagination of their own heart, do so
abound; what wonder ir it that the Lord has let loose so many unclean spirits,
as no history can show more in so short a time in any age, or in any place of
the world, by whose ranging up and down among us, God is about to make manifest
the stability and sincerity of the faith of them, who are approved, and to take
trial of others, (in whom such damnable practices* as by the doctrine of
devils, are now openly defended, will be found unrepented) whether after they
shall hear their ungodly pranks maintained and patronized, by some Sect-master,
Heretic or Schismatic, they will abhor such abominable doctrine, and repent
their own former mis-deeds, which have spoken the language of some of those
vile errors; Or whether they will justify their own faults, (according as
their Sect-masters do teach them to do,) either by despising all the
Ordinances, and lifting themselves above the same, or by rejecting the commands
and cords of the moral Law, will loose themselves from the obedience thereof,
as if Christ had freed the believer from the command and authority of the Law,
no less then from the Covenant and curse thereof; or by blaspheming the
Scripture, will cry down the truth, and the use and power of it; or by calling
every truth in question, will exempt themselves from the bonds of all Religion;
or will walk after the imagination of their own heart, and make their own
conceits their Oracle, their fancy their faith, and their lusts their God; or
will, by opposing one or other of the Persons of the Godhead* deny and separate
the indivisible Essence of one God in three Persons; or by receiving the
doctrine of some of those many lesser antichrists which are in the world, will
incorporate themselves in the great mystical body of that one Antichrist,
spoken of in Scripture; or in a word, will by rejecting the truth, and not
receiving of it in love, when it is offered, bring in upon themselves strong
delusions, and give a powerful possession of themselves to the devil, whereby
he may so rule in them, as to make them vent whatsoever hell can devise, to the
dishonor of God and Christian Religion, that all such may be damned, as for
their not receiving the truth in love, so also for their taking pleasure in
unrighteousness, according as the Apostle did prophecy should come to pass,
2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.

In such a time therefore as this is, wherein the Lord is manifesting, who are
of God, and who not, who do know God, and who not; who do follow the Spirit of
truth, and who are led by the spirit of error, and is deciphering them by this
infallible mark which the Apostle gives, 1 John 4.6. that the one gives a
believing and obediential ear to the Penmen of holy Scripture; the other does
not so; what a mercy, yea, what an honor and happiness is it for the Lords
children, to make such use of a settled Ministry (which is the great gift of
Christ bestowed upon his Church,) as not to be carried about with every wind
of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. not to be led away with the error of the
wicked, nor fall from their own steadfastness, but to grow in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. Which grace,
and honor, and happiness, that it may not only continue with your Lordship,
but also be granted to all those that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity,
is the prayer of

Your Lordships ready Servant in the Gospel, DAVID DICKSON.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
IN the two former parts of this work, I have spoken my mind to thee, in
relation to this brief Explication of the Psalms: I will not here keep thee up
in the entry of this last part, nor say any more unto thee, save this, It is
our bound duty, to bless him that inhabiteth the praises of Israel, who will
have all the Mourners in Sion to be comforted, and who, as he has prepared in
this mountain unto all people, Isa. 25.6. a feast of fat things, a feast of
wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well
refined, by bestowing Christ, and the unsearchable riches of his grace, upon
every Penitent who flees to him for delivery from sin and wrath; so has he
also prepared to every such soul the excellent songs of Sion, to increase their
festival gladness, and for evidencing of his purpose to give unto them
everlasting joy, after this life is ended, has put in their hands for their
comfort in every condition, wherein they can be in this present life and valley
of tears) this sweet-smelled bundle of Psalms; wherein he has made his works
of mercy and of judgment the pawnes of his promises, for complete happiness
unto them, and also of the utter overthrow and perdition of all their enemies,
and has appointed both mercy and judgment to be the matter, as of their joy,
so of his own glory in the Church, to be lifted up as a sacrifice upon the
Altar Christ Jesus, by the voice of his people, singing with grace to him, both
alone and in company, and making melody in their hearts: therefore as in the
changes of our own particular private condition, we have liberty to choose for
our use such parts of the Psalms, as do speak most near to our present case:
So let us be bound in public meetings of the Church, to join with the
Congregation in singing every truth uttered by Gods Spirit in the Psalms, as
we are directed by the Minister and mouth of the meeting, for glorifying of
him, who has done, promised, threatened, and taught, whatsoever is therein
expressed; Remembering that his Praises are the pillars of our faith; and that
his joy is our strength; and that those calves of our lips, are acceptable
sacrifices to God through Jesus Christ, in and for whom

I am thy Servant in the Work of the Gospel, DAVID DICKSON.

A BRIEF EXPLICATION Upon the last Fifty Psalms.
PSALM CI.
DAvid, not being as yet entered in possession of his Kingdom, does by
direction of the holy Spirit, fall upon a consideration of the duties of a
righteous Prince, which he sets down as a rule, to be followed by himself
and all Magistrates, obliging himself, to endeavor to conform his Government
thereto: wherein he is but a type and shadow of Christ, in whom alone the
perfect performance of the duties here promised are to be found. The principal
duties which David undertaketh to discharge, may be, for orders sake, reduced
to the number of eight, according to the number of the verses.

Ver. 1. I Will sing of mercy and judgment, unto thee, O LORD, will I sing.
The first duty which he undertaketh, is, to delight himself in all royal
virtues, required for the Government of good or bad subjects; and to make those
duties his Song; and to approve himself to God for the sincerity of his
intention in this undertaking. Whence learn, 1. All the duties of righteous
Government may be comprehended under these two heads, mercy and judgment; for,
mercy takes in the care of the poor, needy, oppressed or injured; and
judgment takes in the care of equity, and righteous dealing among the
subjects, with the rewarding of the good, and punishing of evil doers: mercy
provideth for all good things which the subject needs, and judgment
provideth for their security, and for removing whatsoever evil may trouble
them; I will sing (says he) of mercy and judgment. 2. Such as are designed
unto any calling, especially any public charge, should prepare themselves for
it: partly, by laying before themselves the duties belonging to the right
discharge of such a calling: and partly, by bending of their hearts, and laying
engagements on their spirits, for the faithful discharge thereof; for so much
does David's example here teach us. 3 Duties of a man's calling, should both be
studied unto, and discharged with some cheerfulness and readiness of mind;
for, I will sing of mercy and judgment, imports so much. 4. As it is
expedient for the peoples better acceptance of a man to a public charge, that
his purpose to discharge his duty therein be published; so also it is expedient
for the man's stirring up and fastening to his duty, that he engage his heart
unto God; for, so does David's example teach us: Unto thee, O LORD, will I sing.

Ver. 2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way: O when will thou come
unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. The second duty
which he undertaketh, when God shall come unto him to perform his promise, and
put him in possession of the Kingdom, is, that he will cast a copy to all the
subjects, of godly and wise behavior in his own person and family, according
to the rule of Gods Word. Whence learn, 1. He that purposes to carry a public
charge well, must discharge the duty of a private man well in his own person,
and make his own personal carriage exemplary to all who shall hear of him: for
so does David's undertaking here teach us. 2. It is necessary for our personal
carriage, and conversing with others, that we make the Lords commands our Rule;
for that is a perfect way; and that we study to make application of general
rules prudently, according to the circumstances of time, place and person: for,
this is wisdom, as David's example does teach: I will behave my self wisely in
a perfect way. 3. Such as believe Gods promises, do long to have the
performance of them, as we see in David, who had a promise of the Kingdom, and
looked long for it: O when will thou come unto me? 4. In the performance of
promises, the Lord makes his approaches nearer and nearer unto the believer,
and then shall be the nearest communion, when God shall perform all that he has
promised unto us: for David calls the giving unto him the possession of the
promised Kingdom, Gods coming unto him: O when will thou come unto me? 5. A
man's holiness, righteousness and wisdom, is put to proof by his behavior to
his domestics, with whom he does most frequently and entirely converse: for
herein does David promise to give evidence of his walking wisely in a perfect
way: I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. 6. To complete a man's
sincerity, it is necessary not only that he have a perfect way, and a prudent
carriage in it, but also that he be upright in his heart, intentions, ends and
motives; therefore David adds, I will walk with a perfect heart.

Ver. 3 I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them
that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. The third duty undertaken is, that
he will be far from plotting of any wicked thing, and far from communion with
any persons in an evil course, which is a proof of the uprightness of his
heart, undertaken in the former verses. Whence learn, 1. A wicked design is
inconsistent with uprightness of heart, which has an aim at pleasing of God,
and at nothing else but what he will allow: I will set no wicked thing before
mine eyes. 2 A man can hardly be free of an evil course, if he shall be tempted
unto it, except he hate and abhor such courses in other men's practices; for he
who is resolved to be upright, should say truly, I hate the work of them that
turn aside. 3. Albeit an upright heart may be at unawares entangled in a sinful
course; yet so soon as he does perceive it to be such, he will quit it;
therefore after David has said, He hates the work of them that turn aside, he
adds, It shall not cleave to me.

Ver. 3. A froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked person.
The fourth duty undertaken is, in relation to the Court and places of trust: he
will not have in his company, nor will countenance a perverse or wicked person;
Whence learn, 2. Among the vices of the heart, frowardness, perverseness and
wickedness, are most of all to be eschewed and abhorred, because those evils
do harden the heart against admonition, and do make it incorrigible in an evil
course, albeit a better course be shown; therefore David denounces war
against such a disposition; A froward heart shall depart from me. 2. It is good
for a King, and for his Court, and for his subjects, and for the standing of
the Kingdom, that wicked, perverse, and impious men be out of credit in the
Court, and not admitted to places or power of trust; for nothing can be more
acceptable to God in the point of Government, nor more amiable to the subjects
then this; for which cause David promises to the subjects beforehand, I will
not know a wicked person; much more will Christ not know, but disclaim such a
person.

Ver. 5. Who so privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off: him that
has an high look and a proud heart will not I suffer. The fifth duty
undertaken, is the curbing of out-breaking wickedness, especially of that
which most hinders the peace and welfare of the subjects, such as is privy
slander, and open insolency. Whence learn, 1. There is no sort of persons more
pernicious to a King, or to his subjects, then is a privy slanderer, having
credit in Court: for he is able to murder any subject, and ruin his State, by
secret and false reports of him, while the innocent is ignorant of it, and
wants all place to defend himself; and therefore this evil is to be severely
punished by the Magistrate: Who so privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I
cut off. 2 A Kingdom is not well ruled, except proud and insolent spirits,
whose behavior speaks prodigality, strife, emulation and oppression, be
taken order with and born down; Him that has a high look and a proud heart,
will not I suffer. And such, if they escape men's judgments, will not be winked
at by Christ, in whom the truth of types is accomplished.

Ver. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
with me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. The sixth duty
undertaken, is countenancing and encouraging of the godly in the land. Whence
learn, 1. The Magistrate should have a special care to countenance upright men,
and such as fear God: Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful in the land. 2. It
is good policy, for Kings to have in their Court and Council such as are
faithful; Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
with me. 3. He is to be held in our estimation for a faithful man, who walks
after the rule of Gods Commandments; for such, as he called faithful before, he
expounds here to be such as walk in a perfect way; whether his heart be
uprighr or not, does belong to God to judge. 4. As it is good policy in a
State, to have about the King or supreme Magistrate such as are Professors of
true Religion, and of an honest conversation: so it is good thrift and
husbandry, for every man to choose such for their servants in the family; He
that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

Ver. 7. He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that
tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. The seventh duty undertaken, is the
purging out of discovered hypocrites, if they shall creep in into credit or
trust. Whence learn, 1. Deceitful and false men, and counterfeit hypocrites,
may escapemens observation, and creep into the fellowship of the godly, and
climb up to the Court, and get place in Kings houses; for so does David
presuppose here. 2. When men are discovered and found to be deceitful workers
and liars, then such as have power should purge them out; He that works
deceit, shall not dwell within my house; he that tells lies, shall not tarry
in my sight.

Ver. 8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off
all wicked doers from the City of the LORD. The eighth duty undertaken, is to
suppress all ungodliness in the land, and that for the good of religion, and
furtherance of the welfare of the Church. Whence learn, 1. The duty of
Magistrates is to suppress all the wicked in their Kingdom, lest by indulgence
shown to them, they do multiply, and so bear down the godly: I will destroy
all the wicked of the land. 2. The more timously the Magistrate does declare
himself against all wickedness, the more does he what belongs to his duty: I
will early destroy all the wicked of the land. 3. Albeit it be not possible for
any Magistrate, corporally to destroy all the wicked in the land, partly,
because it is impossible to find out every one; and partly, because the number
of the righteous and sound hearted is few, and their power weak; and partly,
because none can determine who they are in particular: yet a godly Magistrate
may civilly destroy them all, by causing to execute civil punishments, and that
Ecclesiastic Discipline be exercised against all them, who do not submit
themselves to Gods laws, till all men yield outward obedience: and unto this
duty should every Magistrate set himself: I will early destroy all the wicked
in the land. 4. The Magistrates duty is, by his power and by punishment of evil
doers, to endeavor the welfare of Gods Church within his bounds, as the
Minister of God appointed for that end: for David says, I will early destroy
all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all the wicked doers from the
City of the LORD. If the Magestrate shall punish open transgressions, the
Church will be in better case: This was David's resolution as a type of Christ,
and howsoever in execution much was wanting in the type, yet Christ will
perform all this exactly in his own appointed time, and in his own order,
partly in this life, partly at men's death, and partly at the last day.

PSALM. CII. A prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and pours out
his complaint before the Lord.
THis Psalm agrees well with the time of the Babylonish captivity of the
Jews, about the end whereof, the seventy years being now nigh expired, the
weight of the misery of Gods people, and the mockery of the heathen, and the
peoples longing for delivery, did so afflict the Prophet, that in compassion
toward the scattered Church, he pours out this prayer, and communicates it
at the Lords direction, to all other feeling members of the body to be made use
of, for the waking up of their affections, and strengthening of their hope of
delivery. The parts of it are three; In the first, he craveth audience to his
prayer because of his sad condition, wherein he sympathizeth with the Church in
affliction, to ver. 12. In the second, he encourages himself in the hope of
being heard in behalf of the Church, to ver. 23. In the third, he lays forth
the occasion of all this grief, which was the fear he had of the cutting off of
the Church of the Jews, before the coming of the Messiah; and shows how he
strengthened his faith in prayer against this temptation.

From the Inscription, Learn, 1. It is no strange thing for the dear children
of God, to be under heavy affliction; for, here it is presupposed that they may
be afflicted, yea, and overwhelmed. 2. The consideration of the condition
wherein the Church is, serves to assuage and mitigate the private calamities
of any particular person at any time: for this prayer gives direction to the
afflicted, whatsoever be his affliction, to look upon the condition of the
Church in the mean time, that it may ease his private grief, if it be well with
the Church; and again, that it may either ease his private grief, or turn it to
run in the right channel, if the Church be in a hard condition, as here it is
held forth: for the most kindly grief of a lively member of the Church, is that
grief wherein he sympathizeth with the calamity of the body, and this wisdom is
propounded in this Psalm; and recommended to Gods people to be made use of. 3.
The affliction of the Saints before us, may and should be the matter of our
comfort and song to God, and hope of help to us in our prayers: for this does
the Inscription and Psalm teach us. 4. The way for a man afflicted and
overwhelmed, to have ease, comfort and deliverance, is, to pour out his soul
before the Lord; for so much is here imported. 5. Albeit a person afflicted,
cannot fill up the words of this Psalm, in his own proper present feeling, yet
may he make good use of this prayer, which teaches him how to wrestle for a
deliverance: for the general title prefixed to the Psalm teaeheth so much.

Ver. 1. Hear my Prayer, O LORD, and let my cry come unto thee.

2. Hide not thy face from me, in the day when I am in trouble, incline thine
ear unto me: in the day when I call, answer me speedily.

In the first part of the Psalm, he prays for ready access and audience to
his prayer, because of his heavy affliction, which is set down more generally,
ver. 1, 2. and more particularly branehed fotth in the nine following verses.
From his petition for audience; Learn, 1. A soul afflicted, seeking relief and
comfort in God, may both confidently pray for, and certainly expect audience
and acceptance of its prayer; Hear my prayer, O God. 2. The earnest prayer of
an humble Supplicant, cannot be kept out from God, by whatsoever objected
impediment; for, Let my cry come unto thee, is thus much: Let nothing hold out
my prayer. 3. Albeit it is not any strange thing to see a soul in trouble, and
God to seem to be displeased with it also, yet the want of Gods consolation,
and sense of his displeasure, is more heavy then the trouble* and is that which
the godly can least endure: Hide not thy face from me, in the day when I am in
trouble. 4. The Lord suffers his babbling children to speak to him in their
own form ^f speech, (albeit the terms which they use, be not fitted for his
spiritual, invisible, and incomprehensible Majesty) such as are, Hear me, hide
not thy face, incline thine ear to me, and such like other speeches. 5. A soul
perplexed and overwhelmed with trouble, cannot long endure the Lords
withdrawing of his presence from it: In the day when I call, answer me speedily.

Ver. 3. For my days are consumed like smoke: and my bones are burnt as an
hearth.

4. My heart is smitten, and withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my
bread.

5. By reason of the voice of my groaning: my bones cleave to my skin.

6. I am like a Pelican of the wilderness: I am like an Owl of the desert.

7. I watch, and am as a Sparrow alone upon the house top.

He sets down his affliction more particularly; First, in the effects and
signs of his sorrow to be seen in his body, to v. 8. Then in the causes
thereof, to v. 11. Thirdly, in the consequence and chief effect thereof
repeated, which is the apparent utter undoing of him, v. 11. As for the first,
we may take the signs of sorrow expressed in a number of simiiitudes, to
describe both the condition of the Prophets natural body, and also the
condition of the body politic, of ^he tribe of Judah now in captivity Whence
learn, 1. The Lords children are subject to such sad conditions, as may bring
their very natural body to a sort of decay, as those similitudes here used do
express. 2. The condition of a visible Church, may seem, and really be in its
own kind, in such a weak, sorry and sick condition, as the comparisons here do
hold forth. 3. As smoke is extracted by fire out of a moist body, and does
vanish when it is evaporated: so may the life and vigor of a Saints body be
spent, and consumed by trouble, and sense of Gods withdrawing, or of his wrath;
My days are consumed like smoke. 4. As fire heateth the hearth, and the hearth
once hot with fire, is able to kindle and burn timber or coals, or any
combustible matter cast on it: so is the sense of Gods wrath in long lasting
trouble, able to spend the strength of the strongest man; My bones are burnt as
an hearth. 5 As grass withers when it is cut: so is the courage of a man
cast down, when he finds Gods anger, pursuing his Church or himself; My heart
is smitten, and withered as grass. 6. When God is seen to be angry, the
comforts of this life a^e tastelesse, and can yield no pleasure; I forgot to
eat my bread. 7. Heavy sorrow can hardly be suppressed, sighs and groans must
of necessity give some vent unto it: for, here is the voice of groaning. 8. The
exercise of the spirit of Gods dearest children may endure long, even till
their flesh fail them: and their leanness may be such as here is spoken of;
My bones cleave to my skin. 9. As in sad troubles familiars use to draw back
from, and leave a man alone; so also a sad soul loves to be alone, rather then
to be a spectacle of misery to others: I am like a Pelican in the wilderness,
I am like an Owl in the desert. 10. Trouble of mind is able to bereave a man
of nights rest, and then his readiest ease of mind, is to vent his grief to
heavenward. I watch, and am as a Sparrow alone on the house top, chirping.

Ver. 8. Mine enemies reproach me all the day, and they that are mad against
me, are sworn against me. The causes of his grief are three; First, the
reproach and desperate cruelty of the enemy against the Church, ver 8.
Secondly, the sense of Gods anger appearing in his dispensation, which drew him
not only to frequent fasting and tears, but also to an uncomfortable life.
Thirdly, the comparison of times of the former prosperity of the Church with
the present adversity, ver. 9, 10. Whence learn, 1. The men of this world use
to meet with pity in their calamity, but the godly are subject to reproaches in
their troubles, which mockery and calamity doubleth their misery; Mine enemies
reproach me all the day. 2. The enemies of Gods people are reasonlesse and
implacable in their indignation against the godly: They are mad against me. 3.
Albeit the miseries of Gods people may be such, as the wicked enemy of
Religion, when he would curse any person, shall wish no worse to them, then to
say, Let him be like such a people, and such a godly person, yet will the
wicked not be satiated with this, except he bring more mischief upon the godly:
They that are mad against me, do curse by me, or are sworn against me.

Ver. 9. For I have eaten ashes like bread; and mingled my drink with weeping.

10. Because of thine indignation and ^hy wrath: for thou have lifted me up,
and cast me down.

The second cause of his grief, was the signs of Gods indignation appearing in
the Churches misery, which made him sit desolate many times in the dust,
weeping when he should have taken some refreshment to his body. Whence learn,
1. The condition of the godly sometime may make them miserable, not only in the
eyes of the world, but also in their own eyes for a time: I have eaten ashes
like bread, etc. 2. Not only may the godly be driven to frequenr fasting and
prayer, but also to have gray dustie bread for their ordinary diet, and that
joined with such grief, as they can take no food with comfort; I have eaten
ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping. 3. The sharpest ingredient
in the trouble of the godly, is the sense of Gods indignation* I mingled my
drink with weeping, because of thy indignation. 4. The troubles which the Lord
does bring upon his own children, should lead them to the sense of their sin,
and of Gods just displeasure against them for the same; I mingled my drink with
weeping, because of thy indignation and wrath. 5. As it is the Lord that makes
changes of condition, and gives now prosperity in his indulgence, and anon
adversity for the abuse of prosperity; so should he be acknowledged in his
bounty and justice good and holy; For thou have lifted me up, and cast me down.
6. Comparison of past prosperity with present adversity, makes the present
afflicted condition the heavier, and Gods just indignation the more evident:
for thus does the Psalmist prove Gods wrath pursuing him and the Church; For
thou have lifted me up, and cast me down.

Ver. 11. My days are like a shadow that declineth: and I am withered like
grass. Here he repeateth the apparent sad consequence and effect of his own
and the Churches affliction; he and the Church of the Jews now in captivity,
were like to be cut off without comfort or hope of deliverance. Whence learn,
1. Not only the visible face of a Church, but also the scattered parts thereof,
may be near to disappearing, and to utter decaying under long continued
trouble; My days are like a shadow that declineth, and I am withered like
grass. 2. The miseries of the godly, and the extreme danger of the Church,
being laid forth before God, are good arguments of hope that God shall shortly
help; for therefore is it repeated, and laid down here for the last part of
pouring out his soul; My days are like a shadow that declineth, and I am
withered like grass.

Ver. 12. But thou, O LORD, shall endure for ever: and thy remembrance unto all
generations. In the second part of the Psalm he striveth to comfort himself in
the hope of grace to be shown to the Church, by seven arguments. The first is,
because God has purposed to perpetuate the memorial of himself unto all
generations, and endures for ever to see it done. Whence learn, 1. There is
ground of hope to believers, in the saddest condition of the Church; for albeit
believers be mortal, yet God in whom their life is hid, is eternal; But thou, O
LORD, shall endure for ever. 2. Because God will have his Name known in all
generations, and will have his Word and Ordinances of Religion made use of
among men, for preserving the memory of his attributes, works and will,
therefore the Church must continue from age to age; Thou shall endure for ever,
and thy remembrance unto all generations.

Ver. 13. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favor
her, yea, the set time is come. The second argument of his hope, that God will
shortly have mercy on his Church is, because the time of the seventy years set
for their captivity, was now almost expired. Whence learn, 1. It is good
reasoning from Gods unchangeablenesse, to conclude a change of the sad
condition of the Church afflicted, from a worse unto a better: Thou shall
endure for ever, and therefore, thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion. 2.
As the Lord has set times for exercising his people with affliction, so also
set times for comforting of them again, which time when it is come, God will
have mercy on them whom he has afflicted; Thou shall arise and have mercy upon
Sion; for the set time to favor her, for the set time is come.

Ver. 14. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones: and favor the dust
thereof. The third argument is, because the Lords people had a great affection
to re-edifie the Temple, lying now ruined. Whence learn, 1. It is no new thing
to see the outward face of Religion, and holy Ordinances defaced; for the
Temple of Jerusalem, is here lying in the dust of a ruinous heap. 2. The
Ordinances of Religion shall not be utterly abolished, but so much thereof
shall be preserved, as may serve for the furtherance of Reformation, and
re-edification of his Church, in Gods appointed time; as here the Temple is
ruined, but there are stones reserved for a new building. 3. When the
ordinances of God are at the lowest, and most deformed in the eyes of the
world, they are and should be most lovely, and looked upon with most estimation
and affection of Gods people; Thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and
favor the dust thereof. 4. It is a good ground of hope that God will shortly
repair the ruins of Religion, when he provides builders, and does put into
their hearts a love to set upon the work of reformation, as the Psalmist
reasoning here does teach us.

Ver. 15. So the Heathen shall fear the Name of the LORD, and all the Kings of
the earth thy glory. The fourth argument of hope is, from the promised
Conversion of the Gentiles, to whom the true Religion was to be transmitted in
Gods own time, by the means of restoring of the Church of the Jews unto their
wonted privilege. Whence learn, 1. The enlargement of the knowledge and fear
of God among them that know him not, should be the aim and encouragement of
zealous Reformers* to use all means which may conduce for Reformation; for so
much we are taught in the Psalm^sts example, desiring the restoration of the
Church of the Jews, that the Gentiles might be brought in; and by hope of the
Conversion of the Gentiles, giving hope of restoration unto the scattered
Church of the Jews; for, So the Heathen shall fear thy Name, is the reasoning
of the Psalmist. 2. When the Lord is pleased to arise, for restoring of his
afflicted people unto comfort, and of Religion unto its own beauty, he can
work so as Kings shall fear and tremble, to see Gods care of his own despised
people; for so says he, The Heathen shall fear thy Name, and all the Kings of
the earth thy glory.

Ver. 16. When the LORD shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory. The
fifth argument of his hope is, from the glory which God should have in
restoring of his Church. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever instruments the Lord uses
in the gathering of his Church, he will have himself seen to be the builder
thereof; for it is the Lord here, that shall build up Sion. 2. As the glory of
the Lord is obscured when his Church is scattered; so when he sets up his own
ordinances again, his glory does appear, yea, and that more then if his Church
had not been scattered; When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in
glory. 3. The connection of Gods glory with the salvation of his Church, is a
comfortable ground of hope, that howsoever the Church be demolished, yet it
shall be restored and repaired again: for, When the Lord shall build up Zion,
he shall appear in glory, imports so much.

Ver. 17. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their
prayer. The sixth argument of hope is, from the Lords respect to the prayers of
his people. Whence learn, 1. The Lords people do reckon themselves destitute
and desolate, when they have not the face of a Church, and do want the public
Ordinances of Religion, which are the tokens of the Lords presence among them:
for especially in relation to their scattering from Ieru^alem and the Temple,
does the Psalmist here call them destitute or desolate. 2. When the Lords
people are scattered one from another, they can trust one another, and meet
together at the throne of grace, by their prayer presented before God, as here
the faithful scattered in captivity, do meet in a joint Petition for the
building up of Sion; the destitute have their prayer put up in Gods hearing; He
will regard the prayer of the destitute. 3. Albeit the Lords people be desolate
and destitute of all earthly comfort and help, and be despised by the world,
yet their persons and prayer are in estimation with God; He will regard the
prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.

Ver. 18. This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people
which shall be created, shall praise the LORD.

19. For he has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary: from Heaven did
the LORD behold the earth.

20. To hear the groaning of the Prisoners: to loose those that are appointed
to death.

21. To declare the Name of the LORD in Zion: and his praise in Jerusalem.

22. When the people are gathered together: and the Kingdoms to serve the LORD.

The seventh argument of hope to be heard is, from the assurance, that as their
calamity was foretold in Scripture; so their delivery promised should be
recorded in Scripture also, to the praise of God, to the edification and
consolation of the Church of God in their solemn meetings, in whatsoever
Kingdoms they lived. Whence learn, 1. The more glory we foresee shall come to
God by the granting of our prayers, the more confidence may we conceive to have
our petition granted; as the Psalmists example does teach us. 2. God has so
provided, that the exercise and experience of the Church in former times,
should serve to manifest his glory, and edify the posterity in aftertimes;
This shall be written for the generation to come. 3. The Lord has determined
by holy Scripture to propagate true Religion, whereby he may be glorified, and
his Church edified, from generation to generation; This shall be written for
the generation to come. 4. The gathering together again of a scattered Church;
the conversion of more sinners, and drawing them into the Church; and the
perpetuation of the Church from age to uge, is a Creation or work of the
omnipotent Creator: The people which shall be created, shall praise the Lord.
5. The Lord should be praised, as for all his work so in special for the
delivery of his Church; and praised not only by them who do see his present
work, and are partakers in their own persons of the gift, but also by all them
that shall hear of the delivery in after times: The people which shall be
created, shall praise the Lord. 6. The Lord does so make manifest his
particular and active providence about his people, as all ages shall
acknowledge his care for them; for the posterity shall say, He has looked down
from the height of his Sanctuary, etc. 7. Howsoever the Lord speak of his
dwelling in his Sanctuary, or in his Church here on earth, yet must we conceive
no thoughts but heavenly of him as present at once both in heaven and earth, to
hear and see the condition and carriage of every one; He looked down from the
height of his Sanctuary, from heaven did the Lord behold the earth, to hear,
etc. 8. The Lords heavenly majesty does not hinder him to humble himself to
behold even the most contemptible things on the earth, but rather he will thus
raise his praise among men: From heaven did the Lord behold the earth, to hear
the g^oaning of the prisoner. 9. Albeit the Lords people may be prisoners, and
put to silence among men, yet their sighs and groans have a loud speech in
the ears of the Lord; He beholds the earth, to hear the groans of the
prisoner. 10. Albeit the Lord suffer his childien to be imprisoned and
condemned to die, yet he can interpose himself (if he please) for their
delivery, before the purpose of their enemies be executed; He beholds the
earth, to loose those that are appointed to death. 11. The end, both of the
sufferings and deliverances of the Saints, is the glorifying of God, and as
their danger does grow, so does the matter of Gods praise for doing for them
grow up also; For he beholds the earth, to hear the sighs of the prisoner, and
to loose them that are appointed to death; To declare the Name of the Lord in
Sion, and his praise in Jerusalem. 12. The time of glorifying God for his works
done for the Church of the Jews, is in a special manner to be under the
Gospel, in the assemblies of the Churches of the Gentiles; for, He loosed those
that were ap^ointed to death, to declare the Name of the Lord in Sion, when the
people are gathered together, and the Kingdoms to serve the Lord: that is, in
the time when Christ shall make the Kingdoms of the earth subject to him.

Ver. 23. He weakened my strength in the way: he shortened my days. The third
part of the Psalm, wherein the Prophet declares the cause of his sorrow, v.
23. and his wrestling against it, v. 24, 25, 26, 27. and his victory over the
tentation, v. 28. As for the first, he compares the case of the Church unto
his own personal condition. for as he in the flower of his age was like to die
by reason of grief for the Church, so was the Church like to perish in their
captivity, and not to go on unto the hoped for coming of the Messiah, and
calling in of the Gentiles, which was necessary for the perpetuation of the
Church unto the end of the world. Whence learn, 1. There is such a strait union
between the Church of one age and another, that the whole Church is as one man;
the Church of the Jews is as one Israel: and there is such a union between the
Church and every member thereof, that every member may and should take and
esteem the condition of the Church, as his own personal condition, and may
speak of it so, especially if he be the mouth of the body, a Prophet or
Minister of the Corporation of the Church; for so much does the Prophets
example here teach us. 2. The Church of Israel from Abrah^m forward, was like a
man entered in his journey, and as it were by so many steps, from one
generation to another, walking on to the coming and receiving of Jesus Christ
the promised Messiah; who was to come of them, as the form of speech here,
borrowed from a wayfaring man, gives us to understand. 3. When the Lord did
scatter the ten tribes, and after that also did lead in captivity the other two
unto Babylon: it seemed unto Israel a stopping of them from going on their
appointed journey, to the coming of Christ, and a making the tribe of Judah so
weak, as there was no appearance of the possibility of their endurance, or
making progress to their desired end: for so much is imported in the words of
the Prophet, taking on the person of Israel: He weakened my strength in the
way. 4. Yea, there was fear of cutting off of that tribe, and of the abolishing
of Israel, and that the Messiah coming of them should not appear; and this was
the exercise of the Church scattered in the Babylonish captivity; and the
fear, and the tentation, wherewith the Church and the Prophet about the end of
the captivity, were wrestling, as is expressed in these words, He shortened my
days, that is, to my appearance (says Israel by the Prophets mouth;) I was
cut off from being as a Church or tribe, for any such use as I expected. 5. The
desire after Christ and communion with him, which the Church and every believer
has, is like the longing which a man has to be at his journeys end, and the
impediments which seem to hinder their communion with him, are like the taking
away of their life from them; He has shortened my days, says Israel.

Ver. 24. I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy
years are throughout all generations.

25. Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the Heavens are the
work of thy hands.

26. They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea, all of them shall wax old
like a garment: as a vesture shall thoa change them, and they shall be changed.

27. But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

Against this tentation, the Church, or the Prophet in the Churches name, does
wrestle in prayer, and strengthens his faith by sundry arguments, taken from
Gods, to wit, Christ's eternity, omnipotency, and immutability, Heb. 1.11, 12.
Whence learn, 1. The Church and any member thereof, may possibly sometime be
put in fear of being cut off, before they can attain their desired end; as
here, Take me not away in the midst of my days, does import. 2. Faith does
take God for the party to deal with, whatsoever strait it shall be brought
into; God is the doer of what is done, says the believer, and so he deals
with God by prayer for relief; I said, O God, take me not away. 3. Appearance
of perishing should not hinder us to pray, but sharpen us rather in our duty,
and when Gods promises and his dispensation do seem to disagree, we may press
the Covenant, and not displease God by so doing; I said, O my God, take me not
away, etc 4. The eternity of Christ is the consolation of the believer in his
mortality; and the eternity of Christ as God, is the pledge of his
preservation, and of the performance of Gods promises unto him; Thy years are
throughout all generations. 5. The omnipotency of God, even Christ, which may
be seen in the works of Creation, is a rock for the believer, who is in
Covenant with God to rest upon; for what can he not do who has made all things
of nothing? Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens
are the work of thy hands. 6 The immutability of God is a notable comfort to
his afflicted people, who because he is not changed, therefore shall they not
be consumed; Heaven and earth shall perish, but thou sholt endure, etc. but
thou art the same. 7. As the heavens and the earth are subject to vanity for
man's cause, and so in regard of this condition wherein they are now, they shall
perish: so also they shall not simply and altogether perish, but be changed as
a garment for man's cause, Romans 8.2^. All of them shall wax old as a garment,
as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art
the same, and thy years have no end, Heb. 1.11, 12. meant of Christ.

Ver. 28. The children of thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall be
established before thee. Here is his victory over the tentation, and a solid
assurance of the perpetuity of the Church from one generation to another,
grounded upon the aforesaid attributes of Christ. Whence learn, 1. He that is
sorry for the affliction of the Church, shall have consolation from God, and a
gracious answer to his prayer, as the experience of the Prophet here does teach
us. 2. The perpetuity of the Church, and establishing of it may be solidly
concluded from the unchangeablenesse and eternity of God; for thus does the
Prophet reason. 3. The Church shall never be barren, but from age to age bring
forth children unto God; The children of thy servants shall continue, and their
seed. 4. The true members of the Church, are not the children of the flesh
simply, but the children of the same faith and obedience with the godly
teachers and servants of God; for so are they who have the promises, here
described; The children of thy servants shall tontinue. 5. Whatsoever change
may befall the visible Church before the world, yet before God she is fixed and
stable, as a house builded upon a rock; The seed of thy servants shall be
established before thee.

PSALM CIII.
THis is a Psalm of praise and thanksgiving to God, for his grace to his
people, wherein the believer stirs up himself, and by his own example others
also to praise God, v. 1, 2. And that for seventeen reasons or arguments of
praise; some of them taken from mercies shown to himself, some from mercies to
all believers, and some taken from his sovereign dominion over all, unto v. 20.
and in the last three verses, there is an exhortation to all the creatures, to
join in Gods praises with the Prophet.

Ver. 1. Bless the LORD, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his
holy Name.

2. Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

In the Pro^hets stirring up of himself to praise God; Learn, 1. The sense of
Gods goodness to a believer is very blessedness felt, flowing from God the
fountain and cause of blessedness: Bless the LORD, O my soul. 2. When a
believer is satisfied with Gods goodness, he cannot satisfy himself in the
expression of his sense of it, or of his discharge of thankfulness for it, but
stirs up his own dull spirit to the work of praise: Bless the LORD, O my
soul. 3. In praising God, special care is to be had of the sincerity of our
heart and affections; All that is within me, bless his holy Name. 4.
Whatsoever is said of God, will be found really to be true of him, and the
believer will subscribe unto the unstained glory of his Name, and may say, All
that is w^thin me, bless his holy Name. 5. Albeit we do not obtain of our
heart at first what we would, yet must we still insist in the stirring up of
the grace of God in us, for any service we are about; Bless the LORD, O my
soul, says he the second time. 6. God has put so many obligations upon every
believer, as may furnish reasons of praise and thanksgiving; Bless the Lord
abundantly and forget not his benefits. 7. As oblivion is always unthankful, so
the remembrance and calling to mind what the Lord has bestowed upon us, with
a due estimation of the meanest benefit, is a point of upright thankfulness:
Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, that is, forget
not any of his benefits, as the form of speech in the Original does import.

Verse. 3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities: who heals all thy diseases. The
first reason of thanksgiving is for remission of sins: the second reaason is
for healing specially of spiritual maladies. Whence learn, 1. Saving grace
bestowed upon us, should have the first room in our thanksgiving unto God,
because it is the evidence of Gods special love to us: for this does the order
of the Prophets thanksgiving teach us. 2. The most holy of Gods servants are
not justified by their good works, but by gracious remission of their evil
works: Bless the LORD, who forgiveth thy iniquities. 3. The remission of sin
is a perfect taking away of the guiltiness, not of some only, but of all sins:
Who forgiveth all thine iniquities. 4. After remission of sin, and
justification of our persons, there remains much inbred corruption, and many
not only bodily, but also and especially sinful infirmiti^s, diseases and
maladies of our souls, whereby we become unable to do the good which we would,
or to eschew the evil which we would not do: and of these diseases God becomes
a Physician to heal them all, by his Spirit of Sanctification bestowed upon
all whom he justifies; Who heals all thy diseases.

Verse. 4. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who crowns thee with
loving kindness, and tender mercies. The third reason of thanksgiving, is for
delivering of him graciously, from perishing: and the fourth reason is, for
giving unto him mercifully many good things; By destruction here he means,
not only the danger of being killed by his enemies, but also and especially the
state of condemnation and perishing in Gods wrath, from which the man justified
is redeemed by the Mediator. Whence learn, 1. The benefit of preservation from
eternal death, is given unto the man, to whom all iniquity is forgiven; for
here these benefits are joined the one with the other. 2. The deliverances
which are given to believers, as well bodily as spiritual, temporal as well as
everlasting, do come to us in the way of Redemption, made by our kind and
faithful Kinsman Jesus Christ; Who redeemeth thy life from destruction. 3. A
man must be sensible of the merit of sin, and see himself in the state of
perdition for sin, before he can put a right estimation upon his delivery, he
must count himself a lost man, till the LORDS Redeemer deliver him, as we may
perceive in the Prophet, saying, He has redeemed thy life from destruction. 4.
The favor which God bestows upon a believer, is not in giving unto him one
or two, or some few evidences of his love and mercy, but in a constant
compassing of him on every hand, in every thing: so that he shall turn him
about to what A^t he will, he is circled round about with love and mercy,
supplying wants, preventing^ or mitigating and seasoning his troubles,
reclaiming him from sin, and directing him in Gods way; Who crowns thee with
loving kindness and tender mercies. 5. The evidences of Gods kindness and
mercy to a man, is not only a means to glorify God, but also a means to put
respect and honor; yea, and a crown of glory on the head of the believer, in
the sight of all who look upon him; therefore says he, Who crowns thee with
loving kindness and tender mercies.

Ver. 5. Who satisfies thy mouth with good things: so that thy youth is
renewed like the Eagles. The fifth reason of thanksgiving is, not only for
blessing the use of the creatures unto him, but also and especially for feeding
him with spiritual food, and giving comfortable refreshments to his Church, set
forth under the similitude of corporal ^eeding upon dainties. The sixth reason
is for comforting his spirit, and reviving it in its dead condition, as the
Eagle is revived and renewed after casting her bill. Whence learn, 1. The
blessing of God upon the believer, makes the use of Gods benefits, and his
ordinary meals and morsels, savourie and sweet, because he has all that is
given to him, with Gods allowance and good will; Who satisfies thy mouth with
good things. 2. The Lord after spiritual hunger and thirst, gives such
satisfaction to the soul of the believer, as banquet-chear and dainties do give
to a hungry and thi^sty man, as the similitude here shows; Who satisfies thy
mouth with good things. 3. As the Eagle decays and grows lean, when her
bill or beak grows so long and crooked as she cannot eat for it, and when she
casts her bill, and her beak is now fitted better to take her food, then she
is revived and strengthened, and as it were grows young again: so fares it
with the soul of the believer, which sometimes is so exercised and troubled, as
it refuses comfort, and lies in a dead condition; but when the Lord renews
the sense of his love, it is a new life, and the inner man is revived again;
Thy youth is renewed as the Eagle. 4. It is an act of thanksgiving unto God, to
give account to our selves, and to reckon over to our own souls, what the Lord
has bestowed on us, and done for us, as appears in the Prophets practice
here, speaking all this to his own soul, in reckoning over the benefits.

Ver. 6. The LORD executes righteousness and judgment for all that are
oppressed. He goes on in his thanksgiving, and ascends from the mercies
shown to himself, unto the praising of Gods righteousness and mercifulness
toward all believers, as well as toward himself, according as every ones need
does require: and here is the seventh reason of Gods praise, for maintaining
the cause of all his oppressed people. Whence learn, 1. The sight of Gods
goodness toward our selves, should lead us to the observation of Gods
goodness to all his children in common, and unto his righteous, holy and
gracious nature, as the example of the Psalmist teaches us. 2. As to be
oppressed was not David's lot alone, but is the common condition whereunto the
godly in all ages are subject: so to have God the defender and the avenger of
those that oppress them, was not the privilege of David alone, but common to
him and all Gods children; For the Lord executes righteousness and judgment
for all that are oppressed.

Ver. 7. He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of
Israel. The eighth reason of Gods praise, is, for his revealing of his will and
works to his Prophet Moses, and to the people of Israel; Whenee learn, 1. The
knowledge of Gods will, of his way of dealing with men, and of his works, are
mysteries which men cannot understand, till the Lord reveal all to them; It is
he who makes his ways known. 2. As God has the choosing of people to whom,
so also of the men by whom he will reveal himself and his ways; He made known
his ways unto Moses, his acts to the children of Israel. 3. As the revealing
of Gods way, wherein he will walk with us, and of his way wherein he will have
us to walk before him, is no small mercy to his Church: so is it no small
obligation put upon his people, and matter of praise and thanks unto God; for
this is made here the matter of the Churches thanks, and of Gods praise, That
he made known h^s ways to Moses, and made Israel to see that he wrought as he
had spoken; He made known his acts to the children of Israel.

Ver. 8. The LORD is merciful and gracious: slow to anger, and plenteous in
mercy. The ninth reason of Gods praise is, for his merciful and gracious nature
expressed in sundry titles. Whence learn, 1. The Lord is compassionate toward
us in our miseries, and ready to pardon our sins; The Lord is merciful. 2. The
Lord is not hindered by our unworthiness to do us good, when we come unto him,
but is ready to show favor to such as acknowledge themselves to be unworthy,
and do seek nothing but of his free love; The Lord is gracious. 3. The Lord
does not easily let forth the evidence of his anger, even when he is provoked;
He is slow to anger. 4. Even in wrath he remembers mercy, and does not let
forth the effects of his wrath in full measure, but tempereth his
chastisements, so as we may endure them, and mixeth mitigations in the most
bitter cups; He is plenteous in mercy.

Ver. 9. He will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for ever.
The tenth reason of praise is, for the short continuance of the effects of his
wrath. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the Lord be ready to live as a reconciled God
and father with us his children, yet we are given to strife, and do frequently
offend and grieve him, and give reason to him to rebuke us, as his not chiding
of us does import. 2. When he has debated his controversy by words, and by
the rod, and has made our conscience challenge and chide us, he does not
entertain the controversy long; He will not always chide. 3. Albeit the
tokens of Gods anger endure longer then we would, yet shall they be removed at
length, he will not pursue his quarrel furrher then our real humiliation;
Neither will he keep his anger for ever.

Verse. 10. He has not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us
according to our iniquities. The eleventh reason of Gods praise is, for the
common experience which the Saints have had already of his mercy. Whence learn,
1. What the Word says of Gods grace, mercy, long-suffering, and other titles
of his goodness, the common experience of his children, yea, and of all the
members of the visible Church may bear witness unto it: He has not dealt with
us after our sins. 2. The felt mercies of the Lord should not extenuate our
sins, but rather make us aggravate our faults, and weigh our misdeservings in
the balance of the Sanctuary; for not by the weight of judgments, (which
oft-times are laid aside, or are gently inflicted) but by the Word must we
judge of our iniquities; For he has not rewarded us according to our
iniquities.

Ver. 11. For as the heaven is high above the earth: so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him. The twelfth reason of Gods praise is, for the
unmeasurablenesse nf his mercy toward his servants, compared to the
unmeasurable height of the heaven above the earth. Whence learn, 1. Our mind
cannot find out a comparison too la^ge, for expressing the superabundant mercy
of the Lord toward his people, For as the heaven is high above the earth, so
great is his mercy toward them that fear him. 2. Those are the children of
God, who howsoever they are not free of sin, yet they are careful to please
God, and loath to offend him; They are persons that fear him. 3. The
consolations of God, and the riches of his mercy, are not appointed to foster
sin or security in any man, but to cherish the hearts of those that stand in
awe to offend God, and study to please him: Great is his mercy to them that
fear him.

Ver. 12. As far as the east is from the west: so far has he removed our
transgressions from us. The thirteenth reason of Gods praise is, for complete
fullness of remission of sin unto the believer in him. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
sins hinder our access to God, yet they do not hinder Gods approaching unto
them, on whom he will have mercy; for sin is not removed, till Christ come to
the sinner, as here is imported. 2. Remission of sin is a gift, full and
complete, given by God unto every believer in Christ, and the guiltiness and
debt of sin, is so far and so fully removed, that it can never be imputed unto
the believer, nor come near to hurt him; As far as the east is from the west,
so far has he removed our transgressions from us. Understand this of the
believer, who does not turn the grace of God into wantonness, but makes use
of grace, to strengthen him in his battle against the body of sin in himself.

Ver. 13. Like as a father pitieth his children, so the LORD pitieth them that
fear him. The fourteenth reason of Gods praise is, for his fatherly pity
toward all his weak children, who would heartily serve him better then they do.
Whence learn, 1. The course of renewed pardon of sin, and daily removing of sin
from the penitent believer, does flow from the Lords adopting of believers to
be his children, as the similitude taken from a father does show unto us* 2.
The love which nature teaches a father to bear toward his obedient child, is
but a shadow of the love of God to believers: Like as a father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. 3. As none of the Lotds
children want their own infirmities, short comings in duties, and fallings into
transgressions; so all of them are looked on by God, in as tender pity as ever
father did show to children: Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord
pitieth them that fear him. Understand this of such as do esteem their sinful
inclination, their greatest misery.

Ver. 14. For he knows our frame; he remembers that we are dust. The
fifteenth reason of Gods praise, is his discretion in moderating his dealing
with us, so as our weakness may bear; and this reason serves to clear and
confirm the former. Whence learn, 1. There is no more strength in man of
himself, then there is in the matter he was made of; We are but dust. 2. The
Lord knows our weakness perfectly, and what we are able ^o endure: He
knows our frame, what stuff we are made of, and how frail our natural
constitution is. 3. It is not for our worthiness in us, that God deals
gently with us, but out of his own goodness, free-love and pity; He pitieth
them that fear him; for he knows our frame.

Ver. 15. As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he
flourishes.

16. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall
know it no more.

17. But the mercy of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting upon them
that fear him: and his righteousness unto childrens children:

18. To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments
to do them.

The sixteenth reason of Gods praise is, for his everlasting mercy, and
constant fidelity in performing whatsoever he has promised to every sincere
believer. Whence learn, 1. All the glory of man in his naturals, when he is
adorned at the best, with learning, wisdom, beauty, strength, riches, honor,
and whatsoever other ornaments he can have, is but like the glory of grass and
flowers, which are very tender and subject to many hazards, and eas^ly broken
down or blasted; and albeit no harm should come to them from without, yet of
themselves they endure but a very short season, and then do fade away: As for
man, his days are as grass, as a flower of the field so he flourishes, for
the wind passes over it, and it is gone, etc. 2. Humane infirmities and
mortality, serve indeed to humble a man, but do not hinder the humbled man to
come and receive of God complete mercy, that is, pardon of sins, supply of
all wants, and life everlasting: Man's days are as the flower* the wind goes
over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more, but the
mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting. 3. The true believer and
heir of the promises, is he, who in his greatest confidence in Gods
everlasting mercy, does stand in awe to offend God; The mercy of the Lord is
upon them that fear him. 4. As mercy is decreed and prepared before the
beginning of the world, for the believer who fears God; so is it let forth in
actual application unto him in this life, and for evermore after this life is
gone; The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting to them that
fear him. 5. Such as out of love to God are loath to offend him; and out of
faith in Gods mercy study to please him, shall have justice to be their friend,
to themselves and to their children who follow their footsteps, from one
generation to another, the Lords righteousness shall be for them, and not
against them; all that is promised to the Saints, shall be done to them, and
for them: His righteousness shall be unto his childrens children. 6. As God
has given the offer of his grace by Covenant, for reconciliation of enemies;
so has he given his Law and Commandments for a rule, to lead the reconciled
man unto salvation, and he only is the heir of the promise of everlasting
mercy and righteousness, who studieth to prove the sincerity of his faith, by
his endeavoring of obedience: For the promise here is made to such as keep his
Covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do them.

Ver. 19. The LORD has prepared his throne in the heavens: and his Kingdom
rules over all. The last reason of Gods praise, is his universal dominion over
all the creatures, whereby a strong obligation is put upon Angels and men to
glorify him. Whence learn, 1. What God does give unto Believers, he is able to
preserve unto them; what he promises, he is able to perform unto them;
whatsoever power in earth or in hell be against them, he is able to defend his
Church and every Member of it: The Lord has prepared his throne in beaven. 2.
Whatsoever praise we owe to God for benefits, which we have received from him,
fewer or more, greater or lesser; we must remember to praise him also for his
glorious and great Majesty, and transcendent excellency over all the creatures:
He has established his throne in heaven, and his dominion is over all. 3.
Whatsoever confusions do appear on earth; whatsoever re^^lutions do fall in
Church or State; whatsoever hardship Gods children do meet with, God guides
the whole business very orderly and well, and performs all his own good
pleasure: His Kingdom rules over all.

Ver. 20. Bless the LORD, ye his Angels that excel in strength, that do his
commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.

21. Bless ye the LORD, all ye his hosts: ye ministers of his that do his
pleasure.

22. Bless the LORD, all his works in all places of his dominion: bless the
LORD, O my soul.

In the last three verses, he inviteth Angels and men and all creatures to
join with his soul in prai^^ng God: True it is, that the Angels need not to be
exhorted to bless God, and many of the Lords hosts and works are not capable
of our exhortation; yet this form of speech signifies, that all of them in
their own kind, and materially at least, do show forth the blessedness of
God; and that if they were all endued with reason, able and fitted formally,
expressly, and directly to glorify God, they were all too few for the work, and
could not either severally, or jointly glorify the Lord, as his deserving is.
Whence learn, 1. The weight of the ^ffering of praise unto God, is too heavy
for men to lift; and as for Angels, it will take up all their strength, and
their best abilities to go about it: Bless the Lord, ye his Angels that excel
in strength. 2. It is the commendation of Angels, that they obey all Gods
commands readily, and we should follow their example, and aim at their
perfection in service; that the will of God may be done on Earth, as it is in
Heaven: For they do his Commandments, hearkening to the voice of his word. 3.
All the several ranks of creatures, are so many mustered hosts, ready to
execute Gods judgments, as they are directed; and are always in their kind
setting forth on all hands, the glory and goodness of God: Bless the Lord,
all ye his hosts. 4. The family of Believers, the servants of the Lord, who
know his will, and study to do it; and in special, his Ministers in the
Church, servants in State, Pastors and Teachers of Gods people, have in a
special obligation lying on them to bless the Lord, who has entrusted them in
his service, and made them do his will: Bless the Lord, ye Ministers of his
that do his pleasure. 5. There is none of Gods works in any part of the world;
nothing which his hands has made, how base and mean soever it may seem, which
does not contribute matter unto the song of Gods praise, and furnish reasons to
glorify and bless the Maker: Bless ye the Lord, all his works, in all places
of his dominion. 6. When the Believer looks on all the creatures in their own
kind, as contributers unto the glorifying of God, he shall find his own
particular obligation for special mercies bestowed upon himself, calling for
particular praise and thanks at his hands; as David does here, who when he has
set all the creatures on work to bless God, concludes thus: Bless the Lord,
O my soul.

PSALM CIV.
AS in the former Psalm, the Prophet stirred up himself, and all others to
glorify God, specially for the works of grace; so here he stirs up himself,
and others to glorify God, specially for the works of creation, and
providence: And in the first place he shows the scope of all the Psalm, v.
1. In the second place he brings arguments for pressing the duty of praising
God, from the first days work of creation, to wit, the light; And from the
second days work in spreading forth the Heavens, v. 2, 3, 4. And from the 3d.
days work of bringing forth the Earth, the Sea, the Floods, and Plants, for the
use of Man and Beast, which were the work of the sixth day, v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And from the works of the fourth day, Sun
and Moon, v. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And from the works of the fifth day,
Fishes, greater and smaller, v. 25, 26, In the third place, he brings
arguments of Gods praise, from the preservation, specially of living creatures,
v. 27, 28, 29, 30. In the fourth place is the conclusion of the Psalm, with
some further reasons for praising of GOD, v. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.

Ver. 1. Bless the LORD, O my soul, O LORD my God, thou art very great: thou
art clothed with honor and majesty. Here is the scope of the whole Psalm,
wherein he stirs up his own soul, and by his own example, all others that
have ears to hear, to glorify our God for his greatness and Majesty,
manifested in his works of Creation and Providence. Whence learn, 1. The Lord
is to be praised by his children; not only for his benefits bestowed upon them,
but also for his own glorious Majesty and greatness; not only is he to be
praised for the works of Redemption and Grace to his Elect children, but also
for the works of Creation, and what he has bestowed upon the creatures, as
this Psalm compared with the former does teach us. 2. Because men have
oft-times the words of praise in their mouth, and do care little to have their
affection suitable to the work in their heart; therefore when we go about to
praise God we should stir up our spirits unto a Religious disposition, as David
does here, saying: Bless the Lord, O my soul. 3. When we go about the work of
^ods praise, we should consider his Majesty, how great he is, and worthy to be
praised: O LORD, thou art very great. 4. Then is the heart best fitted for Gods
praises, when the soul that is about the work of praise, does apprehend its
interest in God, and looks upon him as reconciled, and in Covenant with it
self: O Lord my God, thou art very great. 5. The praises of God do not depend
upon tbe man that praises him, but are fixed in God, and flow forth from
himself so clearly, that none can be excused of ingratitude, who do not
acknowledge his glory: Thou art clothed with honor and Majesty. Albeit God be
invisible, and unsearchable; yet his honor and Majesty may be seen in his
works, which are as a garment, both to hide him in one respect, and hold him
forth in another to be seen: Thou art clothed with honor and Majesty.

Verse. 2. Who coverest thy self with light, as with a garment: who stretchest
out the heavens like a curtain.

3. Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes the clouds
his charet, who walks upon the wings of the wind.

4. Who makes his Angels spirits: his ministers a flaming fire.

In the second place are set down the Arguments for praising of God, taken from
the works of creation, such as were wrought the first and second day, whereof
only so much is spoken, as may lead us unto what is said more thereof, in the
History written by Moses. Whence learn, 1. The works of creation, besides
their natural use, do serve for spiritual uses also; to wit, to furnish unto us
the knowledge of God, to edify us in faith, and stir us up to glorify the
Maker, as here does appear. 2. Among all the sensible creatures of God, the
creation of the light has the first place, for manifestation of his glory;
whether we look unto the brightness and admirable purity of it, which cannot
be polluted by any filthiness whereupon it shines; or the use it has in
operation upon, and setting forth of the beauty of the r^st of the creatures,
therefore he begins at it here. 3. Our thoughts of God should be higher,
larger more purified from bodily apprehensions and all imperfections, then our
thoughts of created light are, when we look upon the light i^^u^inated all the
world at once; For as the garment of a King shows his Majesty, and yet is no
part of his substance or essence, and in its nature is much inferior to his
worth, so is the light nothing but Gods creature, serving to show forth his
glory, and is infinitely inferior unto him: Who covers himself with light, as
a garment. 4. As light filling the world, is nothing but as the garment of the
glorious Creator, manifesting himself wirhin the compass of the world to his
creatures; so the Heavens in their largest circle, are but the Canopy cast
about the seat of a King: for he stretches out the heavens like a curtain. 5.
This world is like a stately house, which is divided in upper or lower rooms,
by joysts, beams and plankes, pu^ between the lower rooms and the higher; and
the firmament sustaining the clouds, is the first division: Who lays the
beams of his chambers in the waters: Or in the second region of the air,
where the waters in the clouds are gathered, and stored up as it were in their
distinct chambers, for the several uset which God has for them. 6. As the
glory of Kings is to be seen when they go i^ Coaches; and their train is
following them, or when they ride on h^^^e-back with their followers attending
the^; so is the glory of the Lord seen, when he makes the weighty clouds,
having in them fl^uds of water, to move from place to place, as charets ab^ve
our heads, and not fall down at once: He m^keth ehe clouds his chariot. 7. The
swift and unperceivable motion of the winds, being raised by God, from all
parts in all places of the world, does serve as a shadow to point out the
everywhere-presence of God; Who walks upon the wings of the wind. 8. The
Angels are the Lords creatures, and do serve him at his pleasure, as the winds
and flaming fire do, swiftly going where he commands them, and in the fervor
of their love to him, dispatching every business committed to them: Who makes
his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire. 9. Great and glorious
must our Lord Jesus be, who is the Creator and Lord of Angels: And makes his
Angels spirits.

Ver. 5. Who laid the foundations of the earth that it should not be removed
for ever.

6. Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood above
the mountains.

7. At thy rebuke they fled: at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.

8. They go up by the mountains: they go down by the valleys, unto the place
which thou have founded for them.

9. Thou have set a bound that they may not pass over: that they turn not
again to cover the earth.

From this to the 19th. ver. he describes the third days work of the
Creation, prepared for the use of man and beast, which were the sixth days
work. The preparation of the dwelling house of man and beast, and other living
creatures above the earth, is set down in these five Verses. Whence learn, 1.
The settling of the earth in a like distance on all hands from the circle of
heaven, compassing it round about, and hanging of the earth in the midst of the
globe, and fixing it by his sole command, where it is now fixed, declares the
unsearchable power of God, and glory of his workmanship: He laid the
foundations of the earth, that it should not be moved for ever. 2. The natural
place of the Element of water, is to be above all ^he earth on ^ll parts round
about: He covers the earth with the depth as a garment, and the waters stood
above the mountains. 3. That a dwelling house might be sitted and prepared for
man not as yet created, the Lord by his powerful command, made the waters go
off so much of the earth as might serve for man's use; and straightway, as if
the waters had been driven and chased, they did run away hastily from off the
bounds allotted unto them, as it were terrified at the thundering, imperious
and effectual command of God: At thy rebuke they fled; at the vo ce of thy
thunder they hasted away. 4 If a man had been present when God commanded the
Seas to retreat from the Earth, he might have seen both a terrible and a joyful
spectacle of a wonderful hasty chase and flight of the waters running fiercely
over the mountains; and when no more mountains were in their way, glyding
down through the valleys into the place wherein they are now: They go up by the
mountains, they go down by the valleys, unto the place which thou have founded
for them. 5. The waters of the Sea, albeit they be higher then the Earth, yet
are they bounded in the place wherein they are, that without command given to
them from God, they may not pass over the bounds prescribed unto them, but do
stay within the Sea-mark, and there lay down their proud boasting waves: Thou
have set a bound that they may not pass over, that they turn not again to
cover the earth: Which they would infallibly do by their own natural motion, if
this miraculous standing command were not constantly in force, as was to be
seen in the flood of Noah, when the boundaries were loosed for a year, till God
did execute vengeance on the wicked world, and thereafter they were sent back
never to come again for such an universal judgment.

Ver. 10. He sends the springs into the valleys which run among the hills.

11. They give drink to every beast of the field: the asses quench their thirst.

12 By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing
among the branches.

13. He waters the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the
fruit of thy works.

14. He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of
man, that he may bring forth food out of the earth:

15. And wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to
shine, and bread which strengthens man's heart.

16. The trees of the LORD are full of sap: the Cedars of Lebanon, which he
has planted.

17. Where the birds make their nests: as for the Storke, the Fir-trees are her
house.

18. The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and the rocks for the
Conies.

Thus the ground of man's habitation is swept; now here it is replenished, and
furnished with all necessaries serving for man's use, and to fowls and beasts
for man's sake. Whence learn, 1. Because the use of fresh waters was necessary
for man, and necessary it was that man should have it nigh hand unto him; for
the more commodious use, the Lord broke up wells of water in several places,
and made brooks and waters, and rivers and floods, like veins in a man's body,
to carry from them water along to all habitable places of the earth, where God
had appointed men to dwell: He sends the springs into the valleys, which run
among the hills. 2. Not only where men do dwell, but also where men's ordinary
resort is not, the Lord has set drinking vessels full of water, for the use of
traveling men and other creatures, appointed to attend man, and some way to
serve his use: He sends the springs into the valleys, which run among the
hills. 3. For the furnishing of man's house on earth, God has pruvided him with
parks for beasts to feed in, and trees for fowls and birds to live in, and
ponds for fishes, as we will hear afterward; and these beasts and fowls, and
singing birds, have their drinking vessels set for them: They give drink to
every beast of the field, the wild asses quen^h their thirst. 4. The Lord has
adorned the habitation of man, with trees growing beside the waters; not only
for his own proper use, but also for the use of fowls and singing birds: By
them shall the fowls of heaven have their habitat^on, which sing among the
branches. 5. Where wells and rivers are not, as in hills and high places it is
seen for the most part; there the Lord supplieth the inlack of waters, by rain
from the clouds: He waters the hills from his chambers, that is, from the
clouds, wherein as in chambers he has stored up great waters. 6. The Lord does
not dissolve the clouds all at once, but by little and little makes them
distill smaller or greater drops only: He waters the hills from his chambers.
7. There is no part of the earth, whereupon God bestows not so much of the
fruit of his operation, as may fill it full of his glory: The earth is
satisfied with the fruit of thy works. 8. The grass and herbs, and the diverse
sorts of them, serving for the use of beasts and men, are worthy of a room in
our meditation of Gods provident care for man and beast: He causes the grass
to grow for the cattle, and herbs for the service of man, that he may bring
forth food out of the earth. 9. The Lords allowance upon man is very large, not
only for necessity, but also for delectation: For he has provided wine, and
oil, and bread. 10. The right use of Gods creatures is not to surfeit, and
bury the memory of God and of the excellency of man above beasts, in
gluttony and drunkenness; but to give him strength and gladness in such a
measure, as may encourage him cheerfully to serve his Maker; And wine that
makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and brcad
which strengthens man's heart. 11. God will have his excellency taken notice
o^ in every thing, which is great, notable, excellent: upon which ground, great
trees are called here, The trees of the Lord. 12. The Lord has furnished
trees, not only with so much sap as might make them grow; but also with so much
sap, as might serve man for meat and drink, and medicine, and other uses: The
trees of the Lord are full of sap. 13. Among the trees the Lord will have us
take notice of the Cedars, as of a special plant of his husbandry on the
earth, for their height and greatness, and durablenesse of the timber, and
namely of those of Lebanon, designed for the use of his people: of which he
says, The Cedars of Lebanon which he has planted. 14. It is worthy of our
marking, that fot the nests of birds, he has provided high trees, where they
might breed and lodge, and bring forth their young more safely and securely:
Where the birds make their nests: as for the Storke, the Firre-trees are her
house. 15. It is worthy of our observation for glorifying of God, that God has
taught weak creatures, naturally to draw themselves to strong defenses; and
sundry sorts of them, to have their several sorts of refuge: The high hills
are a refuge for the wild goats, and the rocks for the Conies.

Ver. 19. He appointed the Moon for seasons: the Sun knows his going down.

20. Thou make darkness and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the
forest do creep forth.

21. The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.

22. The Sun arises, they gather themselves together: and lay them down in
their dens.

23. Man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor, until the evening.

24. O LORD, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all;
the earth is full of thy riches.

Here he brings arguments of praise from the works of Creation on the fourth
day, and shows the uses thereof: Whence learn, 1. The mind of man is not
able to overtake all Gods works at once, whether in their number or order, or
properties, or uses, as the Prophets pitching upon some of them only, does
teach us. 2. The making of two great lights, the Sun and the Moon, is worthy
of our special observation; for by them the glory of the rest of the works, is
much manifested: He appointed the Moon for seasons, etc. 3. The making of two
lights to move about the earth, the one to supply in a sort the others absence,
is a reason of Gods praise: He made the Moon and the Sun. 4. The dividing of
time into nights and days, and sundry seasons that the continuance thereof
might not be i^ksome unto man; but the more acceptable by their interchanges
and vicissi^udes, is a reason for magnifying Gods wisdom and goodness to man:
He appointed the Moon for seasons, the Sun knows his going down. 5. The Lord
has so wise^y mixed the motion of the Sun and Moon, that a sweeter temper is
not imaginable: for if their motion had been the same, and they did move near
together, then the use of the Moon had been the less; if the Moon had been
always punctually opposite to the Sun, then she should have been in a
perpetual eclipse; if the course of the Sun had not been complete once a year,
and the course of the Moon once every month, the earth could not have had so
great service of both: But God has appointed the Moon for seasons, and the Sun
knows his going down; each of them exactly keeping their course as God has
ordained. 6. As Gods wisdom and goodness is to be seen in the Light, so also
in the vicissitude of Darkness between day and day; For Darkness intervening
between days, makes Light every day a new gift, and Darkness calls man
from his labor and travel unto r^st, that he may be refreshed therewith, and
with sleep: Thou make darkness, and it is night 7 It is a remarkable
providence, that ravenous beasts, for the most part are kept in their dens
all day, and not let loose for seeking their prey, till night, wherein all the
beasts of the forest creep forth. 8. None of the ravenous beasts find their
prey, till God bring it unto them: For the young Lions, for hunger, roar^ after
their prey. 9. The natural cries of the distressed creatures, are in substance
natures prayer to its Maker for relief and help: The young Lions by their
roaring, seek their meat from God. 10. It is a matter of praise to God, that
the daylight is made a natural terror to cruel beasts* or that any measure of
being feared by man is left in them: The Sun arises, they gather themselves
together, and lay them down in their dens. 11. It is the Lords praise that he
gives daily new use of the light of the Sun to man, that he may follow his
work and business the better, till the evening, and suffers it to remain
only so long a time, as weak bodies may endure moderate travel: Man goes
forth to his work, and labor until the evening. 12. The more men do meditate
on Gods works, the more do they find a bottomless deep; and the number and
variety of them, more and more unsearchable: O Lord how manifold are thy works!
13. Thus much may be learned of Gods works, that they are all of them
excellently well, and wisely wrought and ordered; and that the riches of Gods
bounty to man and to the creatures, does fill all the earth In wisdom have
thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches.

Ver. 25. So is this great and wide Sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable: both small and great.

26. There go the ships: there is that Leviathan, whom thou have made to play
therein.

He comes now to the works of the fifth day, specially the furnishing of the
Sea as a fish pond for man's use; and making it portable for ships to sail in.
Whence learn, 1. The greatness and wideness of the Sea, the ebbing and flowing
thereof, the motion and saltness of it to keep it from rotting, do speak of
the glory of God, no less then the ornament and rich furniture of the earth
does. For, as the earth is full of riches, so is this great and wide Sea 2. The
diversity and number of great and small fishes in the Sea, speak much of Gods
power, wisdom and bounty: wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small
and great fishes. 3. The making of the Seas for the use of Navigation, that men
who cannot flee nor swim, might the more commodiously keep commerce one with
another in all parts of the world, is a point of Gods praise; There go the
ships. 4 Albeit all and every one of Gods works do set forth Gods power, yet
some of them do it more eminently then other some, for making men see Gods
glory the more in the rest, yea* and in the meanest of his works; Such for
example are the Elephant on earth, and the Whale, and other huge great monsters
in the Sea: That Leviathan whom thou have made to play therein.

Ver. 27. These wait all upon thee, that thou may give them their meat in
due season.

28. That thou give them, they gather: thou openest thine hand: they are
filled with good,

29. Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled, thou take away their breath,
they die: and return to their dust.

30. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the
face of the earth.

In the third place, he brings forth arguments of Gods praise, from the care
the Lord has of the preservation of his works, which most appears in the
feeding of all living creatures, and propagation of the kind; for when some of
the kind are dying from time to time, others are quickened and put in their
room. Whence learn, 1. There is a natural instinct in all the living creatures
in their want, to wait on Gods providence, which men may observe in them;
although the brute creatures know not this, and cannot reflect upon their own
inclinations: For the Psalmist speaking of all living creatures, no less then
of the fishes, he says; These all wait on thee, that thou may give them
their meat. 2 So long as God will have any creature to live, he provideth
timously enough for its food: They wait for thee, that thou may give them
their meat in due season. 3. Gods providence reaches to the least bit of food,
which any living creature meets with: That thou give them, they gather. 4
The Lord is liberal in his dispensation, and feed h^ all the creatures
abundantly, so long as he will have them to live: Thou openest thy hand, they
are filled with good. 5. The Lord demonstrates himself to be the fountain of
life, and that the living creatures do hold their life of him, as well by the
sickening and weakening of the living creatures, as by the feeding and
strengthening of them: For when God withdraws in any measure the wonted
influence of his power from them, then they find a change to the worse: Thou
hidest thy face from them, they are troubled. 6. God has no less special hand
in ^emoving life, then in giving of it: Thou take away their breath, they
die, and return to their dust. 7. Albeit the Lord take away the life of all
individual living creatures, yet he preserves the species and kind of every
liling creature, by making new ones, and raising them up in the room of those
that are taken away: Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are created. 8. The
same Spirit which created the world in the beginning, works yet powerfully in
forming new creatures continually: Thou sendest out thy Spirit; they are
created. 9. The Lord puts a new face as it were upon the earth, from time to
time, partly by Springtime and Summer every year; partly by young living
creatures, in their several generations, one after another, and all these
things do contribute to his renewed praise: Thou renewest the face of the earth.

Ver. 31. The glory of the LORD shall endure for ever: the LORD shall rejoice
in his works.

32. He looks on the earth, and it trembles: he touches the hills, and they
smoke,

In the last place is the conclusion wherein he adds yet more reasons for
praising of God, and then makes sundry uses of the former Doctrine. He takes
up all that he would say, in this; That God shall have perpetual glory from the
works of his goodness and power. Whence learn, 1. The end of all the
workmanship of God, is Gods glory, and he is worthy of glory for his work, and
shall not want his glory from his works for ever: The glory of the Lord shall
endure for ever. 2. As the Lord saw all his work in the beginning to be good;
so in the closing thereof, he shall see all that he has done, to be good, and
nothing properly to be repented of, whatsoever he has done: The Lord shall
rejoice in his works. 3. As the Lord is bountiful to his creatures: so also is
he terrible to the strongest of them, that he may be feared, as well as loved
and praised: He looks on the earth, and it trembles; he touches the hills,
and they smoke* 4. The signs of his terrible power which he has actually
manifested, in shaking of the earth, and kindling of the mountains, do bear
witness how powerful and terrible the Lord is: He looks on the earth, and it
trembles; he touches the hills, and they smoke.

Ver. 33. I will sing unto the LORD as long as I live: I will sing praise to my
God: while I have my being.

34. My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the LORD*

35. Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no
more: bless thou the LORD, O my soul: Praise ye the LORD.

Here he sets down the uses of this Doctrine, which are five, teaching us so
many Doctrines: For the first use, here he binds upon himself an obligation,
joyfully to praise God for ever, teaching us to do the same, when we consider
the Lords works: I will sing unto the Lord so long as I live, I will sing
praise to my God while I have any being. 2. For the second use of this
Doctrine, he promises to himself joy and gladness, in the discharge of the
work of Gods praise; which teaches us how profitable it is to our selves to
praise God: Nothing more sweet to a Believer, then to be about the glorifying
of God, and beholding the matter of his praise, My meditation of him shall be
sweet, I will be glad in the Lord. 3. For the third use, he denounces wrath
and destruction unto the contemners of God, who do not regard his glory, but do
stand out as common enemies of God, and of all his workmanship; which teaches
us, that such as do not j^yne with Gods children in glorifying of God, but go
on in transgressing of his commands, and abusing of his creatures, shall be
separated from the society of Gods servants; unto which judgment every
Believer must subscribe, as very righteous: Let the sinners be consumed out of
the earth, and let the wicked be no more. 4. For the fourth use, he stirs up
himself to bless the Lord for his own particular, who had found favor to be
no more of the numbe^ of Gods enemies, but among the Lords servants, whereby he
teaches those whom God has called from the state of sin unto his holy service,
to stir up themselves to thanksgiving: Bless thou the Lord, O my soul. 5. For
the fifth use, he calls upon all other Believers, and exhorts them to
praise God, and teaches us, that every one according to their place, should
stir up another unto the honoring of God: Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM CV.
THe first part of this Psalm was sung at the carrying up of the Ark of God to
the City of David, 1 Chronicles. 16.8. The whole contains an exhortation to the
Church of Israel, to praise God for his mercies shown toward them, with
reasons serving to press the duty. The exhortation is set down, ver. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. The reasons are more particularly expressed in the rest of the Psalm:
the first rank whereof is taken from the Lords covenanting with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and the care which the Lord had of their persons, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. The second rank is taken from the care the Lord had of
their posterity, when he sent them down to Egypt, and all the while they were
there, ver. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. The third rank is taken from
the manner of their delivery out of Egypt, when they were oppressed, and from
the plaguing of the Egyptians for their sake, ver. 26, 27, 28, to 37. The
fourth rank is taken from the Lords care in leading them through the
wilderness, from, ver. 37, to 43. and the last rank of reasons is taken from
the Lords placing of them in Canaan, where they might serve God according to
his law, ver. 44, 45.

Ver. 1. O Give thanks unto the LORD, call upon his Name: make known his deeds
among the people. The Prophets exhortation unto thankfulness, is branched
forth in ten particulars, whereof three are in this verse set down in order.
Whence learn, 1. As in the matter of glorifying of God, there are several
motives, so should there be several considerations of these motives, and acts
of praising the Lord conform thereto, and namely in relation to benefits
received, the gifts should be acknowledged and confessed to his praise; O give
thanks unto the Lord. 2. In relation to benefits to be received, or to evils to
be removed, prayer to God is a part of praise: Call upon his Name. 3. It is a
part of true thankfulness unto God, to make the world know what God has done
to and for his Church; Make known his deeds among the people.

Verse. 2. Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous
works. The fourth, fifth and sixth branches of the exhottation unto
thanksgiving, are set down in this verse: Wherein learn, 1. The Lord requires
as a part of his praise, and of our thankfulness, that we rejoice in him, and
express our joy by singing; Sing unto him. 2. It is not sufficient to offer
the empty vessel of our joy unto God, or our singing voice in musical tune
only, but also it is required that we fill our joyful voice with holy matter
and good purpose, whereby God only may be reasonably praised: Sing Psalms unto
him. 3. Albeit we have nothing to speak of Gods wonderful works, but what is
known to any neighbor as well as to our selves, yet it is a part of Gods
praise, and of our thankfulness to make his known works the matter of our talk
and ordinary conference, as we get occasion; Talk ye of all his wondrous works.

Ver. 3. Glory ye in his Name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the
LORD. The seventh and eighth branch of the exhortation, is set down in this
verse; Wherein learn, 1. It is a part of Gods praise, and of our thankfulness
to him, to make our boast of God, and rejoice because of our interest in him;
and to proclaim our selves blessed, because of our communion with him; Glory ye
in his holy Name. 2. Our gloriation in God should be holy, joined with a low
estimation of our selves, and with great reverence toward our most holy God;
Glory ye in his holy Name. 3. It is a part of Gods praise and of our
thankfulness, to profess our need of God, and in the conscience of our
emptiness, and his unsearchable riches, to seek our supply in him; for here
the seeking of God is recommended unto us. 4. As seeking communion with God is
a mark of a child of God, so it is also a reason of gladness and joy, because
it both declares that we are of the number of Converts and true worshippers of
God, and also that joy is reserved for us; Let the heart of them rejoice that
seek thee.

Ver. 4. Seek ye the LORD and his strength: seek his face evermore. The ninth
branch of the exhortation is here set down, directing the people where and how,
and for what cause to seek God, to wit, in his own Ordinances before the Arc,
which was the figure of Christ to be incarnate, and is called here the Lords
strength, because it was a pledge of Gods powerful presence with them, who come
unto God through Christ ^ as also it is called Gods face, because God is
reconciled and favorable to all that seek him in Christ, who was signified by
the Arc and me^cy-seat. When^e learn, 1. It is not unusual for the Scripture,
to give the name of the thing signified unto the sign appointed of God, to
represent or shadow it forth, because of the judicial union of the sign and
thing signified and exhibited unto the believer, by the appointment and
institution of God, the supreme Judge and Lawgiver: so here the Ark of the
Conanr is called the Lord, and the Lords strength, and the Lords face, because
the believer, seeking God according to his Ordinance, did meet by faith with
the Lord, and his strength, and face or good will engaged unto the true
worshipper. 2. Whenever the believer makes use of holy signs of Gods
presence, it is not the sign, but God or Christ signified by the sign, which
the believer does fix his heart upon; as here, he that looked toward the Ark,
which was the sign of God in Christ, reconciling himself to the world, not
imputing their trespasses unto them, is commanded to seek the thing signified:
Seek the Lord, seek his strength, seek his face. 3. None do seek the Lord so
earnestly, but they have need of stirring up to seek him more earnestly,
neither have any attained to such a measure of communion with God, but they
have need to seek for a further measure: therefore is it said, Seek the Lord,
seek his strength, seek his face evermore.

Ver. 5. Remember his mavelous works that he has done: his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth.

6. O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen.

The tenth branch of the exhortation directed, together with all the former
branches toward the seed of Abraham. Whence learn, 4. It is a part of Gods
praise and of our thankfulness, to entertain the memory of the Lord, and of
his works and words; Remember his mavelous works which he has done. 2. The
remembrance of the Lords wonderful works, and gracious words, is to be joined
with seeking of his face, as a special help of us unto this duty, as the
conjunction of the parts of the exhortation does teach us. 3. The words of God
in holy Scripture, whether Law or Gospel, are to be looked upon as decrees,
given forth by the great Judge of the world, whereupon certain execution is to
follow according as it is foretold; Remember, (says he) the judgments of his
mouth. 4. It is wisdom to join the remembrance of the Lords works and words,
and to compare the one with the other, that we may the better conceiv of both,
and discern both the words and the w^rks to be the Lords works and words:
Remember, (says he) his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth. 5. Because
we are dull in apprehending of Gods ordinary working, he works sometimes
marvels and wonders, that by them we may the better take up his power in his
ordinary works; and therefore for this end, so much the more should the wonders
be remembered; Remember his mavelous works which he has done, and h^s
wonders. 6. The praise of God which is called for at the Churches h^nd, is
expected only of believers, the spiritual children of Abraham's and Jacobs faith
and obedience: O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his
chosen. 7. As the consideration of Gods grace, bestowing spiritual privileges
on us, does oblige us unto praising and serving God: so also it serves to stir
us up to the duty; for therefore are the faithful called, The seed of Abraham
his servant, the children of Jacob his chosen.

Verse. 7. He is the LORD our God: his judgments are in all the earth.

8. He has remembered his Covenant for ever: the word which he commanded to a
thousand generations.

9. Which Covenant he made with Abraham, and his Oath unto Isaac:

10. And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law: and to Israel for an
everlasting Covenant.

11. Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your
inheritance.

In the first rank of reasons taken from the Lords Covenant with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and from his care of their persons; Learn, 1. Our privilege to be
in Covenant with God, is a special reason of thanks and praise to him, He is
the Lord our God. 2. The Lords sovereignty without the Church, in all Nations
of the world, and in his exercising of justice among all men, as it is the
Lords praise and the Churches profit: so it is the Churches obligation unto the
thankful acknowledging thereof; for the greatness of Gods dominion over all
the earth, does commend the speciality of his respect to his Church; His
judgments are in all the earth. 3. As the Covenant of God is not for a day, or
for temporal favors only, but also and especially for spiritual and
everlasting mercies: so the Lord forgets neither less nor more of that
which he has promised, but albeit long time may intervene before the
performance of his promise, yet nevertheless he remembereth it still, till it
be fulfilled; He has remembered his Covenant for ever. 4 The experience of
every age and proof had of Gods faithfulness, should force men in every age, to
bear witness unto the Lords steadfastness in his Covenant; He has remembered
his Covenant for ever, the word which he has commanded to a thousand
generations. 5. The word which the Lord has said he will do, in special his
promises shall certainly take effect in due time, and order given by
Magistrates for executing of their decrees, is but a shadow of the effectual
accomplishment of Gods promises* which are called here, A word which he
commanded to a thousand generations. 6. Gods Covenant made with our fathers in
our name, is to be laid hold on by us their children, as the example of the
Israelites here does teach us; Which Covenant he made with Abraham. 7. For
further engaging and confirming the children of Covenanters, there is need to
repeat and apply the Covenant unto their children and posterity; For he gave
his Oath unto Isaac, and confirmed the same unto Jacob. 8. The Covenant of
grace is an everlasting Covenan^ with all who do embrace it; for, the Covenant
made with Abraham was an Oath unto Isaac. 9. It is not free for the children of
Covenanters, to embrace or reject, as they please, the Covenant of God made
with their fathers, because the Lord imposed the Covenant upon the posterity,
as a duty whereunto they were obliged from generation to generation: For he
confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law; and to Israel for an everlasting
Covenant. 10. The Covenant of grace made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
with believers after them, did consist in promises made by God, and embraced of
them by faith, as here it is described; for the everlasting Covenant is
expounded to be the Lords, saying: Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan,
the lot of thy inheritance; which promise being received by faith, became a
Covenant with the believer. 11. The everlasting Covenant of grace, propounded
in whatsoever expressions, was one and the same in substance unto the
believers: for these promises, to wit, ( In thee shall all the families of the
earth be blessed, Genesis 12.3. and again, Tell the stars, so shall thy seed be,
which promise Abraham receiving, believed in the Lord, and he counted it unto
him for righteousness, Genesis 15.6. And I will be a God unto thee, and to thy
seed after thee, Genesis 17.7. or, I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after
thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an
everlasting possession, and I will be their God, Genesis 17.8. whereunto this
place does relate) are all taken up here in the free and gracious promise, of
giving everlasting life to the believers, shadowed forth in the typical terms
of giving the land of Canaan for the lot of their in^eritance.

Ver. 12. When they were but a few men in number: yea, very few, and strangers
in it.

13. When they went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another
people.

14. He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved Kings for their
sakes:

15. Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm

In the care which God had of the persons of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who were
in Covenant with him; Learn, 1. They who are in Covenant with God, may be
found at sometimes but a small number; They were but a few men in number: yea,
very few 2. They who are in Covenant with Go^ for a promised blessing, may be
far from appearance of the possible possession of what is promised, as Abraham*
Isaac and Jacob were a very few men, and strangers in the land of promise. 3.
As the paucity, meanness, low condition, unworthiness and weakness of men,
does not hinder God to enter into Covenant with them, but rather by this
means, he commends the freedom and riches of his grace unto them; so is it
requisite in them who enter into Covenant with God, that they be stripped bare
of all conceit of both their own and their fathers worthiness, and yet not be
hindered thereby, from believing, embracing, and holding fast the Covenant; for
this did Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, when they were very few, and strangers in
the land promised unto them. 4. They who have the promises both of this life
and the life to come, may be pilgrims and sojourners without any dwelling place
in the world; The Patriarchs went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom
to another people. 5. In whatsoever worldly condition believers are, and
whatsoever they want in things earthly, yet they want not the love and good
will of God, they have always the defense and protection of God, as his
federates; He suffered no man to do them wrong. 6. No power or place how high
soever, no worldly authority on earth, no law nor privilege of any person or
Kingdom, is a sufficient plea for troubling Gods servants, walking in his
service; He reproved King^ for their sakes. 8. The person of every believer
walking in Gods way, is sacred, sanctified, and set apart for Gods peculiar;
They are the Lords anointed. 9. They who both by Covenant and special calling
to the holy Ministry have charge to declare the Lords will unto the world, are
owned of God as his Prophets, and are fenced with a strict caveat given to all
men by God, how great soever, that they harm them not; Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And upon all these aforesaid
considerations, God is to be thanked and praised by his people.

Verse. 16. Moreover, he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole
staff of bread.

17. He sent a man before them: even Joseph, who was sold for a servant.

18. Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron.

19. Until the time that his Word came: the Word of the LORD tried him.

20. The King sent and loosed him, even the ruler of his people, and let him go
free.

21. He made him Lord of his house; and ruler of all his substance:

22. To bind his Princes at his pleasure: and teach ^is Senators wisdom.

In the second rank of reasons of Gods praise, taken from the care the Lord had
of the posterity of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in bringing them into Egypt, and
preserving of them there; Learn, 1. Every plague, and in special famine, is a
servant of God, ready at a call to come forth, and execute his judgment*
Moreover, he called for a famine on the land. 2. No food can be had, except God
do furnish it, and no food when it is given can feed, except God give a
powerful blessing with it; when that is removed bread feeds not: He brake the
whole staff of bread. 3. The way of the Lords performing of his Covenant, is
not such as carnal reason would prescribe, by giving probable means of
bringing it to pass, but the way he chooses is such as may try the faith of
his children, to wit, by seeming to do the contrary; As here the Patriarchs
having the promise of the land of Canaan, shall not be suffered to be so much
as sojourners in it, but must leave it, and go elsewhere; He called for a
famine on that land: which might seem to make it in less request, and by the
famine also did force them to go where ^hey might find bread. 4. Whenever
the Lord does bring his children into straits and difficulties, he makes
provision for their sustenance in their straits, and deliverance from the same.
When the Lord was to bring his people into Egypt, he provided so as they should
have a friend at Court before they came: He sent a man before them, even
Joseph. 5. Whatsoever may be the intent of men or devils in troubling of Gods
children, God has a hand in every thing which does befall them, how
accidentally soever it may seem to come: Joseph's coming down to Egypt, is
called Gods message; He sent a man before them, even Joseph. 6. That which men
dw sinfully, for satisfacti^n of their own lusts, God does holily and wisely
for his own ends: by Joseph's brethren their selling of their brother, to be rid
of him; God sends Joseph into Egypt, to provide for their livelihood; He sent
a man before them, they sold him for a servant. 7. It is not strange to see the
man whom the Lord minds to exalt, most humbled before he be exalted; and cast
into prison, before he be lifted up to liberty. Joseph was sold for a servant,
whose feet they hurt with fetters. 8. When the Lords servants are entered in
the trial of their faith, they may look to be soundly searched, before they
have ended their trials, and that by sharp affliction, as Joseph was tried;
Whose feet they hurt with fetters, he was laid in iron. 9. The afflictions and
trials of Gods children, will not end when they could wish, but they have a set
measure and time determined of God: He was laid in irons until the time came,
etc. 10. There is a secret word of Gods decree and providence, for ending of
the affliction of Gods children, which God brings forth to light in his own
time, and until this come, his servants must lie in bonds, as Joseph lay in
iron, till the time that his word came; that is, till God made his decree
manifest about the loosing of him. 11. Before affliction shall end, the
manifested work of Gods providence in affliction, must put the afflicted to the
trial of all that is in him, and trial must go before deliverance; The word of
the Lord tried him* 12. The time appointed in Gods decree, to send delivery to
his afflicted children, is made manifest in the effectual moving of instruments
and means of delivery, and in this case if need be, Kings shall be set on work
for the delivery of the Lords children; The King sent and loosed him. 13. Such
as are bound ignominiously for righteousness, shall be one way or other loosed
honorably; The Ruler of the people let him go free. 14. When the Lords people
are humbled sufficiently, God does raise them up, and sometime even in a
visible manner before the world, as here Joseph is by the King of Egypt made
Lord of his house, and Ruler of all his substance. 15. As Gods children are
exalted, for the benefit of those over whom they are set, so should they manage
and maintain their honor and power, by doing good to their inferiors, as
Joseph did who was exalted; To bind Pharaohs Princes at his pleasure, and
teach his Senators wisdom.

Ver. 23. Israel also came into Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.

24. And he increased his people greatly, and made them stronger then their
enemies.

25. He turned their heart to hate his people: to deal subtly with his
servants.

After Joseph, the rest of the family is brought down into Egypt, who sojourned
there, and were preserved till they grew a strong people, and then began their
affliction as a preparation to their out-birnging. Whence learn, 1. Albeit a
man has wrastled with God in prayer, and gotten his blessing, yet may he be
tossed in the world by troubles; Israel also came into Egypt. 2. The heirs of
the promise, and the Lords dearest children may be made sojourners among wicked
people, even in their old age, when they need most to be at rest; Jacob
sojourned in the land of Cham. 3. As when the Lords people grow up unto any
considerable number among idolaters, it is no strange thing if they find
enmity: so it is no strange thing in Gods way, to make them grow the more in
number and power, the more they be opposed; yea, and to make them under
oppression and persecution, to become mightier then their adversaries; He
increased his people greatly* and made them stronger then their enemies. 4. The
hearts of all men are in Gods hand, to turn them whither he pleases to love
or hate, as their affections may serve best his holy purposes: He turned their
heart to hate his people. 5. The trouble and exercise of Gods people, by
whatsoever instruments it be moved, is of the Lord, and he will own the evil
of trouble, which is in the city or country whatsoever; He turned their heart
to hate his people 6. In the most sinful affections, plots and actions of the
wicked against Gods people and servants God has a holy hand, and is not the
cause of their sin: for all the motions of the creatures, which live, and move,
and have their being of God, are made use of by the Creator, as instruments,
whereby he works his own just and holy work for his own ends: but when men
are about that same work for their sinful ends, it becomes sinful in them,
what is holy in Gods part: as the crucifying of Christ was most holy on Gods
part, and most sinful on his enemies part; He turned their heart to hate his
people: to deal subtly with his servants.

Ver. 26. He sent Moses his servant: and Aaron whom he had chosen,

27. They showed his signs among them: and wonders in the land of Ham.

In the third rank of reasons, taken from Gods delivering of his people out of
Egypt, and plaguing of the Egyptians; Learn, 1. When by the malice of enemies
Gods people are brought to greatest straits, then is deliverance near to be
sent from God unto them; They dealt subtly with his servants, he sent Moses
his servant. 2. As it is the Lord who brings his own people into trouble and
straits, so it is he who delivers them again, and provideth instruments for
the doing thereof; He sent Moses his servant. 3. As whosoever do serve Gods
Church to any good purpose, do it not of themselves, but by stirring up, or
commission from God; so whosoever are about to do the Church good, should do it
of intention, as doing him service; He sent Moses his servant, and Aaron his
chosen. 4. As to the end that God may have his own glory in every good work,
his part is to be distinguished from his servants part: so when his servants do
the servants duty faithfully, God will have them commended and approved for it
among men; Moses therefore is called Gods servant, and Aaron his chosen. The
signs and wonders, are called the Lords signs and wonders, and Moses and
Aarons service is called their showing of his signs; They showed his signs
among them, and wonders in the land of Ham.

Ver. 28. He sent darkness, and made it dark: and they rebelled not against
his word.

29. He turned their waters into blood: and slew their fish.

30. The land brought forth frogs in abundance: in the chambers of their Kings.

31. He spoke, and there came diverse sorts of flies: and lice in all their
coasts.

32. He gave them hail for rain: and flaming fire in their land.

33. He smote their vines also and their fig trees: and brake the trees of
their coasts.

34. He spoke, and the locusts came: and caterpillars, and that without number.

35. And did eat up all the herbs in their land: and devoured the fruit of
their ground.

36. He smote also all the firstborn in their land: the chief of all their
strength.

He reckons sundry plagues brought upon Egypt, which are sufficient for his
purpose, to bring the whole history to mind. Whence learn, 1. The Sun cannot
expel darkness in the air, but as God makes way for it, for God can turn the
day into palpable darkness when and where he pleases; He can make the Sun to
shine in one place, and take the comfortable use of it away in another place,
as he thinks good; he can put his enemies under darkness when his people have
light; He sent darkness, and made it dark. 2. It is a piece of glory unto God,
when either his brute creatures, or his rational servants do what he does
command; And they rebelled not against his Word. 3. God can make most useful
creatures to become noisome; He turned their waters into blood. 4. God can
plague men in the matter of their meat, as well as in their drink, and when the
Lord does plague in the one, it is not strange if he shall plague in the other
also; He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish. 5. God can daunt
the pride of the stoutest of his enemies, by his meanest creatures; The land
brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of their Kings. 6. As the
Lord speaks, so shall it be found in due time, he needs not to make much
ado in any business, but speak the word, and it shall be done; He spoke, and
there came diverse sorts of flies. 7. When the proud do strive against God, they
gain nothing but more and more shameful abasement; He brought lice in all
their coasts. 8. The clouds are at Gods command, to sent down soft rain, or
hard and heavy hailestones; He gave them hail for rain. 9. Although fire and
ha^lstones are most contrary in their natures, yet they can agree well in the
work of Gods service, when he employeth them; He gave them hail for rain, and
flaming fire in their land. 10. When lighter judgments do not move men, God
will send more heavy plagues, which shall leave their impression behind them;
He smote their vines also, and their fig trees, and brake the trees of their
coasts. 11. When God fights against a people, all the creatures are ready to
fight against them also, as they are called forth: He spoke, and the locusts
came, and Caterpillars, and that without number. 12. Whatsoever has escaped
the dint of one plague, God can over^ake it by another plague: They did eat up
all the herbs in the land, and devoured the fruit of their ground. 13. When God
does smite the creatures which do serve for man's use, he shows his
long-suffering and patience toward man, and his loathnesse to destroy him, as
we see in the order of Gods proceeding with Egypt. 14. When warning given unto
man does not move him to repentance, then the Lord lays his hand on that
which is most precious unto him; He smote also all the firstborn in their
land. 15. When the Lord pleases to put forth his hand* they that are naturally
strongest and most lively, are no less near to death, then they who are
naturally weaker: He smote all the firstborn, the chief of all their strength.

Ver. 37. He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not
one feeble person among their tribes.

38. Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell upon them.

39. He spread a cloud for a covering, and fire to give light in the night.

40. The people asked, and he brought quails: and satisfied them with the
bread of Heaven.

41. He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out: they ran in the dry
places like a river.

42. For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant.

In the Lords bringing of his people out of Egypt, and through the wilderness;
Learn, 1. Albeit there may be many impediments of the delivery of Gods people
out of their trouble, and from their persecutors, yet the work of delivery is
perfected at length; for when God had smitten Egypt in favor of his own
people, He brought his people forth. 2. All riches that men have are at Gods
disposing, to transfer the right and possession thereof to whom he pleases,
and the Lords special and express warrant gave ^itle to the Israelites, to
retain the Egyptians borrowed jewels; He brought them forth also with silver
and gold. 3. When God grants a delivery, or any sort of benefit, it is a new
gift to enable a man to make use of the offered delivery or bestowed benefit,
such was the benefit bestowed on Israel, when Go^ brought his people out of
Egypt, There was not one feeble person among their tribes. 4. The Lord can make
bloody persecutors of his people to cease from their persecution, and to
contribute to their delivery; and to be desirous to be rid of them: Egypt was
glad when they departed. 5. God can make his persecuted people terrible to
their persecutors, which is no less a wonder then to make the wolf tremble
for fear of the lambs: Egypt was glad when they departed, for the fear of
them fell upon them. 6. Except the Lord did take the guiding and protecting of
his own people, they should perish many ways, after their delivery out of
trouble: but whom he delivers he takes a care of them, as he did of Israel,
for whom he provided the pillar of cloud, to temper unto them the heat of the
day: and the pillar of fire, to temper unto them the darkness and cold of the
night, and made both of them to direct their journey: He spread a cloud for a
covering, and fire to give light in the night. 7. Sometime the Lord will give
unto his people at their earnest desire, that which is not good for them, that
so he may give unto them evidence of his readiness, much more to give them what
is good for them, when they earnestly ask it; The people asked, and he brought
quails. 8. When ordinary means of the preservation of Gods people do fail;
God will provide for them wonderfully, as he gave his people Manna in the
wilderness; And satisfied them with the bread of heaven. 9. As the fountain of
the feeding of Gods people, is not in the creatures: but in God, so should the
eye of his people be carried above the creatures, unto heaven, for preservation
of this life, as well temporal as spiritual: for this end it is said, He
satisfied them with the bread of heaven. 10. God can bring consolation
unexpected, and that by means most unlikely to yield it; He opened the rock,
and the waters gushed out. 11. There is no scarcity in God, of what the Lords
people do stand in need of, he both can and does furnish plenteously, and makes
the opportunity of having the use of his provision follow his people
whithersoever he leads them; The waters out of the rock ran in the dry places
as a river. 12. What the Lord does to his people, he does it for his Covenants
sake; as here, He remembered his holy promise. 13. How many years soever do
intervene Gods promise-making, and the performance, the Lord does not forget
his promise, as here we see after four hundred and thirty years; He remembers
his holy promise, and Abraham his servant.

Ver. 43. And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
gladness.

44. And gave them the lands of the heathen; and they inherited the labor of
the people.

45. That they might observe his statutes, and keep his Laws. Praise ye the
LORD.

From the manner of the Lords bringing his people out of Egypt, and planting
them in Canaan; Learn, 1. Whatsoever bondage the Lords people do fall into, the
Lord in due time will bring them out of it, as he brought forth his people from
the bondage of Egypt. 2. How much soever sorrow his people may find in the
expectation of delivery, so much joy shall they have in the performance of the
Lords promise; He brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
gladness. 3. The Lord does not leave his people, till he put them to some rest
after their troubles, as he gave rest to his people Israel, whom when he
carried them through the wilderness, he gave them the possession of Canaan; He
gave them the lands of the heathen. 4. The Lord makes no end of multiplying
obligations on his people, he maintains them in their possession of what he
does give them; They inherited the labor of the people. 5. The end of the
Lords liberality, is to engage the hearts of his people more and more to the
obedience of his Ordinances, as he did all this to Israel, That they might
observe his statutes. 6. There is no rule for serving of God acceptably, except
his own commands* for Isreal's rule was, to observe his statutes, and keep his
laws. 7. The right use which we should make of whatsoever good was done to the
Lords people, is to glorify God when we hear of it, or read of it, as here we
are directed; Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM CVI.
THe sum of this Psalm is to teach the godly in the time of calamity, lying
upon the Church, or upon themselves; First, to glorify God by faith in him.
Secondly, to reckon up for their encouragement, the frequent forgiveness of
grievous sins to his people in former times. And thirdly, to pray for the like
favor to themselves; and in hope to have their prayer granted, to give thanks
to God. There are three parts of the Psalm answerable thereunto: The first
part is the Prophets strengthening of his own faith* ver. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. The
second part is the confession of our sins in general, v. 6. and in special of
eight or nine gross provocations, which the Lord after correction did pardon,
and gave comfort to his people, to v. 46. which are so many arguments of hope,
to find the like mercy to the Church in this time. The first sin with the
forgiveness of it, is set down from v. 7, to v. 13. The second sin, v 13.14,
15. The third sin, v. 17, 18. The fourth sin, v. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. The fifth
sin, v. 24, 25, 16, 27. The sixth sin, v. 28, 29, 30* 31. The seventh sin, v.
3^, 33. The eighth sin, from v. 34, to v. 43. The ninth point of confession is
of a general heap of sins, oft-times repeated, and all pardoned, with pity
manifested to Gods people, v, 43, 44, 45, 46. The third part of the Psalm, is
a prayer for new experience of like mercy, and a close of the Psalm with
praise and thanksgiving, v. 47, 48.

Ver. 1. PRaise ye the LORD, O give thanks unto the LORD* for he is good, for
his mercy endures for ever. The Psalmist stirs up himself and others four
ways to glorify God under sad afflictions, by believing on him; First, by
exhorting all to praise and thank the Lord for his goodness. Whence learn, 1.
The exercise of praising and thanking the Lord, is very fit for a soul, lying
under the sense of affliction and guiltiness: for that whieh serves for the
Lords praise, serves also* for the comfort and encouragement of humbled
sinners: therefore, says he, Praise ye the LORD. 2. The meditation of Gods
goodness and readiness to communicate unto men of his bounty, is fit to furnish
matter of his praise, Praise ye the LORD for he is good. 3. Albeit a man be
conscientious of his much abusing of Gods goodness, and so might find this to
be the matter of his grief, yet mercy answers all objections, everlasting
mercy loses all doubts, and gives fresh encouragement to the humbled sinner
to draw near, and make yet again use of his goodness; for his mercy endures
for ever.

Ver. 2. Who can utter the mighty acts of the LORD? who can show forth all his
praise? The next me^nes which he uses, to stir up himself and others to
glorify God in believing on him, is wondering at the Lords works, and
innumerable causes of praise. Whence learn, 1. It is a disposition fit for
praising of God, to be sensible of our unability and unfitness, for so great a
work, as the Prophet does show in this example, saying, Who can utter the
mighty acts of the Lord? 2. There is such an impression of Gods Omnipotency on
all Gods works, and in special on those works wherein he has been pleased most
clearly to manifest his power* that no man can comprehend or express it; Who
can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? 3. Albeit the praises of the Lord
surpass all men's ability to declare them, yet neither must the greatness of the
work, nor the weakness and unworthiness of the servant of God, hinder him to
praise as he is able; for even this is a part of praising of God, to confess
and say, Who can show forth all thy praise?

Ver. 3. Blessed are they that keep judgment: and he that does righteousness
at all times. The third means whereby he stirs up himself to glorify God
by believing in him, is a declaring how blessed the believer is. Whence learn,
1. The consideration of the blessing of God upon every true believer, is a
notable encouragement to put confidence in God; Blessed are they that keep
judgment, etc. 2. The evidence of a sincere believer, is not only to keep
judgment, that is, to receive, respect and entertain the Word of God, as a
decree wisely given forth by him, but also to study to obey it in practice
constantly upon all occasions: Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he
that does righteousness at all times.

Ver. 4. Remember me, O LORD, with the favor that thou bear unto thy
people: O visit me with thy salvation.

5. That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness
of thy Nation: that I may glory with thine inheritance.

The fourth means of stirring up himself and others to believe in God,
especially in this time of the presupposed calamity of the Church, and of the
Supplicant, is prayer to God for a new proof of the loving kindness, which God
bears to his people in all ages. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever be the outward
afflicted estate of Gods people, yet they are still beloved, still in favor,
even when tokens of anger by public calamities are manifested against them:
Remember me with the favor which thou bear unto thy people. 2. There
needs no more felicity unto any man, save to be one of Gods people: it may
content any man to have his lot with the children of God, in whatsoever
condition they are put into: for the Psalmist craveth no more, but, Remember
me, O LORD, with the favor which thou bear unto thy people. 3. Albeit the
Lords people seem to be forgotten, yet the Lord will make evident that he does
not forget them, nor any one of them: Remember me, O LORD, with the favor
which thou bear unto thy people. 4. Such as do share with Gods people in
their grief, shall be partakers also of their consolation, deliverance and
salvation, which God has wisely prepared for them; therefore prays the
Psalmist, O visit me with thy salvation, etc. 5. As there are times wherein God
declares his displeasure against the sins of his people, so there are times
when he removes the tokens of his displeasure, and lets forth the evidence
of his love and respect to them, in doing them good, making them glad, and
causing them to glory in him; this is it which the Psalmist looks after,
Visit me with thy salvation, that I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may
rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine
inheritance. 6. The near interest which God has in his people, and which they
have in him, is a solid ground of hope of good, and gladness, joy and
gloriation reserved for them; for they are Gods chosen, Gods Nation,
appropriate unto him: and his inheritance, to remain in his possession from
generation to generation; whereupon the Psalmist does assure himself and the
Church of his hope of good, reserved for the Church; That I may see the good of
thy chosen, etc.

Ver. 6. We have sinned with our fathers: we have committed iniquity, we have
done wickedly. In the second place is the confession of sins, for which God
justly might afflict the Supplicants, but in his mercy could forgive them also,
as he had done to his people in former generations. The force of his reasoning
is this, many times thou did show mercy to our fathers in their afflictions,
notwithstanding their grievous provocations, therefore we must entreat thee,
yea, and hope also for the like mercy in our time; Whence learn, 1. It is not
for naught that the Lord brings calamity on his people, he is provoked so to
do by their grievous offenses; We have sinned. 2. As judgments are sent to
convince of sin, and to draw forth the acknowledgement thereof: so there is no
re^dier way to remove the sin and judgment also, then by confession thereof;
We have sinned. 3. As God when he punishes his people, does reckon with them,
both for their own, and also for their fathers faults, whose footsteps they
have followed: so must the penitent reckon with God for their own faults, and
for their fathers sins whereunto they have accession; We have sinned with our
fathers, etc. 4. Confession of sins must not be slighted, but seriously gone
about, and aggravated duly; We have sinned, we have committed iniquity, we have
done wickedly. 5. True penitents will neither excuse their sins by the example
of their fathers, nor justify themselves, how holy soever they be, when God is
pleading with his Church, but will join in confession with the multttude, as
here the holy Prophet does; We have sinned with our fathers, we have committed
iniquity, we have done wickedly.

Ver. 7. Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not
the multitude of thy mercies; but provoked him at the sea, even at the red sea.
The first particular sin which he confesses is rebellion at the red sea, Exodus
14.10, 11, 12. which sin was so much the greater, as the wonders done in Egypt
for them were great and many. Whence learn, 1. Albeit God manifest himself in
extraordinary working in the sight of misbelievers, yet will they remain blind
ignorants, and brutish beholders of his operations; Our fathers understood not
thy wonders in Egypt. 2. Albeit the Lord should often convince a misbeliever,
both of his justice and mercy, yet the Lords works do take no lasting
impression upon his mind; They remembered not thy mercies. 3. One sin is a
degree to another more heinous, for not observing, is followed with not
remembering, and forgetfulness of duty draws on disobedience and rebellion:
Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the
multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at the sea, even at the red sea.

Ver. 8. Nevertheless, he saved them for his Names sake: that he might make
his mighty power to be known.

9. He rebuked the red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them thorough
the depths, as through the wilderness.

10. And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them: and redeemed them
from the hand of the enemy.

11. And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them left.

12. Then believed they his words; they sang his praise.

As he observed their sin, so he observes Gods mercy to his people; for
notwithstanding their provocation, he brought them through the red sea, and
destroyed their enemies; Whence learn, 1. The evil deserving of Gods people,
does not always interrupt the course of Gods goodness toward them; for,
nevertheless of the aforesaid peovocation, he saved them. 2 As the Lords
goodness does aggravate men's sins, so men's sins do amplify Gods grace, and
make his goodness to the unworthy to appear the more; Nevertheless he saved
them. 3. The Lord has other things to look unto, when he has to do with his
people, then presently to fall upon the punishing of their wickedness and
misdeservings, even when they are found Delinquents: he uses to respect the
glory of his mercy toward his people, and the declaration of his power against
his enemies in favor of his people; Nevertheless he saved them for his Names
sake, that he might make his mighty power to be known. 4 The manner and
circumstances of Gods working, is as well to be considered as the matter, and
how easily he brings the greatest works to pass; He rebuked the red sea
also, and it was dried up. 5. The Lord can make a danger to turn into a
delivery, and a peril wherein a man was like to perish, to be a means of
preservation; So he led them through the depths, and through the wilderness.
6. In any one mercy unfolded, we may take up more mercies then one, and each
particular part of the mercy when it is discovered, will appear no less
glorious, then the whole mercy looked upon confusedly and in gross, as here in
the delivery at the red sea, the delivery from Pharaoh, which is but a part of
the work is pitched upon; And he saved them from the hand of him that hated
them, and redeemed them from the hand of the enemy. 7. The comparing of Gods
dealing with his own people, and with their enemies, amplifieth Gods goodness
to his people, and their obligation unto him; He redeemed them from the hand of
the enemy, and the waters covered their enemies. 8. When the Lords time comes
to enter in judgment with the foes of his Church, he will not miss one whom
he minds to overtake, as here, There was not one of them left. 9. The Lord
sometime works so clearly, for convincing of the misbeliever, that the most
blind and obstinate infidel shall be forced to acknowledge his works; When the
waters covered their enemies, then believed they his words. 10. It serves much
for Gods glory, when he extorteth credit unto his words by wonderful works, but
little to the commendation of the believers, who give credit to Gods Word upon
that ground only; as here we see, for not before, but then did they believe his
words, which imports their preceding misbelief, and that their duty was to
believe his Word, whatsoever appearance might be to the contrary. 11. A
temporary belief extorted by some extraordinary work, may have joined with it a
temporary joy, and praising of God for a time, without any root of saving grace
in the heart: Then they believed his words, they sang his praise.

Verse. 13. They soon forgot his works: they waited not for his counsel:

14. But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness: and tempted God in the desert.

15. And he gave them their request: but sent leanness into their soul.

The second sin confessed here, is their murmuring for want, not of water, but
of flesh, Numb. 11.4, 5, 6. which lust God did satisfy in his wrath to them.
Whence learn, 1. Temporary faith with the fruits thereof, lasts no longer
then a new tentation does assault, and faith grounded not on the word or truth
of it, but only on Gods sensible works, is ready to vanish, when the work is a
little past and gone; They soon forget his works. 2. If Gods works be not
remembered with estimation of, and affection to God the worker, and with some
use making thereof in the obedience of faith, God does esteem them to be
forgotten; as here: for this cause he says, They soon forgot his works. 3.
What the Lord does withhold from his people, or does unto them, he does it for
good purpose resolvedly, to train his people unto obedience, and to try them
whether they will follow their own will or his counsel, as here is insinuated.
4. Misbelievers take the ruling of themselves into their own hand, and will not
stay upon Gods provision for them, but must needs prescribe what they love to
have done, and do murmr if their carnal desires be not satisfied; as here the
sin marked in the Israelites does show: They waited not for his counsel, but
lusted. 5. When men do not wait on Gods direction, lusts become their leaders,
and furious drivers of them as poor slaves to all unreasonable appetites; They
lusted exceedingly. 6. When God by circumstances of time and place does call
for moderation of carnal appetite, the transgression is the more heinous and
offensive unto God; They lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, where they
should have contented themselves with any sort of provision. 7. They that do
not make use of the life and welfare which God allows and provideth, but
prescribe unto God what they would have done to them, do tempt God; They
tempted God in the desert. 8. Importunity and excessive affection to any
unnecessary worldly thing, may draw out of Gods hand that which is good; They
l^sted, and God gave them their request, to wit, flesh in abundance. 9. As
lawful means are attended with Gods blessing, so unlawful means are followed
with Gods curse; He gave them their request but sent leanness into their soul.

Ver. 16. They envied Moses also in the camp: and Aaron the Saint of the LORD.

17. The earth opened, and swallowed up Dathan: and covered the company of
Abiram.

18. And a fire was kindled in their company: the flame burnt up the wicked.

The third sin confessed is sedition which brake forth in K^rah, and his
accomplices, and was fearfully punished, Number. 16.1, 2, 3, etc. Whence learn, 1.
The manner of the Lords governing his people, how gentle soever it be, is
notwithstanding unto wicked men a thing insupportable, as does appear in the
peoples not enduring the Lords meek governing of them by Moses and Aaron. 2.
Rebellion against Gods manner of governing, howsoever it be indeed against God,
yet pretends to be only against men: They envied Moses in the Camp. 3.
Ministers are to be looked unto as men consecrated unto God, and injuries done
to them are against the Lord; They envied Aaron the Saint of the Lord. 4.
Whatsoever open wicked course is set on foot, by ringleaders to any mischief,
and is not disclaimed by the body of the people, may justly be charged upon
all, albeit not in the same degree of guiltiness, as here, Korah and his
Accomplices fault is charged upon the people, They envied Moses in the Camp. 5.
Authors of sedition in the State, and of Schism in the Church, do highly
provoke God to punish them exemplarily, as appears here: The earth opened and
swallowed Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram. 6 Such as will not be
warned to eschew sin, by judgments poured forth upon others, do provoke God to
make themselves spectacles of wrath in the sight of others; A fire was kindled
in their company, the fire burnt up the wicked.

Ver. 19. They made a calfe in Horeb: and worshipped the molten image.

20. Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an Ox that eats
grass.

21. They forgot God their Savior: which had done great things in Egypt.

22. Wondrous works in the land of Ham: and terrible things by the red sea.

23. Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen
stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy
them.

The fourth sin confessed, is the idolatry of the golden calf, which sin is
aggravated, and the danger of their destruction for it, (till Mo^es interceded
for them) is briefly set down here, but more largely expressed, Exodus* 32. and
Deuteronomy. 9. Whence learn, 1. They that are ready to change the Government of the
Church, which God has appointed, will be ready also to change the worship of
God, as experience in the Israelites does teach, who are charged with the one
fault, v. 16. and with the other here; They made a Calfe in Horeb, and
worshipped the molten image. 2. Idolaters are so bewitched with the opinion of
the lawfulness of idolatry, as they dare both devise and practice it in Gods
presence; They made a Calfe in Mount Horeb; the mountain where the Lord did
show himself terrible. 3. Albeit image-making in the matter of Religion and
image-worshipping be an old sin, yet this relative worship offered unto God
before an image, is always rejected of God as no worship done to him, but only
to the image: for God does not expound communication of worship to an image, or
relative worship before an image, according to the intention of the worshipper,
but according to the nature of the action, which is discharged in the second
command of the moral law: Israel in ended to offer the holy day to the Lord,
and appointed the worship toward the golden image for him, as the history
shows, Exodus 32.4, 5. To morrow is a feast of the Lord: yet here the Lords
Spirit declares this to be a worship, not of God, but of the image; They
worshipped the molten image. 4. Making of images to represent God, or any of
the persons of the holy Trinity, is but a vilifying of the glory of God, and
giving it to the image of a creature; yea, the making of an image to represent
God, is the changing of the glory of God into a vile image of some base
creature, and the placing of the one in the others stead and room, for so God
judges, saying, Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an Ox
that eats grass. 5. To have God for our God, and to have him alone for our
God, and the only object of our worship, without any mixture of humane devices
is our glory; and to do otherwise is the shame of the worshipper: They changed
their glory into the image of an Ox. 6. To devise images or pictures to put us
in mind of God, is a very forgetting both of Gods nature, and of his
authority, discharging such dyvices, for so does the Lord expound it; They
forgot God their Savior. 7. Whatsoever works God has wrought, for making
people know him, are all forgotten as well as God is forgotten, whenever men
may make devices of their own for memorials of God: They forgot God their
Savior, which had done great things in Egypt, wondrous things in the land of
Ham, and terrible things by the red sea. 8. Idolatry openly committed in a
land, is a cause sufficient to destroy the Nation which is guilty of that sin:
for, Therefore the Lord said he would destroy them. 9. As they who fear God in
a land, should deprecate Gods wrath that it fall not on it, and should stand in
the gap to divert the Lords wrath: so is their intercession acceptable to God,
and a hopeful means to divert wrath, as is to be seen in Moses* who stood up
before him to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them 10. When God is
glorified in a peoples obedience unto him, he is a wall about them to save them
from harm; but when he is provoked by open idolatry or avowed sin, then is a
gap made in the wall of his protection, that mischief may enter now in upon
them at the breach: He said he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen
stood before him in the breach.

24. Yea, they despised the pleasant land: they believed not his word:

25. But murmured in their tents: and hearkened not unto the voice of the LORD.

26. Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the
wilderness:

27. To overthrow their seed also among the Nations, and to scatter them in the
lands.

The fifth sin confessed, is the contempt of Gods most precious promises,
figured out in the despising of the promise of Canaan unto them, which as it
did flow from misbelief of Gods Word, so it brought forth murmuring against his
dispensation, which did put them in hazard of dissipation and destruction, as
is set down more largely, Numb. 13. and 14. Whence learn, 1. When the promised
inheritance of heaven, (which was figured by the pleasant land of promise,) is
not counted worthy of all the pains and difficulties, which can be sustained
and met with in the way of going toward it: the promised inheritance is but
little esteemed of, as appears in the Israelites, who for love of ease, and
fear of the Canaanites were ready to turn back to Egypt; They despised the
pleasant land. 2. Misbelieving of Gods Word, is the cause of disesteeming of
his precious promises, as here is shown; They believed* not his Word. 3.
Disestimation of Gods precious promises, makes men to quarrel with Gods
providence* when he is leading men to the possession thereof: for this made the
Israelites male content with all that God had done unto them: They murmured in
their tents. 4. When Gods dispensation does not please men, they will not fail
to take a course of their own, and misregard what God commands them: They
murmured in their tents, and hearkened not to the voice of the Lord. The
faithless man is secluded from heaven, and from Gods rest by an Oath; They
hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord, therefore he lifted up his hand
against them; that is, not only began to smite them; but also as it is, Heb.
4.3. He swore they should not enter into his rest. 6. We should fear, lest a
promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of us should seem to come
short of it, Heb. 4.1. and we should labor to enter into that rest, lest any
man fall after the same example of unbelief, Heb. 4.11. because against
unbelieving Israelites, God lifed up his hand to overthrow them in the
wilderness. 7. The Lords vengeance against unbelievers, and despisers of the
Gospel, and of the precious promises thereof, readily does follow the posterity
of unbelievers, as here the vengeance reached, To overthrow their seed also
among the nations, and to scatter them in the lands. 8. As the Lords
threatenings do go forth for sure execution, so they leave room to repentance
and intercession, and do make both the man that perishes inexcusable, and the
man that is spared to know the wrath which he has deserved; For God lifted up
his hand to destroy the unbeliever in the wilderness, before he did destroy
them* and threatened the posterity before the execution did come: For this the
Apostle, Heb 4. does teach us, from the example of Gods dealing with the
Israelites.

Ver. 28. They joined themselves also unto Baal-Peor: and ate the sacrifices of
the dead.

29. Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague
brake in upon them.

30. Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was
stayed.

31. And that was counted unto him for righteousness: unto all generations for
evermore.

The sixth sin confessed, is the mixing themselves in fornication, bodily and
spiritual, in open Idolatry with the Moabites, for which they were plagued,
till Phinehas interceded for them, Numb. 25. Whence learn, 1. Unbelievers are
easily induced to change their Religion, and to make de^ection from God, as is
evident in the Israelites; who by the lust of their flesh, mixed themselves
with the daughters of Moab; and then joined with them in their Idolatry: They
joined themselves also to Baal-Peor. 2. Idolatry is a breach of wed-lock with
God, and an adulterous joining of a man's soul to an Idol; They joined
themselves to Baal-Peor. 3. Communion with Idolaters in worship, or in
ceremonies and appendicles of Idolatrous worship, does prove the Communicants
to be guilty of Idolatry; They are the sacrifice of the dead. 4. Such as fall
from true Religion to Idolatry, do make an ill bargain; they go from the living
God to dead Idols, and deadly Idolatry; They are the sacrifice of the dead. 5.
Men's devices in Religion, and Gods acceptable Ordinances, do stand in
opposition one to another: for men's inventions cannot please God, For thus they
provoked him with their inventions. 6. Nothing does draw on more sudden and
sore judgment, then change of the true worship of God with men's inventions:
They provoked him to anger, with their inventions: and the plague brake in upon
them 7. Such as have warrant from God to punish open sin, should not delay
justice; for thus much does the extraordinary service of Phinehas teach unto
the ordinary Magistrate, who bears the sword by office: Then stood up Phineas
to exceute judgment. 8. As the Lord is loath to strike when he is provoked, so
he is ready to hold his hand, and cease upon any covenient occasion: Phinehas
stood up to execute judgment, and so the plague was stayed. 9. The rule and
order which God has appointed unto men to follow, does not hinder God to give
extraordinary commission to whom he pleases, for any extraordinary piece of
service, as appears in this instance of Phinehas. 10. What God does set men a
work to do by inward and immediate inspiration, that he makes manifest to the
Church by his revealed word of approbation, as the inspired command given to
Phinehas, was justified by Gods revealed will to the Church: I say, by
inspiration; because impressions on men's spirits, or instigations unto that
which the revealed will of God does not allow; or secret impulses unto unlawful
actions, is one thing, and inspiration of Gods extraordinary direction unto any
special work, is another thing: for inspiration from God, was the way of
shunning Gods revealved will, which was to be communicated with the Church, by
a moral way of command given to the Prophet; such as was that inspiration,
whereby God used sometimes to reveal his will to the Church, before the writing
of the Scripture was fully closed: Thus God revealed his will expressly to
Abraham, concerning the offering of his son Isaac: Thus God gave order to Moses
for the Israelites borrowing of the Jewels of the Egyptians, upon his own right
and title, which he has unto all the creatures to dispose of them at his
pleasure: Thus the whole Scripture was not of private interpretation, but the
holy men of God spoke as they were inspired and moved by the Holy Ghost; And
thus was Phinehas instructed unto the particular service: but impressions,
impulsions, instigations, which are not according to the revealed rule of Gods
Word, which now is fully set down in Scripture, as they want Gods moral
direction to teach them, so also they want Gods moral approbation: I say, moral
direction, because providential leading of a man unto any action, is one thing,
and moral direction is another thing. In the way of providential leading, a man
may be led in Gods justice by his own lusts, and Satan's impulse into tentation;
against which evil Christ directs us to pray, Lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from that evil, or the evil one. But where moral direction is,
the man has his manifested commission, and knows formally the warrant of his
action, and so does not sin therein; in providential leading, a man is only a
brute instrument, as the Assyrians and Nebuchadnezzar was, whom God made use of
as of a rod of his indignation, and he knew it not: but in moral direction, the
man is a rational servant, as knowing what he does to be warrantable service;
and so was Moses in all the house of God a faithful servant, doing all as God
commanded Moses; and so was Phinehas here Gods servant, following morally a
clear divine inspiration, a clear command and direction, and therefore had he
also Gods moral approbation: For it was counted to him for righteousness. 11.
As there is a justification of a man's person, which is only by faith in Jesus
Christ; so there is a justification of a certain deed or action, when it is
accepted by God for service; and of this sort is the justification of Phinehas
his zealous act: for this act was imputed unto him for righteousness, or for a
righteous piece of service. 12. What God does justify, whether it be a man, or
a man's action, no man may condemn it, for it stands absolved, as in this may
be seen; It wat imputed unto him for righteousness, unto all generations for
evermore.

Ver. 32. They angered him also at the waters of strife: so that it went ill
with Moses for their sakes.

33. Because they provoked his spirit: so that he spoke unadvisedly with his
lip^.

The seventh sin confessed, is murmuring at Meribah for want of water, whereby
meek Moses was drawn in the snare of a rash speech, and of a notable
inconveniency, Numb. 20. Whence learn, 1. Often repeated sin obstinately
persisted in, cannot but provoke God to anger; for as before they had murmured,
so also now murmuring again, They angered God at the waters of strife. 2. When
the Lords servants in doing their calling are striven against, there God is
also striven against; for this cause the place where the people strove with
Moses, is called the waters of strife: to wit, with God, because they strove
with Moses. 3. The Lords servants are in danger to be drawn into sundry
tentations and snares, by the evil carriage of the people, over whom they have
charge, as by occasion of the peoples murmuring, It went ill with Moses for
their sakes. 4. Albeit men are to be pitied who are provoked to sin, yet the
provocation excuses not the sinner, but it aggravateth the sin of the
provoker; as here, It went ill with Moses yet for their sakes: Because they
provoked his spirit. 5. In the holiest of men, there are relics of sin
unmortified, and such weakness, as they may readily fall into sin in an hour
of tentation: For Moses spoke unadvisedly with his lips. 6. It is a dangerous
case to come unto the Lords holy service, with any passion or carnal
perturbation, or to mingle Gods public service with our passions, as in the
case of Moses does appear. 7. The leading of an holy life in the former time of
a ^ans life, cannot justify nor excuse an ill action thereafter, nor hinder
Gods wrath when the sin breaks forth, as is to be seen in Moses case, with
whom it went ill, because he spoke unadvisedly with his lips.

Ver. 34. They did not destroy the nations* concerning whom the LORD commanded
them: The eight sin, is their disobedience to Gods command after they were
placed in the land of Canaan, which is set down in sundry particulars. The
first is, their sparing of the Canaanites, whom God commanded them to destroy.
Whence learn, 1. Neglect and omission of that which God does command to be
done, does bring men under guiltiness and challenge and wrath, and proves the
fountain of more mischief afterward, then men are aware of, as here appears;
They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the LORD commanded them. 2.
Men should not spare the lives of those whom God commands to destroy, lest
God make a quarrel of it, as here he does against the Israelites.

Ver. 35. But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works.

36. And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.

The second particular following on the former sparing of the Canaanits, is
forbidden marriages with them, and contagion of their ill manners. Whence
learn, 1. Sins of omission, make way for, and draw on sins of commission, as
here we see. 2. Unequal matching with open Idolaters, draws on contagion of
Idolatry; They were mingled with the heathen, and learned their works. And they
served their Idols: 3. Making of images in the matter of Religion, is a work of
the heathen; for so it is here reckoned and called, their work. 4.
Image-worshipping, and Idolatry, is a sin that is easily learned, the contagion
whereof does spread quickly, For the Canaanites Idols were a snare to the
Israelites. 5. Service to Images is condemned of God* as worship of Images is
condemned: yea, God comprehends under service, all and whatsoever respect
done to Images, as an abominable and damnable sin; For they served their Idols,
is here the challenge. 6. How pleasant soever, and delectable, and profitable
men do plead Images to be; yet God esteems of them as doleful inventions,
which bring no profit to their servants and worshippers, save dolor and grief;
for so much does the word in the Original give us to understand. 7. Whatsoever
fair pretenses men do suffer themselves to be led away with, unto the
fellowship of Idolaters and service of images, are nothing but deluding
deceits, which shall bring on the contrary evils undoubtedly: They served their
Idols which were a snare to them.

Ver. 37. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils.

38. And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their
daughters: whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land was
polluted with blood.

39. Thus were they defiled with their own works: and went a whoring with their
own inventions.

A third particular of their disobedience in Canaan, is their sacrificing their
children to Idols, whereby the land was fearfully polluted. Whence learn, 1.
When men depart from the rule of Gods Worship, there is no stay nor standing
till they fall into the grossest Idolatry, whereunto they are tempted: Yea,
(says he) they sacrificed their sons and daughters. 2. The rage of Idolatry
is such, as it will not spare whatsoever is dearest, even the lives of children
and friends to maintain it: They sacrificed their sons and daughters. 3. The
service done to Idols, and Images of man's devising, is not done to God, as men
do pretend who worship them; but to Devils, who are the devisers, suggesters
nnd enticers of men unto all sort of unlawful worship; and who are served and
obeyed in effect by false Religion, Deuteronomy. 32.17. 2. Chron. 11.15* 1 Cor. 10.20.
They sacrificed their sons and daught^rs unto devils, whom they sacrificed unto
the Idols of Canaan. 4. Idolaters are blood-thirsty, and do not stand for the
innocence of any party or person, by whose bloodshed the Idol may be honored,
and Satan may be pleased who is a liar and murderer from the beginning: They
shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and daughters, whom they
sacrificed to the Idols of Canaan. 5. When innocent blood is shed, the land is
polluted, whatsoever be the cause which is pretended; They shed innocent blood,
and the land was polluted with blood. 6. The highest point of holiness in a
false Religion, is but filthiness and pollution; and no invention of man can
make the followe^s thereof more holy by observation thereof, but does pollute
them still, the more they follow them: For thus were they defiled with their
own works. 7. Following of men's inventions in Religion, is Idolatry or
spiritual adultery, because God is forsaken in so far, and another god and
lord in Religion is received in Gods stead: for so much faith the Text, They
went a whoring with their own inventions.

Ver. 40. Therefore was the wrath of the LORD kindled against his people:
insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance.

41. And he gave them into the hand of the heathen: and they that hated them,
ruled over them.

42. Their enemies also oppressed them: and they were brought into subjection
under their hand.

Here is shown what followed on their following of their own inventions, to
wit, slavery and subjection unto men, in Gods indignation. Whence learn, 1.
When men do follow sin and their own ways, wrath follows them: For therefore
was the wrath of God kindled against his own people. 2. When from the Word of
the Lord men will not believe how odious superstition is to him, he will make
them find it by his plagues: For therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled.
3. No privilege can make men so lovely before God, as the love of ^dols and
Images in the matter of Religion does make them to be loathed of him: His wra^h
was kindled, even against his own people, insomuch that he abhorred his own
inheritance. 4. When Gods people do follow the superstition of Idolaters,
either by complying to gratify them, or in way of pleasing themselves; it is
justice with God to make Idolaters their masters, and to make his people lose
the benefit hoped for by compliance: And he gave them into the hand of the
heathen. 5. It is righteousness with God to put his people under the yoke of
men that hate them, when they have cast off the easy yoke of God who loves
them: And when men follow ways which God abhors, God justly does make them
suffer what they do most abhor; He gave them over into the hand of the
heathen: and they that hated them, ruled over them. 6. The sins of Gods people
do make open way for their enemies, and do put strength, courage, and victory
into their hands; and lest the Lords people should not be moved by that change
of government, he makes their burden under their enemies unsupportable: Their
enemies also oppressed them. 7. When people will not humble themselves in the
way of repentance, it is righteousness with God to bring them low by
judgments, as here is seen: The Israelites do not repent of their sins, And
they were brought into subjection under their enemies hand.

Ver. 43. Many times did he deliver them: but they provoked him with their
counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity.

44. Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry.

45. And he remembered for them his Covenant: and repented according to the
multitude of his mercies.

46. He made them also to be pitied of all that carried them captives.

The ninth and last point of confession, is of a heap of manifold sins often
repeated; notwithstanding which God did show pity to his people for his
Covenants cause. Whence learn, 1. The Lord leaves no means unessayed to gain
his people, sometimes he puts them to sore trouble, sometimes he delivers
them, and exercises them with the vicissitude of calamities, and deliveries,
if by any means they may be saved: Many times did he deliver them. 2. Such is
our wickedness and perverse nature, that still we give the Lord a bad meeting
for his mercies; and instead of thankfulness, do provoke him by doing and
following what we our selves think fittest, as is to be seen in the Israelites:
Many times did God deliver them, but they provoked him with their counsel. 3.
Men in the course of their sins, have high and self-pleasing conceits of
themselves, and no impenitency is without pride; but by sad judgments God many
times makes them lie low in affliction, who do not walk humbly in the way of
obedience, as here we see the Israelites provoked God by their counsel, that
is, by their own devices, conceits and inventions; But they were made low by
their iniquities. 4. Albeit Gods people oft-times provoke him, and in their
prosperity do not regard God nor his commands; yet God regards them so, as both
after a whiles prosperity, to correct them; and after a whiles adversity, to
comfort them: Nevertheless he regarded their affliction. 5. God by heavy
affliction moves men to cry unto him, who otherwise would not have called upon
him at all, as his dealing with proud provoking Israel here does show, who in
affliction are made to cry. 6. Albeit there be commonly great unsoundnesse in
the cry of oppressed people; yet God will hear that cry* and help them out of a
temporal trouble, as here; He regarded their affliction, when he heard their
cry. 7. As when Gods people do abuse his grace, and do forget their Covenant,
and are plagued for their sins; the good of the Covenant, and confederacy with
God is obscured, buried, and as it were forgotten: So when the Lord does change
his dispensation, the benefit and good of the Covenant is brought to light
again; for then God takes occasion to show, that albeit his people do forget
the Covenant, yet he forgets it not: For he remembered for them, or, for their
behalf, his Covenant. 8. The unchangeablenesse of Gods merciful nature and
love to his people, makes him change the course of justice into mercy, and no
other change, except of this dispensation is meant by Gods repentance, when it
is said, And he repented according to the multitude of his mercies. 9. The
mercy of the Lord is so large, as the multitude of former sins, and abused
bypast favors cannot hinder the sinner once again to come unto the
inexhaustible fountain of grace, and cannot hinder God once more to show mercy
to a sinner; yea, albeit God has entered in judgment with the sinner, and has
begun to pour our deserved wrath upon him; even justice thus begun to be
executed, cannot hinder God to hold his hand, and show mercy once again to the
sinner: for here experience teaches, that often times when he had entered in
judgment with Israel, He repented according to the multitude of his mercies.
10. God has the ruling of all men's affections, to make them turn as he
pleases: God mixeth the most bitter cup of judgment given to his people to
drink, with the ingredient of compassion; and what pity his people do find
from any hand, it is the fruit, effect, and evidence of Gods pity toward them:
He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them capt^ves.

Verse. 47. Save us, O LORD our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to
give thanks unto thy holy Name, and to triumpth in thy praise.

48. Blessed be the LORD God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting, and let
all the people say, Amen. Praise ye the LORD.

The last part of the Psalm, wherein the Psalmist draws two conclusions from
what he has been speaking, and teaches the Church to do the same in their sad
afflictions: The one is a prayer for the fresh experience of the like mercy
unto the Church; and to every member thereof in their time, v. 47. The other is
a praising of God in assurance of faith, that he would certainly do so, v. 48.
Whence learn, 1. The right use of the history of Gods mercies to his Church, is
to go to God in humility, and to encourage our selves to seek and expect the
like to our selves: Save us also, says the Church here. 2. Seeing God in
showing mercy to his people, does always respect the Covenant; it is good for
the sinner not to quit his interest therein, but to claim new experience of
mercy, according to the tenor thereof: For this respect, the Church prays
here; Save us, O LORD our God. 3. The visible Church may be so defaced for a
time, that howsoever the visible members thereof can never cease to be, but one
generation shall follow another; yet the outward societies and solemn
assemblies of the Church, may be dissolved and disappear by scattering of them,
as this part of their prayer, Gather us, does import. 4. It is a heavy
affliction for the godly to live in the company of enemies: and of men of a
false Religion: from this evil they desire to be delivered, Gather us from
among the heathen. 5. The face of a visible Church, wherein we may have the
communion of Saints, and occasions to dwell together with them, and enjoy with
them the public and free use of Religion; is a great mercy, and worthy that
God should be entreated for it: Gather us from among the heathen, to give
thanks to thy holy Name. 6. The Lords people are allowed to glory in the LORD,
and to boast in his praise; and the end of their seeking the liberty of free
assembling of themselves together, should be, that they may declare the LORDS
praise, and glory in him: Gather us to give thanks to thy holy Name, and to
triumph in thy praise. 7. When we have prayed according to Gods will, we should
take our prayer for granted, and leave it lying at GODS feet, as the Church
does here. 8. Let the LORD do to his Covenanted people what he pleases, they
shall never want reason to praise, thank and bless him, for the closing of
this Psalm teaches so much: Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel. 9. The LORD is
the everliving Fountain of spiritual and everlasting blessings to his own
people; and whatsoever become of temporal things, there is reason of blessing
GOD for spiritual and everlasting mercies; and to say, Blessed be the LORD GOD
of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting. 10* When the Spirit of the LORD
does raise the Song of the praises of GOD by his Prophets and Ministers; It is
the Brides part, and the part of every Member of the Church, to join in the
thanksgiving, and subscribe with acclamation unto the blessing of GOD: And let
all the people say, Amen. 11. When the Believer has in his own person given
thanks to God, he should stir up others, according as his station calls him
unto it, to praise the LORD also, as here is done; Praise ye the LORD.

PSALM CVII.
THis is a Psalm of praise for Gods gracious and wise dispensations toward
men. In the former part whereof, the Psalmist reckons four exercises of Gods
people, by Gods justice, bringing them to straits, and by his mercy delivering
them again: The first exercise is by banishment, and by the Lords bringing them
back from it, to v. 10. The second is by captivity and imprisonment, and
delivery out of it, to v. 17. The third is by bodily sickness, and recovery
from it, to ver. 23. The fourth is by danger by Sea, and delivery out of it, to
ver. 33.

In the latter part of the Psalm, he praises God for his wise dealing with
people and Nations, in changes made among them, in their lands, persons, goods
and estates, for the good of his own, and overthrow of the proud. One change is
of a fertile, into a barren wilderness, for the Inhabitants sins, v. 33, 34.
Another change is of a barren land into a fertile and plentiful soil, well
peopled, to v. 39. A third change is, wasting and spoiling of a well peopled
and fertile Country, v. 39. A fourth change is, pulling down Princes, and
Statesmen, and confounding of them, so that they know not what to do, or
whither to go, v. 40. The fifth change is, the lifting up of the poor and
desolate, and enlarging of them in all respects, v. 41. The best witnesses of
which changes, are the godly and wise observers of Gods providence, who for a
reward of their observation shall have comfortable use and benefit of all Gods
dispensations, v. 42, 43.

Ver. 1. O Give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: for his mercy endures
for ever.

2. Let the redeemed of the LORD say so: whom he has redeemed from the hand of
the enemy.

3. And gathered them out of the lands, from the East, and from the West: from
the North, and from the South.

He exhorts all to give thanks unto the Lord, and specially the Lords
redeemed ones, brought back from exile out of all countries where they
wandered. Whence learn, 1. Unto no duty are we more dull and untoward, then to
the praise* of God, and thanksgiving unto him; neither is there any duty
whereunto there is more need that we should be stirred up, as this earnest
exhortation does import: O give thanks unto the Lord. 2. Whether men do
acknowledge the grace and bounty of the Lord or not, he is worthy to be thanked
and praised; partly, because of his liberal and ready communicating his goodness
freely, not only to not deserving, but also to ill deserving persons, and that
out of mere mercy; and partly, because he follows the man who has found
mercy, with mercy more and more; and partly, because he refuses to no man
mercy who seeks it, or shall seek it of him, at what time soever, to the
worlds end: For so much says the reason of the exhortation, For he is good,
for his mercy endures for ever. 3. Every man has matter and reason, and
obligation lying on him, to praise God; but specially such as have more
pa^ticular, oftener and greater experience of mercies then others have had: Let
the redeemed of the Lord say so. 4. Redemption made by Christ of his own Elect,
is the fountain of every particular benefit bestowed upon them: for the Elect
are called the reedeemed of the Lord here, before the particular delivery from
banishment be specified; and that delivery is called a redeeming of them, Whom
he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy, as flowing from the great
Redemption. 5 So often as men have ^eceived deliverances, they owe unto God so
many lives, and God has so many titles of right unto them, as they have
received preservations: And those will the Lord have to be witnesses of his
mercy before the rest of the world: Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom
he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy. 6. As the Lords children may be
scattered in all the corners of the world, and excluded from the external
communion of the Saints; so none of them do return from exile, to join
together in the use of Religion and holy Ordinances, except by Gods special
hand gathering them: For he gathered them out of the lands, from the East and
from the West, from the North and from the South.

Verse. 4. They wandered in the wilderness, in a solitary way: they found no
city to dwell in.

5. Hungry and thirsty: their soul fainted in them.

Here is described first the distress of the redeemed in their exile, v. 4, 5.
Then their exercise in calling unto God. And thirdly, their bringing home, v*
6, 7. Whence he infers the duty of thanksgiving, whereunto he had before
exhorted, v. 8, 9. From their distress, Learn, 1. Such as the Lord has a
purpose to draw into the fellowship of himself and of his Saints, are subject
to wandering and exile, both bodily and spiritual, as the exercise of exiled
Israelites shows: They wandered in the wilderness. 2. The Lords exiled ones
do find no home, till they be brought to the fellowship of the Saints; They
wandered in the wilderness, in a solitary way: they found no city to dwell in.
3. The Lords exiles may be in danger of famine, both bodily and spiritual, and
like to faint for lack of food, bodily or spiritual, or both sorts, as the
banished here; Were hungry and thirsty, and their soul fainted in them.

Ver. 6. Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble: and he delivered them
out of their distresses.

7. And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of
habitation.

From their exercise in their double distress, of banishment and famine, and
from their delivery; Learn, 1. Straits do put men to seek God in a serious
manner: Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble. 2. The earnest prayer
of Gods distressed children wants not a good answer; And he delivered them
out of their distresses. 3. When the Lord will comfort a supplicant, he will
deliver him from so many parts of his trouble, as may serve to lead him on his
journey; he will furnish food, and direction, both whither to go; and by what
way to go: And he led them by the right way, that they might go to a city of
habitation. 4. To be directed of God what to do, whether it be in relation to
matters temporal or spiritual, is a special benefit, and a fair fruit of
prayer: For he whom the Lord does guide, shall walk safely, and prosper in his
way: He led them by the right way, that they might go to a city of habitation.

Ver. 8. O that men would praise the LORD for his goodness: and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.

9. For he satisfies the longing soul: and fills the hungry soul with
goodness.

From the duty required of the exile now returned home; Learn, 1. The mercies
of the Lord showed to his own, do call for praising of God by themselves, and
all beholders; they call for praise, both in secret and in society* O that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, 2. The Lords manner of delivering of
his own out of their great troubles, whether bodily or spiritual, has
ordinarily some observable wonder in it: O that men would peaise the Lord for
his wonderful works to the children of men. 3. The poor and needy supplicants
do live upon Gods furniture; he is a provider for such, and lets them want
nothing, but satisfies them sufficiently: and this is no small comfort unto us
and matter of praise unto God; For he satisfies the longing soul, and fills
the hungry soul with goodness.

Ver. 10. Such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: being bound in
affliction and iron.

11. Because they rebelled against the words of God: and contemned the counsel
of the most High.

12. Therefore he brought down their heart with labor: they fell down, and
there was none to help.

13. Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble: and he saved them out of
their distresses.

14. He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death: and brake their
bands in sunder.

15. Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness: and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

16. For he has broken the gates of brass: and cut the bars of iron in
sunder.

Here is set down the second exercise of Gods people, to wit, by captivity and
imprisonment brought upon them for their sins, and their delivery from it, upon
their turning to God, with the use thereof. Whence learn, 1. As liberty of our
persons to go about our callings freely, is no small benefit; so imprisonment
is a sore affliction, even a sort of living death, and a sort of burial of the
quick: For they sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. 2. Bonds and
chains put upon the prisoner, do add much weight unto the heavy condition of
the imprisoned, and yet the Lords people are subject to both: for here is
presupposed, They may be bound in affliction and iron, in their prison. 3. It
is above all the affliction of imprisonment and bonds, when the cause of the
imprisonment is not righteousness, but, because they have rebelled against the
word of God, and contemned the counsel of the most High. 4. The not bearing the
easy yoke of obedience, may bring on the heavier yoke of Iron, bonds and
imprisonment upon us, as here is expressed. 5. The greatness of the Majesty of
God, aggravateth the sin of despising his Word; They contemned the counsel of
the most High. 6. As the Word of the Lord is both deep counsel for wisdom, and
also profitable advice for us; so the contemning of it is so much the greater
sin, and draws on the greater wrath: They were bound in affliction and
iron, because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel
of the most High. 7. The Lord brings men into sore distresses, to make them
sensible of their despising his authority; and to break their natural pride,
and stoutnesse of heart against him, and to show them the vanity of all their
former fleshly confidence: Therefore he brought down their heart with labor.
8. Affliction is then come to the height, and its complete measure, when the
sinner is made sensible of his own weakness, and does see that there is no
help for him, save in God alone: They fell down, and there was none to help. 9.
When all help and comfort under heaven does fail, relief may be found in God
for them that cry unto him for it: There was none to help, then they cried to
the Lord in their trouble. 10. The Lord will not only hear and help them who
are unjustly imprisoned, but those also who for their sins are so punished:
They cried, and he saved them out of their distresses. 11. It matters not how
deep the danger be wherein a man is, when he turns to God for relief: for so
great as his distress is, so great shall be his delivery: He brought them out
of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their bonds in sunder. 12. The
end of the delivery of poor sinners, is, that they may glorify the Lord, and
may invite others to do the like: for this here is a part of the thankful man's
duty, O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men. 13. No power of man, no bonds, no opposition
which any creature is able to make, can hinder the delivery of the man whom God
will own: He has broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in
sunder.

Ver. 17. Fools, because of their transgression: and because of their
iniquities are afflicted.

18. Their soul abhors all manner of meat: and they draw near unto the gates
of death.

19. Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble: he saves them out of their
distresses.

20. He sent his word, and healed them: and delivered them from their
destructions.

21. Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness: and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

22. And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving: and declare his
works with rejoicing.

The third exercise of Gods people, is by sickness of body; the drawing on
whereof he shows to be by sin, v. 17, 18. The means of delivery to be by
prayer, v. 19. whereupon they are recovered as God gives order, v. 20. and the
use of this is set down, v. 21, 22. Whence learn, 1. As other troubles come for
sinning against God, so does sickness come amongst the rest: Fools because of
their transgression, and because of their iniquities are afflicted. 2. Sin does
blind sinners, and bereave them of the right use of their reason; and makes
them choose trifles, with the loss of what should be most precious: therefore
they are justly called fools. 3. Natural means of life and refreshment, are
unsavory and unable to refresh, except God give the man ability to make use of
them, and put his blessing into them: Their soul abhors all manner of meat.
4. As in other troubles, so in sickness, men are not easily brought to the
sense of their sin, till trouble be at the height, and the man made low: Their
soul abhors all manner of meat, and they draw near to the gates of death. 5.
Great is the stupidity of a sleeping conscience, which cannot be wakened up to
seek Gok till extremity come: They draw near to the gates of death, then they
cry unto the Lord in their trouble. 6. When men are brought unto the sense of
their sins and misdeservings, and of their danger, and of their own weakness,
and thereby made to seek unto the Lord, the mercy and relief is near at hand:
Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, so he saved them out of their
distresses: And here is to be seen mercy and goodness in God, to cause
sicknesses as his Sergeants and Messengers to lay hold on the fugitive sinner.
7. Neither sickness nor health do come or go, but God gives order to them, as
to his own servants: He says to sickness, go from a man; and to heal^h,
return unto him: He sent his Word, and healed them. 8. When trouble does show
wrath, and that does weaken the sense of sin, and sense of sin sends the man to
seek mercy, then God will readily remove all his troubles together: He sent his
word and healed them, and delivered them from their destructi^ns. 9. As men
have found mercies of God, so should they study to be thankful, and specially
in such a way as may be most profitable to others: O that men would pra^se the
Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men. 10.
Moral and spiritual service is more acceptable to God then any ceremonial
performance, the sacrifice of thanks is more then the sacrifice of an ox: Let
them sacrifice the sacrifices of thansgiving. 11. The special matter of joy in
the receiving of a benefit, is the manifestation of Gods respect to us, in his
working for us; And let them declare his w^rks with rejoicing.

Ver. 23. They that go down to the Sea in ships, that do business in great
waters:

24. These see the works of the LORD: and his wonders in the deep.

24. For he commands, and raises the stormy wind: which lifts up the
waves thereof.

26. They mount up to the heaven: they go down again to the depths: their soul
is melted because of trouble.

27. They reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: and are at their
wits end.

The fourth exercise of Gods children, is by their danger in Sea, and their
delivery from their danger. Whence learn, 1. The Art of Navigation and
following of the Merchant-Trade by Sea, how dangerous soever it be; yet is
lawful, and allowed of God, for compassing of men's affairs, in commerce
between Nation and Nation: for this is set down here as the vocation and
occupation of some men, to wit, of those that go down to the Sea in ships, that
do businesses in great waters. 2. Some sort of persons have more occasion of
observation, and experience of remarkable passages of providence in preserving
of men's lives, then others have, and these most of all should bear witness of
Gods work according to their experience; These see the works of the Lord, and
his wonders in the deep. 3. There is no storm or motion in the Sea, or blowing
of the winds out of any part, but as God actually does raise them: For he
commands, and raises the stormy wind* which lifts up the waters thereof.
4. When God will try a man by trouble, he will not leave him till he make him
sensible of his frailty, weakness, and unability to overcome dangers: They
mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths: their soul is melted
because of trouble. They reel too and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, etc.

Ver. 28. Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble: and he brings them
out of their distresses.

29 He makes the storm a calm: so that the waves thereof are still.

30* Then are they glad because they be quiet: so he brings them unto their
desired haven.

In their delivery from the storm; Learn. 1. Albeit the LORD does deliver many
from shipwreck by Sea, yet he takes none of them for witnesses of his mercy,
but such as had recourse to him in their strait by prayer: Then they cry unto
the Lord in their trouble* those are the men whom the Lord remarketh. 2. The
fervent prayer of the Lords Redeemed, who at length at least make God their
refuge in trouble, have deliverance for the fruit following upon it: They cry,
and he brings them out of their distresses. 3. As the raising of a storm is
from the Lord, so the quieting of it again is his work also; and both the one
and the other work has the time and measure of it so disposed of, as may best
serve to his purpose: He makes the storm a calm: so that the waters thereof
are still. 4. According as is men's grief in trouble, so is or should be the
greatness of their joy in their delivery: Then are they glad, because they be
quiet. 5. So many Sea-voyages, are so many evidences of Gods so often conducting
and convoying of Seamen to and fro: So he brings them to their desired haven.

Ver. 31. Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness: and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.

32. Let them exalt him also in the Congregation of the people: and praise him
in the assembly of the Elders.

From the use of this exercise here required; Learn, 1: That it is the part of
every man, who come to the knowledge of any experience or new proof of Gods
mercy, in special to any of his people, not only to acknowledge Gods goodness
by themselves* but also to wish that the reason of his praises were known to
all men, and that all men might praise God also for it: O that men would praise
the Lord for his goodness. 2. It is the duty of a thankful man, not only to
praise God for the experience he has had of Gods goodness in his own person;
but also to praise God upon that occasion, for any other the wonderful works
which the Lord works daily for the children of men: O that men would praise
the Lord for his wonderful works to the children of men. 3. Seamen after their
returning home, should carefully observe the meetings of the Church, as for
other reasons: so because they have been withdrawn so long from those
assemblies, while their voyage did last. And let them exalt him also in the
Congregation of the people. 4. Beside the assembly of the whole Congregation,
the Scripture makes mention of the Church or Congregation, or assembly of the
Elders, who had the oversight and governing of the particular Synagogues and
Churches of the people: For here and elsewhere, beside the Congregation of the
people, there is mention made of the assembly of the Elders, as distinguished
from the assembly of the people: And let them praise him in the assembly of the
Elders. 5. As prayers are, and should be made in the Congregation for such of
the flock as are in any special danger of their lives; so duty requires that
praises should be offered for their remarkable deliveries, or recoveries out of
those dangers: for of such as are delivered from shipwreck, it is said, Let
them exalt him also in the Congregation of the people. 6. As it is a part of
the peoples duty, to acquaint the Elders of the Congregation with such passages
of Gods most remarkable providence about them, as may be most for glorifying of
God, and for the peoples edifying; so it is a part of the work of the Eldership
to take notice of, and make the best use in their prudence of what falls out
among their flocks, whereby all may be edified: For as the right judgeing of
Gods works of providence requires prudence and wisdom; so they who are set
over the Congregation, as most eminent therein for their wisdom and prudence,
should go about this part of their charge among other duties; For it is said,
And let them praise him in the assembly of the Elders.

Ver. 33. He turns rivers into a wilderness: and the water-springs into dry
ground:

34. A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

In the latter part of the Psalm, the Lord is praised for his wisdom, in
making changes upon Countries and Nations, men's persons and estates, some in
justice, some in mercy, as he sees fit: of which changes he reckons up five.
The first whereof is, the turning of a fertile land into barrenness for the
inhabitants sins. Whence learn, 1. When fertile land becomes barren, and men
are cut short of their commodities by sea or land, by the creatures not
yielding service, as they were wont to do, men should lift their eyes above all
second causes, and fix them on God, who what way he thinks best brings the
change: He turns rivers into a wilderness, and the water-springs into dry
ground; that is to say, a fruitful land into barrenness. 2. The proper
meritorious cause of Gods cursing of a fertile land, is the sins of the
inhabitants, whom God will have so answered in their labors on the ground, as
they answer the Lord in his husbandry and pains taken upon them, and whom God
will chastise for their sin, and so move them to repent: He turns a fruitful
land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.

Ver. 35. He turns the wilderness into a standing water: and dry ground into
water-springs.

36. And there he makes the hungry to dwell; that they may prepare a city for
habitation.

37. And sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits of
intrease.

38. He blessed them also, so that they are multiplied greatly: and suffers
not their cattle to decrease.

The second change mentioned, is of a barren land into fertility. Whence learn,
1. The fertility of land is not to be attributed to men's industry, but unto
God: He turns the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into
water-springs. 2. If God afflict, his justice finds the cause of it in man:
but if he do good to any man, it is of his own good pleasure, without any cause
in man: therefore no reason is given here of this change, as was of the former,
but simply, He turns dry ground into water-springs. 3. The Lord takes
pleasure to provide for the needy, and they shall be forced to acknowledge his
goodness in his provision for them: And there he makes the hungry to dwell,
that they may prepare a city for habitation. 4. When God opens a door of
blessing men, he will have it improved, and ordinary means diligently used, as
here, He will have them sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield
fruits of increase. 5. When the Lord is pleased ^o bless men, he will bless
them largely in the growth of their families and substance, and will extend his
care even to their beasts; He blesses them also, so as they are multiplied
greatly, and suffers not their cattle to decrease.

Ver. 39. Again, they are minished and brought low, through oppression,
affliction and sorrow. The third change is, by spoiling a populous and
well-planted country. Whence learn, 1. Such as have been raised from a low
condition, can hardly bear prosperity, but are readily puffed up with it, as
this change presupposes. 2. God can bring down such as do abuse prosperity,
and make them as base as ever they were* Again, they are minished and brought
low. 3. The Lord has more ways then one to spoil a fertile country; for
albeit he do make it continue fertile, yet he can bring the sword of the enemy
on it: They are brought low, through oppression, affliction and sorrow.

Ver. 40. He pours contempt upon Princes: and causeeh them to wander in the
wilderness, where there is no way. A fourth change is, in the pulling down
Princes, and putting Statesmen to perplexity. Whence learn, 1. As Kings and
Rulers do not keep their place, and power, and estimation among men, but by
Gods investing them with dignity, so when they lose their dignity and are
despised, they must look to God as the doer, and search the quarrel: for God
will honor them that honor him, and they who despise him shall be lightly
esteemed: He pours contempt upon Princes. 2. It is God who gives wisdom and
prudence unto men, for ruling of States; and when their wit is employed for
their own earthly interest, he can take their wisdom from them, and give them
a cup of giddie wine, and put them in such perplexity, as they know not what to
do; he can banish them out of their country, and send them as vagabonds
through the earth; He causes them to wander in the wilderness, where there is
no way.

Ver. 41. Yet sets he the poor on high from affliction: and makes him
families like a flock. The fifth change is, in comforting the afflicted, and
raising them out of the dust into a better condition, after they are humbled in
the sense of their own poverty. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the Lord casts down
the mighty, and puts the wise to perplexity, yet he will pursue them no
further then unto humiliation, if so be they take with their sins, and seek
reconciliation with God, as his Word prescribes, and depend upon God as needy
poor souls, he will lift them up again; Yet he sets the poor on high from
affliction. 2. As pride and self-estimation, because of riches, or power, or
wisdom, or any other earthly reason, goes before ruin; so lowliness of
mind, humiliation in the sense of sin and of unworthiness, and of weakness
and witlesnesse, driving a man to depend on God, as a beggar does for alms,
goes before exaltation; He sets the poor on high from affliction, and
makes him families like a flock.

Ver. 42. The righteous shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniquity shall stop
her mouth.

43. Who so is wise, and will observe those things: even they shall understand
the loving kindness of the LORD*

He closes the Psalm with two promises, one of performing what is here said,
to the comfort of the righteous, and shame of the misbelieving proud sinner:
The other is of manifesting his loving kindness to such as do observe and make
use of Gods providence. Whence learn, 1. Such as being justified by faith, do
endeavor to order their conversation righteously, shall be witnesses of the
Lords performing of his Word: The righteous shall see it. 2. As there is joy in
believing of the Lords Word, so there is yet more joy in beholding the
performance of his Word; The righteous shall see it and rejoice. 3. Among other
mercies bestowed upon the righteous man, this is one, that the Lord puts him
upon the counsel of his working, does expound his providence unto him by his
Word, teaches him to compare Gods Word and his Works, and makes him witness
that God is as good as his Word; The righteous shall see it and rejoice. 4. The
wicked shall be disappointed of his expectation, in regard of the good which he
hoped to himself, and shall find himself mistaken about the godly, whose ways
he counted to be folly: The righteous shall rejoice, and all iniquity shall
stop her mouth. 5. As the works of the Lords goodness, justice and mercy are
wrought in the sight of men, that they may observe his way* and keep the
observation thereof in memory: so are they the wisest sort of men, who do
observe Gods providence best, and do compare it with the Lords Word, that they
may understand it rightly; Who so is wise, and will observe these things. The
wise man, and the observer of Gods ways toward the children of men, here is
one. 6. Albeit there be very few wise observers of Gods proceeding with men in
justice or mercy, yet so many as are his disciples* Students of his Word, and
do walk answerably thereunto, shall never want matter of observation of Gods
kindness toward themselves; For who so is wise, even they shall observe the
loving kindness of the Lord.

PSALM CVIII.
THis Psalm is composed of a part of the fifty seventh Psalm^ from v. 7. to
the end, and of a part of the sixty Psalm, from v. 5. to the end, but in a
diverse notion; for in the fifty seven and sixty Psalms, David is praying for
experience of the truth of the promise made to him, concerning the Kingdom of
Israel, and victory over his enemies on all sides, being now in hazard by them,
but here he is making use of the experience received, and of victory obtained
over enemies within and without the Kingdom of Israel, for the encouragement
of the Church militant to the end of the world, against intestine and foreign
enemies whatsoever. Again, in these two former Psalms, whence he does repeat
the words of this Psalm, he had his own interest to plead, beside what was
typical in his exercise: Here, his own interest being settled, and the promise
made to himself performed; he recommendeth this experience of his in a more
abstract notion from his own particular, and in a more typical way of a pledge
of the victory of the true Church militant, under her Head and Lord, over all
her both intestine enemies and foreign, without the verge of the visible
Profession, that in the faith of Christ, and hope of his prevailing in the work
of enlarging and reforming of the visible Catholic Church, and overthrowing of
the open enemies of Christ's Kingdom, typified under the exercise of David, the
true subjects of Christ might go on in their warfare with the greater
confidence.

This Psalm has two parts: In the former is the thanksgiving of faith, and
promise of praise, in hope of obtaining all, which the Church is here to pray
for, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. In the latter part is the prayer for preservation of
the Church, ver. 6. with confidence to be heard and helped, whatsoever
impediment appear, against all who stand out against Christ's Kingdom, whether
within the visible Church, v. 7, 8. or whether without, such as are professed
enemies unto it, v. 9, 10, 11. which prayer is followed forth, v. 12. and
comfortably closed with assurance of the Churches victo^y by the assistance of
God, v. 13.

Ver. 1. O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise even with my
glory.

2. Awake Psaltery and Harp: I my self will awake early.

In the thanksgiving of faith, and promise of praise, he composeth himself in
the best frame of spirit unto the work, and fitteeh himself by all means unto
it. Whence learn, 1. It is our duty, especially when we are about any piece of
immediate spiritual worship, to take heed what we are doing, what the work is
about which we are going, who the Lord is with whom we have to do, and how our
heart is disposed, that so we may approve our selves to God with the more
comfort: for this does the Psalmists example teach us; O God, my heart is
fixed, I will sing. 2. In Gods worship it is very needful we should have our
minds present without diversion* and our affections composed, and set rightly
toward the Lord, and the work in hand, as here, My heart is fixed. 3. As a man
first tuneth his instrument, and then plays on it: so should the holy servant
of God first labor to bring his spirit, heart and affections into a solid and
settled frame for worship, and then go to work; My heart is fixed: or prepared
firmly, I will sing and give praise. 4. As the glory of man above the brute
creatures, is, that from a reasonable mind he can express what is his will by
his tongue: so the glory of the Saints above other men, is to have a tongue
directed by the heart, for expressing of Gods praise: I will sing and give
praise, even with my glory. 5. That only is our glory, wherein and whereby we
do most glorify God: for this cause the tongue directed by a holy heart, is
here called David's glory: I will sing and give praise, even with my glory. 6.
Under typical terms we are taught to make use of all sanctified means for
stirring of us up unto Gods service: for this the Psalmist intends, when he
says; Awake Psaltery and Harp. 7. We our selves must first be stirred up to
make right use of the means before the means can be fi^ to stir us up:
therefore, says he, I my self will awake early.

Ver. 3. I will praise thee, O LORD, among the people, and I will sing praise
unto thee among the Nations.

4. For thy mercy is great above the Heavens: and thy truth reaches unto the
clouds:

5. Be thou exalted, O GOD, above the Heavens; and thy glory above all the
earth.

Here is the praise of God, and the reasons thereof; Whence learn, 1. It is no
small help unto the discharge of a duty, to engage the heart unto God for the
doing of it, for in effect that is the most we can attain unto in this life,
but in the next life we shall have full vent for our will to praise God, and
shall follow our purpose with perpetual perseverance: I will praise thee, O
Lord, among the people. 2. Sincerity has confidence to profess its purpose
before the Lord: I will praise thee, O Lord. 3. As it is the duty and desire
also of a true worshipper, that all the world should be stirred up to praise
the Lord: so it was the comfort of the Church of the Jews, to foresee the
joining of the Gentiles in the song, and to see the Gentiles stirred up by the
songs of the Jewish Church; I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people, and
will sing praises unto thee among the Nations. 4. The matter and reasons of
Gods praise, are higher then the worshipper can reach, and larger then he can
fathom, and in special the mercy of the Lord toward his people, is larger then
the wide circle of Heaven: Thy mercy is great above the Heavens. 5. There is
more stuff and substance of good in the Lords promises, then the
sharpest-sigh^ed Saint ever did or can perceive; for when we have followed the
promise, to find out all the truth which is in it, we meet with a cloud of
unsearchable riches, and are forced to leave it there; for so much is included
in this, Thy truth reaches unto the clouds. 6. The height of our praising of
God, is to put the work of praising God upon himself and to point him out unto
others, as going about the magnifying of his own Name, and to be glad for it,
as here; Be thou exalted, O God, above the Heavens, and thy glory above all the
earth.

Ver. 6. That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and
answer me. After the praise of God from faith, follows the prayer of faith.
Wherein learn, 1. The Church is the Lords beloved, or the incorporation more
loved then any thing else in the world* therefore here called, Thy beloved. 2.
Because the Church is Gods beloved* the care of it should be most in our mind,
and the love of the preservation of it, should draw forth our praye^ most in
favor of it; That thy beloved may be delivered, save. 3. Whosoever is
entrusted with any public charge, Civil or Ecclesiastic in a special manner,
should make the preservation and welfare of Gods people, their chief aim, and
the chief matter of their prayer, and the greatest sa^^^faction of their
desires, as here is done; That thy beloved may be delivered, save, and answer
me. 4 As it is presupposed that the Church shall be frequently in danger, so it
is certain that her delive^y and preservation must be brought about by God in
his way, and by his power, and God must be trusted with this work; therefore
says he, That thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right hand.

Ver. God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem:
and mete out the valley of Succoth.

8. Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head: Judah is my Lawgiver.

Here the Psalmist looks unto the word of promise for his answer. Whence
learn, 1. Supplicants must take the answer of their prayers from the Word of
promise, for he who finds his warrant to pray, has his answer before he
begin to pray* for he prays according to the Will of God, and so he has his
petition; so does David teach: God has spoken in his holiness. 2. Faith
closing with a promise will furnish joy to the believer, before he enjoy the
performance of it: God has spoken, says he, I will rejoice. 3. The believer
of a general promise, may branch out the particulars in it, which are not
performed no less clearly, then if they had been particularly expressed: for
so does the Psalmist teach, saying, I will divide Sechem, and mete out the
valley of Succoth, which thing came to pass as he believed, and the whole
Kingdom under him was now settled for his particular interest, when this Psalm
was composed: but as it typified the reducing of the distracted parts of
Christ's Kingdom into the unity of Reformation, and joint subjection to his
Government, it was to be performed no less certainly then the distracted parts
of the typical Kingdom of Israel was to be joined in uniforme subjection under
David, who here says; Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Ephraim also is the
strength of my head, Judah is my Lawgiver.

Ver. 9. Moab is my wash-pot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe, over Philistia
will I triumph. After composing of the tribes of Israel, representing the
visible Church, he turns him to the foreign enemies of the Kingdom, and
assures the Church of victory over them also. Whence learn, 1. As in the
typical victories of David, so in the Conquest which Christ makes, some are
more sincere and cordial subjects, some do feign subjection out of constraint
or carnal motives; and as in David's, so in Christ's victories, some are vessels
of honor; all serving for the use of the great house: Moab is my wash-pot,
over Edom will I cast out my shoe, over Philistia will I triumph. 2. When faith
does look through the prospect of Gods Word and Promises, it will discover
afar off many advantages, as here we see.

Ver. 10. Who will bring me into the strong City? who will lead me into Edom?

11. Wilt not thou, O God, who have cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go
forth with our hosts?

In the war against Edom, the difficulties are represented, which the Church
militant shall meet with in her battles against open enemies, which
difficulties are here overcome by faith, encouraging her against all
impediments. Whence learn; 1. The Church of believers may find, and shall
find in some passages of their exercise, some maine difficulties meeting them
in their progress, and some enemies harder to overcome then others; some
devils more strong in their possession then others, represented here by the
strongest City of Edom; Who will bring me into the strong City? 2. When we meet
with any difficulty greater then any former has been, faith must give more
employment unto God, and put in to him for more assistance and strength: Who
will lead me into Edom wilt not thou, O God? 3. Faith must not be discouraged
in her warfare, from any tokens of Gods displeasure, formerly let forth against
his people, but rather must draw encouragement from thence, taking all the
executions of threatenings for so many pawnes and pledges of the performing of
promises, as the Psalmist does here: Wilt not thou who had cast us off? and
wilt not thou go forth with our hosts?

Ver. 12. Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man. He repeateth
his prayer, and insisteth upon his request* Whence learn, 1. When the believer
finds his faith weakest, he must make use of prayer, as the infirm man does
of a staff in his walking; Give us help from trouble. 2. He who would have
Gods help in any business, must quit confidence in man's help; and the seeing
of the vanity of man's help, must make the believer to trust the more unto, and
expect the more confidently Gods help, as here is done; Give us help from
trouble, for vain is the help of man.

Verse. 13. Through God we shall do valiantly; for he it is that shall tread
down our enemies. He closes the Psalm comfortably, in assurance of the
Churches victory. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever may be the variety of the
exercises of faith, victory and triumph shall close the war, and crown the
wrastler; Through God we shall do valiantly. 2. Albeit the means be nothing
but vanity without God, yet they must be used, for they are something when they
are used by us, and put in Gods hand: for, Through God we shall do valiantly.
3. What the Lord does by the believer as his servant, or by any other
instrument, God must have the glory of it; Through God (says he) we shall do
valiantly. 4. The faith of the Churches victory over her enemies, is grounded
upon Gods engaging in the war, for the Church, and against our enemies; For he
it is that shall tread down all our enemies.

PSALM CIX. To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
DAvid, as a type of Christ, has here to do with his and the Lords desperate
enemies. The Psalm has three parts. In the first part, he complains against
them unto God, v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. In the second, he pronounces the fearful
vengeance of God against them, by way of imprecation in the Spirit of
prophecy, unto v. 21. In the third part, he puts up a prayer to God for
himself, and is comforted. In all which he is a type of Christ, and has an eye
unto Christ's Kingdom, and to the desperate enemies thereof, as the Apostle
Peter does teach us in his application of what is here spoken, as a Prophecy
to be in part completed in Judas, Acts 1.20. And so David here, is not
satisfying his own private revenge against Achitophel, or any other such like
traitor, but as a Prophet foretelling what judgment was to fall on the
desperate enemies of God, and as a Saint subscribing to Gods righteous
judgments, for the terror of all opposers of Christ's Kingdom.

Verse 1. HOld not thy peace, O God of my praise:

2. For the mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful are opened
against me; they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.

3. They compassed me about also with words of hatred: and fought against me
without a cause.

4. For my love they are mine adversaries: but I give my self unto prayer.

5. And they have rewarded me evil for good: and hatred for my love.

In his complaint, he prays the Lord to show himself in justice against his
desperate enemies, and charge them for false and malicious calumnies, and
wicked ingratitude against him. Whence learn, 1. As the most innocent and holy
servants of God are subject to heavy slanders, and false calumnies raised
against them, so the best remedy and relief in this case* is to go to God with
the matter, as here the Psalmist does. 2. The Lord will bear witness in due
time unto the innocence of his oppressed and unjustly defamed servants, ^s here
the Prophet prays for in his prayer, and does expect it: Hold not thy peace,
O God. 3. A good conscience may be sure to be cleared from false imputations,
and should comfort it self with Gods approbation in the mean time, because
whatsoever infamy the believer does lie under, the Lord will bring forth his
innocence and commendation: for this reason among others, the Prophet does call
the Lord, O God of my praise. 4. Impudent back-biters will put such a face upon
the most wicked calumny and slander of an innocent servant of God, and will
avow it openly in his face, as if it were of truth, as here we see: For the
mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against me, they
have spoken against me with a lying tongue. 5 An innocent man may be so
circumvented with calumnies and lies forged of him, as he shall be unable to
find out any way to clear himself, as here we see; They compassed me about
also with words of hatred, 6. Albeit, when an innocent man has to do with a
wicked and impudent slanderer, he may be put to no less hard exercise, then if
he were yoked in a combat to fight for his life, yet it is comfort when God and
his own conscience know that he suffers unjustly: They fought against me
without a cause. 7. Innocence, kindness and good deeds, done by the godly,
unto the wicked instruments of Satan, will not exempt them from their malicious
calumniating of them, yea, no man is more subject to this requital then they
who do deserve best of the wicked world, even Christ and his servants are of
all men most traduced: For my love they are my adversaries, says the type of
Christ, and Christ in him. 8. It is not the way to overcome the calumnies of
the wicked, to render reviling for reviling, or to loose the tongue unto evil
words; but the only way to overcome all, is to go to God as Supplicants, as
here the Psalmist did; But I gave my self to prayer. 9. When malicious lips
against a man are joined with the ingratitude of the Calumniator, it makes up
a fearful ditty against the slanderer; as here, And they have rewarded me evil
for good* and hatred for my love.

Ver. 6. Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand:

7. When he shall be judged, let him be condemned: and let his prayer become
sin.

8. Let his days be few: and let another take his office:

9. Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.

10. Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek their
bread also out of their desolate places.

11. Let the extortioner catch all that he has: and let the stranger spoil
his labor.

12. Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to
favor his fatherless children.

13. Let his posterity be cut off: and in the generation following let their
name be blotted out.

14. Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the LORD; and let not
the sin of his mother be blotted out.

15. Let them be before the LORD continually; that he may cut off the memory of
them from the earth.

16. Because that he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor and
needy man: that he might even slay the broken in heart.

17. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in
blessing, so let it be far from him.

18. As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with his garment: so let it
come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.

19. Let it be unto him as the garment which covers him, and for a girdle
wherewith he is girded continually.

20. Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the LORD: and of them that
speak evil against my soul.

In this second part of the Psalm, he pronounces the most fearful vengeance
of God upon malicious calumniators, and that as a Prophet and the Messenger of
God, to show the wrath of God against such wicked persons in general, and
especially against the enemies of the Gospel; for he speaks here as the type
of Christ, as Peter shows, applying this prophecy to Judas by name, Acts
1.20. Whence learn, 1. Albeit it be not lawful for any man to use such
imprecations, out of private revenge, or against any man in particular, as
David does, who was led as a Prophet by the Spirit of God, yet this does show
unto us, that fearful and heavy are those judgments which attend ungrateful
calumniators of honest men, and in special all such as are enemies to Christ
and to his Gospel, and to his faithful Ministers, or to those in whom the work
of Gods grace does appear, and that in special for their devising and fostering
lies and slanders of them that profess Gods truth, of purpose to make them,
and the truth which they maintain, and all of their kind, to be the more
hated and despised among men: for this which is written here, shall be their
judgment, according as they draw deeper in this sort of transgression, and do
approach to Judas his treachery. 2. More specially, these are the wages and
reward of the desperate enemies of Christ, and the Gospel, and Christ's
servants; First, all sort of mischief shall come upon such a man's own person
from men, and from devils, and from Judicatories, and from Heaven, Wrath shall
be on him, in relation to his liberty, to his enterprises, to his suits of law,
and his exercise of Religion, till he be cut off from the world, and rooted
from his place, v. 6, 7, 8. Secondly, mischief shall be on his family, wife and
children, goods and estate, whereof his children shall have no benefit, but be
exposed to all misery without pity, v. 9, 10, 11, 12. Thirdly, mischief shall
be upon his posterity till they be rooted out, with infamy to him of whom they
came, being pursued in wrath to the third and fourth generation, as the
children of him that hated God, till his fame and memory perish, v. 13, 14, 15.
and that for his merciless persecuting of the Lords poor children, v. 16.
Fourthly, the curse of God, without hope of Gods blessing, shall pursue his
graceless and cursed disposition, to the vexation of his soul and body, and it
shall be fastened on him on all hands perpetually, v. 17, 18, 19. as the just
reward of the deadly enemies of the Lord, and of the salvation of his people,
v. 20* And this is set down as a part of a Psalm of David, to be sung unto
Gods praise, and allowed and said Amen unto, by all the people of God, against
the desperate and unreconcileable enemies of Christ, and of his true servants,
whereby the Church of God may be edified and kept fast in the faith and
profession of Christ, and free from persecution of his faithful servants.

Ver. 21. But do thou for me, O GOD, the Lord, for thy Names sake: because thy
mercy is good: deliver thou me.

22. For I am poor and needy: and my heart is wounded within me.

23. I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am tossed up and down as
the locust.

24. My knees are weak through fasting: and my flesh fails of fatness.

25. I became also a reproach unto them; when they looked upon me, they shaked
their heads.

The third part of the Psalm, wherein the persecuted Saint puts up prayer
unto God for comfort to himself, and for delivery, using sundry reasons for
strengthening of his faith, to v. 26. where he repeateth his prayer, with other
reasons to enforce it, to v. ^9. and having found comfort and victory, he
closes the Psalm with thanksgiving, v. 30, 31.

From his first prayer, and the reason thereof; Learn, 1. Whatsoever mischief
be appointed for the enemies of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, it shall not
prejudice the godly persecuted, nor hinder their access unto God, or Gods
befriending of them, for so teaches the Psalmist; But do thou for me. O God,
the Lord. 2. It concerns God in his glory, as to punish his foes, so to
defend his friends and children: Do thou for me for thy Names sake. 3. The plea
of the believer is not his own goodness, but the readiness of Gods mercy unto
Supplicants; Because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me 4. Because God is good
and merciful* therefore he will not suffer his own to perish in their
affliction; Because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me. 5. Before the Lord do
comfort his children in their affliction, he brings them to the sense of
their own insufficiency, and of their need of his help, and when this poverty
of spirit is given, it is a fore runner of delivery; Deliver thou me, for I am
poor and needy. 6. As the Lord by affliction does waken the sense of sin, and
wound the man's spirit, so is he a ready Physician to the contrite: Deliver thou
me, for my heart is wounded within me. 7. This mortal life is like a shadow,
and when affliction is superadded to mortality, man's life is like the shadow of
the evening, which is speedily stretched forth til it vanish, and when a Saint
is in this condition, he may expect the fruit of Gods compassion, as here,
Deliver me, for I am gone like a shadow when it declineth. 8. The children of
God must not look for any certain dwelling place, but to be driven to and fro
by persecution, as the wind makes the locust to leap from place to place; I
am tossed up and down as the locust. 9. The grief of the godly under
persecution may overcome the natural comfort of meat and drink, and bring their
body to wasting leanness; My knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh
fails of fatness. 10. As it is usual for the wicked to mock the godly, being
brought low by persecution: so there is no part of the cross more heavy to
the godly then derision; I became also a reproach unto them when they looked
upon me. 11. That which God does threaten for a curse on the wicked, may for
the point of outward calamity fall upon the dearest children of God; as what is
threatened, Deuteronomy* 28. in sundry things, is here found on the persecuted child
of God; I became a reproach unto them, they shaked their heads.

Verse. 26* Help me, O LORD my God: O save me according to thy mercy.

27. That they may know that this is thy hand: that thou, LORD, have done it.

28. Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed, but
let thy servant rejoice.

29. Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame: and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a mantle.

He prays again for help, and adds more reasons, especially this reason,
that so the difference of Gods dealing with his servants, and with his foes may
the better appear; Whence learn, 1. As trouble is lengthened and lies on, so
must prayer be repeated and insisted upon, as here: Help me, O Lord my God, and
save me according to thy mercy. 2. When the Lords children do perceive that
Gods honor is obscured by their suffering, they become no less desirous to
have God restored to his honor, then to have themselves delivered from
trouble; Save me, that they may know that this is thy hand, that thou, Lord,
have done it. 3. Albeit the Lord be the inflicter of the troubles of the godly
for their trial, and for manifestation of his truth toward them, and grace in
them, yet the world cannot perceive this, till God lift up the hand of his own
out of trouble; Save me, that they may know that this is thy hand, and that
thou, Lord, have done it. 4. When God shows himself reconciled to a soul,
light arises in trouble, to let them see both their own relief, and the
overthrow of their adversaries, as here is shown in the proposition of the
condition of the godly and their enemies. 5. It matters not what the enemy
speak against the godly, so long as God approves them: yea, the more the
enemy be despiteful, the more will the Lord be kind to his servants: Let them
curse, but bless thou. 6. When the controversy between the godly, and their
persecutors comes before the Lord to be judged, shame shall cover the face of
the persecutor, and Gods child shall rejoice; When they arise, (to wit, for
pleading of their cause) let them be ashamed, but let thy servant rejoice. 7.
The pretenses whereby the wicked deceive their own consciences in persecuting
the Saints, shall be their sin, and their shame and confusion; Let mine
adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their
own confusion, as with a mantle.

Ver. 30. I will greatly praise the LORD with my mouth; yea, I will praise him
among the multitude.

31. For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor: to save him from those
that condemn his soul.

He closes his prayer and the Psalm comfortably. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the
persecuted children of God be put to mourning and prayer for a time, yet the
issue of their exercise shall be joy and praise; For I will greatly praise,
says the Supplicant here. 2. It is not unusual to God to make the delivery of
his children manifest before the people, who were witnesses of their hard usage
by the wicked, and to make his servants to proclaim his praise with their own
mouth; I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth, yea, I will praise him
among the multitude. 3. As Satan, v. 6. shall stand at the right hand of the
Persecutor, both to drive him on to perdition in his sin, and then to accuse
him and torment him for it, so shall the Lord stand at the right hand of his
persecuted servants in their lowest condition, to strengthen them under their
trouble, and to deliver them out of it; For he shall stand at the right hand of
the poor* to save him from them that condemn his soul. 4. Albeit the experience
of the promised delivery be not yet come, yet the foresight of it by faith in
Gods Word, and gracious nature, is sufficient cause of joy to the persecuted
Saint, and matter of praise unto God; I will greatly praise the Lord with my
mouth, for he shall stand at the right hand of the poor to save him.

PSALM CX.
THis Psalm contains the doctrine of Christ, God and man in one person,
concerning his everlasting Kingdom and Priesthood, whose Kingdom albeit begun
to be manifested among the Jews, yet was to be extended unto the Gentiles with
great success, v. 1, 2, 3 As for his Priesthood, he is settled therein for ever
by an Oath, v. 4. and that with the overthrow of his enemies, how great or many
soever, v. 5, 6. yet not without Christ's sufferings, by which he was first to
be humbled, and then to be exalted, v. 7.

Ver. 1. THE LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand: until I make
thine enemies thy footstool. In the first place, the Prophet being taught of
God, describes the Person of Christ, in both his Natures, and in his Kingly
office, which he exercises in heaven from the beginning of the world to the
end thereof, until all his enemies shall be destroyed. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
the understanding of Christ's person and offices be necessary unto the Church,
yet none know the Son save the Father, and they to whom he will reveal him: for
David knew Christ only by the Fathers teaching; The Lord said, says he. 2.
Christ is David's Son, and David's Lord also: David's Son, in regard Christ
assumed his humane nature of David's seed; and David's Lord, because he is God,
very God and very man in one person; The Lord said to my Lord, that is, God the
Father revealed to me concerning God the Son, my Lord and Redeemer. 3. Christ
in his Kingly office is exalted to the fellowship of glory and power with the
Father, authorized by him in his Kingdom, and established therein by divine
decree: The Lord said to my Lord. 4. Christ since the beginning of the world
has had, and to the end of the world shall have enemies to his Kingdom, who
shall fight against him, but he shall prevail over them complea^ly and
gloriously, to their shame and confusion: Sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool. 5. No less then divine power is able to
subdue the enemies of Christ's Kingdom; for devils and wicked men, sin, death
and hell are opposite to his throne; Sit there until I make thine enemies thy
footstool. 6. Albeit this victory is not fully obtained, till the end of the
world, because of the renewing of the battle by new instruments, from
generation to generation, yet till then and for ever Christ the King enjoys
his glory in heaven, and sits judging and ruling powerfully all things for
the good of his Church; Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies
thy footstool.

Ver. 2. The LORD shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in
the midst of thine enemies. In the second place he shows the means and
manner of his Conquest and governing, to wit, by the preaching the Gospel.
Whence learn, 1. Christ wants not a rod and scepter whereby to govern, but he
has the Word of God preached for the Ensign of his Princely power and
preheminencie, which is the arm and power of God unto salvation to every one
that believes* and which is able to throw down every strong hold exalted
against the knowledge of him; This is the rod of thy strength. 2. Christ was
King in his Church, and was in exercise of his office before his Incarnation,
and that by his Word preached, which is the rod of his mouth, Isa. 11.4. For he
shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion, presupposes the rod of his
strength in Sion. 3. It was decreed, that Christ's Kingdom, howsoever first and
most clearly manifested among the Jews, yet should not be limited within
Judea, but should go forth unto the Gentiles for subduing them; The Lord shall
send the rod of thy strength out of Zion. 4. How many enemies soever shall
oppose the Kingdom of Christ, and how powerful soever they shall be, yet
Christ shall bear rule, enjoy his Kingdom, maintain his subjects, and go on
in his Conquests; Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.

Ver. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties
of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou have the dew of thy youth. In
the third place he shows what success Christ shall have; for he shall have
abundance of Converts, who shall come to his Church offering themselves* as the
free-will-offerings were brought to the beautiful holy Temple, and that in such
multitudes and Con^^uence, as his young Converts shall be innumerable, like the
dew upon the grass, which dew issues out as it were from the mornings womb
as its daily birth. Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever course our Lord shall take, for
inviting and compelling guests to come to his feast, and to the society of his
visible Church, yet only his Elect, his redeemed ones, all of them are made
most willing Converts by his Omnipotent power, effectually inclining their
hearts, and making them willing; Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power. 2. Christ's Church by the administration of holy Ordinances, by the
setting forth of the Lords holiness, by her teaching and persuading
effectually unto the duties of holiness, is exceeding beautiful in the eyes of
God, and of spiritual beholders; Thy people shall be willing in the beauty of
holiness. 3. True Converts by the power of the Gospel are Christ's children and
offspring, who shall grow up before him in simplicity and harmlesnesse, as the
youth in each generation do grow, and shall be for multitude as the stars of
Heaven, as the sand on the seashore: or as the morning dew descending from the
Heaven: From the womb of the morning, thou have the dew of thy youth.

Ver. 4. The LORD has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchizedech. In the fourth place, is his Priesthood settled.
Whence learn, 1. Christ as he is King of his Church, so he is Priest also, for
the teaching of Gods will to his subjects, for reconciling them to God by his
propitiatory sacrifice, for sanctifying them, for making their services
acceptable, for bearing the iniquity of their holy things, for interceding
always for them, and blessing them effectually in the Name of the Lord: Thou
art a Priest, says the Lord unto our Lord. 2. Christ is an everlasting Priest,
who lives for ever to make intercession for us, and neither needs nor can
admit any successor, or suffragan to himself in his office; Thou art a Priest
for ever. 3. Christ in his office is no Usurper, for he is called to it, his
Priesthood is unchangeable, confirmed by an Oath, having the glory of God laid
in pawn for its stability and continuation without change: The Lord has
sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever. 4. Aarons order was not
confirmed by an oath, but was an imperfect type of Christ's Priesthood* to
endure only till the Lord came, till the time of Reformation came, and was to
be changed at Christ's coming; for seeing a change behoved to be made of the
Priesthood. a change behoved also to be made of the Levitical law: Thou art a
Priest for ever* (not after the order of Aaron, but) after the order of
Melchizedech. 5. Melchizedechs order, was not the pattern, but a type and
shadowing resemblance of Christ's Priesthhood: for as Melchizedech in his
Scriptural being is mentioned and brought in, without showing who was his
father or mother, and had both the offices of King and Priest joined in his
person, and was first King of righteousness, and then King of peace; as is
more largely described by the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews: so is
Christ really without beginning and ending, both King and Priest, who brings
perfect righteousness and peace to his subjects; Thou art a Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchizedech.

Ver. 5. The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through Kings in the day of
his wrath.

6. He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies: he shall wound the heads over many countries.

In the fifth place is set down the victory of Christ over his enemy. Whence
learn, 1. Christ the Mediator, and King of his Church, and every believer in
him, have God ready at hand in all that they have to do: for as Christ is at
the right hand of the Father for glory, so the Father is at Christ's right hand
for cooperation and assistance: The Lord at thy right hand, says he. 2. As the
Kings and Rulers of the earth are usually great enemies to Christ's Kingdom, so
he is the hardest party that ever they shall meet with: The Lord at thy right
hand shall strike through Kings. 3. The Lord has a time of patience wherein he
bears with his enemies, and a day of wrath when he will break forth against
his adversaries: He shall strike through Kings in the day of his wrath. 4.
Christ's Government is wise and just, convincing some of sin, and pordoning the
penitent; convincing others of sin, and sealing them up to condemnation,
casting down the proud, and comforting the cast down, and doing all things for
the good of the subjects most discreetly; He shall judge among the heathen. 5.
Were there never so many enemies to Christ, they are all dead men before him,
whom he wili kill, and will cast their carcases in the ditches of their own
camps; He shall fill the places with dead bodies. 6. As he will punish the
multitudes of people, who under wicked Commanders do oppose his Kingdom: so
will he in special punish wicked Rulers, that lead on their people against him,
how many soever they be who are joined in conspiracy; He shall wound the heads
over many countries.

Ver. 7. He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up the
head. In the last place is set down the manner of Christ's carrying on his
Kingdom and Priesthood in his Church, to wit, by suffering and enderlng
hardship, as a good soldier pursuing the victory: for which his humiliation it
is promised he shall be exalted. Whence learn, 1. It behoved Christ first to
suffer, and then enter into glory: He shall drink of the brook in the way; or,
he shall partake of the waters of affliction. 2. Whatsoever a good soldier
does, or suffers in his warfare against, and in pursuit of his enemies,
Christ did and suffered in pursuing his enemies in his own person, and shall do
and suffer in his mystical body; He shall drink of the brook, that is, content
himself with any obvious entertainment, which he meets with in the chase of
his enemies, and not be retarded with any care of better fare, then what may
further his purpose. 3. As Christ's personal sufferings were not to endure any
longer then the time he was on his way to his glory, so neither are the
sufferings of his soldiers or his Church militant, his mystical body, to
endure any longer then they are in their way to the triumph, that is, during
this short life: He shall drink of the brook in the way. 4. As Christ in his
person was exalted after his sufferings as Victor, and did enter into his
glory: so shall he exalt every member of his mystical body after their
suffering, and lift up their head: for it is appointed even for the^^, through
many afflictions to enter into glory; Therefore shall he lift up the head.

PSALM CXI.
THe scope of this Psalm is to stir up all to praise God, and that for so many
reasons as there are verses in the Psalm. The exhortation is in the first
words: Praise ye the Lord. The reasons follow in order. The Psalm is composed
so after the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, as every sentence or half verse
begins with a several letter of the A B C in order, and all the Psalm is of
praise only. Whence we learn in general, 1. Sometime it is expedient to set all
other things apart, and employ our selves expressly to proclaim the praises of
the Lord only; for so is done in this Psalm. 2. The praises of the Lord are
able to fill all the letters, and words composed of letters, in all their
possible junctures or composition; for so much does the going through all the
letters of the A B C point out unto us he is Alpha and Omega, and all the
middle letters of the A B C of praise. 3. The praises of the Lord are worthy to
be kept in memory: for that this Psalm may be the better remembered, it is
composed after the order of the A B C, and so it insinuates thus much to us.

Ver 1. PRaise ye the LORD: I will praise the LORD with my whole heart in the
Assembly of the upright, and in the Congregation. He sets down the scope of
the Psalm in a word of exhortation to praise the Lord, and then annexeth ten
reasons and motives thereunto. The first motive is from his own example; Whence
learn, 1. When we are about any part of divine worship. it shall be to good
purpose to set our eye mainly upon the scope which we propound to our selves
therein: for so with less wavering of thoughts, and more fixed presence of
mind, we shall follow our purpose; Thus much does the Psalmists example here
teach us, setting down all he purposes to aim at in this word, Praise ye the
Lord. 2. The Pastor of the Congregation, being about to stir up others to this,
or any other spiritual duty, should go before them in his own example, and stir
up himself for that same end: for so teaches the Psalmist, saying, I will
praise the Lord. 3. As the Lord is worthy of hearty praises, so should we with
our heart take up the Song, and bear out the work; I will praise the Lord with
my whole heart. 4. Solemn meetings of Gods children for Gods public worship,
and furthering one another therein, is an Ordinance of God appointed for that
end: I will praise in the Assembly, and in the Congregation. 5. Albeit the true
members of the Church invisible, be only they who are justified, and who are
regenerate, and who are Students of sanctity and righteousness; and albeit
such only are fittest hearers, discerners and joyners in the Lords worship, yet
must the whole Congregation, or visible members of the Church, whatsoever they
be before God, be admitted to the fellowship of hearing God praised; for
thereby the elect unconverted may be regenerate; for when the Psalmist has
said, I will praise the Lord in the Assembly of the upright, he subjoyneth
also, and in the Congregation.

Ver. 2. The works of the LORD are great, sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein. The second reason of the exhortation to praise God, is from
the greatness and excellency of Gods works. When^e learn, 1. We need not go far
to seek matter for praising the Lord, his works are at our hand to furnish
matter; and albeit the Lords works in comparison one with another be some of
them greater, some of them lesser, yet all and every one of them being looked
upon severally are great; The works of the Lord are great. 2. Whatsoever glory
does appear in Gods works* there is more hid treasure and excellency therein to
be sought out, and if men do not see much in Gods works, it i^ because they do
not seek them out; The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them,
etc. 3. It is a mark of a wise child of God to take pleasure in Gods work, and
to take pleasure to search and see Gods praise therein, and these only do reap
the right use and benefit thereof; They are sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein.

Ver. 3. His work is honorable and glorious: and his righteousness endures
for ever. The third reason of praise, is the glory and honor of God to be seen
in his works. Whence learn, ^. The glory of Gods wisdom, power, justice or
mercy, or some of his attributes, is stamped upon his works of Creation and
Providence, and they who have an open eye to look upon them rightly, will
^cknowledge it; His work is honorable and glorious. 2. When the rays of Gods
wisdom, power, goodness, or any attribute, are perceived in his work, they
cause an honorable estimation of God, and of his work also; and a right
estimation of Gods work cannot be attained till his glory be seen in it; His
work is honorable and glorious. 3. Albeit the world always, yea, and Gods
children also, do often misconstrue the Lords work and dealing with themselves
and with others, yet there is no wrong therein, there was never any wrong, nor
ever shall there be any the least point of injustice in his dealing; His
righteousness endures for ever.

Ver. 4. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered: the LORD is
gracious, and full of compassion. The fourth motive to praise God, is the
course he takes to make his works to be remembered, mixing mercy and compassion
in all his providence toward men, and specially his own people. Whence learn,
1. What the Lord has done for his Church, he has ordained that it should be
remembered; and this he procures, partly by printing upon his works the large
impression of his power and goodness; partly by doing the like works when the
Church stands in need thereof; and partly by his Ordinances, commanding them
to be remembered; He has made his wonderful works to be remembered. 2. As the
grace and loving pity of God toward his Church, is the cause of the wonderful
working of God for his Church: so are they strong motives to cause his works to
be remembered unto his praise; For the Lord is gracious and full of compassion,
does here infer so much.

Ver. 5. He has given meat unto them that fear him, he will ever be mindful
of his Covenant. The fifth motive to praise God, is, because God according to
his Covenant provideth for the necessities of his people. Whence learn, 1. The
Lord in all ages has carefully furnished maintenance for the life, both bodily
and spiritual of his own people; He has given meat to them that fear him. 2.
As what good the Lord does unto his people, is because of his Covenant with
them, so what is to be done for them, he will do for his Covenants sake also,
without being wearied: He will ever be mindful of his Covenant.

Ver. 6. He has showed his people the power of his works: that he may give
them the heritage of the heathen. The sixth motive to Gods praise is, the proof
which he gave of his power for, and good will to this people, in bringing them
out of Egypt and unto Canaan. Whence learn, 1. The Lords working wonderfully
and extraordinarily for his people, were it but once and at one time, as it is
a sufficient reason of praising him ordinarily at all times thereafter, so it
is a sufficient prop to the faith of his people at all times; for this use are
we taught to make of the Lords working for his people, in giving them the
heritage of the heathen. 2. As the Lords working for his people at one time,
gives evidence of what he can do for them at any time: so will he have his own
people in special spectators, observers and witnesses of his working at any
time, that they may make use thereof at all times; He has showed his people
the power of his works, that he may give them the heritage of the heathen.

Ver. 7. The works of his hands are verity and judgment: all his Commandments
are sure.

8. They stand fast for ever and ever: and are done in truth and uprightness.

The seventh and eighth motives to Gods praise, is the suitableness of his Work
unto his Word, and the stability of his Word and Works in truth and
uprightness. Whence learn, 1. The works of the Lord done for his Church, and in
his Church to his people for their correction or comfort, and against their
enemies for their overthrow, do prove the Lord to be true and faithful in his
promises and threatenings: The works of the Lord are verity and judgment. 2.
As the Words and working of the Lord agree together, so should they be esteemed
of, acknowledged and commended by us: The works of the Lord are verity and
judgment. 3. The whole Word of God, all which he has commanded us to observe
and make use of, is worthy of all commendation* and of perpetual use; for all
the parts of it do agree one with another, suitable to the condition of his
people in all ages, good and profitable to them: it is clear and plain, and not
ambiguous, when it is rightly considered and compared with it self: for even
the ceremonial law, albeit abolished for the outward observation of the carnal
ceremony, which figured forth Christ to come, yet endures for ever in the
real signification of substance, benefits and duties thereby shadowed forth:
and the moral law* howsoever it serves to condemn me^ for their sins; yet it
is also a paedagogie to draw and drive condemned men to seek righteousness and
life in Christ* and to lead the believer along i^ his hand to heaven; All his
Commandmnts are sure, they stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth
and uprightness.

Ver. 9. He sent redemption unto his people: he has commanded his Covenant for
ever: holy and reverend is his Name. The ninth motive to Gods praise, is the
course which he has taken for man's salvation, and for his divine honor.
Whence learn. 1. The Lord ha^h made redemption ready for men, and haeh given
forth a commission for making offer of it, and for applying it to the benefit
of the believer; He sent redemption to his people. 2. Whosoever do receive the
message of Redemption sent unto them, God is entered with them in an
everlasting and unchangeable Covenant, for grace and salvation unto them: He
has commanded his Covenant for ever. 3. Wherein soever God has ^ngaged
himself by Covenant, we must not suspect him to be otherwise minded then he
has spoken, but must in faith and fear subscribe to his declaration, lest we
take his Name in vain: For holy and reverend is his Name.

Ver. 10. The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom: a good
understanding have all they that do his Commandments, his praise endures for
ever. The tenth motive to praise God is, from the fruit of believing and
obeying him. Whence learn. 1. As it i^ true wisdom to know the Lords will, and
to observe it: so then do men begin to give proof of wisdom in them, when they
begin to make conscience of the obedience of faith, and to stand in awe to
misbelieve Gods Word, or disobey his commands; For the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. 2. Howsoever the wicked who follow their own counsel, may
seem wise to worldlings, and the Lords children to be simple and witless, yet
in effect, the man that studieth constantly unto the obedience of faith, is the
only wise man; A good understanding have all they that do his Commandments. 3.
Albeit many do neglect to praise God, yet he shall not want praise: for the
matter of his praise shall endure, and he shall provide such as shall praise
him, from generation to generation, and for evermore; His praise endures for
ever.

PSALM CXII.
Ver. 1. PRaise ye the LORD, Blessed is the man that fears the LORD: that
delights greatly in his Commandments. THis Psalm is a praising of God for
blessing of the believers, and the whole Psalm does prove that the believer is
blessed, which Proposition is set down, v. 1. and confirmed with so many
reasons as there are verses following. Whence learn, 1. Albeit in singing of
some certain Psalm or part thereof, there be nothing directly spoken of the
Lord, or to the Lord, yet he is praised when his truth is our song, or when his
works and doctrine is our song, as here it is said; Praise ye the Lord. And
thereafter the blessedness of the believer takes up all the Psalm. 2. It is
the Lords praise, that his servants are the only blessed people in the world:
Praise ye the Lord: why? because, Blessed is the man that fears the Lord. 3.
He is not the blessed man who is most ob^ervant to catch all opportunities to
have pleasure, profit and worldly preferment, and cares not how he comes by
them: but he is the blessed man, who is most observant of Gods will, and
careful to follow it; Blessed is the man that fears the Lord. 4. As there is
matter of great delight and contentment in Gods Word, unto all them who fear
God: so the true mark of a sound believer and fearer of God, is delighting to
know, believe and obey Gods Word, for so he describes the man that fears
God: He delights greatly in his Commandments.

Ver. 2. His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright
shall be blessed. The first proof of the believers blessedness, is the
blessing of his children, (if God shall see it good to give him sons and
daughters of his body,) or the blessing of those that do by his teaching and
example follow the footsteps of his faith and obedience. Whence learn, 1 Albeit
we are bound to serve God, whether he give unto us benefits or not; albeit our
service at the best be but a very weak endeavor, and many ways tainted: and
albeit we be unprofitable servants, presupposing we could so serve, as we
should give perfect obedience, and do all that is commanded; yet it pleases
God to allure us unto his service, by propounding rewards and encouragements
unto us, as in this Psalm we see. 2. The best way to bring a blessing on our
children and posterity, is to fear God, by our instruction and example to
teach them to follow us in the Lords fear; For their seed shall be mighty upon
earth, even Kings and Priests unto God, whatsoever shall be their worldly
portion. 3. Albeit few do believe, yet is it true, that upright dealing has
better fruits then witty projecting and cunning catching: The generation of
the upright shall be blessed.

Ver. 3. Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness
endures for ever. The second proof of the believers felicity, is the blessing
of him in his outward estate. Whence learn, 1. Whether God shall give more or
less to the upright man, one way or other it shall be more useful to him then
all the wealth of the wicked can be to them: Wealth and riches shall be in his
house 2. Besides the temporal commodity and fruits in this life of the
believers righteous carriage, gracious rewards are laid up for him in another
life for ever: His righteousness endures for ever.

Ver. 4. Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness: he is gracious
and full of compassion, and righteous. The third proof of the believers
blessedness, is comfort in all troubles, and a deliverance out of all
difficulties, as the fruit of Gods grace enduring in him. Whence learn, 1.
Albeit the Lord will not exempt the believer from dark passages of his
providence, or from affliction and perplexity, yet he will make him sure of
comfort, direction, and a good event; Unto the upright there arises light in
darkness. 2. The light and comfort which is bestowed upon the upright, is the
fruit of Gods grace toward him, and of the juncture of saving graces in him:
for the words may be extended both to God, and to the believer by Gods
donation; He is gracious and full of compassion, and righteous; which is true
of the believer in some degree, and of God it is true, absolutely and
infinitely.

Ver. 5. A good man shows favor and lends; he will guide his affairs with
discretion. A fourth proof of the believers blessedness is, from his
properties or fruitfulness of his faith, in the works of justice and mercy,
dispensed with discretion. Whence learn, 1. The believer to whom God has
extended favor and kindness, will be good to them among whom he lives, and by
the fruits of equity, love, kindness and mercy, will give evidence of Gods
grace dwelling in him: for here the believer is called, A good man, who shows
mercy, and lends. 2. Grace and godliness, sound and fruitful faith, do not
make men to become fools without discretion, but do consist well with prudence
and discretion, in ordering their affairs wisely, and do teach them to give,
when, what, and to whom they should give, as the circumstances of time, and
place, and person, need of the party, and their own ability do require: He
will guide his affairs with discre^ion.

Ver. 6. Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance. A fifth proof of the believers blessedness, is the
promise of his stability in grace, and estimation with God for ever. Whence
learn, 1. No man shall serve God for naught; the grace bestowed upon him making
him to abound in well-doing shall be followed with more grace, rewarding and
crowning grace in him, and in special he shall be settled in the state of grace,
whatsoever temporal changes of inward or outward condition he may suffer;
Surely he shall not be moved for ever. 2. Albeit the world may misregard the
believer, and traduce him while he lives, and calumniate him when he is dead,
yet his memory shall remain fresh and fragrant before God, Angels and good men
who know him: The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.

Ver. 7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting
in the LORD. A sixth proof of the believers blessedness, is from the peace of
God guarding his heart against the fear of evil. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the
believer wants not his own infirmities and fears, yet he is not overcome of
fear, as the wicked or incredulous are; He shall not be afraid of evil tidings.
2. The guard of the godly man's heart, is not confidence in his own wisdom or
strength, natural courage or any earthly thing, but that which setleth him is
faith in God: His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.

Ver. 8. His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his
desire upon his enemies. The seventh proof of the believers blessedness, is his
security from his enemies. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the believer be not exempted
from having enemies; yea, and those mighty and terrible, and such as will be
studying a mischief against him, and breathing out terrors, yet faith in God
will guard his heart so, that he shall not be moved from the course of Gods
obedience for all that the enemy can do; His heart is established, he shall not
be afraid. 2. The light of Gods Word does show unto the believer both his own
delivery, and the overthrow of his enemies* which if he do not see in full
effect in his own time, yet he shall foresee it in the predictions of Gods
Word: He shall not be afraid, until he see his desire upon his enemies.

Ver. 9. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor: his righteousness
endures for ever: his horn shall be exalted with honor. The eighth proof of
the believers blessedness, is from his constant course in fruitfulness of
faith, and from the fruits thereof. Whence learn, 1. The works of mercy to the
distressed* are a special fruit and commendation of the faith of the believer:
He has dispersed, he has given to the poor. 2. The believer so gives as he
may be still able to give to many; He has dispersed. 3. As the believers
righteousness by justification, so his endeavor to be righteous in the effect
of sanctification, is not by fits, but constant and permanent; His
righteousness endures for ever. 4. Albeit the righteous may have their
reputation blasted among men, yet God in due time shall make them honorable:
His horn shall be exalted with honor.

Ver. 10. The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his
teeth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish. The last proof of
the blessedness of the believer is, that his enemies shall envy his
happiness, when they shall see the godly in good case, and themselves
miserable. Whence learn, 1. Sometime, even in this life the Lord so exalts
the believer, as his enemies are made witnesses thereof to their grief; and
however, yet at length at the great day they shall see the believers joy
clearly, to the increase of their own sorrow: The wicked shall see it, and be
grieved. 2. The more the wicked do envy the good of the godly, the more
miserable does he make himself: He shall gnash with his teeth and melt away. 3.
As the seeming good which the wicked does, shall be consumed and vanish; so the
good which he hoped and desired to have, shall never come to be enjoyed by him,
but shall vanish: He shall melt away, the desire of the wicked shall perish.

PSALM CXIII.
THis also is a Psalm of praise, wherein first, the Proposition, that God is
to be praised by all, is set down, v. 1, 2, 3. In the next place are the
reasons taken from his incomparable majesty, v. 4, 5. In the third place, are
the reasons of his praise taken from his bounty toward men, in raising the
afflicted unto an honorable condition, v. 6, 7, 8. and enlarging of desolate
families, v. 9.

Ver. 1. PRaise ye the LORD, Praise, O ye servants of the LORD: Praise the Name
of the LORD.

2. Blessed be the Name of the LORD, from this time forth, and for evermore.

3. From the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same: the LORDS
Name is to be praised.

From the exhortation to praise God, and declaration of his deserving to be
praised; Learn, 1. As it is all men's duty to praise the Lord, so in special it
is the duty of his Ministers, and Officers of his house. First, because their
office does call for the discharge of it publicly. Next, because as they
should be the best esteemers of the reasons of his praise, so also should they
be the fittest instruments to declare it. And lastly, because the ungodly are
deaf unto the exhortation, and dumb in the obedience of it: therefore when he
has said, Praise ye the Lord, he subjoyneth, Praise, O ye servants of the
Lord. 2. As the Lord will not be known, but as he declares himself in his
Word, so he will not be praised, save as he has declared himself; Praise the
Name of the Lord. 3. The time of the exercise of Gods praise, and continuation
of this service has no term set unto it, but is to endure all our life, and
for ever after; Blessed be the Name of the Lord from this time forth and for
evermore. 4. The praise of the Lord is not to be confined unto any place,
people or nation, but course should be taken that it may be extended from one
end of heaven to the other, from east to west, on both hands, south and north;
From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same, the Lords Name is
to be praised; for every where there is matter for it.

Ver. 4. The LORD is high above all Nations: and his glory above the Heavens.

5. Who is like unto the LORD our God? who dwells on high.

In the reasons taken from the Lords Majesty; Learn, 1. God must be exalted
above whatsoever excellency is to be seen in Kings and People in all the
earth; For the Lord is high above all Nations. 2. God must be exalted above
whatsoever glory is to be seen in the Fabric of Heaven, and more glory must be
given to him then what all the creatures can express: for heaven and earth,
and all things which he has made, are but the effect of some few words of the
Lord; His glory is above the Heavens. 3. Of any, or of all things which we see
or hear of, or can imagine, there is no comparison to be made with God, who
has set his throne above all the creatures; Who is like unto the Lord our God,
who dwells on high?

Ver. 6. Who humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in
the earth.

7. He raises up the poor out of the dust: and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill.

8. That he may set him with Princes: even with the Princes of his people.

9. He makes the barren woman to keep house; to be a joyful mother of
children: Praise ye the LORD.

In the reasons taken from the Lords gracious providence, in the revolution of
Kingdoms and families; Learn, 1. As the excellency and Majesty of God is so
great, that in regard of his own al-sufficiency he might justly despise the
excellency of Angels and men, whereof he standeeh in no need: so the Lords
taking any notice of men or Angels, is a point of humbling of himself, it is a
point of love to the creature, making him stoop so low as to look toward them;
For he humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the
earth. 2. As the Lord declares himself wonderful in the works of Creation, so
also in the works of Providence, in changing the public affairs of Kingdoms,
above and contrary to all probability and expectation of men; He raises up the
poor o^t of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill. 3. Preferment
unto high places comes neither from the east, nor from the west, but as God
casts down some, so he raises other some, That he may set them with Princes,
even with the Princes of his People. 4. Gods way manifested in Scripture, is
contrary to the course of levelling, for he will have some to be in a mean
place, and some to be Princes, even among his own People, as this text shows.
5. Howsoever the Lord be no less conspicuous in his throwing down of the
mighty, then in the raising of the poor: yet will he rather take his praise
here from his lifting up of the needy and poor, then from the casting down of
the mighty, that so he may give comfort and hope to the dejected that depend
upon him: He lifts the needy out of the dunghill, that he may set them with
Princes. 6. It ie no small benefit, yea, it is the greatest dignity in the
world, to be advanced not in wrath, but in mercy, to rule over the Lords
people: for so does God here commend his bounty to the needy; That he makes
them sit with the Princes of his People. 7. All changes in men's families are of
God, no less then the changes of St^te; He makes the barren woman to keep
house. 8. It is the special blessing of a family to increase in number: for
the Lords making the barren bear a number of children, is here made the
example of the most comfortable change of a distressed house: He makes the
barren to be a joyful mother of children. 9. The very hearing what comfortable
changes the Lord can make, and does make the afflicted to find, is a matte^ of
refreshment to all, and of praise to God from all* Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CXIV.
THis Psalm is a praising of God, for the gracious and glorious work of
delivering of his people out of Egypt, and bringing them into Canaan, and that
for six reasons. The first whereof is, v. 1. The next, v. 2. The third, v. 3.
The fourth, v. 4. The fifth with the special use thereof, v. 5, 6, 7. The
sixth, v. 8.

Verse. 1. WHen Israel went out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from a people
of strange language. From the matter of praise here specified; Learn, 1. The
Lords most glorious work done for his people, in special the work of
redemption, should be oftenest remembered, as the mention-making here and
elsewhere of the time when Israel came out of Egypt, shows. 2. Redemption is
then best esteemed of, when the miserable condition wherein we were, is called
to mind, as here Isreal's Redemption is commended from the state they were in,
in Egypt: The house of Jacob went from a people of a strange language. And this
is the first reason of commending this work of God.

Verse. 2. Judah was his sanctuary: and Israel his dominion. The next reason of
commending this glorious work, is the joining of delivered Israel in a near
fellowship with God. Whence learn, 1. People redeemed by God, are no more their
own, but are the Lords purchase, redeemed for his service: Judah was his
sanctuary, and Israel was his dominion. 2. The title and interest which God
justly does claim in his people, is that they may be consecrated unto him in
holiness, and subject themselves as his loyal Subjects to his Government:
Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel was his dominion. 3. All the consecration
and sanctification of Israel, is comprehended in and flows from what was to
be found in the tribe of Judah, and that is in Christ Jesus the flower of his
tribe: All Israel is his dominion, but Judah is his sanctuary.

Verse. 3. The Sea saw it, and fled: Jordan was driven back. The third reason of
Gods praise for this work, is from the drying of the red sea, and of Jordan,
that his people might pass out of Egypt, and into Canaan. Whence learn, 1.
Gods dealing for his people whom he has ransomed, does prove his wonderful
power for them, and love toward them, as the two miracles of the drying of the
sea, and of Jordan do commend the redemption of Israel. 2. When God will
deliver his people, no opposition can hinder, and when he will possess them in
what he promised, no impediment can withstand him: The Sea saw it, and fled,
and Jordan was driven back.

Verse. 4. The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs.
The fourth reason of Gods praise, is the causing mount Horeb and other hills
(in their way to Canaan) to tremble and quake, when he put forth his power on
them in the sight of his people. Whence learn, 1. There is no power in the
earth which God cannot overtop when he pleases, though they were like the
strongest mountains: for as he can shake the earth, so can he move and remove
any power on earth, as he gave evidence when he made the mountains by
earthquake to skip like rams, and the little hills like lambs.

Verse. 5. What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan that
thou wast driven back?

6. Ye mountains that ye skipped like rams: and ye little hills like lambs?

7. Tremble thou earth at the presence of the LORD: at the presence of the God
of Jacob:

The fifth reason of Gods praise, is the evidencing of his power, put forth
before his people, in so wonderful and miraculous a manner, as no cause can be
given of the works wrought for his people in their coming out from Egypt, their
entry into Canaan, and in the wilderness, except only Gods extraordinary
manifestation of his presence amongst his people, and for them: which the
Psalmist brings forth, by asking the cause of these miracles, and answering
the question by the terrible presence of God. Whence learn, 1. The Lord can
work so clearly for his people, that the most stupid and brute souls shall be
convinced of his respect to his children, as this experience does show. 2. If
Atheism, and unbelief in men could find any natural reason, or any pretense
of reason, whereby they might obscure the glory of Gods doing for his people,
they would not fail to do it, as this interrogation teaches; What ailed thee,
O thou Sea, etc? 3. The more narrowly the works of the Lord are looked unto,
the more evidently does his power and presence appear in working them, as the
answer unto the question, and holding forth the Lords presence twice for the
cause of such changes on the creatures do show. 4. The end and use of Gods
power manifested in favor of his people, is first, that all flesh should fear
God, and stand in awe of him; and next, that his covenanted people should look
upon his terror, as their bulwark: Tremble thou earth at the presence of the
Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob.

Verse. 8. Which turned the rock into a standing water: the flint into a
fountain of waters. The sixth reason of Gods praise, in the wo^k of delivery of
his people out of Egypt, is his wonderful provision for their drink in the dry
wilderness, by dissolving the flinty rock into water. Whence learn, 1.
Whomsoever the Lord does redeem, and set upon their way to heaven, he will
provide for whatsoever is necessary for their sustentation and comfort in their
journey, as his providing of drink for the camp of Israel give^h proof. 2. We
being called of God to follow our Redeemer, till we be put in possession of
promises, must not stand for any difficulty, or disappearance of means for our
sustentation and comfort, for God can work his purpose by contrary-like means:
He turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountaine-of waters.

PSALM CXV.
THe Church of Israel being under the power of the heathen, and unable to help
themselves, do flee to God for relief; and in the former part of the Psalm,
they pray for delivery, strengthening their hope to be heard, by four
argu^^^ts, unto v. ^. In the latter part, the Church is encourage^ to trust in
God, and to expect deliverance in due time, by several reasons, all serving to
confirm their faith, unto the end of the Psalm.

Verse. 1. NOt unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory: for
thy mercy, and for thy truths sake. In praying for relief from the bondage of
idolaters, they reject all confidence in themselves, and bring arguments of
their hope to be helped from other grounds. Whence learn, 1. It is no strange
thing to see Gods people for their chastisement, or trial, put under the power
of idolaters, as this experience of Israel does show. 2. When we seek any thing
from God, we ought to acknowledge our own unworthiness and ill deserving, and
to renounce all confidence in our selves: Not unto us give the glory, says the
Church here. 3. Albeit the Lords afflicted people may want all ground of hope
from their own behavior, yet grounds of hope can never be wanting, when they
look to Gods mercy and truth, and the glory of his grace in helping of them:
Not unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory: for thy mercy,
and for thy truths sake.

Verse. 2. Wherefore should the heathen say: Where is now their God? The second
reason of hope to have their (...) granted, is because if the Lord do not
deliver them, idolaters, under whose power they do lie, will continue to
blaspheme the true Religion, and the true God, whom the true Church does
worship. Whence learn. 1. The enemies of the Church are ready to blaspheme the
true Religion, when the Lords people are brought in straits, and under their
power, as here, The heathen say, Where is now their God? When we have brought
our selves in misery, and our Religion in danger of disgrace, we ought to be
more careful to have the Lord restored to his honor; and true Religion
restored unto its own beauty, then to be freed from misery; for the Church here
cannot endure the dishonor of God in their affliction: Wherefore should the
heathen say, Where is now their God?

Verse. 3. But our God is in the heavens: he has done whatsoever he pleased.
The third reason of hope to be heard, is, because God is omnipotent, and
supreme Governor of all things, and his authority is as his power, absolute,
to do what he pleases: and this reason strengthens also the former reason.
Whence learn. 1. The more the wicked do oppose God and the true Religion, the
more should his servants assert his glory, and truth: as the Church does here,
saying, But our God is in heaven. 2. The consideration of Gods absolute power,
and authority exalts God above all idols, stops all murmuration against
his dispensation toward his people, and their enemies; closes all disputation
against his revealed will, and loses all objections, arising from
difficulties, and impediments, which might hinder hope to be helped out of
misery, as here we see, Our God is in heaven, he does whatsoever he pleases.

Verse. 4. Their idols are silver and gold: the work of men's hands.

5. They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they see not.

6. They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell not.

7. They have hands, but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk not:
neither speak they through their throat.

A fourth reason of hope, that the Church shall be delivered from the power of
idolaters, is, because there is no other God to deliver them, save the Lord:
Idols can neither help their worshippers, nor hurt Gods people who despise
them, and therefore his people will hope in their own true God, and despise
idolaters and their idols both. Whence learn. 1. Images in the matter of
Religion whatsoever they seem to be, or represent, are but idols; for so are
they called here. 2. Images in Religion profit nothing, but bring trouble to
men, as their name in the original imports. 3. Albeit idolaters do bestow
largely upon their Idols; and put upon them artificially some shape, to
represent some perfections by them, yet the riches of the matter can give them
no excellency: They are but silver or gold at the best, their forgers and
authors are but men; for it is sufficient to disgrace any point of Religion if
it be of man's devising: They are the work of men's hands. 4 So many members as
the Images have, serving to represent some perfections by them, are so many
lies: for they have mouths, but speak not; eyes have they, but they see not;
They have ^ares, but they hear not; noses have they, but they smell not; they
have, hands but they handle not; feet have they, but they walk not, neither
speak they through their throat.

Verse. 8. They that make them, are like unto them: so is every one that
trusts in them. For closing this reason, he turns the reproach, which
idolaters did cast upon the true God and his worship, over upon themselves.
Whence learn, 1. Albeit the Lord be angry at his own people, yet must they not
forsake him, and go after idols to be helped by them: for so does the Church
here teach us. 2. The consideration of the folly of false Religion, should make
us cleave the closer to the true Religion, and to abhor the errors of humane
devising; for so are we taught by this example. 3. As it is an honor to be of
the true Religion, so it is the greatest disgrace a man can have, to be an
idolater: for the disgrace of the idol falls upon the worshipper thereof, as
here we see. 4. All idolaters are brutish, the makers of idols, authorizers of
them, worshippers and servers of them, are all like reasonlesse, and senseless
blocks, in this matter, like the idols which they make: They that make them,
are like unto them, that is, They have eyes, and see not, etc. 5 Whosoever do
expect any good, by making or worshipping of images, they join inward
worshipping of them, with the outward: and in their expecting any good by that
means, they prove themselves like reasonlesse blocks, as void of true wisdom
in this point, as images are of sense and motion: So is every one that trusts
in them.

Verse. 9. O Israel trust thou in the LORD, he is their help, and their shield.

10. O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD: he is their help, and their shield.

11. Ye that fear the LORD, trust in the LORD: he is their help, and their
shield.

In the latter part of the Psalm, the Church is encouraged to trust in the
Lord, and so to expect deliverance according to the petition set down, v. 1.
And that by seven reasons. The exhortation to trust in God is threefold, one
directed to Israel, v. 9. Another to the Priests, and Levits, v. 10. The third
to all that fear God, v. 11. Unto which exhortation, the first reason of
encouragement is added and repeated again and again. Whence learn, 1. No
tentation of affliction should drive us from expecting relief in trouble, and
trusting in God for it: for notwithstanding the Church here is under the feet
of the heathen, yet all are exhorted to trust in God: O Israel, trust thou in
the Lord. 2. Whosoever in their trouble do trust in God, may be assured to be
delivered, and guarded against all evils which may mar their blessedness:
Trust in the Lord for he is their help, and their shield. 3. The Ministers of
Gods house should go before the Lords people in trusting in God, and adhering
to him, specially in time of trouble; O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord. 4.
Such promises as are made in common to the house of Israel, are sufficient to
support the faith of public Ministers of the Lords house, as here we see: He
is their help, and shield. 5. As every one that fears God, is of the number
of true Israelites: so trusting in the Lord, he may be no less confident of
the consolation, and protection of God, then the public Ministers of the Lords
house: Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their help, and their
sh^^ld. And this is the first reason of encouragement to trust in God.

Ver. 12. The LORD has been mindful of us, he will bless us, he will bless
the house (...) Israel: he will bless the house of Aaron.

13. He will bless them that fear the LORD: both small and great.

The second reason of encouragement is taken from former experience of Gods
respect unto his people that fear him: and the third is taken from the promise
of blessing them, in time to come. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the Lord uses to
afflict his people, yet he does not forget them* or lay aside affection to
them: The Lord has been mindful of us. 2. The right use of bypast experience
of Gods care of us in affliction and trials, is to put trust in God in
aftertimes of new trial and affliction, as here, The Lord has been mindful
of us, is made use of to this end. 3 As the duty in trusting in the Lord, is
common to all sorts of persons, so the blessing of faith is common* and does
belong to all sorts of believers, great and small: He will bless us, he will
bless the house of Aaron, he will bless them that fear the Lord, both great
and small.

Verse. 14. The LORD shall increase you more and more: you and your children.
The fourth reason of encouragement to trust in the Lord, is, because the number
of believers shall be multiplied* Whence learn, Albeit the Church be driven, to
deep affliction, and distress, yet the number of the believers in God shall
increase, and the measure of Gods graces in his people shall be augmented, and
no age even unto the last shall want a posterity of believers, and God will
make no end of blessing them* which is ^o small encouragement unto believers:
The Lord shall increase you more and more, you and your children.

Verse. 15. You are blessed of the LORD, which made heaven and earth. The fifth
reason of encouragement is, because God omnipotent has pronounced believers to
be blessed, how miserable soever they may seem to themselves, and to others.
Whence learn, 1. Whatsoever distress believers may fall into, yet can they
never be accursed nor deprived of the blessing of righteousness, and eternal
life: for it is said to them all, You are blessed of the Lord, who calls
things that are not, and makes them to be. 2. The sight of the Lords work in
making heaven and earth of nothing, should strengthen us to apprehend how
richly the Lord can and will perfect what he says of blessing his people: You
are blessed of the Lord, who made the heaven and the earth.

Verse. 16. The heaven, even the heavens are the LORDS: but the earth has he
given to the children of men: The sixth reason of encouragement to trust in God
is, that albeit the Lord be abundantly satisfied in himself, and needs
nothing from the world, yet men have need to depend upon his goodness, and
trust in him, who has given unto them the use of his creatures on the earth.
Whence learn, 1. As it is no need of any creature which has moved God to make
a world, but rather his superabundant self-sufficiency has made the heavens
and the earth, to this end, that therein he may set forth his al^^ sufficiency
to the creatures: so is it no need of man's service, which made him make a
people and crave service of them: for he could be served with what he has in
Heaven; The heaven, even the heavens are the Lords. 2. Albeit God has no need
of m^n, and can live without dependence on man, yet man cannot live without
dependence on God, and use of his creatu^es in the world* The heaven is the
Lords, but the earth has he given to the children of men, wherein they may
dwell, and be sustained by what he bestows on them there. 3. As the plenty of
^iches of the earth is a pawn of the Lords readiness to give better things
unto man: so it is an evidence of man's poverty, and need of the service of so
many of Gods creatures, and of his obligation to trust in God and depend upon
him: The heaven is the Lords, but the earth has he given to the children of
men.

Verse. 17. The dead praise not the LORD: neither any that go down into silence.

18. But we will bless the LORD* from this time forth and for evermore. Praise
the LORD.

The seventh reason of encouragement to trust in God, is, because the Church of
believers shall be continued from generation to generation, and shall never
want reason to praise and bless God, from this time forth* and for ever*
Therefore in confidence of this mercy, let them trust in him, and praise him:
this reason he makes clear thus; The dead spiritually cannot praise the Lord,
and if the succession of the Church of believers should be now cut off with
this afflicted generation, neither could we who live, praise God in the earth
longer then we live on it, nor should there be any Church after us to discharge
this duty among the children of men: but this is impossible, for God shall not
want a generation of living believers to praise and bless him for his
goodness to the worlds end; Therefore we shall (...) and come forth of this
present affliction, and ere we die, another generation of believers shall take
this work off our hand, and so shall we that are the Church of God, bless him
from this time forth and for evermore: Whereupon he exhorts all men in this
confidence to praise the Lord, and closes the Psalm. Whence learn, 1. If
there were not a Church of believers, God should want his praise on the earth:
for the dead, to wit spiritually, do not praise the Lord. 2. And if in any time
of affliction, while the world stands, there were not a deliveran^^ ^^to the
Church, so that one generation of believers might ^ot follow another, then
should Gods praise among the children of men be abolished out of the world: for
as the (...) spiritually cannot praise the Lord, so neither can the dead bodily
praise him among them that know him not; that is; on the earth, where God^
praise is to be taught unto men: For the dead praise (...) the Lord, so neither
any that go down into silence. 3. Because God shall never want living men on
earth to praise him, and bless him for his goodness, therefore the Church of
believers shall be continued from one generation to another; that they may
bless and praise the Lord in every age, as here is said, But we shall praise
the Lord, from this time forth and for evermore. 4. The Churches affliction
cannot be so heavy, but they shall have cause to bless the Lord for his
goodness, and to stir up others to praise God with them: for the Prophet
closes the Psalm made in deep affliction of the Church with, Praise the Lord.

PSALM CXVI.
THis Psalm is a threefold engagement of the Psalmist unto thanksgiving unto
God for his mercy unto him, and in particular for some notable delivery of him
from death, both bodily and spiritual: The first engagement is, that he shall
out of love have his recourse unto God always by prayer, v. 1, 2. The reasons
and motives whereof are set down, because of his delivery out of a great
strait, v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. The second engagement is to a holy conversation,
v. 9. The motives and reasons whereof are set down, v. 10, 11, 12. The third
engagement is, unto promised praises, or paying of praises and vows before the
Church, with the reasons thereof, v. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Verse. 1. I Love the LORD: because he has heard my voice, and my supplications.

2. Because he has inclined his ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him,
as long as I live.

In his first engagement unto a constant dependence upon God, and calling on
him by prayer; Learn. 1. As it is among the wise purposes of God to put his
children to straites, that they may call on him, and he by granting their
petition may give them a new proof of his love to them, and so stir up their
love to him: so is it the duty of his children, to stir up their love to God,
upon every fresh experience of his respect to them: for this does the example
of the Prophet teach us, I love the Lord, because he has heard my prayer. 2.
Not Gods benefits, but God himself is the satisfactory object of our
complacency, and love wherein we may acquiesce: I love the Lord, says the
Prophet, after he had perceived the benefit. 3. To lo^^ (...) for himself, and
to love him for his favor, and benefits bestowed upon us, do consist well
together: for the loving of him for his favor bestowed on us, does lead us to
love him for himself: I love the Lord; because he heard my voice, and my
supp^^^^ious. 4. The root of thanksgiving is love to God, therefore love is
professed, before thanksgiving be promised; I love the Lord, is first set down,
and then a promise to call upon him in all straits thereafter. 5. It is no
small comfort and obligation put upon a man, to have experience of Gods
regarding of his prayer, and granting of his request, as the Psalmists twice
mentioning of it shows, once* v. 1. and here again; because he has inclined
his care unto me. 6. One proof of Gods hearing of our prayer, may and should
stir us up to believe in him, worship him, and have our recourse by prayer
unto him all the rest of our life: Because he has inclined his ear to me:
therefore will I call upon him, as long as I live.

Verse. 3. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold
upon me: I (...) trouble and sorrow. The sum of the reasons of this
engagement, is set down in his late experience, containing his deep ^rouble, v.
3. His calling to God for relief, v. 4 And Gods grace and mercy usually
extended unto poor supplicants, which helped him out of his low condition, v.
5, 6 The use whereof, name (...) rest on God who had delivered him, is in v. 7*
8.

From his trouble and danger wherein he was; Learn, 1. It is no (...) thing to
see a godly person (...) be in fear of death, bodily and spiritual, temporal
and everlasting, at one time: The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains
of hell got hold upon me. 2. The trouble of mind and conscience also,
whereunto Gods children are subject, as they are found in their several
degrees, cannot easily be expressed, therefore here are diverse words used,
Sorrows of death, pains of hell, trouble and felt sorrow. 3. The greatness
of the trouble, danger, misery and straits, whereinto the Lord does cast his
own, does lay a greater obligation on them who are delivered from those evils,
and makes Gods glory to be the more manifested in their bringing out of them,
as the scope of the Psalmists laying forth of his troubles here does teach us.

Verse. 4. Then called I upon the Name of the LORD: O LORD, I beseech thee
deliver my soul. From his course taken to have relief by calling on God; Learn,
1. The only true remedy of a grieved soul, is God being called upon by prayer;
for he is a strong refuge whereunto the humble soul may flee, and be exalted: I
called upon the Name of the Lord. 2. There is place and time for prayer, even
when the danger seems greatest, and the condition of the party supplicant
appears desperate, as here we see, When the pains of hell caught hold upon
me, then called I on the Name of the Lord. 3. Whether our desires be laid open
before God in many words, or few, it is not material before God: such a hearty
speech as this will pass before God for prayer, O Lord, I beseech thee,
deliver my soul.

Verse. 5. Gracious is the LORD, and righteous: yea, our God is merciful.

6. The LORD preserves the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me:

From the fountain of grace and mercy, whence he was helped; Learn. 1. Gods
gracious and merciful actions do give evidence of his gracious nature, and
readiness to show favor to all men, who according to the tenor of the
Covenant of grace do ^all on him, as here the Psalmist to show the cause of his
receiving actually a good answer, says, Gracious is the Lord, and righteous,
yea, our God is merciful. 2. There is nothing wanting in Gods attributes,
which may give assurance to the believing supplicant, to have his request
granted: he is gracious, and stands not for the persons unworthiness; he is
just and righteous, and will not fail to keep Covenant, and perform all
promises; he is merciful, and does not stand to pardon sin, iniquity and
transgressions: Gracious is the Lord, and righteous, yea, our God is merciful.
3. The Lords children commonly are not the worldly-wisest people, but for the
most part are of mean worldly wit, and whosoever of them has any measure of
prudence, they are for the course which they keep in trials and troubles,
accounted foolish, yea, and in their own estimation they are very witless, and
dare not lean (...) their own understanding, but do seek to be directed of
God; therefore they are here and elsewhere called simple. 4. Such as are
emptied of conceit of their own wisdom, and seek their direction, protection,
and preservation from God, do lie nearest unto the fountain of Gods mercy and
help in every difficulty: For the Lord preserves the simple. 5. Any one
example of Gods grace and mercy to any believer, is sufficienr to prove Gods
nature, inclination, readiness, and good will to every believer that calls
on him; so reasons the Psalmist, I was brought low, and he helped me.

Verse. 7. Return unto thy rest, O my soul: for the LORD has dealt bountifully
with thee.

8. For thou have delivered (...) soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling.

Here is a twofold use of this experience, one to settle his confidence on God,
another to praise God* for the experience of so great a delivery. Whence learn,
1. The general use of all the experiences of Gods favor which we find, is the
strengthening of our faith in God, as here we are taught. 2. (...) trouble and
tentations do not overcome our faith, yet the (...) usually do pe^^urbe, if not
the peace of (...) conscien^^ (...) least the pe^^^ of our mind, and somet^^^^
the peace of both: for, O (...), return to thy rest, imports a disquieting of
him from his rest. 3. As we should study not only to lay hold on God by faith,
but also to rest and acquiesce in his love and truth confidently: so should we
take advantage of every fresh experience of Gods favor, whereby we encourage
our selves to rely upon Gods grace and mercy, as here the Psalmist does:
Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee. 4. Meditation of Gods goodness to us, and speaking of i^ in the third
person, is a ready way to bring us unto nearer access unto God, and to speak
unto his Majesty in the second person, as here we see: For thou have delivered
my soul from death, says he, directing his speech to God. 5. When outward
trouble and inward tentations do set upon a soul at one time, when men do show
their wrath, and God hides his face, it is a sad condition, able to draw
tears from the stoutest heart, and to put him in hazard of sinning, and in
peril to perish: Thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears,
and my feet from falling. 6. As an humble and sensible soul will pack up many
troubles joined together in one, so a thankful soul will branch one mercy out
in sundry particular branches, as here the Psalmist distinguishes, the
delivery of his soul from death, of his eyes from tears, and of his feet from
falling.

Verse. 9. I will walk before the LORD, in the land of the living. The second
engagement by way of thankfulness, is unto a more holy way of walking with
God, whereunto as his faith made him confident, that he should attain, v. 10.
so his recovery from desperation made him a debtor to pursue the duty, v. 11.
and a debtor in so high a measure, as he knew not how to be thankful, v. 1^.

From his hopeful engagement to a holy carriage before God* and his Church;
Learn, 1. It is a good use of experiences of Gods goodness unto us, to engage
and oblige our selves to a more sure and holy ordering of our ways, as the
Psalmist did: I will walk before the Lord. 2. As the time of our life is the
proper opportunity of showing our thankfulness to God: so the visible (...) is
the fittest society we can live in, for expressing our thankfulness: for while
we are living, and living among the godly (beside whose society the rest of the
world is as a company of dead corpses) we have time and place o^ ma^^^esting
our obedience unto God: I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.
3. As a sincere conversation has God and men to be witnesses unto it, so
should the upright servant of God study to approve himself to both, as the
Psalmist does: I will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living.

Verse. 10. I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted.

11. I said in my haste: All men are liars.

12. What shall I render unto the LORD for all his benefits toward me?

He adds motives unto this his confiden^ (...) ^opefull engagement. Whence
learn, 1. Faith gives boldness to promise to our selves, and of our selves,
what the Lords Word does give warrant for: I believed, therefore have I spoken.
2. Faith is our surest holding of Gods blessings, more sure then present sense,
or experience past, or begun possession, for all those may be interrupted, and
overclouded, but faith laying hold on Gods Word, holds fast, when all things
else do fail. I believed therefore I have spoken. 3. Our comfort, confidence,
and quietness, and delivery are so much the sweeter, as heavy troubles and
tentations have gone before them, as here the engagement, is more cheerful, and
confidence more precious, Because (says he) I was greatly afflicted, and more
specially, I said in (...) hast^^: All men are liars, which if we take it of
David, does show that he doubted of the performance of the promise (...)
^ingdome, made in Gods Name to him by Samuel, and therefore was so much the
more comforted, when he saw the truth of it appear again. 4. The servants of
God do not stick to confess their faults and infirmities unto their own shame,
when thereby God may be glorified; as here the Psalmist says, I said in my
haste* etc. 5. Mis-beliefe may sometimes so far prevail* as it may seem to
reign, and a^ a Judge to sit down, and give ou^ decrees: I said in my haste,
that is, I gave it forth as (...)ion or decree. 6. As hastiness is the proper
(...) belief, so it cannot endure long in a bel^^^er, but (...) the time* (...)
inconsiderate passion, and (...) of tentation* I said (...) my (...). 7. When
mis-belief dares not directly v^nt it self against God, or Gods express Word,
it fails to ^uarrel with the messenger, and his fidelity in his commission; I
said in my haste, All men are liars. 8. He that sees Gods benefits rightly,
shall see himself unable to give thanks as becomes him, and shall be forced to
say, What shall I render unto the Lord? Yea, one benefit well considered, shall
call to mind many bypast, and present with it, many other present mercies, as
this one delivery makes the Psalmist say, What shall I render to the Lord for
all his benefits toward me? 9. The seen impossibility to render due thanks,
and praise to God for his mercies to us, should not hinder us, but rather
stir us up to aim at the duty, as we are enabled, as here it does the
Psalmist.

Verse. 13. I will take the cup of salvation: and call upon the Name of the LORD.

14. I will pay my vows unto the LORD, now in the presence of all his people.

The third engagement is unto express praising of God, before the
Congregation, as he had vowed, v. 13, 14. the reason whereof is given, v. 15,
16. and the engagement repeated, v 17* 18, 19.

In his promising to pay his vows, and to give thanks publicly, (...) to the
form of the Levitical ceremony, used in drink-offerin^ (...) as 1 Cor. 10.16.
Whence learn, 1. All that we can do when God has bestowed upon us all that can
be desired, is to acknowl^d^^ the goodness of God, and to thank him for it,
and this also (...) presented unto God by our High Priest Jesus Christ* (...)
is accepted* I will take the cup of salvation: or* I will take the cup of
blessing, and thanksgiving for salvation granted to me for the true sacrifices
sake. 2. It is reckoned by God as a point of thankfulness for benefits already
received, to come to God, and seek yet more benefits of him, as our need
requires* as here we see: I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the
Name of the Lord. 3. In time of straits it is lawful (...) of our faith, and
to tie us the more firmly to give (...) God, to make a vow to God that we will
praise him (...) we vow nothing but what God does allow, and (...) not (...) to
put an obligement upon God to help (...) here, I will pay my vows unto the
Lord* now in presence of all his people 4. When a law^^ll vow is made, we
should be mindful to perform it truly, as the Psalmists example here teaches
us.

Verse. 15. Precious in the sight of the LORD, i^ the death of his Saints.

16. O LORD, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmaid: thou have loosed my bonds.

The motives of this engagement are: first, because God esteems much of the
blood of his servants, (...), because God had used him as own of hi^ own
family* and made him as a freeborn child, to be set (...) the bondage he was
in, v. 16. Whence learn* (...) children are, and should study to be more and
more good, merciful, and me^k: for thus much does ^he word Saints in the
O^iginal signify. 2. Albeit the Lords children are very precious in his eyes,
yet will he put them to sufferings, and hazard of life, but lets them not be
killed, except he see it for his own honor, and theirs also; and in that case,
howsoever the world shall esteem of their death, yet shall it be dear and
precious in Gods eyes: Precious in the eyes of the Lord, is the death of his
saints. 3. What estimation God manifests himself to have of any of (...), he
has the same estimation of all; and what proof he (...) of his estimation of
them, in the preservation of (...) in time of their danger and suffering, it
may (...) his care of all: for the Psalmist intending to (...) the care he had
of him, draws up the praise with (...) the Saints: Precious in the sight of
the Lord, is the (...) of his Saints, without exception. 4. What privileges we
do believe to belong to Gods children, we may and should apply them to our
selves, as the Psalmist does (...) the general doctrine of Gods estimation of
his (...) to himself in particular saying, (...) 5. He who fears, or (...)
children to himself under some (...) apply it to himself under some (...)
condition (...) as here, (...) say, (...) handmaid, that is, ^ born (...) of
the bond-maid under the (...) was born a (...) to the Master of the family. 6.
How unworthy soever we find our selves of the meanest styles of the Lords
children, yet must we join our selves to that number under some title, and not
suffer our selves to be put out of that society, as here the Psalmist, albeit
conscious to his own unworthiness and infirmity in service, yet being conscious
also to an honest purpose, and endeavor to serve God, does aver and assert
his interest in God as a servant, and doubleth and trebleth the asseveration:
Truly I am thy servant, and again, I am thy servant, and the third time, The
son of thine handmaid; because borne within the visible Church, a child of
the Covenant, claiming right unto Gods family by it. 7 Albeit we can speak
little of our doing service unto God, yet if we can speak of Gods doing to us
and for us, as for his own children* delivering us from the bonds of sin,
Satan, hell, and hellish torments of conscience, we shall prove the point of
our interest in God, as here the Psalmist, for proof that his death was
precious in Gods eyes* and that he was cared for as a child of the family,
says; Thou have loosed my bonds, and so he proves his point.

Verse. 17. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call
upon the Name of the LORD.

18. I will pay my vows unto the LORD, now in the presence of all his people:

19. In the courts of the LORDS house: in the mids of thee, O Jerusalem:
Praise ye the LORD.

He repeateth the third engagement unto solemn praising of God, and with this
also, the first engagement unto dependence on God, by worshipping and
invocating of his Name. Whence learn, 1. Believers in the Church of Israel
before Christ, did not rest upon the extern^l ceremonies, but did look through
them to the spiritual intent and signification of the ceremonies: for moral and
spiritual service is here promised by the Psalmist; I will offer to thee the
sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will cal^ upon the Name of the Lord. 2.
Believers in the Church of Israel knew that even no moral service, nor
spiritual service was acceptable to God, except through the intercession,
suffering, and oblation of Christ, signified by the sacrifices; for therefore
does he call his praising of God a sacrifice; I will offer unto thee the
sacrifice of thanksgiving. 3. The promises and vows of the sincere servant of
God, should not be fleeting motions, and rash expressions, but resolute and
fixed purposes of the heart, which a man needs not repent or alter, as the
repeating of the former engagement here does teach us: I will pay my vows,
etc. is repeated in the same words. 4. Public assemblies of Gods people and
places to meet in are needful, that by this means God may be more solemnly
glorified, and his people edified and strengthened in the service of God, and
profession of his truth: I will pay my vows in the courts of the Lords house,
in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. 5. When a man has said all he can for Gods
praise; he must acknowledge that Gods praise is a work which requires more
hands then his own, to lift at such a weighty sacrifice; for this does the
Prophets example teach us, closing the Psalm with Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM CXVII.
Ver. 1. O Praise the LORD all ye Nations: praise him all ye people.

2. For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the LORD
endures for ever. Praise ye the LORD.

THis Psalm is an exhortation to the Gentiles to praise God, v. 1. for his
mercy and truth toward his people, v. 2. Whence learn, 1. In Gods worship it is
not always necessary to be long; few words sometime say what is sufficient, as
this short Psalm gives us to understand. 2. The Conversion of the Gentiles
was foreseen and foretold long before the Jews were rejected, as this
exhortation directed unto them, and prophesying of their praising God does give
evidence. 3. Invitation of any to the fellowship of Gods worship, and in
special unto praise and thanksgiving, is an invitation of them to renounce
their sinful course, and to subject themselves unto God in Christ, and to
embrace the offer of his grace, that so they may join with the Church in the
song of praises: for all the Nations are invited to come unto the society of
the Church in these words; O praise the Lord, all ye Nations. 4. Yea, this
invitation of all the Nations to praise God, set down in Scripture, is a
prophecy which was to take effect in all the elect Gentiles in all Nations, for
so reasons the Apostle, Romans 15.11. from this place, Praise him all ye
people. 5. Albeit there be matter of praise unto God in himself, though we
should not be partakers of any benefit from him, yet the Lord does give his
people cause to praise him for favors to them in their own particular: For his
merciful kindness is great toward us. 6. There is no less reason to praise
God for what he has promised, then for what he has given already; For the
truth of the Lord endures for ever, is made a reason of his praise. 7. As Gods
kindness and truth are the pillars of our salvation, so also are they the
matter of our praise, which always go together, and run in the same channel
toward the same persons, and do run abundantly and for ever together; His
kindness is great toward us, and the truth of the Lord endures for ever. 8.
All they who hear of God, are bound to praise God: Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM CXVIII.
THe Psalmist in this thanksgiving for bringing him so wonderfully to the
Kingdom, prophesies in this Psalm of Christ's troubles by his enemies, and of
his victories over them, both in his own person, and in his mystical body. This
Psalm has such an eye and respect unto Christ and his Church, that whatsoever
shadow of these things may be found in David, the main substance and
accomplishment of all things herein contained, are to be found most clearly and
fully in Christ's wrestling with his enemies, and his triumphing over them for
the comfort of the Church, and glory of the Father: and this the Church of
Israel did perceive and acknowledge, as appears by their acclamation taken
out of this Psalm, and made to Christ at his coming into Jerusalem as King
riding, and by Christ's interpretation, and appropriating of it unto himself,
Mat. 21.9, 15, 42. For this cause also the Psalmist does not prefixe his name
unto this Psalm, whatsoever might be fit for his particular experience in it,
but leaves it to run the more clearly and directly toward the Messiah, or
Christ, who is here mainly intended.

The Psalm may be divided into three parts. In the first, the Psalmist, and
Christ represented by him, exhorts the Church to praise God, and gives
sundry reasons for it, unto v. 14. In the second, he renews the song of Gods
praise, and gives new reasons for the same, to v. 19. In the third, Christ's
triumph is set down; wherein he goes into the Temple and solemn Assembly of
the Church, and here Christ by his rejoicing stirs up the Church to rejoice,
and the Church gives acclamation to him as their Lord and King, and all the
company do rejoice together, and Priests and people stir up one another to
praise the Lord, unto the end of the Psalm.

Ver. 1. O Give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: because his mercy
endures for ever.

2. Let Israel now say: that his mercy endures for ever.

3. Let the house of Aaron now say: that his mercy endures for ever.

4. Let them now that fear the LORD, say: that his mercy endures for ever.

The exhortation is unto the visible Church in general, to thank God for his
everlasting mercy, and to the house of Aaron, and to those that fear God more
specially, to praise him for that same cause. Whence learn* 1. Upon all
occasions we ought to glorify God, and stir up others to do so, especially
when we consider what God does for the Kingdom of Christ, and here let us say:
O give thanks unto the Lord. 2. Albeit the wisdom, power and justice of God, be
glorious matter of praising of him, yet none can heartily glorify him for
these reasons, till they first have experience of the sweetness of his
goodness and mercy; Give thanks, for he is good, for his mercy endures for
ever. 3. Such as are partakers of the goodness which is purchased by Christ,
may lay hold on everlasting mercies, and give thanks for those; Because his
mercy endures for ever. 4 Albeit all the elect have interest in Gods praise,
for mercies purchased by Christ unto them, yet the elect of Israel have the
first room in the song: for Christ is first promised to them, and came of them
according to the flesh, and will be most mavelous about them: Let Israel now
say, that his mercy endures for ever. 5. Men who have more gifts, higher
place, and in special they who are Ministers of Gods house, should go before
others in glorifying Gods mercy manifested in Christ: Let the house of Aaron
now say, that his mercy endures for ever. 6. Whatsoever othe^s do, such as
worship God in their spirits sincerely, should let forth their thankfulness
for Gods grace manifested to them through Christ; Let them now that fear the
Lord say, that his mercy endures for ever. 7. As the salvation of the elect is
one, and the love of God to them one: so should their song be one; as here
four several times it is said; His mercy endures for ever. 8. Christ being
come at length into the world, in the fullness of time, and having ended his
sufferings, and entered into his Kingdom, notwithstanding all the provocations
of men to move God to cut short this mercy, has given proof once for all of
his everlasting goodness and mercy: therefore is it said, Let Israel now; Let
Aaron now; Let them that fear God now, say, that his mercy endures for ever.
And this is one reason of his praises.

Ver. 5. I called upon the LORD in distress: the LORD answered me, and set me
in a large place. Another reason of this thanksgiving is, the Psalmists
experience, representing Christ's suffering and victory, he called to God and
was delivered. Whence learn, 1. As the deliverance which David had out of his
troubles, was a reason of joy to all the Kingdom of Israel, because of the
benefits which they enjoyed under his Government: so the deliverance which
Christ had out of his sufferings, is a reason of joy, thanksgiving, and
glorifying God to all his subjects; I called upon the Lord in distress, he
answered me, and set me in a large place. 2. Albeit the Lord do bring his
children into straits, yet he will not leave them in distress, but will bring
them forth into a large place, as this experience of the Psalmist, and of
Christ our Head, both distressed and delivered for our sake, does give
assurance. 3. The distress of the Lords children is not so bitter, as the
delivery and enlargement out of it is sweet; For he answered me, and set me in
a large place, is here the matter of victorious joy, and of Gods high praises.
4 Delivery out of any great danger, is a matter of glorifying God, especially
when it is the return of prayer, as here, I called on the Lord, and he
answered me, etc.

Verse. 6. The LORD is on my side, I will not fear: what can man do unto me?

7. The LORD takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my
desire upon them that hate me.

A third reason of praise is, because the Psalmist has by this experience
received such confirmation of Gods respect to him, as made him fearlesse for
time to come, and assured of the overthrow of his enemies. Whence learn, 1.
Experience of hearing our prayer should confirm us about Gods friendship: as
here from his late experience he draws this Conclusion; The Lord is on my
side. 2. Gods favor and friendship believed should free us from the fear of
men; The Lord is on my side. I will not fear. 3. Albeit the power of man be an
ordinary tentation to divert the godly from their duty, yet when Gods favor
and displeasure are well weighed, and compared with man's hatred and favor, it
shall be found to be but little which man's either terror or allurement can do,
as rhis interrogation speaks; What can man do unto me? 4. Faith obtains
more good by deliveries, then it finds hurt by assaults, and then is true
says victorious, when Gods friendship is opposed to whatsoever the wrath of
the creature can do, as here is seen. 5. Albeit we have gotten some notable
victories against our enemies, yet we must know our warfare is not ended: for
so much does the Psalmist insinuate, when he goes to make party against his
enemies; The Lord is on my side, the Lord takes my part. 6. Albeit the Lords
people do not despise means and helpers, yet they rely not on them, but on
Gods help, who can bless the means: The Lord takes my part with them that
help me. 7. Faith in its own victory by Gods assistance, sees also the
overthrow of the adversaries; The Lord takes my part, therefore I shall see my
desire on them that hate me. 8. Many good uses may a believer make of one
benefit, one victory, one experience, as here the Psalmist does, he confirms
himself in his reconciliation and friendship with God, he encourages himself
against dangers to come, he exalts God, and puts down to naught the hatred
and favor of man, he resolves to use means, and to expect the blessing from
God, with other sundry good uses which follow hereafter.

Ver. 8. It is better to trust in the LORD, then to put confidence in man.

9. It is better to trust in the LORD, then to put confidence in Princes.

A fourth reason of praise and thanks unto God, is for blessing the course of
faith, and making it better then the course of policy or carnal reason; Whence
learn, 1. As faith gathers strength, when it sees what blessing does follow
on believing, so God gets praise by blessing the obedience of faith; It is
better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in men. 2. Such as believe
in God, in whatsoever mean condition they may be in, are in better case then
the minions of Kings, who lean only to men's favor, and time will prove this to
be true; That it is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in
Princes.

Verse. 10. All Nations compassed me about: but in the Name of the LORD will I
destroy them.

11. They compassed me about, yea, they compassed me about: but in the Name of
the LORD I will destroy them.

12. They compassed me about like bees, they are quenched as the fire of
thorns: for in the Name of the LORD I will destroy them.

A fifth reason of thanks unto God, is David's victory in the type, and Christ's
victory signified, begun and made sure to be perfected over a world of
adversaries. Whence learn, 1. Many adversaries had David, but Christ has more;
for all the world are deadly adversaries to him, All Nations compassed me
about. 2. The Church and Kingdom of Christ has neither power to defend it
self, nor way in this world to escape from its enemies; All Nations compassed
me about, is thrice expressed. 3. Christ's enemies are so despiteful, that in
fighting against his Kingdom, they regard not what becomes of themselves, so
be they may hurt his people; but as the Be undoeth her self in stinging, and
loses her life or her power with her sting, so do they; They compassed me
about like bees. 4. All that the enemies of Christ's Church can do against his
people, is but to trouble her externally* their wounds are like the sting of a
Be, that is* unto pain and swelling, and a short trouble only, but are not
deadly. They compassed me about like bees. 5. The power whereby victory is
obtained over the enemies of Christ and his people, is merely divine, even the
Omnipotency of the Godhead of our Lord, who fights all his own battles and
ours: In the Name of the Lord will I destroy them, thrice expressed. 6.
Particular victories now and then, do give ground of hope of complete victory
over all enemies; for Christ has undertaken here to destroy them all; In the
Name of the Lord I will destroy them. 7. The rejoicing of the enemies, and the
putting forth of their malice against the Church, is but for a short time, and
all to destroy themselves; They are quenched as the fire of thorns.

Ver. 13. Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the LORD helped
me. A sixth reason of thanks, is, for delivery to Christ mystical, from the
chief ruler of the adverse powers, that is, from Satan. Whence learn, 1.
Whosoever be the instruments of persecution of Christ in his members, Satan is
the prime Agent, the Captain of these cursed soldiers: for toward him mainly
is this speech directed; Thou have thrust sore at me. 2. The aim of Satan in
his opposition unto the Church, is to drive them from their station which they
have by faith in God, that they may despair and sin: Thou have thrust sore at
me that I might fall. 3. How weak soever the Lords persecuted children are,
when Satan raises persecution against them, and drives his dar^s at them, yet
does he not prevail, because God assisteth them; But the Lord helped me. 4.
The Lords servants being assisted in their trials, shall have such
deliverances, as shall give them reason to insult, time out of mind, over
Satan and all their enemies, as here the Psalmist, as a type and soldier of
Christ, and Christ our Chieftain does.

Ver. 14. The LORD is my strength and Song: and is become my salvation. This we
make the second part of the Psalm, wherein the song of praise and thanksgiving
is renewed, and four new reasons are added* And first, he gives all the glory
of his victory unto God his strength and salvation. Whence learn, 1. As humane
strength is not sufficient to overcome Satan, so must the wrastler be emptied
of the conceit of his own abilities, and betake himself unto God, as the
complete furnisher of him, as this example does teach us. 2. He that has
renounced confidence in created strength, and has betaken himself unto Gods
furniture promised in his Word, shall have cause to sing, The Lord is my
strength and song. 3. Experimental proof of the truth of Gods promises, is a
new impression of believed truth, and a new taking up of it, which makes a man
say, I perceive of a truth that God is such as he calls himself; He is become
my salvation, does import so much: and this is the first reason of his renewed
song.

Ver. 15. The voice of rejoicing, and salvation is in the tabernacles of the
righteous: the right hand of the LORD does valiantly.

16. The right hand of the LORD is exalted: the right hand of the LORD does
valiantly.

The second reason is from the joy which comes to the justified through faith
in Christ, for the certainty of their salvation purchased by his sufferings and
battles. Whence learn, 1. Such as believe in Christ, and do endeavor new
obedience, as they are the persons to whom Christ has purchased salvation, so
shall they find the joy of the purchase, and acknowledge it to Gods glory: The
voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous. 2.
Albeit the righteous be pilgrims and have no settled dwelling place, yet is
their pilgrimage and private tabernacles made refreshful to them by the joy of
their salvation; The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of
the righteous. 3. The matter of the joy of the righteous, is the sight of Gods
power employed for their safety, and victoriously working out their salvation
and his own glory; The right hand of the Lord does valiantly; The right hand of
the Lord is exalted; The right hand of the Lord does valiantly.

Ver. 17. I shall not die, but live: and declare the works of the LORD. The
third reason of thanksgiving, is assurance of complete victory, and employment
of all gifts given to him in Gods service. Whence learn, 1. The believer may be
assured, that death shall not prevent him, till he have ended his appointed
service: and that as death had not dominion over Christ, so shall it not have
lasting dominion over him; I shall not die, but live: and declare the works of
the Lord. 2. To honor and praise God in this life, should be life to the
believer, and dearer to him then his life, in regard he loves this life, and
the next also, mainly because he shall therein praise God: I shall not die, but
live, and declare the works of the Lord.

Ver. 18. The LORD has chastened me sore: but he has not given me over unto
death. The fourth reason of thanksgiving is, the Lords moderating all
chastisements so, as the Psalmist is not destroyed by them. Whence learn, 1. As
Christ our Head was chastised for our peace, and tasted of death, but was not
given over unto it: so his servants, albeit not exempted from chastisements,
yet they shall not be destroyed by them; The Lord has chastened me sore, yet
he has not given me over to death, says the type of Christ, speaking history
of himself, and prophecy of Christ. 2. The moderation of chastisements and
salvation wrought by them, should swallow up the grief of them, and make them
the matter of our Song, as here we are taught; The Lord has chastened me sore,
yet he has not given me over unto death. 3. It is wisdom to observe the
moderation of chastisements, as well as their sharpness and weight, and to
remember that when adversaries do trouble us, and would destroy us, God is
about only to correct us, and do us good: as here is observed.

Ver. 19. Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and will
praise the LORD.

20. This is the gate of the LORD, into which the righteous shall enter.

The third part of the Psalm, wherein is set down the royal triumph of the
Psalmist, as the type of Christ; First, his marching up to the Sanctuary, v.
19, 20. Then, his beginning the Song of praise, and exhorting all the Church to
rejoice with him, v. 21, 22, 23, 24. Thirdly, the Churches acclamation to her
triumphing King, v. 25, ^6, 27. Fourthly, the Psalmist as a type of Christ,
glorifieth God reconciled by Covenant to the Church, and promises to praise
him still, and closes the Psalm with an exhortation to thanksgiving, as he
began, v. 28, 29

As for the first, the Psalmist as the type of Christ, commands to make way for
his entering into the Lords Temple, and assembly of the Saints where he may
praise the Lord. Whence learn, 1. The place of Christ's and the believers
triumphing on the earth, is the Assembly of the Church, and they who are
touched with the feeling of Gods grace and salvation, have and should have a
great desire to have God glorified in the holy Assemblies: Open to me the gates
of righteousness. 2. As the material Temple of Jerusalem was: so every visible
Assembly of the Saints* is the place where the righteousness of faith and
obedience is to be preached, where the Saints are to be edified in the course
of righteousness, and toward which the truly righteous have and should have
great affection and desire to frequent and honor these meetings: Open to me
the gates of righteousness, in which the righteous enter: I will go into them.
3. The exercise of the Church met together, is mainly to proclaim the Lords
praise: I will go into them, and praise the Lord. 4. The Church-assembly is the
convenient place, where the Lord and the righteous do meet; This is the gate of
the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter. And this is the first part of
the description of the triumph.

Ver. 21. I will praise thee, for thou have heard me: and art become my
salvation.

22. The stone which the builders refused, is become the head- stone of the
corner.

23. This is the LORDS doing: it is mavelous in our eyes.

24. This is the day which the LORD has made: we will rejoice and be glad in
it.

The second part of the description of the triumph* has the song of the
Psalmist, as the type of Christ's song of praise, wherein he in his own name and
in the name of all believers praises God for hearing of the intercession made
for the Church, and for granting salvation to them. Whence learn, 1. The
intercession of Christ, and the prayers also of the Saints put up in his Name,
are all granted, and thereby God is greatly glorified: I will praise thee, for
thou have heard me. 2. The several victories of Christ, and of his militant
members, are the fruits of Christ's intercession, and evidence of salvation to
his mystical members; Thou have heard me, and art become my salvation. 3. As
David the type, so Christ represented by him, was first despised and set at
naught by the chief Rulers, before he was exalted; for he was indeed that
precious stone set at naught by men; The stone which the builders refused. 4.
Men may have high place in the visible Church, who cannot take up Christ when
he shows himself, who have little skill to embrace Christ, and apply him to
themselves or others, as the builders of the Church, Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees refused to acknowledge Christ so much as for a true member of the
Church; He is that stone which the builders refused. 5. Albeit men do misregard
Christ offering himself in his doctrine and ordinances, yet he is the rock
whereon the Church is builded, the foundation whereupon to settle it, the
cornerstone to hold the building compact together, and the head-stone of the
corner for adorning and perfecting the building gloriously, Matthew. 21. 9, 15,
42. He is become the head-stone of the corner. 6. In nothing more does the
wisdom, grace and power of God appear, then in the magnifying of Jesus Christ,
and building of his Church; This is the work of the Lord. 7. When the weakness
of the Church in her self, and the power of her manifold enemies* and the
impediments of this work are looked upon, it is a wonder of wonders to see the
going on of Gods work in it: This is the work of the Lord, and it is mavelous
in our eyes. 8. Albeit there be no day which God has not made, yet in the day
of the manifestation of righteousness, and life immortal through Christ, the
time of the Gospel, and most specially the day of the resurrection of Christ
from the dead, wherein Christ was declared victoriously the only begotten Son
of God, is made a day of light and gladness to poor self-condemned sinners:
This is the day which the Lord has made. 9. Christ allows joy and gladness
to every believer, and true member of his Church, and wills them to glorify
God in this holy joy, wherein he will join with them; We will rejoice and be
glad in it.

Ver. 25. Save now, I beseech thee, O LORD: O LORD, I beseech thee, send now
prosperity.

26. Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the LORD: we have blessed you out
of the house of the LORD.

27. God is the LORD which has showed us light, bind the sacrifice with cords,
even unto the horns of the Altar.

This is the third part of the triumph, wherein the Church makes her Lord
welcome, and congratulateth his victory, prays for a blessing upon his
Kingdom, prophesies of the blessings, and sets her self to offer the
sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving to God for it. Whence learn, 1. As it is
the duty, so is it the hearty desire of every believer to welcome Christ
offering himself as our victorious Mediator and King: for he is worthy, to
whom Hosanna (as it is written, Matthew. 21.) should be sung. 2. Where Christ
comes, salvation also and spiritual prosperity comes, which was promised
before, and shadowed forth in types: for, Save now, I beseech thee, send now
prosperity, is a promising prayer. 3. Albeit Christ has no need of our
prayers, for advancing of his own Kingdom, yet will he have us to pray for his
peoples sake, that his Kingdom may come, and will have all believers in
testimony of their love to his honor, to draw the chariot of his triumph, that
it may ride prosperously, saying, Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord, send now
prosperity. 4. Christ is not come unsent into the world, but with commission to
save his people from their sins; He comes in the Name of the Lord. 5. Together
with Christ all blessings do come, which every believer should heartily
acknowledge and proclaim; Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord. 6.
The Priests and Ministers of the Lord have warrant from the Lord to bless all
them that bless Jesus Christ; for after the acclamation which the people give
to Christ, the Ministers of the Lord pronounce the people, so many as do
heartily receive him as their King, to be blessed: We have blessed you, (say
they to the people) out of the house of the Lord. 7. Comfort against all sin
and misery, is brought unto the Church by Christ, and they who sat in
darkness, in him have seen a great light, which should be acknowledged, as
here, God is the Lord who has shown unto us light. 8. As the Ministers of the
Lord do preach that believers in Christ are blessed, so should they set them
all on work, and themselves also with them, to express by all means their
thankfulness to God for the great grace sent by him; Bind the sacrifice with
cords, even unto the bornes of the Altar.

Ver. 28. Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will
exalt thee.

29. O give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: for his mercy endures for
ever.

In the last place, the Psalmist, as a type of Christ, proclaims the Covenant
between the Father and Christ, and between God and himself in Christ, as a
settled and ratified bargain, and exhorts the Church to thanksgiving, as he
began: as we take this for the speech of Christ triumphing in his Church; We
learn, 1. The Father and Christ, both before he was incarnate and after, do
stand agreed in the Covenant of Redemption: for Christ faith here to the
Father, Thou art my God. 2. By virtue of the Covenant of Redemption between God
and and Christ the Mediator, all sufferings and battles for the elect are
undertaken, and such deliverance given from all troubles, and victory over all
enemies is obtained, as the Mediator is satisfied about it, and praises God:
Thou art my God, and I will praise thee; and over again, Thou art my God, and I
will exalt thee. 3. By virtue of the Covenant of Redemption God is the
believers God also, and ought to be praised, and more and more exalted in our
hearts, and outwardly by us; for as Christ calls God his Father, and our
Father, his God and our God, so every one who do believe in him, may say to
God, Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will exalt
thee. 4. The goodness of the Lord, in sending Christ a Savior unto us, and
the constancy of his mercy to us ^n him calls for everlasting praise and
thanks unto God from us; O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his
mercy endures for ever.

PSALM CXIX.
WE read of no man, who had more troubles and exercises of conscience, or
greater vicissitude of changes outward and inward, or more frequent experiences
of his own weakness, witlesnesse and sinfulness, or of Gods merciful
direction, consolation and deliverance, then David. This man did the Lord fit,
by the immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost, for the edification of the
Church, to express his exercises, and good deliverances from them all: and in
this Psalm as in a bundle, he has collected the sum of his holy
meditations, and of the profitable uses which he made of the revealed Will of
God in Scripture, in all the conditions wherein he was, to teach all the
faithful after him, to have the Word of God in special regard, and to have
respect unto it, as the only rule whereby they might find direction,
consolation and salvation, however matters went. To this end, for memories
sake, he has filled the Hebrew Alphabet, with twenty two meditations, every
one of them beginning with a several letter of the Alphabet, and every section
having eight verses, beginning with the same letter, and every verse almost of
every section, under some expression, making mention of the Scripture.

The words wherein the Scripture, or revealed Will of God in Scripture, here is
expressed, is one of these ten. 1. The law or doctrine, which signifies the
Lords Will to be taught of God, that all men should learn it. 2. Statutes which
signifies, that this revealed Will of God contains the duties which God has
appointed and prescribed for our rule. 3. Precepts, which signifies that this
Will of God is imposed by the authority of our sovereign Lawgiver. The fourth
is commands, which signifies that this revealed Will is committed unto our
trust to be kept. The fifth, testimonies, which signifies that this revealed
Will of God does testify of our duty and our doings, whether conform or not
to the Rule, and testifies also what event may be expected by our believing or
misbelieving, by our obedience or disobedience thereof. 6. Judgments which
signifies the Scripture to be Gods judicial decree, ordaining how our words,
deeds and thoughts should be ordered, what shall be the execution of his will
answerable thereto. 7. Oracle or speech, because the Scripture proceeds, as
it were, from the mouth of God. 8. The Word, which signifies Gods expounding
his mind to us, as if he were speaking unto us. 9. The way of God, which
signifies the Lords giving direction for our several actions how we should
walk, as by so many steps unto the Kingdom of Heaven. 10. Righteousness,
which signifies that the Word of God has in it, the way how a man shall be
justified, to wit, by faith, and how a justified man should approve himself to
God and man, as justified by faith, and that every son of wisdom, must and
will justify this Word of God, as the perfect Rule of righteousness.

ALEPH.
In the first section, he describes the blessed men to be only they who walk
in the obedience of faith, as Gods Word prescribes, ver. 1, 2, 3. and then he
makes application of this doctrine to himself, v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Ver. 1. BLessed are the undefiled in the way: who walk in the law of the LORD.

2. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the
whole heart.

3. They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.

In the description of the truly blessed man; Learn, 1. This is the first
lesson for direction of a man's life, to know wherein true blessedness does
stand, and who is the blessed man; for the beginning of this Psalm with this
doctrine insinuates so much. 2. Albeit every m^n confusedly desires
happiness, yet it is the property of the children of God, effectually and in
earnest to seek true happiness: as the description of the blessed man does
show. 3. As the Word of God only does reveal true happiness, and the way to
it: so only they are blessed, who choose the clear way of Gods Word, to direct
them to blessedness, and do make conscience sincerely to put this doctrine in
practice: Blessed are the undefiled in the way that walk in the law of the
Lord. 4. God has testified in his Word, how a man shall be pardoned of his
sins, reconciled to God, and have right unto eternal life, to wit, by faith in
the Messiah Jesus Christ, and blessed is the man who does hold this way fast:
Blessed are they who keep his testimonies. 5. The true believer of Gods
testimonies, about the way of true blessedness, does study to have communion
with God, and to grow in the fellowship of his grace sincerely: They seek the
Lord with their whole heart. 8* As the blessed man holds fast the Lords
testimonies for reconciliation and communion with God, so he orders his
conversation in the way which God in his Word has prescribed, eschewing sin,
and studying to please God; They also do no iniquity, that is, they are not
workers of iniquity, They walk in his way, that is, they aim and endeavor to
follow the course which God does prescribe. 7. Albeit there be no man who
sins not, yet such as do flee to Gods grace offered in Christ for dai^y
pardon, and do set themselves to obey Gods directions set down in his Word, are
esteemed to be no workers of iniquity, but men going homeward to God, howsoever
clogged with infirmities; They also do no iniquity: How so? They walk in his
ways.

Ver. 4. Thou have commanded us to keep thy Precepts diligently. This doctrine
the Psalmist applies to himself, and first acknowledges his obligation to
follow the direction of the Lord in the obedience of faith, v. 4. and then he
wishes to have grace to obey, v. 5, 6, 7, And thirdly, engages himself to
follow this course by promise and prayer, v. 8. from the acknowledgement of his
obligation to obey Gods Word; Learn, 1. The doctrine of faith and obedience set
down in Scripture, i^ not left to our arbitrament, but is enjoined unto us by
divine authority: there is a command given forth unto us to believe in the Son
of God, and a command to follow the duties of love to God and man: Thou have
commanded us to keep thy Precepts* 2. Albeit the obedience of Gods Word had no
promise of reward, and albeit felicity were not proposed unto us, as the
gracious reward of the obedience of faith, yet the very command it sel^, and
the authority of God, should be a sufficient motive unto it: which obligation
as we should acknowledge, so should we subject our selves unto it, and say,
Thou have commanded us to keep thy Precepts. 3. Howsoever there be great
weakness, even in reconciled souls, and albeit there be some strong relics
of corrupt nature in them, hindering them to do as they would, yet God will
have them aiming to keep hi^ Precepts, diligently making conscience of all
duties to God and man, of the smaller duties as well as of the greater, and
that on all occasions, in all times, places and companies, with their best
affection and strength; Thou have commanded us to keep thy Precepts diligently.

Ver. 5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.

6. Then shall I not be ashamed; when I have respect unto all thy Commandments.

7. I will praise thee with uprightness of heart: when I shall have learned
thy righteous judgments.

The Psalmist wishes to have grace to obey; 1. Because so he should not he
ashamed nor disappointed of his hope, v. 6. and also, so he should be enabled
to glorify and praise God, more perfectly, v. 7. Whence learn, 1. The
Commandments of God are not grievous to the honest heart* for albeit he be
unable to do what he should, yet it is the desire of his heart to do what is
commanded: O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes, is his hearty
wish. 2. When we have received the general direction of Gods Word, we have need
of the effectual direction of Gods Spirit, to apply the Word rightly to our
particular actions: O that my ways were directed, says he 3. The holiest man
is most sensible of his coming short in understanding, and of his weakness to
keep Gods commands, and most desirous of Gods help, as this example teaches
us. No man shall ever have cause to repent of a sincere e^deavou^^ (...) obey
Gods revealed will: for howsoever he may suffer hard things from men, and be
mocked for his sincerity, yet shall he not be disappointed of his hopes, nor be
confounded before God: Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all
thy Commands. 5. Sincerity must aim at universal obedience: for to pretend to
keep one command, and to be found a misregarder of other commands, is a matter
of shame, and a mark of unsoundness: For then shall I not be ashamed, when I
have respect to all thy commands. 6. As Gods Word and Commands are all
righteous decrees in themselves, and unalterable by men; so are they seen to be
such by those who know them best: Even Gods righteous judgments. 7. Men do
praise God uprightly, only in that measure, that they are careful to frame
their life to Gods Will: for honor given to God with the mouth, agrees not
with dishonor done to him in deeds, in a man's life and conversation: I will
praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I have learned thy righteous
judgments. 8. Sound praises of God are the fruit of soundness in piety and
righteousness; and the holiest of Gods servants are but Scholars and Students
in the knowledge and obedience of both: I will praise thee with uprightness of
heart, when I shall have learned thy righteous judgments.

Ver. 8. I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly. From his
engagement to observe this course; Learn, 1* Albeit our resolutions and
purposes have no strength of themselves, yet God requires of us that we should
with full purpose of heart cleave unto his service, and this course he will
bless, for so does this practice teach us; I will keep thy statutes; that is,
I resolve to aim at upright obedience of thy Word: for this is keeping of Gods
statutes, to endeavor to obey them. 2. As he who is most upright in his
resolution, is most diffident of his own strength to perform his resolution:
so is he also most earnest with God in prayer, to enable him to do as he
resolves, as this example does teach us; I will keep thy statutes, O forsake
me not. 3. Albeit no man can be exempted from temporal desertions, whereby his
Christian graces may be tried, and his corruptions mortified, yet the believer
may both pray and expect, that he shall not be deserted; so as his faith should
fail, and his course of obedience should be cut off: for so much does this
prayer promise; O forsake me not utterly.

BETH.
In this section, first he propounds this doctrine; the Word of God is the only
rule, and effectual instrument of renewing and sanctifying of an unrenewed man:
and the only way to find the efficacy of the Word, is to study to conform a
man's mind, will and actions thereunto, v. 1. And then in the next place, to
the end he may teach men to make use of this doctrine by his example, he
shows the sincerity of his own endeavor, by seven evidences in the seven
following verses.

Ver 9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy Word. In the doctrine about the means of regeneration and
reformation of life; Learn, 1. As all men are from the birth polluted with sin,
so should they early and timously be sensible of this evil, and seek for the
remedy of the running issues of sin: for here it is presupposed, That a young
man should cleanse his way. 2. Seeing death is uncertain, and sin grows
stronger through custom; seeing justice is the more provoked, the longer men
shall continue in sin; seeing no age is fitter to serve Satan then youth, being
inclined to take liberty to be headst^ong, self-willed, and given to despise
grave admonition, and no age has more excuses to continue in ^in to its own
perdition, therefore no age has more need of remedy from God then youth has,
and this is imported in the question; Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his
way? 3. Seeing youth is loose, inconsiderate and unattentive; seeing the way of
obedience is slippery, and many bypath are offered to the wayfaring man;
seeing danger of perishing is great, and many are the enemies of man's
salvation, who are always seeking whom they may devour, and seeing no
reconciliation can be made with God, no forgiveness of sin can be obtained, no
solid sanctification nor salvation can be had, except the Word of God be held
for the only rule of direction of faith and conversation: therefore no means
can be, To cleanse the young man's way, but by taking heed thereto, according to
thy Word.

Verse. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy
Commandments. After he has set down the rule of a young man's Conversion and
conversation, he offers himself as an example to follow this rule, and here
are the first and second evidences of his sincerity in aiming at this way; The
first is, the conscience of his upright seeking of God: and the second evidence
is his prayer, to be preserved from wandering from the way of Gods obedience
Whence learn, 1. The sight of what others have attained unto, is a great
encouragement to young Scholars in Gods school: for to encourage the young
man, the Psalmist sh^w^eth here his own profiting in his study 2. Sensiblenesse
of a man's own imperfections, sins and dangers, and seeking in unto God
all-sufficient, for relief of sin and misery, and for a daily more and more
near communion with God, is a mark of sincerity in Religion; With my whole
heart have I sought thee 3 The more experience a man has in the ways of God,
the more sensible is he of his own readiness to wander insensibly, by ignorance
and unadvertance from the ways of God; but the young soldier dare run
hazards, ride into his adversaries camp, and talk with tentations, being
confident he cannot easily go w^ong, he is not so feared, as David here,
crying, O let me not wander. 4. To be diff^^ent of our own wit and strength,
and to depend upon God, instantly praying to be kept in, and recalled from
wandering, proves the sincerity of the purpose of holiness: O let me not
wander from thy Commandments. 5. The going on of the believer in the course of
obedience, and his living the life of God, is not from what he has received
before, but must flow from present influence of grace, sustaining what was
given before, and from grace furnishing fresh supply drawn forth by prayer; as
this prayer, O let me not wander, does testify.

Ver. 11. Thy word have I hid in mine heart: that I might not sin against thee.
The third evidence of his sincere endeavor to cleanse his way, by taking heed
thereto according to his Word, is, the laying up of the Word by faith in his
heart; Whence learn, 1. It is not sufficient to have the Word of God in
brain-knowledge, and common memory, for not wit and memory, but the heart is
the chest to keep it in: I hid thy Word in my heart. 2. Seeing it is impossible
to keep sin out of the heart, void of the Word of God, it is necessary for the
servant of God, to lay up the Lords Word in his heart by faith and honest
affection to it: Thy Word have I hid in my heart, that I should not sin against
thee 3. It is a proof of our sincere endeavor to profit by the Word of God in
the course of sanctification, to be careful that we let not the Word of God
slide from us, that we be not spoiled of it by fear of men, or force of
tentation: that we be not deceived by Satan's wiles, that we suffer it not to go
by our negligence and forgetfulness of it, and that we be careful to approve
our selves to God, in our love to the Lords Word, and estimation of it, as of a
most precious Jewel, as here we see; Thy Word have I hid in my heart, that I
should not sin against thee.

Ver. 12. Blessed art thou, O LORD: teach me thy statutes. A fourth evidence of
his sincerity, in making use of the Wo^d of God, is his blessing God for the
knowledge he has received of it, joined with prayer for increasing the measure
thereof. Whence learn, 1. It is a mark of sincerity of obedience, to be
thankful for what measure we have received, and to be seeking to increase, as
young birds receive their food and cry for more: Blessed art thou, O Lord,
teach me thy statutes. 2. Beside all external teaching, we have need of inward
and effectual teaching from God, to make knowledge lively and fruitful; Teach
me thy statutes. 3. The goodness of God, and his readiness to bless more and
more, is a ground of encouragement to seek a greater measure of his blessing;
Blessed art thou, O Lord, teach me thy statutes.

Verse. 13. With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth. A
fifth evidence of his sincere endeavor to make use of Gods Word, is his care
to edify others, and glorify God by the knowledge and experience which he had
of it. Whence learn, 1. The revealed will of God in Scripture should be the
matter of our speech and conference with others; With my lips have I declared
all the judgments of thy mouth. 2. The Word of God in Scripture should be
looked upon as the sentence of the supreme Judge, uncontrollable and
unalterable by any creature, and whereby men must judge of all truth, and look
to be judged by it: for therefore it is called, The judgment of his mouth. 3.
As the conscience of communicating of our knowledge, and our spiritual gifts,
is a means of encouragement to seek a greater measure: so it is an evidence of
the sincerity and fruitfulness of what knowledge we have; Teach me thy
statutes, with my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.

Ver. 14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies: as much as in all
riches. The sixth evidence of his sincere endeavor to conform his way to Gods
Word, is his joy in Gods service. Whence learn, 1. Delight in Gods service and
worship, is a mark of sincere obedience of his Word: I have rejoiced in the way
of thy testimonies. 2. Spiritual joy in spiritual objects far exceeds any
joy in worldly possessions; I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, more
then in all riches. 3. It is a most sure joy, which arises from the conscience
of practical obedience, and not from contemplation only; I have rejoiced in the
way of thy testimonies

Ver. 15. I will meditate in thy Precepts: and have respect unto thy ways.

16. I will delight my self in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.

The seventh evidence of his sincere endeavor to conform his way unto Gods
Word, is his engagement to set his heart toward Gods Word in time to come, and
not to rest upon any thing already past and done. Whence learn, 1 Sincerity of
our obedience present and past, is proved best, by joining of our hearty
resolution and purpose to go on for time to come: I have rejoiced, I will
meditate, I will delight in thy statutes. 2. It is a profitable means to grow
in grace, to meditate on Gods Word; I will meditate on thy Precepts. 3.
Meditation is then fruitful, when in our conversation we have respect to the
ways of God set down in his Word, whereupon we have meditated; I will have
respect unto thy ways. 4. In meditation on the Word, and endeavor to make use
of it in our life, we will easily wax weary, except we make this course our
delight; I will delight my self in thy statutes. 5. Meditation will fail, and
delectation will wax cold, except the Word be treasured up in a sanctified
memory: I will not forget thy Word. Thus a copy is cast for a young man to
cleanse his way, and to make his life comfortable.

GIMEL.
In this section he prays the Lord for continuance of his life, that he may
have occasion of further service, which he desires may be done by him, and for
this end also he prays, that he may have a deeper insight in the mysteries of
Gods Word, v. 17, 18. And these two petitions he presses by three reasons, v.
19, 20, 21. He prays also for clearing of his innocence, and for removing
reproach from him, for other three reasons, v. 22, 23, 24.

Ver. 17. Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy word.

18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.

From the first two petitions; Learn, 1. As lengthening of life is the good
gift of God in it self, and no small benefit to the man who purposes to employ
it well: so life may be lawfully prayed for: Deal bountifully with thy servant,
that I may live. 2. As the end of our life should be, that God may be served:
so life should not be desired not loved, except for that end, but willingly
laid down, rather then we should forsake his command: Deal bountifully with thy
servant, that I may live and keep thy Word. 3. A faithful servant should count
his bypast service richly rewarded, by being employed yet more in further
service, as this prayer teaches: Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may
live and keep thy Word. 4. The whole Word of God is a law, a Canon or rule,
whereby we should square our faith and conversation, for it is here called
also, Thy law. 5. We by nature are blind, and cannot see the light which does
shine in the Word of God, till he open our eyes to behold it, therefore prays
he. Open thou mine eyes. 6. The Word of God is full of wonders, high and
heavenly mysteries, and he who sees them best, does wonder most: Open thou
mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.

Verse. 19. I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy Commandments from me.

20. My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all
times.

21. Thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed: which do err from thy
Commandments.

Of the three reasons of his petition: one is, because he is but a stranger
here, except for service: another is, because he longs much to know more of
Gods Word. The third is, because he sees Gods vengeance following them who
study not to serve God. Wh^nce learn, 1. Albeit the believer live on the
earth, yet he is not at home, so long as he is on the earth; I am a stranger in
the earth. 2. Whatsoever possession a godly man has in the earth, were it a
Kingdom, he should be a stranger for the matter of estimation of, or affection
to any thing on earth: I am a stranger in the earth. 3. Acquaintance with the
Word of God, is able to make up all the losses of the pilgrim, and to season
all his griefs, it is able to supply the room of friends and counselors, to
furnish light, joy, strength, food, armor and defense; and whatsoever else the
pilgrim needs: for the Lords Word shall either bring all these good things to
the pilgrim, or lead him to God, where he shall find them all; I am a stranger
in the earth, hide not thy Commandments from me. 4. There is a hiding of the
Word of God, when means to hear it explained by Preachers, are wanting: and
there is a hiding of the comfortable and lively light of the Spirit, who must
quicken the Word unto us, and from both those evils may we, and should we pray
to be saved; Hide not thy Commandments from me. 5. Albeit the godly be the
dearest souls unto God of all men in the world, yet will he exercise them with
heartbreaking, especially for spiritual causes, that so he may raise in them
an estimation of his own presence, and furnish work in the mean time to their
faith; My heart breaks for the longing which it has unto thy judgments. 6.
It is not every faint and cold wish, which makes a believer profit in Gods
school, there must be some heat and earnestness in holy desires: and this
affection, as it may not be cold, so neither must it be fle^ting, but constant;
My heart breaks for the longing which it has at all times. 7. These are
proud men before God, who are not penitent for their sin, and are not subjected
to his obedience; for so are they here called. 8. The Word of God condemns
the proud, and pronounces a curse upon them, so long as they continue proud
and impenitent; Thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed. 9. To dare to
wander after a man's own will, and go away from the direction which God gives
us, is pride indeed, and a bold hazarding where God commands to fear: The
proud err from thy Commandments.

Verse. 22. Remove from me reproach and contempt: for I have kept thy
testimonies.

23. Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in
thy statutes.

24. Thy testimonies also are my delight: and my counselors.

He prays also to be cleared in his innocence, and that his reproach may be
removed, and gives three reasons thereof. One is, because indeed he was
innocent in the point wherein he was challenged by his enemies; Another,
because he had sustained the wrath of Princes, for his obedience to God: And
the third, because he had chosen Gods Word for counselors and comforters.
Whence learn, 1. As it is no strange exercise for the godly, to be traduced,
calumniated and reproached, so it is no light burden to bear it, but such as
the godly have cause to seek the removal of it; Remove from me reproach and
contempt. 2. A good conscience is a ground of comfort, in the case of being
reproached, and a ground of confidence, to seek of God relief from it: Remove
contempt, for I have kept thy testimonies. 3. It is not strange to see, not
only the rascal multitude, but also Judges and Rulers who should defend the
godly, to be their enemies; Princes also did sit, and speak against me. 4.
Troubles will try men whether they do fear God or men most, and except the
godly take heed to Gods Word, they cannot stand under the tentations wherewith
they may meet; Princes did speak against me, but thy servant did meditate in
thy statutes. 5. The Word of God is able, not only to uphold a man in his
trouble, but also to make him rejoice in his trouble: Thy testimonies are my
delight. 6. A King with his cabinet-councel, shall not be so well furnished to
persecute the innocent, as the godly Patient shall be advised by the Word of
God, how to answer and carry himself in his trouble; Thy testimonies are my
delight and my counselors.

DALETH.
Verse. 25. My soul cleaves unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy
word. In this section, there are six petitions with their several reasons
annexed unto them, some of them set down before* some of them set down after
the petition. The first petition is for comfort, because of his heavy
condition. Whence learn, 1. Beside the outward trouble from men which the godly
oft-times do feel, it pleases God to exercise them also sometimes with trouble
of mind, immediately from his own hand; My soul cleaves unto the dust. 2.
Albeit the Lord suffer his own to lie so long low in their heavy condition of
spirit, as they may seem dead, yet by faith in his Word he keeps in so much
life, as does furnish unto them prayer to God for comfort; Quicken thou me
according to thy Word.

Ver. 26. I have declared my ways: and thou heardest me: teach me thy
statutes. Another petition is for direction and power to obey Gods Word*
because he had laid open before God all his own course, and confessed what he
knew of his own way. Whence learn, 1. When we are deserted in the point of
consolation, it is wisdom to search our way, if any thing in it possibly has
grieved Gods Spirit, and what we find right, or wrong, or doubtful, it is our
wisdom to lay it out before the Lord in sincerity as here, I have declared my
ways. 2. As we have found audience and comfort after confession in former
times, so may we expect to find the like again: I have declared my ways, and
thou heardest me. 3. The end of our exercise is to make us study to walk with
God more holily, and to feel his direction and guiding more effectually: Teach
me thy statutes.

Verse. 27. Make me to understand the way of thy Precepts: so shall I talk of
thy wondrous works. A third petition is, for increase of understanding of the
mysteries of Gods Word, that thereby he might edify others. Whence learn, 1.
Great is our natural blindness in Gods matters, and the disease is obstinate,
and therefore the petition for light is so much the more to be insisted in*
Make me to understand. 2. It is not sufficient to know the meaning of the
Word, except we know also the way of practicing it prudently: Make me to
understand the way of thy Precepts. 3. Desire of knowledge should not be for
satisfying of curiosity, or for ostentation, or for worldly gain, but to
edify our selves and others in wisdom: So shall I talk of thy works. 4. It
is good first to understand, and then to talk of, and to express truth
formerly meditated and digested, as the order of these two does teach us. 5.
The works of Creation, Redemption and Providence, either set down in Scripture,
or observed in our own experience, do transcend our capacity, and cannot but
draw admiration from them that see them well; I shall talk of thy wondrous
works.

Ver. 28. My soul melts for heaviness: strengthen thou me according unto thy
Word. A fourth petition is for strength and consolation, in his felt fainting.
Whence learn, 1. The Lords children do find supernatural both joys and
sorrows, which the natural man who wants experience of spiritual exercise,
does not understand, as this expression shows: My soul melts for heaviness.
2. No natural means can be a remedy to a spiritual disease, but the Word of
God only, being quickened by himself is the proper cure; Strengthen thou me,
according to thy Word. 3. Spiritual exercise does give unto the Saints the
clearest discerning of their own weakness, and need of support from God: My
heart melts, strengthen thou me. 4. Whatsoever the believer needs, God
does by the Word supply unto him, as light, that he may not wander: life, that
he die not: comfort, that he saint not: and strength, that he fall not:
Strengthen me according to thy Word.

Ver. 29. Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously. A
fifth petition is, to be freed from the course of sinning in general, and from
the course of lying in particular, that so he might neither deceive others, nor
be deceived himself, but directed by Gods law, which can deceive no man. Whence
learn, 1. All sinful courses in life or religion, are all ways of lying,
because they cannot but deceive a man, whatsoever pretenses they carry; Remove
from me the way of lying. 2. As lying in special, and all sinful courses are
liable to our nature, and do lie close unto us: so should we pray the more
against them unto God, who only can remove them: Remove from me the way of
lying. 3. Nothing can decipher unto us a lying way, nor guard us from it, but
Gods law which is the only true way: therefore, says he, Grant me thy law. 4.
Not only are we inclined naturally to lying, but also we have so foully defiled
our selves with the lying way of sinning, that it is so much the more grace to
find any deliverance from it: Grant me thy law graciously.

Ver. 30. I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.

31. I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O LORD, put me not to shame.

32. I will run the way of thy Commandments: when thou shall enlarge my heart.

A sixth petition, is to be saved from shame, and comforted, with the reason
thereof: because he had adhered to the obedience of the Word, and hoped to go
on cheerfully in the obedience thereof, if God should be pleased, by the
removal of his feared reproach, to comfort and enlarge his heart. Whence learn,
1. When a man is about to resolve upon the way of his carriage, in general or
particular, many rules and counsels will be suggested and offered unto him,
each of them having a pretense of some good, so as a man had need to be well
advised what course he chooses; and then only does a man resolve rightly when
he chooses the way of obedience of Gods Word, which cannot deceive him; I
have chosen the way of thy truth. 2. He that would have special direction in
any particular trial, must be a man resolved to follow the Rule of Gods Word,
in all his ways in general, for otherwise he may be left without direction
when he has most need, except he may say for the whole course of his life, I
have chosen the way of truth. 3. The solid consideration, that Gods Word is
Gods decree, may guard a believer against men's terrors and allurements, and
fix him in his right choice, as here; Thy judgments I have laid before me. 4.
As he who has been most steadfast in trialls, in not past danger of being
driven from Gods Word: so of all men it is greatest shame for such a man in
trialls to quit his hold; I have stuck to thy testimonies: O Lord, put me not
to shame. 5. In the trial of our steadfast obedience unto God, there is no way
to persevere, except in the sense of our weakness, and faith of Gods
goodness, we shall call on God to save us, who will not suffer us to be
confounded: O Lord, put me not to shame. 6. The child of God is subject to
bondage of spirit, even after regeneration, in sundry cases, especially when
God brings troubles upon him; hides his comfort from him; and lets forth
appearance of wrath upon him: as the straitening of David's heart here does
import. 7. As when a man's spirit is in bonds, hardly can he walk in Gods
service cheerfully, so when God shows his countenance and comfort a man,
then all Gods service is easy: I will run the way of thy commandments, when
thou have enlarged my heart. 8. When the Lord gives large comfort, and loses
a man's affection from the spirit of bondage, he uses to give also large
measure of strength and activity in his service, albeit not so large as the
man's affection is: I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou have
enlarged my heart.

HE
Verse. 33. Teach me, O LORD, the way of thy statutes: and I shall keep it unto
the end. In this section there are eight petitions, according to the number of
the verses. From the first; Learn, 1. The narrow way of Gods obedience is hard
to be found, hardly kept, and easily mistaken, except God do teach us daily by
his Spirit, what he does at any time teach us by his Word, and therefore we
have need again and again to pray, Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes.
2. As the Lord requires our perseverance in his service, so our perseverance
depends on his continued direction and assistance, which the believer and
daily supplicant for grace may promise to himself in Gods Name: Teach me, O
Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it to the end.

Verse. 34. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea, I shall
observe it with my whole heart. From the second petition; Learn, 1. There is no
true wisdom, except by the knowledge of Gods will revealed in Scripture, and
applied by him, and this we should always pray for: Give me understanding. 2.
Where God becomes teacher* the disciple may promise obedience: Give me
understanding, and I shall keep thy law. 3. As no service pleases God, but
that which a man desires, at least to do heartily: so he that purposes to
persevere, must purpose also to serve God affectionately: Yea, I shall observe
it with my whole heart.

Verse. 35. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for therein do I
delight. From the third petition; Learn, 1. Because there are innumerable
bypath from terrors and allurements without, to make us decline from the
obedience of God, and we of our selves are both weak and subject to errors
within us, therefore should we be the more instant in prayer, Make me to go in
the path of thy commandments. 2. As it is a fair grace of God to have
pleasure and delectation in Gods service, so he who has gotten of God this
grace, may expect also direction and strength, to go on in the path of Gods
obedience: for therein do I delight, is given as a reason of his praying, Make
me to go in the path of thy commandments.

Verse. 36. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to covetousness.
From the fourth petition; Learn, 1. As the most holy of Gods servants have in
them the remainder of their natural stiffness, and averseness from the
obedience of Gods Word, so are they of all men most sensible of this sickness,
and most instant with God, the only Physician to heal it: Incline my heart unto
thy testimonies. 2. The heart cannot want some object whereunto it must cleave,
a man must love something: and if the heart be not set on things spiritual and
heavenly, it will not fail to pitch upon things base, and earthly, as here is
insinuated by opposition of covetousness to Gods testimonies. 3. The love of
Gods testimonies, or of obedience to Gods Word, and the love of base objects,
as the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life, are
inconsistent; for the one is contrary to the other, as here is shown: Incline
mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness.

Verse. 37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity: and quicken thou me in
thy way. From the fifth petition; Learn, 1. The sinful concupiscence of the
heart has defiled the external senses, and made them servants unto it self,
except God do heal both the heart and the senses, as the petition, Turn away
mine eyes, does import. 2. Albeit the corruption of the heart be deadly
wounded, yet it may soon recover life and strength by the external objects of
the senses, if watching over the external man be neglected, as, turn away mine
eyes from beholding vanity, does import. 3. Whatsoever does draw away the heart
from Gods obedience, is but deceit and folly, whatsoever it may seem to the
beholder: Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity. 4. Albeit we know that the
outward allurements of sin be nothing but vanity, yet we cannot beware of
them, nor renounce them, except the Lord help us, when the bait is offered:
therefore is it needful to pray, Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity. 5.
As God sets a watch over the senses, and keeps the Covenant between the
renewed heart, and the eyes, and does renew the vigor of the life of gra^e; so
is the inward corruption suppressed and mortified: for the dying of sin, is
by the quickening of gracious habits in the heart, unto actual exercise, as,
quicken thou me in thy way, does import.

Verse. 38. Stablish thy word unto thy servant: who is devouted to thy fear. In
the sixth petition, he prays for the fruit of Gods promises, for circumcising
his heart, and purifying of it, and that by experience ^he may be settled in
the faith of the promises. Whence learn. 1. Faith purisieth the heart by laying
hold on the promises of sanctification, and urging of God by prayer to the
performance of them: Stablish thy Word unto thy servant, 2. Albeit the promise
be sure in it self, and sure unto faith also, yet when experimental
performance comes, the truth of it is much more confirmed to us: Stablish thy
word unto the servant. 3. Then do we believe the promises, when we take them as
made not only to others, but also as made to our selves by name, as this
prayer shows, Stablish thy word to me thy servant, (to wit, the promise of
sanctification made to believers) and so to me thy servant. 4. He who prays
for the performance of promises, should resolve to be a servant, and careful
to observe precepts: Stablish thy word to thy servant. 3. That man indeed is
Gods servant, how weak soever he be in practice, who is devoted unto Gods fear:
for he proves himself to be a servant by this, Because I am devoted to thy
fear.

Verse. 39. Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are good.
From the seventh petition; Learn, 1. As the godly are subject to sinful
out-breakings, which may bring reproach on them, and on their profession: so
are they also jealous of themselves, as unable to keep themselves, except God
prevent them from giving scandal: Turn away my reproach which I fear. 2. The
way to be kept blameless, is to fear to offend, and to pray unto God for
preservation, and to watch over our hearts, as we are taught here, Turn away my
reproach which I fear. 3. As the fear of dishonouring of our profession by
sin, is a guard on the one hand: so estimation and love of prescribed
holiness, as of a good and profitable thing, is a guard against sin on the
other hand; Turn away my reproach which I fear, for thy judgments are good.

40. Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy
righteousness. From the eighth petition* Learn, 1. Sincerity loves to come to
the light, and offers it self to be approved to God; Behold, I have longed
after thy precepts. 2. To love and long for sanctified subjection unto Gods
Word, is a proof of sincerity; I have longed after thy precepts. 3. A Saint may
have a great desire to believe, and obey Gods Word, and yet in his own sense
feel much deadness in his affections for a time; I have longed, quicken me. 4.
They who bewail their own deadness unto God, shall find according to his
righteous promises, life spiritual recovered and quickened: Quicken me
according to thy righteousness.

VAU
Verse. 41. Let thy mercies come also unto me, O LORD: even thy salvation
according to thy Word.

42. So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I trust
in thy word.

In this section, he prays, first, for deliverance out of his hard condition,
and gives reasons for strengthening his hope in this prayer, v. 41, 42. and
next, he prays for grace to confess Gods truth openly, till the deliverance
come and he strengthens his hope by six or seven reasons, in the rest of the
section.

From his first petition, and the reasons of it; Learn. 1. The believer must
lay hold on mercies not seen, and must not rest till he draw them forth by
prayer; Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord. 2. Whatsoever may remove our
sins, and evil merits, and make way for performance of promises, is mercy in
effect, and must be sought no less then inward quickening and consolation: Let
thy mercies come also unto me. 3. As perils and hazards of life must be
resolved upon by Gods servant, so deliverances one after another, and salvation
may be surely expected: Let thy mercies come unto me, even thy salvation. 4. It
is not any sort of delivery by any means, which the servant of God being in
straits does call for, or desire, but such a deliverance as God will allow, and
be pleased to give in a holy way: Let thy salvation come. 5. As the Word of
promise is the rule of our petition, so is it a pawn of the thing promised, and
must be held fast till the performance come; Let thy salvation come, according
to thy word: and this is one reason of the petition. 6. As the Lords delivering
of his children from the hand of persecutors, does stop the mouths of their
enemies, who say of them, that they are in a wrong course, and that God is not
their friend: so the believer desires the Lord to appear for him, to this
very end, that the mouth of the enemy may be stopped: So shall I have wherewith
to answer him that reproacheth me: and this is another reason of his petition.
7. Whatsoever be our encouragements in our sufferings, the Word of God received
by faith must be the ground of our comfort and confidence, or else the work
will not be sound; for I trust in thy Word, is the ground of David's comfort.

Verse. 43. And take not the Word of truth utterly out of my mouth: for I have
hoped in thy judgments.

44. So shall I keep thy law continually: for ever and ever.

45. And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.

46. I will speak of thy testimonies also before Kings, and will not be
ashamed.

47. And I will delight my self in thy commandments which I have loved.

48. My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments which I have loved: and
I will meditate in thy statutes.

From the next petition, and the seven reasons added thereunto; Learn, 1. It is
not sufficient for Gods glory, that we believe the Word of God in our heart,
but we must also confess it with our mouth in the time of trial; Take not thy
Word out of my mouth. 2. As God may justly for our sins desert us in the time
of trial, when his glory and our duty calls for a testimony: so we must in
the sense of our ill deserving, flee to Gods grace by prayer, and say with
confidence, Take not thy Word out of my mouth. 3. If it shall please God, for
humbling of us, to desert us in some passage of our trial, yet let us believe
in him, and deal with him not to forsake us altogether in our trial: Take not
the Word of truth utterly out of my mouth. 4. Where the belief of Gods
executing of his Word of threatening and promise has place with Gods children,
there is hope that neither men's terror nor allurement shall overcome them in
their trials: for I have hoped in thy judgments, is set down here for the
first reason of his hope to obtain his petition. 5. The Lords keeping our
heart in faith* and our mouth and outward man in the course of confession and
obedience, is the cause of our perseverance; So shall I keep thy law
continually, for ever and ever: and this is the second reason of his petition.
6. As he who departs from confessing of Gods truth* does cast himself in
straits, in dangers, and bonds: so he that bears out the confession of the
truth, does walk as a freeman, the truth does set him free; And I will walk
at liberty: which is the third reason of his petition. 7. Even the conscience
of honest endeavor to obey the Word, has the promise of not being utterly
deserted in the day of trial: for I have fought thy precepts, is the fourth
reason of the petition. 8. The terror of Kings, and of men in power, is an
ordinary hindrance of free confession of Gods truth in time of persecution, but
faith in the truth sustained in the heart by God, is able to bring forth a
confession upon all hazards: I will speak of thy testimonies before Kings. 9.
He that is resolved to confess the questioned truth of God, whosoever do mock
at it, shall not be ashamed of his confession, but rather shall have credit by
it: I will speak of thy testimonies also before Kings, and will not be ashamed:
and this is the fifth reason of the petition. 10. The more men do know the
excellency of Gods truth, and do feel the power of Gods hand, sustaining them
in the faith and confession of it, the more will they love, delight and take
pleasure in the Word of the Lord: I will delight my self in thy commandments,
which I have loved: which is the sixth reason of his petition. 11. He that
finds himself born out in the confession of the truth in time of trial,
should in all time after so much the more as his experience is greater, embrace
heartily the Lords commands, as precious gifts, and should give up himself
absolutely to be governed thereby: for the lifting up of his hands to the Lords
commandments, does import so much. 12. He who out of love to Gods commands,
has endured trial by trouble, and has overcome tentations, may comfortably
approve himself in his former loving of the Lords commands, and thereby renew,
and increase his love to the obedience of them: for after he has said, I will
lift up my hands to thy commandments, he shows that he will do so, with a
ratification, and approbation of his love to them, by adding, thy commandments
which I have loved. 13. The experience of the worth of divine truth, which is
able to bear out it self, and the man also who does confess it, should set a
believer on a more and more earnest study, to know the mind of God revealed
therein, as the Prophet resolves to do, And I will meditate in thy statutes:
and this engagement is the last reason of the petition.

ZAIN.
Verse. 9. Remember the Word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to
hope. In this section, he prays for the performance of the promise, which he
has believed, and whereof he has found the fruits already in a good measure.
Whence learn, 1. The promises of the Gospel and grace of God, give liberty and
confidence to the believer to draw near to God, to seek the full performance
thereof, as here, Remember the Word wherein thou have caused me to hope. 2. The
general offer of the Gospel, and the promises made to the believer, do make
promises to be every believers propriety, no less then if his name were
inserted in the promise, or written in the Bible: Remember the Word spoken unto
thy servant, or promised to me. 3. God that makes the offer of the Word, is he
who also works faith in the believer, and moves him to apply it and trust in
it, the acknowledging whereof, as it is Gods glory, so is it the believers
profit: Remember the Word upon which thou have caused me to hope: for faith and
hope is not of our selves, it is the gift of God.

Ver. 50. This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy Word has quickened me.

51. The proud have had me greatly in derision, yet have I not declined from
thy Law.

52. I remembered thy judgments of old, O LORD: and have comforted my self.

53. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy Law.

54. Thy statutes have been my songs, in the house of my pilgrimage.

55. I have remembered thy Name, O LORD, in the night: and have kept thy Law.

56. This I had, because I kept thy precepts.

The fruits which he has found already by his faith in the Word, are seven,
all in order set down in the rest of the verses of this section. Whence learn,
1. Faith and hope in God do not exempt Gods children from troubles, but do
comfort them in their trouble, so as all other consolations are naught in
comparison; This is my consolation in my affliction. 2. When the believer is
damped with trouble, and sometime as it were dead in regard of spiritual
operations, motions and affections, faith draws life again out of the Word
of promise; for thy Word has quickened me: and this is the first fruit of
faith in Gods Word. 3. Albeit impenitent, graceless men do mock grace, do mock
faith and obedience in the godly; and (in Satan's drift and theirs) to the
intent they may make the godly forsake Gods law, yet faith in the Word is able
to bear the believer up against derision, as experience shows: The proud have
had me greatly in derision, yet have I not declined from thy Law: and this is
the second felt fruit of his faith. 4. It is good to have a number of examples
of Gods dealing with his servants, and with his adversaries, laid up in the
storehouse of a sanctified memory, that thereby faith may be strengthened in
the day of affliction: for so are we here taught, I remembered thy judgments of
old, O Lord. 5. Faith does draw comfort out of the execution of Gods Word of
promise, and of threatening also, in former times; I remembered thy judgments
of old, O Lord, and was comforted: and this is the thi^d felt fruit of his
faith. 6. It is an evidence of sincerity in Gods service, to see wrath and
judgment in the face of sin, and to be diverted from sinning by the sight of
Gods judgment threatened and executed upon the wicked: horror has taken hold
upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy law: and this is the fourth
felt fruit of his faith. 7. As Gods children are in this world strangers and
pilgrims in affection, and dealt with as strangers where they live, so also are
they oft-times banished from their native Country: Thy statutes have been my
song in the house of my pilgrimage. 8. Wheresoever the believer is, and
whatsoever be his outward condition, the Word of God received by faith, shall
bear him company, and furnish him with matter of comfort and rejoicing: Thy
statutes have been my song in the hou^e of my pilgrimage: and this is the fifth
felt fruit of his faith. 9. The knowledge and deep impression of the Majesty of
God, as he reveals himself in his works, and Word, is a powerful means to
strengthen us in the obedience of faith; I have rem^mbred thy Name, O Lord, and
have kept thy Law: and this is the sixth felt fruit of his faith. 10. Well
spent time in secret when we are solitary, shall be rewarded openly by a good
carriage in society and company: I remembered thy Name in the night, I have kept
thy law. 11. It is no small benefit to see and observe what good we have had by
our obedience to God, and how grace has been rewarded by grace in our persons:
This I had (to wit, all the former fruits,) because I kept thy precepts: and
this is the seventh felt fruit of faith, that a man may enjoy the approbation
and comfort of the fruits of faith. 12. Those are reckoned keepers of Gods
precepts, not who have no sin in them, but who study to be free of sin, and
to do Gods will: This I had, because I kept thy precepts. 13. It is wisdom to
reckon what good we have by faith in God, and to endeavor to please him,
rather then to reckon our temporary and light afflictions in our service, as
here we are taught.

CHETH.
Verse. 57. Thou art my portion, O LORD, I have said, that I would keep thy
words.

58. I entreated thy favor with my whole heart, be merciful unto me according
to thy Word.

59. I thought on my ways: and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

61. The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy Law.

62. At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous
judgments.

63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee: and of them that keep thy
precepts.

64. The earth, O LORD, is full of thy mercy; teach me thy statutes.

In this section he labors to confirm his faith, and to comfort himself in
the certainty of his regeneration, by eight properties of a sound believer, or
eight marks of a new creature. The first whereof is, his choosing of God for
his portion. Whence learn, 1. Such as God has chosen and effectually called,
they get grace to make God their choice, their delight, and their portion: and
such as have chosen God for their portion, have an evidence of their
regeneration and election also; for here David makes this a mark of his
regeneration: Thou art my portion, O Lord. 2. It is another mark of
regeneration, after believing in God, and choosing of him for our portion, to
resolve to bring out the fruits of faith in new obedience, as David did; I have
said that I will keep thy words. 3. As it is usual for Gods children, now and
then because of sin falling out, to be exercised with the sense of Gods
displeasure: so it is a mark of a new creature, not to lie stupid and senseless
under this exercise, but to deal with God earnestly, for restoring the sense of
reconciliation, and giving new experience of his mercy, as the Psalmist did; I
entreated thy favor with my whole heart: and this is the third evidence of a
new creature. 4. The penitent believer has the Word of grace, and Covenant of
God, for his assurance to be heard when he seeks mercy: Be merciful to me
according to thy Word. 5. The searching in what condition we are in, and
examination of our ways according to the Word, and renewing of repentance,
with an endeavor of amendment, is a fourth mark of a new creature: I thought
on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. 6. When we do see our
sin, we are naturally slow to amend our doings, but the sooner we turn us to
the way of Gods obedience, we speed the better, and the more speedy the
reforming of our life be, the more sound mark is it of a new creature: I made
haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments. 7. Enduring of persecution,
and spoiling of our goods, for adhering to Gods Word, without forsaking of our
cause, is a fifth mark of a new creature: The bands of the wicked have robbed
me, but I have not forgotten thy law. 8 As it is the lot of Gods children who
resolve to be godly to suffer persecution, and to be forced either to lose
their temporal goods* or else to lose a good cause, and a good conscience: so
it is the wisdom of the godly, to remember what the Lords Word requires of
us, and speaks unto us, and this shall comfort our conscience more, then the
loss of things temporal can trouble our minds: The bands of the wicked robbed
me, but I have not forgotten thy Law. 9. A sixth mark of a new creature, is to
be so far from fretting under hard exercise, as to thank God in secret
cheerfully for his gracious Word, and for all the passages of his providence,
where none sees us, and where there is no hazard of ostentation: At midnight I
will rise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy righteous judgments. 10. A
seventh mark of a renewed creature, is, to associate our selves, and keep
communion with such as are truly gracious, and do fear God indeed, as we are
able to discern them: I am a companion of all them that fear thee. 11. The
fear of God is evidenced by believing and obeying the doctrine and direction of
the Scripture, and no other ways: I am a companion of all them that fear thee,
and of them that keep thy precepts. 12. The eighth mark of a new creature, is
not to rest in any measure of renovation, but earnestly to deal with God for
the increase of saving knowledge, and fruitful obedience of it: for, Teach me
thy statutes, is the prayer of the man of God, in whom all the former marks are
found. 13. As the whole creatures are witnesses of Gods bounty to man, and
partakers of that bounty themselves: so are they pawnes of Gods pleasure to
bestow upon his servants greater gifts then these, even the increase of
sanctification, in further illumination of mind and reformation of life: for
this the Psalmist uses for an argument, to be more and more sanctified; The
whole earth is full of thy bounty, O Lord, teach me thy statutes.

TETH.
Ver. 65. Thou have dealt well with thy servant, O LORD, according unto thy
word. In this section, he gives eight marks of a thankful soul delivered from
heavy trouble for a time. The first mark is his hearty acknowledgement of Gods
goodness toward himself. Whence learn, 1. There is a time to acknowledge
mercies received, as well as to pray for good things not as yet received: and
as it is the duty of a believer to pray in his need, so it is the duty of the
thankful man to confess what he has received for supplying of his need: Thou
have dealt well with thy servant. 2. The Lord will so perform his promise, as
he shall make the believing supplicant witness of his fidelity: Thou have
dealt well with thy servant, according to thy word. 3. As gifts prayed for, so
also gifts received ought to be examined, whether they be given to us, as to
servants of God, and according to the promises made to his servants in the
Word, or not: otherwise a man can neither make right use of them, nor be
thankful for them, as the Psalmist does here, who says, Thou have dealt well
with thy servant according to thy word.

Verse. 66. Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy
Commandments. Another work of his thankfulness, is his seeking the increase of
wisdom and discretion, for enabling of him unto better service of God in time
to come. Whence learn, 1. Beside the knowledge of the general rule of Gods
will, it is necessary to have the gift of discretion, to know our duty, when
particulars clothed with circumstances, come to be tried by the rule: and this
the thankful man should pray for; Teach me good judgment and knowledge. 2. He
that would be directed in the faith and obedience of Gods Word in particular,
ought to be clear in general of his estimation and belief of all Gods Word in
Scripture. Teach me good judgment, (says he) for I have believed thy
commandments.

Ver. 67. Before I was afflicted, I went a stray: but now have I kept thy word.
The third mark of his thankfulness is, his acknowledgement of the wisdom and
goodness of God, manifested in, and wrought by afflicting of him. Whence
learn, 1. So perverse are we by nature, as we are the worse oft-times by
prosperity: Before I was afflicted I went astray. 2. When prosperity is abused,
it is Gods mercy to us to visit us with the rod of affliction, and by it to
drive us to make better use of his Word; But now have I kept thy word. 3. When
affliction is sanctified and found in the fruits thereof, it is no less sweet
when it is past, then it was bitter when it was present; as the comparison of
times here does show.

Ver. 68. Thou art good, and do good; teach me thy statutes. The fourth mark
of his thankfulness, now being comforted after trouble is, his acknowledgement
of the goodness of Gods nature and working, and his drawing from this fountain
more sanctification. Whence learn, 1. As goodness is Gods nature, and good is
his work: so it is the thankful man's part to observe it, acknowledge it, and
heartily to praise him for it, especially when he ^s called unto this by late
favors, as the Psalmist does here: Thou art good, and do good. 2. When the
goodness of God is solidly apprehended, it furnishes ground of great
confidence to seek further fruits thereof toward us* as here the Psalmist
does. 3. Of all the fruits of Gods goodness, which a thankful man can crave to
himself, none is fitter to be sought, then the growth of the grace of
sanctification: as here, Teach me thy statutes.

Verse. 69. The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy Precepts
with any whole heart. A fifth mark of a thankful man comforted, is his renewed
purpose not to sin, for fear of the malice or craft of any persecutors. Whence
learn, 1. Beside violence and cruelty we shall find lies and false calumnies
to be the weapons of the wicked against the godly; The proud have forged a lie
against me. 2. The slanders and calumnies of the wicked against the godly, are
so trimmed and dressed up with much artifice, as if they were cast in a mould;
The proud have forged a lie against me. 3. The only way of resisting and
overcoming this tentation, is by the sincere adhering to God in the faith and
obedience of his Word; But I will keep thy Precepts with my whole heart.

Ver. 70. Their heart is as fat as grease: but I delight in thy law. The sixth
mark of a thankful man comforted after affliction and persecution, is his
despising the prosperity of the wicked, in comparison of the benefit of a good
conscience, and joy in God. Whence learn, 1. It is the prosperity of the proud,
which encourages them to persecute the godly, yea, their prosperity so
benummeth their consciences, that they may not fear to persecute: Their heart
is as fat as grease. 2. As a benumbed and seared conscience is a sin annexed to
the sin of persecution, so is it also the plague of God upon them ordinarily,
that they should not repent; Their heart is as fat as grease. 3. The comfort of
a good conscience, and the comfort of delighting in the obedience of faith, is
a greater welfare to the godly then prosperity, how great soever it can be unto
the wicked, and so the godly need not envy the proud and prosperous man: Their
heart is fat as grease, but I delight in thy law.

Ver. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes. The seventh mark of a thankful mind comforted after affliction, is
his estimation that holiness wrought by affliction brings more pleasure and
gain, then affliction did bring with it loss or pain. Whence learn, 1. The
godly have as evil natures as the wicked have, which cannot be subdued and
beaten down, except by affliction, as appears by this experience of the
Psalmist. 2. Albeit no affliction for the present be pleasant, yet afterward it
proves medicine to the godly, whose wisdom it is to observe all the advantages
which come thereby, as the Psalmist does here: It is good for me that I was
afflicted. 3. Profiting in sanctification, is more then may recompense all the
trouble which we are put unto in learning of it: It is good for me that I have
been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

Ver. 72. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me, then thousands of gold and
silver. The eighth mark of his thankful mind comforted after affliction, is
his preferring the advantage of the written Word of God to all riches. Whence
learn, 1. No affection to the Word of God can be in a man, till it be esteemed
by him, as it is indeed, the Word of Gods mouth, as it were breathed out by
himself speaking it: for it is called here, The law of thy mouth, to direct and
enforce our obedience. 2. The spiritual advantage which a holy man does make of
Gods Word, is more worth then all earthly riches: The law of thy mouth is
better unto me then thousands of gold and silver.

IOD.
Ver. 73. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding that I
may learn thy Commandments.

74. They that fear thee will be glad when they see me: because I have hoped
in thy word.

In this section is set down the example of the right carriage of a believer,
brought out of one calamity, and cast into another: his good behavior
consists in these six duties. The first is, to guard well against sin, by
seeking wisdom from God to bear well the tentation of new trouble. Whence
learn, 2. Albeit nothing can satisfy misbelief, yet true faith will make use
of the most common benefit of Creation to strengthen it self; Thine hands have
made me and fashioned me. 2. It is a good way of reasoning with God, to ask
another gift, because we have received one: and because he has given common
benefits, to ask that he would give us also saving graces: Thy hands have made
me and fashioned me, give me understanding that I may learn thy Commandments.
3. Seeing God is our Creator, and the end of our Creation is to serve God, we
may confidently ask whatsoever grace may enable us to serve him, as the
Psalmists example does teach us. 4. As the afflicted Petitioner for grace to
obey Gods Commandments, is strengthened in his faith, by the hope of the glory
which may come unto God by his holy behavior, so also is he strengthened in
his prayer, by the hope of the edification, which others the Lords children may
have by beholding his carriage; They that fear thee, will be glad when they
see me. 5. It should be the joy of all believers, to see one of their number
sustained, and borne out in their sufferings; for in the proof and example of
one sufferer, a pawn is given to all the rest, that God will help them in the
like case: They that fear thee will be glad when they see me. 6. The Lord
shall so work for the man that hopes in his Word, that both he and others shall
have cause to be glad, for the grace of faith and hope bestowed on him: They
shall be glad when they see me, because I hoped in thy word.

Ver. 75. I know, O LORD, that thy judgments are right: and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me. The second duty of the suffering believer, is
to ^ustifie God in afflicting of him. Whence learn, 1. Albeit we see not the
particular reasons of Gods dispensation, yet the belief of the Lords
righteousness and wisdom should quiet our minds from all murmuring and
disputation, and suspicion about the Lords doing, as here is done; I know, O
Lord, that thy judgments are right. 2. It is not sufficient that we justify
God, and forbear to murmr against Gods afflicting of us, but we must believe
that God out of love does afflict us, by way of performing of his Covenant unto
us; I know that thou in thy faithfulness have afflicted me.

Ver. 76. Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according
to thy Word unto thy servant.

77. Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my
delight.

The third duty of the afflicted servant of God, is to seek comfort from God,
according to his promise. Whence learn, 1. Albeit we know that our sins have
drawn on our affliction, yet that must not hinder us to seek comfort from God
in that affliction^ and nothing can comfort the afflicted, except the sense of
Gods kindness and mercy to him: Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be
for my comfort. 2. Albeit full remedy be promised in the Word, and albeit salve
for every sore be treasured up there, yet the sweet effect of these promises we
cannot have, without dealing with God by prayer, to apply in particular, what
faith in the Word believes in general: Let thy merciful kindness be for my
comfort according to thy Word. 3. To the end we may have the benefit of the
promise, it is wisdom to thrust in our selves among those to whom the promise
is made, under one title or other as we can and to put our name in Gods Writ:
Let comfort come into me, according to thy Word to thy servant: that is, the
Word of Promise which is made to servants, and so to me, and so let it come to
me. 4. The sense of Gods tender mercy to the believer, is the very life of the
believer, it is death to him to want it: Let thy tender mercies come unto me,
that I may live. 5. As we love the sense of Gods mercy, so must we love Gods
Word, and study the obedience of faith, and he who has the one, may pray and
hope for the other; Let thy tender mercies come unto me, for thy law is my
delight.

Ver. 78. Let the proud be ashamed, for they dealt perversely with me without a
cause: but I will meditate in thy Precepts. The fourth duty of the afflicted
servant of God, especially by persecution, is to pray against his enemies, and
then to go on in his way of serving God. Whence learn, 1. Proud, graceless,
impenitent men, will not prove friends to the godly, but unreasonable
persecutors of them, as they find occasion: The proud have dealt perversely
with me without a cause. 2. When the proud and wicked in the world are our
party, God will be a friend to us who do seek for relief from him, and will
disappoint them of their plots against us: Let the proud be ashamed, for they
dealt perversely with me without a cause. 3. Persecution by the wicked makes
and should make the godly study to understand the Word of God more clearly and
fully then before: Let the proud be ashamed, but I will meditate in thy
Precepts. 4. The best defense against persecution, is to stand fast in a good
cause, and study obedience to Gods Word; for by this means the afflicted do
remain Gods servants, and the Lord is engaged to do for them as his servants;
for this is the course the Psalmist takes.

Ver. 79. Let those that fear thee turn unto me: and those that have known
thy testimonies. The fifth duty of the afflicted and persecuted is, to labor
to know friendship and fellowship with others who are godly, which may both
strengthen themselves and others. Whence learn, 1. As it should not seem
strange unto us if the godly forsake our fellowship when we are persecuted,
seeing God does suffer this for the humbling, and trying, and turning us to
believe in God alone: so it is our duty to recover them who have deserted us,
and to draw them in unto us again, and to pray to God to further us: Let those
that fear thee turn unto me, does teach all this. 2. As God when he pleases,
diverts the comfort of the fellowship of godly friends, so he can bring them
back again to us, as the prayer does import. 3. Only they* who with fear to
offend God, have the sound knowledge of Gods Word, are fit comforters and
strengtheners of the godly under persecution; Let those that fear thee, turn
unto me, and those that keep thy testimonies.

Ver. 80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed. The
sixth duty of the afflicted, is to study above all things, to be sincere in
his carriage, and in his defense of a good cause; uprightly aiming to do what
is right rightly, and for the right ends. Whence learn, 1. Mind and heart in
the best men, are so perverted by natural corruption, (which is not fully
abolished in any) that not man's free will, but Gods free grace must help this
evil: for this prayer, Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, does import so
much. 2. Sound knowledge of the statutes, and sound affection toward the
statutes, and a sound purpose in the following of the statutes, must be joined
together in the Lords Martyrs; Let my heart be sound in thy statutes. 3. As the
unsound heart will not bear out the good cause, nor keep up with the godly in
their good way, but will fall off to his own shame: so the upright man fleeing
unto God in the fear of his own weakness, and suspicion of the deceit of his
own heart, shall be preserved from shame, as this prayer imports: Let my
heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.

CAPH.
In this section is shown how deep the persecuted servant of God may draw in
his affliction before God give him comfort, in the first four verses thereof,
and how he should behave himself in that sad condition, in the last four.

Verse. 81. My soul faints for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.

82. Mine eyes fail for thy word: saying, When will thou comfort me?

83. For I am become like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy
statutes.

84. How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou execute judgment on
them that persecute me?

As for the first, there are four degrees of his deepnesse in distress, to
wit, fainting of faith, almost failing of hope, failing of the body, and
longing for death; Whence learn, 1. It is not strange to see God breaking the
heart of his own child with affliction, even when he is suffering persecution,
that so his faith may be tried and trained unto more strength: My soul
faints. 2. A believer in God, how afflicted soever he be, seeks not to be
delivered, but in a way allowed of God; My soul faints for thy salvation: or,
till thou deliver me in thy good way. 3. The strength of the faith of the
strongest of Gods servants will prove but small, when affliction is great, and
Gods help is delayed: My soul faints for thy salvation. 4. Albeit the faith
of the Lords children seem to faint, yet it cannot die, it cannot fail
altogether: for it looks to the Word, and thereby gathers strength and
hope; My soul faints, but I hope in thy Word. 5. Albeit hope keeps the eye
of the mind so fixed upon the promise, as it is ever looking for deliverance,
yet long delay of help makes hope weak, and ready to faint; Mine eyes fail
for thy word. 6. Hope, and patience, and complaining unto God may stand
altogether, but they must never be severed from prayer; Mine eyes fail for thy
word, saying, When will thou comfort me? 7. Longer exercise by trouble may
affect the body of Gods dearest children, so as wasting leanness may be seen
on it: I am become as a skin-bottle dried in the smoke. 8. No trouble should
drive us to sin, but we should choose rather to pine away in affliction, then
to be freed from it with sin; I am become like a bottle in the smoke, yet I do
not forget thy statutes. 9. It is good in time of persecution or affliction
whatsoever, to have an eye both on the Promises, and on the Precepts: for the
looking to the Promise does encourage to hope, and the eyeing of the Precepts
does prove the hope to be sound: The Psalmist hoped in the word, v. 81. and v.
83. He forgate not the statutes. 10. Albeit long affliction be able to make the
believer weary of life, and to desire to die, yet must he yield unto God, to
live so long as he pleases: How many are the days of thy servant? 11. The
delivery of the persecuted is ordinarily joined with the punishment of the
persecutors, and the afflicted must wait till their cup be full; When will thou
execute judgment on them that persecute me?

Ver. 85. The proud have dug pits for me: which are not after thy law.

86. All thy Commandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfully; help thou
me.

87. They had almost consumed me upon earth: but I forsook not thy Precepts.

88. Quicken me after thy loving kindness: so shall I keep the testimony of
thy mouth.

He shows yet further how he carried himself in this condition: he lays out
his enemies carriage before God, v. 85, 86. and his own steadfastness in
extreme danger, v. 87. and prays for comfort, that he may in his trial bear
out, v. 88. Whence learn, 1. The course of persecutors, is full of traps and
snares, whereby they study to overtake the godly, without fear of sinning in
so doing; The proud have dug pits for me, which are not after thy law. 2. As
the common quarrel of the wicked against the godly, is for keeping of Gods
commands: so the common comfort of the godly is, that they have a good cause to
defend; All thy Commandments are faithful, they persecute me wrongfully. 3. The
worse the cause and course is, which our adversaries do follow, the more
hopeful may we be to be helped of God: They persecute me wrongfully, help thou
me. 4. It is a good means of courage, and comfort, and strength in
persecution, to lay the carriage, and cause of us, and of our adversaries
before our eyes, and compare them together by the Word, and then lay them forth
before God, as the Psalmist does here. 5. Albeit the godly may run the hazard
of losing all things they have in the earth, yet that is the height of their
hazard in defense of Gods truth, for what they have in Heaven cannot be taken
from them: They had almost consumed me upon earth. 6. No hazard of whatsoever
we have in the world, life, lands, goods, friends, liberty, or what else, can
warrant a man to depart from the obedience of Gods command, controverted
between the persecutor and him: They had almost consumed me upon earth, but I
forsook not thy Precepts. 7. Through the infirmity of the flesh, the feeling of
the comforts of Religion, and the freedom of following Gods service
cheerfully, may be interrupted, as quicken me, here does import. 8. Whatsoever
measure of spiritual life, strength or comfort can be abated and diminished by
affliction, the renewed sense of Gods love and friendship to us, (which we
should seek after always,) can easily restore and recompense it: Quicken me
after thy loving kindness, so shall I keep the testimonies of thy mouth.

LAMED.
In this section, he shows, first, how he was comforted under persecution, by
faith in Gods Word: and to this end he commends the worth of the Word of God,
or of the Scripture, for four reasons: The first is, because of the stability
of it in heaven, v. 89. The next, for the durable usefulness of it in every age
of the Church, v. 90. The third is, because by Gods Word the earth is
established, v, 90, 91. The fourth is, because of his own experience of comfort
and strength by it in his affliction, v. 91. And in the next part, he
expresses his thankfulness in the rest of the verses of this section.

Ver. 89. For ever, O LORD, thy word is settled in heaven.

90. Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou have established the
earth, and it abides.

91. They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy
servants.

92. Unless thy law had been my delight: I should then have perished in mine
affliction.

In his setting down his comfort, which he had by faith in the Word, and what
estimation he had of the Scripture; Let us learn, 1. God has given unro us his
Word to bear up our faith, in every hardest condition, and it is a sure rock
which will not fail us, whatsoever appear, or howsoever we do fail or faint:
For ever, O Lord, thy word is established. 2. Albeit the effect of Gods Word
does not appear sometime, but is over-clouded with trouble and tentations, yet
it is sure and fixed by Gods decree unalterable in heaven, and cannot want the
effect in due time: For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven. 3. The
stability of the Lords Word depends upon the stability of Gods truth and
faithfulness, which because he is absolutely unchangable, his Word is so also;
Thy faithfulness is unto all generations. 4. The truth of God is not always
hid up in heaven, but in all generations the truth of the Word, and the
faithfulness of God who has spoken it, is from age to age made manifest among
men; Thy faithfulness is unto all generations. 5. The stability of the earth is
nothing but the effect of Gods Word, and the stability of the earth, and frame
of the world, is a pawn of the stability of Gods Word: Thou have established
the earth, and it abides. 6. As heaven and earth do continue in their motion
and station, and do serve God as his Word has ordained, so should we do: They
continue this day according to thy Ordinances, for all are thy servants. 7
Affliction draws forth the worth of Gods Word, which otherwise could not be
known, and lets it be seen, that the Word of God is able to save a sinking man
in tribulation; Unless thy law had been my delight, I should then have
perished in my affliction. 8. The Word of God, being received by faith, is able
not only to save the believer from desperation in trouble, but also to make him
rejoice, as he who is feeding on delicates, as experience has proved; Unless
thy law had been my delight, I should have perished in mine affliction.

Ver. 93. I will never forget thy Precepts: for with them thou have quickened
me.

94. I am thine, save me: for I have sought thy Precepts.

95. The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies.

96. I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy Commandment is exceeding
broad.

In the latter part of this section, he shows his thankfulness: first, by
engaging his heart to the faith and obedience of the Word, v. 93. Then, by
dedication of himself unto God, as his servant, to be saved by him, v. 94.
Thirdly, by engagement of his heart to continue against all persecution in the
obedience of the Word, v. 95. And fourthly, by commendation of the Word above
all things in the world, v. 96. Whence learn, 1. The worth of the Word of God
is found so excellent in the experience of the believers, that their experience
does six and settle their estimation of it, their love to it, and their
purpose to make use of it always; I will never forget thy Precepts, for with
them thou have quickened me. 2. The believer is the Lords peculiar servant,
bound to him by the bonds of Creation, Redemption and Covenant; and it is his
duty thankfully to reckon his interest and right in God, and Gods interest in
him, for his own encouragement and for Gods praise; I am thine. 3. When a man's
faith is strengthened about his own interest in God, then may he be confident
to pray to God, and to expect for salvation temporal and eternal from him: I am
thine, save me. 4. Honest endeavor to obey Gods commands, how weak soever,
does prove the believers interest in God, and confirms his hope to be saved
by him; I am thine, save me, for I have sought thy Precepts. 5. Persecutors of
Gods servants for obedience to Gods Word, are in effect murderers both of soul
and body, in driving them to forsake Gods commands: The wicked have waited for
me to destroy me. 6. The trouble which the godly sustain by persecutors, should
drive them to search more deeply into the Word of God, and to harden themselves
against all that the persecutors can do: and every comfort given to them from
the Word, should do the same; But I will consider thy testimonies. 7. The use
of all things visible is temporal, but the use and benefit of the Scripture is
everlasting: all things visible have their own perfections in their own kind,
and do extend some of them to one temporal use, others of them to another use,
but the Word of God extends in its kind to all uses, which may bring
blessedness in this life, and in the world to come; A man may satisfy himself
in the contemplation of the worth and virtue of any thing, which is visible in
the world, but the riches of the Word of God is unsearchable, the deep wisdom
of God in the Scriptures is unscarchable, and the perfection of the Scripture
is above all comparison; I have seen, (says he) an end of all perfection, but
thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

MEM.
Ver. 97. O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day. He goes on in
this section, to commend the Word of God, and to show his estimation of it for
eight reasons. The first is, because it has gained the affection of his heart
unto it, so as he cannot but continually dwell upon the meditation of it.
Whence learn, 1. As the Scripture in it self is most lovely for the Author,
matter and use thereof: so is it most affectionately loved by the believer, and
none can either express or judge, how great is his affection to it, except God
only, O how love I thy law! 2. True love to the Scripture makes good memory of
it, and frequent meditation of it also; It is my meditation all the day.

Ver. 98. Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies:
for they are ever with me. The second reason of commending the Scripture, is
the wisdom which it teaches against enemies. Whence learn, 1. Holiness is
great wisdom: for albeit learning, and malice, and long experience may teach
persecutors much, yet wisdom from the Word of God does teach the persecuted
believer far more: Through thy Commandments thou have made me wiser then mine
enemies. 2. Such as derive their wisdom not from the Word of God, but from the
counsel of flesh and blood, within or without themselves, cannot have their
counselors always with them to consult with, but he that seeks his wisdom
from God and his Word, has his counsel always present with him, to bring to
his remembrance what he has learned, and to teach him to make use of it; For
thy Commandments are ever with me. 3. Whatsoever use or benefit we make by the
Word of God, all the glory thereof belongs to the Lord; For thou through thy
Commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies.

Verse. 99. I have more understanding then all my teachers: for thy Testimonies
are my meditation. The third reason of commending the Scripture is, because the
believer thereby is made more wise then his teachers. Whence learn, 1. Wisdom
is not so^ied to teachers, but God is free to give as much and more to those
that are taught: I have more understanding then my teachers. 2. Though the
teacher give forth the general doctrine of faith and manners, yet there is a
more particular application of the Word to the hearers, which only God
furnishes unto the believer by the Word: and in this respect the believer may
say, I have more understanding then all my teachers. 3. The special application
of the Word to our several necessities, comes by joining private means with
the public, such as are reading, praying and meditation: For thy testimonies
are my meditation.

Ver. 100. I understand more then the ancients: because I keep thy Precepts.
The fourth reason of the commending of the Word is, because it is able to make
a man more wise then old age, and long experience of the affairs of men in the
world can do. Whence learn, 1. Old age and experience in common affairs, is
not effectual to direct men in the course of Gods obedience, especially when
they have to do with persecutors, but Gods special wisdom by the Word must
come in here and teach: I understand more then the ancients. 2. To keep close
to direction of Gods Word is more safe then to follow the mind of antiquity
departing from the Word, or the authority of men; I have more understanding
then the ancients, because I keep thy Precepts.

Ver. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I may keep thy
Word. The fifth reason of the commendation of the Scripture, which is also an
evidence of his respect unto it is, because for the love of the understanding
of it, and keeping of it, he had abandoned every sinful course* how pleasant
and how profitable soever it seemed to be. Whence learn, He that would be a
wise disciple of Gods Word, must beware ^o follow sinful courses, for so he
shall grieve Gods Spirit, who must make the Word clear unto him: neither is it
sufficient to abstain from notorious sins only, but also from every evil way
for the same reason; I have restrained my feet from every evil way, that I may
keep thy Word.

Ver. 102. I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou have taught me.
The sixth reason of his commending the Word is, because he was enabled by it
to overcome all tentations which tended to divert him from obedience thereof.
Whence learn, 1. As there are nor wanting tentations on all hands, to divert
men from obedience of the Word, specially in time of persecution: so there is
great need of adhering unto it always, and specially in time of trouble, as
the Psalmist did: I have not departed from thy Commandment. 2. He who has
stood fast in his obedience in the day of trouble, may lawfully take comfort in
it afterward, but must give the glory thereof unto God, as here: I have not
departed from thy judgments, for thou have taught me.

Ver. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey to my
mouth. The seventh reason of his commending the Scripture is, because of felt
sweetness in it. Whence learn, 1. There is pleasure and delight to be found
in hearing, reading, speaking and meditating on Gods Word, yet only the
believer is he who can discern it: How sweet are thy words to my taste! 2.
Spiritual pleasure does far surmount earthly and carnal pleasure; Thy words are
sweeter then honey to my mouth.

Ver. 104. Through thy Precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every
false way. The eighth reason of his commending the Word is, because he is made
wise to sanctification by it, and made to hate all sin for it. Whence learn,
1. As men are involved in error, because they understand not the Scriptures: so
by the knowledge of it they are delivered from error, and made wise against
seducers: Through thy Precepts I get understanding. 2. He that rightly
understands the Scripture, as he cannot choose but love and commend it, so he
cannot choose but hate every course contrary to it: Therefore I hate every
false way. 3. Because every sinful way is a false way, and cannot but deceive
the man that walks therein, therefore we must hate every sinful way, and that
from the fountain of love to the Word of God; Through thy Precepts I get
understanding, therefore I hate every false way.

NUN.
Ver. 105. Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet: and a light unto my path. As in the
former section he gave evidences of his love and respect to the Word of God, so
in this section he gives eight evidences of his sincere purpose to make use of
it in his practice for time to come. The first is, his resolution to make it
his light to direct him in all his actions. Whence learn, 1. A man's ways are
all in darkness, except in so far as he follows the direction of Scripture;
but he that follows the rule of the Word, knows whither he goes, and what
he does; Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet. 2. The light of Scripture is not only
able to give a man general rules for ordering his life, but also to direct
every particular action. Thy Word is a light unto my path. 3. Love to the word,
and estimation of it (which is the duty set forth in the former section) is
best evidenced by making practical use of it in a man's conversation, which is
the duty set down in this section: and whosoever loves it, and loves it so as
to obey it, shall find a sweet, lively and comfortable light in it, to carry
him through all the dark passages of this miserable and sinful life, that he
shall have cause to say, Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, etc.

Ver. 106. I have sworn* and I will perform it: that I will keep thy righteous
judgments. The second evidence of his purpose, to conform his life to the
rule of the Word, is the tying of himself by an oath to endeavor to keep it.
Whence learn, 1. The upright man is willing to be bound to the obedience of
Gods Word, not only with the necessary bond of Gods Command, and of his natural
duty to his Sovereign, but also by the straitest voluntary bonds he can, and
will not repent his resolution for ever: I have sworn and will perform it,
that I will keep thy righteous judgments. 2. Vows, Covenants and Oaths, to
tie us unto the faith, profession and obedience of the true Religion set down
in Scripture, are lawful and sanctified means to help us to be constant; I
have vowed and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. 3.
The equity of all the Commands of God should be a great motive to fasten us
unto the obedience thereof; I will keep thy righteous judgments.

Verse. 107. I am afflicted very much: quicken me, O LORD, according to thy
Word. A third evidence of his purpose to make use of Gods Word is, his seeking
nothing for his comfort and encouragement in his greatest affliction, except
the quickening of spiritual life in himself by the Word. Whence learn, 1. It
is no strange thing for the most holy men to be acquainted with the saddest
sort of affliction, bodily and spiritual: I am afflicted very much. 2. From
whence soever affliction does come, faith goes to God only for comfort, as
here, Quicken me, O Lord. 3. When God is pleased to make the Word of Promise
lively, or to perform what the promise allows us to expect, such a
consolation is a sufficient antidote to the heaviest affliction; Quicken me, O
Lord, according to thy Word.

Ver. 108. Accept, I beseech thee, the free-will-offerings of my mouth, O LORD,
and teach me thy judgments. A fourth evidence of his purpose to make use of
Gods Word, is his present practicing of it, in offering spiritual sacrifices
of confession, praise and prayer, that his service may be acceptable, and that
he may be taught yet more in the obedience of the Word. Whence learn, 1. It
was spiritual, moral service, which the Lord by the Ceremonial Law did teach
his people of old to offer unto him through Christ, and the godly in the Jewish
Church were not ignorant of this; for here the Psalmist prays: Accept, I
beseech thee, the free-will-offerings of my mouth. 2. Albeit our best service
be unworthy of it self to be presented to God, but must have weight by Gods
gracious acceptance, yet must we offer it, and have hope through Christ's
sacrifice that it shall be accepted: Accept, I beseech thee, the
free-will-offerings of my mouth. 3. Together with the offer of our present
service, it is good to join the purpose of growing in obedience and prayer for
grace so to do still; Accept the free-will-offerings of my mouth, and teach me
thy judgments.

Ver. 109. My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law. The
fifth evidence of his purpose to practice Gods Word, is his resolution on all
hazards, even of his life, to keep affectionate memory, and actual respect unto
Gods revealed will. Whence learn, Whosoever will live godly, must resolve to
run hazard of life daily in the time of persecution, and he who lays his
reckoning so, has evidence in himself of his upright purpose, to follow Gods
Word; My soul, or my life is continually in my hand, as ready to be laid down
for maintaining of righteousness: Yet do I not forget thy law.

Ver. 110. The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy
Precepts. The sixth evidence of his purpose of constancy in Gods service, is
his approving of his former carriage, in his bypast trial, which shows he is
resolved so to do also for time to come. Whence learn, 1. It is usual with
persecutors to make acts and statutes, or to broach some danger one or other,
which shall either force the godly to go off the right way of obedience to Gods
Word, or to fall in the snare; The wicked have laid a snare for me. 2. The
godly must hold on the royal way of Gods commands, whether he fall in the snare
of worldly inconvenience or not, as the Psalmist did: Yet I erred not from thy
Precepts. 3. He who has kept the highway, and has trodden upon snares, and
repents not his course, gives evidence of his sincere purpose to follow the
Lord thereafter also, through all dangers, as this example teaches us.

Verse. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are
the rejoicing of my heart. A seventh evidence of his purpose to adhere to Gods
Word, is, his placing of his riches and pleasure in his adhering unto it.
Whence learn, 1. The Word of God believed, is the surest riches of the Saints,
which when all things fail, does maintain and hold up their right unto God
and eternal life and so should it be looked upon by the believer; Thy
testimonies have I taken as my heritage for ever. 2. The felt benefit of the
Word of God, furnishing spiritual light, comfort, peace, strength, meat, drink,
clothing, and whatsoever commodities an inheritance can yield, is and should be
the joy of the believer, and a tie upon his heart to make him stick close unto
it; Thy testimonies have I taken as my heritage for ever, for they are the
rejoicing of my heart.

Ver. 112. I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes always: even unto
the end. The eighth evidence of his purpose to practice the Word of God, is the
bent of his heart, carrying him on to perform whatsoever God does command all
the days of his life. Whence learn, 1. Albeit it be Gods work only to incline
the heart unto Gods testimonies, as we see, v. 36. yet when God has made the
change, and his child is content to follow the direction of Gods Word, this
inclination of the heart is counted also the man's own work, as here, I have
inclined my heart. 2. As only hearty service pleases the Lord, so that only is
sincere and constant, which proceeds from the heart: and he who finds this
inclination, has in himself the witness of his sincerity; I have inclined my
heart to perform thy statutes always even to the end.

SAMECH.
Verse. 113. I hate vain thoughts: but thy Law do I love.

114. Thou art my hiding place, and my shield: I hope in thy Word.

As he gave before evidences of his affection to the Scripture, and of his
purpose to obey it in his practice: so in this section he gives six evidences
of his hatred of the evil, which is contrary to the good, which is promised and
commanded in the Scripture. The first evidence is his hatred of the most secret
and meanest degrees of actual breaches of the Lords law: and for this
protestation he gives three reasons. Whence learn, 1. With earnest love to
good, hatred of evil necessarily must be joined, as the connection of these
duties in several sections does teach. 2. Every dislike of evil is not
sufficient, but perfect hatred is required of us against all sorts and degrees
of sin: I hate vain thoughts. 3. All sinful courses in Religion or
conversation, (such as are all those that are not warrantable by Gods Word,)
are unprofitable, and shall disappoint all those who do follow them; I hate
vain thoughts. 4. Hatred of sin is then acceptable to God, when it flows
from the love of Gods Word set down in Scripture: But thy law do I love. And
this is the first reason of his protestation. 5. The protection and defense
which is to be found in God against the evil of trouble, should strengthen the
believer in the hatred of the evil of sin, as here it does: Thou art my hiding
place and my shield: and this is the second reason of his protestation. 6.
Faith in Gods Word is the fountain of the hating of sin, and confiding in God;
I hope in thy Word: and this is the third reason of his protestation.

Ver. 115. Depart from me ye evil doers: for I will keep the Commandments of my
God. A second evidence of his hatred of sin, is his renouncing all fellowship
in sinning with whatsoever person or persons; let them seek Associates where
they list, he would have no fellowship with them in the unfruitful works of
darkness. Whence learn, 1. He that would eschew sin, must beware to comply
with wicked men in their wicked courses, and in this respect must separate from
them, not altogether from conversing with them, for then a man must go out of
the world, but from fellowship with them in evil doing: for in this respect is
it that he says, Depart from me ye evil doers. 2. Nothing can save a man from
complying with sinners, but sincere resolution to keep Covenant and Communion
with God, and not to displease him; For I will keep the Commandments of my God.

Verse. 116. Uphold me according unto thy Word, that I may live: and let me not
be ashamed of my hope. The third evidence of his hatred of sin, is partly his
estimation of it as a shameful thing, and partly his prayer to be preserved
from the shame which sin does draw after it. Whence learn, 1. The believer does
not lean to his own strength, or holy purpose, but is sensible that he shall
easily fall into sin, except God preserve spiritual life in him: and therefore
he prays: Uphold me that I may live 2. Albeit a believer be not able in
himself to persevere, yet because of Gods promise to hold up the weak who lean
unto him, he may be confident to stand, Uphold me, according to thy Word, that
I may live. 3. Sin should therefore be hateful, because it brings shame to
the sinner of it self, and shameful disappointment of his hoped for felicity;
Uphold me, and let me not be disappointed of my hopes.

Ver. 117. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto
thy statutes continually. The fourth evidence of his hatred of sin, is his fear
of mischief and perishing, which he cannot eschew, except by Gods preserving of
him in the course of his obedience. Whence learn; 1. The strongest believer is
most sensible of his own weakness, and most afraid to sin, and most
apprehensive of the evil of sinning, and of the good of persevering in the
obedience of God: therefore again he prayeeh, Hold thou me up, and I shall be
safe. 2. Gods preserving a man from sinful courses, gives great encouragement
to him to persevere sincerely in the obedience of all Gods commands: Hold thou
me up, and I will have respect unto thy statutes continually. 3. The believer
may undertake any duty, provided he take God for the surety of his performance,
who if he be sought unto by prayer, and relied upon in the use of the means,
will not refuse to enable us to perform whatsoever duty we shall undertake;
Hold thou me up, and I will have respect unto thy statutes continually.

Verse. 118. Thou have trodden down all them that err from thy statutes: for thy
deceit is falsehood.

119. Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I
love thy testimonies.

The fifth evidence of his hatred of sin, is his observation of the mischief
decreed and begun to be executed against evil doers. Whence learn, 1. It is a
special means to preserve us from sinful courses, to observe the mischief
which follows thereupon: Thou have trodden down them that err from thy
statutes. 2. Only they who fear to sin, do see the evil of other folks sinning,
and only they can make good use of Gods judgment on others, who are sensible
of the merit of sin, if they should fall into it themselves: for this is the
observation of a believer. 3. Albeit the wicked hold their head high, and lift
up themselves in their sinful courses against God, yet he has already trod
down many such persons, and has decreed to tread down all of that sort: Thou
have trodden down all them, etc. 4. Not only such as openly and grossly are
wicked and profane, but also all they who please themselves in the by-pathes
of their own wandering, and do not care for pleasing of God, shall perish: Thou
have trodden down all them that err from thy statutes. 5. Whatsoever be the
baits of pleasure, profit and preferment which draw men from the obedience of
God, and whatsoever be the excuses, pretenses and confidences which do secure
the impenitent sinners consciences, all will be found to be selfe-deceit, lies
and vanity: For their deceit is falsehood. 6. The godly and wicked live
together in the visible Church, as dross and good metal, but God who is the
purger of his Church, will not fail by diversity of trials, and judgments to
put difference between them, and at last will make a perfect separation of
them, and cast away the wicked as refuse: Thou put away all the wicked of
the earth as dross. 7. The destruction of evil doers, as it should make us
hate sin, so should it move us to love the course of holiness: Thou put
the wicked away, therefore I love thy testimonies.

Verse. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy
judgments. The sixth evidence of his hatred of sin, is the fear he had of
Gods threatening, and wrath, and judgments. Whence learn, 1. A render heart is
easily affected, as with Gods mercies, so also with Gods judgments: My flesh
trembles. 2. The godly because of the remainder of sin in them, and their
natural frailty, are not exempted from the sense of the terror of God, yea, it
is needful they be now and then exercised therewith, that so they may be kept
in awe, and their joy may be tempered with fear and trembling, and their prayer
may be sharpened, and they may be kept watchful, and so their obedience may be
furthered: My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments.

AIN.
Ver. 121. I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.
In this section he prays to be directed, comforted and helped against his
oppressors, for six reasons. The first whereof, is because his carriage and
cause was righteous, Whence learn, 1. It is no strange thing to see godly
innocent men troubled, persecuted and oppressed: for here is one oppressed, who
says truly, I have done judgment and justice. 2. A believer put in the power
of oppressors for a good cause, may call for, and look for Gods assistance, and
presence, and not to be given over to the will of the persecutors: Leave me not
to mine oppressors.

Verse. 122. Be surety for thy servant for good, let not the proud oppress me.
Another reason of his petition, is because he has ground by the Covenant of
grace, to request God to engage for him, that he shall not be oppressed
utterly. Whence learn. 1. Seeing the Lord is obliged to his people by Covenant,
to defend his servants against their enemies, and that all things shall turn to
their good, the believer has warrant to employ God in his need, to interpose
himself for the relief of his servant, that he be not distressed: Be surety
for thy servant for good, and let not the proud oppress me. 2. Before men do
turn persecutors of the godly, they forget both God and their own condition,
and become proud: Let not the proud oppress me.

Verse. 123. Mine eyes fail for thy salvation: and for the word of thy
righteousness. A third reason, because he is like to faint, and to lose hope
by the Lords long delaying of delivery. Whence learn, 1. As men have received a
greater measure of faith, so use they to get a greater measure of trial, as
here this Champion is suffered to lie in trouble till he be like to sink in it:
Mine eyes fail for thy salvation. 2. Albeit the words of promise be neither
performed, nor like to be performed, yet faith should justify the promise, for
true and faithful: Mine eyes fail for the word of thy righteousness.

Verse. 124. Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy: and teach me thy
statutes.

125. I am thy servant, give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

The fourth reason of his petition for delivery and help, and for direction how
to carry himself in trouble, in the mean time (...) delivery come, is because
the Lord uses to deal with his servants, not in justice, but in mercy. Whence
learn, 1. The course of Gods dealing with his children, is not the rule of
strict justice, or the Covenant of works, but the way of mercy: Deal with thy
servant according to thy mercy. 2. It should satisfy the request of the child
of God under persecution, if God shall direct him to walk holily and
righteously till the delivery come, and to profit in sanctification: Deal with
thy servant according to thy mercy* and teach me thy statutes. 3. When
tentation unto mis-beliefe does oppose our petition, or the reasons thereof, it
is wisdom to resist it, and to assert our interest in the promise, whatsoever
be opposed, and to pursue our petition: I am thy servant, give me
understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

Verse. 126. It is time for thee, LORD, to work: for they have made void thy
Law. The fifth reason of his petition* is because the persecutors were come to
the height of sin, and did stand in no awe of God, or his Word, but rejected
it as a thing of naught. Whence learn, 1. As sinners grow in sin till they
trample Gods law under their feet, so according as they grow in their sin,
the time of Gods manifesting his justice draws near; It is time for thee,
Lord, to work. 2. What persecutors do intend, yea, and what their work of
persecution drives at, and intends, is put upon the persecutors score; for
they have made void thy Law, is charged upon them for their controvening of it
so grossly, as if they had intended to abolish it.

Verse. 127. Therefore I love thy Commandments above gold, yea, above fine gold.

128. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right:
and I hate every false way.

The sixth reason of his petition, is because the more the persecutors do go
about to make Gods law void, the Psalmist was the more zealous for it, loved
it, esteemed of it, justified it, and hated whatsoever was contrary to it so
much the more. Whence learn, The hatred of holiness and of Gods truth,
perceived in the persecutors, should stir up the love of the godly to the
truth so much the more, Therefore I love thy commandments. The more that the
wicked despise Gods Word, we should esteem the more of it; I love thy commands
above gold, yea, above fine gold. The more they wrangle, and wrest it in any
point, the more should we defend and justify it in every point; Therefore I
esteem thy precepts concerning all things to be right. And the more the wicked
love wickedness, we should the more hate it, and all the branches of it; I
hate every false way.

PE.
In this section he professes, his high estimation of, and affection to the
Word of God, v. 129, 130, 131, and prays for the benefits which are offered,
and may be had in it, in the rest of the section.

Verse. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them.

130. The entrance of thy words gives light: it gives understanding unto the
simple.

131. I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy commandments.

He falls here in a new admiration of the excellency of the Word of God, and
in a vehement passion of love toward it. Whence learn, 1. As the Word of God in
Scripture is wonderful in it self, and wonderful in the operations thereof
so when it is best seen, it is most admired, and every new looking upon it,
raises new admiration of it: Thy testimonies are wonderful. 2. The more the
Word is admired, the more is it loved and submitted unto, and more earnest
desires are kindled to make use thereof in practice: Therefore does my soul
keep them. 3. The innermost cabinet of a man's soul, is the proper case wherein
to keep the knowledge of faith, love, and purpose of obedience of Gods
testimonies: My soul does keep them. 4. Albeit the Word of God in Scripture be
full of high mysteries, yet (which is indeed wonderful) it may be read with
profit by simple people, or any who desire knowledge; and it is so plain to
every one who will be Gods disciple, as it gives light and direction presently
to the reader, in the maine points of salvation, and commanded duties: The
entrance of thy word gives light. 5. An humble soul loving to be instructed,
albeit weak in natural judgment, shall be made wise to salvation by it: It
gives understanding to the simple. 6. The more a man know the wonderful
excellency, use, and benefit of the Scripture, the more will he love it, and
long to understand more of it, as here the Psalmists experience teaches: I
opened my mouth, I panted, for I longed for thy commandments. 7. Common and
ordinary affection, or desire after the saving knowledge of the Scripture, is
not sufficient, but affection earnestly bended, is necessary according as the
excellency of the wisdom in it does require: I opened my mouth, and panted. 8.
The Word of God is no less necessary, and comfortable to a man's soul, then
meat is to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, or cool air to the weary: I
opened my mouth and panted. 9. When a man's affection and love to Religion is
kindled, he has great need to study hard, to have sound knowledge and
understanding of the Scripture, lest his zeal and affection miscarry: I longed
for thy commandments.

Verse. 132. Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me: as thou usest to do
unto those that love thy Name. Unto this profession of his estimation and
affection unto the Scripture, he subjoyneth four petitions for the right use
and benefit thereof. The first is the sense of that mercy which is promised and
usually bestowed upon such as love the Lord. Whence learn, 1. The Lord
bestows but short glimpse of his favor and reconciliation on his servants,
that they may find their need to have that sense often renewed unto them: Look
thou upon me, and be merciful unto me. 2. As it is a mark of Gods child to
find in himself love of Gods Name, so it is a mark put upon him, to be
visited by God with glimpse of kindness, and mercy to him: Look upon me, and
be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do to them that love thy Name. 3. As it
is good to mark Gods usual dealing with his own children, so it is good to
study conformity with Gods children in our affection to God, that we may sinde
conformity with them in consolation, for so does the Psalmist here. 4. It is
wisdom for us not to affect singularity of divine dispensations toward us, but
to be content to be dealt with as others of Gods children before us have been
dealt with: Be merciful to me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy
Name.

Verse. 133. Order my stepts in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion
over me. The second petition is for sanctification of his actions, and for
mortification of sin. Whence learn, 1. Albeit we have the Word of God for our
perfect rule, yet we have need that God should fit us, and strengthen us to the
obedience of it: Order my stepts in thy word. Albeit by nature we are ignorant
and erroneous, uncertain and unstable in the way of Gods obedience, yet in the
sense of our sin and weakness, we may pray to God with confidence to be
heard; Direct, order, and establish my steps in thy word: for so much the Word
in the Original does import. 3. Albeit by nature we are slaves to sin, and
any sin may bring us in subjection, yet when in the sense of our weakness,
we have recourse to God to be helped, we may pray with hope to be heard: Let
not any iniquity have dominion over me.

Ver. 134. Deliver me from the oppression of man: so will I keep thy precepts.
The third petition is for delivery from the oppression of persecutors, that
they be not able to drive us from the belief and obedience of Gods Word. Whence
learn, 1. Beside the body of sin and inward tentations, the godly have the
persecution of the wicked without to drive them from Gods service, as this
prayer does import. 2. When the Lords servants in the sense of their weakness,
do seek help against persecutors, he both can and will deliver them either by
breaking the yoke of the oppressor, or by giving strength to them to bear out
in holy obedience of Gods Word, under the burden: Deliver me from the
oppression of man. 3. The end of our seeking to be free from bodily bondage and
trouble from men should be, that we may serve God the more cheerfully: Deliver
me, so will I keep thy statutes.

Ver. 135. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and teach me thy statutes.
The fourth petition is for spiritual consolation, and increase of
sanctification. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the sense of Gods favor to us may be
withdrawn for a time, yet the right which we have to God reconciled to us in
Christ, may bear us out in the hope of having it renewed unto us in his
service: Make thy face to shine upon thy servant. 2. Because the Lord uses,
with the light of consolation, to give also the light of direction in duties we
should seek both, and wait for both from the Lord: Make thy face to shine, and
teach me thy statutes. 3. As there are degrees of Gods manifesting of his
favor, and degrees of profiting in the obedience of Gods Word: so should we
seek the increase of both, and no measure received should hinder the seeking of
a greater measure, as the often repeating of the same petitions in effect does
show: Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and teach me thy statutes.

Ver. 136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes: because they keep not thy
Law. He adds a reason to this last petition, because it grieved him much to
see God dishonored by them among whom he lived, and to see them, by not
obeying Gods statutes, draw upon themselves Gods wrath. Whence learn, 1. He who
is sorrowful for dipleasure and dishonor done to God, may look to be
comforted by God, as the connection of this reason with the former petition does
teach. 2. True zeal is so far from private revenge of personal injuries
received by persecutors, as it can pity their miserable case, and mourn for
them: Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law. 3.
Godly affections are larger then bodily expressions can set forth and that
which bodily expressions do set forth, signifies a will to vent much more then
the body could furnish. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they
keep not thy Law.

TSADDI.
Ver. 137. Righteous art thou, O LORD: and upright are thy judgments. In the
last verse of this section, he prays for a greater measure of the saving
knowledge of the Scripture, most ardently, and premiseth eight reasons before
the prayer, from which he does infer his petition as a conclusion: The first
reason of this petition, is from the righteousness of God, which appears in
the Scripture, and in the execution of Gods Word. Whence learn, 1. The way set
down in Scripture for justifying of men, and the way set down for sanctifying
of men, and for the saving of such as follow the way prescribed of God for
salvation, and the punishing of such as despise the way of life p^esc^ibed, are
very righteous, when they are well considered: Upright are thy judgments. 2.
The way of righteousness set down in Scripture, and of execution made
according to it, may be demonstrated by the essential righteousness of Gods
nature, because as he is righteous, so must his Word and working conform
the^eto be righteous also: Righteous art thou, O Lord, and ^pright are thy
judgments.

Verse. 138. Thy testimonies that thou have commanded, are righteous: and very
faithful. The second reason of the petition is, because the testimonies of
Scripture which God has commanded us to believe and obey, are not only
righteous but also very faithful, which can never fail a man that believes
and obeys them. Whence learn, 1. To the end that our faith and obedience may
be solidly grounded, we must hold for a foundation, that the Scriptures are
righteous and true, and that every truth revealed therein, does include a
command to believe it; and every duty of men declared therein, includes a
command to obey it: Thy testimonies which thou have commanded, are righteous,
and very faithful. 2. It is needful for a believer to labor to have the
impression of the truth, and righteousness of the Word of God in Scripture
stamped on his own heart by freequent meditation, and acknowledgement thereof,
as the Psalmists example here does teach us.

Ver. 139. My zeal has consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy
words. The third reason of the petition is, because his zeal to the commands of
God was so great, as the opposition which his enemies made unto them, did
torment him, and such zeal required growing knowledge. Whence learn, 1. Zeal
had great need of sound knowledge, that it misccary not, and he that finds
zeal kindled in his breast, should labor to inform himself well, as the
Psalmist does, v. 144. and here: My zeal has consumed me, because mine enemies
have forgotten thy word. 2. Holy affections are able to work upon the body, no
less then common and natural affections: My zeal has consumed me. 3. The
contempt and misregard of the Word of God, perceived in any, especially in
professors within the visible Church, is a just reason of zeal, a just cause of
grief and anger against such workers of iniquity: My zeal has consumed me,
because mine enemies have forgotten thy word.

Ver. 140. Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loves it. The fourth
reason of his petition, is because he sees such holiness and unmixed truth in
Gods Word, as he cannot choose but love it, and therefore must pray that he may
know more of it. Whence learn, 1. The Word of God is a Word clean from all
mix^^re of flattery or falsehood, tried to be true in the experience of all
ages: Thy word is very pure. 2. New contemplations of the excellency of the
Word of the Lord, draws forth new commendations of it, and raises fresh
affection of love to it: Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it.

Ver. 141. I am small and despised: yet do I not forget thy precepts. The fifth
reason of his petition is, because the Word of God held up his heart, and
comforted him against all the contempt of men. Whence learn, 1. The godly may
readily lose reputation at wicked men's hands, when they will not comply with
their wickedness: I am small and despised. 2. Albeit we do lose estimation for
adhering to the Word of God, yet the Word should not lose estimation for that
with us: I am despised, yet do I not forget thy precepts.

Verse. 142. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness: and thy Law is
the truth. The sixth reason of his petition, is because everlasting
righteousness, and everlasting truth is in Gods Word, and may be found in
experience by it. Whence learn, 1. This is the excellency of the Law of God
above all the laws of men, that not only it is righteous at the first giving
out, but also righteous in all ages and times: Thy righteousness is an
everlasting righteousness: and thy law is truth. 2. The righteousness which
God has devised and set down in his Word to justify sinful men, is an
everlasting righteousness, even the righteousness by faith in Jesus Christ,
borne witness unto by the Law and the Prophets: Thy righteousness is an
everlasting righteousness, and thy Law is truth. 3. It is good for the settling
and strengthening of the holds of our faith, to consider again and again, what
excellent profit may be had by it, and how true it is, as here the Psalmist
does.

Ver. 143. Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy Commandments are
my delight. The seventh reason of his petition, is because the Word of God has
been his delight, when trouble and vexation has befallen him for obedience of
it. Whence learn, 1. The believer is not exempted from outward trouble for
righteousness, nor from the vexation and inward anguish of spirit which may
follow it: Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me. 2. After that the
believer has felt his own weakness, and the force of trouble, he may expect
victory over trouble, and to be rid from the vexation of it, and brought even
to rejoicing in tribulation* yet thy Commandments are my delight.

Verse. 144. The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me
understanding, and I shall live. The eighth reason of his petition, is because
life everlasting is to be had by the everlasting righteousness set down in
Gods Word, therefore he prays to have more understanding thereof, that is,
to have more clear knowledge and more strong faith in Gods testimonies. Whence
learn, 1. This is the main Doctrine in all the Word of God, to teach men
concerning everlasting righteousness, or how a man is justified before God,
therefore is this again repeated, Thy righteousness, or, the righteousness of
thy testimonies is everlasting. 2. The belief or saving understanding of this
Doctrine brings eternal life to the believer: and for this end being joined
as the last reason with the former seven reasons, it should make a man seek to
grow in the faith, or in the saving knowledge of the testimonies of God set
down in his Word: Give me understanding, and I shall live.

COPH.
Verse. 145. I cried with my whole heart: hear me, O LORD, I will keep thy
statutes. In this section he falls on another maine petition unto God, for
restoring unto him, and increasing in him the vigor of spiritual life by his
Word, v. 149. and to press this petition he uses four arguments, some going
before, some following after it. The first argument has four branches; the
first is, because he had prayed earnestly before for quickening of him, that so
he might be enabled to serve God. Whence learn, 1. When the world is crying,
Who will show us any good thing? this man wishing for pleasure, and that man
for riches, and he for honor, and he for preferment, the Lords children should
be seeking grace to serve God, as the Psalmist did: I cried with my whole
heart, hear me, O Lord, and I will keep thy statutes. 2. When the conscience
can bear witness of hearty seeking of grace to serve God, the Supplicant may
confidently call for, and expect comfortable quickening of his spirit unto Gods
service, as the comparison of this verse with the 149. verse does show. 3.
Whatsoever spiritual grace we seek of God, we should seek it earnestly: for if
we seek it, so as if we did not regard whether we obtained our request or not,
such seeking should under-value the grace which we seek; I cried with my whole
heart.

Verse. 146. I cried unto thee, save me: and I shall keep thy testimonies.
Another branch of the argument is, because he did not pray for delivery out of
his trouble, for satisfaction of his natural desire, but that he might give
further proof of his purpose to obey Gods Word. Whencee learn, The conscience
of a sincere purpose to seek God, may encourage us to seek both consolation,
and lively ability to serve him; I cried unto thee, save me, and I shall keep
thy testimonies.

Verse. 147. I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy
word. A third branch of the argument is, because out of hope to find the fruit
of Gods promises, he had been early about the duty of prayer. Whence learn, 1.
Prayer should be earnestly followed and with no small diligence in using of the
means, specially of prayer, so the Lords children come by their holy desires,
as here we see; I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried. 2. Looking
unto the Word does furnish faith and hope, and faith and hope do furnish
prayer, or else the Supplicant might soon faint: I cried, I hoped in thy Word.

Ver. 148. Mine eyes prevent the night-watches: that I might meditate in thy
word. A fourth branch of the argument is, because when his nights rest was
broken by troubles, he did meditate on Gods Word: when his persecutors were
securely sleeping. Whence learn, 1. The difficulty wherein the Lords children
are cast many times, does bereave them of their nights rest: Mine eyes prevent
the night-watches. 2. The time which solicitude does take from our sleep, is to
be spent upon prayer and meditation of Gods Word, and not upon perplexing
thoughts: Mine eyes prevent the night-watches, that I might meditate in thy
Word.

Verse. 149. Hear my voice according unto thy loving kindness: O LORD, quicken
me according to thy judgment. This is the main petition in this section, put
up for renewing and increasing in him the vigor of spiritual life by faith in
the Word, wherein he gives a second reason of this his prayer, taken from Gods
kindness expressed in his promises. Whence learn, 1. Albeit a man had no
special promise of help in a particular exercise of trouble, yet the
consideration of Gods mercy and loving kindness, manifested in general in his
Word, is a sufficient ground to strengthen his hope to be helped: Hear my
voice, according to thy loving kindness; O quicken me according to thy
judgments. 2. As the feeling of spiritual deadness does argue life and sense
in Gods children, so does it fit a man for renewed influence, and sense of
spiritual life: O Lord, qu^cken me according to thy testimonies.

Verse. 150. They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy
law.

151. Thou art near, and all thy Commandments are truth.

The third reason of his petition is, because his enemies were ready to do him
a mischief, and were far from regarding Gods law, but he believed God was the
more n^ar to deliver him, and that his Word was true, and therefore he desires
renewed vigor of spiritual life. Whence learn, 1. The more near that danger
is, the more ground of confidence have Gods children in their danger, to call
and hope for the influence of his Spirit: They draw near that follow after
mischief. 2. The further the enemies of the godly are from Gods law, and the
nearer they are to do a mischief, the nearer are Gods children to find the
communion of the life of God; They draw near that follow after mischief, they
are far from thy law. 3. For the consolation of a sufferer for righteousness,
it is necessary to believe Gods readiness to deliver him, and to believe the
truth of Gods Word, whereby his cause is justified; for the following of Gods
command* is a pledge of Gods assisting of him, and delivery also, no less then
a promise: Thou art near, and all thy Commandments are

Verse. 12. Concerning thy Testimonies, I have known of old, that thou have
founded them for ever. A fourth reason of the petition is because he had long
since experience of the everlasting stability of Gods testimonies, and therefore
craveth to be quickened according to them. Whence learn, 1. The faith of the
stability and unchangablenes of Gods Word in general, is a good means of
applying and making use of the passages thereof in particular; Concerning thy
testimonies, I know that thou have founded them for ever. 2. Bypast experience
of the truth of Gods Word, is an encouragement to hope for help in like trials
afterward; Concerning thy testimonies, I know of old, that thou have founded
them for ever.

RESH.
Verse. 153. Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy
law. In this section he prays for delivery out of his affliction, and for
quickening of him, by consolation and spiritual ability, to serve God till the
delive^y came; and to strengthen himself in the hope of obtaining this, he
brings forth eight reasons of his petition. The first is, the conscience of
his adherence unto, and endeavor to obey the Lords Word. Whence learn, 1.
Albeit the Lord cannot but see and consider our trouble, yet we can hardly rest
satisfied, till he by real effect make it evident that he piti^th us in our
affliction, and delivers us out of it: Consider mine affliction, and deliver
me. 2. As no trouble or tentation should drive us from the obedience of Gods
Word, so the more closely we adhere to the Word in the obedience of faith* the
more may we be assured to be delivered: Deliver me, for I do not forget thy law.

Ver. 154. Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy Word. He
urges the same petition, and insinuates a second reason for it, from the
Lords engagement by his Word, to be Advocate for him, to deliver him, and to
quicken him. Whence learn, 1 Albeit the godly under persecution have a good
cause, yet they cannot plead it, except God their Redeemer show himself as
Advocate for them: therefore prays the Psalmist, Plead my cause. 2. When God
the Redeemer pleads a man's cause, he does it to purpose really and
effectually: Plead my cause, and deliver me. 3. Except the Lords Clients shall
find new influence from God from time to time in their troubles, they are but
as dead men in their exercise: for, Quieken me, imports this. 4. Till we find
lively encouragement given to us in trouble, we must adhere to the Word of
promise: Quicken me according to thy Word. 5. What the believer has need of,
that God has not only a will to supply, but also an office to attend it, and
power to effectuate it, as here he has the office of an Advocate, and of a
powerful Redeemer also, wherein the believer may confidently give him daily
employment, as he needs; Plead my cause, and deliver me, quicken me according
to thy Word.

Ver. 155. Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes. A
third reason of his petition of delivery is, because the wicked who misregard
Gods commands when they fall into trouble, are far from delivery. Whence learn,
1. The wicked have neither rght to salvation, nor to temporal delivery from
trouble when they fall into it; Salvation is far from the wicked. 2. It is the
mark of a wicked person to misregard, or not to care to know and obey Gods
Word: Salvation is far from the wicked, for they seek not thy statutes. 3.
Salvation is near to those that make conscience to obey Gods Word, how strait
soever their condition shall seem, for so much does the force of this reason
import.

Ver. 156. Great are thy tender mercies, O LORD: quicken me according to thy
judgments. A fourth reason of his petition is, because Gods tender mercies are
great, and therefore the Psalmist may expect the influence of life till he be
delivered. Whence learn, 1. When the godly do think or speak of the damnable
condition of the wicked, they should not be senseless of their own deserving,
nor of Gods grace, which has made the difference between the wicked and them;
Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord. 2. As the mercies of the Lord, which are
the fountain of all the benefits which the believer does ask, are very
excellent in themselves: so are they in the estimation of the believer, when he
looks upon them: they are many and mother-like, tender and great; Great are
thy tender mercies, O Lord. 3. Spiritual life is subject to often fainting, and
has need frequently to be supported and restored by the believers looking on
the promise, and presenting of his case unto God on the one hand, and by Gods
granting of the petition on the other hand: Quicken me according to thy
judgments.

Verse. 157. Many are my persecutors, and mine enemies; yet do I not decline
from thy testimonies. A fifth reason of his petition is, because he had many
persecutors, and yet did adhere to Gods Word. Whence learn, 1. As it is no
strange thing to see the godliest men exposed most to persecution; so it is no
small measure of grace which God bestows on them, to bear out the truth
against all opposition; Many are my persecutors and mine enemies, yet do I not
decline from thy testimonies. 2. He who continues in the* faith and obedience
of the Word against persecution, may expect sustenance and consolation in his
trouble, and delivery out of it: for this is the force of the reason.

Verse. 158. I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved; because they kept not
thy Word. A sixth reason of his petition is, because he was sorrowful to see
his enemies provoke God by their transgressions. Whence learn, 1. Anger,
grief, indignation and loathing (which the word in the original does bear) are
lawful in Gods quarrel against sin; I beheld the transgressors, and was
grieved, because they kept not thy word. 2. He who is affected with grief,
anger and vexation for Gods cause* when he sees God provoked by transgressors,
may expect consolation and strength to himself in the defense of Gods cause, as
the force of the reason does import.

Ver. 159. Consider how I love thy Precepts: quicken me, O LORD, according to
thy loving kindness. A seventh reason of his petition is, because he did
sincerely love the Lords Word, and therefore expected to be quickened in the
sense of Gods kindness. Whence learn, 1. It is a mark of true zeal for God,
which flows from love of the Lords Word, and he who finds this mark in
himself, may offer it to God for a proof of his sincerity; Consider how I love
thy Precepts. 2. He who can approve his love to Gods Word, and his zeal for God
to be sincere, may expect consolation and strength from God in his need, as the
reason does prove. 3. So often as we find deadness in our spirits, so often
should we run to Gods kindness, the fountain of life to repair it: Quicken
me, O Lord, according to thy loving kindness.

Verse. 160. Thy Word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous
judgments endures for ever. The eighth reason of his petition is, because the
Word of God, and every part of it, according whereunto he craved comfort and
delivery out of his trouble, was true and unchangeable for ever. Whence learn,
1. Such is the excellency of the Word of God, as neither it can be sufficiently
commended, nor the believer satisfy himself in commmendation thereof, as this
among many commendations does testify. 2. Truth, and all truth is the short
sum of the whole Scripture, from the beginning to the ending of it nothing
but truth; nothing allowed in it but righteousness: Thy Word is true from the
beginning, and every one of thy righteous judgments endure for ever. 3. He who
foundeth his prayer for comfort and delivery on the rock of Gods faithful and
righteous Word, may be sure to obtain his request: as the force of this reason
does evidence.

SHIN
Verse. 161. Princes have persecuted me without a cause; but my heart stands
in awe of thy Word. In this section, he takes comfort by six approved
evidences of saving grace felt in himself, which he presents unto God to be
sealed by him. The first evidence is his adherence to the obedience of faith,
notwithstanding of his being persecuted by Princes. Whence learn, 1. It is a
sore tentation when the godly are persecuted for righteousness by their
Governors, by whom they should be encouraged and defended, and yet this
exercise of the godly is no strange matter: Princes have persecuted me without
a cause. 2. As it is an ease, and a piece of comfort to the godly, that they
have not deserved persecution: so their innocence is an aggravation of the sin
of the persecutor, as here; They have persecuted me without a cause. 3. There
is no means to save us from sinning for fear of men, but the fear of the
supreme power of the Almighty; But my heart stands in awe of thy word, which
is all one as to stand in awe of God. 4. To bear out persecution of Princes,
out of respect to the obedience of Gods Word, and fear to offend God, is a mark
of saving grace, as here it is brought forth.

Verse. 162. I rejoice at thy Word: as one that finds great spoil. The seeond
evidence of saving grace in him, is a greater joy felt in Gods Word, then in
any thing in the world, yea, such a joy, as the greatest joy of worldly men, is
but a shadowing similitude of it. Whence learn, 1. He that fears to offend
God more then he fears to fall into any worldly inconvenience, may rejoice in
the obedience of faith more then in any worldly advantage, as the experience of
the Psalmist does teach, who says; My heart stood in awe of thy Word, when
Princes did persecute me, and subjoyneth, I rejoice in thy Word, as one that
finds great spoil. 2. The joy of a believer, which he finds in the
obedience of faith, is so great, as the joy which a Victor in battle does find
in the spoil of his defeated enemies, which is but a shadow of it, albeit the
joy of delivery from death, the joy of victory, the joy of riches, honor and
peace, and ease are joined in the Victors breast altogether on a sudden: I
rejoiced at thy Word, as one that finds great spoil. 3. The juncture of fear
to offend God, and joy in obedience of him, is a mark of a gracious spirit, as
the Psalmists producing of it as a mark of grace in him makes evident.

Verse. 163. I hate and abhor lyeing: but thy Law do I love. The third evidence
of saving grace in the Psalmist, is his joint hating and abhorring of all sin,
and loving of the obedience of Gods Word. Whence learn, 1. As the speaking of
untruth, or concealing of truth which should be confessed, is a lying; so every
controvening of professed obedience unto Gods Word, is a work of lying and
self-deceiving, which a believer should hate and eschew: I hate and abhor
lying. 2. Slight hatred of a sinful course, is not sufficient to guard a man
against it: for where the enmity is not great, the man's agreement with sin may
soon be made, but such abhorring and deadly hatred of sin is required, as
cannot admit reconciliation: I hate and abhor lying. 3. Ha^ing and abhorring of
all sin arising from, and joined with the love of Gods Word, is a solid mark of
saving grace: for abhorring of some sin, and of all sin, for temporary reasons,
may prove unsound; but this is sincerity, when a man can say, I hate and abhor
lying, but thy Law do I love.

Ver. 164. Seven times a day do I praise thee: because of thy righteous
judgments. The fourth evidence of saving grace in the Psalmist, is the
frequent admiration of the goodness of God to man, set forth in Gods Word,
with hearty praising of God for it. Whence learn, 1. As the studying of the
Word of God brings the believer to see his own blessedness revealed in it:
so it brings him also to admire and praise God for that and for all his
righteousness declared in it: Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of
thy righteous judgments. 2. The more a man discover Gods glory in the Wo^d,
and be taken with the love of God, and admiration of God for what he sees, and
does make use of Gods Word unto Gods praise, the more clear evidence has he of
the work of saving grace in himself, as here the Psalmist makes use of the
mark; Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments.

Verse. 165. Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend
them. For confirmation of the former marks of saving grace, he commends the
love of Gods Word, by two notable effects; One is, that it brings a glorious
peace with it: Another is, that it makes a man hold on the way of Gods
obedience, whatsoever impediments or stumbling blocks shall be cast in his way.
Whence learn, 1. The receiving of the truth of God in love, gives great
peace, peace passing understanding: for the law of works does show a man's debt
and danger, and the believer subscribeth lovingly to the justice thereof: and
the law of saving faith shows remission of sin, righteousness and eternal
life through the Messiah Jesus Christ, and the believer embraces the offer
heartily: and the law of new obedience directs the justified man how to go on
to the full possession of blessedness, and the believer does heartily take on
this holy yoke upon him, and so he walks as a man reconciled with God, and at
peace with him: Great peace have they who love thy law. 2. Albeit there be many
stumbling blocks and impediments to divert the beleeer, from the obedience of
Gods Word, arising from the terror and allurements of the world, from the
troubles and exercises of the godly, from the scandals given by Professors, and
such like, yet the love of Gods Word is able to carry a man strait on his way
to heaven* without stumbling or turning aside to the one hand or the other:
Great peace have they who love thy law, and nothing shall offend them.

Verse. ^66. LORD, I have hoped for thy salvation: and done thy Commandments.
The fifth evidence of saving grace in the Psalmist is, the conscience of his
sound faith and obedience. Whence learn, 1. Sound hope of salvation is joined
with the care of keeping the Commandments: for he who has this hope purifieth
himself, that he may be holy: Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done
thy Commandments. 2. As none can have heart or hand to keep Gods commands,
except he have hope to be helped out of every trouble wherinto he may fall, and
to be fully saved at last: so he who has the hope of salvation, has great
encouragement unto obedience, and where the conjunction of these two are found,
the man has evidence of saving grace, and boldness to go to God in this
confidence, as the Psalmist does; Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and
done thy Commandments.

Ver. 167. My soul has kept thy Testimonies: and I love them exceedingly.

168. I have kept thy Precepts and thy Testimonies: for all my ways are before
thee.

The sixth evidence of saving grace is, the approved testimony of his
conscience concerning the sincerity of his heart, and that after a new
examination of the soundness of former marks, which here are looked upon over
again, and presented to God with other three marks of sincerity, to wit,
spiritualness in obedience, exceeding love to the Word, and daily walking as
in the sight of God. Whence learn, 1. After a believer has found marks of
saving grace in himself, it is wisdom for him to examine these marks over
again, whether they be in him indeed and in truth or not: for if they be indeed
in him, how weak soever they be, and albeit joined with imperfections, if
compared with the perfection of the moral law, yet will they bear weight in
the balance of the Gospel, (where any measure of uprightness passes for
perfection,) as here the example of the Psalmist does teach. 2. Where the soul,
or the renewed part of the man is for the obedience of faith, there is a
sincere keeping of the commands: My soul has kept thy testimonies. 3. Where
the love to Gods Word, and the obedience thereof exceeds the man's love to
any thing which might divert him, there is a sincerity in keeping of the Word;
I love thy testimonies exceedingly. 4. As the looking always unto Gods
all-seeing eye, is a special means to make a man keep his commands: so the
conscience of his endeavor so to do, testifies sincerity; I have kept thy
Precepts and thy Testimonies: for all my ways are before thee.

TAU.
Verse. 149. Let my cry come near before thee, O LORD: give me understanding
according to thy Word. In this last section, he closes all the former sweet
meditations, and comfortable expressions concerning his faith and love, and the
fruits thereof, with five petitions. The first is, for the increase of saving
knowledge of the Scriptures. Whence learn. 1. Nothing is so necessary to be
sought of God as practical knowledge* whereby a man may know how to behave
himself toward God and man in every estate, according to the rule of Scripture;
Give me understanding according to thy word. 2. If God delay to answer us in
this petition or any other, or seem to hide himself from us, let us follow hard
after him with earnest supplication, as the Psalmist teaches us; Let my cry
come near before thee, O Lord. 3. The promises of Gods Word are sufficient to
give us breath in crying, and hope to have a good answer, and patience till it
come: Give me understanding according to thy Word.

Ver. 170. Let my supplications come before thee: deliver me according to thy
Word. The next petition is, for deliverance out of his trouble. Whence learn,
1. Albeit the believer is not exempted from trouble, but rather engaged to bear
the cross, till he come to the crown, yet is he privileged to have access to
God in prayer for comfort, strength and deliverance from it; Let my
supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy Word. 2. The
believer craveth nothing but what is promised, and as that may, so it does
satisfy him: Deliver me according to thy Word.

Verse. 171. My lips shall utter praise: when thou have taught me thy statutes.

172. My tongue shall speak of thy Word: for all thy Commandments are
righteousness.

He strengthens his hope in these two prayers, by a promise of thankfulness for
any measure of a gracious answer. Whence learn* 1. As the end of our petitions
should be that we may be enabled to praise God really, so the use of granting
of our petitions should be thanks and praise; My lips shall utter thy praise,
when thou have taught me thy statutes. 2. Thanksgiving in words does best
beseem the man, who indeed is obedient in his life unto God: and as no man can
obey God in his deeds, but he that is taught of God, so he that is taught of
God to obey in deeds, may well promise upon that condition, to praise God in
words also: My lips shall utter praise, when thou have taught me thy statutes.
3. To teach others the ways of God, requires that we our selves be taught of
God; When thou have taught me thy statutes, my tongue shall speak of thy Word.
4. There is no ground of edifying our selves and others, and of glorifying of
God, but from the Word of the Lord: My tongue shall speak of thy Word. 5. True
righteousness is to be found only in the Word of God; and nothing is approved
in it, nor recommended to us by it, save righteousness only, which should move
us thy more to study it our selves, and then to communicate it to others: For
all thy Commandments are righteousness.

Ver. 173. Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy Precepts.

174. I have longed for thy salvation, O LORD: and thy Law is my delight.

A third petition is for assistance in trouble, till God should send full
delivery to him, whereof three reasons are subjoyned: One, from his making
choice of the Word above all earthly things: Another, from his longing and
expecting of deliverance according to it: And the third, is from his delight in
the Word. Whence learn, 1. As they who are resolved to serve God may be sure of
opposition, and of adversaries, and of trouble from them: so may they be
persuaded to find Gods help in all their troubles against adversaries, for
this much is imported in those words, Let thy hand help me. 2. A^beit
allurements to divert the believer from Gods obedience, be offered unto him,
yet must he reject them, and deliberately prefer Gods obedience to them all:
for thus much is imported in the Psalmists practice: For I have chos^n thy
Precepts. 3. He who has preferred obedience to the baits of sin, and has
resolved rather to suffer then to sin, may look for Gods assistance to sustain
him in his trouble, that he shall never have cause to repent him of his choice:
Help me, for I have chosen thy Precepts. 4. Albeit it be natural to seek
deliverance out of trouble, yet it is proper to the godly to love no
deliverance but such as God sends by his own means in his own time, and in
this mind to wait for this sort of deliverance in the way of Gods obedience;
For I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord, was the Psalmists way to be
delivered. 5. The believer is not comfortless in his trouble, he has his own
spiritual comfort, pleasure and delight in Gods truth or in God manifested
therein; Thy Law is my delight, says the Psalmist in trouble.

Ver. 175, Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and let thy judgments
help me. A fourth petition is, for continuation of his life for honoring of
God. Whence learn, 1. As the godly have no will to fall into the hands of men,
or to lose their life by murderers: so do they not love life, but for further
glorifying of God: Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee. 2. Whosoever
have a design to honor God in their life, which design they have not as yet
attained, may lawfully pray for prolonging their life a while; Let my soul
live, and it shall praise thee. 3. As the Word of God has pronounced sentence
already for the sustaining of his suffering servants, and for taking order with
their persecutors: so accordingly may the godly pray and expect to be helped;
Let thy judgments help me.

Ver. 176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant: for I do not
forget thy Commandments. The fifth and last petition is, that the Lord would
recall the Psalmist, now being a banished exile, and bring him home to the
communion of his people, as a wandering sheep is brought home to the flock by a
kindly shepherd. Whence learn, 1. As the believer is always a pilgrim in his
affection toward this earth: so also he may be corporally banished from his
native country, and thrust out from the fellowship of the Church, as the
experience of the Psalmist teaches, who does lament his case, saying, I have
gone astray like a l^st sheep, driven out by storm or dark day, or by the
hunting of the dogs, chased out from the rest of the flock. 2. Albeit the
banished believer be separated from the fellowship of the Church, and from his
friends, yet not from communion with God the good shepherd, who hears the
bleating of the poor wandering sheep wherever it be, and will take care of it,
and seek it out: Seek thy servant, says the exile Psalmist unto the Lord. 3.
The way for the believer to keep communion with God in his trouble of
banishment or whatsoever other trouble, is to remember the direction of God in
his Word, for going on in the way of faith and obedience, and he may assure
himself that the good shepherd shall not forget him: Seek thy servant, for I do
not forget thy Commandments.

PSALM CXX.
THe scope of this Psalm is, by the experience of the Psalmist, to teach and
comfort such as shall be traduced, and falsely slandered. His exercise and
deliverance is set down summarily, v. 1. And his prayer in his distress, more
largely in the rest of the Psalm.

Ver. 1. IN my distress I cried unto the LORD; and he heard me. From his
exercise in general, and deliverance; Learn, 1. The godly oft-times are put to
straits and perplexities, tha^ they know not what to do till they go to God by
prayer: In my distress I called unto the Lord. 2. Distress is a means to make
prayer fervent, and fervent prayer wants not a good answer: I cried unto the
Lord, and he heard me.

Ver. 2. Deliver my soul, O LORD, from lying lips: and from a deceitful
tongue. In the rest of the Psalm he first puts up his petition to be saved from
the bloody tongue of the calumniator, v. 2. and then denounces Gods judgment
against him, v. 3, 4. and closes with a lamentation, v. 5, 6, 7.

From his particular petition; Learn, 1. How innocently soever the godly shall
behave themselves, yet are they subject to the bitter backbiting of bloody
calumniators, traduc^ng them, and forging lies against them, to make their
Governors and Judges fall upon them, as the Psalmists experience shows:
Deliver my soul, or my life, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful
tongue. 2. Albeit the innocent believer can find no means to refute the
calumny, nor be able to eschew the danger wherein to he is cast thereby, yet
God can find a way for clearing of his name, and saving his person, as the
prayer teaches: Deliver my soul, O LORD, from lying lips.

Ver. 3. What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou
false tongue?

4. Sharp arrows of the mighty? with coals of Juniper,

He denounces Gods judgment against the calumniator, however the matter shall
go. Whence learn, 1. The calumniator has as little advantage by his sin, as
any sort of sinner, but for the judgment of God he is sure of it: For what
shall be given unto thee* thou false tongue? 2. The traducer of the godly has
exquisite vengeance waiting for him, which he never dreamed of, and which no
tongue can sufficiently express: What shall be done unto thee, thou false
tongue? 3. As calumnies do hurt the name of the godly suddenly, before he can
be aware, and the wound remains long, as arrows shot against them: and as
the coals of Juniper have the greatest heat, and burn long ere they be
quenched: so shall the judgment of the calumniator be: Sharp arrows of the
mighty, or shot by a strong man, and coals of Juniper.

Ver. 5. Woe is me, that I sojourne in Mesech; that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar.

6. My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace.

7. I am for peace, but when I speak, they are for war.

In his lamentation; Learn, 1. False brethren counterfeit professors of
Religion, rotten members of the visible Church, are no better neighbors then
savage and wild Barbarians, robbers, Muscovites, and Arabians, Men of Mesech,
and Kedar, without the verge of the visible Church. 2. It is a woeful condition
to dwell among the wicked, and yet the godly cannot eschew it, they may well
lament it: Woe is me that I sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar. 3. So long as the godly live among wicked calumniators, they reckon
themselves as banished men living in a foreign Country, and are made
oft-times to lament their condition: Woe is me that I sojourn in Mes^ch, and
dwell in the tents of Kedar. 4. A man should have a great cause of lamenting
before he give (...) to his woe: his patience should do its part for a
sufficient (...) time, in hope to have the evil remedied: for the Psalmist
(...) not break forth at first, but says, My soul has long dwelt with him
that hates peace. 5. It is not sufficient to live innocently with the wicked,
but duty requires that we should labor (...) mitigate the fury of
adversaries, as the Psalmist did: I am for peace. 6. If peace be studied with
those among whom we do live, and we obtain it not* yet shall the ditty of the
wicked be so much the more augmented thereby: When I speak, they ar^ for war.

PSALM CXXI. A Song of degrees.
The scope of this Psalm is to show, that howsoever we (...) ready to seek
help any where else, rather then in God, ye (...) help is to be had, except
from God: perfect help, and full de^^very is to be had in him undoubtedly, as
the Psalmists expe^^ence and example of faith do teach: wherein the Psalmist
leaving all other confidences beside God, betaketh him to ^od Almighty only, v.
1.2. And from his own experience, gives encouragement to all Gods people to
place their confidence in God alone, by six promises, in the six verses
following, to the end of the Psalm.

Verse. 1. I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help.

2. My help comes from the LORD, which made heaven and earth.

From the Psalmists example and exercise; Learn, 1. The Lord uses to bring
such trouble upon his own children, as shall make them sensible of their own
weakness, and of their need of help; for otherwise we are ready to encounter
with smaller troubles, in our own strength: I will lift up mine eyes to the
hills, from whence comes my help. 2. Some one earthly power or other, is the
first refuge which naturally we do lo^k unto, to see what help may be found
there: which our natural inclination the Psalmist taxes indirectly in the name
of lifting the eyes to the hills, to wit, to the powers of the world, rather
then to the heavenly hills of Gods omnipotency; I lift up mine eyes unto the
hills; not these earthly ones, will he say, which I see cannot help me, but to
hills higher* then the highest earthly help, as afterward he makes clear. 3.
Nothing can satisfy faith, except the alsufficiency of God, who made heaven
and earth of nothing, and can give help where there is no appearance of relief:
My help comes from the Lord, which made heaven and earth.

Verse. 3. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved* he that keeps thee will
not slumber. For the confirmation of his own faith, and the faith of others,
that they may rest on God, and depend upon him only for relief in their
straits, whether they have means of delivery, or not, he brings forth six
promises of God unto the believer* for our faith being weak has need to have
the promises of God branched into small parts, and multiplied in particulars,
that so they may be the more easily applied. The first promise is in this
verse. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the believer be of himself weak and ready to
fall, yet the Lord will save him from ruin, and keep him fast in the defense
of the truth for which he is put in straits: He will not suffer thy foot to be
moved. 2. The providence of God is so vigilant for the safety of the believer,
as the believer needs not to fear, lest he suffer any inconveniency by Gods
oversight; for, He that keeps thee will not slumber.

Ver. 4. Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. A
second promise made to all Gods people, which also confirms the former
promise. Whence learn, 1. The Lord is keeper and watchman over his Church, and
every member thereof, and this is his Style and memorial in all ages: Behold,
he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. 2. The right which
particular believers have unto promises, does belong unto them, because they
are made to the Church; over which the Lord takes such ca^e* as he never in no
moment of time fails in his attending the Church, and every particular member
thereof: He that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep.

Ver. 5. The LORD is thy keeper: the LORD is thy shade upon thy right hand. The
third promise particularly directed to the believer, including the Psalmist
himself* Whence learn, 1. Albeit the believer has not a promise to be free
from trouble and persecution* yet he has a promise of consolation in it, and
of defense from the hurt of it: The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade.
2. When trouble comes the Lord is not far to seek, but is ready to be found,
for protection and consolation: The Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.

Verse. 6. The Sun shall not smite thee by day: nor the Moon by night. The
fourth promise made with allusion unto, and application of that care which God
had over his people, when he brought them out of Egypt through the wilderness,
whom he guarded them from the heat of the Sun, by a cloud by day; and from
the cold and moistness of the night and Moon, by a pillar of (...) by night.
Whence learn, 1. Albeit the believer be subject to sund^y perils from
adversity, and prosperity, from one adversary power at one time, and from
another adversary power at another time; yet the Lord so cares for him, and so
t^^perateth, and moderateth his exercises, that he shall be sure not to be
harmed, in order and relation to the carrying on of his felicity: The Sun
shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night. 2. What care the Lord had
over his people in the wilderness, the same has he still over every believer,
as the application of the like mercy does show: The Sun shall not smite thee
by day, etc.

Ver. 7. The LORD shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall preserve thy
soul. From the fifth promise; Learn, 1. Whatsoever trouble shall befall the
believer, he shall be freed from the evil of it, because God shall make all
troubles work together for his good: The Lord shall preserve thee from all
evil. 2. If the believer lose any thing by trouble, he shall not lose what is
most precious; the Lord shall save his soul, and (so long as it is expedient)
his bodily life also: He shall preserve thy soul.

Ver. 8. The LORD shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in: from this
time forth, and even for evermore. From the sixth promise; Learn, 1. Albeit all
men have need to have their carriage in all their affairs directed of God, yet
none has the promise of direction and success, save the believer only, to
whom it is said here; The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in.
2. The Lord so takes his own by the hand to care for them, as he does not
leave them nor forsake them afterward, but goes along with them for ever: The
Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in: from this time forth, and
even for evermore.

PSALM CXXII.
THe Ark of God had for a long time moved from place to place, at length the
Lord reveals unto David the place whereof Moses had spoken, to be Sion where
the Arc should rest, and there David set up the A^ke, having revealed unto the
people the Oracle: whereupon the people did heartily embrace the will of God,
and came to that place appointed for public worship, and did invite one
another to go up to worship* In this Psalm, we have first David's joy for the
peoples willingness to assemble unto the Lords house, v. 1, 2. In the next
place, he praises Jerusalem, v. 3, 4, 5. In the third place, he exhorts all
to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, representing the universal Church, and
uses some reasons to set them forward on the duty, v. 6, 7, 8, 9.

Ver. 1. I Was glad when they said unto me: Let us go into the house of the
LORD.

2. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.

From the joy which David had in the peoples willingness, to join together in
the public worship of the Lord; Learn, 1. Sometime the message of the Lords
servants is well taken at their hand, and the fruit of their labor is ^eturned
upon them, to their no small joy, as here David professes in his experience: I
was glad, when they said unto me, Let us go. 2. As people lawfully may, yea,
and should not only stir up one another, by their example and mutual private
exhortation, unto the service of God, but also stir up their teachers, and
Rulers: so teachers and Rulers should think it no incroachment upon their
office, nor disparagement to their person or gifts, or place, to be stirred up
to their duties by the people, but rather should cherish and foster the peoples
holy zeal, as here we are taught by David's practice: I was glad when they said
unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. 3. As it is no small benefit to
have a settled place for public Assemblies unto Gods worship, so should it be
thankfully acknowledged when it is bestowed and resolutely made use of, as here
we see the people did: Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.

Ver. 3. Jerusalem is builded as a city, that is compact together.

4. Whither the tribes go up* the tribes of the LORD, unto the testimony of
Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the LORD.

5. For there are set the thrones of judgment the thrones of the house of
David.

He commends Jerusalem, the figure of the Church of God and of the
corporation of his people. First, as a City for a community. Secondly, as the
place of Gods public Assemblies for religious worship. Thirdly, as the place
of public judicatories, for governing the Lords people under David, the type
of Christ. Whence learn, 1. The Church of God is not without cause compared to
a City, and especially to Jerusalem, because of the union, concord, community
of laws, mutual commodities, and conjunction of strength, which should be
among Gods people: Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together. 2.
That which commends a place most of any thing, is the erecting of the Lords
banner of love in it, and making it a place for his people, to meet together
for his worship; Jerusalem is a city whither the tribes go up. 3. Whatsoever
civil distinction Gods children have among themselves, and howsoever they dwell
scattered in several places of the earth, yet as they are the Lords people,
they should entertain a communion and conjunction among themselves as members
of one universal Church, as the signification of the peoples meeting thrice in
the year at Jerusalem, did teach: Whither the tribes did go up, the tribes of
the Lord, 4. As the tribes, so all particular Churches, how far soever
scattered, have one Lord, one Covenant, one Law and Scripture, signified by the
tribes going up to the testimony of Israel, or to the Ark of the Covenant or
testimony, where the whole ordinances of God were to be exercised 5. The end of
the ordinances of God, of holy covenanting and communion, and joining in
public worship, is to acknowledge the grace and goodness of God, and to
glorify him: for the tribes did go up to give thanks unto the Name of the
Lord. 6. The Church of God wants not the one Government and Governors,
Courts and Judicatories, belonging to Christ and his Church, as the erecting of
Ecclesiastic Judicatories in Jerusalem did signify and teach: for there are
set thrones of judgment. 7. The civil Governors in their civil power, should
contribute what their power can, to the furtherance of the Church Government,
and the Courts thereof: as the thrones of the house of David, joining their
assistance in Jerusalem unto the Ecclesiastic Courts, did signify and teach:
There are set the thrones of the house of David.

Verse. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.

7. Peace be within thy walls: and prosperity within thy palaces.

8. For my brethren and companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee.

9. Because of the house of the LORD our God, I will seek thy good.

In the last place he exhorts all to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, or of
the Church signified by it, and joyneth four motives unto it. One because as it
was a proof of love to the Church, so it had a promise of a blessing, v. 6.
Another motive is, from his own example, praying for it. v. 7. A third, because
so did love to the brethren require, v. 8. A fourth motive, because so did
respect and love to the Church or house of God require, v. 9. Whence learn, 1.
The Universal Church militant, should be dear to every member thereof, and
prayed for, that it may prosper: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. 2. As none
can pray for the welfare of the Church heartily, except they love her: so none
shall love her and seek her welfare, but shall fare the better for it; for it
is promised here, They shall prosper that love thee. 3. The Church is a
warre-town, and a walled town which is situated among enemies, and may not
trust them who are without, but must be upon its keeping, as the type thereof,
Ieru^alem, with her walls and towers did shadow forth: Peace be within thy
walls. 4. Peace within the Church is no less needful, then prosperity within
it; and if peace be within the Church, it matters the less what enemies she
have without: Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces,
does import or insinuate so much. 5. All the members of the Church militant,
should be affected one to another, as brethren, as fellow-partners in loss and
gain; for the relation which they have to one Father the Lord, and one Mother
the Universal Church: For my brethren, and companions sake, I will now say,
Peace be within thee. 6. Seeing the Church is the Lords dwelling house in this
world, whosoever loves the Lord must not only inwardly affect, but also
effectually by all means endeavor to promote the good of the Church, that is
to say, every true member of the Church must do what in him lies, and as his
calling will suffer, to have Religion established, Gods ordinances obeyed,
public worship erected, the Word truly preached, Sacraments rightly
administered, and Church Government according to the Word of God exercised: for
so teaches this example; Because of the house of the Lord my God, I will seek
thy good.

PSALM. CXXIII.
THe scope of this Psalm is to teach the Lords people, how to carry themselves
when they are oppressed by the tyranny of their proud adversaries, and are
destitute of all help under heaven, wherein the Psalmist makes his address to
God, in patience, humility, and hope, v. 1, 2. And prays for comfort under,
and relief from, the contempt of the proud adversaries* v. 3, 4.

Ver. 1. UNto thee lift I up mine eyes: O thou that dwell in the heavens.

2. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistress: so our eyes wait upon the
LORD our God, until that he has mercy on us.

From the Psalmists address unto God, by this short prayer, under the
oppression of the Church; Learn, 1. The force of prayer does not consist in
multitude of words, but in faith, and fervent laying forth of desires before
the Lord, as here we see. 2. It is not strange to see Gods children oppressed,
and despised, and destitute of all relief, except of what may be expected from
heaven, as this case here set down shows. 3. Albeit the Lord seem to hide
himself from all manifestation of his kind respects unto his people on earth,
yet he will be found in heaven, and there must we betake our selves in hardest
straites: Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens.
4. The very lifting up of the bodily eye of the believer toward God in his
trouble, has its own use and force with God. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes. 5.
As servants of old were in their condition slaves, deprived of the common
comfort of liberty, might wear no weapons, were exposed to all injuries, and
had no help or comfort, except the favor of their Master or Mistress: so
fares it oft-times with the believer for his outward condition, as the
similitude and present case of the Church here teaches: Behold, as the eyes of
servants look unto the hand of their Masters. 6. It is fitting that the
persecuted believer have a low estimation of himself before God, be patient
under his hand, submissive to his dispensation, and hopeful of help in his
address unto God: for so much the similitude from servants behavior toward
their master and mistress does teach: As the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of
her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord. 7. The interest which the
believer has in God under any relation, has comfort sufficient included in
it, as here the Lords being Master, is sufficient to sweeten bondage of
servant, and handmaid, but Covenant Interest sweeteneth it much more: Our eyes
are upon the Lord our God. 8. As masters and mistresses are taught to show
pity, mercy, bounty, and protection unto their servants* on the one hand, and
servants are here taught on the other hand, by their good behavior, not to
mar their favor: so the believer is taught to behave himself before God, as
a servant indeed, by endeavoring indeed to obey God. 9. The term of the
Saints patience and waiting, is till God show mercy: Behold, as the eyes of the
servants, etc. so our eyes wait on the Lord our God, until that he have mercy
on us.

Verse. 3. Have mercy upon us, O LORD, have mercy upon us: for we are
exceedingly filled with contempt.

4. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease,
and with the contempt of the proud.

From his prayer for comfort and relief; Learn, 1. Whatsoever aileth the
Church, the Lords mercy is the remedy; Have mercy. 2. Each member of the Church
should be sensible of the trouble of the whole body, and deal for it as for
himself: Have mercy upon us, O Lord. 3. As misery is more pressing, so should
petitions be doubled, and poured forth in the Lords bosom: Have mercy, have
mercy upon us. 4. Contempt, disdain and derision of Gods suffering servants, is
the heaviest and most grievous part of their affliction; Have mercy upon us,
for we are exceedingly filled with contempt. 5. They that prosper in
wickedness, are ready instruments to afflict the godly, and to persecute them
for righteousness, and to mock the godly in their misery, when they have
wrongfully troubled them: Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of
them that are at ease. 6. So long as persecutors and oppressors of Gods Church
do prosper, and find success in their ways, they will not cease to please
themselves in their wicked course, and despise both the persons and the cause
of Gods people, whatsoever be said against them: Our soul is filled with the
contempt of the proud.

PSALM. CXXIV.
THe scope of this Psalm is; first, to acknowledge the delivery of the Church,
to be evidently the Lords own work, the danger being so great out of which they
were lately delivered, v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and next, to bless the Lord for their
preservation v. 6, 7, 8.

Verse. 1. IF it had not been the LORD who was on our side: now may Israel say.

2. If it had not been the LORD who was on our side, when ^en rose up against
us.

3 Then they had swallowed us up quick: when their wrath was kindled against us.

4. Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul.

5. Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.

In the acknowledgment of their wonderful delivery, the Psalmist does show that
their adversaries on the one hand, were so strong, so many, so crafty, so cruel
and malicious, and the Lords people on the other hand were so weak, and so
destitute of all counsel and help, that their deliverance could be ascribed to
no cause, save to Gods strong power assisting his own. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
the Lord do suffer his Church sundry times to be brought near to destruction,
yet always does he prove himself the Churches friend and helper, against
their enemies; If it had not been the Lord who was on our side. 2. The Lord so
does help his people, as he draws forth the acknowledgement of their
weakness to help themselves, and of utter impossibility to be safe without his
assistance: If the Lord had not been on our side, may Israel now say. 3. After
we are delivered out of a danger, we should study to apprehend it no less
livelily, then when we are in the danger, and that so much the more as we are
naturally disposed to the contrary, as the repeating and new representing of
the danger they were in does import and teach. 4. Men in the state of nature
are ready to be party adversaries unto the Church: If the Lord had not been on
our side, when men rose up against us. 5. The wicked have an appetite after the
blood of Gods people, as wild beasts have after their prey: Then they had
swallowed us up quick. 6. If God should not bridle the fury of the wicked
against his people, the worldly strength of the godly to defend themselves, is
nothing: Then they had swallowed us up quick* when their wrath was kindled
against us. 7. If the wickedness of the world were let loose against Gods
people, it should run as violently against the Church, as floods of water
against those that are within the channel: Then the waters had overwhelmed us,
the stream had gone over our soul. 8. The more the matter of the Churches
delivery is looked upon, the danger is the better seen, and the greatness of
their delivery also, as the insisting in the similitude does teach: Then the
proud waters had gone over our soul.

Verse. 6. Blessed be the LORD, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth.

7. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is
broken, and we are escaped.

8. Our help is in the Name of the LORD: who made heaven and earth.

In the Churches thanksgiving for their delivery, they make a threefold use of
their experience. First, they praise and bless Gods goodness, v. 6. Secondly,
they make much of the benefit and rejoice therein, v. 7. And thirdly, they
strengthen their faith in God for time to come, v. 8. Whence learn, 1. It is
our duty after delivery from dangers, to acknowledge not only Gods power for
us, but his goodness also toward us, and to acknowledge him the fountain of
all blessedness upon that occasion: Blessed be the Lord who has not given us
as a pr^y to their teeth. 2. As the Churches enemies are superior to her in
worldly strength, so also in policy, craftiness, and wordly wit, as the fowler
is craftier then the bird; Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of
the fowlers. 3. According as the danger is fearful, so is the delivery sweet
and joyful: The snare is broken, and we are escaped. 4. It is as easy for God
to deliver his people out of their enemies hands, even when they have the godly
in their power, as to break a net made of thread or yarn, wherewith birds are
taken: Blessed be the Lord, the snare is broken, and we are escaped. 5. The
fairest fruits of our by past experience is to glorify God by confidence in
him for time to come, as here, Our help is in the Name of the Lord. 6. Then is
our confidence in God to be delivered from evil well bottomed, when we consider
the Lords Omnipotency manifested in the creation of the world, and held out by
his Word unto us: for so much does the Psalmist teach, when he makes mention
of the Name of the Lord, and the work of the Lord, in professing of his
confidence: Our help is in the Name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

PSALM CXXV.
THe scope of this Psalm is to confirm the faith of the believer, persecuted
and oppressed by the wicked, that he may hold out walking in the straight way
of Gods obedience: and to this end, the Psalmist uses four arguments. The
first is from the stability of the believers felicity, v. 1, 2. The second, is
from the short time of his trouble, which he shall suffer by persecutors, v. 3.
The third, is from the goodness which God will manifest toward him, set down
in the Psalmists prayer, v. 4. The fourth, is from the Lords judgment upon
backsliding hypocrites, who make shift for themselves to be freed from trouble
by unlawful means, v. 5.

Verse. 1. THey that trust in the LORD shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be
removed: but abides for ever.

2. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the LORD is round about his
people: from hence forth even for ever.

From the first encouragement to trust in God in the time of trial; Learn, 1.
There is no service more acceptable to God, or more profitable to us, then
glorifying of God by faith in him, when tentations do assault us, as the
professing of the duty, and motives which are used here do teach us. 2. Seeing
the happiness of the believer is so established that he cannot miss of it, he
may the more cheerfully hazard in God service all things temporal and moveable,
trusting in the Lord: They that trust in the Lord, shall he as mount Sion,
which cannot be removed, but abides for ever. 3. The preservation of the
believer, and the stability of his blessedness, flows not from any strength
in himself, but from the Lords guarding of him: As the mountains are round
about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people.

Ver. 3. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the
righteous, lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity. From the
second encouragement of the believer to trust in God in the time of trial;
Learn, 1. No promise made to the believer, must secure him from being exercised
with trouble, but rather must fore-warne him of, and fore-arme him against
trouble: for here it is presupposed he may be burdened by the rod of the
wicked. 2. It is a sore trial for the godly, to have their Rulers their
persecutors for righteousness, but this exercise shall not last long: For the
rod (which is the sign of power) of the wicked, shall not rest on the lot of
the righteous. 3. Because there is hazard lest the believer should faint in
trouble, therefore the Lord will not try his own who believe in him above
their strength, but will give them a deliverance that they may escape: The rod
of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous
put forth their hands unto iniquity.

Ver. 4. Do good, O LORD, unto those that be good: and to them that are upright
in their hearts. From the third motive to believe in God in time of trial
especially; Learn, 1. The true believer is a good man, harmless, bountiful,
delighting to do good to all men* and to do wrong to no man, for here he is so
called: Do good, O Lord, to those that be good. 2. Albeit the believer seem to
be hardly handled by afflictions, yet shall it afterward appear that God has
thereby been working for his welfare; for the pra^er of the Psalmist indicted by
God, does promise so much; Do good, O Lord* unto those that be good. 3. As a
man that trusts in God is honest in his heart, how weak soever, in doing the
good he would, and he takes care not only to cleanse his life, but also to
purify his heart: so shall he be dealt with by God as a good man, whatsoever
be his own estimation of himself: Do good to those that are good, and unto
them that a^e upright in their heart.

Ver. 5. As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the LORD shall
lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.
From the fourth motive to believe in God for bearing out in trial; Learn, ^^.
In the time of trial, there will sundry be found hypocrites, counterfeit
dealers, misbelievers; who will shift for themselves, and turn aside from the
obedience of faith, by their own crooked ^ourses, as here is insinuated: As for
such that turn aside unto their crooked ways. 2. God will decipher
hypocrites, who do not trust God, or do not adhere to the obedience of faith in
time of trouble and trial, and will put them as complyers with the wicked, in
the same reckoning with his open enemies: The Lord will lead them forth with
the workers of iniquity. 3. To look upon the judgments of God, pursuing
backsliding mis-believers in time of persecution, should be a strong motive, to
make professors constant in the obedience of faith, on all hazards in time of
trial: for the punishment of the will mis-believer is set down here, to teach
men to be honest and stout in the faith and obedience of God; For such as turn
aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers
of in^quity. 4. Whatsoever trouble the Lords people shall be put unto in the
time of trial, they shall still remain in Gods favor and grace; and when the
Lord has purged his Church in some measure, by winnowing corrupt hypocrites
out from among his people, the Church shall be restored to her peace* But peace
shall be upon Israel.

PSALM CXXVI
THis is the Churches song of thanksgiving for her delivery from the captivity
of Babylon, wherein first the greatness of the mercy is set down, v. 1, 2, 3.
then a Prayer to God for enlarging of the benefit, by making many to embrace
the offer of delivery, v. 4. and thirdly, an encouraging consolation to such as
had returned or should return from Babylon to their own land, v. 5, 6.

Ver. 1. WHen the LORD turned again the captivity of Zion: we were like them
that dream.

2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then
said they among the heathen: The LORD has done great things for them.

3. The LORD has done great things for us, whereof werre glad.

In the thanksgiving the mercy is magnified; First, because it was above all
their expectation, v. 1. Secondly, because it not only rejoiced Gods people,
but also convinced the heathen of Gods power for, and goodness toward his
people, v. 2. Thirdly, because it was in it self a mercy worthy to be praised
and rejoiced for, v. 3. Whence learn, 1. As the Lord sometime gives evidence
of his justice in afflicting his Church: so also sometime he gives evidence of
his mercy to his people, by delivering of them, restoring and comforting them:
as this Psalm holds forth. 2. Whosoever be the instruments of the delivery
and consolation of the Church, the Lord will so order matters as he shall be
seen to be the worker of the work himself; therefore is it said here; When the
Lord turned again the captivity of Zion. 3. The performance of Gods promises is
more glorious then the believer can perceive or apprehend before he see it;
When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream.
4. The delivery and consolation of Gods Church is no less matter of joy, and
gladness, and praising of God, then their affliction is of sorrow; Then was
our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing. 5. In the delivery
of the Church the Lord uses to work so evidently for his people, as their
adversaries are forced to acknowledge it; Then said they among the heathen, The
Lord has done great things for them. 6. Inward joy in God, and outward
acknowledgement of Gods working for his people, is the duty of every true
member of the Church, and is all which can be done at the first receipt of the
mercy by way of thankfulness; The Lord has done great things for us. 7. There
is a special eminency of the Lords working for his people, above what he
works for the rest of the world in governing of them: The Lord has done
great things, say both the heathen and the Church. 8. There is this great
difference between the praise which the heathen are forced to give to God, and
that which the Lords people heartily offer unto him: the one does speak as
having no interest nor share in the mercy; the other do speak as they to whom
the mercy is intended, and wherein they have their portion with others: He has
done great things for them, say the heathen: but, he has done great things for
us, say the Lords people.

Ver. 4. Turn again our captivity, O LORD, at the streams in the South. From
the prayer; Learn, 1. The offer and opportunity given of a mercy, is one
benefit: and the embracing of the offer, and taking the opportunity to make use
of it, is another benefit: many have the one who receive not the other, as many
had the liberty of returning from the captivity of Babylon, who made no use
thereof, but did prefer the ease and pleasures of Babylon, unto the
prerogatives of Zion, as this prayer imports. 2. It is no less mercy to give
people a heart to embrace and make use of offered mercy, then it is to purchase
the means, and proclaim the offer of it in their audience: as this prayer does
import. 3. Such as have found grace to embrace the offer of Gods mercy, should
pity and pray for others, that they may find the like mercy also; Turn again
our captivity, O Lord. 4. As the restoration of the Church is no less
comfortable, then is the making of a river run in a dry land: so is the one no
less possible to God then the other; Turn again our captivity, as the rivers
of the South, or droughtie lands.

Ver. 5. They that sow in tears: shall reap in joy.

6. He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

From the encouraging consolation of all the Lords afflicted people; Learn, 1.
As the Lord has appointed harvest to follow the seed-time, so has he
appointed the consolation of his own Church to follow after their afflictions:
this does the similitude import. 2. As the husband man has first toyling,
labor and great expenses, and a time to endure in patience, till he find the
fruit of his labors: so fares it with Gods children, they may be in grief for
a time, before they find the good of Religion: this also does the similitude
hold forth. 3. There is a difference between the husbandman and the Lords
afflicted child; the husbandman may have an ill harvest, but the child of God
afflicted, and using the means, shall never have an ill harvest, his labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord: his sorrow shall be turned into joy, and his
fruit shall be multiplied unto him abundantly; For they that sow in tears,
shall reap in joy: He that goes forth, and weepeth, bearing precious seed,
shall undoubtedly come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him* His
consolation shall be sweeter, then his affliction was bitter.

PSALM CXXVII. A Song of degrees for Solomon.
THe scope of the Psalm is to show first, that the defense of our persons, and
success in our affairs, do depend upon Gods blessing upon the means used, v.
1, 2. Next, to show that multitude of children is Gods blessing also, v. 3, 4,
5. The Psalm is entitled for Solomon, who was to build the house of God, and
to enlarge the Kingdom of Israel. Whence learn, 1. All truth of God must be
studied, but specially that part whereof we are to have special use in our
life, and exercise of our calling, as this doctrine here commended to Solomon
does teach. 2. Neither Solomon, nor the wisest and most active among men, must
ascribe more to themselves in compassing their affair, then other men may do:
for this doctrine is taught unto Solomon. 3. Whatsoever we have, or we do, or
we purchase, or can atchieve by whatsoever lawful means, God must be
acknowledged as the giver, doer and blesser of us therein: for the scope of
this Psalm, is to teach this lesson unto Solomon, and to the whole Church.

Ver. 1. EXcept the LORD build the house, they labor in vain that build it;
except the LORD keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain.

2. It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of
sorrows: for so he gives his beloved sleep.

From the first doctrine, showing that the defense of our persons, and success
in our affairs do depend on Gods blessing; Learn, We are subject to a twofold
practical error* One is, we ordinarily look first to means, or to our own
strength, or to appearances of accomplishing our designs, and in the
confidence of those we follow our business. Another is, when any success is
found, we are ready to sacrifice to our own nets, and to intercept the praise
due to God, as this doctrine does presuppose. 2 To correct our natural error,
it is wisdom to consider, that many men have had plenty of means, and have
managed them skilfully and painfully, and yet without success: For except the
Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. 3 As it is a duty for
men to provide for their own commodious living, and their families well-being
by allowed means, and in their incorporations to provide for Magistrates,
Rulers, and other things needful for the defense and welfare of the
incorporation, and not to neglect the means: so must God be looked unto,
believed in, and depended upon, because he only can give the blessing, he can
work without means, but the means can effect nothing without him; Except the
Lord keep the City, the watchman does watch but in vain. 4. The Lord justly
does plague the painfulnesse of some, who toil like infidels in the use of the
means, whereby the truth of the doctrine does appear; It is vain for you to
rise up early, to set up late, and to eat the bread of sorrows, that is,
sparingly to feed upon course morsels, to eschew expenses. 5. It is the only
way for having a quiet mind, and good success, to use the means without
anxiety, and to commit the success unto God: and this wisdom is the proper
gift of Gods chosen children: For so he gives his beloved sleep.

Ver. 3. Lo, children are an heritage of the LORD: and the fruit of the womb
is his reward.

4. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man, so are children of the youth.

5. Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them, they shall not be
ashamed: but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.

From the second doctrine* Learn, 1. The Lord will be seen in a special manner
in the withholding or giving children to married persons, and will have the
benefit acknowledged when he does bestow it: Lo, children are an heritage of
the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward. 2. When God gives children
for a blessing, he gives grace, as to the Parents to bring them well up, so to
the children to be comfortable to their Parents, and to go about their Parents
business, so readily as arrows out of the bow; As arrows are in the hand of
a mighty man, so are children of the youth. 3. In peace and war, dutiful
children will do for their Parents, and for their Pastors, Magistrates, Rulers,
as their fathers and mothers: for the Parents who have such children, shall not
be ashamed, but shall speak with the enemies in the gate. 4. Temporal benefits
are then evidences of happiness, when the man is a believer in God, and a
depender upon him, and is blessed spiritually by God: for of such only does the
Psalmist say, Happy is the man that has his quiver full of such arrows, as
gracious children, or gracious subjects are.

PSALM CXXVIII.
THe scope of this Psalm is to show the blessedness of the man that fears
God, which does appear: First, in the temporal blessing of him in his calling,
v. 1, 2. Secondly, in his family, v. 3, 4. Thirdly, in pouring spiritual
blessings upon him, v. 5, 6.

Ver. 1. BLessed is every one that fears the LORD: that walks in his ways.

2. For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee.

From the doctrine of the blessedness of the man that fears God; Learn, 1.
That the sure evidence of a sound believer, and truly blessed man, is the true
fear of God, keeping him in the awe and reverent obedience of God: Blessed is
every one that fears the Lord. 2. He is not the man that fears God, whose
fear is taught by the Precepts of men, or who devises to himself ways of Gods
service, and binds superstitious bonds upon his own conscience, but he that
walks in the prescribed paths of the obedience of Gods commands: only he
fears God, that walks in his ways. 3. The fear of God does not consist
with an idle life, but requires that a man according to his abilities should
be employed in some lawful exercise, profitable for the use of the
incorporation where he lives: for here the labor of his hands is presupposed,
whereby Gods blessing of him may be derived unto him: Thou shall eat the labor
of thine hands. 4. It is no small favor from God, to have the right and
comfortable use of Gods benefits given unto us, and only the godly man who is
painful in his calling, has the promise of this; Happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee.

Ver. 3. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house, thy
children like Olive-plants, round about thy table.

4. Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed, that fears the LORD*

From the second evidence, which is Gods blessing of his family; Learn, 1.
Marriage is a state of life well beseeming the godly man, and it neither
hinders the fear of God, nor the man's felicity, but consists well
therewith: Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine. 2. Godliness is great gain,
it has the promise of this life, (so far as is good for us,) and of the life
to come: wife and children, and a table with maintenance competent for the
sustenance of the family, are branches of blessedness, when bestowed upon a
godly man, and should be so looked upon; Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine
by the sides of thy house, thy children like Olive-plants round about thy
Table. 3. There is a reward for the righteous, even in this life, and albeit it
be not always discerned, yet he who shall behold and consider Gods providence
about the godly man, shall see this temporal favor, or the equivalent granted
unto him: therefore is it said, Behold, thus (that is, in this or the
equivalent benefit,) shall the man he blessed that fears the Lord.

Ver. 5. The LORD shall bless thee out of Zion* and thou shall see the good of
Jerusalem, all the days of thy life.

6. Yea, thou shall see thy childrens children: and peace upon Israel.

From the third evidence of Gods blessing of the true believer and fearer of
his Name, by giving him things spiritual; Learn, 1. What measure soever of
things temporal the Lord shall give to the man that fears him, he reserveth
unto him all the promises of righteousness and life, which the Lords Word
holds forth to the Church, and of those he shall be sure; The Lord shall
bless thee out of Zion. 2. The godly man shall not want succession, if God see
it good for him or if not children of his bobody, yet followers of his faith
and footsteps in Piety, whom he has been instrumental to convert: Thou shall
see thy childrens children. 3. Whatsoever estate the Church of God be in,
during the godly man's lifetime, he shall behold in the mirror of the Lords
Word, and in the sensible feeling of his own experience, he shall perceive and
take up the blessed condition of the true Church of God, and rejoice therein
all his days; Thou shall see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life,
thou shall see peace upon Israel.

PSALM CXXIX.
THe scope of this Psalm is, to confirm the faith of Gods people against
persecution. The parts thereof are two: The former is, praise to God for
delivering many times his Church from the oppression of persecutors, v. 1, 2,
3, 4. The other has a prophetical curse against the enemies of the Church, v.
5, 6, 7, 8.

Verse. 1. MAny a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say.

2. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: yet they have not
prevailed against me.

In praising God for the Churches delivery lately granted to her he calls to
mind many by past persecutions, wherein the Lord had preserved his Church from
overthrow. Whence learn, 1. The visible Church from the beginning of the world
is one body, and as it were one man, growing up from infancy to riper age: for
so speaks the Church here; Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth.
2. The wicked enemies of the Church, they also are one body, one adverse army,
from the beginning of the world continuing war against the Church: Many a time
have they afflicted me from my youth. 3. As the former injuries done to the
Church, are owned by the Church in after-ages, as done against the same body,
so also the persecution of former enemies is imputed and put upon the score of
present persecutors; Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may
Israel now say. 4. New experiences of persecution, when they call to mind the
exercises of the Church in former ages, serve much for encouragement and
consolation in troubles: Many a time have they afflicted me, may Israel now
say. 5. Albeit this has been the endeavor of the wicked in all ages to
destroy the Church, yet God has still preserved her from age to age; Yet they
have not prevailed.

Verse. 3. The Plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their ^^rrowes.

4. The LORD is righteous: he has cut asunder the cords of the wicked.

He repeateth the same praise of God in delivering his Church from oppression
of the enemy, under the similitude of cutting the cords of the plough, which
tilleth up another man's field. Whence learn, 1. The enemies of the Church do no
more regard her, then they do the earth under their feet, and do seek to make
their own advantage of her, as usurpers use to do in possessing and laboring
of another man's field; The Plowers plowed upon my back. 2. The Lord uses to
suffer his enemies to break up the fallow ground of his peoples proud and
stiff hearts with the plough of persecution* and to draw deep and long furrows
on them; They made long their furrows. 3. What the enemies do against the
Church, the Lord makes use of it, for manuring the Church, which is his field,
albeit they intend no good to Gods Church, yet they serve in Gods wisdom to
prepare the Lords people for receiving the seed of Gods Word; for the
similitude speaks of their tilling of the Church, but nothing of their
sowing, for that is reserved for the Lord himself, who is Owner of the field.
4. When the wicked have plowed so much of Gods husbandry, as he thinks good
to suffer them, then he stops their design, and loses their plough; He
has cut asunder the cords of the wicked. 5. In all the exercise of the Church,
and in all Gods patience toward the persecutors thereof, and in his delivering
of the Church, and punishing of the wicked, the Lord is upon a laudable work of
chastising, humbling, trying and training his people to better service, and
showing of his mercy on his people, when they are humbled, and of his justice
against the wicked; The Lord is righteous, he has cut asunder the cords of the
wicked.

Verse. 5. Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Zion.

6. Let them be as the grass upon the house tops, which withers before it
grows up.

7. Wherewith the mower fills not his hand: nor he that binds sheaves, his
bosom.

8. Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the LORD be upon you: we
bless you in the Name of the LORD.

In the latterpart of the Psalm he prays against all the enemies of the
Church, and curses them. Whence learn, 1. All those are the enemies of the
Church, who love her not, who seek not her welfare, who are glad when it goes
ill with her, and do envy her prosperity; They hate Zion. 2. Confusion of face
and destruction shall be their portion, who are enemies to Gods people, and the
Church may lawfully pray for it in the general: Let them all be confounded, and
turned back, who hate Zion. 3. Albeit the trouble of the Church, which she
sustaineth by persecution, seem long, yet the time of the persecutors is but
short, like the time of grass on the house top, which withers ere it grow
up; their glory is but a vain show, like the greenness of grass on the house
top; their high place is their ruin, as the house top exposes the grass on
it, to the greater heat of the Sun; their strength wants root, like the
grass on the house top, which withers before it grow up, wherewith the mower
fills not his hand, nor he that binds sheaves, his bosom. 4. To salute the
reapers of the field, or any within the visible Church, whom we find about
their lawful labor or employment, and to pray God to speed them and bless
them is not unlawful, nor a taking of Gods Name in vain, (when done honestly)
for in the Psalmists days, it was the laudable custom of Gods people, as they
went by the reapers of the field, to say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you,
we bless you in the Name of the Lord 5. It is no small loss, which the wicked
persecutors of the Church sustain by this, that their work is not blessed unto
them of the Lord, and that they shall want the benefit of the prayers of the
Church: for they shall be as the grass, which comes to no ripeness nor good
fruit, whereupon any man can crave a blessing from God unto them: they who go
by them at this their work, shall not say, The blessing of the Lord be upon
you, we bless you in the Name of the Lord.

PSALM CXXX.
THis Psalm contains the exercise of the Psalmist, wrestling under the sense
of sin with fearful tentations, which were like to overcome him, wherein he
prays for relief, v. 1, 2. opposes Gods mercy to his justice, v. 3, 4. and
waits for comfort, v. 5, 6. then he brings forth the use which he makes of
the relief and comfort which God gave unto him, by encouraging the Church to
trust in Gods mercy, because he will deliver his people from all trouble and
sin, v. 7, 8.

Ver. 1. OVt of the depths have I cried unto thee, O LORD.

2. Lord, hear my voice, let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.

In the first two verses we have his distress, and prayer for relief in
general terms. Whence learn, 1. The dearest Saints of God have been hardly
exercised by trouble in their spirits, and brought into danger of desperation
sometime, while they seemed to themselves to be in a lost condition, like a man
ready to drown in deep waters: Out of the depths did I cry unto thee, O Lord.
2. How desperate soever our condition, or case of our soul seem unto us to be,
yet should we not cease from prayer unto God: Out of the depths have I cried
unto thee, O Lord. 3 Albeit our prayers seem to us sometime to be misregarded
of God, and neglected, yet should we not give way to such thoughts as those,
but should double our petitions so much the more, as tentations do dissuade us
to pray, as the Psalmist did: Lord, hear my voice, let thine ears be attentive
to the voice of my supplications.

Ver. 3. If thou, LORD, should mark iniquities: O LORD, who shall st^an?

4. But there is forgiveness with thee: that thou may be feared.

In these two verses, we have the objection made against his prayer, from the
conscience of his sins, according to the law, and his answer unto the objection
from the mercy of God, according to the grounds of the Gospel; Whence learn, 1.
Sin furnishes ground to all our vexations, and tentations, and objections made
against our prayers, our comfort and our faith: as the experience of the
Psalmist does teach us, against whom his iniquities here stood up; to hinder
his answer from God. 2. In the case of conscience wherein sin is justly charged
upon us, there is no shift for us to deny or excuse sin: it must be confessed
and laid open before God, as the Psalmist does here. 3. If the Lord should deal
with Supplicants in the way of strict justice, according to the tenor of the
Law or Covenant of works, no man could escape condemnation and the curse; If
thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? that is, no man
should stand. 4. He who is fled for refuge unto Gods mercy, according to the
Covenant of grace in Christ Jesus, may decline judgment according to the
Covenant of works, and betake him unto the way of Justification by faith,
according to the Covenant of grace, whereby remission of sin is promised to the
believer; If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?
but there is forgiveness with thee. 5. The belief of Gods mercifulness does
open our mouth in prayer, and encourages us unto the hearty worship, service
and obedience of God, whereunto otherwise we could never have heart nor hand:
But forgiveness is with thee, that thou may be feared. 6. Then is grace and
mercy in God rightly made use of, when we fear to offend God, so much the more
as we believe him to be gracious, to forgive the penitent Supplicant;
Forgiveness is with thee, that thou may be feared.

Ver. 5. I wait for the LORD, my soul does wait: and in his Word do I hope.

6. My soul waits for the LORD, more then they that watch for the morning; I
say, more then they that watch for the morning.

Having prayed and wrastled by faith against the terror of Gods justice, he
waits for a good answer, and for consolation. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the
Lord does not at first heal the conscience of sin, and the smart of it, yet the
believer may surely expect comfort from him: I wait for the Lord. 2. Then does
faith its own part, when it frames the heart to patient waiting on God, and
hope in him; My soul does wait. 3. He that waits for a good answer from the
Lord, must have the Word of Promise, made in the Gospel to such as seek mercy
from God, for the warrant of his hope; My soul does wait, and in his Word do I
hope. 4. He that waits on God for comfort, should persuade himself of his
speeding, and must not slack his hope for a delay, but grow in desire after the
Lord, more then the Watchman waits for the morning; My soul waits for the
Lord more then they that watch for the morning, I say, more then they that
watch for the morning.

Ver. 7. Let Israel hope in the LORD, for with the LORD there is mercy: and
with him is plenteous redemption.

8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

In the latter part of the Psalm, it is presupposed he has go^ten comfort,
and here he exhorts all the Lords people to follow his example, in the day of
their outward trouble and perplexity of conscience, assuring them of grace to
be found in God to their full satisfaction. Whence learn, 1. When God has
delivered us out of straits, it is our duty to extend the fruit of that mercy
as far as we may, and to exhort others according to our place, to follow the
way of faith in God; Let Israel hope in the Lord. 2. Mercy according to the
Covenant of grace, gives the same ground of hope unto every one within the
Church, which it gives to the Psalmist, or to a Writer of the Scripture; Let
Israel hop^ in ^e Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, says the Psalmist
from his own experience. 3. So many straits as the Lords people can fall into,
so many escapes and deliveries has the Lord in store for them: With him is
plenteous* Redemption. 4. As sin is the root of all trouble, and the chief evil
of Gods people: so the remission of sin is the chief cure of all their trouble,
and this the believer may be sure of; He shall redeem Israel from iniquities.
5. When the Lord forgiveth sin to his own, he forgiveth all sin less and more,
whereof his believing child is guilty; He shall redeem Israel from all his
iniquities. 6. The delivery of Gods people from sin and trouble, flowe^h all
from the Covenant of Redemption, and every delivery of them is a part of the
execution of that Covenant: With him is plenteous Redemption, and he shall
redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

PSALM CXXXI.
Ver. 1. LORD, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I
exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high for me.

2. Surely I have behaved my self, as a child that is weaned of his mother:
my soul is even as a weaned child.

3. Let Israel hope in the LORD, from henceforth and for ever.

IN this Psalm, the Prophet minding to teach the godly to be humble before
God, however matters go with them, does propound his own example, v. 1, 2. that
so the believer may persevere in hope, v. 3. He proves his humility by the
lowliness of his heart, sobriety of carriage, and keeping himself within his
vocation, v. 1. and by the submission of his will unto Gods dispensation, v. 2.
the use and profit whereof, as he had found in his own experience, so he
recommendeth the following of his example unto all Gods people, as the way to
be constant in their hope, v. 3. Whence learn, 1. Albeit pride be a ri^e vice,
which attends vain man in every degree of excellency, and supposed worth in
him, yet the grace of God is able to keep humble a wise, rich and potent man,
yea to keep humble a King and Conqueror: for it is David who says here: Lord,
my heart is not haughty. 2. He who will approve himself in his humility unto
God, must purge his heart as the fountain from pride, and his eyes and outward
carriage also, that they be not the signs and tokens of pride, and watch over
his actions, that they go not without the bounds of his calling, and commission
given to him in Gods Word: Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty,
neither do I exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high for me 3
Albeit the most excellent of men are but witless, weak and unclean things,
comparable to young children lately weaned from the breasts, yet it is the
property of the godly to know this, and acknowledge himself to be as a child
that is weaned of his mother. 4. The Lord is as a mother, wise and tender
toward his children, dealing with them as their age, weakness, witlesnesse,
and other necessit^es do require: for so much does the similitude lead us unto.
5. The godly must not look to be satisfied in their childish will and appetite,
but must resolve to be deprived of their carnal comforts, which naturally they
most affect, as a child weaned is put from the breast to a more hard diet,
this does the comparison import. 6. The humble man must be content to be
handled and dealt with as the Lord pleases, and to submit himself absolutely
unto Gods dispensation, must depend upon his care and favor, and wait for the
manifesting of it, when and how it shall please God to dispose, and this most
of all does prove humility; My soul is even as a weaned child. 7. The peace
and quiet comfort of humility is such, as the humble man from his own
experience may encourage every man to follow that way, with confidence to find
the benefit of it: for, Let Israel hope in the Lord, says the Psalmist here
from his own experience. 8. The servant of God who desires to persevere to the
end, must wait on God in the way of humility, and hope in him unto the end: Let
Israel hope in the Lord, from hence forth and for ever.

From this doctrine we may have the description, both of a proud man, and of an
humble. He is a proud man, who being ignorant or insensible of his sinfulness
and infirmities, does lift up himself in some vain confidence, to follow some
unwarrantable course, for satisfying his own mind, and will not submit himself
unto Gods dispensation. Again, he is an humble man, who in the sense of his
sins and infirmities stands in awe of God, keeps himself within the bounds
of his calling and commission, renounceth all confidence in his own wit, and
submits unto Gods dealing, in hope to be helped by God in all things, as he
stands in need.

PSALM CXXXII.
IN this Psalm the Church is taught to pray, according to the Covenant made
with David, representing Christ: First, for the maintenance of true Religion,
to v. 10. Next, for the continuing of the Kingdom in his race, and preservation
of the Church of Israel, and so of the Kingdom and Church of Christ figured by
it: In the first petition, he prays for the Lords affectionate and effectual
remembrance of David, and of the sufferings undergone by David, for maintaining
his Covenant with God, v. 1. And then, calls to mind the care which David
had in settling of the place of Gods worship, v. 2, 3, 4, 5. Thirdly, he
shows, how after the Lords departing from Shiloh, his Arc was found in
Kiriath-jearim, and thence brought up to the City of David, v. 6. Fourthly, the
Church professes her willingness and purpose to worship the Lord, now asc^nded
unto Mount Sion* v. 7, 8. And fifthly, he prays for holiness of doctrine in
the Lords Ministers, and joy to the godly in obeying them, v. 9. In the next
petition, first, the Church prays for the Covenants sake made with David,
that the Lord would not withdraw his countenance from his offspring, v. 10.
Then, to strengthen their faith in the petition, they repeat the Covenant of
God made with David, as we have it, Psalm. 89. concerning his offspring, and
mainly concerning Christ, v. 11, 12. Then, they pray ^oncerning the Temple and
City of Jerusalem, representing the universal Church, v. 13, 14. and concerning
his Ministry, v. 15, 16. and concerning the increase of Christ's Kingdom, and
for confusion of his enemies, v. 17, 18. for we must not conceive this prayer
delivered to the Church for the use of all ages, to have the full
accomplishment, except Christ and his Church and Kingdom be mainly
comprehended and aimed at in it.

From the whole Psalm in general; Learn, 1. There is a perpetual Kingdom and
Priesthood, appointed to be established among the people of God in his Church,
as the prayer given to the Church, to be applied and made use of in all ages,
does give us to understand, and this is the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ.
2. As the evident appearing of this Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ, should
be dear to the hearts of all Gods children, so should supplication daily be
made to God, that this his Kingdom may come, with its own blessing following
upon it, as the Church is taught here.

Ver. 1. LORD, remember David, and all his afflictions. In the first petition;
Learn, 1. Seeing the Covenant made with David, especially concerning sure
mercies, was known mainly to belong to Christ, and to concern the Church and
every member thereof; it is wisdom for the Church in all ages to look to their
interest in this Covenant, and to hold up before God the memory and use
thereof, as here the Church is taught to do: Lord remember David, that is,
remember the Covenant made with David in type, and with Christ represented by
him. 2. Albeit the Lord can properly forget nothing, yet he is said to
remember, when he by effectual working testifies his not forgetting; this is
the remembrance which the Saints do here pray for; Lord remember David. 3. The
Covenant made with David and with Christ, consists well with afflictions
probatory on David's part, and expiatory on Christ's part, and neither the one
sort nor the other wanted their own respects with God, but Christ's afflictions
being redemptory and meritorious, are most to be heeded by the Church; Remember
David, and all his afflictions. 4. Whatsoever care the godly have to promote
Gods honor, whatsoever grief and sorrow they bear when they find opposition,
or want success in this their endeavor, whatsoever trouble and persecution
they suffer in the maintaining or promoting of Gods cause, all is reckoned up
unto them as parts of service, which God will not forget to follow with mercy
to them, and to theirs after them; Lord, remember David, and all his
afflictions.

Ver. 2. How he swear unto the LORD, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob.

3. Surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my house: nor go up into my
bed.

4. I will not give sleep to mine eyes: or slumber to mine eyelids.

5. Until I find out a place for the LORD: an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob.

In the second place is set down the care which David had to settle the worship
of God in the land; what time this Vow and Oath was made by David, it is not
specified in any other place of Scripture, neither is it needful for us to be
curious about the time or form of words; for the meaning is not, as if David
on a certain day, being ignorant of the place of settling of Gods Ark and
building the Temple, did limit God to reveal it unto him ere night came; but
the meaning is, that David swore to have a care of the settling of Gods Ark,
before he settled his own house, and that he would not enjoy the commodities
which his royal Palace (not as yet builded) might yield unto him, before he saw
the Ark settled in the place where the Temple should be built. Whence learn, 1.
It is lawful to tie our selves by an Oath unto that duty, whereunto we were
absolutely tied by law before: yea, and it may sometimes be expedient to tie
our selves unto a duty by swearing, for evidencing our hearty purpose to follow
that duty cheerfully, and for stirring up of our selves so much the more to
follow it, as we are conscious of our slacknesse unto it, or feebleness to
resist temptations; for here* David swear unto the Lord, that he would
discharge such a duty. 2. A lawful Vow is a part of divine worship, due to be
made to God alone; for David offered this religious worship to God only: He
vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob. 3. The Omnipotency of God is the treasure
of the Churches strength, wherein every believer has an interest: He is that
mighty one of Jacob. 4. The care of Gods public worship, and establishing of
Religion, where we have place and power, should be more earnest and greater in
every true subject of Gods Kingdom, then the care of his own private affairs,
and in the case of competition and comparison, the settling of Gods worship
should be preferred before our settling in any worldly commodity: as the example
of David here does teach us.

Verse. 6. Lo, we heard of it at Ephrata: we found it in the fields of the wood.
In the third place, the Church speaks and compares the settled condition of
the Ark now with the fleeted condition wherein it was before, for it was
sometime in Shiloh, in the tribe of Ephraim, and now say they; Lo, we heard of
it at Ephrata: and when it was in a manner lost, being taken by the
Philistines* they say, they found as a thing once lost, the Ark in
Kiriath-jearim, or City of the woods; We found it in the fields of the wood,
and now it is settled will they say, we know where to find it established: for
this to be the Churches meaning is given us to understand in the next verse,
wherein they say: We will go up into his tabernacles. Whence learn, 1. The
presence of the Lord in his Ordinances, was never so fixed in any place but
that mercy may be turned into a story of, It was or has been: if it be abused,
as what the Lord did to his house in Shiloh, was a history in the days of the
Kings, Lo, we have heard of it: (that is, of the Ark of the Covenant) at
Ephrata. 2. When once the Lord has fleeted the tokens of his presence far out
of a land, it is a rare mercy and unexpected, and no less then is the finding
of a treasure, or of a lost jewel, to see the restoring of his Ordinances
again, as was to be seen when God brought back the Ark from the Philistines to
Kiriath-jearim; which mercy the Church here acknowledges; We found it in the
fields of the wood. 3. The way of God, about the showing of his presence in his
holy Ordinances in any place, is not as men may expect, but as God sees good
to dispose, as the Churches speech gives us to understand; We found the Ark in
the fields of the wood.

Ver. 7. We will go into his Tabernacles: we will worship at his footstool.

8. Arise, O LORD into thy rest, thou and the Ark of thy strength.

In the fourth place, the Church stirs up her self to worship God in Sion,
where the Ark, representing Christ, was placed, praying now for the benefit of
Gods presence, as Moses prayed at the marching and settling of the Ark. Whence
learn, 1. When God has revealed his will in any point of Religion, we should
without delay or dispute go follow his direction, as the Church does here, when
the Ark is settled in Sion; We will go into his Tabernacles. 2. Where the Lord
has promised to be found, there must we come and keep trust with him, and
worship him* We will go into his tabernacles, we will worship at his footstool.
3. The true worshipper must lift his mind above every external and visible
Ordinance of God, and seek him in heaven where his glory shines most, counting
all things on the earth no more but as his footstool: for so was the Church of
old directed to do, when they had the Lord most sensibly manifesting himself in
his Tabernacle and Temple: We will worship at his footstool. 4. The Church in
after-ages may call for, and expect the like benefit of Gods presence with his
Ordinances, which his Church in former ages has found, as the prayer of the
Church here, being one with the prayer of the Church in the wilderness, does
teach us: Arise, O Lord, as Moses said, when the Ark did remove. 3. The Ark of
the Covenant was the figure of God incarnate, the type of Christ in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, and therefore, after the manner of
Sacraments, the sign receives the name of the thing signified; Arise, O Lord,
thou and the Ark of thy strength.

Verse. 9. Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness: and let thy Saints
shout for joy. Now he closes the first petition with a prayer for Gods
blessing of his Ministers, and of their Ministry among the people; Whence
learn, 1. Where the Lord is received, he must have Ministers, men set apart for
his public worship and service, as the Prayer for the Priests does presuppose.
2* The chief badge and cognizance of the Lords Minister, is the true doctrine
of justification and obedience of faith in a holy conversation: Let thy Priests
be clothed with righteousness. 3. People have reason to rejoyre, who have the
benefit of such approved Ministers; and whosoever do really embrace the true
doctrine of justification by grace, whereby men justified by faith, become the
servants of righteousness in their life, are indeed Saints, and are called to
rejoice; Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints
shout for joy. 4. It is the duty of the whole Church to pray for such a
Ministry, and for such effectual blessing following on it, as may make sinners
become Saints, and sad souls to sing for joy, as here is prayed for.

Verse. 10. For thy servant David's sake: turn not away the face of thine
anointed. The second maine petition is, for the manifestation of Gods respect
unto David's offspring, wherein under the figure of David's successors in the
Kingdom, he prays for the Kingdom of Christ, as before he prayed for his
Priesthood. Whence learn, 1. Every faithful member of the Church should pray,
as for the Churches welfare, so also for the welfare of the supreme Magistrate,
and of the Civil State whereof they are members: for so runs the prayer here
in the figure: Turn not away the face of thine anointed, to wit, the King of
Israel, for whom they pray, that he benot put to shame by disappointment of his
hopes. 2. The Lords anointed, or the supreme Ruler of the Lords people, should
be a daily Supplicant unto God, and a depender upon him: for the petition does
presuppose, that his face was toward the Lord, praying to him* and waiting for
good from him: Turn not away the face of thine anointed. 3. The Lords Covenant
is of great respect with God, and should be made much use of by us, as here we
are taught; For thy servant David's sake, turn not away the face of thine
anointed, that is, for the Covenants sake made with David in the type, and with
Christ represented by him, refuse not his lawful petitions. 4. The truth
intended in the type, teaches us that the intercession of Christ for his
subjects shall never miscarey, nor shall Christ be refused in what he wills
to be done to or for his subjects: for in him the prayer is surely heard:
Christ that anointed One cannot be refused, nor any who truly do pray in his
Name.

Verse. 11. The LORD has sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it:
Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.

12. If thy children will keep my Covenant and my Testimony, that I shall teach
them, their children also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore.

For strengthening of faith in this petition, he calls to mind more
particularly the Covenant of God with David. Whence learn, 1. Every Word and
circumstance of Gods promise, is worthy to be looked upon, and well considered,
as this example teaches us. 2. Whosoever do seek a benefit, according to Gods
Word, ought firmly to believe the promise of it, and to rest upon the stability
of the promise, as here we find the example: The Lord has sworn, he will not
turn from it. 3. Albeit the promise, that Christ should come of David be
absolute, and settled with an Oath, yet the promises of temporal things made to
David, are conditional, as God should see fit to give them, and as his children
should carry themselves in Gods obedience, so should they have temporal
benefits, and succeed him in the temporal throne: If thy children will keep my
Covenant and my testimonies, thy children also shall sit upon thy throne for
evermore, Ver. 13. For the LORD has chosen Zion: he has desired it for his
habitation.

14. This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have desired it.



He gives a reason for the absolute promise of Christ's coming to rule the
spiritual Kingdom of Israel, or the Church, because the Lord had chosen Zion in
the type, and the universal Church under the figure, to be his chosen Temple
and habitation, wherein he delighted. Whence learn, 1. Where God will settle
his Sanctuary, there he will settle his Kingdom also: Sion must not want a
King; for the reason here, why the Lord will with an oath set up one who shall
be the fruit of David's body upon the throne, is, Because he has chosen Sion.
2. The Lords pitching upon any place to dwell in, or persons to dwell among,
comes not of the worthiness of the place, or persons, but from Gods good
plea^ure alone; For the Lord has chosen Sion, he has desired it for his
habitation. 3. The Lord rests in his love toward his Church, accepting the
persons, prayers, and service of his chosen people: he smells a sweet savor
in Christ here, and his love makes his seat among his people steadfast: This is
my rest, I have desired it 4 What is promised under typical figures, is really
everlasting, not in regard of the figure, but in regard of the signification:
For this is my rest for ever, is true only in respect of the Church,
represented by Sion. 5. No reason is to be craved for Gods everlasting good
will to any person or incorporation; his pleasure may suffice for a cause: This
is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it, or have pleasure
in it.

Verse. 15. I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor
with bread.

16. I will also cloth her Priests with salvation: and her Saints shall shout
aloud for joy.

The rest of the articles of the Lords Covenant with David, are so many
promises which the Lord does make concerning the blessing of the Ministers of
Christ, unto the Churches good, and the increase of Christ's Kingdom, in
despite of his enemies, in the last verses.

From the promise made concerning the blessing of the Ministry for the peoples
good; Learn, 1. The true subjects of Christ, shall not want the means of
spiritual life, spiritual meat, drink, clothing, and whatsoever is necessary
for their salvation: I will abundantly bless her provision. 2. The
dispensation of good things unto Gods children, is such as shall make them
sensible of their own insufficiency; they are not exempted from feeling their
wants, and being in straits, but as they feel their need, so shall they be
provided for: every evil which they feel, shall have a perfect remedy in
Christ, and in his Word, which shall satisfy the needy soul: I will satisfy
her poor with bread 3. Christ's Church shall neither want Ministers, nor shall
his sent Ministers want commission for teaching of saving truth, but shall be
clothed with authority to preach and to proclaim salvation to the believers:
I will also cloth her Priests with salvation. 4. The Ministers of
righteousness teaching the true way of justification, and obedience of faith,
are also the Ministers of salvation: for the clothing of the Priests with
righteousness, v. 9. is here, the clothing of them with salvation. 5. Comfort
and joy shall the Lords people have, who do embrace a Ministry clothed with
commission to hold forth righteousness and salvation in Christ unto them: Her
saints shall shout aloud for joy.

Verse. 17. There will I make the horn of David to bud, I have ordained a lamp
for mine anointed.

18. His enemies will I cloth with shame: but upon himself shall his crown
flourish.

From the promises made in favor of Christ's Kingdom; Learn, 1. As Sion in the
type was the place where Christ manifested himself King of Israel, so also the
Church mainly signified by it, is the place and incorporation, wherein Christ
is to be seen manifestly to be King: There will I make the horn of David to
bud. 2. The glory of typical David's Kingdom, was revived in Christ the true
David; the budding of Christ's Kingdom in Jerusalem, was the budding of David's
Kingdom in a more glorious way then ever his temporal Kingdom flourished:
There will I make the horn of David to bud. 3. This is the Crown and
accomplishment of the Churches felicity, that she has Christ for her King:
There will I make the horn of David to bud. 4. How low soever Christ's Kingdom
can be brought in the world, yet it is fixed as a well rooted tree, it is
rooted as the horn of an Unicorne; although it may seem gone, or so weak as it
cannot subsist, yet it shall bud and grow in despite of all opposition: There
will I make the horn of David to bud. 5. It is no wonder to see adversaries
opposing Christ's Kingdom, for it is here foretold and presupposed: His enemies
will I cloth with shame. 6. Albeit the enemies of Christ do promise to
themselves advantage, by their opposition made unto Christ, and hope to
overturne his Kingdom, yet have they all been, and shall be ashamed for ever
of their expectation, whosoever do hate his Kingdom: His enemies will I cloth
with shame, which they shall not be able to hide, but must put on and walk
therein, as a man does in his garments. 7. The more Christ is opposed, the more
shall his splendour, and glory grow in the world: But upon himself shall his
crown flourish.

PSALM CXXXIII.
Ver. 1. BEhold, how good, and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell
together in unity.

2. It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the
beard, even Aarons beard: and went down to the skirts of his garments.

3. As the dew of Hermon: and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of
Sion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing: even life for evermore.

This Psalm does fit the condition of Gods people, in David's time, when after
their civil wars they were brought to an happy unity in Religion, and civil
Government. This sort of concord and communion of Saints is here commended to
the Church as both pleasant and profitable. The goodness of it is spoken of,
v. 1. The pleasantness of it, v. 2. The profitablenesse of it, v. 3. Whence
learn, 1. Those are most fit to put a price, and right estimation upon peace
and concord, who have seen and felt the evil of discord and contention, as
David's experience proves; for this is a Psalm of David, who had proof both
of war and peace. 2. The fruits of peace in the reformation of Religion, and
of civil Judicatories, do so redound unto the comfort of all families and
private persons, as the good of concord may be demonstrated sensibly: Behold,
how good it is! 3. Such a concord is true concord, and worthy of the name,
which does unite the members of the visible Church, as brethren, or children of
one Father, in the true Religion, for the mutual discharge of all the duties of
love: How g^od is it for brethren to dwell together in unity! 4. Some things
are pleasant and not profitable, and some things are profitable and not
pleasant, but the concord of Gods people, or holy peace within the visible
Church in any place, is both pleasant and profitable: Behold, how good and
pleasant it is, for brethren to dw^ll together in unity. 5. This blessing is
not to be expected by any, but through Christ, on whom the oil of gladness,
and all the graces of the Spirit are first poured out, and then from him are
carried to the meanest member of his body, as Aarons head being anointed with
oil, the benefit of it extended it self to the uttermost borders of his
garments; for the similitude borrowed from Aarons anointing, as the type of
Christ, does teach us so much: It is like the precious ointment, etc. And this
similitude represents the pleasantness of concord, the sweet smell whereof
refreshes all that have any spiritual sense. 6. As dew makes the herbs and
trees to flourish, for the utility of man: so is concord profitable to the
Church and State* As the dew of Hermon, or dew that descended upon the
mountains of Sion. 7. Where holy concord makes its residence among brethren
dwelling together in unity, there the blessing of the God of peace in this
life, and for the life to come; makes its residence also: There the Lord
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore. 8. This blessing of brethren
living in the unity of the spirit and bond of peace, is not promised only, but
also there is an everlasting order given forth from the Supreme Ruler of all
things, for the forthwith applying of the blessing effectually to those that
thus live together: There the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for
evermore.

PSALM CXXXIV.
In this short Psalm, the Spirit of the Lord, by the mouth of the Psalmist,
exhorts the Lords Ministers to go about the exercise of their public
Ministry, in praying, preaching and praising God, v. 1, 2. and blessing the
congregation met together. v. 3.

Verse. 1. BEhold, bless ye the LORD: all ye servants of the LORD: which by
night stand in the house of the LORD.

2. Lift up your hearts in the Sanctuary: and bless the LORD.

From the exhortation to the Lords Ministers; Learn, 1. The public worship of
God is to be carefully looked unto: and all men, but especially Ministers, had
need to be stirred up to take heed to themselves, and to the work of Gods
public worship when they go about it: for so much does behold, in this place
import. 2. The scope and special end of public worship is to set forth the
blessedness of God in himself, and in his operation for, and toward his
Church: for all the parts of public worship and service, in prayer, reading of
Scripture, preaching, praising, and thanksgiving, singing of Psalms, and
blessing of the people, do aim at this: Behold, bless ye the Lord. 3. The
discharging of the public worship of God, requires that there be public
Ministers, appointed by God, and separated unto this holy function; Bless ye
the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord. 4. It was commanded in the Law, Exodus
27* 20, 21. that so soon as daylight began to fall at even, lamps should be
lighted, and shine all night in the Tabernacle, till the morning, and that the
Priests and Levits should by course wait upon his service, that there should
not be darkness in the Lord house, but light always night and day: whereby
was signified, that howsoever the world lies in the darkness of ignorance, of
sin and misery, yet in the Lords Church remedy against all those evils, and
relief from them is to be had: and that God has ordained Ministers, and
public Officers, to entertain and hold forth the shining of the light unto
the Church; and to this end not to stand to break their nights rest, when the
service does call for it: Bless the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, which
by night stand in the house of the Lord. 5. Prayer to God, as the mouth of the
people, is a part of the office of the Lords Ministers: for so much is imported
by pointing at the gesture of the supplicant: Lift up your hands in the
Sanctuary, that is, in the place where the people assemble. 6. To praise the
Lord, and to teach the people what the Lord is, what blessedness is to be
found in him, and how they should acknowledge this, and make use of it, is
another part of the Ministers office: Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary, and
bless the Lord.

Ver. 3. The Lord that made heaven and earth: bless thee out of Sion. In this
verse the Lords Ministers as they are directed, so they go about to bless the
people out of Sion, in the Name of the Lord: Out of Sion, because there was the
Arc of the Covenant, the figure of Christ, God incarnate, through whom alone
the Lords blessing is derived unto his Church. Whence learn, 1. All men lie
under the curse* till God bring them into the fellowship of his Church, and
pronounce them blessed by his Word, as, The Lord bless thee, does import. 2.
It is a part of the office of the Lords Ministers, to pronounce with authority
Gods blessing upon his people, which is no more then a wish or prayer for them;
for they are sent of God with commission to say. The Lord bless thee, 3. No
blessing is to be expected but from Christ, represented by the Arc of the
Covenant, which was in Sion: The Lord bless thee out of Sion. 4. The
confidence of the believer to obtain whatsoever is promised in the Lords Word,
is builded upon the Covenant of God, and the omnipotency of God: and what can a
soul stand in need of, which this fountain cannot yield? The Lord that made
heaven and earth, bless thee out of Sion.

PSALM. CXXXV.
THe scope of this Psalm, is to set forth the praises of the Lord: wherein
there is an earnest exhortation of all the Church, and of all the Lords
Ministers to praise God, v. 1, 2, 3. whereunto are added seven motives or
reasons, from v. 3, to v. 12. In the next place, the Psalmist turns his
speech toward the Lord, and praises him; and gives two reasons more for the
praising of God, v. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. In the third place, more specially
he exhorts the Ministers, and every particular member of the Church to praise
God, and so closes with blessing of him.

Ver. 1. PRaise ye the LORD, praise ye the Name of the LORD: praise him, O ye
servants of the LORD.

2. Ye that stand in the House of the LORD, in the courts of the House of our
God.

In the exhortation directed to the whole Church, and to the Ministers; Learn,
1. The work of praising God, should be gone about affectionately; and unto it
should we stir up our selves, and others with all our might: as this manifold
exhortation to praise the Lord, and sing praise, does teach us. 2. That which
is spoken or manifested of God, must be carefully taken notice of, that he may
be praised out of knowledge: for he will not have praises, but as his Word does
direct; for this does, Praise the Name of the Lord, import. 3. The public
Ministers of Gods House, who are set apart for teaching and leading of the
people in his service, by reason of their Office and employment, must stir up
themselves unto this work of praising God, whatsoever may be their own private
condition, sad or joyful: for their obligation so to do is greatest, Praise
him, O ye Saints of the Lord, O ye servants of the Lord. 4. As our privileges
are more then the rest of the world, by being in Covenant with God* and
admitted to have room in the holy assemblies of his people, so should our care
to praise God be the greater; Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the
Courts of the house of our God.

Verse. 3. Praise the LORD, for the LORD is good: sing praises unto his Name,
for it is pleasant. He insisteth in the exhortation, and begins to give
reasons to move us to praise God. Whence learn, 1. The Lord is worthy to be
praised, not only for his essential goodness, but also for the letting forth
thereof on the creatures, and toward his people most of all; Praise the Lord,
for the Lord is good: and this is the first reason or motive to praise. 2.
Singing of the Lords praises is a part of the moral worship of God, and should
be done with cheerfulness of heart, as a work wherein we rejoice to be
employed: Sing praises unto his Name. 3. The work of praising God, has a sort
of reward joined with it: when we praise God most, we get most benefit by so
doing: it is so comely in it self, so pleasant unto God, and profitable to the
person that offers praises, so fit to cheer up his spirit, and strengthen his
faith in God, whose praises are the pillars of the believers confidence and
comfort, that a man should be allured the^eunto: Sing praises unto his Name,
for it is pleasant; and this is the second motive or reason to praise God.

Verse. 4. For the LORD has chosen Jacob unto himself: and Israel for his
peculiar treasure. The third reason of praising God is, because he has by
electing Israel, put a great respect and price upon his people. Whence learn,
1. The Jews have a respect of honor put upon them, (how unworthy soever they
have proved themselves of it many times,) above all the Nations of the world,
in that God has chosen them to be his people* among whom he will always have
a chosen number, which of no other Nation can be said: For the Lord has chosen
Jacob unto himself. 2. The Lords Covenanted people are no less precious in his
eyes, then a peculiar treasure is in a man's eyes; He has chosen Israel for his
peculiar treasure.

Ver. 5. For I know that the LORD is great: and that our LORD is above all
gods. The fourth reason of Gods praise is, because the Lord is greater then all
earthly, yea, then all imaginable excellencies in the world, as the Church does
both believe and know by experience. Whence learn, 1. The largeness of Gods
dominion over all Nations, and over all imagined excellency of the idols of the
Gentiles, does commend the mercy of God to that Nation, which he does prefer
unto the rest, by taking them in Covenant with himself* The Lord is great, and
our Lord is above all gods. 2. As the Lord does by his extraordinary working
for his people make manifest his glorious and great majesty to them, so should
they so much the more for their experience praise him before all the world: For
I know that the Lord is great, and our Lord is above all gods, does import not
only the Psalmists belief of the point, and experience of the truth thereof,
but also his practice of the duty.

Ver. 6. Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth: in
the seas, and all deep places. The fifth reason of Gods praise, serving also
to confirm the former reason is, because God is the Omnipotent Creator, and
absolute Governor of all things, disposing of them as he pleases. Whence
learn, 1. The great works of Creation, Sustentation, and governing all things,
do show the Lords greatness, and do furnish matter of his praise: Whatsoever
the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the sea and all deep
places. 2. The Lords will and pleasure is the measure of the extending of his
Omnipotency, and no further must we extend his power unto action, then his
revealed will gives warrant; Whatsoever the Lord pleased* that did he. 3. The
Lords will is the sovereign and absolute cause of all his working, and that
whereon all men's faith and reason must rest; Whatsoever he pleased, he did.

Ver. 7. He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, he makes
lightenings for the rain, he brings the wind out of his treasuries. The
sixth reason of Gods praise is, because there is no motion in the clouds or in
he air, but that which he makes. Whence learn, There is none of the motions
of the creatures so light o^ variable, which are not wrought by God, and
wherein his providence does not actually put forth it self in vapors, clouds,
rain, lightnings, winds and all: He causes the vapors to ascend from the
ends of the earth, he makes lightnings for the rain, he brings the wind
out of his treasuries.

Ver. 8. Who smote the firstborn of Egypt: both of man and beast.

9. Who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh,
and upon all his servants.

10. Who smote great Nations: and slew mighty Kings.

11. Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og King of Bashan: and all the Kingdoms
of Canaan.

12. And gave their land for an heritage: an heritage unto Israel his people.

The seventh reason of Gods praise is, for his wonderful Redemption of his
people out of Eqypt, and powerful overthrow of the Canaanites, and placing of
his people in their room. Whence learn, 1. The Lords working for his Church in
former times, is matter of praising God in all after-ages: as this example of
the mentioning so often of the slaughter of the firstborn of Egypt, both of man
and beast, does teach. 2. Gods working for his people is such, that their
enemies being posed, must acknowledge his wonderful acts: He sent tokens and
wonders in the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh and all his servants. 3.
When God engages for his people, he will overtop the mightiest Kings and
Kingdoms, and tread them under in favor of his Church; Who smote great
Nations, and slew mighty Kings, Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og King of
Bashan, and all the Kingdoms of Canaan. 4. The care of God for his people is
indefatigable, he cease not to prosecute begun favors, till he bring them to
an end: He follows Isreal's Redemption out of Egypt, till he give them
possession of Canaan. 5. Albeit there be difficulties and opposition to the
settling of Gods people in their possession, yet the work goes on, and must be
perfected; and the close of Gods work is no less glorious then the beginning
of it: He gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his people.

Verse. 13. Thy Name, O LORD, endures for ever: and thy memorial, O LORD,
throughout all generations. In the second place, the Psalmist turns his
speech toward the Lord, and praises him yet more: and then, in the following
verses adds other two reasons of his praising God. From this verse, Learn, 1.
What the Lord does declare himself to be in one generation toward his Church,
may and should be a means to know what he will do in all time to come for his
people, as need shall require* Thy Name, O Lord, endures for ever, and thy
memorial, O Lord, throughout all generation. 2. As the constancy of Gods love
toward his people, and care for them is a matter of high praise unto God: so it
is a matter of sweet refreshing joy to the believer, which makes him look up
kindly unto God, and praise him: as here the Psalmist in praising Gods
constancy, turns his speech twice toward him: O Lord, O Lord.

Ver. 14. For the LORD will judge his people: and he will repent himself
concerning his servants. The first new reason of Gods praise is the hope, that
the Lord will plead the cause of his afflicted people, and will comfort them.
Whence learn, 1. Then are bypast mercies of God rightly made use of, when they
strengthen faith and hope in God for mercies to come: as here we see the Lords
memorial made use of, for the Churches present comfort. 2. Wheresoever Gods
people are oppressed by their enemies, howsoever God has ever just quarrel
against his people, yet will he examine what moved the enemies to trouble them:
and albeit he do not at first give out sentence, yet he will execute justice in
favor of his people in due time: For the Lord will judge his people, to wit,
by pleading their cause against their enemies. 3. The constancy of Gods love to
his people, makes the change of his sad dispensations into more comfortable, to
be certain: and therefore Gods afflicting of his people, is a work wherein he
will not continue* because his mercy toward his people is everlasting* For the
Lord will judge his people, and he will repent himself concerning his servants.
4. As it is a sort of grief to God to afflict his people, so it is a sort of
comfort to him to comfort his people by delivering of them from their sad
affliction; for the word, Repent himself, in the Original does signify also
to comfort himself.

Ver. 15. The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

16. They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they see not.

17. They have ears, but they hear not: neither is there any breath in their
mouths.

18. They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusts in
them.

The second new reason of Gods praise, is taken from the business of all idols
compared with God: and of all idolaters compared wi^h his servants. Whence
learn, 1. True wo^shippers of God do detest images and idols, and all false
religion, how gorgeously soever they be decked up by idolaters: The idols of
the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. 2. How delectable
soever the invention of images, or worshipping of idols seem to be, yet do
these vanities bring nothing to the worshippers, save grief and vexation: for
so does their name in the Original import* 3. Worshippers of images are not
esteemed according to their intention and profession, when they say they
worship the thing represented by them, but are to be judged by Gods verdict of
them, who has p^onounced their gods to be no other thing, then their images
which are shaped by the Artificer like a man; They have mouths, but they speak
not, etc. 4 Idolatry is a benumming sin, which bereaveth the idolater of the
right use of his senses and reason; They that make them are like to them. 5.
Beside outward worship offered by idolaters to their images, they are found to
offer unto them also the inward worship of their souls: They trust in them; and
in trusting in them, or looking for any good by them, they are but brutish, or
like senseless blocks; So is every one that trusts in them.

Verse. 19. Bless the LORD, O house of Israel: bless the LORD, O house of
Aaron.

20 Bless the LORD, O house of Levi: ye that fear the LORD bless the LORD.

21. Blessed be the LORD out of Zion: which dwells at Jerusalem: Praise ^e
the LORD.

In the close of the Psalm, the Psalmist exhorts all ranks of the godly,
both public Officers and private members of the Church to bless God, and
gives example of obedience in his own person. Whence learn, 1. As the whole
incorporation of the Church receives common benefits from God more then any
incorporation beside, and as every rank and order of people do receive benefits
more particularly to themselves: so should the whole incorporation together,
and every one of every rank give pr^ise unto God, and set forth his
blessedness before others, as their vocation permits: for, Bless the Lord,
O house Israel, is spoken to the whole incorporation; and, Bless the Lord, O
house of Aaron, does speak to the Priests; and Bless the Lord, O house of
Levi, is directed to the under officers of Gods house. 2. Albeit all men are
exhorted, and each person in their several places called upon, yet they only
who fear God, will discharge the duty conscionably, therefore after all it is
said, Ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord. 3. The true worshipper of God
draws this special point of Gods praise, from Gods manifesting of himself to
his Church in and through, and for Christ: for this is signified by the types,
figures and tokens of his presence in Sion and Jerusalem; Blessed be the Lord
out of Sion, which dwells at Jerusalem 4 When the song of praise is sung unto
God, the work of his praise is not en^ed, but must be continued, renewed and
followed still; Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM CXXXVI.
THis Psaime is an exhortation to confess Gods goodness and and mercy, and to
praise and thank him for the manifestation thereof, in so many sundry works of
his: upon this ground, because the fountain of his mercy, whence his works did
flow, does run still, and endure for ever, to the benefit of his own people in
special. The reasons of the exhortation unto thanks and praise, are set down in
order, so many in number as the verses are, unto every one whereof is added one
common reason* from the everlasting endurance of his mercy In the first place,
the exhortation is thrice propounded, with reasons taken from the Lords
attributes or names, v. 1, 2, 3. In the second place* reasons are given from
his works, and in special from the work of Creation, v. 4, to v. 10. In the
third place, reasons are given from the work of Redemption of Israel, and
bringing them forth out of Egypt* and planting them in Canaan, from 10, to v.
23* In the fourth place, reasons of thanks are given, from his late mercy to
the Church in the Psalmists time, v. 23, 24. And last of all, a reason is
given, from his goodness to all living crea^ures, v. 25. whereupon he closes
with an exhortation unto thanksgiving to the God of heaven, v. 26^

Verse. 1. O Give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: for his mercy endures
for ever.

2. O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endures for ever.

3. O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

From the threefold exhortation to give thanks, with the reasons subjoyned
thereto: ^earn, 1. When we have praised God for what reasons we have offered
unto us in one Psalm, we must begin again, and praise for other reasons, and
when we have done so, we have not overtaken our task, the duty lies still at
our door to be discharged afresh: as this Psalm does show. 2. God is to be
acknowledged and praised as the fountain of the being, continuance and
preservation of all things that are in the world, and as the performer of all
his promises: O give thanks unto the Lord Iehova. 2. The knowledge of Gods
attributes, properties or Name, and in special of his goodness, is able to
draw forth the praising of God from every believer: O give thanks unto the
Lord, f^r he is good. 3. Neither is God weary of doing good, nor is his mercy
spent, by what he has already let forth of it, but it continues as a river
still running; For his mercy endures for ever. 4. Whatsoever is the Lords
praise is for our profit and advantage, and so is a matter of thanks from us
unto his majesty: O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good. 5. The Lord is
more excellent then all the Magistrates, Rulers, Princes and Kings in the
world: yea, he has all those perfections joined in one in him, which idolate^s
do feign to be scattered among their idols, of whom they conceive one to excel
in one thing, and another in another thing: O give thanks to the God of gods.
6. To whom the Lord is God by Covenant, he is always and for ever their God;
For his mercy endures for ever. 7. God is the only sovereign Lord of all
things, and the only Potentate, who has absolute right, and absolute power to
do what he pleases, and can when he will, overtop all principa^ities and
powers, to the benefit of his followers: O give thanks to the Lord of lords. 8.
The perpetuity of Gods mercy does make the benefit of Gods sovereignty
forthcoming for ever to the believer, and to stand as a matter of const^nt
praise and thanksgiving to him; Give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy
endures for ever.

Verse. 4. To him who alone does great wonders: for his mercy endures for ever.

5. To him that by wisdom made the Heavens: for his mercy endures for ever.

6. To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy
endures for ever.

7. To him that made great lights: for his mercy endures for ever.

8. The Sun to rule by day: for his mercy endures for ever.

9. The Moon and Stars to rule by night: for his mercy endures for ever.

From the reasons of praise and thanks to be given to God, which are taken from
his works of Creation; Learn, 1. Every work of God is wonderful, and able to
make a man astonished if it be well considered: To him who does great wonders.
2. Whatsoever instruments the Lord is pleased to use in any of his wonderful
works, he alone is the worker, and will not communicate the glory of the work
with any creature: To him who alone does great wonders. 3. The constancy of
Gods mercy to his own, does make the use of Gods wonderful power constantly
forthcoming to them, as their need requires: For his mercy endures for ever.
4. The making of the Heaven, as it is a wonderful work, and a matter of
constant praise unto God, so a wondrous benefit unto his people in many
respects; To him that made the Heavens. 5. The wisdom of God appearing in the
fabric of heaven, as it is worthy to be praised, because it is of so large a
compass, as the motion of it shall be no ways troublesome to man: the stars
so glorious an ornament, so useful to man, and so regular in their motion as is
wonderful: To him that by wisdom made the Heavens. 6. It is the mercy of God
that the Heavens do continue in their service to sinful men* For his mercy
endures for ever. 7. The earths standing up above the w^ters, which by course
of nature should be above the earth,) is a standing miracle for the use of man,
that he might have a pleasant dwelling while he is in the world; To him that
stretched forth the earth above the waters. 8. It is the mercy of God* that the
waters do not return to their natural course to cover the earth as they did in
the flood of Noah; For his mercy endures for ever. 9. The illumination of the
world by so great lights, as might at once shine upon the one half of the
earth, (which otherwise should be in darkness for the most part) is a matter
of Gods praise, and man's profit, deserving thanks from man unto God: To him who
made great lights. 10. It is the Lords mercy that he has not changed this
course, nor removed this much abused benefit from us; For his mercy endures
for ever, 11. The making the Sun to be the fixed fountain of daylight, rather
then to have served the world with the light which shined the first three days
of the Creation, is for the greater benefit of man, as for many other reasons
so for this, that every part of the day might be better distinguished,
according to the motion of the body of the Sun. The Sun to rule the day. 12.
That God has not discharged the Sun to shine upon sinful men* who deserve to
live in darkness, is a proof of his endless mercy to his own: For his mercy
endures for ever. 13. The tempering of the darkness of the night by the
Moons light, and by the light of the stars in their courses, is a matter of
Gods praise, and of man's comfort, and the continuing of this favor still, is
the evidence of his mercy to his people: He makes the Moon and Stars to
rule by night, for his mercy endures for ever.

Ver. 10. To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn; fer his mercy endures
for ever.

11. And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endures for ever.

12. With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his mercy endures
for ever.

13. To him which divided the Red Sea into parts: for his mercy endures for
ever.

14. And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy endures
for ever.

15. But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea: for his mercy endures
for ever.

16. To him which led his people through the wilderness; for his mercy endures
for ever.

17. To him which smote great Kings: for his mercy endures for ever.

18. And slew famous Kings; for his mercy endures for ever.

19. Sihon King of the Amorites: for his mercy endures for ever.

20. And Og the King of Bashan: for his mercy endures for ever.

21. And gave their land for an heritage; for his mercy endures for ever.

22. Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endures for ever.

In the reasons of Gods praise, taken from the work of delivery of Israel out
of Egypt, convoying of them through the wilderness, and planting them in
Canaan: Learn, 1. The Lord should be praised for the works of Creation, as by
all men, so especially by those who are partakers of the benefit of Redemption:
and those only who are sensible of the benefit of Redemption, will give him
praise for the works of Creation, and common Providence, as the fastening of
the duty of praise, especially upon Israel, here does teach us. 2. The Lords
preserving of his Church from the beginning does concern the true members of
the Church in all times after, to be thankful for it, no less then for the
continuing of the course of the Heavens, Sun, Moon and Stars; as the context of
the Psalm does hold forth. 3. The Lords punishing of the enemies of his Church
in Egypt, is an obligation on the Church to praise him for ever: and his
constant mercy gives assurance, that he will avenge the quarrel of his
oppressed people in all ages: To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn, for
his mercy endures for ever. 4. The delivery of Israel from the bondage of
Egypt, is a matter of Gods perpetual praise: and it is a pledge of Gods mercy
to his Church in all ages; He brought out Israel from amongst them; for his
mercy endures for ever. 5. As the work of the Churches delivery is more
difficult, so does the Lord put forth more clearly his Omnipotency for
perfecting of it, as appeared in Isreal's bringing forth out of Egypt, with a
strong hand and outstretched arm. 6. One proof of Gods power manifested for
his Church, is a pawn of his purpose to give so often proof as need shall be, of
his power for his peoples relief; For his mercy endures for ever. 7. The most
improbable deliverances from danger, are very possible to God, who can turn the
sea into dry land for his peoples escaping; To him which divided the sea into
parts. 8. The constancy of Gods mercy to his Church, makes his dividing of the
sea a pawn of his power and purpose to deliver his Church how great soever
their straits shall be: For his mercy endures for ever. 9. It is a work of no
less mercy and power, to give his people grace to make use of an offered
means of delivery, then to prepare the deliverance for them, but the constancy
of Gods mercy does not only provide the means, but also gives his people
grace to make use thereof in all ages: He made Israel to pass through the
midst of it, for his mercy endures for ever. 10* God can make that means
which proves effectual for the safety of his people, to prove a snare to the
wicked for their destruction, as the Red sea was a snare to the Egyptians; But
he overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea. 11. The constancy of Gods
mercy toward his people, is a pledge of the constant course of his justice
against their enemies; For his mercy endures for ever. 12. As thankfulness
makes search of many mercies in the bosom of one, so the innumerable
multitude of Gods mercies does force the thankful man to sum up many mercies
in one: as here all the mercies in the forty years journeying in the
wilderness are drawn up in a word; To him that led his people thorough the
wilderness. 13. It is the constancy of Gods mercy, which makes him continue
the conduct of his people, and bear with their manners, till he put an end to
their journey; He led his people through the wilderness, for his mercy
endures for ever. 14. The people of God may meet with no less difficulties in
their way to heaven, then they have found hindrances of their Conversion, as
the typical example of Isreal's meeting with opposition before they entered
Canaan does show. 15. Albeit Kings and potent Powers should oppose the settling
of Gods Church in any place where he pleases to plant it, yet they shall not
be able to hinder his work: for his mercy is forthcoming in one age as well as
in another, that praise and thanks may always be given unto him; Who smote
great Kings, for his mercy endures for ever. 16. Men of renown lose their
credit, when they meddle with the Lords Church, and readily they lose their
lives also: and this should be a document to all mighty men, and a matter of
comfort to Gods people; He slew famous Kings, for his mercy endures for ever.
17. The Lord will have the first opposers of the settling of his people
exemplarily punished, and their punishment made no less famous then their sin
has been; He slew Sihon King of the Amorites: and the like will the Lord do in
all ages against the chief adversaries of his people: For his mercy endures
for ever. 18. When judgment upon one enemy does not terrify others of them
from opposing Gods people, the like destruction shall fall upon those that make
head against the Church; And he slew Og King of Bashan. 19. The slaughter of
the enemies of Gods people is the work of the Lord, whosoever be the
instruments; for it is not here said that the Israelites slew Sihon and Og, but
the Lord slew them; and the like mercy may the Church look for in all ages; For
his mercy endures for ever. 20. It is the Lord who gives heritages at his
pleasure, and who can dispossess such men of their lands, who will not suffer
the Lords people to inherit that land which the Lord has given them: He slew
Sihon and Og, and gave their land for an heritage; and the like mercy may the
Church look for in all ages, as it shall be found good for her: For his mercy
endures for ever. 21. When the Lord puts down the enemies, and puts his
servants in their place, it is a double mercy; As He gave the lands of Sihon
and Og to be an heritage unto Israel his servants. 22. There can no cause be
found in Gods people, why God should do good to them, or why he has done good
unto them: but the constancy of his own mercy only; For his mercy endures for
ever.

Verse. 23. Who remembered us in our low estate; for his mercy endures for ever.

24. And has redeemed us from our enemies; for his mercy endures for ever.

In the reasons of Gods praise taken from the late experience of the Church in
the days of the Psalmist: Learn, 1. Unto whatsoever praise we can give to God
for what he has done before our time, we should add praises also for what the
Lord has done for us in our time, as here the Church in the P^almists days
does unto all the former add this: Who remembered us in our low estate. 2. The
season and ordinary time of the Lords manifesting himself for his people is,
when they are brought low, and emptied of their own strength, and of all hope
of worldly assistance; Who remembered us in our low estate. 3. The Lords
presence, help and assistance, good will and respect to us, is better observed
by afflicted people then by prosperous: for troubles, necessities and straits,
are means to open men's eyes, and waken up their senses, to take up the worth
of the Lords working: He remembered us in our low estate. 4. The mercy of the
Lord is set on work for his people, both when they are in adversity to sustain
them, and to raise them out of it: and in prosperity to maintain them in it,
and to teach them the good use of it, in looking wisely on Gods dealing with
them in both conditions: He remembered us in our low estate, for his mercy
endures for ever. 5. Albeit the proud enemies of the Church may prevail, and
bring the Church into bondage for a time, yet the Lord will not suffer the
enemy to oppress, nor his people to be oppressed always, but will deliver
his own in due time: as here, He has redeemed us from our enemies. 6. The same
reason and cause is to be found of the delivery of Israel out of Egypt, and of
the delivery of the Church at any time from their enemies, and that is mercy
only; For his mercy endures for ever.

Ver. 25. Who gives food to all flesh; for his mercy endures for ever. In the
reason of Gods praise taken from his goodness to all living creatures; Learn,
1. The Lords goodness and fatherly care of all living creatures, is worthy to
be marked and made use of for his praise, in special the giving of every living
creature their ow^ food convenien^ for them, and that in due season every day:
Who gives food to all flesh. 2. The mercy of the Lord toward his children, is
the cause of ^his care and respect unto such other creatures, as man has need
of: For his mercy endures for ever. 3. The care which God has of all flesh to
give them their food, is a ground of assurance to his people of his far greater
care of them; For his mercy endures for ever, to them.

Ver. 26. O give thanks unto the God of Heaven; for his mercy endures for
ever. From the close of the Psalm; Learn, 1. Heaven and heavenly gifts are
the height of all the felicity of the Saints, and the flower of all Gods
benefits unto his children, for which above all other favors he is to be
thanked and praised by his people: O give thanks unto the God of Heaven. 2 God
is the strong God of heaven, not only because he made the heaven, and shows
his glory most there, but especially because he has promised to give heaven,
and all spiritual graces unto eternal life in heaven, to his own people by an
everlasting Covenant: of which heaven and heavenly mercies he is God: O give
thanks unto the God of heaven 3. As mercy has entitled heaven unto the
Saints, so does mercy preserve them in their right, and will preserve them in
the possession thereof for ever: For his mercy endures for ever.

PSALM CXXXVII.
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. In the first, is set down the
lamentable condition wherein the Lords people were in their captivity in
Babylon, ver. 1.2, 3. In the next, is their constancy in Religion, ver. 4, 5,
6. In the third, is their denouncing of judgment by way of imprecation against
the instruments and chief authors of their calamity, ver. 7, 8, 9.

Ver. 1. BY the rivers of Babylon there we sat down, yea, we wept: when we
remembered Zion. In the first part, wherein the sorrowful condition of the
captive Church of God is set down; Learn, 1. The people of God by their sins
may procure the taking away of the face of a visible Church from them, and the
taking away of their civil liberties also, and may procure banishment from
their own country among idolaters, as the captivity of the Jews in Babylon
does show. 2. When men do not make use of the privileges of Gods public
worship, it is righteousness with God to remove these abused favors, and to
cast the abusers thereof out among idolaters, as here the Jews were, who
because they made not use of Jerusalem, the vision of peace, they are thrust
out into Bab^lon, a place of all confusion. 3. When the Lords people provoke
God against them, the wickedest wretches and vilest idolaters in the world may
overcome them in a battle, and rule over them as over slaves: as the experience
of the Jews does prove. 4. When desolation is brought upon Gods people, no
wonder to see them remain in that condition for a time, and not to be delivered
immediately out of it: By the rivers of Babylon there we sat down. 5. The
public miseries of the Church, are causes of heaviness unto the true members
thereof, and motives of mourning: There we sat, yea, we wept. 6. Comparison of
a prosperous condition bypast, with adversity present, does augaugment misery
and increases grief, especially when bypast mercies abused are compared with
just judgments inflicted in the palce thereof: We wept, when we remembered Sion.
7. They who will not esteem of the privileges of Sion when they have them,
will be forced to acknowledge the worth thereof with sorrow when they want
them: We wept, when we remembered Sion.

Verse. 2. We hanged our harps upon the willowes, in the midst thereof. The
Lords people carried with them into their captivity their harps; first, as
means of stirring up their affections, in their private worship of God.
Secondly, in hope to have some use of them afterward in the Lords worship, in
their own land. And thirdly, that thereby they might make profession before
their oppressors of their Religion, and of their hope of restitution in Gods
appointed time, albeit they could not frame their heart for the present to
rejoice as they were wont to do* Whence learn, 1. Means to help in private
devotion must be the more made use of, that public means are wanting: for the
Jews debarred from the Temple do carry their harps with them into their
scattering and captivity* 2. In the midst of our calamity we ought both to have
hope of deliverance out of our trouble* and to profess it before those that
have us under their power; for so did the captive Jews in their captivity,
they carried their harps into Babylon. 3. There are times when the signs of
our joy may be suppressed, and the signs of our sorrow expressed: We hanged
our harps on the willowes. 4. The most lawful and commendable sorrow, is that
which is taken for the dishonor of God, and the desolation of the Church: When
we remembered Sion, we hanged our harps. 5. No natural comfort, nor invitation
unto carnal joy, can counterbalance the causes of spiritual grief, neither
rivers, nor shadow of willowes, nor any thing else can stay the godly grief of
Gods captived people: We hanged our harps upon the willowes, in the midst
thereof.

Ver. 3. For there they that carried us away captive, required of us a song,
and they that wasted us, required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs
of Sion. Their affliction was augmented by the insulting of the Babylonians
over them, calling for a song from the Jews, to feed their godless mirth.
Whence learn, 1* Oft-times sorrows do not go single, and alone, but one grief
is joined to another, one de^p calls to another: as here, insultation of the
Babylonians is joined with the bondage and captivity of Gods people. 2. As the
sorrow of the godly is the matter of the laughter and joy of their enemies and
no sport to the wicked is so relishing, as a jest broken upon the true
Religion: so no affliction unto the godly is so heavy, as to find their own
sins to draw not only misery on themselves, but also dishonor upon their
Religion: as here we see, the Jews hanged up their harps, and why? For they
that carried us away captive, required of us a song: and they that wasted us,
required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Sion. 3 Corrupt
nature makes no other use of spiritual things, then thereby to satisfy their
sensual desires: as here it is mirth, and singing only, for which the
Babylonians do seek to hear a Psalm sung: Sing us one of the songs of Sion.

Verse. 4. How shall we sing the LORDS song in a strange land?

5. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem: let my right hand forget her cunning.

6. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth;
if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

In the second place, wherein the Jews constant profession of their Religion
is set down, and their refusing to satisfy their enemies desire, in
prostituting the Lords worship to their ca^nal pleasure; Learn, 1. Albeit we be
under the feet of our enemies and albeit we have drawn on our misery by our
sinning, yet must we neither deny our Religion, nor any part thereof for fear
of man, nor subject our Religion to men's pleasure, as men think good to direct
us in it, whatsoever may be the danger; for so does the example of the captive
people of God teach us, refusing to sing Psalms at the desire of the
Babylonians: How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land? 2. The place
where God is not worshipped, should be a strange land unto us his people, and no
place kindly or comfortable unto us, but where the Lords people may enjoy the
liberty of Gods public worship, and of the communion of Saints: How shall we
sing the Lords Song in a strange land? 3. Whatsoever be our own private
condition, worse or better, it must not take up the room in our affection,
which is due to the Church; it must not make us forget the affliction of
Joseph, for that were to provoke God to make those benefits useless unto us,
which did divert us from sympathy with the Church: If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning, or if the Church of God, and
the good of it be not preferred above our own private contentments, it shall be
righteousness with God to turn the means of our private contentment, to be
the means of our private grief: If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave
to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem to my chief joy. 4. To
seek men's favor with the det^iment of any point of Religion, or to consent
unto men's encroachment upon matters of Religion, that we may have their favor,
or that we may be freed from their trouble, or sit at more ease under them, is
to forget God and his Church, and our respects which we owe to God, and to his
Church: as we are taught by the example of the Jews, refusing to sing Psalms
at the Babylonians desire or direction, and expounding their obedience to the
Babylonians in this point, to be nothing else but a forgetting of Jerusalem,
and a denying of their Religion, if they should have yielded.

Verse. 7. Remember, O LORD, the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem: who
said, Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.

8. O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed: happy shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us.

9. Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones agaenst the
stones.

In the imprecation used against the enemies of the Church, and in particular
against their false brethren the Edomites, who helped on their affliction, and
against the Babylonians who were the chief oppressors of them; Learn, 1. False
brethren are the chief instruments of persecution of the true members of the
Church, whenever they find occasion, a^ the Edomites, the posterity of Esau
did prove in the destruction of Jerusalem: Remember, O Lord, the children of
Edom. 2. Whosoever do delight in the Churches calamity, and do endeavor the
Churches ruin by word or deed; by their stirring up of others to afflict them;
or by any oppression which may tend to the Churches prejudice, when the Lord is
visiting her, their sin shall not be forgotten of God in the day, when the
Lord judges his people, but shall be severely punished; Remember, O lord, the
children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem. 3. No less will suffice the
adversaries of the Church then the utter ruin, and rasing of it to the ground;
Who said of Jerusalem, Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof. 4. The
estate of the Church at the worst is better then the estate of Babylon, or any
estate of her adversaries, how prosperous soever, at the best; for albeit the
Church be in captivity and oppressed, yet she shall not be destroyed, but it is
not so with her adversaries: but, O daughter of Babylon, who art to be
destroyed, 5. Faith is neither blinded by the prosperity of the wicked, nor by
the adversity of the Church, but does see through the prospect of the Lords
Word, both her approaching delivery of the Church, and the ruin of her
enemies: for, O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, does show unto
the captive Jews so much. 6. As the enemies of Gods Church have measured out
unto the Lords people, so it shall be measured back again and more, for a
reward unto her adversaries: Happy shall he be that rewards thee, as thou
have served us. 7. There is an happiness, wherein blessedness does not
consist, which neither is a part, or branch of blessedness, nor a proper mark
of blessedness, but only signifies some happiness in the consequence of a
man's work, tending to the glory of God and good of his Church; and such is the
happiness of the Medes, and Persians here spoken of, who, whatsoever were
their corrupt intentions in their war, did work, albeit not as religious
servants, yet as Gods instruments, a good work of justice upon the oppressors
of Gods people, and a good work of delivery of the Lords people: Happy shall he
be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. 8. Albeit it be
a sinful thing to satisfy our carnal affection in the misery of any man; yet
it is lawful in Gods cause to wish that God be glorified, albeit in the
confusion of his enemies: and here great need is to have the heart well guarded
with the fear of God, for wherwise to allow the dashing of little ones against
the stones, might make a man guilty of savage cruelty.

PSALM CXXXVIII.
THis Psalm is David's thanksgiving unto God, and praising of him for the
experience he had of his love and faithfulness. The promise of praise or
thanksgiving, is set down, v. 1. and six reasons are to be subjoyned in the
verses following, which are closed with a prayer in the end of the Psalm.

Verse. 1. I Will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will I sing
praises unto thee. In the promise of praising God; Learn, 1. It is a part of
our thankfulness, to engage our heart to praise God for after-time, when we
find that all the thanks we can give for the present, are short of our duty or
desire to praise him; I will praise thee, says David. 2. As sometimes the
believer will find his heart set at liberty in Gods worship, which at another
time he will find to be in bands, so should he take the opportunity of an
enlarged heart, to run in the way of Gods service, as David does here: I will
praise thee with my whole heart. 3. Albeit the faces of Princes, Rulers, and
Magistrates, use to lay some restraint upon the liberty of speech, which men
use to take before mean persons, and albeit Princes ordinarily love rather to
hear themselves praised by flatterers, then to hear either God or man magnified
in their audience, yet a heart enlarged with the sense of Gods Majesty,
greatness, and goodness, will not stand to confess, and proclaim Gods truth,
greatness and goodness, and other points of his praise, in the audience of
the greatest men on the earth, pu^ case they should think themselves cried
down, and more lightly esteemed of, by this means: Before the Lord will I sing
praise to thee.

Ver. 2. I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy Name, for thy
loving kindness, and for thy truth: for thou have magnified thy Word above all
thy Name. He engages himself also unto the public ordinary worship of God,
according to Gods command, and then gives the reasons of his engagement.
Whence learn, 1. Worshipping of God in secret is indeed necessary, but it is
not sufficient for the man who minds thankfulness to God, except he follow
the public means also, and that after the way which is prescribed by God,
directing all his service to be offered to God through Christ: for this is
imported in David's worshipping toward the Arc, which was placed in the
tabernacle or Temple: I will worship toward the holy Temple, and praise thy
Name. 2. The experience of the Lords kindness and faithfulness in his
promises made to his people, is a lively motive unto believers to praise him: I
will praise thy Name for thy loving kindness, and thy truth. 3. There is more
to be seen and felt in the experience of Gods children, then they could promise
to themselves out of Gods Word: for they find that God in effect is better in
his payment then in his promises, for thus much does this commendation import;
Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name, that is, I have found more
effect in the performance of thy promise, then the promise seemed unto me to
hold forth in thy Name, and this is the first reason of David's engagement unto
thankfulness.

Verse. 3. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me: and strengthenedst me
with strength in my soul. The second reason of his thanksgiving is more
special, because God had upholden him by his inward comfort in the time of his
trouble, and had answered his prayer graciously. Whence learn, 1. The Lord
uses to put his children unto straits before he deliver them, that he may be
seen the more clearly to be their deliverer: for David cried unto the Lord,
before the answer of his ordinary and daily prayer was given unto him; In the
day when I cried, says he. 2. To be supported in trouble, and to have strength
to bear out in trouble till the full delivery come, is a real and remarkable
answer from God to his peoples prayers: In the day when I cried, thou
answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul. 3. Albeit before
the outward and complete delivery come, the passages of Gods secret sustaining
of a man be not well marked, yet when they are looked back upon in the clear
light of accomplished deliverance, the least degrees of delivery and secret
supporting of the man under trouble; will appear clearly to be answerers of
prayer, and begun delivery: as David here observes, and gives account
thereof. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me
with strength in my soul.

Ver. 4. All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O LORD: when they hear
the words of thy mouth.

5. Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the LORD: for great is the glory of
the LORD.

The third reason of his thanksgiving is, because he foreseeth in the Spirit of
prophecy, how great glory and praise, and thanks the Lord shall have, when he
shall convert the Gentiles, and reveal his Word and works unto them. Whence
learn, 1. The foresight of the glory which God shall have in the world before
its end, by the promised propagation of his Gospel, should stir up all who
believe the approaching glory of God, to magnify and praise him in their own
time: for the foresight of the glory of God to be manifested among the
Gentiles* is here the matter of the song of David, and of the Church of the
Jews All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord. 2. When the glory
of the Lord is seen it does overshine all the glory in the world: for Kings
when they see Gods glory, shall fall down and praise God: All the kings of the
earth shall praise thee, O Lord. 3. It is the Word of God mainly which shows
forth the glory of the Lord, and makes his works to be wonderful* All the
kings of the earth shall praise thee, when they hear the words of thy mouth. 4.
Albeit the knowledge of God which comes only by his works, be able to
convince even the Heathen, of the Lords care over his people, and to astonish
them, yet not the knowledge of the Lord which comes by his works, but that
which comes by the hearing of the Word of the Lord, is able to convert a man,
and to make him walk in the obedience of faith, and to rejoice in God, and to
sing his praises cheerfully: When they hear the words of thy mouth, they shall
sing in the ways of the Lord, 5. The glory of the Lord which is manifested in
his Word, is the highest glory which is manifested to the world; for after all
the glory of his works of Creation and Providence, which the Word holds
forth, it shows forth the glory of Gods grace and mercy to the self-condemned
sinner, which mercy to the penitent soul in some re^pect, is above all Gods
works, for in this respect it is here said: Great is the glory of the Lord.

Verse. 6. Though the LORD be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly: but the
proud he knows afar off. A fourth reason of David's thanksgiving and praising
of God, is for his different dealing with the humble and proud. Whence learn,
1. Albeit the Lord be so highly exalted above all the creatures, as it is a
sort of humbling himself to behold his creatures, even in the heavens, yet he
is so good and gracious, that his superlative grandour, does not hinder his
taking notice of the meanest lost sinner, who humbles himself before him:
Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly. 2. The greatness
of the Majesty of God commends his humility, and the Lords looking low for
the good of the poor Supplicant, commends his greatness, and makes it more
lovely: for it is here put for a point of his praise: That though the Lord be
high, yet has he respect unto the lowly. 3. The Lord observes the disposition
of men, who are proud and who are humble before him* for this does the text
point at. 4. The humble do lose nothing by their humility, nor do the proud
gain any thing by their pride, but by the contrary the humble find grace, and
the proud are resisted of God; He has respect to the lowly, but the proud he
knows afar off. 5. Pride excludes a man from access to God, and a proud man
cannot have communion with God: He knows the proud afar off.

Ver. 7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me, thou shall
stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand
shall save me. The sixth reason of his giving thanks and praise unto God, is
his confidence, that whatsoever trouble he shall fall into hereafter by his
enemies, the Lord will sustain him under it, and deliver him out of it Whence
learn, 1. It is a good use of bypast experience, to conceive hope to be helped
of God in time to come: as the example of David here teaches us. 2. Whatsoever
trouble a man has been in, he may fall in as great or greater afterward: yea,
he may possibly be in a comfortless condition, and helpless and hopeless for
any thing can be seen, yea, and be compassed about with trouble on all hands,
yea he may faint under the burden, and be as a dead man: for thus much David
presupposes may be his condition afterward: Though I walk in the midst of
trouble. 3. How great soever, and how many soever straits and difficulties the
believer can forecast and foresee, he may promise to himself as great and a^
many supplies of strength, and deliveries from God: Though I walk in the midst
of troubles, thou will revive me, that is, thou will put new life and comfort
in me. 4. Against the power and wrath of adversaries, Gods power and good will
is a sufficient guard, succor and relief: Thou shall stretch forth thine hand
against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me.

Verse. 8. The LORD will perfect that which concerns me: thy mercy, O LORD,
endures for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands. The sixth reason
of his giving thanks and praise, is his confidence of the Lords constant
continuing with him, and making him to persevere in Gods obedience unto the
end, which he closes with a prayer that he may persevere. Whence learn, 1. The
believers heart cannot be quiet, till it be sure of perseverance, and of this
he may be made assured: for the same Spirit of grace which has made him see
the Lords engagement for him in time past, can give certainty of the continuing
of Gods grace in time to come; The Lord will perfect that which concerns me:
He finds a work of Gods love to him already begun, and then gathers hence
that the Lord will perf^ct that work of grace which he has begun 2 The believer
does not build his hope of perseverance upon any strength or constancy in
himself, but upon the unchangeablenesse of Gods eve^lasting mercy, as here
David shows unto us: The Lord will perfect that which concerns me, why? and
upon what ground is he so confident? Thy mercy, O Lord, endures for ever. 3.
True assurance of perseverance must be joined with the sense of a man's own
weakness and unworthiness, and ill deserving, (if God should deal wi^h him in
justice) yea, it must be joined with dependence upon God in faith and prayer,
and use of the means; for such was the assurance which David had, who after
that he has said, The Lord will perfect that which concerns me, subjoyneth,
forsake not the work of thine own hands, which imports so much. 4. Faith has
always for its own strengthening to make use of all bonds betwixt God and it
self as a creature, and in special as a new creature, that seeing his calling
and gifts are without repentance, he would make out the work of grace and
salvation, where he has begun it, as David teaches us: Forsake not the work
of thy own hands.

PSALM CXXXIX.
DAvid being wickedly slandered and persecuted by his adversaries, finds his
zeal kindled against them: and l^st his own hearts corruption should deceive
him, as being carnal in this matter, he presents his heart unto God, the
all-seeing and every-where-present Judge of the secrets of all hearts* and he
presents also his adversaries both persons and cause, with his own carriage
toward them to be tried by God, praying that himself may be directed toward
life everlasting.

In the first place, the Omniscience of God is declared, v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
In the next, the Omnipresence of God, with his Omniscience is set forth, v. 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12. In the third place, the reason is given of Gods so exact
knowledge of all the secrets of his heart, because the Lord did form and
fashion him, in so wonderfully wise and powerful a way, as he could neither
express nor comprehend, v. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. In the fourth place, he
confesses to God his judgment of wicked men, and his hatred of their ways,
making God, who is the searcher of hearts, Witness and Judge of his sincerity:
Corrector and Director of his course toward everlasting life, v. 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24.

Verse. 1. O LORD, thou have searched me, and known me.

Ver. 2. Thou know my downe-sitting, and mine uprising: thou understandest
my thought afar off.

3. Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my
ways.

4. For there is not a word in my tongue: but lo, O LORD, thou know it
altogether.

5. Thou have beset me behind and before: and laid thine hand upon me.

6. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it.

In his acknowledging of Gods Omniscience, and perfect knowledge of every thing
in him, and in his betaking himself unto God, for clearing of him, comforting
of him, and bearing him through all calumnies and reproaches: Learn, 1 The
godly may sometimes be so overclouded with calumnies and reproaches, as they
cannot find a way to clear themselves before men, but must content and comfort
themselves with the testimony of a good conscience, and with Gods approbation of
their integrity, as here David does, saying, O Lord, thou have searched me and
known me. 2. As the knowledge which the Lord has of us is most accurate,
having, as it were, a perfect searching joined with it: so the belief of this
point is necessarily to be applied to our selves, that it may rule our
conversation, breed us comfort and peace, and confidence in our approaches unto
God, whosoever be against us, as David's example here does teach us. 3. The Lord
is acquainted with all the motions of the external man, the meanest gesture of
the body falls under his cognition and observation: Thou know my
down-sitting and my uprising. 4. What advisements we are upon, what
consultations and deliberations we are about, the Lord knows all perfectly
before we conclude any thing: Thou understandest my thoughts afar off. 5. The
Lord does not only observe our aim and scope, but also how we purpose to
convey out matters, and how we go on and proceed in accomplishing of our
purposes, what rule we follow or reject, from the morning to the evening: Thou
compassest my path, and my lying down. 6. The Lord knows us so well as the
best knowledge which our entire friend can have of us, with whom we do
communicate our mind, and who knows all our design and way to go about it,
is but a shadowing similitude of Gods knowledge of us: Thou art acquainted with
all my ways. 7. There is not a word which we speak, either idle or to purpose,
but the Lord considers it perfectly: For there is not a word in o^r tongue,
but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. 8. We are so enclosed within the
view of Gods beholding of us, and so compassed by his providence, and so
powerfully ruled by his power, as we cannot turn this way or that way, but we
are still in his sight, and under his disposing of us, as he sees fit: Thou
have beset me behind and before, and laid thy hand upon me. 9. The knowledge
which God has of us and of our ways, is so particular and perfect, so far
above our capacity, as we cannot comprehend the manner of it: Such knowledge is
too wonderful for me. 10. When we are about to look upon Gods perfections, we
should observe our own imperfections, and thereby learn to be the more modest
in our searching of Gods unsearchable perfection: Such knowledge, says David,
is too high for me, I cannot attain unto it. 11. Then do we see most of God,
when we see him incomprehensible, and do see our selves swallowed up in the
thoughts of his perfection, and are forced to fall in admiration of God, as
here, Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain unto
it.

Verse. 7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit: or whither shall I flee from thy
presence?

8. If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell,
behold, thou art there.

9. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
sea,

10. Even there shall thine hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me.

11. If I say* Surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be
light about me.

12. Yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day:
the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

In David's setting forth the Lords Omnipresence and Omniscience to be such, as
he cannot escape his sight and power; Learn, 1. The right making use of Gods
all-seeing providence, and every where presence is, to consider our duty to
walk before God, as in his sight always, and not to seek to hide our selves,
or our counsel from him* as David does here: Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence? 2. Whosoever walk in the
darkness of their own devices, and misregard God in their ways, as if they
might escape his sight, or eschew his hand, are much mistaken: for there is no
place of refuge from his pursuing; Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or
whither shall I flee from thy presenec? 3. Neither men's presumption and
blessing of themselves in courses not allowed by God, nor their estimatinn of
high prefe^ment in Church or State, (which are a sort of a man's lifting up
himself to heaven,) can avail a man, when he comes to be tried before God; If
I ascend to heaven, thou art there: where fugitives from God cannot h^ve place.
4. A man's base condition and meannesse in the world, or his desperate
resolution to perish, provided he can have his will for a time, yea, his
desperate dispatching himself, when he is incurably miserable, will not avail a
man, nor carry him through: for God fastening the man in the misery which he
has resolved to endure, will make him find that he has too sore a party: If
I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. 5. Changing from place to plaee,
and fleeing from one country to another, or going to such solitary places
where no man resorteth, cannot deliver a man from Gods pursuing and overtaking
of him; If I take the wings of the morning, and dw^ll in the uttermost parts of
the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.
6. Whithersoever a man shall go, he must be furnished with power and strength
from God to go thither: for, there shall thy hand lead me, imports so much.
7. Gods power and justice shall ever be a man's master, go whithersoever he
shall go; Thy right hand shall hold me. 8. The fugitive sinner has many
devices in his head, to elude Gods sight and justice, and all to deceive
himself, and will run from one shift to another, before he turn himself to
God; and his thoughts of Gods presence are so gross, as amongst other
thoughts, to think himself hid in the night from God, but in all, poor fool, he
is deceived; for if I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me, even the night
shall be light about me; yea, the darkness hides not from thee, bus the night
shines as the day, the darkness and the night are both alike to thee.

Verse. 13. For thou have possessed my reins: thou have covered me in my
mothers womb.

14. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: mavelous
are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

15. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and
curiously wrought in the lonest parts of the earth.

16. Thine eyes did see my substance yet being unperfect, and in thy book all
my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned: when as yet there
was none of them.

17. How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God: how great is the sum
of them?

18. If I should count them, they are more in number then the sand: when I
awake, I am still with thee.

In the third place, where the Psalmist gives a reason of Gods exact knowledge
of, and power over him, because he has formed him in the belly wonderfully;
Learn, 1. In regard that God has made us in the womb, and we live, and move,
and subsist by his power, it is not possible that God should not know our
words, works and thoughts and all, and have us always in his sight and under
his power: For thou have possessed my reins, thou have covered me in my
mothers womb. 2. The knowledge of God, and his Government of the creature, is
not like a man's, who sets himself for a while on this object, and then
turns off to another object, but Gods Knowledge and Government is a settled
possessing of his own workmanship, by a constant beholding, by a settled ruling
of his work, by a constant maintaining and judging of the most secret motion of
a man's spirit: For thou have possessed my reins, thou have covered me in my
mothers womb. 3. The Lord in framing our bodies in our mothers womb, did
cover his tender work with his mighty power from all inconveniences, as with a
shield: Thou have covered me in my mothers womb. 4. The right sight of Gods
workmanship in our very bodies, will force us to praise Gods unspeakable
wisdom: I will praise thee, for I am fearfully made. 5. When God is seen in his
glory in any thing, his majesty becomes terrible to the beholder, his glory is
so bright; I am fearfully made. 6. As the Lords rare works, without
consideration, look upon a man very common like, so his common works being well
considered, become very wonderful: I am wonderfully made. 7. The right sight of
any one of Gods works, gives light in all his works, to show them all
wondrous: Mavelous are thy works. 8. The consideration of Gods work in our
bodies well digested, is profitable for our soul: And that my soul knows
right well. 9. As the Lord does acqu^int us with his works, we should observe
them well, and bear witness to what we observe for his glory, as David does,
saying, And that my soul knows right well. 10. In the framing of our bodies
God knows what he is making, neither darkness nor distance of heaven from
earth, nor any other impediment, does hinder him in his working: My substance
was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret. 11. The making of a man's body
of so many bones, arteries, veins, sinews, etc. is a most curious piece of
work; I was curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. 12. God sees
things before they be made, and his purpose to make has no less clearness of
kn^wledge of the thing to be made, then the subsistence of it when it is made
can give; and God in his decree to do, knows the thing to be done, as fully
as when it is done: Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being imperfect, and
in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned,
when as yet there was none of them. 13. The Lords decrees of things to be done,
are so clear, so determinate, so certain, as if the description and history of
the thing already come to pass were written in a book: for so much does the
comparison taken from a written book to show the nature of Gods decrees,
Import; In thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. 14. There is rare wisdom to be
learned out of Gods decrees and works; How precious are thy thoughts unto me?
15. What pains a man takes in the searching thereof, is well recompensed with
pleasure and profit, as David's experience does teach. 16. We should study this
wisdom till we find it sweet, and then lay it up as a precious jewel in our
mind, when we have found it: How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O
God? 17. All Gods revealed decrees, are the matter of the believers comfort and
his joy, how harsh soever they seem to the unbeliever and unrenewed man; How
precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God? 18. The particulars of Gods
purpose and decreed will toward his own children, which from time to time do
come to light, as they are revealed by the daily execution of them, are
innumerable; How great is the sum of them? if I should count them, they are
more in number then the sand. 19. Albeit the most vigilant of the Saints
sometimes fall in drowsinesse and sleepiness of Spirit, that they cannot
perceive Gods presence with them, and care of them, and love unto them, yet
when the Lord wakeneth up their souls, and renews their spiritual senses,
they are forced to see and acknowledge that the Lord does never leave them,
even when they least perceive his presence: For, when I awake, I am still with
thee, does import all this.

Ver. 19. Surely thou will slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore ye
bloody men.

20. For they speak against thee wickedly: and thine enemies take thy Name in
vain.

In the last place, he confesses his judgment of, and affection toward his
adversaries, and offers all to be searched and approved of God, and himself
to be directed thereafter unto life everlasting: and first, he shows his
judgment of his adversaries, and the reason of his abhorring the fellowship of
their courses. Whence learn, 1. Where we perceive wickeddesse to reign, there
we may be assured destruction will follow: Surely, thou will slay the wicked, O
God. 2. When we do pass our judgment of men's persons and courses, we had need
to conform our judgment unto what we know the Lord will allow as here the
Psalmist does, directing his speech to God, 3. When the Lord will comfort his
servants under persecution, he will let them see not only their own blessedness
in himself, but also the destruction of their enemies approaching, as here we
see. 4. When we see destruction attending upon the way wherein others are
walking, we ought to keep off from fellowship with their unfruitful works or
darkness: for otherwise whatsoever duties any special relations do call for at
our hands, David was very observant of them toward his greatest enemies* but he
separated from them only as wicked and as bloody, and as they were on a course
of perdition; Depart from me therefore ye bloody men. 5. When we have a
controversy with the wicked, we should take heed that private spleen do not
rule us, but that only our in^erest in Gods quarrel with them does move us, as
the Psalmist does here: For they speak against thee wickedly. 6. What the
wicked do or speak against Gods servants for righteousness sake, it is against
God in effect; They speak against thee, and are thy enemies. 7. Such as
profess themselves to be the people of God, and yet do persecute the godly
unjustly, under the color of law, or some specious pretenses, do in effect
take Gods Name in vain: Thine enemies take thy Name in vain.

Ver. 21. Do not I hate them, O LORD, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with
those that rise up against thee?

22. I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.

After declaring his judgment of his enemies, he professes his hatred to
their persons, qualified with wickedness, as is said Whence learn, 1. There
are some men, who beside the common enmity which is in all men against God, do
oppose themselves in an eminent way against God and godliness, as haters of
God; for this the text does presuppose. 2. Such as are perceived open enemies
unto God, we may lawfully hate them, without breach of the law of love: for the
love which we owe unto God absolutely, gives warrant to hate them who oppose
God comparatively: Do not I hate them that hate thee? 3. Injuries done against
God, should touch and affect us, no less nearly then injuries done to our
selves; And am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? 4. When God
is injured by our enemies, we had great need to look to the sincerity of our
affection, that our hatred against them, and our zeal for God and his truth be
upright, so as we may say with David, I hate them with a perfect hatred, I
count them mine enemies.

Ver. 23. Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts.

24. And see if there be any wicked way in me: and lead me in the way
everlasting.

When David has searched himself, and is approved of his own conscience, he
offers himself over again to be searched by God. Whence learn, 1. As we have
need to try our zeal, when Gods quarrel and our interest are joined, that
there be not some dregs of our ill humors mixed therewith: so must we not rest
upon the testimony of our own conscience in this case, but must offer our heart
to be searched of God, over and over again, and must entreat him to purge us of
every corrupt mixture, as David does; Scarch me, O God, and know my heart, try
me, and know my thoughts. 2. He had need to be sincere in all his ways, who
craveth Gods approbation in any one of his ways, for if a man be corrupt in
any of his ways, he may deceive his own heart in all other of his ways: this
does David import, when he says, And see if there be any wicked way in me. 3.
Every wicked way, is a way of grief, trouble and sorrow: for so imports the
name given to it in the original. 4. The good way allowed of God, is a lasting
way appointed of God of old, and will be approved by him for ever: Lead me in
the way everlasting. 5 We cannot walk in the ways of God, without his actual
and effectual leading of us therein, beside his direction given in common by
his Word; and therefore we had need to pray with David, Lead me in the way
everlasting.

PSALM CXL.
DAvid, being pursued for his life, and loaded with false calumnies of wicked
men, prays, First, for deliverance from them, v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Secondly, prays against them, v. 8, 9, 10, 11. Thirdly, declares the Lords
gracious answer, v. 12, 13.

Ver. 1. DEliver me, O LORD, from the evil man: preserve me from the violent
man.

2. Which imagine mischiefs in their heart: continually are they gathered
together for war.

3. They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under
their lips. Selah.

In his prayer for deliverance; First, he requesteth for preservation from
their cruel devices and slanders, v. 1, 2, 3. Then repeateth his prayer for
preservation from the present danger^ wherein he was, by reason of the snares
laid for him, v. 4, 5. Thirdly, he repeateth his petition, with some special
grounds of confidence and hope to be relieved, v. 6.

From the first request; Learn, That most innocent and godly men, by the
calumnies of the wicked, are sometimes cast in great dangers, whence they see
no appearance of deliverance, for clearing their name, or saving of their life,
except God find it out: and in this case God is and should be their refuge;
Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man. 2. How wicked soever, how violent soever
the enemies of Gods children be, God can rescue his servants out of their
hands: Preserve me from the violent man. 3. Such as not only in fit of passion,
but also in cold blood, resolve to do mischief to the godly, may justly be
esteemed evil men, violent men, for so are they here described; Which imagine
mischief in their hearts. 4. When wicked men have devised what they can by
themselves against the righteous, they cannot trust their own wits, as able to
make the plot fast, except they consult one with another frequently, that they
may join their counsels and their forces together, to make the snare sure;
Continually they are gathered together for war. 5. That wicked men may the
better carry on their design against the godly, they possess the simple
people with prejudices of them, devising and spreading false lies, and bloody
calumnies of them, contrived with great cunning, and made very probable in
appearance, lest any should pity them, when they are cut off; They have
sharpenyd their tongue like a serpent. 6. When the wicked have vented deadly
lies of the godly, they have in readiness new slanders and capital crimes to
charge them with falsely: Adders poison is under their lips.

Ver. 4. Keep me, O LORD, from the hands of the wicked: preserve me from the
violent man, who have purposed to overthrow my goings.

5. The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by the
way-side: they have se^ grinnes for me. Selah.

In his repeated petition for pr^servation; Learn, 1. It will not suffice the
wicked to defame the godly, and murder them in heart and tongue, but also they
seek to have them in their grips, except God interpose himself for their
safety: Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked. 2. The desperate
resolution of the wicked to overcome the godly, must not discourage the godly,
but sharpen their prayer: Preserve me from the violent man, who have purposed
to overthrow my goings. 3. Hunters and Fowlers did never go more cunningly to
work, by snares, nets and traps to catch their prey, then the wicked go about
to have the advantage of the godly, to bring their life under their power: The
proud have laid a snare for me and cords, they have spread a net by the
way-side, they have set grinnes for me.

Ver. 6. I said unto the LORD, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my
supplications, O LORD.

7. O GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation: thou have covered my head in
the day of battle.

In the repeating of his petition the third time, with reasons of hope to be
helped; Learn, 1. The malice of men should move the believer to make use of
Gods favor and friendship, and of the Covenant with him, I said unto the Lord,
Thou art my God. 2. The claim which faith lays unto God, should proceed from
a fixed purpose, to stand to its right and interest it has in God: I said unto
the Lord, Thou art my God. 3. When faith finds the Covenant fixed, then
prayer finds vent, and the man pours forth his desire with hope, as here:
Hear the voice of my supplication, O Lord. 4. When misbelief does present to
the godly the greatness of the danger, the man's own weakness, and the power
of the adversary, faith should present, in opposition to these, the strength
of God and his power for salvation, as engaged by Covenant to the behoof of the
believer: O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation. 5. As present straits
should bring to mind bygone dangers and deliverances, so bygone experience
of delivery should strengthen faith for the present: for this use David makes
of his present and bygone exercise. 6. In time of danger God uses to
interpose himself, for the preservation of his own servant, more nearly and
closely, then a helme^ cleaves to a man's head in the day of battle, and does
ward off a blow better, then any piece of armor can do, as David's experience
teaches; Thou have covered my head in the day of battle.

Ver. 8. Grant not, O LORD, the desires of the wicked: further not his wicked
device, lest they exalt themselves. Selah.

9. As for the head of those that compass me about: let the mischief of their
own lips cover them.

10. Let burning coals fall upon them, let them be cast into the fire: into
deep pits, that they rise not up again.

11. Let not an evil Speaker be established in the earth: evil shall hunt the
violent man to overthrow him.

In the second part of the Psalm, wherein he prays against his enemies;
Learn, 1. God can overthrow all the devices of the wicked, and the wicked can
effect nothing against the godly, except God grant them their desire; for so
much does this prayer import: Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked. 2.
The prayer of the godly against the plots of the wicked, has more power to
overturn them, then the wicked have wit or strength to promote them; Further
not his wicked device. 3. When one of the wicked finds success in his wicked
devices, all of them grow proud, and do misken God for that cause: Furrher not
his wicked device, lest they exalt themselves. 4. God will not give always
success unto the wicked oppressors of his people, were there no other reason
for it but this one, to crush the pride of his enemies* and to make it cease;
Further not his wicked device, lest they exalt themselves. 5. What mischief the
wicked have threatened to bring upon the godly, shall fall upon themselves, and
bitter as gall shall their part be, (as the Word will suffer in the Original,)
who are chief Ringleaders of the pe^^^^ution of the godly: As for the head of
them that compass me about, let the mischief of their own lips cover them. 6.
The overthrow of the wicked shall come upon them, as the ruin of a wall
covering them and smothering them: Let mischief cover them; their torment shall
be piercing and intolerable, like the perdition of Sodom; Let burning coals
fall upon them; no escaping for them, Let them be cast into the fire; no
getting out of the torment, no recovery for them: Let them be cast into deep
pits, that they rise not again. 7. Backbiters and Calumniators shall not only
be debarred from heaven, but also Gods curse shall follow them on earth, and
not suffer them nor their posterity to enjoy quiet prosperity in the world: Let
not an evil Speaker be eshablished in the earth. 8. When oppression has cried
to God against the oppressor, it is sent forth as a Sergeant to follow him at
the heels wherever he go, till it overtake him, and throw him headlong into
destruction: Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him.

Verse. 12. I know that the LORD will maintain the cause of the afflicted: and
the right of the poor.

13. Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy Name: the upright shall
dwell in thy presence.

In the third part of the Psalm, is the answer of the Psalmists prayer, in a
comfortable persuasion of Gods maintaining of his persecuted children, and
delivering of his own afflicted servants out of all their troubles. Whence
learn, 1. Whosoever shall persecute and oppress the righteous, shall find God
their Party, joined in the cause with the afflicted: The Lord will maintain the
cause of the afflicted. 2. The faith of Gods assistance is a sufficient comfort
to the godly, to uphold them till the deliverance come, and this persuasion God
uses to give to his persecuted servants for their upholding; I know that the
Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted. 3. The main thing which the
Lords servants do care for, is their cause and their right, that whatsoever
they shall suffer, their cause may go free and be justified: and this the Lord
does secure here: The Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the
right of the poor. 4. Whatsoever hardship the godly do meet with in their
exercise, joy and deliverance shall close their troubles, and whatsoever prayer
and mourning they shall be driven unto by persecution, praise and thanksgiving
shall be the last part of their trial; and this the Lord will have his people
persuaded of: Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy Name. 5.
Whatsoever imperfections the believer shall find in himself, yet his upright
and sincere dealing with God, by the daily acknowledgement of what is amiss in
him, and by his making use of the remedy held forth in the Gospel, shall prove
him to be a righteous man; for the righteous and the upright man here is one.
6. Beside all the comfortable blinks of Gods kindness in this world, granted
to the believer, he has assurance of perseverance, and of everlasting
fellowship with God: The upright shall dwell in thy presen^e.

PSALM. CXLI.
THe Psalmist, being in distress by the malicious persecution of his
adversaries, prays for relief, and for a holy carriage under his trouble;
till his own full delivery, and till his enemies destruction should come. The
petitions are seven: the first is general, for acceptance of his person, and
granting of his prayer, v. 1, 2. The next is, for direction of his speeches, v.
3. The third is, for guiding of his heart and actions, v. 4. The fourth is, for
the benefit of the fellowship of the Saints, by their wholesome counsel and
admonition, v. 5. with the reasons thereof, v. 6, 7. The fifth is, for the
comfort of spiritual communion with God, v. 8. The sixth is, for preservation
from the plots of the enemies, v. 9. The seventh is, for the overthrow of his
enemies, v. 10.

Verse. 1. LORD, I cry unto thee, make haste unto me: give ear unto my voice
when I cry unto thee.

2. Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense: and the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice.

In the first petition, which is general, for granting of his prayer, and
accepting of his person in his prayer; Learn, 1. Mi^-beliefe does seek many
ways for delivery from trouble, but faith has but one way, to go to God, to
wit, by prayer, for whatsoever is needful: Lord, I cry unto thee. 2. Present
danger, or long continuance of trouble, does put an edge upon the devotion of
the believer: Lord, I cry unto thee. 3. Albeit the godly dare not set a time
to God when he shall come, yet they may declare the strait they find
themselves in, and what need they have of speedy help: Make haste unto me. 4.
As it is an ordinary tentation suggested to the godly in the time of trouble,
when they pray and do not receive answer, that their supplication is
mis-regarded: so should it be repelled by renewing of our petition so often as it
is offered, as this example teaches; Give ear unto my voice, when I cry unto
thee. 5. The prayer of Gods children, is very sweet smelled and acceptable to
God, through the mediation of Christ, as the ceremonial offering of incense,
and sacrifice (whereunto David here does allude, did signify: Let my prayer be
set forth before thee, as incense; and the lifting up of my hands, as the
evening sacrifice. 6. Our prayers unto God should be joined with
submissivenesse of spirit, self-denial and hopeful dependence on God: for so
much does the gesture of lifting up of the hands in prayer of its own nature
signify, and therefore here the gesture is put for the prayer, which should be
joined with such an inward disposition; Let the lifting up of my hands be as
evening sacrifice.

Verse. 3. Set a watch (O LORD) before my mouth: keep the door of my lips. In
the second petition, which is more special, for direction of his speeches;
Learn, 1. The godly in their trouble, especially by persecution, are under
tentation to hurt their own cause by unadvised and passionate speeches: for
this does the prayer import. 2. As words of passion from our muddy affection,
are ready to break out in time of trouble, so should we in the sense of our own
inablity to suppress them, entreat God to bridle our tongue, that nothing
break forth to his dishonor, Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth* keep the
door of my lips.

Verse. 4. Incline not mine heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works
with men that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties. In the
third petition, for guiding of his heart, and actions; Learn, 1. The godly are
subject also to another tentation under persecution, to be driven to some
unlawful way of revenge or some sinful compliance with the wicked, either by
terror or allurement, as this petition does import. 2. The holiest of Gods
servants have reason to pray unto God, Lead us not into tentation, when they
consider that their daily sinning, may open a door to justice, to give over
their hearts, for a time, to its own natural wicked inclination: for in the
sense of this danger, David prays; Incline not my heart to any evil thing. 3.
As to meet injuries with injuries, is not a means to be rid out of trouble,
but a means to involve us in further trouble: so also to comply with workers
of iniquity, for fear of danger from them, is not a means to eschew trouble,
but rather a means to draw down Gods wrath: Incline not my heart to any evil
thing, to practice wicked works with them that work iniquity. 4. As the Lord is
the only Sovereigne over the heart, in whose hand the heart is, to turn it
where he pleases, so will he being entreated by prayer, set it right; Incline
not my heart to any evil thing. 5. The present pleasure and commodity of
sin, is in high estimation with the sinner, and much sweeter to him then what
he may lawfully enjoy; The pleasures of sin are his delicates. 6. No man can
keep himself from being taken with the allurements of a sinful course, except
the Lord preserve him: Let me not eat of their dainties. 7. The holies^ men in
Scripture, have been most sensible of the impotency of their own free will, and
inability to resist tentations, or to bring forth the habits of grace unto
action; most diffident of themselves, most dependant upon God, most careful to
make use of means, and conscientious in following of ordinances, as their
prayers do testify: Incline not my heart to any evil thing, let me not eat of
their dainties.

Verse. 5. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head: for
yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities. The fourth petition, is for
the benefit of the communion of Saints, wherein David perceiving the mischief
which unhappy flatterers about the King, procured to the King, and to the godly
in the land, he prays to God, to grant him such godly men about him, as would
never consent to any wrong deed of his, but would dissuade him, dissent from
him, yea, reprove and rebuke him rather, if need were; which sort of friendly
smiting of him, he promises shall be most acceptable to him: and for this, he
gives four reasons: the first whereof is, because he had so much love to his
enemies as to pity them in their calamities, and to pray for them. Whence
learn, 1. As flatterers are a plague to Princes, especially when they are upon
unjust courses: so righteous and faithful admonishers of us, in whatsoever
place we are in, are a notable blessing, and worthy to be prayed for: Let the
righteous smite me. 2. According as a man does hate sin, and love
righteousness, so he hates flattery, and loves to be freely dealt with, and
reproved or admonished: for it is the love of righteousness, and hatred of
sin, which makes David say, Let the righteous smite me. 3. No man is so
far mortified, but a reproof will be a wound to his proud flesh: Let the
righteous smite me. 4. Free dealing and plain reproof, is a fruit of love
unfeigned: Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness. 5. As most
precious oil is to the body, so is the counsel, admonition, and reproof of
the righteous to the soul: for the fruit of both is health and gladness; Let
him reprove me; it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head.
6. The godly when they are persecuted, need not to seek private revenge: for
calamities do abide their persecutors, which they by faith in Gods Word, may
clearly foresee, as David here does presuppose unquestionably, that their
calamities were coming: My prayer shall be in their calamities. 7. The Lords
children should be so far from private revenge, and so ready to come off that
course, if they be tempted to it, that they should keep so much love to their
adversaries, as may make them discharge all commanded duties toward them, as
David here is disposed, whose words import thus much, if I were set upon
private revenge, Lord let me find a friend to hinder me, because I resolve to
follow the duties of commanded love toward mine adversaries: For yet my prayer
also shall be in their calamities. And this is the first reason of the fourth
petition.

Verse. 6. When their judges are overthrown in stony places: they shall hear my
words, for they are sweet. The second reason is, from his purpose to deal with
the simple people, (who now did persecute him, by the misleading of their
corrupt Rulers) as with his kindly subjects, disciples or children; and does
hope to find them tractable: Whence learn, 1. Difference must be put between
ring leaders in an evil course, and those that follow it in simplicity; for so
does the Prophet here put difference betwixt the people, and their corrupt and
wicked Judges. 2. Wicked Rulers and mis-leaders of people, shall be fearfully
punished, as they who are cast down from a steep place, and fall among stones;
Their judges shall be overthrown in stony places. 3. Misled people should be
kindly entertained, and instructed in the truth of Gods Word, as disciples and
children, so soon as the Lord does offer opportunity: When their judges shall
be overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my words. 4. As the doctrine of
grace and godliness is sweet and pleasant in it self, so should it be
esteemed of by the preachers, and so recommended to the people, and so handled
in the way of preaching of it, as it may be acknowledged by the people to be
such; and this shall be, if with the deciphering of sin and the curse, the
remedy constantly be holden forth in Christ; if with the doctrine of all moral
duties, people be directed to draw strength to obey them from Christ, and to
seek to have their service acceptable through Christ; for thus shall the words
of the Lord be both pleasant and profitable to people: This course did David
resolve, They shall hear my words, for they are sweet.

Ver. 7. Our bones are scattered at the grave mouth: as when one cutteth and
cleaves wood upon the earth. This is a third reason, not only of the fourth
petition, but also, and mainly of the whole prayer, for comfort and delivery
from persecution, wherein many of the Lords Priests were slain, and many
others of David's friends were undone, and no more regard had of their lives and
bones, then the hewer of wood has regard to the chips which fall off in
hewing: wherein David and his followers, were a type of Christ, and of his
followers, whose persecution is here represented, and Prophesied of. Whence
learn, 1. Albeit the death of the Lords servants be dear unto him, yet their
lives, and the burial of their bones, are no more regarded by the wicked, then
so many chips of wood, which the hewer of wood heweth off with his axe: Our
bones are scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth and cleaves wood
upon the earth. 2. When Christ's subjects are so entertained, (as here is set
forth) their case being presented unto God, has no small force to draw down
delivery, and to bring a change of the affairs of their foes, as the force of
the reason annexed unto the prayer does teach.

Verse. 8. But mine eyes are unto thee, O GOD the Lord: in thee is my trust,
leave not my soul destitute. The fourth reason of the petition, relating mainly
to the prayer for delivery: after which is subjoyned the fifth petition,
including the substance of all his prayer. Whence learn, 1. How great soever
the darkness of his calamities may be, and how thick soever the clouds of
present trouble are, to hide from us the Lords care of us, and his loving
kindness unto us, yet faith must look, and pierce through them all unto God,
and to his power and constancy of truth and love: But mine eyes are unto thee.
2. Whenever faith turns it self toward the Lord, it sees sufficiency in
God to help, as the man has need: Mine eyes are toward thee, O God the Lord.
3. As it is good to believe in God in time of greatest straites, so it is good
to avow our belief before God, and to observe this for our further
strengthening, that we have obtained mercy to believe, as here David does; Mine
eyes are toward thee: in thee is my trust. 4. A soul which has God for a
covering of protection and comfort, has also every condition it can be in,
well seasoned: but the soul that lacks this governing, is bare and naked, and
destitute, without guard against any evil which may fall upon it: against this
evil we have great need to pray, Leave not my soul destitute. And this is the
fifth petition in this prayer.

Verse. 9. Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me: and the grinnes
of the workers of iniquity. The sixth petition, is to be saved from the privy
plots, which his enemies had laid against him. Whence learn, 1. The adversaries
of Gods people, or persecutors of the righteous for righteousness, are workers
of iniquity, let them pretend unto godliness, laws, or justice, as they
please, for so are they here described* 2. Persecutors of the righteous, use
not to go so openly to work, as to persecute them directly for righteousness,
but do make plausible laws and statutes, which may seem reasonable to the
world, and yet such laws as the godly cannot without sin obey, and so their
commands do ensnare the godly, as here they are called, snares and grinnes. 3.
From the plots of persecutors, and in special from iniquity established by a
law, none can deliver the godly so, as they shall neither sin nor suffer the
penalty, except God alone: Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me,
and the grinnes of the workers of iniquity.

Verse. 10. Let the wicked fall into their own nets: whilst that I withal
escape. The seventh petition is, as for his own delivery, so also for the
overthrow of obstinate enemies, who cannot be reclaimed. Whence learn, 1. The
prayers against persecutors which are dited to the penmen of the Scripture, are
prophecies of their punishment, and decrees whereunto the Church may subscribe
in the general: and this prayer is one among the rest. 2. When the persecutors
do lay plots and snares against the righteous, they lay plots against
themselves; and there is no need of another plot for their ruin, save that
which is of their own devising: Let the wicked fall into their own net. 3. It
is not unusual to see the overthrow of persecutors, and the delivery of the
righteous, wrought by one and the self-same means, and brought about at one
time: Let the wicked fall into their own net, whilst that I withal escape.

PSALM CXLII. Maschil of David, etc.
THis Psalm does show what was David's exercise, when he was in the cave of one
of the mountains of Engedi, (1 Samuel 24.) flying from Saul: wherein he first
sets down his betaking of himself to prayer in general, v. 1, 2. Secondly,
the straits wherein he was for the time, v. 3, 4. Thirdly, what was the special
petitions of his prayer, with the reasons thereof, v. 5, 6, 7.

From the inscription; Learn, 1. That when the Lord does put any of his
children in straites and difficulties, he is providing instruction, and wise
direction unto them, and to others, by the means, for this danger brings
forth a Psalm of instruction: Maschil of David. 2. The profit which follows,
upon sharp exercises, is able to recompense all the pains whereunto they are
put in trouble, as this particular instance does show. 3. It is wisdom for us
to mark the special dangers wherein we fall, and how we have behaved our selves
therein, and to see what use we should make thereof, as this example of David's
calling to mind of the danger he was in, in the cave, does teach us.

Verse. 1. I Cried unto the LORD with my voice: With my voice unto the LORD did
I make my supplication.

2. I poured out my complaint before him: I showed before him my trouble.

In the setting down of his exercise in this danger, and how he made God his
refuge by prayer; Learn, 1. The grace of God can so calm a man's mind, in the
deepest danger of present death, as he may confidently put up his desire for
delivery; and no danger can be so desperate, but a man may by prayer be
delivered out of it, one way or other, as David's experience teaches: I cried
unto the Lord, says David, being in the cave, half buried as in a grave, Saul
and his host being at the mouth of it. 2. He that is acquainted with God, and
haunteth his presence by prayer, ordinarily will find a ready way to go to
God, in an extraordinary danger, whereof David in this difficulty, shows his
experience. 3. The uttering of right words, with the voice in prayer, in the
time of perplexity, is a work of faith, presuppose there were so much inward
confusion and multitude of thoughts in the mind, as might call in question
whether the supplication of so perplexed a mind could be an acceptable prayer:
therefore David twice mentions the uttering of his voice: I cried with my
voice, with my voice. 4. It is a sweet mercy to have grace to pray to God, and
is not only profitable for the present, but also the memory of this mercy is
refreshfull afterward, as experience here does show. 5. It may be an ease to
our mind, when we are full of perplexity, and grief and fear, to tell the Lord
what aileth us: I poured out my complaint before him. 6. To present our
confusion and perplexity and trouble of mind, to be looked upon by God, and to
be read by him, is a real prayer or supplication; I showed before him my
trouble.

Ver. 3. When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my path:
in the way wherein I walked, have they privily laid a snare for me.

4. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know
me, refuge failed my: no man cared for my soul.

The strait wherein David was, did make his wit to fail him, that he knew not
what to do: for albeit his cause and carriage in it was approved of God, yet
his enemies hunted him so hard, as they had very nigh catched him in the snare;
his soldiers who were with him fainted, and were ready to shift for
themselves, and to render up David, if the army had approached to the cave, no
man cared for his life, none would stand to his defense. Whence learn, 1.
Trouble and danger in extremity, do put a man's wit on work to think upon all
means of possible delivery, and when none can be found, the mind is involved
in perplexity, and falls down as it were in a swoon: My spirit was
overwhelmed within me. 2. Whatsoever danger we may fall into, it is good that
our cause and carriage be such as God will allow: This was David's advantage
here, When my spirit was overwhelmed with in me, then thou know my path,
that is, thou approvedst my part, who was unjustly pursued. 3. How innocently
so ever we behave our selves, yet persecutors will not cease to hunt us, till
they take us in the snare, if they can: In the way wherein I walked have they
privily laid a snare for me. 4. When great straites do come, wordly friends and
all who may be in danger for helping of us: will readily forsake us: and this
is the lot of Christ and his servants, who in suffering for righteousness, are
left alone without all comfort or encouragement from men: I looked on my right
hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me; no
man cared for my soul. 5. It is lawful for a believer to make use of lawful
means for his delivery, and to call for assistance of such as are bound to
assist him, albeit he may suspect to be refused, as David did here.

Verse. 5. I cried unto thee, O LORD, I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion
in the land of the living.

6. Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low, deliver me from my
persecutors: for they are stronger then I.

7. Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy Name; the righteous
shall compass me about: for thou shall deal bountifully with me.

In the last place, he sets down his last refuge, and the words of his
prayer, with the reasons to help his hope to be heard. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
all men, and all means of delivery in the world should fail us, yet must we
not give over, but pray to God, and depend upon him, who never fails his
supplicants that seek him, as David did; I cried unto thee, O Lord. 2. The
less comfort we find in the creature, we should trust the more in God, as
David did, who when all forsook him, said o God, Thou art my refuge. 3. God
alone with us may suffice ^s in every condition, as he did David; Thou art my
portion in the land of the living. 4. As the sense of our own weakness, and of
our adversaries power, a^e good whe^stones to sharpen our prayer: so the lower
we be brought and emptied of carnal confidence, we may expect the more
confidently help from God, as here Dav^d reasons; Attend unto my cry, for I
am brought very low: deliver me from my persecutors, for they are stronger then
I. 5. So long as ^he godly man is debarred from the benefit of Gods public
worship and ordinances, he is but in a prison in his own estimation; Bring my
soul out of prison. 6. The end of our prayer for delivery out of trouble,
should be that we may the more freely and fruitfully serve the Lord: Bring my
life out of prison, that I may praise thy Name. 7. When any one of Gods
persecuted servants is delivered, it is a matter of comfort, joy and
encouragement, and of mutual congratulation to all the godly, who have interest
in their righteous cause any way; The righteous shall compass me about. 8.
Before a bodily delivery come, the Lord sometime gives inward assurance that
it shall come; for, Thou shall deal bountifully with me; for David's words being
taken as spoken in the cave, do show so much.

PSALM CXLIII.
DAvid being in great trouble of mind, for the long continuance of his
persecution by his enemies, and also under some exercise of conscience, through
the sense of his sin, prays in this Psalm for deliverance in general, from
his twofold trouble, v. 1, 2. because of his pitiful condition set down, v. 3,
4, 5, 6. Then he presses his prayer in nine more special petitions, in the
rest of the Psalm.

Ver. 1, HEar my prayer, O LORD, give ear to my supplications: in thy
faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.

2. And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified.

In the prayer, as it is generally propounded; Learn, 1. Outward bodily trouble
is able to raise trouble of mind, and trouble of conscience also, especially
when outward trouble continues long, and God seems to debar prayer from
access, or not to give answer thereto, as this experience of David shows, 2.
Whatsoever be the trouble of a man's mind, and from what cause soever it
arises, prayer is the first and readiest means of ease and quietness, as
here we see in David, Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear to my supplication.
3. The Lords faithfulness and righteousness, which serve to terrify a
natural man, are props and pillars of comfort and encouragement unto the
believer, who is fled to the throne of grace: In thy faithfulness answer me,
and in thy righteousness. 4. When the conscience of sin opposes our prayer,
or our hope of delivery out of trouble, it must be answered by flying to Gods
grace: and when justice seems to pursue us, then the prayer of faith does
change the Court of justice into the Court of grace: for albeit the sins of
the godly may take peace of conscience from them for a time, yet they cannot
debar them from seeking favor and pardon, according to the Covenant of grace,
especially when they are studying to serve God, as this example teaches us:
And enter not into judgment with thy servant. 5. There is no way of
justification by the works of the Law, neither before regeneration nor after,
but only by grace: for David, a man of singular holiness, says, En^er not
into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall none living be
justified: to wit, if thou enter into judgment with him according to the Law
of works*

Ver. 3. For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down
to the ground: he has made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been
long dead.

4. Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me: my heart within me is
desolate.

The reasons of his prayer are two: the first is taken from the miserable
condition, wherein the violence and oppression of the enemy has driven him,
v. 3, 4. the other is, from his careful use of the means for finding grace, v.
5, 6. In the first reason; Learn, 1. After we have fled to Gods mercy,
according to the Covenant of grace for remission of sin, we may confidently lay
forth all our worldly trouble before God, and hope for relief, as here David
does. 2. It is not strange to see the godly in a manner wracked by their
persecutors, and undone in their worldly condition, for so was David served:
The enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down to the ground,
he has made me dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead: and this
he speaks in regard of his being hunted from place to place, and forced to
hide himself in the wilderness, and at length to take banishment upon him, and
to live among idolaters in the land of darkness. 3. Troubles when they are
long continued, are able to daunt the natural courage of the stoutest of Gods
servants: for God, for emptying of his own children of self-conceit, and
humbling them in the sense of their own weakness, uses to suffer trouble to
have more weight, then they could beforehand apprehend, as here, Therefore is
my spirit overwhelmed within me, my heart within me is desolate. 4. How heavy
soever trouble be found, and how unable soever we find our selves to bear it
any longer, yet must we not succumbe, nor give over wrestling, but must present
our case unto the Lord, as this example does teach us.

Ver. 5. I remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works: I muse on
the work of thy hands.

6. I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsts after thee as a
thirsty land. Selah.

From the second reason of his prayer, taken from the conscience of his
diligent use of the ordinary means, for finding comfort and relief: Learn, 1.
The remembrance of our own former experience, and of the experience of others
of the Saints set down in Scripture, (which should have force to support our
faith, albeit we have nothing of our own experience,) is a fit exercise for a
fainting soul under trouble, as here we see, I remember the days of old, I
meditate on all thy works. 2. The meditation of the works of Creation and
Providence, is a fit means also to support our faith in Gods Word* albeit we
have no example, nor experience of any who had been in the like condition
before us: for therein we shall find the evidence of what the wisdom and
Omnipotency of God can do, in performing of promises; I muse on the works of
thy hands. 3. Before we can draw profit by the pledges of Gods power apparent
in his works, we must resolve to meditate and muse upon them at leisure: for a
slight look of these will not draw forth the profitable use of them: I
remembered, I meditate, I mused, says David. 4. With meditation upon Gods
works, earnest prayer must be joined: I stretch forth my hands unto thee. 5.
When faith sees not only a promise of help, but also by the experience of
others who have been helped, a probability also of its coming speed, it raises
a drought and longing for the fruit of the promise, and keeps the eye fixed
upon God, without looking for relief from any where else; My soul thirsts
after thee, as a thirsty land.

Ver. 7. Hear me speedily, O LORD, my Spirit fails, hide not thy face from
me: lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. In the rest of the
Psalm, he presses this prayer in nine petitions more particular: The first is
for speedy deliverance; the second for some blink of favor, and both these
have their reasons adjoined in this verse. Whence learn, 1. Sore trouble and
long delaying of Gods help, is able to shake faith and weaken courage: Hear me
speedily, O Lord, my heart fails. 2. The believer must never give over
seeking of Gods help, how nigh soever he be to failing and falling off: Hear
me, O Lord, my spirit fails me. 3. Faith makes use of extreme dangers and
instant destruction, as of wings to mount it self up unto God; for death and
destruction cannot be so nigh, but faith finds time to flee to its refuge,
and run to God, to interpose himself before destruction be executed^s Hear me
speedily, my spirit fails. 4. The Lords displeasure apprehended in trouble,
is more terrible then the trouble it self, and the least intimation of his
favor, is very life and delivery; for, Hide not thy face from me, was here
David's deepest distress, and the showing of the least blink of Gods favor,
should have relieved him. 5. The Lord will not suffer his childrens faith to be
over set, albeit he suffer it to be hardly assaulted: Hide not thy face from
me, lest I be like to them that go down to the pit, or lest I be like to them
that perish. 6. The sense of trouble and weakness in Gods children,
acknowledged before God, is more able to bear them through from under their
troubles, then all the stupid stoutness^ of contumacious minds, as the
experience of this Champion David shows unto us.

Verse. 8. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do
I trust: cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul
unto thee. The third petition is, for timous comfort in the Word of promise:
and the fourth is, for direction in the way of Gods obedience, and both have
their reasons adjoined in this verse. Whence learn, 1. The consolation which
the believer does seek, is that which is promised in the Word, and he will
content himself with the comfort which comes by hearing, till the full effect
of the promise come: Cause me to hear thy loving kindness. 2. That comfort is
indeed early, and sufficiently timous, which comes before we perish or
despair; Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning. 3. Trusting in
God without comfort, is a reason to persuade us we shall have comfort, and the
readiest way that can be to come by it: Cause me to hear thy loving kindness:
for in thee do I trust. 4. As it is the believers trouble to be in such
perplexity, as not to know how to behave himself in it: so is it a part of his
comfort and delivery, to understand what to do next, and how to behave him
self: Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk. 5. He who seeks
direction from God, must lift up his heart off all diversions, and depend on
God only; for, I lift up my soul to thee, is the reason of his petition to be
directed.

Ver. 9. Deliver me, O LORD, from mine enemies: I fly unto thee to hide me.
The fifth petition is for delivery from his enemies, whereunto a reason is
added here. Whence learn, 1. As there is no enemy, from whom the Lord cannot
deliver a man who is reconciled, how potent soever the enemy be: so
deliverance from ou^ enemies is a fruit of our friendship with God; Deliver me
from mine enemies. 2. Albeit our enemies had compassed us so, as there were no
apparent escape, yet the believer may find a hiding place in God; I fly unto
thee to hide me.

Ver. 10. Teach me to do thy will; for thou art my God, thy Spirit is good:
lead me into the land of uprightness. The sixth petition is for grace to walk
righteously and holily, till he came to heaven, which he calls the land of
uprightness. Whence learn, 1. In time of trials and troubles men are in no
less danger of sinning and foul-losing, then they are to fall into further
bodily dangers and inconveniences, and have need, in the sense of their
inability, to walk circumspectly, and to seek direction from God: Teach me to
do thy will 2. The Covenant of grace wherein the believer is entered, gives
ground to pray and hope for the growth of sanctification: Teach me to do thy
will, for thou art my God. 3. We have need of such teaching, as has with it
leading, such direction, as has with it strengthening unto obedience, such
information as does direct us, not only in the general rule, but also how to
apply it in particular actions, and which does not leave us in any part of our
duty to our selves: Teach me, lead me. 4. Heaven is the land of uprightness,
and we must have the Lords constant teaching, and his constant leading of us,
till we be possessed of heaven; Lead me into the land of uprightness. 5. The
teacher and leader of believers, in the obedience of Gods Word and Will, is the
Spirit of God, whose goodness must be opposed to our natural sinfulness and
ill deserving: Thy Spirit is good, lead me into the land of uprightness.

Ver. 11. Quicken me, O LORD, for thy Names sake: for thy righteousness sake,
bring my soul out of trouble. The seventh petition is, for some reviving of
his damped and dead spirit, and the eighth is, for ending the course of the
enemies persecution of him, and reasons are subjoyned to both. Whence learn, 1.
Albeit believers be subject to soul-fainting and deadness, yet they retain
life spiritual in such a measure, as makes them still sensible of their own
weakness, and able to bemoan themselves unto God, who is able to revive them;
Quicken me, O Lord. 2. It concerns God in his honor, to revive the spirits
of the contrite ones, when they have their recourse unto him; Quicken me, O
Lord, for thy Names sake. 3. Albeit the Lord acquaint his children with
trouble, yet he will not suffer them to lie still in trouble, but will in due
time set them free; Bring my soul out of trouble. 4. The Lord will have his
justice not terrible to his children in trouble, but comfortable and a pawn of
their delivery from their oppressors: For thy righteousness sake, bring my
soul out of trouble.

Ver. 12. And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies: and destroy all them that
afflict my soul; for I am thy servant. The ninth petition is, for the
overthrow of his desperate enemies, whereunto reasons are added. Whence learn,
1. The enemies of the righteous who are persecuted for righteousness, shall
perish: Cut off mine enemies, destroy them all. 2. Mercy to the Lords oppressed
children, and justice against their enemies, go together; and the work of
justice on persecutors, is a work of mercy to the oppressed: Of thy mercy cut
off mine en^mies. 3. As the conscience of endeavor to serve God, gives sweet
refreshment in time of trouble: so our short coming must not deprive us of the
title of servants, but we must assert our interest in God our Master and Lord,
so long as we love to do his will, as David does here; for, I am thy servant.

PSALM CXLIV.
DAvid being now King, but yet not fully settled on his throne, in this Psalm
gives thanks to God for the work already wrought, v. 1, 2* 3, 4. and prays
for completing the deliverance, and settling of him in his Kingdom, v. 5, 6, 7,
8. and in hope to be heard, promises praise to God, v. 9, 10. and in the last
place, repeateth his petition, with reasons taken from the benefit which should
redound unto the Lords people, by settling of him in his Kingdom, v. 11, 12, 13,
14.

Verse. 1. BLessed be the LORD my strength, which teaches my hands to war,
and my fingers to fight,

2. My goodness, and my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer, my shield,
and he in whom I trust: who subdueth my people under me.

3. LORD, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of man;
that thou make account of him?

4. Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passes away.

In David's thanksgiving for what the Lord had done for him; Learn, 1. As we are
to praise God for mercies received, when we would have new mercies: so we are
to strengthen our faith for receiving new benefits, by looking what we have
received already, as David does here. 2. The believer has all his abilities
and furniture, not so much in what is received already in himself, as without
himself in God: Blessed be the Lord my strength. 3. As what skill, what
furniture of strength, what success a man has in any thing, is of the Lord:
so the acknowledgment thereof, is both a part of his thankfulness unto God,
and a means of the confirmation of his own faith: Blessed be the Lord my
strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to fight. 4. What the
Lord is in his own nature, he is in his good will, Covenant, and operation
toward the believer, and so appropriate unto the believer as his own treasure,
out of which he is furnished in all things: therefore David calls him, My
goodness. 5 ^^ny evils are ready to rush in upon the believer, which the Lord
wardeth off as a bulwark: and upon this account David aith, My fortress 6.
When trouble from the world and inferiou^ creatures do fight against the
believer, the Lord lifts him up above all and compasses him about with
defense; for thi^, David says, My high tower. 7. Albeit it, pleases the Lord
sometime to let trouble in upon the believer ye^ he suffers not the believer
to perish therein, nor the trouble to harm him more then if it had been kept
off: for this cause, David calls God, My deliverer. 8. Albeit the Lord will
guard the believer on all hands, when he is to enter the lists with an enemy,
yet will he be employed for this end: for this cause David compares the Lord
to a shield or buckler, and calls him* My shield. 9. The multitude of ways,
how God is, and may be steadable unto us, serves to make use of him by faith,
according to our several necessities, as David teaches, saying, It is he in
whom I trust. 10. As the light of faith, shows what God is to us by right and
Covenant: so also it shows to us, what are his operations and particular
benefits bestowed upon us; It is he, (says David,) who subdueth my people
under me. 11* Gods mercies are then most highly esteemed of, when the believer
is humbled in the sense of his humane frailty and unworthiness in general, and
of his own in particular; Lord, what is man that thou take knowledge of him?
12. It is a mercy to be wondered at, that the unworthiness of man, does
neither hinder God to love him, nor to esteem of him: What is the son of man
that thou make account of him? 13. There is nothing in a m^n wherein he can
glory, nothing which can deserve any thing at Gods hand, and all natural
perfections are but the shadow of something in effect: Man is like to vanity.
14. Were there no more to abase a man, have what he may have in this world, his
mortality and shortness of life is a sufficient reason for it; His d^yes are a
shadow that passes away, and all this commends the riches of Gods grace and
good will to man, and helps the believers faith against the enmity of man.

Ver. 5. Bow thy Heavens, O LORD, and come down: touch the mountains, and
they shall smoke.

6. Cast forth lightning, and scatter them, shoot out thine arrows and destroy
them.

7. Send thine hand from above, rid me, and deliver me out of great waters:
from the hand of strange children.

8. Whose mouth speaks vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood.

In the next place, he prays to God to let forth his power, for subduing the
rest of the Kingdom under him, by repressing of his enemies, and saving him
from their contention and conspiracies against him. Whence learn, 1. How
unworthy soever a man be in his own eyes, he may seek great things of God,
according to the estimation and respect he has in Gods eyes: for upon this
account David prays, that God would ^ow the Heavens and come down, for his
help, that is, would humble himself so far as to own his own servant. 2. If
God please to manifest himself for any of his servants against the highest
powers on earth, they shall soon feel the force of his wrath, like ^ire taking
hold on them: Touch the mountains, and they shall smoke. 3. No man can stand
against him who has thunder and lightning at his command, and arrows of
destruction, to shoot as he pleases: Cast forth thy lightning and scatter
them, shoot out thine arrows and destroy them. 4. Whatsoever the power of
adversaries may be, or the difficulty or danger the believer can be in, if he
shall oppose Gods good will and Omnipotency for him, against the difficulty, he
shall be Master over it: Send thine hand from above, rid me, and deliver me out
of great waters. 5. The enmity of false brethren, counterfeit Professors of
Religion, whose words, Oaths and Covenants cannot bind them, nor secure the
godly whom they malign, is no less dangerous then deep and raging waters are,
out of which God only can deliver a man: for, Deliver me out of great waters,
is expounded here, Deliver me from the hands of strange children whose mouth
speaks vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.

Ver. 9. I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a Psaltery, and an
instrument of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.

10. It is he that gives salvation to Kings: who delivers David his servant
from the hurtful sword.

He adds his purpose and promise to praise God for the benefit which he
prays for, as a reason of his hope to be heard. Whence learn, 1. The Lord in
wisdom, gives deliverance out of trouble, by parts and degrees, and so
dispenses his benefits, as he may give his children occasion, both of oftener
prayer, and of oftener new praises, as David's experience shows, who having
given thanks for the bringing of him to the Kingdom in part, prays for
enlarging of the benefit, and promises upon this account a new thanksgiving: I
will sing a new song unto thee, O God. 2. The upright engaging of our heart to
praise God for the benefit which we pray for, is an argument of hope that we
shall have it, as here David makes use of it; I will sing a new Song unto
thee, O God. 3. According as a benefit not yet received has luster, and does
shine in our eye, so are we content to be in Gods debt for thanksgiving, if he
shall grant it, (let the performance thereof prove as it may) as we see here in
David, who, because the adding of the government of the eleven tribes unto his
Kingdom over the tribe of Judah, seemed to be a great accession unto his
present possession, if God should give them to him, he promises large thanks:
Upon a Psaltery* and an instrument of (...) strings will I sing praises unto
thee* which imports the highest measure of his praising God, that he could
imagine; and unto this his promise, he subjoyneth the form of thanksgiving
which he did purpose to use. 4. It is not the place or power of a man, how
great soever he be, which does preserve a man, but the greatest of men must be
preserved by God, no less then the meanest, It is he that gives salvation
unto Kings. 5. One experience is sufficient to a believer, for confirming his
faith in any general doctrine, as here, He who delivers David his servant
from the hurtful sword, is sufficient to make him subscribe, that It is he that
gives salvation to Kings.

Verse. 11. Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose
mouth speaks vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.

12. That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our
daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a Palace.

13. That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store: that our
sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets.

14. That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in, nor
going out: that there be no complaining in our streets.

He repeateth his prayer for delivery from false and treacherous enemies, whom
neither Word nor Writ, neither Oath not Covenant could bind, and adds yet
more reasons of enlarging of his Kingdom, from the benefits which might come
to the Lords people thereby. Whence learn, 1. As the greatness of a benefit,
so also the greatness of the difficulties which may hinder that benefit, being
foreseen, should sharpen prayer for the benefit* and against the impediments
thereof, as here the repetition of, Rid me, and deliver me, etc. does teach us.
2. He that is called to public employment o^ office of governing of a people
should seek all things of God, for the public good of the people mainly, and
should make the holy peace and prosperity of the people their main aim, as
David here craveth deliverance from his enemies, and the enlarging of his
power, that the people might prosper and flourish both in children and riches;
That our sons may be as plants, etc. 3. Godly Magistrates are a special
means of peace and prosperity to the subjects, and should be careful, as in
training up of young men in grace and virtue, so as they may be fruitful
instruments of the public good; as plants grown up in their youth: so also of
young women, that they may be beautified with all endowments, which may make
them to be godly mothers of the succeeding age: Our daughters may be corner
stones, polished after the similitude of a Palace. 4. Peace and plenty of corn
and cattle, and other things needful for this present life, are benefits of God
in themselves, very helpful for the standing of a Kingdom, and training up of
the youth in goodness and virtue, and worthy to be prayed for; That our
garners may be full, affording all manner of store, that our sheep may bring
forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets. 5. For the continuance of
prosperity and peace in a land, industry in every man's vocation is requisite,
and so righteous behavior of the people, as may prevent not only war offensive
and defensive, but also may prevene lest any vagabond beggars be suffered, or
indigent persons forced to complain in the streets: for so much is imported,
while he says, That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no
breaking in, to wit, of foreign enemies; nor going out, to wit, of the people
to invade other Nations; That there be no complaining in our streets, for want
of justice or necessary maintenance.

Ver. 15. Happy is that people that is in such a oase; yea, happy is that
people, whose God is the LORD. He closes the Psalm with the commendation of
such a condition of a well-governed people, but with a provision, that they be
in Covenant with God, and believe in him. Whence learn, 1. A people is happy
which is so governed and cared for, and blessed of God, as Israel was under the
reign of David the servant of the Lord: Happy is th^^ people that is in such a
case, as is here described. 2. A peoples happiness is not solid, where true
Religion is not settled: where the people is not in a Covenant of grace, and
reconciliation with God, whatsoever worldly prosperity they may have: but so
many as are in favor with God, and do walk in friendship with him, they are
blessed, whatsoever be their outward condition: Happy is that people, whose God
is the Lord.

PSALM CXLV. David's Psalm of praise.
THis Psalm is altogether of praises, every verse beginning with a several
letter of the Hebrew, A, B, C, from the first to the last: wherein David
stirs up himself to the work of Gods praise somewhat more generally, from
the beginning to v. 8. and from the eighth verse, he praises God more
particularly, giving ten arguments of praise, unto the last verse, and closes
the Psalm with the engaging of himself anew again, and exhortation of others
to follow the song for ever.

From the Inscription, which is A Psalm of praise; Learn, 1. It is our duty,
and a point of spiritual wisdom, to set aside all particulars of our own, and
go about the work of praising God only, as this Psalm teaches us. 2. The
praises of God are able to fill all the volumes in the world, and what
composition of letters can be made in any language: and this the going through
all the letters of the Hebrew A, B, C, gives us to understand. 3. It is
expedient to commit to memory some select Psalms, especially about Gods
praises, for to help memory: The wisdom of God has ordered this, and some
other Psalms, so as the order of the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet may help
the memory not a little.

Ver. 1. I Will extol thee, my God, O King: and I will bless thy Name for
ever and ever.

2. Every day will I bless thee: and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever.

He engages himself unto the work of praising of God twice: in the former part
of the Psalm once, v. 1, 2. and of this he gives a reason, and prophesies
that the praise of the Lord shall be perpetuated throughout all ages, v. 3; 4.
then he engages himself the second time, and Prophecies of the Churches
holding up this song, v. 5.6.7.

In David's first engaging of himself to praise; Learn, 1. The man who heartily
can praise God, is he that is reconciled to God; a man in Covenant of grace,
reconcliation, and frienship with God* as David was: I will extol thee, my
God. 2. Then is God praised, when the man who gives praise to God, is humbled
before God, and all things created are put down under Gods feet, and God lifted
up in estimation above all: I will extol thee. 3. Every King should do homage
unto God, as King over him, as David does: I will extol thee, my King. 4.
Praise should so be given unto God, as the man who praises may approve
himself to God, for sincerity of purpose, as unto a present hea^er of those
praises: I will extol thee, I will bless thy Name. 5. He who will praise God,
must know him as he has revealed himself, and praise him according to that
rule: I will bless thy Name. 6. Seeing God is essenti^lly blessedness in it
self, and the fountain of blessing to his worshippers, it is a point of our
thankfulness, and praise of him, to acknowledge so much: I will bl^sse thy
Name. 7. As an upright worshipper of God, has no time set to his purpose of
service, so no time shall end his task: I will bless thy Name, for ever and
ever. 8. Praising of God is not a work for solemn days only, but also must be
ordinarily discharged: for every day gives new reasons for it: Every day will
I bless thee.

Ver. 3. Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised: and his greatness is
unsearchable.

4. One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy
mighty acts.

From the reasons of this engagement taken from Gods greatness, and from the
Prophecy of the continual proclamation of it to be in the Church; earn, 1 The
greatness of God manifested in his work, partly in the manne^ of manifestation
of his presence now and then, by apparitions; partly in the amplitude of his
dominion, of his p^wer^ of his wisdom, and of his providence, etc. is worthy
of ou^ meditation, and to be acknowledged by us; and the Lord himself worthy
to be praised for this his greatness: Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised. 2. When we have searched what we can, and have meditated till we be
faint, there is no finding out of the Lords greatness; His greatness is
unsearchable. 3. As it is the duty of the Church in every age to praise God,
and to transmit the praises of God to the posterity: so it is the Lords purpose
to have a care, that this duty be done in all ages: for it is prophesied, One
generation shall praise thy works to another. 4. Every age shall have their own
addition of Gods mighty acts, in their time unto what he has done formerly:
They shall declare thy mighty acts.

Ver. 5. I will speak of the glorious honor of thy Majesty, and of thy
wondrous works.

6. And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and I will declare
thy greatness.

7 They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness: and shall
sing of thy righteousness.

In David's engaging of himself the second time to praise God, and in his
prophesying of the Churches holding up the song; Learn, 1. In God, and in his
works and ways, there is a wonderful beauty and comeliness, a splendour of
glory, and a shining Majesty to be seen; and that should be observed and talked
of by the observers, unto the edification of others: I will speak of the
glorious honor of thy Majesty. 2. There is no looking in upon God immediately,
but men must behold him as he lets forth himself in his Word and works to
be seen: for, I will speak of thy wondrous works, is subjoyned to the talking
of Gods glorious honor and Majesty. 3. When men do not mark his works of mercy
and bounty, the Lord will show unto them works of justice, that is, terrible
works, and give them matter of talking upon this account: And men shall speak
of the might of thy terrible acts. 4 He who knows most of God or has seen
and observed best his operations, should labor most to set forth his praise;
who ever come short in the duty, such a man should not fail, as David does
teach us, saying, I will declare thy greatness. 5. Albeit every work of God be
matter of his praise, yet the works of mercy and truth to, and for his Church,
is the special theme, which the Lord gives his people to study and declare:
They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness. 6. The
righteousness of God, whereby he justifies sinners, and sanctifies the
justified, and executes judgment for his reconciled people, is the sweetest
object of the Churches joy: for they shall sing of thy righteousness.

Verse. 8. The LORD is gracious and full of compassion: slow to anger, and of
great mercy. In the second place, he praises God more particularly, and gives
some ten reasons or arguments of his praise: the first is from his grace toward
sinners. Whence learn. 1. Unworthiness and ill deserving should not hinder
sinners to come to receive mercy and reconciliation: The Lord is gracious. 2.
Albeit the sinner has drawn on much misery upon himself, and justice has
seized upon him for his sins, yet may he be relieved and brought out of his
misery, if he seek the Lord: For the Lord is full of compassion. 3. Albeit the
Lord be sundry ways provoked to visit with the rod, yet he gives time to
repent, before he declare his wrath: He is slow to anger. 4. The Lords anger
does not endure longer then his people be humbled in the sense of their
provocation. and when they seek pardon he is ready to grant it; He is of great
mercy.

Verse. 9. The LORD is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his
works. The second reason of Gods praise, is his bounty generally unto all his
creatures, and that for man's sake. Whence learn, 1. The Lord is good and kind
to all men, even the wicked not excepted: The Lord is good to all. 2. Gods
mercy may be seen toward man, in the continuation of the whole course of the
creatures, which being defiled by man's sin, he might in justice have
abolished, or made them either useless to man, or else instruments of his
grief: His tender mercies are over all his works.

Ver. 10. All thy works shall praise thee, O LORD: and thy Saints shall bless
thee. The third reason of Gods praise, is the glory of his works, which do
furnish matter unto the Saints to bless God. Whence learn, 1. Albeit all men
were silent, the Lords works one and all, shall speak each of them in their own
kind, to the praise of God. All thy works shall praise thee, O God. 2. Albeit
every man does not make use of Gods goodness and works, but most men do
smother the glory of God in their atheism, yet the Lord has a number who have
found grace in his eyes, who shall observe Gods goodness, both to the
creatures and to themselves, and shall bless him upon that account; And thy
Saints shall bless thee.

Verse. 11. They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingd^me: and talk of thy power.

12. To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts: and the glorious
Majesty of his Kingdom.

The fourth reason of Gods praise, is from the Lords dominion and power,
whereof the Saints are both observers and Heralds. Whence learn, 1. There is
no less matter of praising God, for the upholding, and governing of the
creatures, then for making of them: They shall speak of the glory of thy
Kingdom, and talk of thy power. 2. The Lord will have his Saints to instruct
such as are not converted, to know his glory, power, and Majesty, that they may
be brought in, and made subjects of his special Kingdom of grace: Thy Saints
shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom* and talk of thy power, to make known
to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom.

Verse. 13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom: and thy dominion endures
throughout all generations. The fifth reason of Gods praise, is from the
perpetual endurance of Gods Kingdom. Whence learn, 1. Earthly Kings as they
have but few subjects, so they live but a short while in their Kingdom: but
the Kingdom of God, both that general Kingdom which he has over all the
creatures, and that special Kingdom over the Saints in his Church, is from age
to age perpetual: Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy dominions
endures throughout all generations.

Verse. 14. The LORD upholdeth all that fall: and raises up all those that be
bowed down. The sixth reason of Gods praise, is from his care and sustaining of
the weakest of the subjects of the Kingdom of grace. Whence learn, 1. Albeit
none of the subjects of the Kingdom of grace, are freed from the danger of
falling into sin, and into trouble; yet they are preserved that they fall not
so deep as the bottom of sinning unto death, or perishing in their troubles:
for God interposeth himself to prevent their perdition: The Lord upholdeth all
that fall. 2. So many of the subjects of the Kingdom of grace, as feel their
own weakness and inability to stand under the burden, either of sin or
trouble or both, do find God a supporter of them* a comforter of them, and a
deliverer of them: He raises up all them that be bowed down.

Ver. 15. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in
due season.

16. Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.

The seventh reason of Gods praise, is his particular care to maintain the
life of every living creature, so long as he pleases to lend it. Whence learn,
1. The Lord does not cast off the care of any living creature which he has
made, but keeps so constant an eye of providence upon it, as does make every
living creature, in its own kind, turn the eye of it toward him: The eyes of
all wait upon thee. 2. There is a secret instinct of nature in all living
creatures, which leads them toward their maker, in their danger to cry, and
in their hunger to bestirre themselves; and the business which they make,
going to and fro to seek their meat, is a kind of hoping and waiting to find
some sustenance of their life, laid unto them by their maker, in one place or
another They wait upon thee. 3 God does not frustrate the na^ural expectation
of hungry creatures, but gives to every one of them that sort of food which is
fit for them: Thou give them their meat. 4. As in the variety of meat,
suitable to the variety of living creatures; so also in the time and season of
giving of it, the wisdom, riches and goodness of God does appear; Thoug vest
them their meat in due season. 5. As in the meat, and in the time o^ b^stowing
of it, so also in the measure bestowed, the Lords goodness and rich bounty is
to be seen toward the basest of living creatures: Thou openest thy hand, and
satisfiest the desire of every living creature.

Verse. 17. The LORD is righteous in all his ways: and holy in all his works.
The eighth reason of Gods praise, is from his righteousness, and holiness, in
all his proceedings and works. When^e learn, 1. As the providence of God about
the creatures i^ common, is to be marked, so also and especially his dealing
with man, according to the rule of equity and justice: The Lord is righteous
(says he) and holy. 2. Albeit the Lord deal otherwise in many things, then we
could have expected, and otherwise sometime the^ we can see the reason of his
doing, yet is he always just and holy in his proceeding: The Lord is righteous
in his ways, and holy in his works. ^. It is not sufficient for us to give the
glory of righteousness and holiness unto God, only in some of his ways, and
works* or in his ways toward others, and not toward our selves; or in his
dealing with some persons, and not with all persons, but we must justify the
Lord in our hearts and words always, and in all things* toward all men for
ever: The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

Verse. 18. The LORD is nigh unto all them that call upon him* to all that call
upon him in truth.

19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their
cry, and will save them.

The ninth reason of Gods praise, is for his hearing the prayer of needy
supplicants. Whence learn, 1. The Lord loves the praise, which arises unto
him, from his goodness to his people, and citizens of his Church, more then any
other points of his praise: as the often falling upon the praising of God from
this ground does show. 2. Albeit God be every where present, yet there is a
sort of more friendly presence, which God gives to them that worship him, then
that which is his common presence every where; and this is the nearness of
grace and friendship: The Lord is nigh to them that call on him. 3. As God will
have his gracious presence opened up, and manifested to his worshippers, by
prayer, so will he have this favor alike patent to all that pray unto him, and
seek him without exception of persons: The Lord is nigh to all them that call
upon him. 4. Because there is a counterfeit and false sort of worshipping, and
calling upon God, which is debarred from the benefit of this promise, to wit,
when the party supplicant is not reconciled, nor seeking reconciliation through
Christ the Mediator, or is seeking something not promised, or something for a
carnal end, that he may bestow it on his lusts: therefore he who has right
unto th^s promise, must be a worshipper of God in faith, and sincere intention:
and to such the Lord will show himself nigh; He is nigh to all them that call
upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. 5 Those are worshippers of God in
truth, who fear him, and such men's holy desires, are prayers which the Lord
will not refuse, but will satisfy them: He will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him. 6. If the Lord answer not the prayer of the man that fears
him, at first, yet when he calls in earnest, when he is in trouble, in
straits and hazard, he will answer him, and close his exercise with salvation:
He also will hear their cry, and will save them.

Verse. 20. The LORD preserves all them that love him: but all the wicked will
he destroy. The tenth reason of Gods praise, is from his different dealing with
his friends, and with his foes. Whence learn, 1. True worshippers, and true
fearers of God, are persons who love God, and such persons shall be sure, that
all things shall work ^o their welfare, nothing shall hurt them: The Lord
preserves all them that love him. 2. All such as do not love God, but love to
lie still in sin, and to follow their own lusts, shall be as certainly
without exception destroyed, as the lovers of God shall be preserved: The Lord
preserves all them that fear him, but all the wicked will he destroy.

Verse. 21. My mouth shall speak the praise of the LORD: and let all flesh
bless his holy Name, for ever and ever. He closes the Psalm with a promise
to praise the Lord yet more, and exhorts all men to bless him for ever.
Whence learn, 1. When a man has said all he can in Gods praise, he shall find
himself come short of his duty* and his obligation to praise God to be still
lying on him, as this example of David in the close of the Psalm does show us.
2. The Lord will be praised in our spirits, and outwardly in our words and
external expressions also; My mouth shall speak the praises of the Lord. 3.
Some duties belong to some persons, and other duties belong to other persons,
but the duty of praising the Lord, is the duty of every man, albeit only the
believer gives obedience to this: Let all flesh bless him. 4. It is needful
that every worshipper of God, in the discharge of praise, remember their own
frailty, and be h^mbled: Let all flesh bless him. 5. The duty of praising and
blessing God must be so holily discharged, as the Lord may be honored in
effect: Let all flesh bless his holy Name. 6. Such as praise God and b^esse
him heartily, shall follow this exercise for ever: Let all flesh bless his
holy Name, for ever and ever.

PSALM CXLVI.
THis Psalm is a Psalm of praise wholly, wherein, when the Psalmist has
exhorted all men to praise the Lord, he engages himself to the work, v. 1, 2.
Then he teaches the way how to praise God in effect, to wit, by renouncing all
carnal confidence, and trusting only in the Lord, v. 3, 4, 5. Thirdly, he
gives reasons, both of trusting in God, and praising of God: and closes as he
begun, with the same exhortation to praise God.

Verse. 1. PRaise ye the LORD: Praise the LORD, O my soul

2. While I live will I praise the LORD, I will sing praises unto my God, while
I have any being.

From the stirring up of others and himself to praise God; Learn, 1. The duty
of praising God is so necessary, so deserved by God, so profitable to us, and
so spiritual, that we had need frequently to stir up our selves and others
unto it: Praise ye the Lord. 2. For discharging the duty of praise, all the
powers of the soul must be stirred up: the mind, to meditate; the memory, to
bring forth former observations; the heart and affections, for discharging of
the duty in the best manner: Praise the Lord, O my soul. 3. Whatsoever
concurrence we find of others in the work of praise, less or more, let us set
our selves seriously and heartily unto it, and engage our own heart for it:
While I live, I will praise the Lord. 4. There can be little heartinesse in
this work, till the soul lay hold on God by faith, and embrace the Covenant of
grace, and so find its own interest in God, and then the soul will praise in
earnest, as the Psalmists example may show us: I will sing praises to my God,
while I have any being.

Verse. 3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there
is no help.

4. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: in that very day his
thoughts perish.

He shows the way how to praise God really; to wit, by renunciation of all
earthly confidence and fixing faith and trust on God alone for renouncing of
all confidence in creatures, he gives reasons, v. 3, 4. and for trusting in
God, he gives reasons, by praising of God, unto the end of the Psalm.

In the forbidding of carnal confidence; Learn, 1. What a man does most trust
in, that he esteems most of, and praises it in his heart most: therefore
does the Psalmist set us upon God, as on the right object of trust, and
diverteth us from the wrong, that he may teach us to make God the only object
of praise. 2. Because the maine object of our carnal confidence naturally, is
man in power, who seems able to do for us, able to promote us to dignity and
riches, and to keep us up in some state in the world, therefore must we throw
down this idol^ in particular, that we may place our confidence in God the
better: Put not your trust in Princes. 3. To cut off carnal confidence in man,
that neither mean men may trust in great men, nor great men may trust in the
multitude of mean men, we must remember, that no man is naturally better then
his progenitors, but such as his fathers were, such is he, that is, a sinfall,
weak, and unconstant creature, Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of
man. 4. The reason why we should not put trust in man is, because he can
neither help himself, nor the man that trusts in him when there is most
need: In whom there is no help. 5. He that cannot deliver himself from death,
is not to be trusted in, because it is uncertain how soon death shall seize
upon him: His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth. 6. Whatsoever the
good will, or purpose, or promise of any man can give assurance of, all does
vanish when the man dies: In that every day his thoughts perish.

Verse. 5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: whose hope is in
the LORD his God. In the exhorting of us to trust in God, he gives this
encouragement unto it, that he who trusts in God, may look for help and
happiness in him. Whence learn, 1. The only true object of our faith, and
confidence, is God, as he is revealed by his Word to his Church, to wit, The
God of Jacob, the God of Israel. 2. Faith in God brings true felicity with
it, and help in time of need: Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his
help. 3. Hope of help and happiness, from trust and confidence in God, must be
grounded upon the Lords entering in Covenant with us, and becoming ours through
the Mediator: whose hope is in the Lord his God.

Verse. 6. Which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is; which
keeps truth for ever.

7. Which executes judgment for the oppressed, which gives food to the
hungry: the LORD loses the prisoners.

8. The LORD opens the eyes of the blind, the LORD raises them that are
bowed down: the LORD loves the righteous.

9. The LORD preserves the strangers, he relieveth the fatherless and widow:
but the way of the wicked he turns upside down.

10. The LORD shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Sion, unto all
generations: Praise ye the LORD.

For encouraging of us yet more to believe in God, who offers himself to be
reconciled with us, and to be our God in Christ, he gives other ten motives:
and as every one of them is a point of Gods praise, so is it a prop and pillar
to support the believers faith. The first motive to believe in God, and first
reason of Gods praise, is, his omnipotency and al sufficiency, made manifest by
the work of creation, and preservation of all creatures: Which made the heaven
and the earth, the sea, and all that therein is. 2. The second motive to
believe in God, is another point of Gods praise, to wit, his faithfulness in
making and keeping Covenant, and performing his promises unto everlasting:
Which keeps truth for ever. 3. The third point of Gods praise, and prop of
faith, is this, albeit the Lord, for the glory of his Name, and good of his own
people, do suffer the godly to be persecuted and oppressed also, yet he will
plead the cause and controversy of the believer, and will deliver the
oppressed, and punish the oppressor: Which executes judgment for the
oppressed. 4. The fourth point of Gods praise, and pillar of faith, is this,
albeit the Lord suffer the believer to feel the need of what is needful for
soul or body, yet he does not suffer him to starve for want of what is
necessary: He gives food to the hungry. 5. The fifth point of Gods praise, is,
albeit the believer may, for his sins or for trial of his faith, be cast in
prison, and brought in bondage, yet the Lord will loose his bonds; The Lord
loses the prisoners. 6. The sixth point of Gods praise is, albeit the
believer may be in darkness of trouble, and anxiety of mind for a time, and
knows not what to do, yet the Lord will show him deliverance, and give him
direction and comfort: The Lord opens the eyes of the blind. 7. The seventh
reason of Gods praise* and encouragement to trust in him is, that howsoever the
burden of trouble may overpower the believer, and make him walk heavily under
discouragement, yet the Lord will renew strength and comfort, and delivery unto
him: The Lord raises them that are bowed down. 8. The eighth reason to praise
God, and eighth encouragement to trust in God, is the believer who is fled to
the righteousness of the Mediator for his justification, and studieth to a
holy and righteous conversation, may be sure he is free from the curse,
approved of God, and shall find the fruits of Gods good will to him: The Lord
loves the righteous. 9. The ninth reason of Gods p^aise, and encou^agement to
trust in him is, from the Lords different manner of dealing, on the one hand
with the poor and needy believer, who has none to do for him: and on the other
hand, with the proud, and powerful man of this world, who trusts to carry
his business by means of the creature, and misregardeth the Lord; he
preserves the one, and destroys the other: The Lord preserves the stranger,
and r^lieveth the fatherless, and the widow: but the way of the wicked he
tu^neth upside down. 10. The t^nth reason of Gods praise, and the last
encouragement of the believer to trust in him, and not to put confidence in
Princes, is this* the Lord is the only Sovereign King, who lives for ever, and
has engaged himself to the Church, and every believer in every age, therefore
he only is wor^hy to be trusted in* and worthy to be praised; The Lord shall
reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generasions. Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM CXLVII.
THis Psalm is for stirring up of the Church to praise and thanksgiving. The
exhortation is threefold. The first is, v. 1. and six reasons for it, or
motives unto it, are set down, v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The second exhortation is, v.
7. and three reasons for it, v 8, 9* 10, 11. The third is, v. 12. and six
reasons for it, unto the end.

Ver. 1. PRaise ye the LORD: for it is good to sing praises to our God: for it
is pleasant, and praise is comely. In the first exhortation; Learn, 1. There is
no part of Gods worship whereunto we are more indisposed, or need more stirring
up, then to praise God, as the frequent repeated exhortations do import. 2. The
first motive is this, all the encouragements which can be imagined unto any
work, do all concur here: It is profitable to praise God: for it is good to
sing praises to or God All Gods praises are the believers advantage and sto^e
houses: and It is pleasant; full of sweet refreshment, as when a man does view
his own rich and well situated inheritance: and it is honorable to be about
the employment of Angels, to be Heralds of the Lords glory: Praise is comely

2. The LORD does build up Jerusalem: he gathers together the outcasts of
Israel. The second reason of Gods praise, is for his care over his Church.
Whence learn, 1. The Church is the Lords special handie work, he is the
builder, upholder and restorer of any b^each in it: The Lord does build up
Jerusalem. 2. The members of the true Church are oft-times scattered one from
another, not only by common judgments, but also by persecution and schisms,
that they cannot keep that sweet communion one with another which is to be
wished, but God is the only gatherer and uniter of them, after whatsoever sort
of scattering: He gathers together the outcasts of Israel.

Verse. 3. He heals the broken in heart: and binds up their wounds. The
third reason of Gods praise is, for his care of the afflicted believer, when by
trouble outward, or inward, or both he is wounded in spirit, broken and brought
d^wn, made sickly and weakened; He heals the broken in heart, and binds up
their wounds, as a tender Surgeon, or Physician does the wound of his
Patient.

Verse. 4. He tells the number of the stars: calls them all by their names.
The fourth reason of the exhortation to praise God is, his particular knowledge
of every thing, which does transcend the capacity of men, and to them is
impossible: He tells the number of the stars, and calls them all by their
names. In which similitude he shows also, that albeit ^braham could not
comprehend the multitude of the children, either of his faith, or of his flesh,
more then he could count the number of the stars, yet the Lord knows every
believer by name, as he knows every star, and can call every one by their
name.

Verse. 5. Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.
The fifth reason of Gods praise is* because in his attributes he is
incomprehensible, namely in his dominion over all, in power, to do all, and in
his wisdom to contrive whatsoever we stand in need of, so that nothing can be
against us, but he is above it; nothing can be needful for us, but his wisdom
can devise the means to bring it to us, and his power does put his will in
execution for our good; Great is the Lord, his power it great, his
understanding is infinite.

Verse. 6. The LORD lifts up the meek: he casts the wicked down to the
ground. The sixth reason is, from his different dealing with the godly and the
wicked: as for the godly, who in the meekness of a subdued spirit, do submit
themselves under the mighty hand of God, he comfort them and relieveth them:
but he abaseth the proud who do not stand in awe of his Majesty: The Lord
lifts up the meek, but he casts the wicked down to the ground.

Verse. 7. Sing unto the LORD with thanksgiving: sing praise upon the Harp unto
our God. The second exhortation unto praise and thanksgiving, in cheerfulness
and joy, is expressed with three reasons. In the exhortation; Learn, The whole
works of God, each of them in their own way, call (as it were) for our
estimation and praising of the workmanship which we see, they call for our
answer, as it were, and our duty requires of us, joyfully to make answer unto
the call, (as the Word imports) in praising the Maker, and thanking him for
the use and benefit which we have of his works: Sing unto the Lord with
thanksgiving, sing praise upon the harp unto our God.

Verse. 8. Who covers the heaven with clouds, who prepares rain for the
earth: who makes grass to grow upon the mountains. The first reason of the
second exhortation is, from his wise disposing of the clouds. Whence learn, 1.
Sometime the Lord hides the glory of the open heaven with clouds, that it may
appear again, with so much more new, fresh and pleasant luster: He covers the
Heaven with clouds. 2. The change which God makes upon the face of the Heaven
by dark clouds* is for advantage to the inhabitants of the earth: He prepares
rain for the earth. 3. The Lord takes care of the most barren parts of the
earth, to make them, by raining on them, more pleasant and profitable, then
otherwise they could be: He makes grass to grow upon the mountains.

Verse. 9. He gives to the beast his food: and to the young ravens which cry.
The second reason of the second exhortation to praise God is, from the Lords
care of beasts and fowls, whereby he gives men to understand, that he has a
far greater care of them: He gives to the beast his food, and to the young
ravens which cry.

Verse. 10. He delights not in the strength of the horse: he takes not
pleasure in the legs of a man.

11. The LORD takes pleasure in them that fear him: in those that hope in his
mercy.

The third reason of the second exhortation is, because God esteems very
little of those things wherein men naturally do put confidence, whether their
own strength or the strength of any creature, such as horses are, whereof men
do make most use: but he takes pleasure in the godly, who do fear him, and do
hope in him. Whence learn, 1. Men have more objects of carnal confidence, then
the idol of the power of Princes, or of the multitude of ^ollowers: for before
man want an idol, he will idolize his own strength, or the strength of an
horse, and put confidence therein, as the slight estimation which God has of
these confidences, and the discharge of putting confidence in them do
insinuate. 2. Wherein soever a man delights most, and puts most confidence,
that is the man's idol, and that which the man does bring in competition with
God, as the Lords discharging of taking delectation or pleasure in the
creature, instead of discharging to esteem of it, or put trust in it, does
import. 3. God esteems of no man for his riches, honor, command of horse and
foot, nor for his bodily strength: He delights not in the strength of the
horse: he takes not pleasure in the legs of a man. 4. The only right object of
our joy, pleasure and confidence, is God himself, as the opposition does teach
us: such as both believe in God, and fear to offend him, are the only men
acceptable to God, in whom God delights, and takes pleasure to keep
communion with them; The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those
that hope in his mercy; and by consequence such as do not fear him, and who,
when they are overtaken in a transgression, do not run to him for pardon in the
hope of mercy; He takes no pleasure in them.

Verse. 12. Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Zion. In the third
exhortation to praise God, expressly directed to Jerusalem and Sion,
representing the Church in all ages; ^earn, 1. Albeit all the earth be obliged
to praise God, yet only the Lords people are the right estimators of his glory,
and the fit proclaimers of his praise: Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem. 2. Albeit
all the creatures are the Lords, yet the Church is the Lords in a more nigh
relation; for the Church may claim interest in God as her own by Covenant;
Praise thy God, O Zion.

Verse. 13. For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates, he has blessed
thy children within thee.

14. He makes peace in thy border: and fills thee with the finest of the
wheat.

The reasons for the third exhortation are six, whereof four are in these
verses. The first is, the Lord has fenced his Church with walls, gates and
bars, that the gates of hell cannot prevail against it: He has strengthened
the bars of thy gates, to wit, by interposing of his Omnipotent power for her
preservation. 2. The second reason of praise is, that he makes one generation
to follow another in his Church, and the children to be in greater number then
their forefathers, by adding daily unto the Church such as are to be saved; He
has blessed thy children within thee: not only in regard of multiplication of
them, but also by making them to abound in all knowledge and grace. 3. The
third reason of praise is, that the true members of the Church have peace with
God, and among themselves, in that measure which is expedient for her good: He
makes peace in thy borders. 4. The fourth reason is, because he feeds his
people with food convenient, but especially in regard of their spiritual
nourishment, in giving them the bread of life, whereof the finest flower is but
a similitude; He fills thee with the finest of the wheat.

Verse. 15. He sends forth his commandment upon earth: his Word runs very
swiftly.

16. He gives snow like wool: he scatters the hoare frost like ashes.

17. He casts forth his ice likt morsels: who can stand before his cold?

18. He sends out his Word and melts them: he causes his wind to blow,
and the waters flow.

The fifth reason of the third exhortation unto Gods praise, is taken from Gods
powerful ruling of the least changes in the clouds, and in the air, in making
foul wearher and fair, frost and fresh weather, as he pleases, by which
similitude he will have his people to understand, that the Lord rules with a
more special eye all the changes which fall out in the external condition of
the Church. Whence learn, 1. The course of the creatures, and the changes in
them, even unto the least meteor or change, which is to be seen in the clouds
or in the air, is particularly directed and governed of God, whose will is a
law to the creature, and whose command has ready execution: He sends forth
his Commandment upon earth, his Word runs very swiftly. 2. The least change
of weather, by snow or frost, or ice, is by Gods dispensation and appointment,
much more any change of affairs in his Church; He gives snow like wool, he
scatters the hoare frost like ashes, he casts forth his ice like morsels.
3. The consequents and effects of the changes which God does make, as well in
one case as in another, could not be endured if God should not temper them, and
provide some remedy against them, as appears in the making of frost: Who can
stand before his cold? 4. Before any change from frost to fair weather can be
made, a new order must come forth from the Lord, and when that comes, air and
water do return to their former course, and so it is in any other change in the
world, especially in the affairs of the Church; He sends out his Word, and
melts them: he causes the wind to blow, and the waters flow.

Verse. 19. He shows his Word unto Jacob: his statutes and his judgments unto
Israel.

20. He has not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his judgments they have
not known them. Praise ye the LORD.

The sixth reason of the third exhortation to praise God is, from the different
dealing of God with his Church, and with the rest of the people of the world.
Whence learn, 1. The benefit of the Scriptures, and the opening up and
application of them, unto the edification of the hearers, is a precious gift of
God: and this benefit the Lord has bestowed on his Church, called by the names
of Jacob or Israel; He shows his Word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel. 2. The benefit of the Scriptures, and revealing the
Word of life unto the Church, makes Gods people in a better condition, and
more excellent then any other incorporation can be in* He has not dealt so
with any Nation. 3. Where the Word of God in his Scripture is not opened up,
there the Lords dealing with men in justice and mercy, and the way which the
Lord keeps in ruling of the world, is not understood, but people there do
live in deadly darkness; As for his judgments they have not known them. 4. As
the benefits bestowed upon the Church are most excellent, so the Church is most
bound to praise God, both for those mercies, and for all other his glorious
works: Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM CXLVIII.
IN this Psalm, the Church is stirred up to praise God, because of the
incomparable excellency of his glory and majesty, appearing first in the
heavens above, v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Secondly, in the earth and sea beneath, and
lower parts under the Heaven, v. 7, 8, 9, 10. Thirdly, in the governing of men,
and of all sorts and ranks of men, but especially in doing for his Church, v.
11, 12, 13, 14. In all which, as he shows, how the world is full of Gods
glory, so he points at matter of his praise, whithersoever we turn our eyes.

Ver. 1. PRaise ye the LORD, praise ye the LORD from the Heavens: praise him in
the heights.

2. Praise ye him all his Angels: praise ye him all his hosts.

3. Praise ye him Sun and Moon: praise him all ye stars of light.

4. Praise him ye Heaven of heavens: and ye waters that be above the Heavens.

5. Let them praise the Name of the LORD: for he commanded, and they were
created.

6. He has also established them for ever and ever; he has made a decree
which shall not pass.

In the exhortation to praise God because of his glory shining in the Heavens;
Learn, 1. Howsoever the glory of the Lord does shine in all his works, yet
there are degrees of the shining of it, and the chiefest glory is from
celestial creatures, and from the consideration of what is in heaven: Praise ye
the Lord, praise ye the Lord from the Heavens. 2. As God is praised in heaven*
by the blessed spirits that are there* so the true worshipper should join with
those that praise him there: Praise him in the heights, or high places. 3.
Albeit the Angels have the first place in the song of Gods praise, and need not
to be stirred to the work of praise by us, yet it is a part of our praising of
God, to consent unto their song, and account their work well bestowed on the
Lord their M^ker, and to hold the example of them before our eyes, aiming to do
Gods will on earth* as it is done in Heaven: Praise him all ye Angels. 4. The
Lord has at his hand swift servants not a few, to go in what message he
pleases to direct them* and they are ministering spirits for the good of his
Church; Praise ye him, all ye his Angels, or his messengers. 5. The Lord is
also well furnished with soldiers, for all his creatures are ready at his
command, to fight in Gods quarrel, in defense of his friends, and pursuit of
his foes: Praise ye him all his hosts. 6. The Lords armies are not idle, but
are still on their work of praising, doing the works of peace even in the midst
of war: Praise him all his hosts. 7. Beside the common song of praise, which
all things have as they are creatures, every one of the creatures have their
own proper parts in the Song: The Sun in his particular virtue and motion, the
Moon in hers, and the stars in theirs, every one by themselves, and these also
jointly make up a sweet and harmonious melody, to the praise of God; Praise ye
him Sun and Moon, praise him all ye star: of light. 8. The variety and
difference of place and distance from the earth, of Sun, Moon and Stars, some
of them being lower, some of them higher, as the Eclipses of Sun and Moon, and
the diverse positions of the stars do show, are all matters of Gods praise:
for the lowest region of the air is here called Heaven; and the place where
the Sun, Moon and Stars are set, is called Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens,
the third Heaven, where Angels and spirits of just men made perfect do remain,
each and all of them do serve for Gods praise; Praise him ye Heaven of Heavens.
9. The bottles of waters in the clouds, flying above the lowest region of the
air, ready to be dissolved here and there, as God pleases to water the earth,
do serve as matter, both of wondering at Gods work, and praising of him: Praise
him ye waters that be above the Heavens. 10. Praise is due to God, not only for
the making of the Heavens, but also for the making them of nothing, by the sole
word of command, which did produce them, by saying; Let them be: let them
praise the Name of the Lord; for he commanded, and they were created. 11. The
speechless creatures have their own way of praising God, and men have their
way of praising: speechless creatures praise God in their own kind, when they
hold forth, as in a table, the matter and reason of praising God, and men do
praise God, when they do observe and acknowledge, and proclaim one to another,
the reasons of Gods praise, and these exhortations do import both; Let them
praise the Name of the Lord. 12. The course and appointed motions of the
Heavens, are so settled during the standing of the world, as they shalll not
fail to go on according to Gods decree, which as it is a matter of Gods
praise, so also of man's comfort, who shall have the use and benefit thereof
from generation to generation: He has also established them for ever and ever,
he has made a decree which they shall not pass.

Verse. 7. Praise the LORD from the earth: ye dragons and all deeps.

8. Fire and hail, snow and vapor: stormy wind fulfilling his Word.

9. Mountains and all hills: fruitful trees and all Cedars.

10. Beasts and all cattle: creeping things, and flying foul.

In the exhortation, made in the second place unto the creatures under heaven:
Learn, 1. As the heavens, so also the earth and the deep sea, are filled with
the matter of Gods praise: Praise the Lord from the earth, ye dragons and all
deeps. 2. The most terrible creatures serve to set forth Gods glory, as well as
the most useful and comfortable: Ye dragons and all deeps. 3. The changes which
are made in the clouds or in the air, by storms or tempests, or whatsoever
way, come not by chance, but are all directed forth by God, for some intent of
his: and in what work he does employ them, they fail not to execute his will:
Fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind fulfilling his Word: and out of
those changes praises do arise unto God. 4. The diversifying of the face of the
earth with higher and lower parts, with mountains, hills and valleys, and the
adorning of the face thereof with trees, some taller, some lower and smaller,
some barren, some fruitful, contributeth much to the praise of God: Mountains
and all hills, fruitful trees and all Cedars. 5. Beside all that is said in the
variety of things living on the earth, each of them do contend with other,
which of them shall show forth more of Gods wisdom, power and goodness; Beasts
and all cattle, creeping things and flying foul: all those creatures do offer
matter of praise unto God, that men may take the song of their hand, and
directly, formally and properly, praise God for his glorious properties
evidenced in them.

Ver. 11. Kings of the earth, and all people: Princes and all Judges of the
earth.

12. Both young men and maidens: old men and children.

13. Let them praise the Name of the LORD, for his Name alone is excellent: his
glory is above the earth and heaven.

Having gone thorough other creatures, he comes to man who is the chief, both
matter and instrument of Gods praise. Whence learn, 1. The Lord is glorious in
his workmanship and government of all the creatures, but most of all in men,
whom he calls to be Factors, Collectors and Chamberlains, as it were, to
gather unto him the rent of praise and glory, from all other crea^ures, and
then to pay praises for their own part also; Kings of the earth, and all
people, let them praise, etc. 2. God is no leveller of men's estates and outward
condition in the world, or allower of levelling, but for his own praise and
men's good, he has ordained distinction of men in Kings and subject people,
Princes and Judges, and people to be judged in all parts of the earth; Kings of
the earth, and all people: Princes, and all Judges of the earth 3. As Civil
government is appointed of God, so they who are advanced to this dignity, are
first in the obligement unto the duty of setting for^h Gods praise, and yet
subjects here also must contribute, according to their place and ability, Kings
of the earth and all people, Princes and all Judges of the earth. 4. It should
qualify the minds of men who are in honor, that their preferment is but on
earth, and their time no longer then while they are on the earth, and that they
are under a King and Judge, whose dominion is heavenly and everlasting;
therefore does he join this addition, Kings of the earth, Princes and Judges
of the earth. 5. As distinguishing of men in regard o^ estate, so
distinguishing of sex and age, offers much matter of praise, when particulars
are considered; and for the very distinction in sex and age, God is to be
praised: Both young men and maidens, old men and children, let them praise. 6.
There is much matter of Gods glory in the earth, and more in the heavens, but
the glory of himself and of his properties, is more then all* that either is
or can be seen, or found or expressed in, or by the creature: Let them praise
the Name of the Lord: for his Name alone is excellent, his glory is above the
earth and the heavens.

Verse. 14. He alone exalts the horn of his people, the praise of all his
Saints: even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise ye the
LORD. In the last place, he points at the glory of God manifested to the
Church, for which all Gods people are bound to praise him. Whence learn, 1* The
praise of God for what he does to, and for his Church (...) ^bove all the rest
of his praises, from the rest of his works, as far as the work of redemption,
grace, and salvation to sinners, is above the works of creation. and worthy to
put the capestone upon the rest of the work of his praises, as here it is
placed. 2. Beside all the use and benefit which the Lords people have of the
whole works of Gods hands, he lifts them up in strength, victory and glory
over all their enemies, and over all other incorporations in the world, who are
but slaves to sin and Satan in comparison of them: He also exalts the horn
of his people. 3 The exalting of the strength, victory, and glory of the
Church, stands mainly in the exalting of the Messiah, or of the Kingdom of
the Messiah represented by the exalting of David; for Christ is the horn of
his people, in whom their victory and glory is obtained, and maintained unto
them; and therefore the horn of his people is expounded here to be, The praise
of all the Saints. 4. Those are the true children of Israel, who glory in
Christ as their strength, their victory, and glory, and do study to be in
effect Saints: for, his people, and his Saints, are here expounded to be, even
the children of Israel. 5. Students of holiness, who glory and rejoice in
Jesus, as their strength, victory, righteousness, and salvation, and who are
wrestlers for the blessing as true Israelites, are the Lords people in a more
strait union with God, then any other people in the world; A people near unto
him: and that in regard of their Covenant with God, their incorporation in
Christ, and the inhabitation of the holy Spirit in them, and the mutual love
between God and them. 6. Of all people in the earth, the people of God have
most reason to praise their Lord: Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM CXLIX.
THis Psalm is a ninefold exhortation of the true members of the Church, who
are believers and Saints in effect, to praise God for saving grace bestowed on
(...) for special privileges granted unto them; not only (...) what is given
to the world, but also above what is given to the visible members of the
Church, who are not as yet converted: whereunto some reasons or motives unto
the obedience of these exhortations are added.

Verse. 1. PRaise ye the LORD: sing unto the LORD a new song: and his praise in
the Congregation of the Saints. From the first two exhortations; Learn, 1. The
elect, regenerate, or true believers, have a song of their own, for mercies
proper to them, beside the praise which they have to give for the Lords work
round about them, and therefore they have a proper reason to praise God for
their own particular: Praise ye the Lord. 2. The song of the redeemed elect and
converted, is a new song which shall never wax old, nor be cut off, an
everlasting song: Sing unto the Lord a new song. 3. It is Gods ordinance, that
the worshippers of the Lord should have assemblies and meetings* wherein
publicly and jointly they may glorify the Lord in proclaiming cheerfully his
praise: Sing his praise in the congregation of the Saints.

Verse. 2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Sion be
joyful in their King. From the third and fourth exhortation; Learn, 1. It is
the Lords command, that his people rejoice in himself, with a joy above all
the joy which they can have in the creatures, which God has given to them,
that they may the more cheerfully praise him: Let Israel rejoice in him. 2. The
Church of the elect and renewed Saints, is the special workmanship of Gods
grace, not only as his creatures, but also as his new creatures, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works: Let Israel rejoice in him that made him. 3. The
Church is a peculiar Kingdom by it self, whereof God is King in a peculiar
way, able to govern his people by his Word, discipline and Spirit, and to
defend his Church, and all his own ordinances therein, to the comfort of all
the true members thereof: Let the children of Sion be joyful in their King.

Verse. 3. Let them praise his Name in the dance* let them sing praises unto him
with the timbrel and harp. From the fifth and sixth exhortation to praise God;
Learn, 1. The joy of the believer, is a great and growing joy, arising from
rejoicing, in the former verse, to exulting, in this verse, signified by
dancing: Let them praise his Name in the dance. 2. The joy of the godly is a
complete joy, employing all, and filling all the power^ of the soul, signified
by musical instruments used in the paedagogy of the old Church: Let them sing
praises unto him with the timbrel and harp.

Ver. 4. For the LORD takes pleasure in his people: he will beautify the meek
with salvation. Of these exhortations he gives two reasons. Whence learn, 1.
The Lord loves believers and repents not, but rests in his love, and
takes pleasure in his workmanship upon them: The Lord takes pleasure in his
people. 2. The constancy of the Lords love toward his people, is the ground of
the Churches constant joy in God, and perpetual praising of him: Let them sing
praises to him with the timbrel, and the harp: for the Lord takes pleasure in
his people. 3. Whatsoever matter of joy believers or true Saints have in God,
yet they are acquainted with as much affliction in the world, as emptieth them
of rejoicing in themselves; humbles them, and subdueth their spirits, and
makes them to aim and endeavor without fretting or grudging, to digest all
the Lords dispensations toward them, and for this cause the believers, or
Saints, are called meek. 4. Albeit the affliction wherewith the godly are
acquainted, does obscure their blessedness, and hide the beauty thereof before
the world, yet God in love to them, oft-times wipeth off the black and blemish
of affliction, by giving them glorious deliveries, and at length he gives to
them full salvation: He will beautify the meek with salvation.

Verse. 5. Let the Saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their
beds.

6. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth: and a two-edged sword be in
their hand.

From the seventh, eighth and ninth exhortations to praise God; Learn, 1. The
godly, or true members of the Church, are Gods favorites, endued with grace,
accepted through the beloved: yea, and are good to such as they live among; for
so much does the word Saints import. 2. The believer may be joyful now, for
the glory hoped for, and may glory in the promised blessedness, as if it were
already possessed: Let the Saints be joyful in glory 3. The joy allowed upon
the Saints, is a lasting joy* both day and night; a joy which when they are
most retired, may be most enjoyed, which being examined in secret shall be
found solid; a joy full of quiet, rest and peace, as if they were ^esting in
their beds; a joy which shall continue with them, when their bodies are lying
in the grave: for thus much may the words bear in diverse respects; Let them
sing aloud upon their beds. 4. The praises of God set down in his Word, wherein
the Lords Name and attributes, the Lords promises and glorious works,
especially done in favor of his Saints, are set down, are the matter of the
Saints confidence, gloria^ion and joy, worthy to be talked of, and openly
declared in the audience of others, for the glory of God, and edification of
people: for what the Lord is, to wit, wise, powerful, merciful, just, etc.
that the Lord is for his people, and for every believer in him; and therefore*
Let the high praises of the Lord be in their mouth* 5* As the Word of God
wherein Gods praises are set down, is the matter and warrant of the Saints joy
and confidence in God, so also is it a powerful weapon to overturn all
adversaries power whatsoever, both bodily and spiritual: Let the p^^ises of God
be a two-edged sword in their hand.

Verse. 7. To execute vengeance upon the heathen: and punishments upon the
people.

8. To bind their kings with chain: and their nobles with fetters of iron.

9. To execute upon them the judgment written: This honor have all his
Saints. Praise ye the LORD.

By way of motive unto the obedience of the former exhortations, to rejoice in
God, and glorify him, he subjoyneth a special use of the praises of God, set
down in Scripture in relation to enemies, and persecutors of the Saints; over
whom all believers have a spiritual victory by faith in God, so that as the
Lords Officers, they may pronounce doom and sentences condemnatory against all
their enemies great and small, according as the Scripture gives them warrant.
And this doom and sentence of judgment pronounced by the believer, whether in
his own mind* or vocally as occasion offers, must have execution undoubtedly
following upon it, according to what is written in the Scripture, and this is
no small honor allowed upon the Saints. Whence learn, 1. The elect and
regenerate, believing students of holiness, have enemies both without the
Church visible, and within it, both heathen and people. 2. God will be avenged
upon them all great and small; for it is presupposed that vengeance must be
executed upon the heathen, and punishment upon the people. 3. The believers are
in a fort executioners of this vengeance, because they as doomsters, do take
the sentence from the mouth of God, the just Judge, and pronounce doom on them,
whereupon, in the set time follows execution; the Word of God falling on them
in effect, as a sharp sword to cut them asunder: thus the truth and justice of
God, with his other attributes, all being parts of his praise, Are a two-edged
sword in their hands, to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishment
upon the people. 4. The greatest Monarchs, Rulers and Judges among men, are
subjected unto the Word of God, and must be bound either to the belief and
obedience of it, or unto the punishment and vengeance pronounced against the
transgressors thereof, so fast as if they were bound in strongest fetters: for
the praise of God in the mouth of his Saint, are, To bind their kings with
chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron. 5. The Lords children and
Saints must not do wrong to Kings or Nobles, or to any man else; they must
neither pronounce nor execute judgment according as they please, but as the
written Word of God prescribes or allows: for here they are tied, To execute
nothing upon them, save the judgment written. 6. These privileges are
spiritual and common to all believers, who according to their places and
callings, whether public or private, may for their own comfort, and for others
edification, accordingly apply the Word of God to themselves, and against their
enemies: for, This honor have all his Saints, and therefore they ought in a
special manner to bless God for their privileges: Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CL.
IN this Psalm the Spirit of the Lord does call upon us thirteen times to
praise the Lord: Each exhortation points forth God to be the only object of
pra^se. The first and the last exhortation is to all, to praise God absolutely,
without giving any motive more then his very Name imports, which indeed is a
sufficient reason: for seeing the Lord is God, who has his being of himself:
and all the creatures have their being of him, and dependence on him, it
follows of necessity, that he is praise worthy in himself, and deserves to
be praised by all his creatures. The second, third, fourth and fifth
exhortations, have reasons and motives annexed unto them, as the matter of his
praise, v. 1, 2. The sixth, seventh, eighth, nineth, tenth, eleventh, do teach
the manner of his praise, under the terms of the Levitical service, v. 3, 4,
5. and the twelfth points at the persons or special party, which must yield
the praise unto God, with a reason insinuated, moving thereunto, v. 6.

Ver. 1. PRaise ye the LORD: Praise God in his Sanctuary: Praise him in the
firmament of his power.

2. Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.

From these exhortations which have motives annexed to them; Learn, 1. The
holiness of God, (which is the unstained clearness and untainted glory of all
his attributes, such as are his wisdom, power, justice, mercy, and all the rest
of his properties mentioned in Scripture) is the subject of the Saints praising
of God in the Church, and of Spirits praising of him in heaven; for the word in
the Original does bear, Praise the Lord in his holiness, in hls Sanctuary, in
heaven his holy place. 2. The holiness of God should be mainly looked unto by
all men, who are about to praise him, that our hearts and mouths may be
rightly framed for so high a service, and we may beware to take his Name in
vain: for he will be sanctified of all that draw near unto him, especially in
the work of praise: Praise God in his holiness. 3. Matter of praise is
furnished to us, in the wisdom and power of God, which is to be seen in the
creatures, and particularly in the frame of the stories of heaven; in the first
whereof, his power supports the huge weight of waters in the clouds; in the
second, the stars and planets move, and make their circles constantly; and in
the third, Heavens, Angels, and Spirits of just men made perfect do praise God;
Praise him in the firmament of his power. 4. Matter of praising God is
furnished by his manifold mighty acts, to be seen in the powerful sustaining,
ruling and employing of all his creatures, as he sees fittest for his own
glory, for the building of his Church, delivering of her from dangers, and
overthrowing of her enemies; Praise the Lord for his mighty acts. 5. Matter of
praising God is furnished in his wonderful greatness, and in the rays of
excellency, shining in all his dispensations, and manner of governing the
world, sustaining some individual creatures, which are still the same, from the
Creation, and multiplying others in their kind, to the astonishment of a
serious beholder; Praise him according to his excellent greatness.

Verse. 3. Praise him with the sound of the Trumpet: praise him with the
Psaltery and Harp.

4. Praise him with the Timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed instrumrnts
and Organs.

5. Praise him upon the land Cymbals: praise him upon the high sounding Cymbals.

Here are other six exhorrations, teaching the manner of praising God under the
shadow of typical music, appointed in the Ceremonial Law. Whence learn, 1*
Albeit the typical Ceremonies of musical instruments in Gods public worship,
belonging to the paedagogie of the Church, in her minority before Christ, be
now abolished with the rest of the Ceremonies: yet the moral duties shadowed
forth by them, are still to be studied, because this duty of praising God, and
praising him with all our mind, strength and soul is moral, whereunto we are
perpetually obliged. 2. The variety of musical instruments, some of them made
use of in the Camp, as trumpets; some of them more suitable to a peaceable
condition, as Psalteries and Harps; some of them sounding by blowing wind in
them; some of them sounding by lighter touching of them, as stringed
instruments; some of them by beating on them more sharply, as Tabrets* Drums
and Cymbals; some of them sounding, by touching and blowing also, as Organs:
all of them giving some certain sound, some more quiet, and some making more
noise: some of them having a harmony by themselves; some of them making a
Consort with other instruments, or with the motions of the body in dancings,
some of them serving for one use, some of them serving for another, and all of
them serving to set forth Gods glory, and to shadow forth the duty of
worshippers, and the privileges of the Saints: The plurality and variety, (I
say) of these instruments, were fit to represent diverse conditions of the
spiritual man, and of the greatness of the joy to be found in God, and to
teach what stirring up should be of the affections and powers of our soul, and
one of another, unto Gods worship; what harmony should be among worshippers of
God, what melody each should make in himself, singing to God with grace in his
heart, and to show the excellency of Gods praise, which no means nor
instrument, nor any expression of the body joined thereto, could sufficiently
set forth: and thus much is figured forth in these exhortations to praise God
with Trumpet, Psaltery, Harp; Timbrel, Dance, stringed instruments; and Organs,
loud and high sounding Cymbals.

Ver. 6. Let every thing that has breath, praise the LORD: Praise ye the LORD.
In the twelfth exhortation, pointing at the party called upon to praise God;
Learn, 1. Living creatures, which draw breath and give unto, and take from God
their life afresh every moment in their breathing, do above all visible
creatures speak most to the praise of Gods wisdom and power in framing and
preserving of them: Let every thing that has breath, praise the Lord. 2. Of
all living creatures, men are most bound to praise God, as they in whom God in
the Creation, and in their several generations, from age to age, did and does
breath the Spirit of life, and of all men those are most bound to praise God,
on whom he has bestowed his holy Spirit: and howsoever the Lords works in all
men shall speak to his praise, how wicked soever men shall be, yet only renewed
souls, in whom God has breathed his Spirit, as the word breath in the Original
may bear, shall voluntarily and sincerely praise God: Let every thing that has
breath, praise the Lord. 3. The Spirit of the Lord, when he gave the Psalms to
the Church of the Jews, had an eye toward the rest of the world, of whom he
was in his appointed time to exact this Song of praise: and so we who are
Gentiles, brought unto the society of the Church, are bound to join in the
work with them; and when we are joined, and when all who are to be converted
are joined, yet are we all too few, to bear up this Song of Gods praise; and
therefore to show this, it is said, Let every thing that has breath praise the
Lord. 4. When we have said all we are able to say for Gods praise, we are but
to begin again anew; for this are we taught by the renewing of the exhortation,
in the close of sundry Psalms, and here also, at the end of all the Psalms:
Praise ye the Lord. And after us must all the creatures come in their own kind
and order, to offer up praise also, as we are taught, Rev. 5. v. 12. where
after that elect Angels and Saints, whose number was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands, had sung their Song, saying, With a loud
voice, Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain, to receive power and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. Then it follows,
v. 13. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the
earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying,
Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

FINIS.
BOOKS newly printed by RALPH SMITH.
Master HVTCHESONS Exposition of Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk and
Zephaniah.

A Practical Discourse of Prayer, showing the Duty, Necessity, and the several
sorts of Prayer, by Mr. THOMAS COBBET.

The CHRISTIANS CHARTER, showing the Privilege of Believers: the third
Edition, very much enlarged, by Mr. WATSON, Minister of Stephens Walbrook --

Also Mr. WATSONS Treatise of CHRISTIAN CONTENTMENT, the second Edition.


