A DIALOGUE Betwixt the Devil and the Whigs.
Now, Reader, tell me, if you can,
Which is the Devil, who the Man;
For if a Tekelite be a Turk,
They both do (All) the Devils Work.
Whigs. WE have pursued those Plots thou did invent,
And made our Parties in a Parliament,
And to no purpose, what can we do more;
Thou let'st the Tories in, yet keep'st the Door.

Devil. When ought does not succeed you first blame Me,
Amongst your selves Ye never did agree:
Your Wise-false-brethren have undone your Cause,
And from no Subjects, slav'd you to the Laws.

Whigs. We know no Laws but those our Selves do make,
And Hanging never confess (All) for Thy sake:
Thou know what we have done, and more would do,
But deal'st with us, as Witches, leave us so.

Devil. My Power is to Incline, not to Compel,
You are the Ministers to Act for Hell;
But do not send me those I did expect,
Through your base Cowardice, or Fool's neglect.

Whigs. Can We do more than Thou; We killed a KING,
And his Best Subjects did to Judgment bring:
We sent them hence, when they were under Ground,
We thought all Flesh, was in the Devil's Pound.

Devil. You speak as you believe, were it not so
Thousands of you might unto Heaven go;
But Your Association with Me
Will keep us Friends to all Eternity,
And never be reproached for Perjury.

Whig. Thou the first Rebel, taught'st us to Rebel,
Surely Thou need'st no Company in Hell.
Thou shamd'st Us in Contriving of this Plot,
That GOD himself would oversee the Blot,
Because that in his Name it was Begot.

Devil. There is a Bard a^ strange as is his Name,
A Power you know not, who has raised his Fame,
It Is He, whose Wisdom Countermin'd your Arts,
And on your selves returned your poisoned Darts.

Whig. That Devil Observator, Oh! it is He
We would not see (GOD) in His Company:
Our very Thoughts, He seemed to know so well,
They were in Print, before the were known in Hell.

Devil. His Demon circles Him, I cannot Kill
Nor Hurt Him, so much as to shake his Quill,
He Writes such Truths, and Speaks such Sacred Things,
The Churches Champion, and the Guard of Kings.

Whig. Though Thou Confess, Thou can not yet Repent
No more than We; Then down when we are sent,
There curse the Fates, who spin so long His Thread,
That He will live, to see our Children Dead.

Devil. Take Comfort yet, the Blood that You have spilt,
No former Age can parallel your Guilt.
I did corrupt the Mobile of Heaven.
You did the like on Earth, now We are even.
This Kindness I will do; Over my Furies,
I Will make You Presidents, Judges, or Juries.

Printed by N.T. at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden. 1684.


