THE ROYALISTS DEFENSE: VINDICATING THE KING'S PROCEEDINGS IN THE LATE WAR
MADE AGAINST HIM.

Clearly discovering, How and by what Impostures the Incendiaries of these
Distractions have subverted the known Law of the Land, the Protestant
Religion, and reduced the people to an unparalled Slavery.

Veritas emerget Victrix.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

To all the People of ENGLAND.
IN every Commonwealth where the tyranny of an Arbitrary power prevails not,
some known persons are assigned; unto whom, for matter of law, both the
Governors, and the Persons governed, do submit: For example, where a King has
the Sovereignty, if it be likewise in his power to judge the Law, his authority
is Arbitrary: He may then take the life, or confiscate the estate of whom he
pleases, and for what cause he thinks fit.

And the same it is, when the sovereign power is in several persons, whatever
their number be, and however composed, if they have also authority to judge the
Law by which they govern, the rest of the People are inslaved to their will.

But herein the Subjects of England are a most happy people; By the
constitutions of this Realm, our King has inherently in His Person the
sovereign power of government, but He has not authority to judge the Law. The
Judges of the Realm declare by what law the King governs, and so both King and
people regulated by a known law.

(...) giddy multitude, out goes Presidents found in the Old Testament, showing
that Subjects so anciently, sometimes resisted lawful Authority, and have
rebelled against their King.

Nor be the Lawyers herein excusable, too many of them (declining the authority
of the Judges of the Realm) make their own expositions of the Books, and
Records, their rule to know the Law.

Now amongst those, he who has once got the reputation of an Antiquary, and
has accustomed himself to discourse of things out of the common road, ipso
facto, is Master of this Art. It is then but making use of some dull
expressions found in an old worm-eaten Record, selecting the mistaken opinions
of some particular Judges obiter, delivered in Arguments, or some dark
Sentences taken out of a rotten Manuscript. And if any printed Book be daigned
the mentioning, it must not be the known authentic Authors, reporting the
resolutions of the Court of Justice, nor such as show the common and constant
practice of the Kingdom, which is the Law it self, but some antiquated thing
whose Author is unknown, and his meaning as obscure. These rules being
observed, his work is done; the people observing this Cynicks discourse to be
different from other men, presently conclude him to be far more learned in his
profession, then his fellow Lawyers, and gaze upon him as an infallible guide.

Those sorts of people, both Divines and Lawyers, thus prepared, are equally
armed to assault either King, or Subject; and (ever looking upon their
particular interest) as they find Instruments to work upon, make their
applications, sometimes by the assistance of a greedy Sycophant-Courtier, the
KING is abused, being by those persons drawn to act things not warranted by the
constitutions of the Realm. Other times by the aid of discontented Spirits,
whoever (affect popularity) the people are incited to disobey the Kings just
commands. And so, misunderstanding, oftentimes is occasioned, between the King
and His Subjects, whereupon arises fears and jealousies on both sides.

This (in some sort) was our condition before this Parliament, which was the
groundwork whereupon these men at Westminster (even by a total destruction of
the whole Nation) have completed the business.

At the first meeting of this Parliament, the confusion began visibly to
appear: The Incendiaries of that Faction not only cherished the old, but (by
casting false calumnies upon the King) fomented new jealousies, whereby the
people were put into such a pannick fear, as that they believed a present
destruction inevitably must befall them, if not preserved by the Members of the
two Houses of Parliament.

And the King on the other side, with wonderful expressions of loyalty (even
by the same Serpent) was told He should be made more Glorious, then any of His
Ancestors or Predecessors: But the Members having thus increased the flame,
between the King and the Subject, and having by these false surmises and
cunning dissemblings, gulled the people into a belief, That whatever the
Members declared, be it in things either Spiritual, or Temporal, the one was
good Law, and the other true Gospel; which the Members perceiving, they
instantly made use thereof, and upon that score Voted it a high Breach of the
Privilege of Parlialiament for any (the Judges, the Courts of Justice, nor the
King himself excepted) either to oppose their Commands, or to deny that to be
Law, which they declared so to be: By which slight, their whole work was
finished, for by this the known Law was absolutely subverted, and both King and
people (for their Consciences, their Lives, Estates, and Fortunes) inslaved, to
their will and doom.

But this Arbitrary power, thus by the Members usurped, rested not long there:
Shortly after that, a Faction in the City of London, who were the mony'd men,
and so interessed in buying the Church Lands, and those who were possessed of
beneficial places in gathering that cursed tax of Excise, and the like, gave
the law unto these Members; And now we see it is a Council of War (although
acted in the name of the Westminster men, called the Parliament) and none else,
who dare declare the Law. And so for the present six or eight empty souls, and
(until enriched by theft and plunder) indigent persons, are our Legislators.

And in this condition the people must be, It cannot be otherwise until the
King be restored to His just Rights; for till then, although we have as many
new Governors as new Moons, it is but so often changing the Theif.

It is not at all considerable to the people, whether this or that Faction, or
which opinion in Religion prevails in the Houses, be it the true Protestant
Religion established, Popery, Presbytery, Independency, or what else soever it
is, whilst the King is kept from his just Rights of His Negative Voice in
Parliament, and his Sovereign power of Government, every predominant Party
makes his Will the Law: and consequently, the people for their Consciences,
their Lives, Estates, and Fortunes inslaved to that Faction.

Therefore whether thou be a Royalist, or against thy King, what Religion
soever, Sect or opinion thou do profess: If thou have not lost thy wits,
thou must be sensible of thy present sad condition; Do thou enjoy a
competent estate? do thou find comfort in having freedom of thy conscience
in matters of Religion? In the society of thy wife, family, kindred, or
friends? if thou do consider what hopes thou have to enjoy them, to think
thereof, will rather add grief unto thy soul, then increase thy consolation;
for being defeated of thy Protector (the known Law) which is banished, thou
can not for the least instant of time, promise to thy self continuance of any
one of these blessings.

If the major part of the Members require from thee, thy life, thy estate, thy
fortune, thy friend, or what ever else is most dear unto thee: It is, say they,
a breach of Privilege of Parliament, not to submit thy self to the block, and
render all to their lusts.

And if thou have in this War, acted against thy King, thy case is still worse,
for by that War, the Law is destroyed, and so thou have been an Instrument of
thine own and the Kingdoms ruin. Yet of that faction against the King, there
be two sorts of people: The one for self ends, against their own knowledge:
the other misled, and so pursuing (although an erroneous one) their own
conscience.

For those of the first rank, I fear (like unto Judas) their own souls
render themselves hopeless of pardon, which I presume (like unto Catiline)
makes them judge themselves in no security, but by attempting worse evils,
which doubtless begat that barbarous Vote and declaration of the Members, not
to make further Application to their King. And for those of the latter rank,
how far their following the dictamen of their own conscience, in point of
Divinity may excuse them, I will not dispute, but, certain I am by the
constitutions of this Realm, in Temporal things, it neither extenuates the
crime, nor mitigates the punishment. In our Law, it is a Maxim, and a just one
too: Ignorantia Juris non excusat. If not known the Law, be a Plea, or
justification in facts of Treason, murder, felony, trespass or the like, both
King and people were without protection, either of life, person, or estate: It
were easy for every Malefactor to pretend ignorance of the Law. Therefore when
the difference between the King and the two Houses first happened, every
Subject at his peril ought so far to have rectified his judgment, as to have
informed himself which side the Law obliged him to adhere unto: yet not by that
obliged to impossibilities; for, although most men (in many particulars) are
unknowing of the Law; every one (even of the meanest capacity) may as easily
learn from whom he is to be informed thereof, (the Judges of the Realm) as a
sick man may find out where his Physician dwells.

Now for want of so much consideration as to make enquiry, whether (by the Laws
of England) the King, or the Members, was therein to be obeyed, that sort of
people were surprised, quitting their Allegiance to their King, adhered to the
Members their fellow Subjects, and engaged in this horred Rebellion: Therefore
in strictness of Law, as guilty of Treason, as those of the former rank.

And thus by receding from that one principle in submitting to the true Judge
of the Law, this desolation is come upon the whole Kingdom. Had the King been
suffered to enjoy his lawful power of Sovereignty: The Judges of the Realm
their Offfce of declaring the Law, by which the King governs, and the
Parliament (that is, the King and the two Houses jointly its proper authority,
viz. When necessity requires to make new Laws, or change the old: Had the
Divines, the Lawyers, and especially the Members of the two Houses, kept
themselves within their own spheres, and every one submitted unto, and obeyed
his lawful Superior, the known Law of the Land had continued in force, and
consequently we had still been a most flourishing people.

But it is never too late to amend: and if every one would herein begin at
home, the work were instantly done: but although it cannot be expected that
all men will do their duty, yet for those who were cheated into this Rebellion,
their judgments being once rectified, it were not only against the rules of
charity, but of reason likewise, to conceive they should not with much more
Zeal endeavor to restore the King and the people to their freedom, then
(grounding upon an erroneous conscience) they prosecuted theirs, and their own
confusion.

Now to show, that the honest vulgar people (which are infinite in comparison
of the Seducers) were by the Incendiaries of these Westminster men intrapped
into this Rebellion. That by the Laws of the Land (every man's only true guide)
all the Subjects of the Realm ought in that War to have adhered unto the King;
That by the peoples disobedience therein, the known Law is subverted, and
themselves inslaved: That until the King be restored unto His just rights, the
known Law set on foot, and a submission to the true Judges thereof, the people
are not to hope for other, then increase of misery: And that by doing this,
(which is both in their power, and the peoples duty to perform) is the scope
of this Treatise.

And herein, let none heretofore active against the King (by reflecting upon
the Law, which as before appears, does judge him a Traitor) be deterred from
doing his duty; That were (in example of Judas) to revenge themselves upon
their own persons: They do thereby become the Authors of their own ruin;
for as we have the seat of (...)

(...) then by attributing it to the Parliament: Therefore much more is the
arrogance of the Members to claim that unlimited authoty without the King.

CHAP. V.

That the Judges of the Kings Bench, of the Common Pleas, and the Barons of the
Exchequer, are the Judges of the Realm, unto whom the people are bound lastly
and finally to submit themselves for matter of Law. p. 49.

Wherein is showed, that the Members are neither qualified, nor of a composier
fit to Judge the Law: And that if the King or the two Houses have that power,
the known Law is destroyed, and the people inslaved.

CHAP. VI.

That the Judges of the Realm ought to be elected, and authorized by the King
of England, for the time being, and by none else. p. 64.

Wherein it is showed, to be most preposterous for the Members to assume it;
And that all persons condemned, and executed by their sentence, or the sentence
of their nominall Judges (whether guilty or not guilty) are murdered, and all
other proceedings void in Law.

CHAP. VII.

That the King is the only Supreme Governor, unto whom all the people of
this Nation in point of Sovereignty, and Government, are bound to subject
themselves. p. 69.

Wherein is showed, that Sovereign power of Government, power to make Laws,
and power to judge the Law, are three feverall things; and by the constitutions
of England ought to be in three several hands: The first is in the King, the
second in the King and the two Housis, and the third in the Judges. That the
Members having usurped all these, have destroyed the Law, and inslaved the
people.

CHAP. VIII.

That the Militia of the Kingdom by the known Law of the Land is inherent in
the Crown, and at the absolute command of the King and none else. p. 89.

Wherein is showed the true use of the Militia, the gross absurdity of the
Members claim thereunto: And that their usurpation herein has undone the
Kingdom.

CHAP. IX.

That all persons who have promoted this War in the name of King and
Parliament, and all such as have acted therein, or adhered thereunto, are
guilty of Treason. p. 100.

CHAP. X.

That the Subjects of this Nation, are not only commanded from doing violence
to the Kings Person, or prejudice to His authority, but are obliged with their
lives and fortunes, to assist and preserve His person, and just rights from the
fury of His enemies both foreign and domestic. p. 112.

CHAP. XI.

That those persons at Westminster, who call themselves, The Parliament of
England, are not the two Houses, nor Members of the Parliament. p. 113.

CHAP. XII.

Results upon the premises.

That the people of England under the government of the King, according to the
Laws of the Realm are a free Subject. p. 125.

CHAP. XIII.

That the people of England under the government claimed by the Members of the
two Houses, are absolute slaves. p. 128.

CHAP. XIV.

How the Subjects of England were brought into this slavery. p. 132.

CHAP. XV.

The way how to restore the people unto their former Liberty. p. 135.

The Preamble, or Introduction to the ensuing Discourse, wherein are contained
the Motives which induced the Author to take up Arms for the KING against the
Forces raised by command of the Members of the two Houses of PARLIAMENT.
WHen the unhappy difference between His Majesty and the two Houses began to
appear, I endeavored to satisfy my self of the cause thereof; which I found
to be thus:

The Members formed a (...) concerning the 25. Febr. 1641.
Militia of the Kingdom to this effect, viz. That certain persons by them
therein named, shall have power to Call together, Muster, and Arm all the
people of the Kingdom, and Conduct them into any part of the Realm to
suppress rebellious Insurrections or Invasions in such sort as the Members
(without the King) shall signify: this power to continue so Long and no longer
then those Members please, and disobedience therein to be punished by the
Members and none else.

This being presented to the King, He refused to confirm it with His Royal
Assent: The Members thereupon, stiling it, An Ordinance of Parliament without
the King, declared it a Law: By which in words, not only the Militia of the
Kingdom, and the Government of the Realm, was taken from the Crown, and
removed to the Members, but an Arbitrary power usurped by them to signify and
declare what Facts were Rebellion, and what not; and accordingly by pretext and
color thereof caused the people to be Arrayed, Armed, and Mustered: And so in
effect the Kings Sword and Scepter wrested out of His hands by His own
Subjects.

And further, the Members pretending the King (not consenting to that Law) was
Evil-counselled by like Ordinances, raised Armies, appointed the Earl of Essex
their General, authorized them by War to Kill and slay their fellow Subjects,
and to remove from the King those pretended bad Counselors.

The King by His Proclamation inhibited all Persons from adhering unto them,
and required His Subjects obedience unto Him 27. Maii 1642.
their King.

Hereupon I seriously bethought my self, whether I was obliged herein to obey
the King, or the Members; and resolved the Laws of England ought to be my
guide, which I found to be thus:

That this Nation is governed by a known Law, that Law expounded by the Judges
of the Realm, Those Judges appointed and authorized by the King our only
Supreme Governor, unto whom alone all the people of England are obliged (in
point of Sovereignty and Government) to submit themselves.

Then I considered in whom the power of the Militia was before the making of
the aforesaid Ordinances.

Secondly, (...) ^^teration those Ordinances made:

For the first, I found that the Militia of the Kingdom by the known Law was
inherently in the King.

For the latter, that no New Law can be made, or the Old changed but by the
King, with the assent of the two Houses of Parliament: And finding the King
therein to dis-assent, I did without scruple resolve the law was not altered,
therefore the Militia still in the Crown, and consequently, that it was my duty
herein to obey the Kings Command, not the Members.

Then I considered what was the offense of a Subject to join with those Forces
raised by the Members, which I found, to be the crime of High, Treason.

And lastly, it being the duty of every Subject not only to decline opposing
his Sovereign, but to assist Him against all disloyal actions, I took up
Arms for Him, (and in His defense) in this War: Since which, I have met with
some Objections against these my proceedings, which with my Answers to them, I
have set down in this ensuing Discourse.

And first, concerning the grounds of the Law.

CHAP. I. That the Laws of England consist in general customs, particular
Customs, and Acts of Parliament.
MOst evident it is, that from the subduing of this Nation, by the Romans,
(which is about 1700 years ago) the people of this Realm have been governed
by a Monarchical power, first under the Roman Emperors, then under the
Saxons, awhile under the Danes, again under the Saxons, and lastly, under the
Norman Conqueror and his Progeny until this day; yet by what particular Laws
those former Kings governed, no authentic Author beyond the time of William
the Conqueror does make it appear. But certain it is, after that Conqueror
had in a Battle slain Harold, and vanquished his Army (which is near 600 years
since) the people of this Nation submitted unto him as King of England, who
being in possession of the Crown agreed to Govern by known Laws: Now Vide Pref.
Cok. 8. Report.
whether those were new Laws introduced, or the old continued (as to this
purpose) is not material: But by that very same Law (as by several Acts of
Parliament it appears) diverse of his Successors Kings, (calling unto them
for their advice such of their Subjects as they thought fit) by Acts of
Parliament made new Laws, and changed the old; but succeeding Kings since that
have herein limited themselves, insomuch as by the Constitutions of the Realm
(as now it is settled) the Law of England consists in these three particulars:

1. General Customs, as thus, the eldest Son to Inherit his Fathers Preface
to Cok. 4. Report.
Land; the Wife to enjoy a Third part of her Husbands Inheritance for her
Dower; these, and such like, are generally Law Coke 9. fol. 75. Plo. 195. 319.
throughout the Kingdom, therefore called the Common Law.

2. Particular Customs, as thus, in some places the youngest Son, in other
places all Equally Inherit their Fathers Land; these, and such like, are
particular Customs, being fixed to particular places, and by ancient,
constant, and frequent use, is become Law there, although not generally
throughout the Kingdom.

3. Acts of Parliament made by the King with the assent of the two Houses: All
which together, that is to say, The Common Law, particular Customs and Acts of
Parliament make the Law of England. By this Law all men are protected in their
Persons and Estates, wherein there is no difference between King and People,
for neither King nor Subject has, or can justly claim any right interest
Cokes Preface 4. Report.
or authority, but such as He is entitled unto by the Common Law, by Particular
Custom, or by Act of Parliament.

In the next place it is showed when the two Houses were Instituted, and what
is a Parliament.

CHAP. II. What is a Parliament, and how, and when the two Houses were
Instituted.
AS it is necessary for a Commonwealth to have a Law, so every known law must
be grounded upon certain rules: Therefore be it composed with never so much
care, the people cannot be well governed, unless some persons have power in
some things to alter the old and make new Laws. Emergent occasions are often such
as require raising money, and other things to be done which the prescribed rules
of a known Law cannot warrant; which persons so authorized to make Laws in this
Nation, are called the Parliament.

And that those Persons at this time consist of the King and both Houses
jointly, is a thing most obvious to all men, but how long it has been so is
uncertain: For although all the Sages of the Law, and judicious Historians
agree, (and therewith reason it self concurreth) that ever since we have had
Laws, some persons have had power in some things to alter and make new Laws,
which might properly be called a Parliament, yet until long after the Norman
Conquest. I do not find it cleared what was a Parliament, or what Persons had
that power: But upon perusal of the Statutes themselves, (which I conceive in
this case to be the best proof) I confess I am much inclined to believe, that
until the Reign of King Edward 1. there was not any formed body or known
persons whom the King was obliged to summon unto a Parliament for the making of
Laws; wherein I shall begin with the first Law of that nature, which at this
day binds the people: And therein we cannot go beyond the ninth year of the
Reign of King Henry 3. that of Magna Charta being the first, Magna Chart. 9 H.
3.
upon serious perusal of which Act, the Charter of the Forest, and the
Statute of Ireland enacted the same year by the words thereof The Charter of
the Forest, 9 H. 3.
I am induced to believe (although (doubtless) with the consent of diverse of
His Subjects) that they were made by the sole power of the King. Stat. of
Ireland, 9 H. 3.


In the Preamble of the Statute of Merton made 20. Hen. 3. are these words,
viz. It is provided in the Court of our Sovereign Lord Stat. of Merton made 20
H. 3.
the King, holden at Merton before William Archbishop of Canterbury and others
His Bishops and Suffragans, and before the greater part of the Earls and Barons
of England there being Assembled, for the Coronation of the King and His Queen,
about which they were all called, where it was Treated for the Commonwealth of
the Realm; And then were made diverse Acts of Parliament; By which it clearly
seems to me, That the Persons consenting to the Laws then made, were not
summoned to a Parliament, but to the Kings Court, and not called to make Laws,
but to solemnize the Coronation of the King and His Queen, Those Treated with
Bishops, Earls and Barons, not the Commons, nor all the Bishops, Earls and
Barons, only such as the King thought fit to be present at His and His Queens
Coronation, And none of them called by Writ.

Likewise in the Preamble of the Statute of Marlbridge made 52 Hen. 3. are
these words, viz. For the better Estate of this Stat. of Marlebridge, made 52
H. 3.
Realm as it behooves the Office of a King (the more discreet men of the
Realm being called together) as well on the higher as on the lower estate,
etc. So that to this Parliament it seems only such Lords and other discreet
men of the Commonwealth (such as the King thought fit) were summoned.

But in the Preamble of the Statute of Westminster first made Westminst. the 1.
made 3 E. 1.
3 Edw. 1. are these words, viz. These are the Acts of King Edw. 1. by His
Council, and by assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbotts, Priors, Earls,
Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Realm being thither summoned, because
our Sovereign Lord the King had great desire and zeal to redress the State of
the Realm: By which it appears that to the making of Laws at this time there
was a great and general concurrence, for besides, Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbotts, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty, the Kings Council
gave their advice therein, and consented thereunto.

But by subsequent Acts of Parliament, it seems to me such a general Assembly
was not necessary, For in the Statute of Bigamy made the next year, being 4
Edw. 1. are these words, viz. In the Stat. of Bygamy made 4 E. 1.
presence of certain Reverend Fathers, Bishops of England, and others of the
Kings Council as well the Justices as others did agree they should be put in
writing for a perpetual memory.

And 6 Edw. 1. The King and His Justices made an exposition of certain of the
Articles upon the Stat. of Gloucester. In the Preamble 6 E. 1.
of the Statute of Mortmaine are these words, viz. We therefore Stat. of
Mortmaime made 7 E. 1.
intending to provide convenient remedy by the advice of our Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and other our Sujbects being of our Council have provided, etc.

In the Preamble of the Statute called Articuli super Chartas, it Articuli
super Cart. 28 E. 1.
it thus expressed. viz. Forasmuch as the Articles of the Great Charter has
not been observed, because there was no punishment upon the Offenders, etc. our
Lord the King at the request of His Prelates, Earls and Barons Assembled in
Parliament has enacted certain Articles, etc.

In the Statute of Eschetors made at Lincoln, 29 Edw. 1. are Stat. of
Escheators made 29 E. 1.
these words, viz. At the Parliament of our Sovereign Lord the King, by His
Council it was agreed, and also commanded by the King Himself, That from
thenceforth it should be observed and done according to the advice of the
Reverend Father William Langton, Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and
Treasorer to the King, John Langton then being Chancellor, and other of the
Council then being present before the King, etc. By these Acts it still seems
to me, That both for the Lords and for the Commons, as the King pleased,
sometimes were called more, sometimes fewer, sometimes part of the Commons,
sometimes all, and sometimes none of them, yet the power one and the same; for
at all the times aforesaid, several Statutes were made, which to this day
bind the people equal to any Act of Parliament made since.

Whereupon, I conceive that the two Houses of Parliament were not originally
composed with the beginning of the Law, for as by the aforesaid Acts of
Parliament it does appear in the Reign of King Edw. 1. being the ninth King
after the Conqueror, and in time above two hundred years from the Conquest
(all which space we were governed by the same Law we now have) there was not
any formed Body, known Persons, or Assembly, whose consent was necessary to
join with the King to make an Act of Parliament; but it seems that when the
King conceived it fit to make a Law, He called to Him such of His Subjects
either of His Council, or others, as He thought most proper to be consulted
with concerning that present occasion; if it concerned matter of Law (as in
these of the exposition of the Statute of Gloucester, and the Statute of
Bigamy, and other such Acts) the Judges and other of His Council learned were
principally consulted with; if it concerned the people in general, as that of
the Statute of Will. 1. and other such like, the people of all sorts were
called to advise with the King what Laws were to be made. And so I conceive it
was from that time upward to the Conquest.

Therefore when any Book or History makes mention of a Parliament in those
days, that Assembly (as I conceive) was no other but as aforesaid. And rare it
was for any King in those times to consult with any other in making Laws but
the Prelates, the Peers, his Privy Council, the Judges, and other persons
learned in the profession; yet doubtless never concluded any matter of moment
without consent of such his people as were proper to be advised with therein.

Nor do I conceive it was in the power of any King after William Coke. Calvin's
case. b.
the Conqueror had consented to govern by a known law to alter the
fundamental grounds thereof.

But in those days, although we were governed by the same law as now, yet it
appears to me we had not any formed bodies of the Houses, nor could any Subject
by the law challenge a particular privilege to be summoned to Parliament, nor
claim right to a negative voice.

But now the law is otherwise, there be two formed bodies, which must be
summoned, assembled, and their assents had, before any new law can be made, or
the old changed, the King at this day has not a power therein without the
joint concurrence of the Stat. 33. H. 8. cap. 21.
two Houses; which constitution of the two Houses, and this power which the
Members have to consent unto, or refuse laws propounded Coke. 8. fo. 20. b. 12
H. 7. 20 H. 8. Dyer. 59. 60.
by the King, seems to me to have been attained thus; Clear it is, nothing is
more plausible to the people, then to be preserved from extraordinary Taxes,
and payments of money: And that might induce King Edw. 1. to make a Law, which I
find he did 34. of his Reign in these words, viz. No Tallage or Aid shall be
taken or levied by Us, Our Heirs in Our Realm, without the good 34 E. 1. c. 1.
will and assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses,
and other Freemen of the land: By this the King excluded himself and his
Successors (by themselves alone) to tax, or impose upon the people any
payments of money, and from thenceforth no subsidy, or other aid could be given
him by the Subject without consent of Prelates, Peers, and Commons: This I
conceive was the first foundation of the House of Commons, and the groundwork
for the formed bodies of both Houses; For it is obvious that (if not the
principal) one chief end of calling Parliaments was, and is, to raise money for
the public affairs: so that after the aforesaid Statute of 34 Edw. 1. it had
been to little purpose to call a Parliament of Prelates and Peers, and not to
summon the Commons. And upon view of the Statute made after that time, it
appears that those persons were more frequently called.

And doubtless King Edw. 1. and other succeeding Kings finding that the
greater number of the Prelates, Peers, and Commons consenting thereunto, more
cheerfully the Laws were obeyed, it begat in them a desire to increase their
number, and to have their assent not only to Subsidies, but to every New law.
And accordingly several Kings summoned more Towns to return Burgesses, created
new Corporations, and granted to them power to send their Deputies: yet was it
not reduced to any certainty what number were to be summoned to Parliament, the
aforesaid Statute of 34 Edw. 1. only declaring, That no tax, etc. shall be
levied without assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land, not mentioning how many, or what
particular persons, so that it was still left to the Kings choice how many to
call, And so continued for a long time after, For to the making of the Satute
of Staple 27. E. 3. but one Statute of Staple made 27 E. 3.
single person was summoned for any one County as by the preamble thereof in
these words appears, viz. Edw. by the grace of God, etc. Whereas good
deliberation had with the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and great men of the
Counties, that is to say, for every County one for all the County, And of the
Commons of Cities, and Boroughes of our Realm, summoned to our great Council
holden at Westminster, etc.

But afterward all the Bishops, and Peers, two Knights for a Shire, two
Citizens for a City, and two Burgesses for a Borough town were usually called;
And by a Statute made 7. H. 4. the 7 H. 4. cap. 15.
Writ of summons now used was formed, and by one other Act made 1. H. 5.
direction is given who shall be chosen, that is to say, 1 H. 5. cap. 1.
for Knights of the Shire, persons resiant in the County, and for Cities and
Boroughes, Citizens and Burgesses dwelling there, and freemen of the same
Cities and Boroughes and no other.

And so by frequent calling Parliaments, constant summoning the Prelates,
Peers, and Commons as aforesaid, the Kings not pressing Laws to pass, nor any
Law being admitted to bind without such consent, the Parliament became a body
composed thus, viz. of the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the
Commons being three Estates, and the King head of all, and as the soul adding
life, And by continuance of time it likewise became in the nature of a
fundamental ground, That no new Law can be Stat. 33 H. 8. cap. 21. Coke. 8.
fo. 20. 11 H. 7. 27. 7 H. 7. 14. Dyer 59. 60. Co. 4. Inst. p. 25.
made, or the old altered, but by the King with the assent of the two Houses of
Parliament.

And yet the King at this day (which is evident by common experience) has
power to increase the numbers of either House, and that without stint: Thus the
power of the Kings of England was restrained from making Laws without consent
of their Subjects as aforesaid; wherein the difference is but thus; Former
Kings in some things without consent of any known Body or Assembly had power
to alter the old, and make new Laws, our Stat. 24 H. 8. ca. 12. Coke. 5. f. 28.
King cannot in any one particular alter the old, or make a new Law without the
assent of the two Houses.

Yet Monarchy remains, the people are governed by the same Law, and under the
same power as before, which is by the Kings sole Authority. And Laws now made
by Act of Parliament, although they bind not without assent of the two Houses,
yet they are the Kings Laws, and are properly said to be made by Him, And the
Statutes for the most part are, and the best form of penning an Act is thus*
viz. Be it enacted by the Kings Majesty, with the assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons, etc. Coke. 8. fo. 20.


Besides, at this day after a Law is made by Act of Parliament, the execution
of that Law is by the Kings sole Authority, the power to pardon the
transgressors thereof, and Authority to dispense Coke. 7. fo. 36, 37. 2 H. 7.
6. Co. 7. 14. Plo. 502.
with the Law it self is totally in Him, for example, if by Act of Parliament
it be made felony, or other crime to transport any commodity beyond the Seas,
the King after the fact committed, may pardon the offense, and before it be
committed, by His Letters patents (without assent of the Members) may by a non
abstante dispense with the Law it self, and legally Authorize any person
notwithstanding that Statute, to Transport that prohibited commodity, and so in
all public, and penal Acts not prohibiting malum in se.

Thus it appears, that originally the Parliament consisted of the King, calling
to Him for their advice such as He thought fit. But now by consent of former
Kings, as aforesaid, no new Law can be made, or the old altered, or abrogated,
but by the King with the assent of the two Houses: And so the King and the
Members (...). f. 59. p. 19. Coke 8. fo. 20. 12 H. 7. 20 H. 8. Plo. 79 4 H. 7.
18. 7 H. 7. 15. 33 H. 6. 17, 18. 12 H. 7. 20. Just. Hutton against Shipmoney.
32. 33.
of these two Assemblies jointly concurring at this day are the Parliament.
Upon which it consequently follows, that the King has an absolute negative
Voice in every Law to be propounded; But in regard this is now not only
denied, but a power usurped by those Members without the King to make Laws, in
the next place that point is more fully debated.

CHAP. III. That the Members of the two Houses have not power in any one
particular to make a new Law, or to change the old, The Legislative power not
in both Houses together. The Kings negative Voice.
The King of England for the time being, having an absolute negative Voice
therein.
AGainst this I have seen a Treatise published by Order of the House of Commons
in the name of William Pryn an utter Barrister of Lincolns Inn entitled thus,
viz. That the King has no absolute negative Voice in passing Bills of common
right, and justice for the public good. And to make good his position proceeds
to his proof in this manner. The King (says he) in most proceedings in
Parliament, as in reversing judgments, damning Patents, and the like, has no
casting Voice. 2. That Kings in ancient time have usually consented to Bills for
the public good, else gave such reasons of their denial as satisfied both
Houses. 3. That Kingdoms were before Kings, and then the people might have
made Laws. 4. That the King may die without heir, and thereby the people may
have such power again. 5. That the Lord Protector in the infancy of a King
may confirm Bills, and so make Laws. 6. That in Countries where Kings are
elective, and so an interregnum, the people in the vacancy of their King may
make Laws. 7. That the two Houses have frequently denied to grant the King Aid
by Subsidies. 8. That the Kings of this Realm have been forced to give their
Royal assent to Bills, as in that of Magna Charta: This is the substance of his
objections and arguments against the Kings negative Voice in Parliament.

Answer.

M. Pryn has spared no labor to make good his assertion, fetching his
arguments from a time supposed by him before Monarchy here began, secondly upon
accidents happening since this Monarchy, And then imagines a time to come,
that is, when the King and all the blood Royal of England shall be extinct for
want of an heir at Law to inherit the Crown. First, for his far fetched
argument; Kingdoms (says he) were before Kings; These words taken in their
literal sense, imply a gross and absurd contradiction, and he might as well
say that servants were before Masters, or the Son before the Father: But
doubtless Mr. Pryns meaning is, that Countries and people were before they had
Kings over them, yet his words being so expounded, make nothing to his purpose:
suppose that before Monarchy began in this Nation, the people had been governed
by a known Law, to conclude thereupon, That the Members of the two Houses at
this day have power to make Laws without the King, or that the King has not a
negative Voice in Parliament is to no more purpose, then if he should say, The
Earth was made before it was peopled, Ergo, there is neither man woman nor
child in the world: or thus, This Nation was peopled before they were governed
by a Law, Ergo, the people neither had either Law or government. The Jews upon
the like ground may argue thus, viz. our Religion was before Christ, Ergo, the
people at this day ought not to profess Christian Religion.

But Mr. Pryns argument is more absurd, he cannot show that the people of this
Nation before they were governed under Kings had either Literature, known Law,
or Government: However clear it is, This Nation has been Monarchiall above
1200. years before the institution of the two Houses of Parliament, And so Mr.
Pryns argument that Kingdoms were before Kings, is no weight at all to prove,
That the two Houses have power to make Laws without the King.

And much like unto it is his argument, That the King may die without heir,
for if that should happen (says Mr. Pryn) the people might make what Laws they
should think fit: Now thereupon he concludes thus, Ergo, the Members at this
day have power without the King, to make Laws. With more reason the King might
argue thus. All the lands in England mediatly or immediately are held of the
King, and if the owners die without heir, by the Laws Co. 1. Instit. fo. 1. 12
H. 7. 20.
of the Realm, Escheats to the Crown, and so becomes at the Kings disposal,
but every man may die without heir, Ergo, all the lands in England at this
present are the proper inheritance of the King: No Lawyer can deny major or
minor, yet the conclution thereupon is absurd.

But in Mr. Pryns case, admit the King should die without heir, although it be
granted that the people had thereby power to make Laws, yet gross it were to
conclude upon it, That the Members of the two Houses might so do: For if the
King and that Stem Royal were extinct without issue, the two Houses would be
extinct too. By the Law of England, if the King die during a Parliament Coke.
4. P^^ Institutes 46. Rot. Parl. 1 H. 5. nu. 26.
ipso facto, the Parliament is dissolved, because the King (who was head, to
advise with whom, and by whose Writ, and command the Members were summoned) is
dead. Yet in that case, the successor King if he please might call a new Parl.
But when the King dies without heir, there is no succeding King to summon it,
And so the constitution of Parliament, and the whole Law and Government (the
fountain of all which being stopped) would be suspended, if not ended, and the
people left without Law; Then it might be granted Mr. Pryn, That the strongest
party concurring in that case would govern: yet that is no proof that the
Members had thereby power to make Laws: And therefore more absurd it is to
conclude upon Mr. Pryns reason, That the two Houses at this day (whilst the
King and the blood Royal are in being) have that power.

Then for his objections upon Authority, or presidents happening since the
beginning of the English Monarchy. Kings (says he) have no voice in reversing
judgments, or damning Patents in Parliament, therefore they have not a voice
in passing Bills for public Laws.

Answer.

Mr. Pryns words must be understood one of these ways, viz. That these
judgments are reversed, and Patents damned by Act of Parliament, or else in
the ordinary way of proceedings of Law, as in a Court of Justice; if he mean
by Act of Parliament, he only beggs the question. And false it is to say the
King has not a negative Voice in every Act propounded for a Law. If he mean
by judicial proceedings, as in a Court of Justice (which I conceive he does)
then the case truly stated is but thus; The Lords House in Parliament time is
a Court of Judicature, and (amongst other things) the Members of that Assembly
have power (the cause being regularly brought before them by writ of error,
and by the advice of the Judges and not else) to reverse erroneous judgments
given in the Kings Bench, wherein it is true the King has no Voice; but that
nothing disproves His negative Voice in making Laws: if so, that reason serves
as well to exclude the Commons as the King, for in reversing judgments in the
Lords House, the Members of the lower House have no Voice, and so if this
argument of Mr. Pryns be of force, the Lords without King or Commons have power
to make Laws by Act of Parliament. Then for damning Patents, neither the Lords,
nor the Commons, nor both Houses jointly have power judicially, or finally to
determine the validity of any Patent or grant of the King: That properly
appertains to the Judges of the Kings Bench, of the Common Pleas, and other
Courts of Justice, before whom (as afterward it is more clearly showed) such
cases may be judicially brought to trial, wherein neither King, Lords, or
Members of the Commons House has Voice.

And for the rest of his arguments, they rather prove the contrary, then that
which Mr. Pryn infers upon them: Kings (says he) have in former times showed
their reasons why they denied to pass Bills presented unto them by both Houses,
which proves that those Kings had power to deny them, else they could not show
cause of their refusal, no more then Mr. Pryn can render reasons of his being
at Westmiuster, unless he have been there. But Mr. Pryn knows all Kings have
most frequently rejected Bills passed by both Houses (and Bills declared by the
Members to concern the public good) without rendering their reasons for the
same.

And for the power of the Protector to confirm Bills passed by both Houses, if
that be granted, that in some cases of imminent necessity the Protectors
consent might make good, and perfect such Bills, it nothing proves the absolute
power of both Houses without the King, but rather the contrary, and plainly
demonstrates the imperfect power of the two Houses, who cannot without the
consent of a Protector in such cases make any complete and binding Laws,
Therefore (if not stronger) the same it must be, when we have a King no infant,
and Reigning without a Protector.

But says Mr. Pryn in Countries where Kings are elective, by the death of the
Present King, until a new one be chosen: the people having no King over them
may make binding Laws. Here although I believe Mr. Pryn cannot for other
Countries make his position good, yet this admitted to him, rather disproves
his argument against the Kings negative Voice; for of his own showing it
appears, that in those Countries where Kings are elective, after such time as
the people have chosen a King, they cannot make Laws without Him, And if so
where Kings are elective, much more they cannot where Kings are hereditary.
Therefore by Mr. Pryns own argument it follows, that in this Nation, neither
the people, nor the two Houses without the King, have power to make Laws. For
we have no interregnum, there is not with us any time of vacancy Coke. 7. 30.
of a King, eo instante upon the death of the precedent King, the Crown is
vested in the successor.

And for the two Houses refusal to grant the King Aid by Subsidies and the
like, That disproves the Kings power of His negative Voice in Parliament, as
the Kings refusal to confirm Bills passed by both Houses prove that the King
at this day may make Laws without them.

But says, he if Kings will not pass Laws presented unto them by both Houses,
they may be compelled thereunto, for Kings (says he) have been so forced, as
King H. 3. in that of Magna Charra and other Statutes.

Answer.

To admit that a Judge of a Court of Judicature may be forced to declare his
opinion, or to give judgment against his own conscience, seems to me to be
so absurd, as I cannot but suppose that Mr. Pryn himself would grant it to be
most unreasonable, and even to be destructive of the Law it self. If the King
should assemble powers, and by force compel the Lords, or Commons to pass
Laws by Him propounded, it would be judged an act of high Tyranny, and I
believe Mr. Pryn would conceive Laws so obtained bound not, And if so in that
case, (if he be not extreme partial) he must upon the same ground agree, that
the King in the like case ought not to be forced. He doubtless has the same
authority, the same rules, and motions to be guided by His Conscience as a
Subject has. And methinkes the Law should protect the King from the violence
of the people, as much as it preserves them from the force of their King,
certainly it is (at least) reci (...) money or Oath taken is actually vested in
the King succeeding, upon which the Law says, that although in hoc individuo
Hen. Rex Coke 7. fo. 30.
moritur, yet the King in His politic capacity never dies.

Besides, if the King at His Coronation should refuse to take an Oath, we have
no more Law to compel Him thereunto, then we have to force Him to be Crowned.
And as it is not material to the right and power of the King whether he be
Crowned, or not, so it is inconsiderable to the people to have Him sworn, for
if we had no municipall Law, the King unsworne were bound in Conscience to
govern the people by natural equity. But we have a known Coke 7. Calvin's case
fo. 17.
Law by which both King, and Subjects, (the one by a directive power, the
others by both directive and coercive) are regulated, and every one protected
in his just rights, and this, whether the King be Crowned, or not Crowned,
whether he take an Oath or no Oath.

Secondly, admit Kings obliged to take an Oath at their Coronation, yet even by
the Members own showing, they are not bound to take it in the words by
themselves mentioned, And of all the Kings past, they instance but seven who
have taken any Oath, and but three of those seven (admitting that Oath in
French and the other in Latin to be one, and the same) they name to have taken
it: And of these three, offer proof but for one, And themselves show that the
Oaths taken by the other four, viz. King H. 8. King E. 6. King James, and King
Charles differ in the very words in question, and render a quite other sense,
viz. of that of King H. 8. they set down the words thus, viz. (And affirm
them which the Nobles and people have made and chosen with my consent. And that
of King Ed. 6. thus, viz. Do you grant to make no new Laws, but such as shall
be to the honor of God, and the good of the Commonwealth, and the same shall
be made by consent of your people, as has been acoustomed. And for the Oaths
of King James* and King Charles they say the word (choose) was left out.

So that upon the whole matter that which has been, or can be said herein is
but thus: Some Kings at their Coronation have taken an Oath, but that any King
is obliged so to do, or being obliged that he ought to pursue the foresaid
words, it neither does, nor can be made good.

Thirdly, admit that Kings have taken the Oath in the foresaid words, and
obliged thereunto, yet that nothing proves the Members power without him to
make Laws. William the Conqueror Coke, Calvin's case fo. 17.
(all men must grant) might have imposed upon this Nation what Laws he pleased.
But being resolved to have a settled Government, granted to the people such Laws
and customs as were just Vid. preface Co. 8. Rep.
and equal between Him and them; And so bound Himself and His successors to
Govern by a known Law.

The people being thus freed from the servitude incident to a Conquest, nothing
could be more acceptable to them, then the continuance of that Law: And nothing
being more safe for a King, then to have the love of His Subjects, succeeding
Kings might be induced at their public Coronations, voluntarily to take an
Oath for the preservation of the Laws: And in that sense these words, (quas
vulgus elegerit) might be aptly used, for it is not improperly said, the people
had chosen those Laws which the Conqueror (with their good liking) had
consented to govern by. So that the Coronation Oath (admitting it in the words
as the Members have expressed) cannot in any reasonable sense, be rendered
otherwise then thus, viz. Do you grant to keep, and for your self promise to
defend, and to the honor of God corroborate the just Laws and customs which
the people have chosen. This imports a settlement of a known Law, which the
King swears to preserve, but to render the words in the future tense, and to
make the King to swear, to confirm such Laws as the people shall choose (what
ever they be) tends to confusion.

But, say the Members, if (elegerit) in this place be Englished have chosen,
the King is not sworn to keep Laws afterward made, which is utterly mistaken,
for when a new Law is made, it is then part of the Law of England; And being
sworn in general words, to defend the Law, He is sworn to defend all the
Law. For example; the Judges in general words are sworn to determine
controversies according to the Law, and frequent it is after the Judges have
taken that Oath, for the Law to be altered by Act of Parliament, yet the former
Oath binds those Judges, and they are obliged, even by that Oath, to give
sentence as the Law is, according to that alteration, not as it was when they
took the Oath. And so it is with the King, he having taken the Coronation
Oath, is thereby bound in Conscience to defend and observe every Law afterward
made.

Fourthly, admit the word (elegerit) in that place to be Englished in the
future tense, and the King to swear to confirm the just Laws which the people
shall propound unto Him, That cannot admit of any other interpretation then
thus: viz. If the people propound Laws to the King, which in themselves are
just and equal, He is by His Oath obliged in conscience to confirm them, but
He is not thereby bound in conscience to consent to all such Laws as the people
shall say are just: That were to make one part of the Oath to contradict
another part thereof, for by the former part of the Oath, the King swears to
defend the Laws of the Realm, And by the same Oath (thus expounded) He is not
only bereft of power to perform it, but swears at the pleasure of the vulgar
multitude, to destroy it. Suppose the King thus sworn, be desired by the
people to make a Law thereby to exempt persons from punishment for Treason,
Felony, or other crimes, or to settle the power of Srveraignty, and government
upon Subjects, in this case the King, even by that Oath, were obliged to reject
such Laws, for it is neither a just Law, nor does it stand with reason, to
exempt any from punishment for such crimes, or to exact of the King to quit His
Authority, nor (were it in His power) ought He to put His people under the
yoke of their fellow Subjects.

Fifthly, but however if the King should in terminis swear to confirm all Laws
(whether just or unjust) to be propounded to Him by the people, That does not
enable any to make Laws without Him. A King (although not sworn) is obliged in
conscience to consent to such Laws which are in themselves good for the
Commonwealth just, and equal between Him and His Subjects, but is not
compellable to change either Law or settled Government; And if so unsworne, it
follows that his being sworn to do it, is but a further tie upon His
conscience: By swearing to confirm such Laws as His people shall propound unto
Him, that gives not power to them to make Laws without Him; such an exposition
of an Oath (until this Parliament) was never heard of.

Sixthly, if such an absurd exposition of an Oath could be admitted, the
Members of the two Houses cannot be the people intended by the words of this
Oath, for Kings have taken Oaths at their Coronations, before the institution
of the two Houses; Secondly, the Members of the two Houses do not derive their
power from the people, but from the King, by whose Writs they are summoned.

And first for the Lords House, none can sit there but a Peer of the Realm,
none can create a Peer but the King, not one Member Coke, Calvin's Coke. fo.
15. Coke 7. fo. 33.
of that House (the Prelates excepted) but He, or His Ancestors, from whom he
claims his Peerage, derives that honor from this King, or from His
progenitors Kings of England since the Norman Conquest: And for the Prelates,
And their power as Peers to sit in that Assembly, it was founded by the Kings
too.

It is now, and ever was in the sole power of the King of England for the time
being, by Patent, or by Writ of summons, to create and call to that House,
without stint or limitation, as many, and what persons He thinks fit; which
creation, and the Kings Writ of summons is their Commission, The words whereof
follow, viz. Carolus, etc. charissimo, etc. Comiti. Arundell. Quia de
advisamento and assensu Consilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus
negotiis, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud civitatem nostram West. 1. Die
Maii prox. futur' teneri ordinavimus, and ibidem vobiscum, cum Prelatis,
magnatibus and proceribus dicti regni nostri colloquium habere and tractatum,
vobis sub fide and ligeantiis quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injungentes
mandamus quod personaliter, etc.

So that, to the institution of the Lords House, and the power which the
Members of that Assembly have to sit, and Vote in Parliament, the people are
not at all consulted with in any particular.

And for the Commons House, the institution thereof, and the Commission which
the Members of that Assembly have, is derived from the King too; That which the
people act and do therein, is only to elect the Knights of the Shires,
Citizens, and Burgesses; and therein too their authority is by the Kings Writ,
the direction whereof they are bound to pursue: It is not in the power of the
Inhabitants of any County, or town, to add unto, or lessen the number of
persons to be elected, or to enlarge or limit the authority of those chosen:
But former Kings (as before is showed) sometimes called more, sometimes fewer,
and at their pleasure created new Corporations, and gave them power to send
Burgesses. And every King had, and at this day has authority, to enable and
command every town in England to send Burgesses to Parliament.

And when the Knights and Burgesses are elected, the peoples power is ended,
then the persons chosen are to perform their duties, wherein they must be
guided by their Commission, it is that which does distinguish them from other
men, else every one in the Kingdom had equal power to sit and Vote in
Parliament: And they have no other Commission then the Kings Writ of summons,
which follows in these words, viz.

Rex Vicecomiti salut'. Quia de avisamento and assensu consilii nostri pro
quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, nos statum and defensionem regni
nostri Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concern: quoddam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Civitatem nostram Westm' tertio die Novembris prox' futur' teneri
ordinavimus, and ibidem cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and proceribus dicti regni
nostri colloquium habere and tract': tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes quod
facta proclam' in prox. Comitatu tuo post receptionem hujus brevis nostri
tenend. die and loco predict' duos milit' gladiis cinctos magis idoneos and
discretos Comit' praedicti, and de qualib' civitate Com' illius duos cives, and
de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretior' and magis sufficientibus libere
and indifferenter per illos qui proclam' hujusmodi interfuer' juxta forma^
statutorum inde edit' and provis. eligi, and nomina eorundum milit' Civium and
Burgensiu^ sic electorum in quibusdam Indentur' inter te and illos qui
hujusmodi election' interfuerint, inde conficiend' sive hujusmodi elect'
presents fuerint vel absentes, inter: eosque ad dict' diem and locum venire
facias. Ita quod iidem milites plenam and sufficientem potestate^ pro se and
co^munitate Comit' Civitatu^ and Burgoru^ praedictorum divisim ab ipsis
habeant, ad faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc ibid' de communi consilio
dicti regis nostri (favente Deo) contigerint ordinari super negotiis ante
dictis: Ita quod pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi, seu propter improvidam
electionem militum, Civium aut Burgensium predictorum dicta negotia infecta non
remaneant quovis modo. Nolumus autem quod tu nec aliquis alius Vicecomes dicti
Regis nostri aliqualiter sit electus and electionem illam in pleno Comitatu
factam distinct and aperte sub Sigillo tuo and singulis little qui electioni
illi interfuerint nobis in Cancellar' nostram ad dictum diem and locum
Certifices indilate remittens nobis alteram partem Indenturarum predictarum
praesentibus consuet' una cum hoc breve. Test meipso apud Westminster. And the
return of the aforesaid Writs in these words. (viz.) Virtute istius Brevis
eligi feci duos milites gladiis cinctos magis idoneos and discretos de Comitatu
meo, (viz.) A. and B. qui plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and
Communitate Comit' predict' habent ad faciendum and consentiendum iis quae ad
diem and locum infra contentos de Communi Consilio regni Angliae ordinari
contigerint. Et predicti A. and B. manucapti sunt per quatuor manucapt' ad
assulendu^ ad Parliamentu^ dom' Regis apud Westminster ad diem infra contentum
ad faciendum quod hoc breve in se exigit and requirit.

I have here exactly set down all those Commissions, by authority whereof the
Lords House, and the Commons House, sit, and Vote in those Assemblies, which is
far short of giving them power to make Laws. That of the Lords, commands them
to advise, and consult with the King, concerning the great affairs of the
Realm, both in Church and Commonwealth. That of the Commons, to do and
consent unto such things as the King and the Peers shall agree upon.

And as the Members have their authority, to sit and Vote in the House from the
King, so it is at His will to summon a Parliament, when, and as often as He
thinks fit: And the Members being met together, are kept there as long as he
pleases, and at every instant time (when he sees cause) dissolved again. And
whilst they are continued together, their office is, to enquire, and inform
themselves of the grievances of the Kingdom, to consult how to reform them,
and for that purpose (if need be) to compose Laws, and present them to the
King. But all this is only by way of advise, it binds not until the King has
taken their Council, and put life into those Laws by His Assent. All which is
not only pursuing Plo. fo. 79. 4 H. 7. fo. 18. 7 H. 7. fo. 15. 33 H. 6. 17,
18. 12 H. 7. fo. 20. Dier fo. the Duke of Norfolks case.
their Commission, but is made good by the constant practice of the Kingdom:
For, there was never any Law, Statute, Act of Parliament, or Ordinance made in
this Nation, which bound the people, whereunto the King did not give His Royal
Assent.

And scarce one Parliament since the Institution of the two Houses, but the
Members of both those Assemblies, have passed Bills for new Laws, presented them
to the King, which He has rejected: The Parl. rols.
whereupon every such Bill was instantly set aside, acknowledged by the
Members, and judged by all men to be invalid, neither binding King or people.

And for these words (le Roy s'avisera) the opinion of Justice Hutton, and the
words of King Richard the second, nothing can be inferred thereupon against the
Kings negative Voice, but rather the contrary. The Kings answer (say they) to
Bills presented to Him by the two Houses, which He rejects, is thus (le Roy
s'avisera) that is, He will advise whether to confirm them or not: It seems
to me strange to conclude thereupon, Ergo, the two Houses may make Laws without
Him, that is plainly a non sequitur, but it does directly imply, that the King
has election to make it a Law, or no Law, else it were in vain for Him to
advise upon it.

And the words of King Rich: 2. (admitting that story to be true) saying He
conceived Himself bound by His Oath to consent unto that Law, shows first,
that it was in His power to consent, or not to consent; secondly, that the
Members could not do it without Him; thirdly, that it was only an obligation
upon His Conscience. And that He, because He conceived it to be a just Law,
thought Himself tied in conscience to confirm it.

Upon the whole matter clear it is, (admitting the King to have taken an Oath
in the words mentioned by the Members) it rather proves the Kings power of a
negative Voice, then disproves it.

But the Members (I am confident) know that the King neither did, nor was
obliged to take the aforesaid Oath; The King pursuing former presidents
recorded in the Exchequer, took the Oath in words, and according to the
Ceremony as follows, viz. After the Sermon is done the King arises and goes
to the Altar, and there the Archbishop administreth these questions.

And the King Answers.

Bishop. Sir will you grant and keep and by your Oath confirm to the people of
England the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England your
Lawful and Religious Predecessors; And namely, the Laws, Customs, and
Franchizes granted to the Clergy, by the glorious King S. Edward your
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel
established in this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings
thereof, and the ancient Customs of the Realm?


King. I grant and promise to keep them.


Bishop. Sir will you keep peace and godly agreement entirely (according to
your power) both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy and the people?


King. I will keep it.


Bishop. Sir will you (to your power) cause Law, Justice, and discretion in
mercy and truth to be executed in all your Judgments?


King. I will.


Bishop. Sir will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful customs
which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have, And will you defend and uphold
them to the honor of God so much as in you lies?


King. I grant and promise so to do.

Then one of the Bishops reads this admonition to the King before the people
with a loud voice, Our Lord and King, we beseech you to pardon, and to grant,
and to preserve unto us, and to the Churches committed to our Charge all
Canonical privileges, and due Law and Justice, And that you would protect and
defend us as every good King in His Kingdoms ought to be protector and
defender of the Bishops and the Churches under their government.


King. With a willing and devoute heart I promise and grant my pardon, and that
I will preserve and maintain to you and the Churches committed to your Charge
all Canonical privileges, and due Law and Justice, And that I will be your
protector and defender to my power by the assistance of God, as every good King
in His Kingdom in right ought to protect and defend the Bishops and Churches
under their government. Then the King arises and is led to the Communion table
where he makes a solemn Oath in sight of all the people to observe the
premises, And laying His hand upon the Book says,

The things which I have before promised I shall perform and keep, so help me
God and by the Contents of this Book.


Now for the King to oblish Episcopacy, to destroy the whole Government of the
Church established by Law, for the King (so far as in Him lies) to transfer
unto His Subjects that regal power which is inherently in His Person, to
change the Monarchical Government into a confusion, to reduce his Subjects
(being a freeborne people) unto a perpetual slavery under their equals and
fellow Subjects, certainly cannot stand with this Oath. All which in the
proposals made to Him by the Members (nay more, and worse then words can
express) is required, and by most Barbarous and inhumane cruelties attempted
to be forced from Him. Now having done with this Oath, I shall proceed further
to examine the legality of the Members doctrine, to exclude the King from His
negative Voice.

It is an undoubted maxim in every Law, that no Person, Court, or Assembly can
Act or do any thing concerning the public affairs of the Kingdom or
Commonwealth without Commission, which stands with all the reason in the
world, else it follows, that every one has equal power to make Laws, Act,
and do what he thinks fit. And by the constitutions of this Realm, every
Person, Court, or Assembly, must derive its authority by one of these ways,
viz. by the Kings grant, by Act of Parliament, or by custom and use: if by the
Kings grant, the Patent it self declares the persons authorized; if by Act of
Parliament, the Statute names the men; if by custom and use, that use and
custom is their Commission. For example, if the King by His Commission
authorize twenty persons, or any ten of them, whereof A. B. or C. to be one to
determine a felony, if seventeen of the twenty, in the absence of A. B. and C.
execute that Commission, all their proceedings are void, as done without
Commission, seventeen strangers not named in the Commission, might as well act
therein as they.

And if the Commission be by Act of Parliament, none can execute that
Commission but those authorized by the Statute. And the like holds when custom
and use is the Commission, unless that custom and use warrant the persons to
act, it is done without authority, and so void.

Then for the point in question, The Members of the two Houses have no grant
from the King, nor is there any Act of Parliament to enable them to make Laws,
nor does custom warrant it: For until this Parliament, they never made Law
without, and against the Kings consent, nor claimed power so to do.

But say the Members in the foresaid Declaration, If there be not an agreement
between His Majesty and His Parliament, either Nov. 2. 1642.
His Majesty must be Judge against His Parliament, or the Parliament without
His Majesty, for (say they) that question whereupon the safety of the Kingdom
depends, must not be undetermined: And (say they) if His Majesty against His
Parliament; why not as well of the necessity in the question of making a Law,
without and against their consent, as of denying a Law against their desire and
advise? The Judge of the necessity (say they) in either case, by like reason is
Judge in both. Besides, (say they) if His Majesty in this difference of
opinions should be Judge, He should be Judge in His own case: But the
Parliament should be Judge between His Majesty and the Kingdom, as they are in
many, if not in all cases. And (say they) if His Majesty should be Judge, He
should be Judge out of His Courts, and against His highest Court, which He
never is. But the Parliament should only Judge without His Personal Assent,
which as a Court of Judicature it always does, and all other Courts as well as
it. And (say they) if the King be for the Kingdom, and not the Kingdom for
the King, and if the Kingdom best knows what is for its own good and
preservation, and the Parliament be the representative Body of the Kingdom, it
is (say they) easy to judge who in this case should be Judge. But (say they)
it it not so easy to understand what is the danger of unsetling by this means
the security of all men's estates. Is this danger (say they) kept of us by His
Majesty's single Vote? And all men's estates without security, and exposed to an
arbitrary power, because in all Courts of Justice, and in the Court of
Parlialiament (and that without any appeal from it) men's estates and interests
are Judged without His Majesty's Personal Assent. But (say they) we do not say
this as if the Royal Assent were not requisite in the passing of Laws, nor
do, nor ever did we say, that because His Majesty is bound to give His consent
to good Laws, presented to Him by His people in Parliament, that therefore they
shall be Laws without His consent, or at all obligatory, saving only for the
necessary preservation of the Kingdom, whilst that necessity lasts, and such
consent cannot be obtained.

Answer.

Here with much art and cunning it is endeavored to misleade the people: And
for that purpose the true question is declined, and other questions raised,
which at the first sight may to the vulgar seem plausible. When a difference
happens (say the Members) between the King and the Houses, and thus in a thing
which concerns the safety of the Kingdom, it must not rest undetermined,
therefore (say they) either the King must be Judge against the Houses, or the
Houses must be Judge against the King, and conclude for themselves.

But the case being rightly stated, and the constitutions of the Realm, duly
considered, every rational man will conclude, that this power being granted
the Members, all the rest of the people of England are of a free Subject become
absolute slaves; which is thus: This Nation is governed by a known Law, which
has its prescribed rules, therefore (as before I said) it may be necessary in
some things, to alter the old, and make new Laws. And that being so, some
known persons must Judge when necessity requires such a change, and
consequently until those persons have so judged it, all the people ought to
conclude there is no need to alter the Law. And by the Laws of England (as
before is said) the King, and the two Houses are that Judge, no major part, it
is all jointly who have that power. As if A. seized of Lands, upon his
marriage, is tied not to sell without the consent of B. and C. in this case A.
B. or C. may negatively hinder the sale, but it were absurd to conclude
thereupon, that A. B. or C. or any two of them, have power to sell, but most
injurious it were, upon that ground to give power to B. and C. to sell the
Lands of A. without his personal consent. So in this case, the Kings of
England have debarred themselves from making, or changing the Laws, without
assent of the two Houses, whereby the King, the Lords House, or the Commons
House, has power negatively to hinder the making of any new Law, or changing
the old, but it follows not, therefore the King, the Lords, or Commons, or
any two of those bodies, have power to make a Law: The difference is no less,
then between the having, and not having a known Law: The one imports the
settlement of a known Law, and preserves it, and the other introduces an
arbitrary government. For example, if the King has power to make what Laws He
thinks fit, He may at pleasure, bereave the Subject of life, and confiscate
their estates. But now having a known Law, and thereby protected in our
persons and estates, the King having a negative Voice to hinder the changing of
that Law, there ensues no such evil consequence. And the same holds with the
members, the Lords House, and the Commons House, having each of them a negative
Voice to hinder the changing of the Law, or making a new Law, does not lessen
the peoples protection of their persons, nor alters the property of their
estates; The known and settled Law still preserves both.

But admit one, or both Houses without the King, to make what Laws they please,
it follows, they have power to put to death whom, and for what cause they
think fit, and for their own use, to seize, and dispose of their estates,
their will is then the Law: So that to give this power to the King alone, or to
one, or both Houses without the King, the consequence is equally evil. If the
King have it, both Law and Parliaments are destroyed; If the Members, Monarchy,
the Parliament, and the Law it self are totally abolished.

And if the King by having this power of a negative Voice, be Judge in His own
cause, the Members having that authority, are so too. But that is a mere
fiction, neither King, nor Members, by having a negatie Voice in Parliament are
Judges in their own cause, but all, that is to say, the King, and the Houses
are jointly Judges, when it is fit to make a new Law, or change the old.

And so long as they extend not beyond the power of a negative Voice, the
Members of the two Houses are persons indifferent between the King and the
people; and so is the King, indifferent, between the Members and the people.
For example, if the King propound a Law to take away the life of His subjects,
to tax them with payments of money not warranted by the known Law, or
otherwise to enlarge His Prerogative, the Members may assent thereunto, and so
make it a Law, or refuse it, and herein they are indifferent between King and
people, for the benefit of those Laws thus propounded, accrues not to them.

And so it is, if either, or both Houses propound a Law to the King, whereby
they would assume to themselves the absolute power of Government, to put to
death whom they please, to tax, or impose upon the people, to confiscate their
estates to their own use, the King is a person indifferent between the Members
and the people, to Judge whether to pass it or not. But when the Members
without the King assume power to make Laws, the dispute between the King and
the people is ended, the business is then immediately and totally between the
Members and the people: Therefore by excluding the King from His negative
Voice, the Members have made themselves Judges in their own case: By our
woeful experience we now find there is none, either to umpire, or mediate,
between the Members and the people; And so the Members by this have assumed an
arbitrary power.

Nor does this power of a negative Voice in the King, take away, or lessen the
authority of any Court of Justice; Every Court of Judicature, pursuing its
Commission, has power to determine the interest, both of King and people, and
that without assent either of King or Member: The known Law is their ground to
judge by, not the opinion of the King, or of either, or both Houses.

Nor can the King in this be said to Judge out of his Courts, or against the
two Houses of Parliament, for the King and the two Houses have herein equal
power, that is, every one of them a negative Voice, they are all together
jointly Judge of that high Court of Parliament, but no one, or two of these
bodies is Judge thereof: So that by the Kings, and either Houses having a
negative Voice, it cannot be said they Judge each other, out of that, or any
other Court of Justice.

But some object, that if the refusal of the King shall hinder the making of
Laws, the Commonwealth is in danger to suffer, for (say they) the King may be
refractory, and deny to pass good Laws.

Answer.

No humane Law can preserve a Commonwealth from every mischief. That Law which
avoideth the most inconveniences, is the best Law. It is granted that the will
of the King, or of either House, by refusing to pass a Law propounded, may
prove mischievous: But upon pretense of necessity, to give power to the King,
and either House, or both Houses (without the King) to alter the Law, or to
make new Laws, were more dangerous, If that rule serve them to make good Laws,
it enables them to make bad ones too. If they be Judge when to make one Law,
they are Judge to make as many, and what Laws they please; they who have this
power, may declare what they list to concern the safety of the Kingdom. Once
break this rule; That no new Law can be made with consent of the King and the
two Houses, and there is no end of the distraction. Upon the same ground that
the Lords, and Commons in the case of the Militia (pretending a necessity, and
that the King was refractory) assumed power to make Laws without Him, the Lords
House may exclude both King and Commons, the Commons House, Lords and King, or
the King both Houses.

When there arises a difference between the King, and the two Houses, if it be
of necessity that the King, or the two Houses must so far Judge the business,
as to make a Law without the other, by the same reason, when a difference
happens between the two Houses, one of them must be Judge against the other,
and make a Law without the others consent, for such a difference between the
two Houses, may as well happen to concern the safety of the Kingdom, as when
the difference falls out between the King and both Houses: And if either House
obtain the sole power to make Laws, still there is no period, for if reason,
or real necessity require it, and should be Judge when, and what Laws are to
be made, the lesser number of one of those Assemblies peradventure may be in
the right; But whether right, or wrong, the zelots may chance to side with the
little flock, rise up, and in tumults call it Justice. And so consequently the
good Law of the Land destroyed, and club-law introduced, and the very being of
Parliaments taken away; whereas by observing the constitutions of the Realm,
in submitting this power of making Laws to the Judge thereof, that is, the King
without the assent of the two Houses, all these absurdities and inconveniences
are avoided.

Which constitution being rightly understood, is grounded upon great reason,
and is most equal between King and people; for the Commons House upon just
grounds (for any thing to them appears) may pass a Bill, which the Lords upon
as just reasons may reject, the Members of that Assembly being persons, who for
the most part have a greater and deeper reach and insight in State affairs;
And both Houses may pass a Bill, conceiving it necessary for the preservation
of the Kingdom to have it made a Law, and thereupon desire the Kings consent,
which the King may as justly reject, And for such reasons (they may be matters
of that nature) as not convenient, and most unfit to be imparted and revealed
to such a multitude as the seven hundred Members or more of both Houses. But
when all, that is, when the King and the two Houses concur, the Commonwealth
may as safely depend upon it, as upon any humane institution.

Upon these grounds it is, that when a dispute happens concerning the making
of a Law, the King being of one opinion, the Lords of another, and the Commons
of a third, or when any one of the three bodies dissent from the other two,
there is no umpire but themselves to end that controversy, nor can they decide
the question by any other way, but by a joint agreement, or quitting the
dispute, for until a joint concurrence of all three, their proceedings are but
conferences, and their results, what they would have to be Laws, but no Laws
indeed, until by consent of all three, they be reduced to Acts of Parliament.
No Order, Ordinance, or what ever it is, or shall be called, made by consent
Plo. fo. 79. 4 H. 7. fo. ^18. 7 H. 7. fo. 15. Dier. fo. The Duke of Norfolkes
case Justice Hutton against Shipmoney, fo. 32. 33. Coke 8. fo. 20.
of any one or two of these bodies alone, has the strength or force of a Law,
our Law takes no notice thereof, like a verdict for life, lands, or goods, in
which case the major part of the Jury, determines not the question, all twelve
must agree, else it is no verdict, for the question being fact, some one of the
Jury may have better knowledge thereof, then all the rest.

So in this case, by the constitutions of the Realm, no new Law can be made,
or the old altered, without a joint concurrence of the King and the two Houses.
It is that united body, which at this day (as to the Legislative power)
represent the whole Kingdom. The Members of the Commons House alone, do not in
that manner represent the Commons of England, the Lords and the Peers, and the
King for Himself, but all together do represent the whole Kingdom, no one, or
two of these bodies, can herein be said to represent only any part; every
common person does herein, by the Laws of England, as much depend upon the
judgment of the King and the Lords, as upon the Members of the Commons House.
And so do the King and the Lords upon those Members; for the King, the Lords,
and Commons (as now by consent of former Kings it is settled) are herewith
jointly trusted. As if three Lords authorize three several persons to sell
their Lands, if two of them sell, it binds not, therefore in judging that sale
void, no man is injured, the Lords are seized of their Lands as before, and the
persons trusted have the same power, that is, jointly concurring to sell, and
by that sale the Lords are concluded, it is done by the Commission of those
Lords, and therefore in Judgment of Law their own Act.

So for the Parliament, the King, the Lords, and Commons by the constitutions
of this Realm, are jointly trusted to consent unto the making new, or changing
the old Law, therefore no less then all have Commission for it. And so if the
King, and either House, or both Houses without the King, pass a Bill, or make
a Law, this ought to be judged invalid, none are thereby wronged, still the
known Laws are in force, the people as before, by the known Law are protected
in their persons and estates, and those trusted, that is, the King, the Lords,
and Commons jointly concurring, have power to make new Laws, which consent
concludes the whole Nation, it is done by its representative body, and so by
their Commission.

Thus it appears, that when there is a question and dispute in Parliament,
between the King and the two Houses, it is not necessary to have it
affirmatively determined, nor needful that His Majesty in such cases be Judge
against the two Houses, or the two Houses to Judge it without Him; That is but
a fiction of the Members, devised by them to reduce the Nation unto their
Tyranny; which as the Members knew they could not effect, but by excluding the
King from His negative Voice in Parliament; so that being done, their work was
finished. Then they without the King arrogate power to make new Laws, and
change the old for their own advantage as they pleased: And so both King and
people inslaved. Therefore herein to beguile the people, a case was feigned,
and stated thus, That such a difference between the King and the two Houses as
concerned the safety of the Kingdom, was happened in Parliament: That unless
this question were instantly determined, the Kingdom was in danger to perish.
Then to draw the people to side with the Members, they were told, that the
Lords and Commons were the representative body of the Kingdom. That whatever
the Members in those Assemblies do, it is so much the Act of every particular
person in the Kingdom, as if he were within the walls of the House personally
consenting: And persuaded the vulgar, that this dispute between the King and
the Members (in effect) is between Him and all the people of England. And then
offer it to the consideration of the multitude, whether it be not more likely,
that all the people of the Realm concurring in one opinion, should better know
what is for their own good, then the King being but one single person, and
dissenting in judgment from the whole Nation. The poor people not being of
capacity suddenly to discern the fallacy hereof: And being ravished with a
conceit to be Judge in their own case, in smarmes flocked to this Idol, (the
Members) thinking they had thereby adored themselves, as well as that beast,
and never ceased, until by violence they expelled the King from His negative
Voice in Parliament.

But now, by woeful experience, they both understand by whom, and how, they are
represented, which is thus. The Knights of Shires, Citizens, and Burgesses,
being elected by the Inhabitants of the several Counties and Towns, do in
some sort represent the people who chose them, but that is no further then
their Commission extends; And they have no other Commission then the Kings Writ
of Summons; and the return thereof, word by word, set down before, which
gives them no other authority, then to consent unto Laws agreed on by the King
and His great Council, the Peers, and consequently they do represent the
people no further then to consent unto such Laws. And for the Peers, they have
no Commission at all from the people, nor can be said to represent them, their
authority is solely from the Kings said Writ of Summons, directed to every
particular Lord, by which likewise his power is declared and stinted That is,
to advise with the King concerning the affairs of the Realm. So that the
Lords and Commons put together, they have no Commission to make Laws, we are
still to seek that Legislative power, nor is it to be found, but in the King,
He alone is properly the Lawmakers. But the Kings of England (as before
appears) having excluded themselves to make Laws without consent of the two
Houses; Therefore that united body, the King and the Members of those
Assemblies is called the Legislative power, and the representative body of the
Kingdom.

But that either, or both Houses, or any Assembly, or people in this or any
other Nation governed by Monarchy, has, or ever claimed to have a Legislative
power, or sofar to represent the Kingdom, as to make new Laws, or change the
old, without the Personal consent of the King is such a ridiculaus Bull, as
never was heard, or thought of until this frantic Parliament: Therefore, when
either, or both Houses without the King, take upon them to make Laws, they
extend beyond the bounds of their Commission, they thereby act of their own
head, not as representatives. For example, a Lord by Commission gives power to
A. and B. to let, and set his Land for term of years, so long as A. and B.
pursue this authority, they do represent that Lord: but if by color of that
Commssion, A. and B. demise for life, or sell the Inheritance, it is done
without authority, their Commission reaches not so far, and so not
representatives. Therefore such lease or sale is void, it does not bind the
Lord.

Or thus.

A. (having contracted with B. to make A. feoffement unto him and his heirs of
the Manor of D. upon a condition) by letter of Attorney gives power to C. to
make livery and seisin upon that Condition: C. performs it. In this case, the
Land is as firmly settled in B. as if A. had executed it in his own person,
because it is done by his representative: But if C. (omitting to express the
Condition) make livery and seisin, absolutely nothing passes to B. for says
our Law, C. extending the bounds of his Commission, he does not represent A.
Therefore his whole act void.

So here, the Lords, as before appears, have Commission to advise with the
King; the Commons to do and consent unto things agreed on by the King and them.
Now those Lords and Commons taking upon them, without the Personal assent of
the King, to make new, or change the old Law, it is a power usurped without
Commission or authority, therefore no representatives, and consequently all
their proceedings void.

Then for the distinctions in the aforesaid Declarations mentioned. 1. That no
Law made without the Kings consent binds, unless His consent be first required
and refused. 2. That those Laws be necessary for the preservation of the
Kingdom. 3. That such Laws shall continue no longer in force then that
necessity lasts: these are snares and subtilties only to catch the simple, no
wise man will be taken with them. Suppose the King, upon refusal of the
Members, to have power to make a Law, it is all one as to have that authority
without asking them the question: The Members upon broaching such a doctrine for
the King, would call it tyranny, they might, and justly too, in that case,
account themselves but ciphers. And the like reason holds via versa, if the
Kings denial to make a Law, hinder not the force of it, the absolute power is
in the Members. And whether a Law be of necessity to be made for the
preservation of the Kingdom, or not, he who will be sole Judge of that
necessity, excludes the other, if the King be Judge thereof, the Houses are
excluded, if the Houses assume that power, the King is excluded.

And then for the continuance of those Laws, it is as easy for the Members to
say they have cause to continue them, as to pretend necessity to make them.

The Members judged it necessary for the preservatio^ of the Kingdom, to take
from the Crown the Militia of the Realm, and to settle it upon themselves:
they desired the King to consent, He refused; thereupon the Members without the
King usurped that power into their own hands. The Members now declare it
necessary for the preservation of the Kingdom, for them, without the King, to
impose upon the people impositions, taxes, and payments without stint, to make
what Laws they think fit, to exclude the King from His Regal Authority; to
assume the whole power of Government, and that to be Arbitrary, the King having
been desired to consent hereunto, He refuses. Upon this we see, the Members
without the King assume it, witness the imposition of that horrid Tax by
Excise, Assesments, condemning of their fellow Subjucts to death, confiscating
their Estates, and the like, so that no man can apprehend, that the asking of
the Kings consent (which in show they seemed to desire) is in their esteem,
indeed of any moment.

And the Members by excluding the King from His negative Voice, having got
possession of the wealth of the whole Nation, and dominion over the people,
having thereby wrested from the King the Sword, His Scepter, and Sovereignty it
self; no doubt but the same necessity pretended by them at first to incroach
this power, will be still alleged by them to make their usurped authority
lasting; which accordingly we find, the Members have (as much as in them lie)
made their reign perpetual: They tell us first in general, that in all
matters either concerning Church or State, Declaration against the Scots
papers. p. 63.
we have no Judge upon earth but themselves. And so by their doom, we are,
both for soul and body in an everlasting and absolute slavery unto our fellow
Subjects.

Then they proceed to particulars, and begin with the Militia of the Realm,
which they judge usetesse, and as a thing lying dead, whilst it is in the power
of the King of England. For say the Idem. pap. 71.
Members, by the constitutions of the Realm, the King cannot by himself
alone, without consent of the two Houses, raise money by taxing the people.
Therefore the power of the Militia, say they, inables Him not to do the
Kingdom any effectual service. But those Members having arrogated a power
without the King, to impose upon the people without stint, they do therefore
judge the Militia to be their own. And I confess they are in some sort
necessitated thereunto, for both we and they see, that otherwise then by
troops of Horse, and bands of Soldiers, it is impossible to leavy upon the
Subject, those illegal burdens by the Members laid upon them.

So that it is now come to pass, that our greatest happiness is made the
foundation of our greatest misery, because the King governs us by a known Law,
these Members tell us, we must not be governed by a King, the Kings justness
to His people, has furnished these Tyrants with arguments to dis-throne Him.
By the government under the King, and that authority claimed by Him, the people
have such protection of their persons, and property in their Lands and goods,
as that (otherwise then the known Law declared by the sworn Judges of the
Realm does warrant) the King cannot molest them in either, therefore say the
Members, He ought not to have the power of the sword. But on the other side,
the Members having usurped an arbitrary and tyrannical power over the persons,
lives, estates and fortunes both of King and people, therefore the Militia of
the Kingdom, say they, belongs to them, so that upon the matter, better it had
been, both for King and people, if the King had assumed the Turkish tyranny,
for then the King (even by the Members own argument) had kept His Crown, nor
had the Subject been in so great a slavery as now, we had then been subject
only to one tyrant, but by this doctrine we are vassals to seven hundred.

The Members have already (besides the whole Revenue of the Crown, which they
have barbarously wrested from the King, the Queen, and the Royal Progeny)
taxed upon the people by way of Excise, Assesments, and such like, new
impositions, before this Parliament never known nor heard of in England, above
3000000. l. per annum for their own settled Revenue, yet all this serves not
the turn of these blessed self-denying reformers. Besides all this, they force
the people to lend, to give, they confiscate where they please, and convert to
their own use what sums of money they think fit. Yet setting aside their
own pomp and glory, no visible cause of expense appears saving the Soldiery,
who are kept for no other end but to awe the people and force those exorbitant
and illegal contributions.

Secondly, they have Judged the King (whom themselves even this Declaration
against the Scots papers. p. 67.
Parliament have sworn to be their only Supreme Governor) to be unfit to
Govern. And this for refusing to acknowledge it His duty to be governed by
them His Subjects, and so much as in Him lay, perpetually to vassalage unto
those Rebels Himself, His Royal Posterity, and all the rest of the people.
And to complete the work, they have Judged it Treason, for any Subject of
England, either to Their Votes dated.
make application to His Sovereign, or to receive any Message from Him. By
which Tyranny, the people of this Nation are brought into that sad condition,
as doubtless was never yet paralleled (even from the Creation) upon the face
of the whole earth. For, Traitors we are denounced, both for doing, and not
doing, one and the same thing; By Act of Parliament it is high Treason to
refuse to Stat. 1. and 5. E.
swear the King to be the only Supreme Governor over all the people of the
Realm: And these Members, against this known and declared Law, (although
themselves have taken that Oath) murder such Subjects, as according to their
duty, make address unto Him; And call that their due allegiance, Treason.

And to color these proceedings, the Members have the boldness to vouch God
himself to justify the legality thereof. The power of the Militia, say they,
was the principal cause both of this late Declaration against the Scots
papers. p. 70.
War and the quarrel with the King: then they tell us that the question
concerning their right thereof, having been long and sadly debated both in
black and red battles, God himself has given the verdict upon their sides,
meaning (if their words have any sense) that by their prevailing against the
King in that war, God has judged the cause for them, and against the King. But
who sees not this to be a presamptuous blasphemy, added to the sin of
Rebellion? did not this bold hypocrisy, as aptly suit with the actions of Ket,
Cade, Wat Tyler, and all foregoing Rebels? Certainly as long as any Traitor,
murderer, or felon, can defend himself from the just trial and sentence of
the Law, it is as easy, and upon as just grounds, for him to appeal to God
for justification of his fact, as these Members do now call Him to witness for
them.

So that the consequence to the people of England which follows the excluding
the King from His negative Voice in Parliament, is no less then the loss of
that happy condition of a free Subject, governed by a known Law under a King
and in being reduced to the slavery of an arbitrary power under their equals
and fellow subjects. Therefore all the people of England, do generally,
disclaim the foresaid Members to be their representatives, and refuse to
submit unto their Orders or Ordinances.

Upon the whole matter, these things appear, that the Parliament of England
consists of the King, the Lords House, and the Plow. fo. 79. 4 H. 7. fo 18. 7
H. 7. fo. 15. 33 H. 6. fo. 17, 18. 12 H. 7. fo. 20. Dier. fo.
Commons House jointly concurring; that every one of them has a negative Voice
in making Laws, and consequently all Orders, and Ordinances, or whatever they
may be styled, whereunto the King has not, or shall not voluntarily without
compulsion give His Royal Assent, are done without Commission, warrant, or
Authority, and so not binding King or people. The Duke of Norfolkes case
Justice Hutton against Ship Money, 32. 33. Coke. 8. fo. 20.


In the next Chapter is showed the power of the Parliament of England.

CHAP. IV., That the King, the Lords House and the Commons House, concurring,
have not an unlimited power to make Laws, it being in the breast of the Judges
of the Realm, to determine which Acts of Parliament are binding, and, which
void, and to expound the meaning of every Act.
IT may seem strange to some, that the high Court of Parliament should be
limited in their power, and deny to expound their own Laws. But upon
consideration had of the use of a Parliament, and of the grounds of the Laws of
England, it appears to be both just and consonant to the Constitutions of this
Realm.

The People of this Nation are not governed by a Parliament, Sovereignty is the
Kings, yet the King Himself has not an absolute or an unlimited power over
the people; For as the people are governed by and under Him, so the Law directs
how He is to govern them: But in this Nation (as in every Commonwealth
governed by a settled Law) occasions often happen, to do such things as the rules
of that Law cannot warrant: Therefore necessary it is, to have a power to
supply those defects, and that is the office, and true use of a Parliament;
Which authority rightly considered, is of such concernment to the
Commonwealth, as that the greatest care in the world ought to be had, who are
trusted therewith. It is no less then a power to change that Law, whereby the
people have protection of life, and fortune, and therefore may require the
consent of such persons, as are not rightly qualified to judge which Laws are
binding, and which void, or to expound the meaning thereof. Upon that ground it
is, that by the constitution of this Realm, no new Law can be made, or the old
changed, but by the King, with the assent of the two Houses of Parliament.
Those persons (as before appears) are proper to judge when such things have
happened, as may require the making of a new Law, or to alter the old: But
without derogation from the honor of those persons, That body is not of a
mould fit to judge, which Statutes are binding, which void, or to expound the
meaning of an Act.

First, clear it is, Acts of Parliament may be so penned, and contain such
matter, as ought not to bind either King or people. Suppose it enacted, that
from henceforth, the Members of the two Houses shall be exempt from punishment
for Treason, Murder, Felony, and other Crimes: Or that the King and the two
Houses, from time to time shall consent to make such Laws, as a close
Committee, or certain persons by name shall conclude upon, or that every Act
of Parliament afterward made shall be void, and the like, no man can conceive
such Acts would be binding, for thereby the true use of Parliaments, the Law
and government were destroyed.

Besides, all men grant, that an arbitrary power is absolutely destructive to
the people. And it appears in the next precedent Chapter, that to give this
unlimited authority of making Laws to the King alone, or to either, or both
Houses without the King, were no other then to bring upon the people that
thraldom: Now for this boundless power to be in the King and the two Houses
jointly, although that were nothing so bad as to have it in the King alone, or
in either, or both Houses without the King, yet the people were not thereby so
well secured from the tyranny of an arbitrary power, as when the Judges
determine which Acts of Parlliament are binding, and which void.

Upon perusal of former Statutes, it appears the Members of both Houses have
been frequently drawn to consent, not only to things prejudicial to the
Commonwealth, but (even in matters of greatest weight) to alter and contradict
what formerly themselves had agreed unto, and that even as it happened to
please the fancy of the present Prince, witness that Statute by which it was
enacted that the Proclamations of King H. 8. 31 H. 8. c. 8.
should be equivalent to an Act of Parliament, one other Act which declared
both Queen Mary 28 H. 8. c. 7.
and Queen Eliz. to be bastards, one other which in words 35 H. 8. ca. 1. 31 H.
8. c. 14. 1 Ed. 6. c. 1. 2 E. 6. c. 1. 1 Ma. c. 1. 1, and 2. P. and M. c. 8. 1
El. c. 1, 2, 3. 5 El. c. 1.
gave power to the same King to dispose of the Crown of England by his last
will and testament. And the several Statutes in the times of King H. 8. Edw.
6. Queen Mary, and Queen Eliz. setting up, and pulling down, each others
Religion, every one of them, condemning even to death, the professor of the
contrary Religion.

And now, reflecting upon the proceedings of the present Members, we find they
have de facto arrogated unto themselves (in the highest strain) a power
arbitrary; It is likewise too evident with what terrors, menaces, and inhumane
cruelties, they press their Sovereign Propositions sent to Newcastle. The 4.
Bills sent to the Isle of Wight. The Houses Votes dated to have no further
Addresses to their King.
to pass Acts of Parliament for confirmation thereof. Doubtless had they not
met with a King (even beyond humane expectation) most magnanimous, it had been
effected: And suppose this Kings consent had been obtained, or that He, or any
other succeeding King shall be drawn by force, or fraud, to consent thereunto,
and admit such Acts of Parliament to bind, it will follow that no Government
can be more arbitrary, nor any people from free Subjects become more absolute
slaves, then the Englishmen are and will be.

And being thus brought into misery, that which is still worse, our selves and
posterity to the end of the world, are likely to live under this vassallage
without hope of redemption, if not by Gods mercy timely remedied. For it cannot
be imagined that the Members, so long as they have power over their Prince and
other His good Subjects, and whilst their persons, estates and Fortunes are
thus at their will and pleasure, it cannot be imagined (I say) that by their
own judgment (against themselves) or sentence, we shall be enfranchized.

Now if I appeal to any rational man (not prejudicated as a person herein
particularly concerned) whether that Law which declares such Acts of Parliament
to bind, or that which judges them void be the more prudent, wholesome, and
reasonable Law: I dare be bold to conclude, that sentence herein will be given
for the latter. And since it follows that some Acts of Parliament may, and
ought to be adjudged void, that being granted, reason dictates to every man of
sense, that not the Members, but some other known persons must determine which
Statutes bind the people and which are invalid.

Now that the Judges of the Realm have power not only to determine which Acts
of Parliament are binding and which void, but to expound the meaning of every
Act, is no new doctrine, it is the known Law, and the common practice of the
Kingdom, which is the Law it self. In the books of our Law it is declared
for a fundamental ground, Coke 8. f. 118. D. and St. l. 1 c. 6. fo. 10.
That such Statutes as are against Common-right, repugnant, or impossible, are
void, and that they ought to be so declared by the Judges of the Realm; For
example, by the Statute of Carlisle made 35. E. 1. it is ordained that the 35
Ed. 1. c. 4.
Seal of the order of the Cistercians and Augustines shall be kept in the
custody of the Priour and four others, and that any deed, sealed with any
other seal, shall be void: and this Statute is judged to be void in Law, and
that the Priour notwithstanding this Law, and against the express words
thereof, sealing deeds with any other seal, those deeds are judged good, for
the Priour could 27. H. 6. title Annuity 41. Coke 8. fo. 118.
not seal with that seal in the custody of the other four, and therefore that
Statute repugnant in it self, and so void.

It is likewise declared by the Judges, Coke 8. f. 111.
that where a Statute gives power to A. to determine all pleas happening within
his manor, in that case A. shall not have power to determine such pleas as
concern himself, and the same it were if the Statute should in express words
grant to A. that authority, for it is repugnant to reason and common justice,
that any man shall be judge in his own case.

It is resolved by the Judges of the Realm, that diverse prerogatives are so
inseperably annexed to the Crown, as that they cannot be severed by Act of
Parliament; for example, by a Statute made 23 H. 6. c. 10. it is enacted that
no man shall continue Sheriff of a Shire above one year, and by that Act
declared in 23 H. 6. c. 10.
these words, that all Patents from the King of that office of Sheriff for
years, for life, in tail, or in fee shall be void, any clause or words of non
obstante put into such Patents notwithstanding. Now thisStatute, as to the
Kings power is by the Judges of the Realm declared void, and although that
Statute was never repealed, all Kings since might have granted that office for
life, in tail, or in fee, and grants thereof have been made accordingly,
contrary to the express words of that Statute, yet resolved to be good: 2 H.
7. 6. b. Co. 7. 14. P. Com. 502. b.
And ever since that Act all Kings have most frequently continued Sheriffs in
their office for longer time then a year. Even common experience shows, that
the power of the old Sheriff, does not cease or determine until the King has
made a new Sheriff, and notice thereof given to the old, which oftentimes
happens to be after the year: And in Michaelmas Term 5. and 6. of Queen Die.
355. 36.
Eliz. the Sheriffs (by reason of the great plague then, and of the adjournment
of that Term wholly) were made and named by the Queen without the Assembly of
the Justices in the Exchequer, according to the common usage, and though for
the most part none were named but one of the two which remained in the bill of
the year then last passed, yet by all the Justices and Sergeants at Law, it was
holden, that the Queen by Her prerogative might have made a Sheriff without any
such election, notwithstanding any Statute to the contrary, which appears in
Dyers Reports. Die. 225. 35.


The King is fountain of Justice and mercy, therefore if it were enacted that
he shall not grant Commissions to determine felonies, or that from henceforth
it shall not be in his power to pardon any Crime, or that all such pardons
shall be void, such Laws would be void, and would not bind, as being repugnant
to Law, government, Coke 7. 37.
and reason, to stop that fountain.

The King by His Prerogative has authority to dispense with penal Laws, which
cannot be taken from Him by Act of Parliament, although in express terms it
be enacted that all such dispensations with a non obstante shall be void; which
clearly appears by the foresaid case of the Sheriff, for though by that
Statute of 23 H. 6. it is inacted that all Patents of the King shall be void as
before, although with a non obstante, yet the Judges at all times have resolved
it, as a thing without dispute: That those Patents (although expressly against
the words and intent of that Act) with a non obstante are good in Law. And so
the books take it for a fundamental ground, that the King may by His Patent
with a non obstante dispense with Laws made by Act of Parliament, and put the
difference Coke 7. 37.
between Acts prohibiting what the Common Law prohibits Coke 4. fo. 35.
in which case the King cannot by His letters Patents with a non obstante (how
strong soever it be penned) dispense with such Acts or any one point of the
Common Law of England, which forbids only that which is malum in se, otherwise
it is of Acts prohibiting things not before prohibited by the Law, which are
only mala quia prohibita, the King may dispense with such Acts by His Letters
Patents, with a non obstante, though those very Acts expressly say, that such
Letters Patents with a non obstante shall be void. That Prerogative being
inseparable as is showed before, and not to be abolished by Act of Parliament,
no more then His other prerogatives of as high a nature, viz. those of
denouncing War and concluding Peace, inhaunsing or debasing of Coin or the
like, which are flowersinseperably annexed to the Crown, and most proper for a
King, but not suitable with the condition of a Subject, therefore the Judges
have resolved they cannot be severed by Act of Parliament.

And the same it is when the Law is only declared by Act of Parliament. If the
King and the two Houses declare, that it is not by the Common Law of England,
Treason to kill, or to attempt to kill the King, the Queen, or Prince, or that
it is not felony to steal, or the like, such declarations are of no effect,
they ought not, they do not, they cannot conclude the Judges.

And as every Statute may be judged by them whether it be binding or void, so
the meaning of the words thereof must be by the Judges expounded too. It is the
true sense which is the Law, not the bare letter, (and this exposition is
likewise the office of the Judges as is said before.)

For example, by a Statute made 1 Eliz. it is enacted that all leases made
afterward by any Bishop of his Church Lands, exceeding El. not printed.
21. years or three lives shall to all intents and purposes be judged void, and
yet it has been adjudged, both in the Kings Bench, and in the Common Pleas,
that a lease for an hundred years, is not void against that Bishop himself who
was lessor, wherein the Judges expound the meaning of the Lawmakers to be
thus, that their intent was only for the benefit of the Successors, not to
relieve any man against his own Act, therefore such leases made after the
Statute, exceeding twenty one years, or three lives, are voidable only by the
successors if they please, and adjudged not void against the lessour himself,
contrary to the express words of the Statute: And in like manner, are other
infinite Acts of Parliament expounded by the Judges, wherein it is a maxim in
Law that their exposition of Statutes ought to be according to the rules of the
Coke 3. fo. 13. and 77. Plow. fo. 352.
Common Law, by which it appears the Members are not the interpreters, for they
know not the rules of the Law.

Besides, the Parliament cannot be the final expounders of Statutes for these
reasons. 1. It appears before that it is not the bare letter, but the true
sense and meaning of the words, which is the Law. And the King and the two
Houses cannot declare the meaning of those words, but by Act of Parliament,
they cannot (says our Law) otherwise speak, what ever they Act, or do, in
any other way, is extrajudiciall: if the King and both Houses unanimously
deliver an opinion, (without reducing it to an Act of Parliament) concerning
the meaning of a former Statute, it is of no more nor greater force, or effect,
then for the Judges of a Court of judicature, to give their opinions in a point
of Law, in a case not judicially depending before them, such an opinion binds
not, nor is pleadable in a Court of Justice.

And besides the absurd inconvenience, and the impossibility to have an Act of
Parliament to determine every question arising upon Statutes, it may so happen,
as that the King and the two Houses can never give an end to one controversy:
For example, suppose an Act be made to explain the meaning of former Statute
ambiguously penned, the words of this Act must have a meaning too, and may
admit of several interpretations as well as the former Act did, and several
persons as they are therein concerned, may differ in the exposition thereof,
and so irreconcilable as not to be ended without the authority of a Judge, and
this may fall out upon every Act of explanation upon explanation in infinitum,
and consequently by that way there cannot to the end of the world be a final
determination of the difference.

2. The validity of every Statute, and the exposition thereof, at the will of
every person concerned, may regularly be brought before the Judges of the Law,
but cannot judicially depend before the Parliament. For example, every Statute
is binding, or void; if binding, it concerns the Subject in his person or
estate, and when it is put in execution, the ministers, or actors therein, may
(at the will of him interrupted thereby) be sued in the Court of Common Pleas,
or in some other Court of Justice, by an action of trespass, by which suite
what ever the Act of Parliament is, both the validity of the Statute, and the
meaning of the words thereof, is submitted to the Judges of that Court, and to
their judgment; As suppose this case to arise upon the foresaid Statute of 23
H. 6. that one who has continued Sheriff above one year by virtue of a Writ
directed to the Sheriff of the same County, does arrest the body of A. who for
this brings his action of trespass in the Common Pleas, in which the Sheriff
justifies by virtue of the Writ, A. replies, pleads the Statute, and shows,
that the year was ended before the arrest, upon which the Sheriff demurs in
Law; by these pleadings the whole fact is confessed on both sides, the Sheriff
does acknowledge his year was out before the arrest, and A. confesses the
arrest was by virtue of the Kings Writ directed to the Sheriff, and so the
question being matter of Law, it is to be determined by the Judges of that
Court, wherein the sole doubt is, whether that Statute be binding, or void: for
if binding, judgment ought to be given for the plaintiff A. because the
Statute being good, the defendant was not Sheriff after his year ended when he
made the arrest, and so had no authority; if void, it ought to be given for the
Sheriff, for then the Law is not by it altered, and so he was Sheriff at the
time of the arrest, although his year was out.

Now in this case no man can deny, but that the Judges must give judgment,
else the Court of Common Pleas (which were absurd to imagine) has not power to
determine an action of trespass, and judgment being given (as in this case it
ought to be) for the Sheriff (because it is already resolved and received for a
known truth that the foresaid Statute binds not the King, this duty of the
Subject to serve the King in person (says the book) Coke, Calvin's case. fo.
14.
being due by the Law of nature, cannot be severed by Act of Parliament) it is
final. And so if it were enacted that a Member of the Commons House, or any
other subject by name, should not be condemned, or punished for murder, who
afterward commits the fact, for which being arraigned at the Kings Bench bar,
he pleades the Statute, the Judges even against the express words, and intent
of that Act, ought to give sentence of death. And contrariwise if by Act of
Parliament it were enacted that all Pardons for felony to be granted by the
King, should be judged void, after which a subject commits felony, obtaines the
Kings pardon for it, is arraigned at the bar, and pleads this pardon, it ought
to be allowed being duly pleaded, and the Justices in such case ought not to
condemn but to acquit the prisoner: And these judgments (as to any appeal to
the Parliament) are final; they cannot be brought before the King and the two
Houses by any suite, or action at Law: They cannot judicially determine any
thing but by Act of Parliament; And if they shall in this case make a new
Statute, that Law must (even by the same Judges) be expounded too.

3. The Parliament is a body so composed, as that it is not only improper, but
almost impossible for these persons finally to determine any one point of Law:
A Court of Judicature ought to consist of one entire body, and of such a body,
as at all times has power, not only to deliver its own opinion, but by that
sentence to decide the question depending before them, but the Parliament is
not so composed: The Members of that Assembly are divided into three several
bodies, and their proceedings several and distinct: and obvious it is, that in
one and the same thing they frequently conclude opposite each to other, yet
until all three concur, it binds not. And so though every Member of those
bodies has given his sentence according to his own conscience, yet the
question is not decided, and that which is worse, peradventure never can be
brought to a period, for it may fall out these three bodies of the King, the
Lords House, and the Commons, may in that perpetually differ in opinion.

These things considered, every rational man must conclude, that the
Parliament is not of a Composure fit for this work, nor instituted for that
purpose: Those things (as afterward in its proper place is more fully showed*)
are the office of the Judges of the Realm.

By this it appears, that when the two Houses have passed a Bill for an Act of
Parliament, and to it the Kings Royal Assent is had, the Parliaments power
ends, and then begins the authority of the Judges of the Realm, whose office
is (the case being regularly brought before them) first to judge, whether the
Act it self be good, and if binding, then to declare the meaning of the words
thereof. And so the necessity of having a power upon emergent occasions to make
new Laws is supplied, and yet the fundamental grounds of the Law, by this
limitation of the power of the Lawmaker, with reference to the Judges to
determine which Acts of Parliament are binding, and which void, is preserved.

Upon the whole matter clear it is, The Parliament it self, (that is, the
King, the Lords, and Commons) although unanimously consenting, are not
boundless, the Judges of the Realm by the D. and St. fo. 18. Plo. 399. 563.
Dyer 313. 231. Coke 147. Co. 8. 118. 33 H. 6. fo. 18. Co. 8. fo. 18.
fundamental Law of England have power to determine which Acts of Parliament
are binding and which void, and to expound the meaning of every Statute.

Thus whilst every person, Court, and Assembly keep within its own bounds, the
known Law protecteth every man in his just rights; the Subject, whilst that is
observed, need not doubt protection of his person, and may securely challenge a
property in his estate. But the Members do now teach, or (to speak more
properly) force upon the people another doctrine: They without the King not
only assume the power of a Court of Judicature, and that without any appeal
from it, but an authority and power to Declaration 2 Nov. 1642.
make and declare the Law, and that boundless too, whereby Law it self is
totally destroyed.

It is a Maxim in Law, that every disseisor of Land is seized in fee simple,
and that no man can give a particular estate by wrong; for example: A. Tenant
for years, remainder to B. for life, remainder to C. in tail, remainder to D.
in fee, E. outs A. from his possession, E. does not hereby get the estate for
years, but by that entry has displaced all the remainders, and (until
re-entry by A.) is wrongfully seized to him and his heirs: Like unto this was
that of the Members: They injuriously excluded the King from his negative Voice
in Parliament: They have not by it gained power to make Laws without Him, but
whilst they continue this usurpation, they wrongfully disinherit both King and
people of all their birthrights; The known Laws of the Land is by this
totally subverted: until the King be reinvested herein, we have neither common
Law, particular custom, or Statute Law, nor can any man challenge protection
of his person, or property in his Lands or goods, for, what Law they make, how
repugnant to sense, and reason, how barbarous soever it be, neither the Judges
of the Realm, nor any other, if we may believe the Members, have The Houses
Votes dated.
power to examine, control, or oppose it: Thus our excellent Laws, the Members
have so much, and so often boasted to defend, are by the same persons, at the
same instant, and even by the same medicine (excluding the King from His
negative Voice) they pretended to preserve them, destroyed. So that I confess,
the Members were necessitated, not only to deny the King this power, but to
assume authority without Him to make Laws, and that without stint or
limitations: for by the known Law, the facts, and proceedings of these Members
are Treason. Therefore they must make new ones, else be judged by the old. And
to make new Laws, yet to admit the Judges power to determine whether they bind
or not, were to fall into the same Predicament of Treason: In the next place it
is showed who are the Judges of the Law, which power (although with as little
reason or sense as the former) the Members have usurped too.

CHAP. V. That the Judges of the Kings Bench, of the Common Pleas, and the
Barons of the Exchequer, are the Judges of the Realm, unto whom the people are
bound lastly and finally, to submit themselves for matter of Law.
BUt some give this power to the Parliament, others to the two Houses jointly,
others to the Lords House singly, and some make the House of Commons Judge of
the Law.

All which are mere surmises by faction raised and spread abroad since this
Parliament, for besides what before is said herein, in the next precedent
Chapter, upon consideration had of the quality of the persons of those Members,
the Commission required to authorize a Judge of the Law, and the composier of
that Body; It will appear, they are so far from having any such power, as that
(the Lords House in some particular things excepted) neither the Parliament,
nor the two Houses jointly, nor either of them singly, can judicially, or
finally determine any one point of Law.

First for the quality of the persons: And to begin with the House of Commons.
They consist of Knights of Shires, Citizens, and Burgesses: The Knights of the
Shire, we see by experience, although sometimes men of estates are chosen, yet
not always of the best understanding: For the Citizens, and Burgesses, the
Cities and Corporations for which they serve, are Instituted only for
advancement of trade, and accordingly the bodies of such towns and places,
consist of Tradesmen, whose educations are only to learn Crafts and
occupations, and the far greater number of them mecanick handy-crafts: Besides,
the true cause of authorizing Corporations to send Burgesses to Parliament, is,
that they may give information concerning the Trading in those places, to the
end, if need be, to make Laws for the increase thereof; And therefore such
Citizens and Burgesses should be tradesmen; which appears, both by the foresaid
Statute made 1 H. 5. and the words ^ H. 5. c. 1.
of the Writs of Election: By that Statute it is enacted, that none shall be
elected Citizens or Burgesses, but freemen, dwellers and Inhabitants in such
Cities and Borough Towns. And by a Statute made 23 H. 6. It is enacted that
none shall be chosen a Knight of Stat. 23, H. 6. c. 15.
the Shire, but Knights* or notable Esquires, or Gentlemen borne and shall be
able to be Knights. And no man to be such Knight, which stands in the degree
of a Yeoman, and under. And the words of the Writs of Election are these. For
the Shire, Duos Milites gladiis cinctos, etc. For a City, Duos cives, etc. For
a Borough, Duos Burgenses, etc. And so both by Act of Parliament, and by the
Writ, the Intent of the Law is declared to be, that for the Shire, Gentlemen,
for Cities and Boroughs Tradesmen are to be elected: And the Members who serve
for those Corporations, are above four times the number of all the rest.

So that the Laws of England for electing Citizens and Burgesses, being
observed as they ought to be, the far greater part of that Assembly, must
consist of Tradesmen and persons very unapt to judge the Law; Yet more proper
for that service for which they were intended, then such as are at this present
usually chosen; Whilst the Statutes and the Laws of the Realm were therein
observed, we heard not of any tumultuous or disorderly proceedings in that
House: But of later times, and especially since the beginning of King James His
Reign, the Borough Towns, by procurement of factious persons, have more
frequently chosen such, who were so far from having knowledge in the Trades and
Traffic of those Boroughes; or being resident, or dwelling there, as that they
never saw the Town, nor was the Burgess ever seen of any one of his Electors:
yet contrary to the express negative words of the aforesaid Statute, and
direction of the Writ, the Commons House declare those Elections Legal, which
shows that these Members are very incapable to understand the Law, else a
company of persons who have illegally without any due election by faction as
aforesaid, packed themselves into that body, and accordingly resolved to
observe no other Law, but their own will, and so however, whether learned, or
unlearned, not fit to be Judges of the Realm, or finally to declare the Law.

2. All the Members of that House, as well Knights as Burgesses are elected by
the vulgar multitude, and therefore were elections made according to the Laws
of the Realm, Popular elections sometime produce like unto themselves: In
so much, that it may happen that not one knowing man in the profession of the
Law, or one person literate, shall be returned Member of that Assembly.

3. Experience shows it is most frequent as well for Knights of the Shire, as
for Burgesses to elect Infants and Children, which are by that Assembly
approved on, and have equal Voice with the rest, although by the Constitution
of the Realm (as experience shows) they are so far from being admitted
Judges of the Law, as that none until he be of the age of twenty one years is
capable to be sworn of a Jury, to try the least matter of fact.

4. All differences in that House are decided thus: First by debate the
business is reduced to a head: Then the Speaker puts the question, then the
Members Vote, and the greater number carries it, so that if the question be
upon a point of Law, the quality of the persons of that Assembly considered,
(admitting them as learned as ordinarily they are returned) the best which can
be expected in such a case, is, That the major part (who is the Judge in every
question there) may happen to concur in Vote, with some few of their fellow
Members who they hope understand the business: And so at the best, this Judge
decides the controversy by implicit faith: For, it cannot be imagined that
the greater number of that Assembly, by any debate there had, shall understand
many questions of a Law, which daily, and frequently happen.

And for the Lords House, the Members of that Assembly have no other authority
to sit, or Vote there Coke, Calvin's* case. fo. 15. Coke 7. fo. 33.
but as Peers of the Realm, and admit the King never to create a Peer of the
Realm, but a man of the greatest judgment, it cannot be expected
understanding should always descend: Upon which ground it is, that a grant of
a place of Judicature to one and his heirs, as to his heirs is void in Law,
and although the education of the Lords, for the most part are fit for persons
of Honor, yet they are not qualified to Judge the Law.

Thus for the quality of the Persons: Now for the Commission.

Admit every Member of each House, in knowledge, more profound then the most
learned Judge, that makes them not Judge of the Law; If the most learned,
because so learned, be a Judge, it is far more difficult to find out the Judge,
then to know the Law, it is like as well the ignorant, as the learned, would
pretend to the greatest knowledge: But that is not the rule to know a Judge, he
is distinguished from other men by his Commission.

It appears before, that no Court, Assembly, or Person, has authority to
determine any matter of Law, but by Grant from the King, by Act of Parliament,
or by prescription: Even so it is for the power, extent, and jurisdiction of
any such Court, person, or Assembly; For, as no man can have any authority but
by Commission, so none can claim greater, or other power then is thereby
granted: For example, If the Court be erected by the Kings grant, the Patent
declares what authority the Judges have, beyond which they have none: If by Act
of Parliament the Statute does express what they have Jurisdiction of, if by
prescription, Custom, and use inform the Judges what they have to do, and for
a prescription to make it good these three things must concur. 1. It Dav.
reports fo. 29.
ought to be time out of mind, which is not allowed by our Law; (If it can
appear to have had its commencement since the Reign of King R. 1.) Secondly,
Litleton fo. Coke 9. fo. 27. Davies reports fo. 29.
although it has been ancient, yet unless it have constantly and frequently
practiced without interruption, it is not good. Thirdly, The thing it self
claimed must in the judgment of the Law be reasonable, otherwise, be the usage
time out of mind, and how frequent soever, it ought to be disallowed, for
Litleton fo.
malus usus abolendus.

The Chancery, the Kings Bench, the Common pleas, and the Court of Exchequer
are Courts of Justice: The Judges thereof have power of Judicature, and
although in some things their authority may be enlarged, and in other things
abridged by some particular Acts of Parliament, they have their jurisdiction
Coke 8. f. 145.
principally by prescription. Custom and use is their Commission: The said
Courts were not erected by Patent, nor by Parliament, yet every one of them
has its proper and peculiar jurisdiction: The Chancery for Equity, the Kings
Bench for Pleas of the Crown, the Common pleas for real actions, and other
matters of the Law; The Exchequer for the Kings Revenues: And every one of
these Courts is circumscribed within its own bounds.

The Chancery (unless it be in some particular cases warranted by custom)
has not power to determine questions of Law; nor the other three Courts matter
of Equity: The Common pleas not to intermeddle with the Pleas of the Crown,
nor the Kings Bench (unless occasioned by breach of the Kings peace) with
questions concerning title of Lands; And none of them has authority to extend
beyond its bounds in any one particular: All which is made good, by authority
and reason; For authority it is resolved in the books of the Law, that if the
Judges of the Common pleas Coke 10. fo. 76, 77.
in an Appeal or Indictment for murder, felony, or other capital crime,
condemn any person, their proceedings are void, as done coram non Judice.
That person so condemned, although guilty of the fact, in the judgment of Law,
is not attainted, nor his blood corrupted, he forfeits not his estate, and if
executed, Co. 10. fo. 76.
although by the command of the Judges of that Court both Judge and executioner
are guilty of felony, and punishable as if done without that command.

If the Lord of a Leete hold his Court, or the Sheriff his Turn, at other
times then custom does warrant. Or the Court of Marshalsey assume
jurisdiction, not made good by use, their proceedings are void. In all which
cases the Officers, or Ministers of those Courts, are punishable for executing
the commands of the Judges thereof; wherein the Law takes this difference, viz.
When a Court assumes power to determine that which it has not Commission to
determine, Co. 10. fo. 76.
and when it has jurisdiction of the cause, yet proceeds inverso ordine, in
the first, as in the cases aforesaid; The Minister is not excused, or justified
by the warrant of the Court; In the latter, the warrant or process of the
Court, is a legal justification, as thus: If the Court of Common Pleas hold
Plea without original, or award process of Capias against a Peer, and the
like, in these cases, although the proceedings be illegal, yet in regard the
Court has jurisdiction to determine the cause, if it were Co. 10. fo. 76.
regularly brought before them, the process or warrant of the Court, is a good
justification for the Minister thereof.

And this rule holds with all other Courts, Assemblies, and persons, when they
act, or do such things as they have Co. 10. fo. 74.
not Commission for, their proceedings are void: So that the Laws of England
admits not of Judges, but persons qualified to perform that office, yet
ability by it self, is no Commission to make a Judge.

The Judges of the Common Pleas, are as learned in the Law, and as able for
their knowledge to determine Pleas of the Crown as the Judges of the Kings
bench, but they have not the same authority. The Court of Common Pleas has not
used it, and consequently it is out of their Commission.

And that no Court ought to extend its own bounds, is made good by reason; For
if any Person, Court, or Assembly takes upon them, in any one thing, to execute
that which their Commission extends not to, by the same reason, they may assume
it in another, and so in infinitum, upon which it follows, that the power of
that Court, Person, or Assembly is become boundless: And if one Court, Person,
or Assembly may enlarge its bounds, the like reason holds with every Court,
Person, and Assembly in the Kingdom; and so a Parity introduced, and
consequently the whole Government subverted and destroyed.

In the next place it is considerable to know, what Commission the Parliament,
the two Houses, or either of them, has therein.

And first for the Commons house: That Assembly has no Commission from the
King, nor by Act of Parliament to Judge the Law; and for Prescription, they
fail in all the foresaid three particulars: for, they cannot challenge any
thing time out of mind: The Assembly it self had its beginning after the Reign
of K. Ric. 1.

Secondly, admit them to have been time out of mind, they fail in the use, for
until this Parliament they never executed or claimed any such thing.

Thirdly, admit them to have been time out of mind, and constantly to have used
the power of Judicature, yet it ought to be disallowed, because not reasonable:
it is repugnant to the Rules of Law and justice, that persons not fitly
qualified should have power of Judicature.

By the constitutions of England, controversies are decided thus, The Plaintiff
exhibits his complaint in a Court of Justice, and that Stat. 37 E. 3. cap. 15.
in the Latin tongue. The Defendant answers in the same Court and Language,
out of which pleading the case arises; which sometimes is question facti, and
sometimes question Juris: If it be facti, it is tried by a Jury sworn by
authority of that Court where the suit depends, and that cannot be the Members
of the Commons house, for (besides the difficulty of the Language) those
Members cannot give an Oath; and if it be matter of law, the sworn Judge is to
determine it; but they are not sworn to do justice.

And for the Lords house it is granted, that in some things, which custom and
use has made good, the Members of that Assembly have power of Judicature; for,
although that House, (as now it is formed and settled) has not been so ancient
as to make a Prescription, yet the Prelates, the Peers, and the Judges time out
of mind, have been frequently called together by the Kings of England, and
consulted with concerning making of Laws, and other the affairs of the
Commonwealth. And amongst other things, the Lords (depending therein on the
advice of the Judges) have so auntiently, as the beginning thereof cannot be
made appear, by licerse of the King, upon Writs of Error, reversed erroneous
Judgments given in the Kings bench: But as the Lords have this authority by
Prescription, so they are excluded from all other power of judicature, but that
which custom and use does warrant; for, Prescription, is all the Commission
they have. Neither Grant from the King, nor Act of Parliament they have for a
Court of justice.

Now to give power to the Lords house, or to the Commons house, to enlarge
their Commission, or Jurisdiction, the same inconveniences would thereupon
ensue, as by suffering other Courts to do the like; if the Members of the
Commons house, should at this day, take upon them to give an Oath, and this
legally entitle them to it, by the same reason they might, (as now the present
Members of that Assembly in effect does) without King, or Lords, assume the
whole Government.

And for the two Houses jointly, they are not a Court of judicature; they have
therein no Commission at all, neither from the King, nor by Act of Parliament,
nor by Prescription.

And for the Parliament, that is, the King and the two Houses, that body cannot
properly be said a Court of Justice. The Office of a Judge is, upon a Question
depending before him, to declare what the Law is; but the office of the
Parliament, is only to make new laws.

By this it appears, that neither the Members of the Lords house, nor of the
Commons house are qualified to be Judges of the Law, nor have they either
jointly, or severally Commission for that purpose.

And lastly, admit every Member of either house in Learning sufficiently
qualified to make a Judge, their composure considered, they are not capable
jointly to perform that Office; they being two distinct bodies, their
proceedings several and distinct, it cannot be expected, but they shall
frequently differ in Opinion and judgment: therefore were they never so
learned, should the King grant unto them power of judicature, or should they
have that authority given them by an Act of Parliament, the Laws of England
would judge both that Grant and Statute absolutely void Coke 8. 118.
as a thing most incongruous against sense, and reason.

Upon which it follows, that if the Lords House, or the Commons house, or
both Houses jointly, have, or shall condemn any person, for Treason, Felony,
or other capital offense, try any title of Land, tax the people with payments
of money, seize or confiscate the Subjects estates, or the like, be it by
Order, Ordinance, or any other way, all such proceedings are void, done coram
non Judice: Coke 8. fo. 76.
and consequently, both the Members, and all persons executing their commands
therein, are by the Laws of England punishable, as Murderers, Felons, or other
transgressors, because done without warrant or authority: And how long soever
they shall continue this power, and how frequently soever it is used, that
alters not the case, the Law is still the same it was.

Yet herein, I do not abridge the power and authority of the Peers of the
Realm. It is true, when the King has constituted a Lord high Steward, and
consented to the trial of a Peer for his life, for a fact committed against
the known Law, such a Peer not only may, but ought (the Lords observing the
rules of law) to be tried by the Lords his Peers. But there is no color for
the Lords, or for the Commons, or for both Houses jointly, although the King
should give way thereunto, to try, or judge any Commoner: Every common person
ought to be tried by his Peers too, that is, by a Jury of the Commons, and that
Jury by the Laws of England, ought to be of that County, and near that place,
where the fact is committed. It is a Rule in our Law, that in capital
offenses, Vbi quis delinquit, ibi punietur: persons dwelling near the place,
are most likely to have cognizance of the fact. Besides, by our law, every
freeborn Subject of this Nation, has at his arraignment, power and liberty to
challenge Jurors impannelled for his trial: But all such liberties are taken
away by this usurpation of the Members.

Thus it appears, that the Judges of every Court of Justice, so far as their
Commission extends, and no other persons, are Judges of Law. But the Judges of
no one Court, are those unto whom the people are bound lastly to submit
themselves, for every Court of Justice in some respect is inferior to another
Court or power unto which appeals lie, as in the case of a Writ of error and
the like, unless it be in the Exchequer Chamber when the cause regularly
depends before the Judges of the Kings Bench, the Common Pleas, and the Barons
of the Exchequer, into which Chamber, things of great weight and difficulty
concerning matter of Law are usually transmitted; And being there judicially
determined from that sentence, t^ conceive no appeal lies to any other Court
by Writ of error. That is the Co. 5. f. 8. vid. the Kings Answer to the
Petition of right.
sentence and judgment of the Judges of the Realm: yet from that judgment
some persons are of opinion, a Writ of error lies before the Lords in the
upper House of Parliament.

But upon consideration had of the reason of the Law concerning the proceedings
in Writs of error brought there: I conceive it were to little purpose to permit
any such appeal unto the Lords upon judgments given in the Exchequer Chamber
before all the Judges of the Realm.

The power of the Lords House to reverse erroneous judgments, I conceive began
thus; The Court of the Kings Bench, is the highest Court of Judicature, wherein
any suite of Law can legally and regularly be brought; and therefore their
proceedings not to be examined by any other ordinary Court of Justice, every
one of them being inferior to it: But the Judges of the Kings Bench, are as
subject to err as the Judges of other Courts; Therefore as requisite to have
their proceedings examined.

Now in regard the Judges of the Realm were at all times, at least assistant
to the Lords House, it was proper enough to have the errors of the Kings Bench
reversed in that place: And having had its beginning thus, constant use and
custom has Legally entitled them unto it: Therefore, although peradventure
it may have happened, that some few particular Writs of error, have been
brought in the Lords House, upon judgments given in some other Courts, I
conceive the prescription (which is all the Commission they have) lies only
for the Kings Bench. And I am the more confirmed therein, because the Law
books mentioning the authority of the Lords House, in reversing judgments, do
generally instance in the Kings Bench, not naming other Courts. Besides, as the
Lords House has this jurisdiction by prescription, the same use and custom
requires these circumstances. 1. That the Kings consent to prosecute a Writ of
error be obtained; because every judgment in the Kings Bench, does immediately
concern the King, the jurisdiction of that Court being properly Pleas of the
Crown. 2. That the Lords after the cause is brought before them, proceed by
the advice of the Judges, which is indeed the essential part of the
prescription: To have a profession of Law, Courts of judicature erected,
persons learned in that profession appointed Judges thereof, it were most
preposterous to have the proceedings of these Judges (even in the most
difficult points of the Law) examined, reversed, and controlled, by persons
ignorant in that profession.

By the constitutions of England, no man is capable to be a Judge, unless he
have understanding in the Law to perform that office. Therefore shall the King
grant to one who is most learned, a Judges place to him, and his heirs, as to
his heirs it were void, and the same it were, if such a grant were made by Act
of Parliament: And so consequently if the Lords should prescribe that time out
of mind, they, and their predecessors, Lords of the Parliament, in Parliament
time, have (without mentioning it to be with the advice and assistance of the
Judges) reversed erroneous Judgments given in the Kings Bench, or in any other
Court of Justice, it (...) be disallowed, judged as an evil use, not consonant
to the rules of Law or reason, it were (without any disparagement to their
Lordships) all one (if not better) when the question is whether the Judges of
the Court of Kings Bench, erred in judgment, to have it determined by casting
of lots, for whether right or wrong judgment were given, if the Lords determine
it, it is but chance whether they pursue the Law or not: And if by lot expense
of money is saved.

Therefore clear it is, to examine a judgment given in the Exchequer Chamber,
by a writ of error brought in the Lords House, is (in effect) for the same
persons to judge whether themselves erred or not, and so whether the Lords
have, or have not this power, the Judges of the Realm Co. 11. Lord La Wards
case. Coke prefac. third report.
are still depended upon; And in case the King, and the two Houses make an Act
of Parliament, concerning the same thing, when that Act is passed, from them
(as before appears) an appeal lies (by an action or suite at Law) unto the
Judges, who have power to determine whether that Statute be binding or void,
and therefore clear and manifest it is, that in matters of Law the last and
final sentence, is the Judges of the Realm.

But me thinks for a Nation which has been governed so many hundreds of years
by a known Law, and under it, so flourishing a people as the Subjects of
England have been, and yet not to be agreed, who are the final Judges of the
Law, is so gross a thing, as that all foreign Nations hearing of it, cannot
but account us men to have lost our wits. In every constitution it is
oftentimes difficult (even amongst the learned in the profession) in some
particular questions arising, to determine what the Law is: But not to know
what persons have Authority to decide those questions, is most ridiculous.

The Judges of the Law ought to be so conspicuous, as that all persons, even
from the most learned unto the most ignorant, may equally alike discern the
men: Which considered, I conceive it necessary not only for the information of
the vulgar people of England, which have herein been grossly deceived, but for
the Vindication and Honor of our own Nation, and the Law established so far
to digress, as in a word, to show how this fond question was raised and
controverted in this Kingdom, which was thus.

This Nation is governed by a known Law, that Law ^^dgeth the King to be our
only Supreme Governor, gives power to the King, with the assent of the two
Houses, and no other, to alter that Law, and to make new Laws, And to the
Judges of the Realm it ascribes the power finally to declare the Law: Now
such, whose aim is to usurp Sovereignty, or to swallow the wealth of the
Nation, cannot hope to effect their ends by submitting to the known Law, That
were to commit a crime, and immediately submit themselves to the block.
Therefore they must either deceive the people by mis-informing them what the
Law is, else by strong hand to enforce upon them a new Law for their own
purpose. Now that the Members aim was at no less then all, is too too
apparent: But at the beginning of these distractions, they were not in a
condition to force the people, Therefore their Judgments must be deceived.
Hereupon the Plot was, that the Members (in the opinion of the people) should
gain the reputation of being the final Judge of the Law, which was effected
thus: The people by reason of some good Laws obtained of the King by the
Members procurement, were inclinable to believe whatever they propounded; Then
the Members Voted Thus, viz. That when the Lords and Commons declare what the
Law of Their Vote.
the Land is, it is a high breach of Privilege of Parliament to question it.

This being published, and the people (by Incendiaries spread throughout the
Kingdom for that purpose) by false Calumnies cast upon the King, being grossly
abused, the Members work was (in a manner) finished: Then they took upon them
the power of the Militia, declared that the Sovereign power was not in the
Kings Person, but virtually in them: And from thence, what made for their
advantage (how gross soever) did but the Members declare it for Law, and good
enough: Thus the Justice seat, even by a slight became both disputed and
usurped: But now the Scales are turned, The peoples understandings are
enlightened, they see how grossly they were misled, They find that whilst the
Judges of the Realm declared the Law, both King and Subject were preserved in
their Persons, lives, and fortunes: That by this usurpation, the known Law is
subverted, and consequently, that protection vanished. But as the people have
changed their opinions, so have the Members framed a new Argument: They have
left the Word, and betaken themselves to the Sword: They having Armies to back
them; their will is now the Law, and resolve whilst they can, by force to hold
it.

Thus we are fallen into a gulf of misery, whereas had the people been but half
so careful to have found out the Truth, as they were industrious to effect
their own destruction, these calamities had been prevented: When the
difference first happened between the King and the Members, had not the people
leaped into their own ruin, but taken the least consideration thereof; had
they bethought themselves how they were to be rightly informed what the Law
was, they must have resolved, that as we had a Law, consequently there must so
long have been a Judge of that Law; But the Members neither exercised, or
pretended any such power, one minute beyond the foresaid Vote.

And for Authority, to make their pretense good, none can be produced, but that
their own testimony in this their own case; and in a thing of no less
concernment, then the gaining of the wealth of the whole Kingdom to their own
use, and enslaving the people to their own pleasure. Hereupon, doubtless the
people would have concluded, that (not the Members) the Judges of the Realm
were the men, unto whom all persons were Obliged to submit for matter of Law.

But it is objected, That this is too great a power for the Judges, for (say
they) those persons may, and do err in Judgment, and are subject to
corruption, as in that case of Ship Money.

Answer.

It is true, the Judges have erred, and it being granted, that in the case of
Ship-mony, they did err, and were corrupt too, and that it cannot be expected
but they shall again, and again err, and be corrupt; yet until we have other
Creatures then Men to make choice of for Judges, this Objection ought to be
disallowed: We find the Members to be no Gods. And for the weight of the
business, concluded to be too great for the Judges; I Answer, that, that power
must be in some; To have a Law without a Judge, finally to end controversies,
were worse then to have no Law at all: And to have a Law, and a Judge of that
Law, who understands not the profession, were a degree worse then that. Suppose
it granted, that the Judges in that case of Ship-mony, gave Sentence by
corruption; whereby about 200000. l. per annum was drawn from the people: To
conclude hereupon, that we must from henceforth have no more learned men chosen
Judges, is extreme harsh. It might as well be argued thus, The Members of the
two Houses have erred in Judgment, and have been corrupt, ergo, we ought to
have no more Parliaments. For as before appears, the Members of former
Parliaments have most grossly erred; And for these present Members they have not
only erred, but have been (in the highest nature) corrupt too. First, They
erred in Judgment, by assuming the Justice seat, the Sovereign power of
Government; and so in infinite other particulars. Then for corruption, since
these Authorities were by them arrogated, twice twenty times 200000. l. per
annum, illegally and barbarously drawn from the people, does not stint them.
They have corruptly by one Vote, not only given themselves the wealth of the
whole Nation, but have likewise enslaved both King and People for their lives
and fortunes to their own will. But clear it is, no constitution can avoid
every mischief: it is the best Law which prevents the most inconveniences:
therefore in this case, that which can be done, is to have persons who are
learned in the profession, made Judges of the Law: and all possible care taken
that they do Justice, and for that, by our Law, no man is capable of a Judges
place, unless he have ability to execute the same: And although he be
sufficient for learning, yet being advanced for bribes or rewards, he is by Law
likewise disabled to perform the office. They are sworn to do right to all
persons; and although error in judgment Vid. the Oath*
is no crime, yet corruption in the Judge, be it for bribes, affection, malice,
desire of preferment, fear, or any other cause, is by our Law an offense of an
high nature, and and most severely punished.

Now (if in stead of exalting themselves) the Members had (as they made some
show for a while) made inquiry, how, and by whom the Judges were drawn (as the
Members allege) to give that corrupt sentence, and had presented the same to
the King, to the end, not only exemplary punishment might have been inflicted
upon them; but they put out of their places, and new Judges elected, the
Members had done like Parliament men, that had pursued their Commission.

And so, whilst the King, the Parliament, the Judges, every Court, and Assembly
retain their own proper authority without clashing with, or encroaching each
upon other, Co. 10. fo. 74.
As by the Laws of England they ought to do, both King and Subject are
preserved in their just rights: And this ought to be exactly observed,
notwithstanding the superiority, or inferiority of any Court, power, person, or
Assembly; because one Court in some respect is superior to another, that takes
not away, nor lesseneth the proper jurisdiction of the inferior Court: Scarce
any inferior Court, but it has some powers, which the superior Court has not:
For example. The Court of CommonPleas has power between party and party, to
determine real actions, which the Kings Bench has not: The Assembly of the
Commons House cannot give an oath, yet the meanest Court of Justice (even a
Court of Pipowders) has that power; So that, if it were admitted, that the two
Houses of Parliament were a Court of Justice, (as it is not) And that it were
the highest Court of that nature in this Kingdom, that would not at all make
good their pretense* to be the final Judge of the Law, from whom no appeal
should lie. But by this Vote, and practice of the Members, all Courts of
justice, and rightful powers in the Kingdom are put down, the Law totally
subverted, and all things reduced to their arbitrary power.

Upon the whole matter clear it is, that the Judges of the aforesaid three
Courts, are the Judges of the Realm, and the persons unto whom all the people
of this Nation are bound lastly and finally to submit themselves for matter of
Law.

But notwithstanding all this, the same necessity which made the Members
exclude the King from His negative Voice, and so to usurp a boundless power
to make Laws, enforces them, to arrogate the Justice seat too. For, it were
to little purpose for them to declare it Treason for a Subject to speak to His
King, and infinite such like gross contradictions both to reason, and the
known Law, and yet permit the rightful Judges to determine the same
questions, that were both to exalt themselves up, and at the same instant to
cast themselves down again. But they tell us they are no such babies: So long
as the people will be fooled, nothing is more certain, but Tyrants they will
be to us their slaves: In the next place it is showed who ought to nominate and
authorize the Judges of the Realm.

CHAP. VI. That the Judges of the Realm ought to be elected, and authorized by
the King of England, for the time being, and by none else.
THe legal authorizing of the Judges of the Law, is of that importance, as
upon it depends the preservation of the people, for no Law, no government, no
Judge, no Law, and if authorized by an illegal Commission, no Judge.

It appears before, that when the Judge extends beyond the bounds of his
Commission, his proceedings are void, as done coram non Judice. Upon the same
grounds, be the words of the Commission never so large, if the authority be
derived from such as have not power to grant it, the whole Commission is void.

Yet Mr. Pryn, by the authority of the Commons House, has published a Treatise
entitled thus.

The Parliaments right to elect Privy Counselors, great Officers, and Judges.

Wherein he endeavors to prove the two Houses, by the Laws of England, ought
to elect the Judges: And proceeds thus. Kings (says he) were first elected by
the people, and as he believes, the people at the first elected the Judges and
great Officers, and bound them by public Laws, which appears (says he) by
infinite Acts of Parliament, regulating both the power of the King, and His
Officers.

That in ancient time Lieutenant Generals and Sheriffs, were elected by the
Parliament, and people: That the Coroners, Majors, Aldermen of Corporations,
Constables, and other such like officers, at this day are elected by the
people, Knights of Shires, and Burgesses are elected by the Commons of the
Realm.

That the King can neither elect a Commoner, nor exclude a Member of either
House to sit or Vote. That the Parliament consists of Honorable, wise, grave,
and discreet persons.

That although the Kings have usually had the election of great officers, and
Judges, it has rather been by the Parliaments permission, then Concession.
That the Judges and Officers of State are as well the Kingdoms as the Kings.

And says, that Mr. Bodin a grave Politician declares: That it is not the
right of electing great officers which prove the right of Sovereignty, because
it often is, and may be in the Subject.

Answer.

Although his whole discourse, is either false or impertinent, yet his saying
that Kings were first elected by the people: That the people as he believes
elected the Judges, and bounded them by public Laws. And for proof positively
affirming (although not naming one Act) That all this appears by infinite Acts
of Parliament, regulating the King and His officers.

The vulgar may thereby conceive that the Members of the two Houses without the
King have made Acts of Parliament. That by those Acts it appears, That the
people elected the first King of England, and the Judges, and bounded them by
public Laws. Although Mr. Pryn himself well knows, that never any Act of
Parliament, was, or could be made, without the Kings express consent: And that
the people of this Nation have been governed under Kings 1200. years before the
first Act of Parliament at this day extant.

So that if Mr. Pryn had made his Argument according to the truth of the fact,
it had been but thus.

After King H. 3. begun his reign (and not before) the Kings of England have
made some Laws by Act of Parliament, whereby in some things they have regulated
their own authority, and the power of their officers and Judges, Ergo, the
people (although we had Kings 1200. years before that) elected the first King,
the Judges, and bounded them by public Laws.

Besides, admit the people had elected the first King, and the Judges; That
nothing proves, that the Members of the two Houses at this day by our Law outgh
to nominate the Judges.

And for the rest of his Arguments they are to this effect.

A question being asked, who ought to elect the Judges? Mr. Pryn says,
Leiutenant Generals and Sheriffs were anciently elected by the Parliament and
people, Colonels, Majors, Aldermen, Constables, Knights of the Shire, and
Burgesses, are elected by the people. Kings cannot elect a Member, or exclude
him from sitting.

That the Members are honorable, grave, and wise. That the Judges are the
Kingdoms as well as the Kings. That although the Kings have usually had the
election of them; perchance it was by usurpation, and Mr. Bodin a great
Politician says, that the election of these officers may be and often are in
the Subject.

Now hereupon to conclude, Ergo, By the Laws of England, the Members of the two
Houses ought to elect the Judges. I cannot more aptly parallel the Argument
then thus, How many miles to London? Answer, a poke full of plums, Ergo, it is
20. miles to London, upon this it might as well have been concluded, 40. 100.
or 1000. miles to London as 20. and so for electing the Judges, upon any of Mr.
Pryns reasons, or upon all together (admitting them all true) It might with as
much sense and reason have been concluded thus, Ergo, the Major of Quinborough,
the great Turk, or the man in the Moon ought to elect them.

Besides, the Members of the two Houses cannot have the election of the Judges
for these reasons.

First, the Chancery, Coke 5. fo. 62. 9 E. 4. fo.
the Kings Bench, the Common Pleas, and the Court of the Exchequer, are Courts
of Justice by prescription, they were instituted before the time of memory,
none knows the beginning thereof, Coke 8. f. 145.
but certain it is, they were Courts of Justice before the House of Commons
had being.

Secondly, as it is necessary that the Judges of the Law be known persons: It
is as requisite that such as elect them, should be constantly visible. But the
Members out of Parliament are invisible.

Thirdly, suppose it enacted; That none that shall be a Judge unless elected
by A. and B. It were no wonder for them, irreconcileably to differ in their
choice: And the two Houses are as distinctly two, as A. and B. That difference
which is, renders the Members more improper for the work, and consequently not
of a Composier fit to elect the Judges.

And that this is the Kings right, is made good thus.

First, It appears before, that those Courts, have had Judges time out of mind.
And so long as any may can show, or prove, there has been Judges of those
Courts, so anciently the Kings of England and none else have elected and
authorized them, which is the strongest proof in the Law: It is the Law it
self. It were absurd for any man to deny that it is felony to steal, or that
the eldest son is heir to his Fathers land, yet there is no other proof to make
it good, but use and practice. And the Kings have as anciently, and constantly,
elected the Judges, as theft has been punished, or that the eldest son has by
descent enjoyed his fathers land.

Secondly, if this King has not right to elect the Judges, no former King had
it, and consequently we never had one Judge rightly authorized: So that Mr.
Pryn has found out a point in Law, which at once makes a nullity of all former
proceedings in those Courts, as things done coram non Judice. But this not all:
If Mr. Pryns doctrine be true, we have had no Parliament, for the Kings not
having power legally to authorize the Lord Keeper, all creations of Peers are
void, and so the Writs for electing the Knights and Burgesses were illegal and
void too; And consequently Mr. Pryns Law admitted, there is no Member of either
House Lawfully authorized to sit or Vote.

And for authority of books, either Law or History, I dare be bold to say
there is not one man in the World, until the sitting of these Members, who
has upon any occasion mentioned these things, but has delivered it as a
fundamental ground, and a positive truth: That the authority to elect the
Judges, is in the King alone. So thatsuch as are unsatisfied of the Kings right
herein, may with as much reason doubt whether we have had a King, Law, or
government.

Nothing can herein be alleged against the King, or on the Members behalf,
unless a new maxim of Law be started up: That no proof (be it never so clear)
is sufficient to entitle the King to any Interest, or authority; But for the
Members, although they have neither authority, use, practice, president, or
reason to make it good, have title and interest, to what they list.

But if the two Houses have the final power to judge the Law, and that every
one who shall dispute their Votes, break the privilege of Parliament. It
matters not who has the election of them, nor who are chosen: If the man be
flexible enough, the meanest capacity, in one days study, and with the expense
of one single penny, may be sufficiently complete for a States Judge, his
Library needs not consist of more books then a copy of the Houses Vid. the
Votes.
Votes, whereby we are declared breakers of the privileges of Parliament, to
deny that to be Law which they declare so to be: For by these Votes, we have no
Law but the Members will. And consequently those persons they call Judges, are
no other but their Echoes. But the true Judges authorized by the King, have
not only the name, but the power of Judges, the known Law of the Land is their
rule to determine every question depending before Vid. the Oath.
them, which they are sworn to observe, notwithstanding any command of the
King, the Members, or any persons whatsoever. And consequently every one is
thereby preserved in his just Interest; but by the Members taking upon them
both to nominate the Judges, and to declare the Law, the Law it self is
destroyed, and both King and people inslaved.

Upon the whole matter clear it is, That the King and none else has power to
nominate and authorize the aforesaid Judges and officers: And therefore if the
Members of the two Houses have, or shall, either in the Kings name, or in their
own, de facto, appoint any persons for Judges in those Courts, or in words, by
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, or general Jail delivery, give power to any
to execute the office of Judicature, in Circuits or otherwise, such persons
have not de Jure, the power of Judges. For the Members have no more authority
to make a Judge, or to give any such power, then any other subject in the
Kingdom has therein. And consequently all the judgments, acts, and
proceedings of those nominall Judges, or such Commissioners are void as things
done coram non Judice. Every person, by such authority, who, either in the
Kings Bench, or at the Assizes, or elsewhere, has been, or shall be condemned
and executed for any crime (whether guilty or not guilty) is murdered. And
every other judgment or sentence by them given, either in Capital, Criminal,
or Civil affairs, is invalid. In the next place it is proved that the King is
the only Supreme Governor.

CHAP. VII. That the King is the only Supreme Governor, unto whom, all the
people of this Nation in point of Sovereignty, and Government are bound to
submit themselves.
AGainst this undoubted right of the Kings, these distractions have produced
another Treatise of Mr. Pryns likewise published by authority of the Commons
House, entitled thus.

The Parliament and Kingdom are the Sovereign power.

Wherein his aim is to persuade the people that the Members of the two Houses,
are the supreme Governors of this Kingdom, and begins thus.

The High Court of Parliament, and whole Kingdom, which it represents (says
he) may properly be said to be the highest Sovereign power, and above the
King, for (says he) every Court of Justice; whose Just resolutions, and every
petty Jury, whose upright verdicts oblige the King, may truly be said to be
above the Kings person, which it binds. But the Court of Parliament has
lawful power to question the Kings Commissions, Patents and Grants, and if
illegal against the Kings will, to cancel or repeal them. Therefore the
Parliament has Sovereign power above the King.

Answer.

Here I deny both his Major and Minor. First, for his Major. Although it is
true, that every Just resolution of any Court of Justice, That is, when the
Judges legally determine such things as regularly depend before them, in point
of Interest binds the King as well as a Subject, that proves not a Sovereign
power in the Judges. If so, it follows, that the Judges of the King's Bench,
the Common Pleas, and of all other Courts of Justice, And (by M. Pryns
Argument) every petty Jury too, have (in point of Sovereignty) a power above
the King, which is most grossly absurd. So that, admit the two Houses a Court of
Justice, which they are not, and to have power legally to determine Causes,
which they have not; That is nothing to Sovereignty. It is one thing to have
power to make Laws, another to expound the Law, and to Govern the people is
different from both. The first appertains to the King and the two Houses, the
second to the Judges, and the third is the Kings sole right. Neither the
making, declaring, or expounding the Law, is any part of Sovereignty. But
regulating the people, by commanding the Laws to be observed and executed,
pardoning the transgressors thereof, and the like, are true badges of a Supreme
Governor: All which are the Kings.

sAnd for his Minor, take his meaning to be the true Parliament. That is, the
King and the two Houses. And it is false that the two Houses without the King,
have power legally to cancel, or make void any Commission, Patent, or Grant
of the Kings: For (as before appears) That united body cannot speak or do
any thing but by Act of Parliament. To say the Parliament without the King may
make a Law, is as gross a Contradiction, as to affirm that the King may make
an Act without the King.

And his meaning being taken to be the two Houses without the King; In that
sense the Members have herein no power at all, for (as before appears) they
are neither a Parliament, nor a Court of Justice; and consequently, have not
jurisdiction legally to cancel or repeal any Commission, Patent, or Grant of
the Kings.

But (says Master Prin) the King, although he be chief, yet he is but one
Member of the Parliament, and (says he) the greatest part of any politic
body is of greater power then any one particular Member.

As the Common Council is a greater power then the Major, the Chapter then the
Dean, the Dean and Chapter then the Bishop, and so the whole Parliament, then
the King, for (says he) in an Oligarchy, Aristocrasie, and Democrasie, That
which seems good to the major part is ratified, although but by one casting
voice, As in election of the Knights of the shire, Burgesses, and the Votes in
the two Houses. And says he, by the Laws of England, The Kings, the Lords and
Commons make but one entire Corporation, and so concludes, that the Major part
of the Parliament, which in Law (says he) is the Corporation, is above the
King.

Answer.

There is scarce one word in this discourse but it is false or misapplied. It
appears before, That the Parliament consists of 3 distinct bodies, viz. the
King, the Lords House, and the Commons House, and in making Laws, (which is
all they have to do) they have but three Voices; yet that which seems good to
the major part of these three, is not ratified: For (as before it appears)
they must all concur, else no Parliament. It is true, where the Government is
Aligarchicall, Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, the major part determines the
Question. But this is mis-applyed to the business in dispute, concerning the
Sovereign power; Our Government is Monarchical. The people of England are not
Governed by a Parliament; The use of a Parliament (as before appears) is only
in some things, when necessity requires, To alter the old, or make new Laws,
wherein the foresaid three bodies, viz. the King, the Lords House, and the
Commons House are jointly trusted.

If Mr. Pryn be asked, what he means by the Major part of that Corporation,
which he in this place calls the Parliament? His Answer must be one of these,
viz. Any two of the aforesaid three bodies, or else, That the King, the Lords,
and the Commons promiscuously put together, are to Vote as one Assembly, and
the greater number of single voices (not distinguishing the several bodies) to
carry it. Grant the first, And then the King, and either House or both Houses
without the King have power to make Laws. Therefore against that, I suppose
both Mr. Pryn, and the Members themselves, will conclude. But the latter it is
he intends, for by that, the House of Commons shall obtain the sole power of
making Laws: That Assembly being in number, almost treble to the King and the
Lords, And so both King and Peer-age excluded; And that not all, but in effect
the Gentry too, for the Burgesses are in number, far more then all the rest.
And (as before appears) these Burgesses not only may, but by the true intent
and meaning of the Law ought to be tradesmen.

Then for his particular cases cited for his proof, viz. the Major and
Commonalty, the Deane and Chapter, the Bishop, Deane and Chapter, they are all
guided by their Charters and foundations, which they ought to pursue; And none
of them have power without their head to make any binding Act. viz. The
Commonalty without the Major, the Chapter without the Deane, or the Deane and
Chapter without the Bishop. And so it is with the Parliament, although both
Houses concur in one opinion, It binds not without the Kings consent. And for
the election of the Knights and Burgesses, that is very impertinent to the
point in question.

Then M. Pryn says, That if the King propound a Law, it binds not, unless it
be consented unto by the Parliament. Ergo, the chief legislative power is in
the Parliament, not in the King.

Answer.

Here M. Pryn according to his wonted slight, divides the King and Parliament,
making them two things, and ascribing unto the two Houses without the King the
name and power of a Parliament: Whereas he knows neither name, nor power is
due to them. And for his Argument it makes more for the King, then for the
Members. For (as before it appears) Laws made by Act of Parliament, although
they bind not without the consent of the two Houses, yet they are the Kings
Laws, Coke 7. fo. 36. 37.
and by himself alone he may dispense with them. Therefore it might properly
be concluded, Ergo, the Legislative power is more in the King, then in the
Members. But for Master Pryns conclusion it is a mere non sequitur.

Then says M. Pryn, Bills for Acts of Parliament are usually agreed on before
they come to have the Kings assent. And such Bills says he, the King cannot
alter. But if the King send a Bill which he desires to have passed; It must be
thrice read, and assented unto by both Houses, who (says he) have power to
reject, alter, or enlarge it as they think fit.

Answer.

This is a gross juggle, all his words in some sense are true, yet as he
intends the vulgar shall apprehend his meaning, nothing is more false: It is
true, if the King send unto the Houses a Bill for an Act of Parliament, they
may alter the Bill. But that done, until the King assent unto it so altered,
it is no Law. And so when both Houses present a Bill to the King, he may alter
it, but his Royal assent makes it not a Law, until the Houses have consented
to it so altered; yet unless M. Pryn be understood thus, that when the King
sends a Bill to the Members, That they may alter it, and make it what they
please; And that new Bill to bind the King without his further consent, he has
said nothing, and that being his meaning, he has abused his Reader with a
gross falsity.

Then M. Pryn observes the penning of the Statutes for Subsidies which he sets
down thus.

Your Commons Assembled, humbly present your Majesty with the free gift of two
entire Subsidies, which we humbly beseech your Majesty to accept. Therefore
(says he) the Commons have the sole power to grant or deny Subsidies. And
(says he) they being the chief Lawmakers in these Acts, by like reason they
are so in all other public penal Acts.

Answer.

Here M. Pryn affirms, that the Commons House, without King or Lords, may
charge the people with Subsidies, And infers thereupon, that they have the like
power in any public penal Act. But observing his proof, And by the same
slight he may as well maintain (even by the Scripture it self) That the
Devil, not God, is to be worshipped. It is thus. Perusing the Acts themselves,
by which Subsidies are granted, and the words are these, viz. We the Commons
humbly present your Majesty with two Subsidies. Thus far he recites the Act;
Then the words follow in this manner, viz. Vide the Acts.
And therefore we humbly beseech your Majesty that it may be enacted. And be it
enacted by the Kings Majesty, the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by authority of the same,
that the King shall have two Subsidies. These being the words which makes the
Law are left out.

Then says M. Pryn, Acts of Parliament made in the time of usurpers, oblige
the right Heirs of the Crown, and the people too. Therefore (says he) the
Legislative power is more in the people, then in the King.

Answer.

It is most false, that all Acts of Parliament made by consent of usurping
Kings bind the right Heirs to the Crown. But true it is, that some Acts of
Parliament made by consent of Usurpers, have been admitted to bind in time of
Kings reigning by Just title, which is upon this ground: The Competition for
the Crown, may happen to be upon a question doubtful, And the difference (as
in that between York and Lancaster) may continue long, and experience shows,
That the King in possession (whether by right, or wrong) wants not means to
declare his Competiter an Usurper. And therefore dangerous it were for the Law
to declare all such Acts of Parliament void. But admit that every Statute made
by the consent of an Usurper to be as binding a Law, as any other, How that
proves that the Legislative power is more in the Members then in the King, is
not intelligible: It rather proves the contrary, it shows there must be a
Kings consent, although an usurper, else no Law: And if so, stronger it is,
when the King reigns by a just Title.

Then says Mr. Pryn, The King has little or no hand in making Laws, His is
but assenting thereunto. As (says he) the form of passing Bills import. For
(says he) Bills being passed both Houses, and presented to the King, his answer
is (le Roy le veilt) the Kings wills it.

Answer.

It is the consent which makes the Law, when the Bill is engrossed, and read in
the House: The question by the Speaker is put to the Members, whether it shall
be a Law or not, and such as are of opinion to pass it, are directed to say I,
and those against it no, and being passed both Houses, it is presented to the
King, whose answer if He confirm it, is, le Roy le veilt.

So that if any difference be, the Kings words are more prevalent, for before
that, it is but a written piece of parchment, not valid, but by tht Kings
words, instantly it has life, and is become a Law binding the whole Kingdom
and people; And this (as before is said) is the Kings Law.

Then Mr. Pryn falls to presidents, which he calls proofs. King Ed. 2. and King
R. 2. (says he) were deposed by the Parliament.

Answer.

The case concerning these two Kings, was thus: Against King Ed. 2. after many
distractions in the Kingdom, the Queen His Wife, and other of Her adherents,
increased the faction, raised a Rebellion, barbarously took the King prisoner,
and during His imprisonment, without any lawful authority, or consent of the
King, in His name summoned a Parliament; and by force drew him in words to
resign His Crown unto His Son, afterward King Ed. 3. and that of King R. 2.
was much to the like purpose: He was drawn to resign His Crown to H. of
Bullingbrooke. Afterward King Hen. 4. and these two lawful Kings, being thus
injuriously bereft of their Scepters, were shortly after most barbarously
murdered too. The whole proceedings of which Acts, all such (Pryn excepted) as
have mentioned them, have condemned the same, not only to be illegal, but as
Acts most wicked and notoriously impious.

But says Mr. Pryn, Pierce Gaveston and the two Hugh Spencers, were by
Parliament banished, the Spencers violently put to death, Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester arrested of high Treason at a Parliament at Berry, and there
murdered. That the Earl of Strafford this Parliament lost his head against the
Kings will.

Answer.

For the banishment of Gaveston, and the two Spencers, his Argument is but
thus: The King with the assent of the two Houses, made an Act of Parliament to
banish them, Ergo, the two Houses without the King have the Sovereign power of
Government. And admit Mr. Pryn has proved (which he endeavors) that the
Members of the two Houses murdered the Duke of Gloucester, and the Spencers,
still that proves not the Sovereign power of government to be in the Members.

That example of the late Bishop of Canterbury, I conceive to be a President,
far more proper to be cited for this purpose, then the case of the Duke of
Gloucester, or the Spencers: For all men know, that Bishop was put to death, by
no other authority, then by order of the two Houses; yet this no more proves
the Sovereign power to be in the Members, then that murder acted by Felton
upon the person of the Duke of Buckingham, proves Felton to be the King of
England; For, the Members of the two Houses, had no more authority to condemn
to death the Bishop, then Felton had to kill the Duke. And consequently the
murder of the Bishop (whatever his offense was, or however guilty) it ^^ing
done by pretext, and color of Law, was more horrid.

And for the Earl of Strafford, it was thus. By the Laws of England no man
can, or ought to be convict of a crime, but by Act of Parliament, by utlagare,
or by trial of his Peers: That is, if a Lord of the Parliament, by a Jury of
Lords, if under that degree, by a Jury of like quality, and being convict, the
Judge ought to give no other sentence, but what the known Law does pronounce
for that fact; Now that Earl, by the Members of the Commons House was accused
of high Treason. The King thereupon declared His resolution, not to protect him
from the trial, or just sentence of the Law. After this the Members (waving
the ordinary proceedings of the Law) passed a Bill to attaint him of Treason,
by Act of Parliament; This Bill was presented to the King, He for some time
refused to make it a Law, which peradventure He might be induced unto, by the
Bill it self: There being a special Vid. the Act.
proviso therein, that the Judges shall not condemn any other for the like
offenses; which might cause the King to be very tender of passing the Act,
thereby to condemn a man as a Traitor, for facts passed, which at the time
committed was not Treason.

This if duly considered is so far from being evil in the King, as that the
whole Kingdom has thereby great cause to acknowledge his goodness: It hereby
appears he desired to govern as King, not as a Tyrant, to proceed against
offenders according to the known Law, not by an arbitrary power. And if some
particular persons too much thirsting after Straffords blood, occasioned such
things, as might draw the King against His conscience to consent unto that Act,
woe be unto them. But however, whether the King passed this Act willingly, or
against His will, or whether the Earl of Strafford were guilty or not guilty
of Treason. That nothing proves that the Members have Sovereign power of
government above the King.

Thus for Mr. Pryns objections against the Kings right to Sovereignty. And that
the Members have no authority therein, is further proved thus.

1. So long as the people have been governed by a known Law, there must have
been a Supreme Governor, but we have had the same Law, by which we are now
governed, long before the Institution of the two Houses.

2. It is absolutely necessary that the supreme Governor, be a person
constantly permanent and visible, but the Members out of Parliament, are not in
being, they are invisible.

3. It is a contradiction to Sovereignty, to be subject to the commands of an
other. But the Members are called together, and dissolved again at the Kings
pleasure.

4. The Composier of the Members is such: As that, to make them supreme
Governors, tends to the destruction (not to the preservation) of the Kingdom
and people. If a woman bring forth a Monster not having the shape of mankind,
our Law Coke fo. 8. 35.
judges it no issue, it is lawful to kill it, it ought not to be baptized. To
have two heads of one body is monstrous, so to have two Kings of one Kingdom,
must be destructive to that Nation. But here (which is a far more prodigious
monster) we by the Members usurpation are governed by two several distinct
bodies, consisting of multitudes without any head. This government is new,
there yet never was the like upon the face of the earth. It is not
Monarchical, Alligarchicall, Aristocraticall, Democraticall, nor (although the
nearest to it) Anarchicall, it is worse then confusion. It can have no proper
name, unless it be called contradiction: Thus for the negative part, that the
two Houses have not the Sovereign power, it now rests to show in whom it is.

And for that these two things are considerable, first, what is the office of
the Supreme Governor, secondly, who has performed that duty. For the first,
all men grant it is to preserve the people in peace, by causing the Laws to be
justly distributed, and the like; which have ever been performed by the King of
England for the time being, and by none else. He has denounced War, proclaimed
peace, inhaunced and debaced Coin, commanded foreign Coin to be current
here, ordered all foreign negotiations; All matters of War, either foraigne
or domestic. And so in all civil affairs.

The Judges of the Law authorized by Him; All legal proceedings in his name,
and by His authority. The Law it self called His Law; He has usually
dispensed with Acts of Parliament, at pleasure pardoned transgressors of the
Law. To Him appertains the forfeitures for Treason, and other offenses. In a
word, He is the sole fountain of Justice, Mercy, and Honor. And Coke pref. 4
part fo. 1. Co. Caudries case fo. 8. Stat. 16. R. 2. cap. 5. 24 H. 8. c. 12. D.
and Stu. f. 43. Dyer 29. Co. 11. 90, 93. Bract. lib. 1. ca. 8. fo. 5, 6. And
infinite other books.
with this constant practice agrees all authorities, histories, and stories:
among which, that of the Oath of Supremacy, if there were no more, is
sufficient to satisfy all the World, the words are these.

I A. B. do utterly testify in my conscience that the Kings Highness is the
only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other His Highness
Realms, Dominions, and Countries, as well in all Spiritual things, or causes,
as Temporal.

Now if the contents of this Oath be true, that is, If the King be the only
Supreme Governor, all the rest of the people, from the highest to the lowest,
whether Members, or not Members, are subject unto Him, and persons governed:
And as all persons are hereby included, so it extends to all things, both
Spiritual and Temporal.

And me thinks it strange, an Englishman should make doubt of the truth of this
Oath. It was composed by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, in the time of
Queen Elizabeth. And at their suite, by Act 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5. El. c. 1.
of Parliament made high Treason for a Subject to deny to take it; And further
enacted, that every Judge of the Law, and other Officer, either Spiritual or
Temporal; every person of any profession or calling, before he be enabled to
exercise the same, every ward, before he be permitted to sue out his Livery,
every one elected Member of the Commons House, before he be permitted to sit or
Vote there, shall take this Oath.

Yet the Members of this Parliament would make an evasion out of it, Thus. The
Kings Supreamacy (say they) is meant in Curia, non in Camera, in His Courts,
not in His private Capacity. And to speak properly, only His high Court of
Parliament, wherein He is absolutely Supreme Head and Governor, from whence
there is no appeal. And (say they) if the Parliament may take an Account what
is done by His Majesty in His inferior Courts, much more what is done by Him
without Authority in any Court. And (say they) It is preached to the people by
the Kings Declarations, that by the Supreamacy is meant a power inherent in the
Kings Person, without, above, against all His Courts, the Parliament not
excepted, whereby (say they) the excellent Laws are turned into an Arbytrary
Government.

Answer.

That which the Members in this discourse say, in effect is but thus. The King
is Supreme Governor; Yet under the Members Government, He has Authority
without appeal to determine all things, yet has not power to determine any one
thing. To blear the eyes of the Vulgar, they are contented the King shall be
called the only Supreme Governor. But the Authority, Power, and Execution
thereof (if we may believe the Members) is their own. The King and People are
herein used, as a Father sometimes deals with his child, telling his little
son, the flock of sheep is his; yet the Father shears them, and takes the
profits to his own use. Even so are King and People dealt with. They are told
bythe Members, that the King by the Supreamacy claims such a power, As that
the Subjects thereby have lost both their Law and Liberty, and would make them
believe, that they are by those Members thereunto restored again.

Whereas all but naturalls may now discern, That whilst the King, together
with the name, enjoyed both the Power and Execution of the Supreamacy, The
people were a free Subject; And that by this usurpation upon the King, They are
inslaved. For, the Supreamacy is in the Kings Person; But by it He neither
has, nor claims an unlimited power. The People are Governed under Him, but
that Government is directed by a known Law, of which Law Cok. Pref. 4. report.
the King is not Judge, nor can He, by Himself alone alter that Law. Now
whilst the Supreamacy, the Power to Judge the Law, and Authority to make new
Laws, are kept in several hands, the known Law is preserved, but united, it
is vanished, instantly thereupon, and Arbytrary and Tyrannical power is
introduced. For example, the Members condemn a Subject to die, they confiscate
his estate to their own use, and (without appeal) have power to Judge the Law
thereupon. This granted, clear it is, the Will of the Members is the Law; they
are hereby Judge, Party, and Witness. It were fruitless for that condemned
person (although guiltless) to urge his innocence of the Fact, or to dispute
the Law upon that Fact, with them who have condemned him. And (as the Members
tell us) there is none else to appeal unto; It is therefore to be feared, the
greater Estate the Delinquent has, or the more spleen some Members bear to his
person, the more Capital is his offense. So that it is the Members, not the
King, who claim a power in their own persons, without, above, against all
Courts of Justice, The Parliament it self not excepted; Our excellent Laws are
by them destroyed, and turned into their own Arbitrary power. And thus the
people are enslaved by a distinction, never heard of, or thought on before this
Parliament, the aforesaid two Spencers only excepted: It is true, they having
committed acts of Treason to color their proceedings, divulged an opinion
suitable to this; they pretended that the Oath of Allegiance was more in
respect of the Crown, then the Kings Person; That the King might be removed,
and the people ought to govern: But those opinions are condemned as damnable
and execrable, by two Acts Cok. Calvin's case. fol. 11.
of Parliament. One called exilium Henrici de Spencer. And the other made 1 Ed.
3.

But that this of the Members, and that of the Spencers, are mere fictions and
delusions to gull the people, is evident both by Authorities of Law, and the
common practice of the Kingdom. It is resolved in Calvin's case (which therein
agrees with the whole current of our Law-bookes) that Allegiance is due only
to the King. Call. case. fo. 10
That theKing has two Capacities, one of a natural body descended of the Royal
Blood, and this is subject to death and infirmities: The other a politic body,
and in that, immortal, invisible, not subject to nonage, etc. That the King
having but one person, and several capacities; It was resolved, Allegiance is
due to his natural Capacity. And consequently, the Sovereign power of
Government inherently in his person. By the Statute 25. E. 3.
common Law of the Land, Treason is to kill, or endeavor to kill the King, His
consort the Queen, or the Prince. Therefore it is the natural body the Law
looks upon, for Call. case. fo. 10
the politic body cannot die. Besides, neither the Queen, nor the Prince has
a politic Capacity. Cok. 4. part instit fol. 46.
If the King die during a Parliament, ipso facto the Parliament is dissolved.
Therefore Sovereignty is not virtually in the two Houses. By the Kings Cok. 7.
fol. 30.
death, (until a late Statute made therein) all suites in Law, even between
party and party, were discontinued. And at this day, the Chancellor, Cok. 7.
fol. 30.
the Keeper of the Great Seal, the Judges, the Sheriffs of Counties, Justices
of Peace, and other Officers, by his death are void, which could not be, if
Sovereign power were not in the natural person of the King, or if that
Authority were virtually in the Members. The Law of the Land says, that
Allegiance is due from the Subject to the King, so soon as he is born, Call.
case. fol. 5. fol. 7. 10.
therefore he is called Subditus natus. And so both Sovereignty and Allegiance
inherently, and by birthright, the one in the person of the King, and the
other in the person of the Subject: And this duty is reciprocal. The King Cok.
2. fol. 15. Call. case. fol. 5.
ex Officio, as King is obliged to protect the people: And the Subject in duty
is bound to obey their Sovereign, for Call. case. fol. 5.
protectio trahit subjectionem, and subjectio protectionem. There be two sorts
of Homage, viz. Call. case. fol. 7. a. b.
Homagium Ligeum, and homagium feudale. The first being Allegiance, is due
only to the Kings Person; And therefore our Law says, it is inherent
inseparable, and cannot be respited. But the latter being due by reason of the
tenure of Land, a Writ lies to respite it. Besides, a body politic can neither
do, nor receive Homage; It cannot be done, but to the natural person of a man.

The Lords and Commons, 10 Jacobi made this recognition, viz. 3 Jaco. c. 1.
Albeit within few hours after the death of Queen Elizabeth, we declared your
Majesty our only and rightful Liege Lord and Sovereign; Yet as we cannot do
it too often, or enough; So it cannot be more fit then in this High Court of
Parliament, where the whole Kingdom in person, or by representation is
present, upon the knees of our hearts, to agnize our most constant Faith,
Obedience and Loyalty to your Majesty, and your Royal Progeny, humbly
beseeching it may be (as a Memorial to all Posterity) recorded in Parliament,
and enacted by the same, that we recognize and acknowledge, that immediately
upon the death of Queen Elizabeth the Imperial Crown of this Realm, did by
inherent birthright and lawful and undoubted succession descend and come to
your Majesty. And that by Lawful right and descent under one Imperial Crown
your Majesty is of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King; And thereunto we
most humbly and faithfully submit and oblige our selves, our heirs and
posterities for ever until the last drop of our bloods be spent; And beseech
your Majesty to accept the same as the first fruits of our Loyalty to your
Majesty and Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever; Which if your Majesty will
adorn with your Royal Assent, (without which it neither can be complete, nor
remain to all Posterity) we shall add this to the rest of your Majesty's
inestimable benefits.

By this we see, that this Kings Father by inherent birthright, had the
Sovereign power of Government; That the Lords and Commons in Parliament, did
not only submit thereunto, but at their humble suite, by Act of Parliament,
obliged themselves, their heirs, and posterities for ever, even to the
spending of their last drop of blood, to preserve Him and His Posterity
therein. But to insist upon particulars of this nature, were too tedious: There
is no other Language to be found, from the beginning of this Parliament, up to
the Roman conquest. Every Statute, book of Law, History, 33 H. 8. c. 21.
and the constant practice of the Kingdom herein concurs. Neither tongue, nor
pen, until these Antipodes, the Members (who belch nothing but contradictions
to truth, justice, and honesty) ever made other expressions. But the juggle is
now (even by the vulgar) clearly discovered, and found to be too slight an
Hocus Pocus trick to gain three Kingdoms.

But it is visible to the world: The Members use the word (King) as they do the
name of God himself, either for their own advantage, or to gull the people,
which (amongst infinite other particulars) by their various proceedings
concerning the Kings Sovereign power, it is manifest.

First, by their foresaid Declaration in words they ascribe unto the King a
greater power then he either has, or challenges: He is (say they) absolutely
Supreme head and Governor. And this in all things, and that final too, for
(say they) from him there is no appeal. But even by the same Instrument they
tell us, that this Sovereignty is not in the Kings person, but totally in the
Members of the two Houses.

And after their preaching of this doctrine, and exercising the Kings office
for some years, then they took the boldness in plain terms to tell us,
they would have no King, that they themselves would (without their Sovereign)
govern the Kingdom.

But herein they catched themselves, for instantly thereupon the people
plainly discerned their intention even from the first, they were by this Vote
satisfied, that the Members aim was not for the public, but for their own
private, to subvert the known Law, and to reduce the people to the slavery of
an everlasting arbitrary, and tyrannical power under their equals.

The Subjects of England upon this Vote unanimously, even through the whole
Kingdom, (as if they were at one instant generally inspired) make their
Protestation against these usurpers. They cry out, and call for their liege
Lord their King: They resolve to submit unto no other government, then by our
ancient and known Laws, which the Members perceiving they returned to their
own vomit, and thinking to deceive the people with a new slight, do now
again begin to word it for a King, and Vote thus.

That this Nation shall be Governed by King, Lords, and Commons. Which is as
perfect a juggle, as that whereby they Declared the Kings power to be virtually
in themselves.

If those Votes bind, it follows, that we neither have nor can have
(otherwise then at the Members will) either King, Law, or Government. Their
last Vote (in words) seems (in some sort) to set up a King; But for any thing
we know, before the next new Moon, the Members may fancy to themselves the same
motives as formerly, and Vote Him quite down again; So that (admitting this
power in the Members, to set up and pull down, to Vote, and u^-Vote) it is
indifferent both to King and people, whether to have a Statue, and call it
King, or a King by the Members Vote.

Then for the Vote it self, (admitting the Members to have authority by their
Votes to alter the Law, which they have not) it is in it self most gross; We
must, say they, be governed by King, Lords, and Commons; But what power is
hereby intended for the King, non constat. By the next Vote the Members may
declare, they meant hereby, that the King shall not have any authority in his
own person, but still judge the Sovereign power (as formerly they did) to be
virtually in themselves. And if so, it only differs in words from that Vote,
whereby they resolved to have no King: In substance it is one and the same.

And if the Members mean (as the words seem to import) that the power of
Government shall be in the King, Lords, and Commons, jointly, and that this
Vote, be so far binding, as to settle that government for ever, (which is in it
self inconsistent with that arbitrary power, they now even by this very Vote
assume) it is likewise in it self most absurd: It is true, that we having a
known Law, whereby we are protected in our persons, lives, and estates, to
have this Law unalterable, otherwise then by the joint concurrence of the King
and two Houses, is a constitution beneficial for the Kingdom; but in point of
Government, it is a Composier, not only improper, but destructive to the whole
Nation. In every Commonwealth accidents frequently happen, which of necessity
require things to be done, yet if not acted with secrecy, hazards the ruin of
the people. For example. The King has intelligence that a foreign Nation is
prepared, and resolved to invade this Kingdom: Hereupon (with great care and
secrecy) a design is laid, to surprise the enemy: In this case, for the King,
at the same time, to proclaim his plot, not only frustrates his design, but
endangers the destruction of the whole Kingdom.

Now admit the King, Lords, and Commons jointly to have the power of
Government, and it is impossible whatever the design be (although the
publishing thereof unavoidably destroy both Nation and people) to keep it
secret.

First, for the Lords: The Members sit and Vote in that House (of what
capacity, or disposition soever) by descent: and experience shows, that wise
men (although Lords too) sometimes beget fools, Honest men, knaves, and Loyal
men, Traitors. And for the Commons House, he who examines his own Country (be
it in any part of the Realm) I am confident will find, the greater number of
those, elected Knights, and Burgesses, unfit for Statesmen or Privy
Counselors: Nor is it possible, that the multitude (if they had authority to
make such elections which they have not) should make choice of apt persons to
govern the Kingdom: Then adding hereunto the number of those Members,
amounting unto seven hundred or more, and doubtless (in point of secrecy) to
proclaim it at the market Cross, and to advise with them, is one and the same
thing.

But admit every Member a perfect Statesman, the composier of that Body
consisting of the King, Lords, and Commons, is such, as not only renders them
incapable to govern the Realm, but is in it self so pernicious to the
Commonwealth, as that it is impossible for the Devil himself to invent
(unless it be that the two Houses without the King) a plat-forme more apt to
introduce confusion, both to Church and State.

When a Capital or Criminal offender is convict, the known Law in point of
punishment does not distinguish of persons: The Judge (whether the offender be
capable of pardon or not) must give sentence (according to the nature and
quality of the offense) upon every one alike: He has not power either to
pardon, or mitigate the punishment; That is the office of the Supreme
Magistrate: Then, what a Tyrannical constitution it were, that the King shall
not have power to distribute mercy, until the major part of the two Houses
have Voted it, common experience makes it easy to judge.

And on the other side, if the King without that joint consent, has not
authority to punish offenders: It will be very difficult to bring the most
horrid malefactors to trial, be the offense Treason, Murder, Sacrilege, or
any other crime, how execrable soever, whilst either House does omit or refuse
to Vote it so, no punishment: An infallible way (I confess) it is to embolden
themselves, and all others their adherents to perpetrate all wickedness under
the Sun.

If a dispute happen, whether to make War, or to proclaim Peace, to fight, or
not to fight an enemy, and the like, it cannot be expected, but that those
three bodies shall (even to the ruin of the Nation) irreconcileably differ in
opinion. But it were endless to insist upon particulars of this nature, the
calamities which have befallen us by the Members arrogating the Sovereign
power of Government, and which daily must ensue, whilst they either continue
that usurpation, or shall be suffered in point of Government, to share with the
King, words cannot express.

Suppose three single persons, had jointly the Sovereign power of government,
no man can imagine, but that they would (even in matters of greatest weight and
peril) stern several ways: But in point of Government to add unto the
King, the Members of the two Houses make it a composier far more preposterous,
and absurd: And consequently to submit to that Vote, to be governed by King,
Lords, and Commons, (although it be admitted the Members intend it a joint
power) were no other, then to introduce contradictions, distractions, and
confusion.

Besides, by settling the government in King, Lords, and Commons, ipso facto,
the known Law is subverted, and an arbitrary power introduced; for, as before
appears, they who have the Government, and also power to make new, and change
the old Law, cannot be guided but by their own will: Whereas, by observing the
constitutions of the Realm, in submitting to the King alone, for matter of
Government, unto the King, and the two Houses joyntlie, for making new Laws, or
altering the old, and unto the lawful Judges of the Realm, to expound and
declare the Law, all arbitrary power is avoided.

And the King for his assistance in matters of Government, has (by the Laws of
England) three sorts of Counselors, viz. His Great Council, His Privy
Council, and His Learned Council. The first is properly the Prelates and
Peers of the Realm, which (besides infinite other testimonies) is proved by
the Writ of Summons to every Parliament. The words are these, viz.

Rex Vicecomiti, etc. Quia de advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, etc.
quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud, etc. 1. die, etc. teneri ordinavimus, and
ibidem cum Prelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni nostri colloquium
habere and tract. Tibi precipimus, etc. duos Milites, etc. venire facias, ita
quod iidem Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro^se and Co^munitate
Commitat. predict', etc. habeant, ad faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc
ibidem de commun^ concilio dicti Regni nostri (favente Deo) contigerint
ordinari suantedictis.

And the Sheriffs return is thus, viz.

Virtute istius brevis eligi feci duos Milites, viz. A. B. qui plenam and
sufficientem potestatem, etc. habent ad faciendum and consentiendum iis quae,
etc. de communi concilio Regni Angliae ordinari contigerint.

Thus it is manifest, that it is the Prelates and Peers, (who have assistants
unto them the Judges, and others of the Kings learned Council, and the Masters
of the Chancery) whom the King advises with as His great Council: It is the
office of the Commons (as likewise by this Writ appears) to do and consent unto
such things, as the King, the Prelates, and Peers agree upon.

The second, are such as the King makes choice of to advise Him in matters of
State, and are sworn to secrecy; And the third are the Judges of the Realm,
and others of the Long Robe, whom the King elects, and are sworn to advise Him
in matters of Law.

Now whilst these Counselors keep within their own bounds, and faithfully
perform their several duties, the known Law is preserved, and so every one
protected: But when they extend beyond their bounds, confusion ensues.

Absurd it were for a sick man (concerning his Cure) to advise with a Lawyer,
or for any one in point of Law, to take advise of a Physician. So for the Privy
Counselors, to judge the Law, for the Judges to determine matter of State. And
the like holds with the Members of the two Houses: They are neither qualified,
nor have Commission either to intermeddle with the Law, or the affairs of
State, otherwise then the King shall think fit to entrust them, by asking them
their advise, wherein they are only to deliver their opinions, not to control.

Therefore when the two Houses have passed a Bill for a new Law, and have
presented it to the King, they have performed their duty, it then rests in the
King, whether to make it a Law, or not, wherein it may be necessary for Him to
take the advice of His Privy Council, His learned Council, or of both. And I
conceive that may be the reason, why Kings have used to answer Bills (which they
pass not) by these words, le Roy, le veili. By these words of the Writ, viz.
Quia de advisamento and assensu consilii nostri, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum, etc. teneri ordinavimus, etc. It appears that the King depends upon
His Council, in calling Parliaments, which oftentimes is occasioned upon
State-affaires, such as requires the assembling of a Parliament, yet not safe
to reveal those reasons to the Parliament men: And so the King, by advise of
His Privy Council, or His learned Council, may, and oftentimes does reject
Bills presented unto Him by both Houses, and yet not convenient to render His
reasons to that multitude.

Therefore clear it is, the men at Westminster have extended beyond their
Commission, and so all these Votes are absolutely invalid, not binding either
King or people. The King notwithstanding these Votes, is, or whatever the
Members shall, or can Vote, will and must be our only Supreme Governor. And
consequently these men at Westminster, by breaking their bounds, are themselves
guilty of those things, which in and by their declarations to the people, they
grossly and falsely aspersed their King with: They have and do arrogate (to
use their own words,) an arbitrary power without, above, against all the
Courts of Justice, the Parliament it self not excepted. And thereby the known
Law is subverted, and consequently, they are most palpably guilty of that
crime, for which they themselves condemned as a Traitor the late Earl of
Strafford, but for attempting to do, and that upon a slender proof too.

Upon the whole matter it may with as much justice and sense be said, that
there was yet never one King of England, as to question whether the King for
time being has inherently in His person the Sovereign power of Government.
But that man who has taken consideration hereof, and yet so absurdly peevish
as to remain unsatisfied of the Kings right herein, the whole world must judge
Him worse then out of his wits to give it unto the Members. Suppose the Steward
of a Lord or Commoner, to claim property in the estate of his Master, I
presume the Houses would account him an unjust Judge, who should determine the
case on the Stewards behalf, upon his own testimony. So here the Members
challenge not only the Sovereignty due unto their Liege Lord, and King, but an
authority arbitrary, over King and people, wherein they have not the least
color of proof, more then their own affirmation. Besides, when a witness
(although not a party) contradicts himself, his testimony becomes invalid: But
the Members solemnly upon their Oaths even this Parliament, have declared the
King their only Supreme Governor, wherein they swore not for themselves, but
on another behalf, that is, for the Kings Interest: So that every prudent man
in common sense and reason, ought to believe, that which these men have thus
sworn for the King; And absolutely to reject this their affirmation contrary
to that Oath, and for their own advantage. And so I conclude this point
concurring with the Lords and Commons 1 Jacobi, that the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, is, by inherent birthright, descended and come to this our King
Charles. And that (according to the Oaths of these Members and their
predecessors in former Parliaments) he is our only Supreme Governor.

In the next place it is showed that the Militia of the Kingdom is in the King.

CHAP. VIII. That the Militia of the Kingdom by the known Laws of the Realm,
is inherent in the Crown. And at the absolute command of the King and none
else.
IT appears before that the King is the only Supreme Governor, which of it
self, is sufficient to satisfy any man of judgment, that the Militia of the
Kingdom is likewise in Him, yet Mr. Pryn by license of the Commons House has
published a Treatise Entitled thus.

The Parliaments Interest in the Militia. Whereby he endeavors to prove that
the Members of the two Houses (which he miscals the Parliament) have the power
over the Militia, the Forts, the Navy and Revenues of the Crown. And begins
thus.

It must (says he) be granted, that the power which His Majesty has, or His
Predecessors enjoyed ever the Militia, the Forts, the Navy, Ammunition, and
Revenues of the Crown, was originally granted to His Ancestors, by the
Parliament and Kingdoms free consent.

Answer.

The Militia, the Forts, the Navy, Ammunition, and Revenues of the Crown
(says M. Pryn) were granted to the Kings Ancestors, by the Parliament, and
Kingdoms free consent. So that, neither the Parliament, nor the Kingdom, by
his own confession, made the grant, nor who he means was this, grantor
himself cannot imagine. However, it is not worth the labor to make further
inquiry thereof, for most certain it is, never any such grant was made. But
admit that before the Kings Ancestors enjoyed them, some persons had power and
Interest therein, and made a grant thereof to the Kings Ancestors: It is as
hard a task thereby to prove that the Members have title to these things, as
to find out this imagined grantor, who never yet was in esse; The Argument is
but thus. The Militia, the Forts, the Navy, Ammunition, and Revenues of the
Crown, were originally granted to the Kings Ancestors, Ergo, at this day, by
the Laws of England, the Members of the two Houses have right thereunto; which
is most absurd: But Mr. Pryn affirming that these things were granted to the
Kings Ancestors, and the truth being, that the King and His Ancestors, time out
of mind, have enjoyed them; It is a good argument to prove the King has title
to them.

And for Parliaments, (as before appears) The first Act we have is Magna
Charta, made 9 H. 3. but the Kings Ancestors and predecessors enjoyed the
Militia, the Forts, the Navy, Ammunition, and Revenues of the Crown, many
hundred of years before that time, therefore could not be granted by the
Parliament, or by its consent. And for the Kingdoms consent, Master Pryn must
explain his meaning what he intends thereby, before it be Intelligible.

Then says M. Pryn, the King has no power to array, arm, or muster His
Subjects but in such manner as the Parliament by special Acts has prescribed.

Answer.

This being granted, makes directly against Master Pryn, it disproves the
Members pretended power to the Militia, and makes good the Kings interest
therein: The Argument is thus. The King cannot muster His Subjects, but in such
sort as is prescribed by Act of Parliament: To conclude thereupon, that the
Members of the two Houses have the power of the Militia, nothing can be more
absurd. But, it directly implies, that none but the King can muster the people.
And consequently, the Militia is in the King.

And for Acts of Parliament prescribing how, or in what manner the people shall
be mustered or arrayed, we have none of that nature, until the Reign of King
Ed. 1. But the Militia of the Kingdom was executed, and commanded by the Kings
of England, 1200. years before that time: And by every Act of Parliament which
does in any sort order, or appoint the mustering or arraying of the Subject; It
appears, that the Power and Authority it self, before that Law was in the
King; And by none of them is taken out of him: And so this Argument of Master
Pryns is to no purpose.

But says M. Pryn, The King has these things, and the Revenues of His Crown
in His politic Capacity, as (says he) a Major and Commonalty, a Dean and
Chapter, and the like, are seized of their Lands. And therefore (says he) the
King, neither by His Will, nor by His Letters Patents, can devise, alien, or
sell the same.

Answer.

If it be admitted, that the King cannot alien such Lands and Revenues as He is
seized of in His politic Capacity, (which is in it self most absurd) how this
disproves his title to the Militia, the Forts, the Navy, Ammunition, and
Revenues of the Crown, is not intelligible. The Argument in effect is but
thus: The King has the Militia, etc. in his politic capacity, Ergo, he has
it not: Or thus, The King cannot sell the Revenues of his Crown, Ergo, the
Members have the Interest therein, and may seize them.

But (says Master Pryn) the Ships, Arms and Ammunition seized of by the
Members, were bought with the Kingdoms Money, And therefore the Members may
seize them.

Answer.

Suppose it understood, what is the Kingdoms Money, and that with such Money,
Ships, Arms, and Ammunition are bought. It seems a good Argument for the King
to Seize them. For He, as King, Coke 2. fo. 15. Calv. case. fol. 5.
ex Officio, is obliged to preserve His people in Peace. Besides, Cok. 7. fo.
16.
that money or other things, which no particular Subject can challenge property
in, by the Laws of the Kingdom, is the Kings. But by the Laws of England we
have no person or pollitick body by the name of the Kingdom, which is capable
to have property, either in Lands or Goods.

And for the Members of the two Houses, as Parliament men, they have not any
politic Capacity, they are not a body to sue, or to be sued, nor are capable
to buy or sell, nor have property in any estate; And consequently Master Pryn,
by his own Argument, has as much title to seize the foresaid Ships, Arms and
Aummunition, as they.

Then (says M. Pryn) the Members seized the Ships and Revenues of the Crown,
to prevent the arrival of foreign forces, and a Civil War, which they
foresaw. As (says he) Queen Elizabeth, in time of War with Spain, granting
letters of Mart, to seize all materials for War, transported through the
narrow Seas.

Answer.

By this discourse we are told what moved the Members to seize the Kings Navy,
and the Revenues of his Crown, which in effect is thus, viz. The Members having
usurped an Arbitrary power over King and people; and thereby having destroyed
the Monarchy of England, had just cause, not only to expect opposition from
their own Sovereign, but (in his relief) arrival of foreign forces from all
the Kings in Christendom. For, upon the same grounds, as the Members made this
seizure, the Subjects of any King may do the like. It is as easy for the
people of Spain, France, or any other Nation in the world, to say they foresee
a War, as these Members pretend it. And I am certain, it is as unlawful and
directly against the constitutions of England, for the Subjects here, to assume
this power, as for the people of any other Country to do the like to their
King. Therefore, I grant, it was an act of Policy for the Members to seize the
Kings Ships, and the Revenues of His Crown; It was a great and principle means
to prevent the suppression of this their Rebellion. But all that proves the
legality of their proceedings, no more then a highway man, having taken a
purse, murders the party robbed, to prevent his own discovery, makes the
robbery lawful. And so M. Pryns Argument, in effect is but thus. The Members
de facto, have seized the Kings Ships and Revenues of his Crown, ergo, they
have done it lawfully.

Thus in Answer to Master Pryns Arguments, whereby he endeavors to prove, that
the Members have power over the Militia, etc. But that they have no color to
claim any Authority therein, further appears thus.

First, all men must grant, That so long as the people have been governed by a
Law, so long the power of the Militia must have been in some; But the people of
England (as before appears) have been governed by a Monarchical power, above
1200 years before the institution of the two Houses: And all that while the
Kings of England for the time being, and none else have executed that
Authority, Therefore not in the Members.

Secondly, it is absolutely necessary, that the power of the Milit^^ be in such
hands, as may at all times provide against approaching dangers to the
Commonwealth. But that cannot be the Members, they are not in esse out of
Parliament. Suppose this Nation (in the vacancy of a Parliament) be suddenly
invaded by a Foreign enemy, or infested by a domestic insurrection: If none
have power to command the people to assemble, and make resistance, until the
summoning of the two Houses of Parliament, nothing but distraction to King and
people can be expected.

Thirdly, the Composier of these Members (being two distinct bodies)
considered, it is as prepostrous for them to command the Militia, as to have
the Sovereign power of Government, or to judge the Law. It may fall out (even
in the time of greatest danger) that one House shall Vote to fight, the other
not to fight, the enemy: And this difference may happen to be unreconciled,
until the Nation be conquered or destroyed.

Thus it appears that the Members have no power over the Militia: It now rests
to prove, that it is the Kings right, which is made good by authority and
reason.

First, for authority, it is proved by constant practice, which is not only
the strongest proof in our Law, but it is the Law it self. We have no formal
Institution of the Common Law, it is no other but common, Ancient, and frequent
use. For example, it is Coke 9. fo. 75. Dyer. fo.
felony to steal, it is not felony of death, unless the thing stolen, exceed
the value of twelve pence; These are things so certainly known, and so
generally received for Law, as that any man to dispute them, renders himself
ridiculous: yet being denied, none can show when the Law began, how, or by what
authority it was made, there is no other proof to make it good, but custom and
use.

So for the Militia of the Kingdom, it was never estated upon the King by Act
of Parliament; or by any other constitution. It is His right by the Common Law
of England which is made good by custom and use, and authorities of books.

And first for custom and use; Any man of what quality or rank soever he be,
reflecting upon his own memory, and observation, must acknowledge, that in all
his time, no Soldiers were impressed, armed, arrayed, or mustered, no Forts,
strongholds, or ^^rrisons, held, or commanded, no Commanders, Officers or
Soldiers Employed by Land or Sea, no Commissions concerning War, either
Foreign, or Domestic, or concerning the administration of Justice, but by
authority derived from the King alone. And such as search the Records in former
times, will find the like practice in all ages. And with this agrees all
Histories, and stories, from this day upward unto the Roman Conquest.

Then for authorities, and to begin with Acts of Parliament, Mag. Char. c. 20.
Magna Charta, granted about 440. years since, not only being the first
Statute, but beyond it there is scarce an authentic record of Law at this day
to be found: In which Act, it is thus declared by King Hen. 3. viz. And if We
do lead, or send him (who is by tenure to defend a Castle) in an Army, he shall
be free from Castleguard, from the time that he shall be with us in fee in our
Host, for the which he has done service in our Wars.

Thus even in that Instrument whereby the King confirmed unto the people their
Liberties; It appears, that by the Laws of the Land, the power of War, was the
Kings sole right.

By an other Statute made 7. of King Ed. 1. being the son, and 7 E. 1. c. 1.
next succeeding King to H. 3. The Prelates, the Earls, the Barons, and the
Comonalty of the Realm Assembled in Parliament declared, that to the King it
belongs, and His part is through His Royal Signiorie, straightly to defend
force of armor, and other force against the Kings peace, at all times when it
shall please Him. And to punish them which shall do contrary, according to the
Laws, and usages of the Realm. And that they (the Subjects) are hereunto bound
to aid their Sovereign Lord the King, at all seasons when need shall be.

After this by several Acts of Parliament, viz. 13 E. 1. c. 6. 1 E. 3. c. 5. 4
H. 4. c. 13. 5 H. 4.
13. of the same King, 1 Ed. 3. 25 Ed. 3. 4 H. 4. 5 H. 4. and other Statutes it
is declared how, and in what manner, the Subject shall be charged with arms,
mustered, arraied, and forced to serve in War. In all which Acts, without
dispute, the whole power and command therein, is admitted to be in the King.

By a Statute made 11 H. 7. The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
declare it to be the duty and Allegiance of the Subjects 11 H. 7. c. 1.
of England, not only to serve their Prince and Sovereign Lord for the time
being in Wars, but to enter, and abide in service, in battle* and that, both
in defense of the King and the Land, against every Rebellion, power, and might
reared against him.

By a Statute made 2 Edw. 6. in the Reign of a child King. The Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament, declare that it 2 E. 6. c. 11.
is the bounden duty of the Subjects to serve their Prince in War.

By a Statute made 4 and 5 P. M. In the Reign of a Woman, the Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament declare thus, 4 and 5 P. M. c. 3.
viz. That whereas heretofore commandment has been given by the Queen and her
Progenitors, Kings of England, to diverse persons to muster their Subjects, and
to levy them for the service of their Majesty and this Realm in their Wars;
which service (says the Statute) has been hindered by persons absenting
themselves from Musters, and by being released for rewards. And then provides
remedy therein, when the Queen, her Heirs or successors shall authorize any to
muster the people.

And by that late unanimous and voluntary recognition made by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament unto King James, they declared thus, viz. We being bound
thereunto, both by the Laws of 1 Jaco. c. 1.
God and Man, do recognize and acknowledge, (and thereby express our
unspeakable Joys;) That immediately upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, the
imperial Crown of the Realm of England, did by inherent birthright, and
lawful and undoubted succession descend and come to your most Excellent Maj.
and that by the goodness of Almighty God your Maj. is more able to Govern us,
your Subjects in Peace and plenty then any of your Progenitors: And thereunto,
we most humbly and faithfully submit, and oblige our heirs and posterities for
ever, until the last drop of our bloods be spent.

Now every man of sense will agree, that the opinion of the Members of this
Parliament, is no more authentic, then the opinions of the Lords and Commons
Assembled in former Parliaments. And that being granted, it follows, that any
one of the aforementioned Statutes, whereby the Lords and Commons declare, That
by the Law of the Land, the power of the Militia is in the King, is so much the
more weighty, and so much more to be relied upon, in this point of the Militia,
then the opinion of these Members, by how much more persons are competent to
determine a question concerning another, then to judge their own case, or when
they resolve for, or against themselves. But these Members (setting aside their
own Votes, in this their own case, and for their own advantage) cannot make
their pretense to the Militia good, by any one Authority, Opinion, Practice, or
President. But this not all: These Westminster men themselves, even this
Parliament, have both in their Ordinances (as they call them) and Petitions,
acknowledged the Militia to be the Kings right.

Besides, it is resolved in our books of Law, that if all the people of England
should break a League with a foreign Prince, without 22 Edw. 4*
the Kings consent, the League were not broken: And consequently, by the
Judgment of the Law the sole power of the Militia is in the King; And with
this agrees all the Authorities, both of our Books of Law and History. It was
never for the space of 1700. years past, questioned or disputed, until now by
these Usurpers injuriously wrested from the Crown.

But the Members, in the name of the Lords and Commons, upon serious
consideration, have lately Voted to this effect: That the Answer to the Scots
pap. fol.
Militia has been long debated in black and red letters, and that God has now
given his Verdict on their sides.

That, however the English men please themselves with their Magna Idem. fol.
Charta, and because their Lives and Estates are not at the Kings Will; and for
that, He cannot make Laws, or raise money without consent in Parliament. All
this (say they) signifies nothing, if the Militia be in the King, for by that
(say the Members) He may destroy the People.

For (say the Members) if there be a true intention to leave unto the People
their known rights, that no Law be made, or Money levied to maintain the
Militia without their consent in Parliament. It cannot enable Him to do the
Kingdom effectually any good alone, But may serve to make Him capable alone to
do them hurt.

Answer.

Every man may be satisfied, these men have spoke what they can to maintain
this their pretended Right; yet these their Votes being duly examined, every
indifferent person will thereby, rather think that the Devil himself, who has
long owed them a shame, has now paid that debt, then by these Votes be drawn
to believe the Members Doctrine.

First, for their supposed Verdict to be given by God himself. Their Argument
therein, is suitable to that of the Jews and Turks, whose examples and
presidents I presume they follow. The Jews (even to this day) audaciously
scoff and taunt us Christians, for receiving Christ Jesus for our Messiah;
because upon the Cross, he being required by them to manifest his authority by
saving himself; and thereupon, then offering to believe his Doctrine, which he
did not: Therefore the wicked Jews concluded they could not. And the Turks,
for the space of 1000. years past, to make good their Doctrine of Mahomet, and
their claim to be the only Monarch of the World, much insult upon the
Christians for their Victories obtained against them, whereby we cannot deny,
but they do possess (amongst infinite other Kingdoms and Countries wrested
from Christian Kings) the places, both of the Birth and Passion of our Savior.
And upon this, the Turks infer, that God has Judged the cause for them,
against the Christians.

Now that difference which is to be found between the Arguments of the Jews and
Turks, and these of the Zelots at Westminster, renders the latter to be the
greater Blasphemous. They (althoughly wickedly protesting against Christ)
pursued their Conscience; Neither Turk nor Jew (for any thing appears) did
know, or believe Christ to be the Savior of the World. These hypocritically
make use of the name of God himself, and to establish themselves in their
usurped possessions, with insolent boldness call him to testify, nay affirm,
that God (in this point of the Militia) has given his Verdict for them, and
against the King, which themselves do not only know, but have acknowledged to
be the Kings Right.

And having with this semblance of sanctity, prepared the People with this
forged Verdict: Then they Vote reasons to persuade the vulgar; That for the
King to have the Militia, tends to their destruction; but that Authority being
placed in the Members, the people are (if we may believe them) secured from
harm. But of their own showing the express contrary, Appears,

First, they tell us, (as the truth is) that by the Laws of England, the King
has not power by himself alone, to tax or impose payments of money upon the
Subject; therefore say they, (mark this consequence) so long as the Law is
therein observed, the Kings having of the Militia, is not effectual to the
Kingdom: Hence it follows, (by the Members own Argument) that if the King
had an Arbitrary power, then the Militia were his own.

So that, by the Members Doctrine, none but Tyrants have title to the power of
the Sword, which I confess is a foundation aptly laid for their own structure.
All the world will witness for them, that in point of Tyranny, the malice of
man, with the advice and assistance of all the devils in hell, cannot outstrip
them: Let the Members search Histories and Stories, Presidents and Examples,
from the first Creation until this Parliament, and not only of this Nation,
but throughout the face of the whole Earth; and I defy the most vigilant
amongst them, to find one Tyrannical act, which these Members (since their
usurpation upon the King) have not done, or audatiously claimed by the Law of
the Land to have power to execute.

Thus appears the different condition of the people, concerning the Militia
under the Kings Government, and this under the Members. By that under the King,
whilst the people submit unto their lawful Superiors, and obey the just
Sentence of Law; there is no need of the power of the Sword, for the King
neither has, nor claims Authority by the Militia to force his Subjects to
make payment of money, or to do any one thing more, or otherwise then the
known Law commands. We are not Governed by the Will of the King, but under Him,
according as the Law of the Land directs: And the use of the Militia is no
other then to preserve the Law. And therefore, in case of disobedience, to
compel submission thereunto; wherein the power of the Sword, that is, the
Militia is as necessary as the Law it self; for, as the people cannot be
protected in their persons, lives or estates without the Law, so that Law is
fruitless, where there wants power to put it in execution. Hence it follows,
(even by reason it self) that he, who has the Sovereign power of Government,
has (as an incident inseparable unto it) the power of the Sword: And by our
Law, the King has the Sovereignty. From him (as before appears) is due to the
people, protection of their persons and Estates; That, by Cok. 2. fol. 15. Cok.
Calvin's case. fol. 5. 7.
the Laws of England, is employed in the word King. And so the word Subject
implies a duty in the people to assist their King. And as this duty is
reciprocal between King and Subject, so the performance thereof, is equally
beneficial to both; And if either fail in their duty, both King and People
are destroyed: Therefore to deny our King the Militia of the Realm, is no
less an absurdity, then to appoint a General of an Army, with commands to
fight an approaching Enemy, and to deny that General use of Arms, and power
to command his Soldiers.

But on the other side, to give the Militia unto the Members, is the same, as
to put the Sword into the hands of a madman; for, as the one has no reason to
restrain himself from doing mischief, so the Members are not guided by any
known Law, but having usurped an Arbitrary power over King and Subject, we
find (by our woeful experience) make use of the power of the Sword to compel
the people to submit unto their insatiable lusts; Witness, (besides the
infinite murders and slaughters of the people) the vast sums of money these
Members, since this Parliament by the power of the Sword have unlawfully
wrested from the Subject, which being justly cast up, would amount to more then
all the Subsidies and grants of that nature given unto all the Kings of
England, for the space of 500. years before that.

Upon the whole matter, clear it is, the Militia of the Realm, by the known
Law of the Land, is the sole and only Right of the King. And consequently, all
Commissions, Powers and Authorities, granted or given by the Members of the two
Houses concerning this War, are void in Law, and no Justification for those
acting thereby; But for the nature of that offense, it is showed in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. IX. That all persons, who have promoted this War in the name of King
and Parliament, and such as have acted therein, or adhered thereunto, are
guilty of Treason.
THe Office of the King, and Duty of the Subject, appears before Cok. Calvin's
case. fol. 5.
to be thus: The King to Command and Govern according to the Established Laws
of the Realm; The Subject to obey those Commands, wherein the Law of all
things abhors force, and enjoynes peace, which Peace, by the Laws of England
is called the Kings Peace. Therefore in every Indictment for Murder, Felony, or
Trespass done upon the person, or estate of a subject; These words, viz.
contra pacem domini Regis nunc Coronam and dignitatem suam; ought to be
expressed: for, although the fact be done immediately against a Subject, yet it
trencheth against the Kings Authority, His Law is thereby broken; And the Laws
of England not only protects the Kings Person from violence, but preserves Him
in His Royal Throne and Government.

Therefore, if any persons in this Kingdom, without command, or assent of the
King, raise Forces, Powers, or Arms, (be it upon what pretense soever) it is a
War levied against the Kings Authority, His Crown and Dignity. For in that,
the Subject assumes the Regal power of the King.

Then for the Authors and Actors of this War; the Kings Castles, Forts, His
Navy, Arms, Ammunition, and Revenues of His Crown, are by force wrested out of
His Hands; Arms raised, conducted into the Field, Himself fought with in
several Battles, His Subjects in every part of the Kingdom, by the awe of
those Armies, forced from their Allegiance. Therefore a War it is, and a War
against the King.

The next Question is, what the Law declares this offense to be. And that
appears by the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. in these words. 25 Edw. 3. c. 2.
Whereas diverse opinions, have been before this time, in what case Treason
shall be said, and in what not: The King, at the request of the Lords, and of
the Commons, has made a Declaration in this manner. When a man does compass
or imagine the death of our Sovereign Lord the King, or of my Lady the Queen,
or of their Eldest Son and Heir; or if a man do levy War against our
Sovereign Lord the King in this Realm, or be adherent to the Kings Enemies in
this Realm, giving aid or comfort in the Realm, or elsewhere; and thereof,
be probably attainted of open deed, by people of their condition, etc. It is to
be understood, that it ought to be Judged Treason.

By this, clear it is, That it is Treason to Levy War against the King, to
compass or imagine the death of the King, the Queen or Prince, to adhere unto,
or aid the Kings Enemies: Of all which, (the death of the King, Queen, and
Prince excepted) the Authors and Actors of this War are guilty.

But M. Prin, has by Authority of the Commons House of Parliament, published a
Treatise, entitled thus.

The Parliaments present necessary defensive War, is Just and Lawful, both
in Law and Conscience, and no Treason or Rebellion.

Answer.

This Title is like his whole discourse, totally, either impertinent or false.

This is not the Parliaments War, but a War of the Members of the two Houses.
Nor is it a War on the Members behalf defensive, but offensive; which (omitting
to express, when, and by whom the Armies and Forces were first raised, that
being obvious to all men) appears by considering the Cause of the War, which
was thus.

The Members having formed a Law, to take out of the Crown, the power of the
Militia, and to settle it in themselves, the King refused to consent unto it;
which refusal was the ground Declaration against the Scots papers.
of this War, wherein the King was only Passive, and the Members Active. They
pressed upon Him to change the Law, He refused. It were gross in this case, to
conceive the King should make a War. But the Members had no way to gain their
ends, but by force, and so began the War.

Then Master Prin proceeds, to prove that this War of the Members is not
Treason: For (says he) they intended no violence to the Kings Person, His
Crown or Dignity, only to rescue Him from His Cavaleers, and bring Him back
to His Great Council.

Answer.

It is true, sometimes the intent of the party committing the fact, alters the
case. For example. A man traveling, the passage is stopped by water: And finding
a horse there, makes use thereof, to get over the water. This is not Felony:
But it is a Trespaas. Suppose this party indicted for felony, at his trial, it
is pertinent for him to confess the fact, That he used the horse, and by
circumstances to make it appear, he intended thereby only to get over the
water, and so to quit himself of the felony. But this man being indicted only
for a Trespass, for him to confess he used the horse to get over the water,
alleging he could not otherwise have passed, thereby to quit himself of the
Trespass were foolish. So here, raising of Armies against the Kings Command,
conducting them into the field, etc. is confessed. But (says M. Pryn) that is
not Treason, for they intended no harm to the Kings Person, His Crown or
Dignity. Which is a fond contradiction, for admitting they intended no harm to
the Kings Person, the fact confessed, is a harm to His Crown and Dignity. And
that in the highest nature that may be; It is a War Levied against Him, and
His Regal Authority, which by the Laws of England is High Treason.

Raviliake, who killed the King of France; upon M. Pryns ground, might have
justified the fact. Although he had confessed to have wilfully killed that
King, yet he might with as much truth and sense, have said, he intended not to
hurt the Kings Person. As M. Pryn, first confessing the foresaid facts of
Levying War, does deny an intent to harm the King in His Crown or Dignity.

Then for rescuing the King from His Cavaleers. If M. Pryn reflect upon the
case of Robert Earl of Essex, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, he will find,
That that Earl (in comparison of Edg-hill Battle) gathered together but a
handful of men, nor was that Queen fought with, nor her Person in danger. All
which things the foresaid Earl, at his Arraignment alleged for himself, And
protested his intent was only to remove from the Queen, some evil Counselors
about her, yet not available. The fact by him confessed, viz. without warrant
from the Queen, in a tumultuous manner, to raise force, was Judged Treason, for
which, that Earl, and his Adherents were executed as Traitors.

Thus for the point of Levying War against the King. Then for imagining the
death of the King, Queen, and Prince, In this case the intent of the party
acting is considerable. For example, suppose the King to be distracted or
distempered, endeavors to violate himself, or assaults a Subject. To lay hands
upon the King, to preserve His, or the Subjects life, in those cases, and such
like, the facts are lawful. And it may so happen, that the King may be slain,
and yet no Treason: As in case of tilting, and such like. Now the intent of any
man cannot appear, otherwise then by the parties confession, or by Proofs,
Circumstances, and Presumptions.

Then for the Authors and Actors in this War; It is true, they deny an
intention to kill the King, the Queen, or Prince. But the Circumstances are as
full and pregnant to prove they intended it, as is possible.

A man seem to come out of a house with a naked sword bloody, none being in
the house but the Corpse of a dead body newly slain with a Sword. This is so
pregnant a presumption, as that, before a just Judge, and an equal Jury, the
man's denial will not avail him.

Suppose one should assault and strike the King, the Queen, or Prince, and with
violence pursue the same, and for this, be indicted to have imagined their
death; for that man to allege, he intended not to kill him or them so
assaulted, were in vain. But certainly the presumptions to prove the Authors,
and Actors of this War, intended to kill the King, the Queen and Prince, are
far more pregnant. Suppose the Members and their Soldiers had declared their
intent to be, to kill them; no man can devise how they could have endeavored
to have effected it, more then has been done by this War. Several Battles
have been joined, the King and Prince in person. And many thousands on the
Kings party slain: And for the Queen, witness the business at Burlington.
The Authors and Actors of the powder plot, were justly condemned for Treason.
Upon that point of imagining to kill the King, the Queen, and and Prince. But
upon this ground of M. Pryns, they might have escaped punishment. It had been
as easy for them to have alleged, that they intended not to kill the King,
the Queen, and Prince, As for the Actors in this War, to pretend it.

But Master Pryn undertakes to make this War against the King to be Lawful, by
Authority and presidents.

Julius Caesar (says he) by a Conspiracy of the Senate of Rome was murdered,
having 23 wounds given him. And then shows the Rebellions in the Reign of
King John, Henry 3. Edward 2. Richard 2. and other Kings; And some of them, it
is true, were murdered by their Subjects.

Answer.

I confess, if presidents and examples of this kind, be Authorities to prove
the facts lawful: It is easy enough to justify this, and every Rebellion:
And M. Pryn having cited that president of Julius Caesar and himself
acknowledging that fact to be murder, he was overseen to omit citing that of
Judas, for it was somewhat later in time, it excels that fact against Caesar,
and is very suitable with this of the Members. He betrayed his Master, and the
Savior of the world with a Kiss; these, their Sovereign with an Oath. Oath
of Supremacy
And like unto those Treasons and Murders against Caesar: King Edw. 2. and King
Rich. 2. they might very aptly have cited the examples of some of their dear
brethren the Scots; several King have been Rebelled against, and Murdered too,
by the Subjects of that Nation: Yet we see they are not (by the people of
Scotland) made examples, or cited for Authorities, to prove the lawfulness
thereof. But contrariwise, That Nation does unanimously declare it their duty
to relieve and rescue their King from out of the hands of His Rebellious
English Subjects. And many other examples I confess there be in foreign
Countries, both Christians, Turks and Infidells, where Kings, by their own
Subjects, have been betrayed and murdered. And so the discontented people in
any Nation, may allege, that King Edw. 2. and Rich. 2. of England, being
lawful Kings, were by their own Subjects, Rebelled against, and Murdered. And
so (be the scene in Spain, France, or any other Kingdom) conclude it is
lawful for them to do the like.

Then M. Pryn explaines the meaning of the aforesaid Statute of 25 Edw. 3. by
which it is declared to be Treason to Levy War against the King, to compass,
or imagine the death of the King, the Queen, or Prince. But the words of the
foresaid Act (says he) must be understood with this Limitation, viz. so long
as Kings execute their Just Royal powers, according to the Laws of God, and of
their Realms, that (says he) is the meaning of the holy Ghost. And even so,
says he, are these words of Saint Paul, viz. (let every Soul be subject to the
higher powers) to be understood with that limitation, yet (says he) No private
man of his own authority, ought to rise in Arms against them, without the
general consent of the whole Kingdom, or both Houses of Parliament.

Answer.

This was a doctrine aptly divulged for the justification of this Rebellion:
And a ready way I confess to draw the multitude to their party, who oftentimes
are (as in this case they were) misled, upon pretense of Law, and Religion, to
their own ruin.

Now admit the Members to have got the Sovereign power. If Mr. Pryn be asked
this question, How he will have the holy Ghost now to speak? If the Members
make a Law, and declare it Treason for the people to leavy War against them,
whether that Law shall be understood with the same limitation. Mr. Pryns answer
will be, that the limitation is now ended. The Members he will say must expound
the meaning of their own Law, and S. Paul's words too. For the Members
themselves tell the people, that they are the Kingdom, whatever they do they
would have us believe to be the act of every person in the whole Nation. And so
not examinable, but by God himself in the next world; so that the Declaration
against the Scots Papers.
Members having got the power into their own hands, whether they govern by
the Laws of God, or man, although they be the greatest Tyrants in the world,
and the highest persecutors of Christian Religion, be it either spiritual or
temporal, although never so pernicious, to foul, or body, it must be admitted
for good Law and true Gospel.

Thus the people (being drawn to recede from their true principle) have
occasioned their own confusion; Whereas by their observing the Laws of the
Realm, these distractions have been avoided. For by the constitutions of this
Kingdom, both King and Subject are regulated by a known Law, which Law,
permits neither King, nor people to be Judge in their own case.

If one Subject wrongfully imprison the person of another, seize his Lands, or
take away his goods, the party injured, has his legal remedy, but is not
permitted to be his own carver, or revenger: if he for his own satisfaction,
kill his adversary, it is murder; If he seize his Lands, or take his goods, it
is a trespass.

So in the Kings case, If by His Command, any Subject be imprisoned, or his
estate taken from him, against the rules of the known Law, that Subject has
his legal remedy against the Kings ministers, wherein, neither the King nor
his officers, are Judge. Therefore, if that Subject thus injured, should, to
revenge himself kill the King, or seize His Revenues, it were a most barbarous
and unjust Law, not to condemn this Act unlawful. And that being admitted, it
must be unlawful to attempt His death, or to leavy War against Him, for any
such cause; And consequently all those facts (although committed upon the
grounds aforesaid) are Treason.

Now that person who conceives himself to be most highly injured, being
required to set down the motives of his taking up Arms against the King, his
pretense can be no other then this. That his person has been imprisoned, his
Lands seized, and his goods taken from him. And this (in his judgment) against
Law, none but Brutes can conclude, these are legal justifications to act, and
do, such things against their King. And so consequently the authors and actors
of this War, are guilty of Treason.

But says Mr. Pryn, The Parliament is not within the meaning of this Statute
of 25 Ed. 3. Therefore not Treason for the Members to seize the Kings Forts,
Arms, Ammunition and Revenues of the Crown, for (says he) the King is a
Member of the Parliament, and therefore if the Parliament could commit Treason,
the King should commit Treason against himself: And (says he) the Parliament
is a corporation and a Court of Justice, and so not capable of the guilt of
Treason.

Answer.

Most true it is, That the King is exempt from the guilt of Treason, for all
Treasons are committed against Him. But every Subject (which includes all the
rest of the people) is capable, both to commit the fact, and is subject to
punishment for the same. And herein there is no difference of persons. It is no
more lawful for a Peer, then for a pezant, to commit that crime, the place
where alters not the nature of that fact, nor does it avail the actors, in
being Members of any Assembly, Corporation, body politic, or Court of Justice.
For every one of these Members, or persons, besides their pollitick capacity,
has a natural capacity too. In which capacity, he is subject to the frailties
of man, he may actually break the Law, and passively suffer for it. But Coke
10. f. 32.
the Assembly it self, the Corporation, the body politic, or the Court of
Justice, can neither commit a crime, nor is capable of punishment. For example,
the Parliament, that is, the King, the Members of the Lords House, and the
Members of the Commons House, their power is only to make Laws by Act of
Parliament. Therefore when the Members of the two Houses in a Parliamentary
way, pass a Bill, which the King confirms with His Royal Assent; Absurd it
were to think this could be an Act of Treason.

And so it is for the Judges of every Court of Justice, keeping themselves
within their jurisdiction, they cannot, in the proceedings of their own Court,
commit Treason. And the like holds with all Corporations and bodies politic.
But if a Member in either House assault or strike his fellow Member, that is a
trespass, and wilfully to kill him, is murder: And by the same reason, to
kill the King, although within the walls of the House, is Treason; And that
being granted, it follows that to imagine His death, or attempt to kill the
King, or agree to levy War against Him, although in that place, is Treason in
such Members.

And herein no formal, or seeming Parliamentary proceedings, will alter the
case. The putting it to the question, voting the business, and settling it by a
Major part, or composing it into a formal Law, and calling it by the name of
an Ordinance of Parliament, neither alter the nature of the crime, nor takes
away the guilt of Treason.

If one who has acted in this War, be indicted for Treason, who at his
arraignment, shows an Ordinance of both Houses, for his justification. The
trial being before a just Judge; It will no more avail him, then Adam was
justified, saying Eve tempted him to eat the forbidden fruit. And the Members,
who commanded those things to be done, being legally questioned, have no more
to say then Eve had. For it was the Serpent who tempted them to commit this
treason.

The rightful Judge will inform them, that the Law cannot be altered, but by
Act of Parliament. The Judges of the Realm understand not the Language of an
Ordinance of the two Houses, nor is any such thing pleadable in a Court of
Justice, the Law takes no notice thereof. These things are done by the Members,
not in their politic, but in their natural capacities. They are not Acts of
Parliament, they are unlawful facts of Parliament Men; And such offenders
being attainted and executed, the Parliament suffers not. Besides, it is the
fact which the Law does look upon: And in this case the greatness of the
person offending, the number committing the offense, and the place where acted,
is so far from extenuating, as that it rather aggravates the crime. For a
conservator of the peace, in his own person to break it, or a Judge of the
Law, to be an example of transgressing it, is more odious then in other men.

Then considering the persons acting, viz. Members of the House of Parliament,
the thing acted high Treason, the place where, in those Houses, words cannot
express the barbarousnesse of it.

Now to conclude this point, I here set down what facts the known Law judges
Treason, the Members Law therein, and the proof on both sides.

What facts the Law judges high Treason, the foresaid Statute of 25 Ed. 3.
makes it manifest in these words. viz. Whereas diverse opinions have been before
this time, In what case Treason shall be said, and in what not, then declares
that by the Law of the Land, these particular facts following are Treason.

1. To compass or imagine the death of the King, the Queen, or the Prince. 2.
To violate the Queen, the Kings eldest daughter unmarried, or his eldest sons
wife. 3. To leavy War against the King, or to adhere unto His enemies, giving
them aid or comforts in this Realm or elsewhere. 4. To counterfeit the Kings
Great Seal, the Privy Seal, or His money. 5. To bring false money into this
Realm, counterfeit to the money of England. 6. To slay the Chancellor,
Treasurer, or the Judges of either Bench, the Justices of Air of Assize, and
all other Justices assigned to hear and determine, in their places doing their
office: And then it is enacted in the negative, that no other thing shall be
judged Treason, until it be declared by the King and His Parliament: And
accordingly by several Acts of Parliament some other things have been made
Treason, viz. 7. To deny the King to be our only Supreme Governor, and so in
some other particulars.
The Members Law herein, both Affirmatively and Negatively follow thus.

1. That it is not Treason to imagine the death of the King, the Queen, or
Prince. 2. That it is not Treason to Levy War against the King, to adhere unto
His Enemies, or to give aid or comforts to them, in England, or elsewhere. 3.
That it is not Treason to Counterfeit the Kings Great Seal, or His Money. 4.
That it is not Treason to deny the King to be the Supreme Governor.
Then for their Doctrine, in their Affirmative it follows thus.

1. That it is Treason to endeavor the preservation of the Kings Person from
violence. 2. That it is Treason for a Subject to aid the King against His
Rebellious Subjects Levying War against Him. 3. That it is Treason to maintain,
or affirm, that the King is the only Supreme Governor. 4. That it is
Treason for any Man, to deny the Members (their fellow Subjects) to have the
Sovereign power of Government. 5. That it is Treason for a Subject, without
leave of the Members, to recide or dwell in London.
But it is not possible to instance in all the particulars of the new Treasons:
therefore in general, the people must know, that whatever the Members shall say
is Treason, They must believe it to be Treason. Now for the poofs. The foresaid
Statute does clearly demonstrate what the known Law is. And therewith agrees
all the Authorities, Judgments, and Resolutions of the Law.

But for the Members, their Law is so new, as that they cannot look beyond the
beginning of this Parliament, nor produce any one Judgment, Resolution, or
Opinion to make good any one of their Doctrines; And consequently, their own
fictions.

Let them speak out, and all that they can say for themselves, is but thus,
viz. We have gotten possession of the Kings Revenue, we have besides that,
settled unto our selves a yearly Revenue, amounting to at least thrice treble
the profits of the Crown of England: and which is still more sweet, we have the
dominion over King and People, we have a power unlimited, to impose taxes and
payments upon whom we please, and what sums we think fit: their persons we
have in vassalage, and can take away their lives, when, and for what cause we
please; for the obtaining whereof, we did Levy War against the King; we did in
that War attempt to kill the King, the Queen and Prince; we did adhere unto
His Enemies, and gave unto them relief and comforts; we have counterfeited the
Kings Great Seal, and His Money; we have, and yet do most barbarously imprison
the Kings Person; we have subverted both Law and Religion. Now for us to
confess the known Law, and submit our selves thereunto, were no other then to
put our necks into the halter: Therefore we must of necessity deny the old, and
forge new Laws. These things considered, I suppose every one (not particeps
criminis) in this odious Rebellion, will judge it more absolutely necessary for
him to endeavor his infranchisement from His slavery, then it was for the
Members to commit this foul Treason and Rebellion, whereby the people are
brought to this Vassalage.

Upon the whole matter, clear it is, that all those Members of either House of
Parliament who consented to the making of any Order or Ordinance, for the
promoting of this War, pretended for King and Parliament; and all other persons
who have acted therein, consented or adhered thereunto, are guilty of High
Treason.

CHAP. X. That the Subjects of this Nation are not only commanded from doing
violence to the Kings Person, or prejudice to His Authority, but are obliged
with their lives and fortunes to assist and preserve His Person and Just Rights
from the fury of His enemies, both foreign and domestic.
ALL the people of this Nation are divided thus, viz. King and Subject; which
of it self is proof sufficient to make this good. The word King, (as before
appears) implies a duty in the King, to protect His people; and the word
Subject, a duty in them to assist Him. By the Laws of England, for a servant to
kill his Master, is an offense of a higher nature, and the punishment for it,
more severe then for the meanest Subject (without such relation of service) to
kill the greatest Peer; for, besides the Subordination between them, a trust
is employed, the breach whereof, (by an act of that nature) by the Laws of
England is petty Treason. Besides, the Law expects from the servant, a
personal assistance, to preserve his Master from violence or hurt; and in that
regard, the Master being assaulted, the servant, by the Laws of England, may
justify to resist the assailant, in defense of his Masters person. And between
the King and His Subjects, the Subordination and Subjection is of a far higher
nature. The trust reposed in the Subject, and his duty to the King, is far more
transcendent: the King being head of the weal public. By violating his person
(says our Law) every Member of the Commonwealth suffers: Therefore in
assisting Him, we do defend our selves.

He is Pater Patriae, we are His natural born Subjects, and so by the Law of
nature, obliged to preserve Him from injury.

Now the person of my Sovereign Liege Lord the King, by an unnatural War,
raised and prosecuted by His own Subjects, being assaulted, and War made
against His Crown and Dignity; And the King, having by His Proclamations
summoned His Loyal Subjects to assist him: upon serious consideration thereof,
I found that nothing was more clear, or pregnant, both by 7 Edw. 1. c. 1. 11
Hen. 7. c. 1. 2 Edw. 6. c. 11 4. 5. P. M. c. 3. Cok. Calvin's case. fol. 7. 14.
Authorities of the books of Law, and several Acts of Parliament (by which it
is abundantly declared to be our bounden duty to serve the King in His Wars,
both against foreign invasions, and domestic insurrections and rebellions.)
Then that I was obliged in duty, by the Laws of this Realm, by the Law of
Nature, by the Law of Reason, and by the Law of God, even by that precept of
Saint Paul in these words, viz. Let 'every soul be subject to the higher
powers, to assist Him against these assaults. And upon these grounds I took up
Arms for Him, and in His defense, against the forces raised by command of the
foresaid Members of the two Houses of Parliament.

CHAP. XI. That the persons at Westminster, who call themselves the Parliament
of England, are not the two Houses, nor Members of the Parliament.
IN my foresaid Treatise, I have (by way of admittance) granted these men at
Westminster to be the two Houses of Parliament. The Houses, from their first
Assembling, to have been completely full, To have unanimously concurred in
Votes, and every Member, to have consented unto all those horrid things, acted
in the name of the Parliament. And in case it had so fallen out, still the Law
(in every particular before mentioned) had been the same; That concurrence of
the Members had nothing altered the case. Therefore sure without dishonouring
the two Houses of Parliament; injuring (in a manner) the whole Peereage, and
the far greater number of the Members duly elected of the Commons House: I
cannot omit, First, to express the cause of these my admittances. Secondly, to
show that these men at Westminster (who now assume the name and power thereof)
are so far from being the Parliament of England, as that they are neither the
two Houses of Parliament, nor Members of them.

For the first, had I, at the beginning fallen upon these questions; whether
Members, or not Members, Houses, or no Houses; I had thereby barred all further
progress in that my Treatise. For, if no Houses of Parliament, then no dispute
can arise, what votes or proceedings of the Members are valid, and which void.
Therefore to introduce these questions, viz. what is a Parliament, the
Authority, and use thereof? The proper office of either House singly, and of
both Houses jointly without the King. I granted (but that I say only by way of
admittance) the foresaid persons to be the two Houses of Parliament: and to
have all powers, and authorities due unto those Assemblies.

Then for the second, viz. that these men at Westminster are neither the two
Houses, nor Members of them, is proved thus.

1. First clear it is, that the essency of a House of Parliament, does not
consist merely in the legal assembling of the Members thereof. Besides that,
it is necessarily required, that every Member have liberty to repair unto the
place of sitting: And there freely (according to his conscience) to Vote, and
deliver his opinion in all things agitated. For example, a Commission is
granted to twenty, with power to them, or any five, or more of them, to execute
the same. Here, although five, (if no more appear) have full power: Yet if all
be present, and consenting to act, no five, nor less then the whole twenty
have authority. So that if nineteen of them injuriously exclude one, the
proceedings of the nineteen are void, which stands with great reason; for, if
nineteen may exclude one, eighteen may exclude another: And in like manner, one
by one they may expel each other, until reduced to the last man.

Besides, frequent it is, in every Assembly consisting of many, where the major
part determines the question. For the business in dispute, (of what nature or
moment soever) to be carried on either side, by one voice. Therefore
injuriously to exclude one single person from Voting, is as destructive to
Justice as to reject Two, Three, or more: Yet herein let not me be mistaken. I
grant, that either House of Parliament, frequently does, and may legally
proceed, although not completely full. And that each Assembly, has authority
(in some cases) to suspend particular Members from sitting. But I say, that
whilst either House, (without lawful cause) wrongfully hinders any one of
their fellow Members to sit, or freely to Vote with them according to his
conscience: The rest of the Members of that Assembly, (what number soever) have
not Parliamentary authority to proceed in any thing. Therefore when a competent
number of either House is Assembled, all those so met, and no less (I mean
without expelling them, or any of them, or forcing any ones conscience) have
power to perform the office of that House. And the same it is if any one
legally returned, shall (by his Fellow Members) be hindered to repair unto the
House. Those disturbers do thereby disable themselves to act in that Assembly.

Now for application to these men at Westminster: It cannot be forgotten, But
that within few days after the first meeting of the two Houses, the election
of many Knights and Burgesses (known to be honest moderate men) were
questioned: Their persons instantly suspended from sitting; but unto this day,
whether rightfully or wrongfully elected (notwithstanding all possible
endeavors to obtain it) not suffered to be determined. Therefore manifest it
is, that to be rid of those Members out of the House, was the only cause of
such questions, and suspensions: But that more clearly appears by the
progress of the business: For not long after those suspensions by Order of
the Commons House, every Member of that Assembly, whose name had been used in
any Patent of Monopoly, or acted therein, was in words disabled to sit or Vote
there. And by color of this Order, diverse Members were expelled, and forced to
quit the House: For no other cause, but for that their names were used in some
Patents or grants of the King, which grants these Members, before and without
any legal trial, judgment, or determination thereof Voted to be void. Yet
(which is a remarkable sign of their injustice) their own babes of grace,
such of them I mean as the faction could confide in (although within the
express words of that Order, and (at least) as guilty of that fact, as any
other) have ever since been, and still are, Mildemay.
principal Voters there. Now if these Members expelled by the foresaid Order,
were wrongfully expulsed, it follows, that the whole Assemby did thereby
suspend it self from acting as the House of Commons; And that they were
wrongfully expulsed, and injuriously debarred sitting, or voting there, is thus
proved.

No person duly elected, and returned of the House of Commons, can be lawfully
expulsed that House but for such cause as by the Law of the Land he is disabled
to sit or Vote there. But the cause mentioned in that Order, by which those
Members were expulsed, does not (by the Law of the Land) disable any man to
sit, or Vote in the House of Commons, Ergo.

To deny the major cannot enter into the heart of any honest Englishman. That
is no less then to give unto the greater part of that Assembly (at all times)
an arbytrary power, without lawful cause to expel thence (although equally
trusted and authorized by King and people with themselves) their fellow
Members; which being admitted unto them, it follows, that the peoples power
of electing, is (in effect) taken away: and consequently no representatives in
that House. For although it be admitted, that after such expulsion the
inhabitants shall elect again; The people cannot expect an end of choosing,
until return be made of such as the present prevalent faction likes of. And
we see (almost as frequently as the tide turns) that the faction of that House
changes; And accordingly expulsions follow, and new elections are made: So
that (admitting this power to expel) it would ease the people of much trouble,
for the Members to indorse upon every Writ, the names of such as shall be
chosen; Or rather, by their Speaker (after a Vote to that purpose naming the
man) to summon him to the House, and so as they Vote out one Member to Vote in
onother.

Which in effect is exercised at present. We see it is not at all considered,
whether the party chosen be fitly qualified for the service or not. If he be of
an humor to concur in opinion with the present faction, good enough. Hence it
is that we find the children, or kindred of those who for the time being sterve
the House (of what age or capacity soever) and none else are judged fit for the
employment.

And so admitting this authority in the major part of that Assembly: The
issuing out of the Writs, the peoples electing, and the returning of the
Members, are become but frivolous, and useless ceremonies. Therefore the
Members no representatives; and consequently no House of Parliament.

And for the minor, It needs not the help of a Lawyer to make it good; every
man of the meanest capacity may judge it. For, if being named in a Patent of
Monopoly, or acting therein, because to disable a Member of either House, to
sit or Vote, it follows, that no man in the Kingdom is qualified for that
service. Every one (in some degree) is guilty of the breach, both of the Laws
of God, and of the Realm. Suppose another faction in that House (happening to
be the major part present) Order, that every Member, who in any fort has
broken the Kings peace, committed fornication, sworn an Oath, or transgressed
the Law of God, or man, be forthwith expulsed the House. If that Order
concerning Monopolies be binding, absurd it were to deny this to have the same
effect. For every one comprised in each Order, is a transgressour of the Law,
and punishable according to the quality of the offense: But no one of them,
more then the other, (by the known Law) is disabled to sit, or Vote in the
Parliament: He who has been an actor in a void Patent of Monopoly, is as
capable to be a Parliament man, as another who has committed fornication,
adultery, assaulted or beaten his neighbor, or the like.

So that, it appears to be the Order of the House, and the will of the Members,
(not the Law of the Land) which does now (in that Assembly) regulate, and
balance the business. Therefore clear it is, that those Members were
wrongfully, injuriously, and illegally expulsed the House. So that, if no more
were in the case, those persons at Westminster, are not the Commons House of
Parliament.

2. Secondly, The Members finding the aforesaid Order of expulsion far too
short, still appearing in the House many honest Englishmen. It was resolved to
cast them out by club-law: It was hereupon insinuated unto the giddy multitude,
that several Members of each House, opposed reformation, and Justice. The
names of such Members as descent in Votes from the sense of the present major
part, are posted in the streets, and injuriously branded with a character of
evil affected persons to reformation. The people hereupon (in great
multitudes) swarm to the doors of both Houses, and there (being prepared and
instructed accordingly) with hideous noise, clamor against Bishops, Popish
Lords, and evil affected Members; And (although most ignorant what it is) call
for Justice.

Now this violent medicine, was so long, and so often applied, that the Houses
(according as empricks commonly use their patients) absolutely confounded their
own bodies; for of above two hundred Lords, 5. 6. or 7. at this day is a
complete House of Peers: And in matters of greatest moment, rare it is to have
ten of that Assembly to carry the question. And for the Commons House of 500
Members, not 100 of those now permitted to sit or vote there (were at any time
by the Law of the Land) Parliament men. And so unless the whole World has
hitherto been mistaken, in attributing the powers of those Assemblies to the
Major part of the Members, whereas it ought to have been given to the least
number. And that by the constitution of the Realm, it is lawful for a part of
them by force, and without lawful cause, to drive from thence, their fellow
Members. We have no House of Parliament at this day.

Nor is the case of the lower House any thing better by their excrease of
number: That forgery of the Kings Great Seal, does no more authorize the
Inhabitants to elect a Knight, Citizen or Burgess, then should the Speaker of
the lower House (in pursuance of the Votes of both Assemblies) counterfeit a
deed in the name of the Speaker of the higher House, purporting a conveyance to
himself, of that Lords Estate, would legally entitle him thereunto. Besides,
were that no counterfeit Seal, The Inhabitants of the County, the free men of
the Cities and Boroughs being deprived of their freedom of election, not
daring (as before is said) to choose other, but such as are intimated to them,
to be nominated by the House, or the Soldiers; they are not in Law Members of
that Assembly.

Thirdly, the Members, although reduced to so small a number, were not hereby
cured of all their griefs: The haunting Ghosts, and inseparable Companions of
every Traitor, (fears and Jealousies) still stick close unto them; by driving
from the Houses, such as visibly opposed this work of destruction; gave not
sufficient confidence to the rest of their own perseverance therein. The
conscience therefore of every one this elect little remnant, in the next place
must be fettered; wherein special use is made of that clause concerning
privileges of Parliament, contained both in the Protestation and Covenant: The
words thereof being general, to defend all privileges, the Members declared,
that by whom, and when this privilege is broken; themselves and none else must
be Judge, And like Judges in their own case, they have determined the
question, no less to their own advantage then by enthralling, not only the
Consciences of their fellow Members, but of every Soul in the Kingdom to
their sense. In order whereunto (as before appears) they have voted, that every
one who shall oppose any result of theirs, is an Infringer of Parliament
Privileges.

Now although the nature of this crime is not yet by them defined; it may (at
every instant time) when they think fit, even by one blast of wind be made to
exceed the highest Treason: So that, most clear it is, after these Votes, no
man endued with honesty or courage, could with safety, sit or vote in either
House; Every one not of the tribe, (unless he run into his own ruin) must
stand mute until the design of the present prevalent faction be visible: And
then (however it suites with his heart) his tongue must chime with that party:
And although this rule be exactly observed, yet once having declared himself,
he is every hour in danger of destruction: For when a new faction gets up,
(which is very frequent) changing his note, oftentimes preserves him, not from
an impeachment; he is from thence, but dandled as a whelp under a Lions Paw;
when that party thinks fit, cru head in pieces.

Now should some of the Judges of any Court of Justice in Westminster Hall,
demean themselves in this manner with their fellow Judges, no wise man would
esteem them to have the power of Judicature: And why a part of the Members of
either House should have this Privilege, more then they, is beyond the reach
of the Westminster-men to make it good: By this it appears, that the Members
have not freedom of Speech, and consequently no House of Parliament.

Fourthly, admitting the Members had not been injuriously expulsed; And had
they been permitted freely to give their opinions; yet these men at Westminster
have disabled themselves to sit or Vote there; which is proved thus.

Every Traitor, Murderer, and Felon, by the Law of the Land is disabled to sit
or vote in Parliament: But these persons are Traitors, Murderers, and Felons,
Ergo.

The Major needs no proof, every one grants it. And for the Minor, Those men
have not only committed such facts as the Law judges Treason, Murder and
Felony; but even making it their daily work, are still constant to those their
principles. They (as before appears) actually Levied War against their King,
which is Treason: They have actually endeavored to kill the King, the Queen
and Prince, which is Treason: They have counterfeited the Kings Great Seal,
which is Treason: They have counterfeited His Money, which is Treason: They have
not only denied their King to be the Supreme Governor, but have arrogated
the power of Sovereignty to themselves, which is Treason: They have this
Parliament declared it Treason to attempt to change the Law. But themselves
have actually subverted both Law and Religion; And have reduced both King and
people to their Arbitrary power, which is Treason. They have, and still do
imprison the Person of their King, which is Treason.

Then for Murder, besides their own consciences (if they have any remorse)
inwardly gnawing the fatherless children and widows, of those slain on both
sides in this unnatural War, raised, and prosecuted by them against King and
Kingdom, in swarms to testify against them. But this not all, they do still
in colder blood, and in further abuse of Justice, by pretext and color of Law,
sometimes in their own names, other while imitating the ordinary forms of Law,
by the mouths of their nominall mock Judges (whose understandings and
consciences by their foresaid Order, and with bribes and rewards they have in
vassalage) condemn, murder, and put to death the Kings Loyal Subjects as
Traitors; and this principally for refusing to commit Treason.

And for felony; That offense is included both in the crime of Treason and
Murder; but there needs not that help to prove them guilty thereof. By the Law
of England it is felony of death, to steal goods exceeding the value of twelve
pence. But these persons (in the nature of robbery) have by force taken from
King and People their whole livelihood.

Suppose 20 Troopers to make an Order, that all persons passing through
High-gate, shall deliver unto them, all such Money as shall be found about
them. If the Troopers (by color of this Order) force the passengers to deliver
their Money: It were ridiculous to deny this to be robbery. Yet, if that Order
made by the Troopers were binding, the fact were lawful. So here, those men at
Westminster have ordered, (which they style an Ordinance of Parliament) that
all the people of England, shall give unto them, the 5 part, and the 20 part of
their Estates. That every man, who eats, or drinks, buys, or sels, shall pay
unto them a certain sum by the name of Excise. That every County and Town
shall likewise contribute unto them, and their Soldiers, vast sums of money.
That all the Kings Revenues, shall be disposed of to them, and to their use:
That all persons who shall oppose them herein, shall be judged Traitors, and
forfeit unto these men their whole estates, and fortunes; And by color of
those Orders we see they do by force seize and take all, to their own use. Now
in regard the foresaid persons at Westminster have not power (as before is
proved) to make such Laws, it directly follows, that the forcing the King and
people herein, is unlawful, and consequently both King and Subject are robbed
of their money, and goods: And their estates wrongfully detained from them.

But peradventure these incendiaries at Westminster will object, that although
they be guilty of those crimes, yet until they be judicially convict thereof,
it cannot be alleged against them.

Answer.

First, By their own practice, they have judged this point against themselves.
For (as before appears) without any legal conviction, they have expulsed
almost all their Fellow Members. And that for supposed facts, which if guilty
of, disabled not them to sit or vote in the house. So that, these
Westminster-men (having to the view of the world committed such facts, as by
law disables them to sit or vote) to be judged no Members, themselves must
confess, is (at the most) but lex Talionis.

Secondly, it may appear (even in the judgment of Law) that a man is guilty of
treason, murder, or felony, although not attainted, or convicted thereof. For
example, one calls another (before any conviction of such a crime) Traitor,
Murderer, or Thief. The Person thus charged, brings his action of slander. In
this case, if the Defendant justify his words: alleging, that the Plaintiff
committed such a fact, which the law judges Treason, Felony, or Murder, and at
the trial proved it. The Jury ought to acquit the Defendant of the slander,
yet still that Traitor, Murderer, or Felon, is not convict of the fact.
Therefore clear it is, a Traitor, is a Traitor. And the people may as well know
him so to be, and as lawfully so call him, before attainder, or conviction, as
to know a spade to be a spade, and so call it.

Besides, when a treason, murder, or felony is committed, it is the proper
office of every petty Constable, and of every Justice of peace; nay, it is the
duty of every honest Subject, to apprehend the malefactor, and to bring him to
due punishment; wherein, neither privilege 4 Part Institutes. fo. 25.
of Parliament, dignity of the Person, or employment of the Offender, is any
protection. It is not only lawful, but the duty of every honest English man, to
lay hands upon the Speakers of both Houses, or upon any Peer, or
Parliament Man, or any other, having committed the crime of treason, murder, or
felony; or justly suspected for the same: And consequently they ought to
apprehend the aforesaid Westminster-men.

It is true, that in the ordinary proceedings, no man can be convict of
treason, murder, or felony, but by Act of Parliament, or by judicial
proceedings recorded in his life time, yet there is another rule in Law too,
viz. that no man shall take advantage of his own wrong. Therefore, if one
before he be convict by such proceedings, be killed in rebellion, and his corpse
viewed by the chief Justice, Coke 4. fo. 57.
he forfeits both lands and goods.

Now suppose 500 ordinary persons (not claiming the power or name of a
Parliament) to have committed the crime of treason, murder, or felony; Then
assemble to themselves multitudes, out the Judges from their Justice seat,
place those of their faction therein; seize the Kings Great Seal; break it in
pieces, and counterfeit an other; Imprison the King, and thus stop the course
of Justice against themselves: Gross it were in that case (because
unattainted, or unconvicted) not to declare them Traitors: Should the people in
that case, omit by all possible endeavors, to apprehend, and bring them to
punishment, (wherein the Law Coke 9. fo. 68. Coke 5. fo. 109.
upon resistance does warrant the killing of them) they were not only
disobeyers of the Law, but the cause of their own misery; Even so it is with
the people at this day: There is no difference to be found betwixt those 500
men, and them at Westminster, but the Westminster-mens pretense of authority,
which renders them more odious; And therefore the people ought to be more
zealous to apprehend them.

Fifthly, it is an undoubted truth, that whilst the Members are so overawed, as
to act and do what others command them; It is no free Parliament; and
consequently all their proceedings void and null. But those Westminster-men are
in that manner awed, Even as they, by tumults expelled their fellow Members,
and by their tyranny fettered their consciences; themselves are now (by the
power of an Army) forced to captivate their own sense to the will of a few
inconsiderable persons; some particular Officers of the Army: The Members do
not, they dare not act any thing, but in obedience of the results of a Council
of War. Nay more, we see, not to alter, and change opinion (how contradictory
soever to former votes, how pernicious to King, Church, or Commonwealth) as
they receive commands from thence, is ground sufficient both of an expulsion
from the House, and an impeachment of Treason.

Hence it is, That we find such contradictory results, sometimes these persons
voting themselves a Parliament, sometimes no Parliament, sometimes much show of
settling a Form of Religion, they unvote that again, and declare (upon
pretense of satisfying tender Consciences) to have none at all. They do (in
effect) say, and unsay, vote one and the same thing, lawful, and not law, even
as the Cudgel hangs over them.

And so unless persons, whose Souls, and Consciences, are so far in
vassalage, as to say, act, and do, what ever the present prevailing Party
commands, make the Houses of Parliament, these Westminster men are not they,
and consequently if nothing but this were against them, it proves them no
Members of Parliament.

Sixthly, admitting these men not disabled by any, or all the foresaid means,
yet by their late Votes declaring their resolution, not to make any address,
or application to the King, nor to permit any from him, they have (by the Law
of England) dissolved themselves; For, setting aside the Kings Writs of
summons, the peoples electing the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, and the
returns thereof made; And the Persons assembled have no more authority to sit,
or vote in either House, then any other men. And by those Writs they have
nothing else to do, but to treat with the King concerning the affairs of the
Realm. Therefore by waving that, they quit all their employment. They do by
it clearly publish unto the world, an absolute denial to take upon them those
things which the King and people entrusted them with, and for which they had
Commission. And consequently, what ever they do is without Commission, or
Authority.

But to do them right, they are in these votes more ingenuous then formerly.
There is now a harmony between their words and actions, which heretofore
jarred. For, notwithstanding their often Declarations, and high Protestations
(even with deep execrations upon themselves if not performed) to make the King
glorious, and the people to flourish: The world might (even from the first
beginning of the Parliament) see, that all their actions tended to the
destruction, both of King and Kingdom.

Now suppose a new gang of four Judges set up in the Court of Kings bench by
color of Authority of these Persons at Westminster, and three of them (by an
Order of their own) to expel the fourth: then two of the three to expel the
third: and then one of the two to assemble multitudes, and expel the other.
And after this the last man by himself alone, or calling unto him two, or three
other persons suitable to himself, to judge the Law, and thereby to declare the
wealth of the Nation to be their own, and both the Members, and the rest of
the people, to be their slaves: And having got an Army on foot to support their
actions; Then to declare that they will have no more relation unto, or meddling
with the Members; such Persons would quickly be denounced no Judges of that
Court; Declared to act without commission, or authority; To be Subverters of
the Law, and would be impeached of high Treason against this new State; Even so
ought all the people to declare these Westminster-men. It is their case against
the King, the people, and the old known fundamental Laws of England.

Upon the whole matter, I cannot more aptly parallel these persons, then unto
those men our Savior in the Gospel warns us of: They have got within the walls
of the Houses of Parliament, but Mat. 7. 15. 16. John 10. 1, 2, 10.
entered not in by the door: They came in Sheeps clothing, expressing themselves
most zealous to advance Religion, and to preserve the peoples Liberty: But by
their fruits, we find them inwardly ravening Wolves; they are like unto those
who our Savior calls thieves, that come to steal, kill, and destroy; they
have abolished all Religion, they have taken from the people their Liberty, and
(almost to the last drop of blood) have sucked from them their livelihood. In a
word, since they cast off their loyalty, and so making themselves masterlesse;
those Wolves are so filled with pride, as that they disdain all other
Creatures; They are so gorged with malice, as that they snarle and pinch at
most men they meet, which has its effects like unto the biting of a mad Dog,
scarce curable, but by a medicine prepared with the heart, or liver of that
biting Cur. So the world sees when these Westminster men have once fixed their
malice, (whether upon those against them, or upon their own Party, whether he
have deserved well, or ill, whether the fact charged upon him be lawful, or
unlawful) it is a million to one, in fine, he perishes. Nor can the wit of
man find a cure for this grief; but to unkennell these Wolves.

And to effect it, the people of England by the rule of reason, by the law of
nature, of Nations, by the Laws of the Realm, and by the Laws of God, are
obliged to do their uttermost endeavor: For to their doors it is now brought,
wherein they cannot expect any formal Warrants, according to the ordinary
proceedings. For (as before appears) the Malefactors themselves, have stopped
the passage of the Law; the people therefore ought not only to declare these
Westminster men, no Houses of Parliament, and no Members of them; but they are
obliged to reject all their Orders, Ordinances, and Commands, what name or
title soever they have given or shall give them: And also to apprehend their
persons, and bring them to due punishment of Law.

CHAP. XII. Results upon the premises. That the people of England under the
government of the KING, according to the known Laws of the Realm, are a free
Subject.
THe use of a Law, is to protect every one under it, in his just Rights, which
(I grant) cannot be done, unless by that Law, the lives, and estates of the
people, be subject to the judgment of some known persons; without that,
neither Malefactor can be punished, nor Controversy decided: Hence it
follows, that the happiness, or misery of the people depends upon the good,
or the bad constitution of that law under which they are governed. For, such a
law may be, as that the people are thereby little altered, from that condition
they were in when they had no Law at all. For example, where there is no Law,
and so the strongest party has the best interest, every one is a Tyrant each
to other; and where the supreme Magistrate has an arbitrary power, the people
are no better then legal slaves to that supreme Governor.

Now this Arbitrary power, cannot be avoided but by observing these principles,
viz. By placing the Sovereign power of Government in one hand, and the
absolute determination of that Law, by which (under the Supreme Magistrate)
the people are governed, in an other hand.

And for making new Laws, or altering the old. That neither the supreme
Governor by himself alone, nor any other without him, have that authority; But
that such a composed body be therewith trusted as have not the power of
government. All which, is observed by the Laws of England. The King by our law
is the only supreme Governor; but his power is not unlimited, for the people
under Him, are governed by a known Law: And this Law not declared by the King,
but by the Judges of the Realm, being persons unconcerned, and sworn to
decide controversies according to the Law; To the King is due forfeitures for
Treason, fines imposed upon offenders transgressing the Law, and the like: But
the King does neither Judge what is Treason, what fact does break the Law, nor
has power to impose a fine upon any offender.

And for making Laws, the King alone has not that power, nor is it in any
other without him. It is no Law, without the joint consent of the King and the
Members of the two Houses; which united Body, has not the government of the
people: And so every one is limited, and kept within his own bounds.

But although we have a known Law, and for the most part (in the execution
thereof) known process, which (and no other) the people are obliged to obey;
yet sometimes (for necessity) the Law refers several things to be acted and
done according to the discretion of persons trusted; whose Commands, (although
they do not observe the ordinary rules and known process of the Law) the
people are bound to submit unto. For example, It is the office of every Sheriff
of his County, to preserve the Kings peace within his liberty: Therefore upon
any sudden insurrection, tumult, or other just occasion, the Law (to enable
him to perform that duty) gives him authority to raise the power of that
County; wherein it is best to the discretion of the Sheriff, to judge when it
is necessary to command the peoples assistance: But herein he is not the final
Judge. In that case it is at the equal peril of the Sheriff, and the
inhabitants of the County. To the one, when to command, and to the other, when
to obey. If the Sheriff without just cause, force the people to rise, himsefe
is punishable: And if he requires the inhabitants to assist him, when it is
necessary, and they refuse, the people are punishable: In which case both
Sheriffs and Inhabitants, being equally concerned; therefore neither the one,
nor the other is Judge, to determine whether there was cause to require
assistance or not. That question, (the cause being regularly brought before
them) properly belongs to the Judges of the Law: And therein he who finds
himself agreived, has liberty to commence his action, and bring it to trial.

And as in that case of the Sheriff for his particular County, the like
accidents may happen, whereby the whole Kingdom may be in such danger, as not
possible (by the ordinary means, and known practice of Law) to prevent the
destruction of it; The Nation may be so suddenly invaded by a foreign enemy,
or infested by a domestic insurrection, as that, without present supplies, and
assistance of men, money, and other provisions of War, the whole people and
Kingdom may perish. It were gross in such a case, to be tied unto the
formalities of Law, or to want means to prevent that danger.

And this cannot be supplied, unless some have legal power to command, and
the people obliged to obey: Therefore by our Law, the King ex officio, as King,
has that power, He may in such cases (by His regal authority) compel His
subjects, in His, and His peoples defense, to serve in person, and contribute
with their purses. Yet herein the King is not the final Judge, if so, the
estate, and fortune of the subject, were at His will; He might then (upon
pretense of necessity) draw from the people their whole fortunes, and estates,
which were (in effect) a power arbitrary. Therefore as before in the case of
the Sheriff, so here, as the people are at their extreme peril, in case of
danger, bound to obey the Kings commands: So it is at the peril of the Kings
Ministers therein employed, that the King has just cause to make that command.
For every subject, who (by the Kings commands, or warrants) is molested, either
in person, or estate, may prosecute suit in a Court of Justice, against the
Kings officers, who interrupted him, wherein the Kings Warrants, Writs, or
Commands, are no legal justification, unless it judicially appear to the
Judges of that Court, where the suite depends, that the King had just cause to
require that assistance. For, the King is not the final Judge in such a case.

So that our Law, in the first place, preserves the Kingdom and people from
danger, by providing remedy against those sudden accidents, yet protects the
subject from tyranny, and arbitrary power.

And this rule for the liberty of the subject, holds in all cases; that is to
say, The Subject of England, under the government of the King, cannot be
forced, either in person, or estate, otherwise then the known Law (judged by
indifferent persons unconcerned as aforesaid) does permit: And consequently the
people of England, a most free subject.

CHAP. XIII. That the people of England, under the government claimed by the
Members of the two Houses, are absolute slaves.
IT cannot be denied, but that, where the King or the Supreme Magistrates
authority over the people is arbitrary, that government is tyrannical: No
tyrant ever had, or can have a greater power. Nor is it possible for people,
(where any Law is admitted) to be under a greater servitude. For, he whose will
is a Law, as he has no superior, so (by any under his command) he cannot be
said to err in judgment; be his sentence never so bloody, cruel, or
barbarous, the dispute is ended, no appeal, or Writ of Error lies; so that the
wisest man, how industrious, or conscientious soever, cannot (for the least
instant of time) promise to himself security of life, or challenge property in
his estate: Therefore if the government in England, practiced, and claimed by
the Members, be arbitrary, it follows that the people are absolute slaves,
wherein these things are considerable.

1. Who they be that arrogate the government. 2. What those persons act de
facto. 3. What power they claim to have de jure.
1. For the first, they are the Members of the two Houses, being in number (the
Assemblies admitted full) about seven hundred persons. They are divided into
two several distinct bodies, without any head, and every body having equal
power. Then for their privileges: It is by themselves declared to this effect,
viz. That none Declaration of the House of Commons 17. Janu. 1641. Votes of the
Parliament, 12. Maii 1642. Order of the House of Commons 3 Jan. 1641.
of them, (although he has committed Treason, Sacrilege, Murder, Rape,
Felony, or any other crime, how execrable soever,) is to be appehended,
questioned or prosecuted for the same, until license be thereunto obtained
from that House, whereof he is a Member. Every offender herein is by their
Declarations denounced a breaker of the liberty of the Subject, of the
privilege of Parliament, and a public enemy to the Commonwealth; And such a
license being obtained, and the Malefactor thereupon apprehended, he is not
(say they) to be prosecuted, by indictment, or otherwise, but in such manner,
and before such persons as that Assembly thinks fit to direct, their persons
are so sacred, as that none but themselves must judge their actions. Thus for
the persons commanding.

2. What they act de facto: We see, by a new Law (called an Ordinance) made by
themselves, without the King, the late Archbishop of Canterbury was condemned
to death and executed: They have confiscated his, and other men's estates, and
by the same pretense, they have taxed the people to the twentieth and fifth part
of their fortunes; They have laid an imposition upon the Subject (heretofore
not heard of in England) called an Excise. They have taxed them with vast
impositions, and payments of money by way of assessements, and otherwise at
pleasure: They receive and dispose of the confiscations, and of all the
aforesaid sums of money, as themselves think fit. They assume the power
(finally) to declare, and Judge the Law; and by color of their own authority,
they have de facto, repealed several Acts of Parliament: And have imposed upon
the people new Laws of their devising.

3. What they claim to have de Jure, if themselves be asked, whether (by Law)
they have not power to act the foresaid things. If they have not authority
(without appeal) to determine what is Treason, murder, felony, or other
capital offense: To put to death who they please. To confiscate any man's
estate; To tax or impose upon the people without stint, whether the profits of
those confiscations, taxes, and impositions be not at their own dispose, and
all this without any account. To these they do, they have already answered
affirmatively; However all men of judgment may be herein satisfied.

The Members had lawful power to put to death the Bishop of Canterbury, and to
seize his estate, else he was murdered, and his estate seized against Law: now
if they had therein lawful authority, it follows, that by the same Law, they
may (whether guilty or not guilty of a crime) put to death any other, who they
shall say deserves to dye, and may confiscate whose estate they please, dispose
thereof to their own use, or otherwise as they think fit: And accordingly we
see they have, and are going fast on (as theives do their booties) to divide,
and share the wealth of the Kingdom amongst themselves. If they did lawfully
tax the people to a fifth part, by the same Law they may tax them to their full
worth: And for excise admit them to have power to charge any commodity with one
penny, and it cannot be denied them, to have power to tax every one, for every
drop of drink, or morsel of m^^t, or what he buys, or sels, to the full,
double, or treble value thereof. If they have power to repeal one Act of
Parliament, they have authority to repeal all the statutes in England: And if
they have authority to impose upon the people one Law, their power therein is
without limitation. They may enforce upon the Subject what Laws they please;
and consequently their power claimed, as highly arbitrary, and tyrannical, as
any have, or can claim to have.

And having made this claim: Then for their security therein, they tell us,
that in all matters, both for soul and body, we have no The Declaration in
Answer to the Scots papers fo. 63.
Judge upon earth but themselves; and denounce Votes of both Houses. 16 Martii.
1641.
every one an enemy to this new State, who shall deny that to be the Law, which
they declare Law.

Yet even now the people are told, that they are, and shall be governed by the
known Law, because say they, Judges are appointed, and suites of Law admitted.

Answer.

There was never any Tyrant, but in some sort permitted a known Law among his
vassals, else the slaves could not acquire estates, and so confiscations to the
Tyrant, would prove inconsiderable.

By the Laws of England, a villain has power to buy and purchase, and is
therein protected against all persons, his Lord excepted; But the Lord may
seize his estate, Littleton. fo.
beat, or strike his villain at his pleasure. The Turk (who has been
accounted the greatest tyrant) his vassals acquire vast fortunes, and are by a
Law protected therein against their fellow slaves. But the Turk (at pleasure)
may not only seize their whole estates, but take their lives too. Even so it
is at present with the people of England, we have liberty to buy and sell, and
acquire wealth; we are (as an English villain or Turkish slave) sometimes
(that is, when the Members please, else not) protected therein against one
another. But when the Members think fit, every man's estate, his fortune, his
person, his life, all is at their will and doom: That Law permitted amongst
the people, reaches not so high as the Members: when they think fit, their
will is the Law; so that our slavery for the present, is worse then was the
condition of an English villain, at the beginning of this Parliament. It is as
bad, nay worse then that under the Turk, they have only one Tyrant, we seven
hundred; They one head over their whole body, we two bodies without a head.

And as it is with us in Temporal affairs; the same it is in Spiritual
things too. The Members have de facto, abolished the Protestant Religion: And
(both in doctrine and discipline) force men's consciences, how absurd or
blasphemous soever it be, to submit to their resolutions: So that if the
question be asked, whether the scripture or the Church be Judge, or how a man
shall be informed of the truth: These Tyrants make answer, that neither
Scripture nor Church is Judge of controversies, but the two Houses. We must no
more search the Scriptures, but submit our selves, our souls, and bodies to the
Votes of the Major part of those two Houses, and thus are the people slaves.

CHAP. XIV. How the Subjects of England were brought unto this slavery.
IT is true, the people of England, for some time before this Parliament, were
grieved with illegal taxations, Monopolizing of Trades, and other things not
warranted by Law: And although there wants not means (besides a Parliament) to
redress any disorder arising in the Commonwealth, yet the cause of the
distempers may be such, as that, (without a Parliament) it would be difficult
to reform them: When the Judges are corrupt, as the Members alleged they were
in that case of Ship Money, when the Officers of State, or other persons of
power near the King, occasioned the mischief, as it was conceived in the
business of Monopolies, few (in the ordinary way of proceedings) dare inform,
or prosecute. Therefore in such cases a Parliament is necessary: The Members in
those things have freedom of speech. And the King having called His
Parliament, at the first meeting thereof, expressed Himself most sensible of
the disorders of the Kingdom, declared His desire to have a perfect
reformation; His resolution to govern according to the known Law: such as
were authors, or actors of the former distractions, he left them to legal
trial. And to complete the business, promised to concur with the two Houses,
in all things tending to reformation.

Thus the Parliament had a happy beginning: and for a good space of time, a
progress suitable. For, such as look upon the Statutes made this sitting,
shall find the work of reformation (even by the King Himself) perfectly
completed; That Judgment for Ship Money, the business of Monopolies, and all
other visible, and Known greivances were taken away: And to prevent the like
danger, for aftertimes, the King passed an Act, for calling a Parliament every
third year. So that, to the obtaining of the greatest happiness, that any
people in the world can desire, there wanted nothing, but to punish the authors
of the former mischief, and then for the present, a dissolution of the
Parliament. Then might every one (by observing a known Law) have promised to
himself security of his person, and challenged property in his estate.

But the sequel shows that it was not the public good, it was their own
private, the government and wealth of the whole Nation, the Members aimed at.

And as a foundation to it, the plot was to make this Parliament perpetual.
But at the first (it not being thought fit to discover their intention therein)
it was pretended that the affairs of the Kingdom, required instant supplies
of great sums of money, which as they pretended, could not be obtained, but
by Loan: And that the people (fearing a sudden dissolution of the
Parliament) would not lend; A Bill therefore is cunningly formed (not at all
mentioning for what time the Parliament should sit) in general words, enacting
that it shall not be dissolved, nor adjourned, but with the assent of the two
Houses: And the King being informed by the hatchers of that plot, that this Act
was for no other end but to procure the Loan of money for the public good,
passed the Bill.

The Members having obtained this Act, and conceiving that thereby the King
could not dissolve the Parliament without their consent, then they began their
intended work: From thence nothing is heard of, in the old Parliamentary way.
The prosecution of the Judges in that heavy charge of corruption is, not only
set aside, but some of them (formerly accused to be such high malefactors as to
have subverted the known Law) are received into the greatest Trevor Baron of
Law.
favor, as persons most proper to usher in the arbitrary power of the Members.

Then are the people amused with fears and jealousies, by printed pamphlets,
they are grossly abused by being told that the King intended to subvert the Law;
and govern by His arbitrary power. To abolish the Protestant Religion, and to
introduce Popery: The Kingdom therefore (it was resolved) must be put into a
posture of defense: The Militia must be taken out of the Kings hands, and
settled in the Members. And accordingly by their command, the Kings subjects are
mustered, arrayed, and put into a readiness for War: they are instructed and
prepared, to take upon them any enterprise the Members shall direct. The
Fortes, the Navy, the Arms, Ammunition, and Revenues of the Crown, are taken
to the use of the Members.

Thus having prepared, and strengthened themselves, the next thing was further
to disinable the King to make resistance: It is therefore falsely and
maliciously declared to the people, that it is against the liberty of the
Subject (for any cause whatsoever, unless upon an actual invasion) to be
forced (by the Kings command) out of their own County. So that by this
doctrine, in case of a foreign Invasion, the enemy must be landed, he must
have footing in the Kingdom, before the people may be gathered together by the
King to make defense: But in case of Rebellion (the business in hand) if the
Rebels once get a formed body, too strong for any one County, the business is
done: They may, if this be true doctrine, undoubtedly conquer (County after
County) the whole Kingdom.

These things being done, it was then conceived opportunely and safe enough, to
publish and declare their intent. Then without the King, they arrogate the name
of the Parliament of England, take upon them to be the Supreme Court of
Justice, to make Laws, and in a word a power arbitrary.

So that the Members have (as an emprick by killing his patient, with improper
medicines cures his disease) reformed this Commonwealth; under pretense to
restore the known Law. The Law it self is by them totally subverted: And that
which is still more grievous, the people were made voluntary instruments of
this tragedy, whilst they conceived they fought in defense of the Law, and
their own Liberties, they were therein their own executioners. They have
embrued their hands in the blood of their fellow Subjects, and by their
victory, have plunged themselves into the debts of slavery.

But these things being done in the name of a Parliament (with some persons)
they still carry the face of Justice; although nothing ever was, or can be,
more pernicious to King and people.

Ket, Cade, Wat Tyler, and the like, in their insurrections, pretended
reformation; To remove bad Counselors from the King: To restore the people to
their Liberties, and to set up the Law, they protested, were the things they
aimed at. Now admit, their intention had been to reform, yet their proceedings
must necessarily destroy both Law and Government. Suppose Ket had been asked,
who should judge what persons had broken the Law, who were bad Councillors,
who should nominate the Officers of State, and the like? Ket would have
answered, that he, who reformes, must judge of the reformation. Therefore, none
but Ket should judge of these things, which had been no less, then to have
arrogated an Arbitrary power, and to enslave the people. And if so in Kets
case, It is the same, when any persons (what ever their quality or number be)
for it is the Authority and Commission, which the Law looks upon, to justify
the fact, not the dignity or number of the persons acting: And as those things
alter not the nature of the crime, so the consequence thereof to the people is
all one. They are as much, and more damnified by an unlawful act committed by
a Lord, as by a peasant, by a thousand, as by one single person.

Then for the Members proceedings; Their assuming power to judge the Law, to
exclude the King from His Negative voice in Parliament, taking upon them,
Authority to make Laws, and the like, are in themselves as unlawful, as the
foresaid acts of Ket, etc. The Members have no more Commission for this, then
Ket had for that: And the consequence thereupon to the people, is one and the
same.

Suppose a single person to have conquered the Kingdom, And thereupon to
assume an Arbitrary power. The lives, estates, and fortunes of the people were
at his command; And so they now be at the will of the Members. And thus the
Subjects were enslaved.

CHAP. XV. The way how to restore the people to their former Liberties.
WHen the Physician has discovered the nature of his sick patients disease,
(and not before) he knows what medicine to apply for the cure: Which holds
with a Commonwealth fallen into disorder. And for England, the cause of its
grief is apparent: It is rather out of joint, then sick of a disease: Our
misery is occasioned, (as before appears) only by setting aside the King. For,
by that, the Sovereign power of Government, the Authority to make Laws, and
the power to judge the Law, are wrested out of their proper places, and drawn
into one hand. The Members by excluding the King, have usurped all these, so
that, there is no other power or rule to guide their actions, but their own
will. But whilst the King held His right, the power of Government was His, the
Authority to make Laws, was in Him, and the two Houses jointly, and to declare
the Law in the Judges; whereby every one was limited within His own bounds, and
so avoid all Arbitrary power.

Thus for the cause of our grief; Then for the cure, when any limb of a man is
out of joint, it so much distempers every part, as that (if not timely
prevented) the whole body is in danger to perish: And as no medecin, without
putting it into joint again, will ease the pain; so by setting straight that
joint at once, it is a perfect cure to the whole body.

Now by setting aside the King, the disorder in our Commonwealth, is no less
then an absolute subversion both of Law and Government: The people are thereby
totally enslaved, and this incurable, but by restoring the King again. For, so
long as the Members exclude the King, so long the aforesaid authorites are
usurped by them, and so a power Arbitrary. For example: If the Members condemn
an innocent man to death: And for a fact (if guilty) not punishable by Law. The
Members having power (without appeal) both to determine the fact, and to
declare the Law upon that fact: And those Members having Judged him to dye, and
to forfeit his Estate unto themselves; This innocent man (all the world must
confess) is without remedy; he is hopeless without the mercy of those, who
gain by his destruction. But the King being restored, the foresaid Authorities
are returned into their proper places, and again divided into several hands:
instantly from thence, every Court, Assembly, and person, not only enjoyes its
own Authority, but is limited within its own bounds; no man then is permitted
to be both Judge and Party; he ought not by our Law to give sentence of death,
if by that Sentence the Judge gave the fortune of the man condemned.

Thus for the Medicine: In the next place it is considerable who shall apply
it. And for that, as the people were the immediate instruments of their own
thraldom, they ought to be the principal Agents of their own freedom; Their
motives to return to their obedience, are far greater, then they had to
recede from it.

Was any heretofore hindered to exercise his own opinions in matters of
Religion? Was his person imprisoned, taxes and impositions laid upon him, not
warranted by the Law? If so, his condition is now far worse. First, for
Religion; The sense of those Members we now find is made the rule of every
man's faith; he is bound to change his Religion, as the Major part of the Houses
shall Vote. The Ecclesiastical Judges heretofore, were limited in their
punishments. The Members are boundless. And as they are not guided, either for
Doctrine or Discipline, but by their own will: So in their punishments, they
are a large too: Shall the Members Vote, that no man shall use the word
Trinity, or call upon our Savior by the name of Jesus, or what else soever it
be? The punishment upon those breaking that Law, may be loss of all his
Estate, or death, if the Members please. Then for imprisoments; formerly the
Judges had power (by whose warrant or command soever committed) as the cause
required, to bail, or set him at liberty. But now once committed by the
Members, the cause is not examinable; unless released by them who committed
him (without redemption or examination) in the gaol he must starve and perish.

And for taxes and impositions, it is true, we have heard of Loans and
Benevolences, and we know the business of Ship Money. But the people are now
taxed by Assessements, Excize, and otherwise at pleasure. Peradventure the
Excize now laid upon London, exceeds not 20000. l. a week, but by the same Law,
that such a sum is imposed, it may be multiplied to a Million a day. If one
County be assessed at 1000. l. a month, it may be raised to 10000. l. a week.
And as these are new ways to tax the people: The Members by the same rule
every day, may devise other new ways to burden them. And doubtless he, who
has his Estate taken from him by Assessements, or Excize, is left as little to
feed himself and family, as if it were taken by way of Ship Money, Loan, or
Benevolence: Nor is any man's hunger satisfied, his thirst quenched, or his
children clothed, by being told that this is done by the representative body of
the whole Kingdom. But on the other side, it is apparent, that the people are
hereby generally impoverished, and the Members in pomp, glory, and wealth,
advanced far beyond their ranks and fortunes.

We had a Star Chamber, and a High Commission, the Judges whereof, sometimes
imposed exorbitant punishments. But we have now the Members (styled a
Parliament) who have not only accumulated unto themselves, the power of those
Courts, and of all other Courts of Justice in the Kingdom, but have therein
assumed an unlimited power, when they think fit to censure, whether it be for a
crime, or virtue, disobedience, or obedience of the Law. The punishment, if
they please, is either pecuniary, corporal brands of infamy, confiscations of
their whole estate, or death it self. And in all this (which by the Laws of
England is most horrid) the Members are both Judge and Party, the profits of
those forfeitures redound unto themselves.

But the new mercenary Preachers, and other incendiaries appointed for that
purpose, blaze those Westminster-men to be persons full of grace and mercy;
They would make the people believe they are such as drive only at the
public, not looking upon their own particulars. And herein make special use
of the putting down of the Court of Wards. The truth whereof, is but thus. By
the Laws of England, every one, who holds Lands by Knights service, (whether
of the King, or of his fellow Subject) and dies, his heir within age of 21
years, the King, or that Lord of whom it is held, has the profits of such
Lands, until his full age, and the government and marriage of his person.
Which being an interest due unto his Lord, by reason of the tenure of his Land,
is as justly his, as the rent of a Tenant for years, belongs to his Landlord.
Now this right, both of King and Subject, these Westminster-men take upon them
to dispose, and call it their own act of grace: Much like unto their taking
from their King, and His Loyal Subjects their whole Estates, and bounteously
dividing it amongst themselves.

But admit they had had Authority (which they have not the least color to
challenge) to alter the Law in this case of tenures: yet the people are not by
this alteration any whit bettered. It is true, formerly the eldest son, or the
heir of some particular persons were (during their minorities) subject to
wardships: But under the Tyranny of these men, and by the doctrine they preach,
the King and all the people are hereditary slaves. Themselves, all their
Children, their Childrens Children, and posterities for ever, in person,
estate, and fortune, (whether owner, or not owner of Land, and however it is
held, even to the worlds end) are at all times at their absolute command.
Suppose the King should quit His right of tenures, and then by other
impositions, wrest from the people 40 times the value thereof: these Members
would judge that to be no act of bounty: And if so in the Kings case, much
worse it is in them. For, they neither have power in the one, nor in the other.
They cannot acquit any one of Wardship, nor lawfully tax the people one penny.

And suitable to this, we hea^ of another bounty intended. The people (say
they) must be eased of free quarter; wherein the Countrymen are dealt with, as
sometime it happens to an innocent man upon the rack, who (to gain a little
respite from the present torment) falsely accuses himself of a crime, for
which he is put to death; or like unto the carriage of a sturdy bold theif
(whereof these times afford examples enough) who tells the owner of a horse,
that unless he may have the value of it, he will steal the horse; but having
got the money, takes the horse too. So here the people are pestered with
quartering of Soldiers, and are so barbarously used by these inhumane
wretches; as that the poor men are prepared to part with their whole fortunes,
to be eased of that present Tyranny. Hereupon a new, and an illegal tax of
about 20000. l. the week is laid upon them; which done, although it a mounts
to twice treble the charge of quartering, still the Soldiers must be bilited:
And their insolency hereby, rather increased then abated. These, and such like,
are all the favors we can expect to have, during the time of the reign of
these Westminster-men.

To be short, they have got possession of the wealth of the whole Nation, and
have usurped an Arbitrary power. So that (did they incline thereunto) they
cannot do unto the people any considerable favor, or act of grace. For, so
long as they abide to these their own principles, of which Arbitrary power
they cannot settle in any man, a permanent estate, interest, power, or
authority, wherein the City of London may be a pattern to the whole Nation. We
see these Westminster-men sometimes judge it fit, that the Citizens should
enjoy all their liberties and privileges: Presently upon that (even by the
same hand) they are not permitted so much freedom, as (from the Lord Major, to
the petty Constable) to elect one officer. But those Officers are placed and
displaced at the pleasure of these Members: To day is granted to them their
own Militia, to morrow (by the same Authority) they are judged persons of so
base a condition, as not capable of so great a power: And not long after that,
courted to accept of it again. They are now exalted to the heavens, and
instantly thereupon (even by the same mouths, and as it were with the same
breath) impeached of Treason. And this is every man's condition. Suppose one, by
these Members to be condemned to death, is by them afterward pardoned: The
next hour, even by ^^ese who pardoned, he may be put to death. An estate of
Land, an Office, or other power, or authority is by these men given for life,
or in fee, be it as strong and full, as words can express it; neither that, nor
any other act of these Tyrants binds one minute longer then they please. And
all this consonant to these their new principles; for these men tell us their
will is the Law, we have no other Judge upon earth, either in soul or body, say
they, but themselves.

Far otherwise it was with the people of this Nation under the King. The King
neither has, nor claims power to tax the people, or impose upon their
estates, but as the known Law permits: When the King has once made His grant,
either of Land, Office, Power, or Authority, He is concluded; He cannot recall
it, or take to himself any thing in Lieu thereof. Therefore shall the King quit
His tenants of the foresaid tenures, and put down the Court of Wards? It may
properly be said an Act of grace and bounty: And so it is in all other things
granted by Him, He is not Judge in His own case, nor has a power Arbitrary;
His Authority and interest, is regulated by a known Law.

Thus appears the different condition of the people, between that in the worst
of times under the Kings Government; and what they are now reduced unto, under
the men at Westminster. So that, if the people had only exchanged that
Government, for this, it had been miserable enough. Therefore considering the
blood which has been spilt herein, most irksome it must be to every honest
soul to think thereof.

But still the peoples case is worse, the former grievances under the King, was
no cause of their defection. For, before this War began, they were reformed,
Ship Money and all grievances were taken away.

In a word, the people had no other motive to draw their sword against their
Sovereign, but thus: They were by these incendiaries falsely told that the
King meant not what he said, nor intended to keep those Laws he had made. But
now every person thus seduced, by his own woeful experience finds, that it was
these persons at Westminster, who meant contrary to what they pretended. If he
look for the Protestant Religion, freedom of conscience, the Laws of the
Realm, Liberty of his person, or property in his estate, due unto (...)
subject, not one of them is to be found. But instead thereof he finds himself
(poor man) catched in the Members net, His conscience, His life, His Liberty,
His estate, and fortune is now at their arbitrary power.

These things considered, he that thinks either of this world, or of the world
to come, upon his soul, or body, if he love himself, or his Country, if he
fear God, or honor the King, must instantly make one in this work to restore
that King to his Throne.

Thus for the persons who ought to apply the medicine, the next is to know how
it shall be done.

And for that, although considering the calamities this Nation has suffered,
in being brought to bondage: To redeem it again may seem difficult, yet upon
consideration had thereupon, it appears to be a thing easily effected.

That of the Members in excluding the King, opposed the Law: Therefore could
not be done but by War, and force. But this of restoring the King, pursues the
Law, and so proclaims peace: And as the Members could not have usurped this
power, but by War, so they cannot hold it but by force. Instantly upon the Law
having its free passage, their Kingdom is at an end; And to every War is
absolutely necessary the peoples personal assistance: and money to pay the
Soldiers. If either of these fail, the War is ended: And obvious it is, that
the persons at Westminster, can have neither of them, but from those, whom by
the same persons have been thus brought to thraldom.

So that to perfect all this work, if every one would do his duty, there would
be no danger of bloodshed: Then there needed no weapons, not doing, would do
the work; Therefore whether thou be in arms or not, obey thy King
according to the Law, make thy payments to whom by Law they are due, pay no
Excise, Loanes, Benevolences, Assessements, Tax, Tollage, or other new
impositions by them laid upon thee. And if these Usurpers require these things,
as due by Law: Tell them, it is contrary to their own doctrine. Wish them to
read the Petition of right, whereby the Lords and Commons in Parliament
declared; That the people ought not to be Taxed with payments of money, but by
Act of Parliament; that is, by the King, the Lords House, and the Commons
jointly concurring: Put them in mind of their Declarations this Parliament,
wherein they call it pernicious The Commons House Remonstrance of the state of
the Kingdom. 15. Dece. 1642.
^^mpt, to go about to Tax the people by way of Excise: That it is against the
liberty of the Subject to be charged with payments of money, otherwise then the
known Law does warrant; that nothing is more horrid then to have Soldiers Idem.
billited, to force upon the people voluntary contributions, or to have new
Idem.
Oaths put upon them. Yet these, and thousand more exactions laid upon thee,
against Magna Charta, the Petition of right, and the known Law, thou may
charge them with. And needs no other Judge to condemn them, but themselves,
out of their own mouths.

And further for thy encouragement herein, be assured, that by this
restoration of the King, not only the people of England obtain their
freedom, but instantly thereupon, ensues peace and unity throughout all the
Kings Dominions. For by that, the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
are again united: The people will then (with great joy and acclamation)
according to the foresaid just recognition of the Lords and Commons unto King
James, perform their duty, unto this our King Charles; And acknowledge Him
according to the foresaid Oath of Supremacy, their only Supreme Governor.

Upon the whole matter, so long as the people continue in this slavery, they
are not only their own wilful tormentors, but disobeyers of the Laws of God
and man. And by quitting themselves from bondage (which is at every instant in
their power to do) they perform their duty to both.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 8. lin. 11. read, or our. p. 10. l. 20. r. his advice. p. 12. l. 14. r.
never had. p. 15. l. 32. r. motives. p. 28. l. 34. r. we having. p. 30. l. ult.
r. without consent. p. 32. l. 26. blot the first and. p. 39. l. 28. r. denied.
p. 48. l. 29. r. the Law, and l. 31. r. can gain. p. 53. l. 9. r. have been.
p. 58. l. 4. r. I conceive. p. 67. l. 14. blot out the last that. p. 88. l. 11.
r. le Roy savisera. p. 98. l. 7. r. he could not. p. 116. l. 26. r. stern. p.
118. l. 31. r. of this. p. 121. l. 34. blot out and. p. 124. l. 12. r. one. p.
127. l. 2. r. left.


