A DIRECTORY FOR CHURCH GOVERNMENT AND ORDINATION OF MINISTERS, To be examined
against the next General Assembly.

EDINBURGH: Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
1647.

A DIRECTORY FOR CHURCH GOVERNMENT AND ORDINATION OF MINISTERS, To be examined
against the next GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

The Preface.
JEsus Christ upon whose shoulder the Government is, whose Name is called
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace; of the increase of whose Government and Peace there shall be no end,
who sits upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom to order it, and
establish it with Judgment and Justice, from henceforth even for ever: Having
all power given unto him in Heaven and Earth by the Father who raised him from
the dead, and set him at his own right hand, far above all Principality, and
Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come; and put all things under his feet,
and gave him to be the Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body,
the fullness of him that fills all in all; He being ascended up far above all
Heavens, that he might fill all things, received gifts for his Church, and gave
all Officers necessary for the edification of his Church, and perfecting of his
Saints.

Of the Church.
THere is one General Church visible held forth in the New Testament, unto
which General Church visible, the Ministry, Oracles, and Ordinances of the
New Testament, are given by Jesus Christ, for the gathering and perfecting of
the Saints in this life until his second coming.

Particular visible Churches, members of the General Church, are also held
forth in the New Testament: which particular Churches in the primitive times,
were made up of visible Saints, viz. of such as being of age, professed Faith
in Christ, and obedience unto Christ (according to the rules of Faith and Life
taught by him and his Apostles) and of their Children.

Of the Officers of the Church.
APostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, were extraordinary Officers in the
Church, and are ceased.

The Pastor is an ordinary and perpetual Officer in the Church; To whose
Office it belongs to pray for, and with his Flock; To read the Scripture
publicly in the Congregation, which is an holy Ordinance in Gods Church,
although there follow no immediate explication of what is read; To preach the
Word, to be instant in season, and out of season; To reprove, correct,
instruct, rebuke, exhort, convince, and comfort: One especial way of
discharging which work of Preaching, is, by a plain laying down the first
principles of the Oracles of God, which is commonly called Catechizing; to
administer the Sacraments; In the Name of God to bless the people; To take
care for the poor: And he has also a ruling power over the Flock as a Pastor.

In the Scripture we also find the name and title of Teacher, who is a
Minister of the Word, and has power of administration of the Sacraments and
Discipline, as well as the Pastor.

The Lord having given different gifts, and diverse exercises according to those
gifts in the Ministers of the Word, though these different gifts may meet in,
and accordingly be exercised by one and the same Minister: yet where there be
several Ministers in the same Congregation, they may be designed to several
employments, according to the different gifts wherein each of them does excel;
And he who does more excel in exposition of Scripture, in Teaching sound
Doctrine, and in convincing gainsayers, then he does in application, and is
accordingly employed therein, may be called a Teacher or Doctor. Nevertheless
where there is but one Minister in a particular Congregation, he is to perform
so far as he is able, the whole work of the Ministry.

A Teacher or Doctor, is of most excellent use in Schools and Universities, as
of old in the Schools of the Prophets, and at Jerusalem, where Gamaliel and
others taught as Doctors.

It is likewise agreeable to, and warranted by the Word of God, that some
others beside the Ministers of the Word, be Church Governors, to join with
the Ministers in the Government of the Church, which Officers, Reformed
Churches commonly call Elders.

These Elders ought to be such as are men of good understanding in matters of
Religion, sound in the faith, prudent, discreet, grave, and of unblameable
conversation.

Deacons also are distinct Officers in the Church: To whose Office it belongs
not to preach the Word, or administer the Sacraments, but to take special care
for the necessities of the poor, by collecting for, and distributing to them
with direction of the Eldership, that none amongst the people of God be
constrained to be beggars.

The Deacons must be wise, sober, grave, of honest report, and not greedy of
filthy lucre.

Of Church Government and the several sorts of Assemblies for the same.
CHrist has instituted a Government, and Governors Ecclesiastical in the
Church; And to that purpose the Apostles did immediately receive the keys from
the hand of Jesus Christ, and did use and exercise them in all the Churches of
the World, upon all occasions: And Christ has from time to time furnished some
in his Church, with gifts for Government, and with Commission to exercise the
same when called thereunto.

It is agreeable to, and warranted by the Word of God, that some others besides
the Ministers of the Word, be Church Governors, as was mentioned before.

It is lawful and agreeable to the Word of God, that the Church be governed by
several sorts of Assemblies. Which are Presbyteries and Synods, or Assemblies,
Congregationall, Classical, and Synodicall.

The Scripture does hold out a Presbytery in a Church; which Presbytery
consists of Ministers of the Word, and those other Church Officers who are to
join with the Ministers in the Government of the Church.

The Scripture does hold out another sort of Assemblies for the Government of
the Church, besides Classical and Congregationall, which we call Synodicall.

Of the power in Common of all these Assemblies, and the order to be observed
in them.
IT is lawful and agreeable to the Word of God, that the several Assemblies
before mentioned do convent and call before them any person within their
several bounds, whom the Ecclesiastical business which is before them shall
concern, either as a party, or a witness, or otherwise, and to examine them
according to the nature of the business. And that they do hear and determine
such causes and differences as shall orderly come before them, and accordingly
dispense Church censures.

It is most expedient that in these meetings, one whose Office is to labor in
the Word and Doctrine, do moderate in their proceedings, who is to vote as well
as the rest of the members; To begin and end every meeting with prayer; To
propose questions, gather the votes, pronounce the Resolves: But not to do any
act of Government, unless in and jointly with the Assembly whereof he is
Moderator.

All the members of these Assemblies respectively, are to attend on the
appointed days of their meetings, or to send the reason of their absence to
be judged by the Assembly where they ought to meet.

The final resolutions shall be by the Major part of the votes of those
members who are present.

Of Particular congregations.
IT is expedient that particular Congregations be fixed, both in their
Officers and members, which are to meet in the same Assembly ordinarily for
public Worship.

When their number is great, that they cannot conveniently meet in one place,
it is expedient that they be divided according to the respective bounds of
their dwellings into distinct and fixed Congregations, for the better
administration of such Ordinances as belong unto them, and the discharge of
mutual duties, wherein all, according to their several places and callings,
are to labor to promote what ever appertains to the power of Godliness and
credit of Religion, that the whole band in the full extent of it, may become
the Kingdom of the Lord and of his Christ.

Parochial Congregations in this Kingdom, consisting of Ministers and People,
who profess faith in Christ, and obedience unto Christ, according to the rules
of Faith and Life taught by Him and his Apostles, and join together in the
public Worship of Hearing, Praying, and administration of the Sacraments, are
Churches truly constituted.

If any Person or Persons in the Congregation, do not answer his or their
profession, but by open sin and wickedness cross and deny it: or if there be
a want of some Officers, or a sinful neglect of Officers in the due execution
of Discipline: yet this does not make that Congregation cease to be a Church:
but requires that there should be a supply of Officers which are wanting: and a
careful endeavor for the Reformation of the offending Person or Persons, and
of negligent Officers by just censures, according to the nature of the cause.

Communion and Membership in Congregations thus constituted, notwithstanding
the forementioned defects, is not unlawful. And to refuse or renounce
membership and Church Communion, or to separate from Church Communion with
Congregations thus constituted, as unlawful to be joined with, in regard of
their constitution, is not warranted by the Word of God.

Separation from a Church thus constituted, where the Government is lawful,
upon an opinion that it is unlawful, and that therefore all the godly are also
bound o separate from all such Churches so constituted and governed, and to
join themselves to another Church of another Constitution and Government, is
not warranted by the Word of God, but contrary to it.

To gather Churches into an independent form of Government out of Churches of
a Presbyteriall form of Government, upon an opinion that the Presbyteriall
Government is unlawful, is not lawful or warranted by the Word of God; Nor is
it lawful for any member of a Parochial Congregation, if the Ordinances be
there administered in purity, to go and seek them elsewhere ordinarily.

Of ordinances in a particular Congregation.
ORdinances in a particular Congregation, are Prayer, Thanksgiving, singing of
Psalms, reading of the Word, Preaching and Catechizing, administering the
Sacraments, blessing the People in the Name of God, and collection for the
Poor. As for Discipline, we refer our selves to what we have elsewhere
expressed.

Of the Officers of a particular Congregation.
IN the Congregation there must be some who are set apart to bear Office: One
at the least to labor in the Word and Doctrine, and to rule: And let others
be chosen ruling Elders to join with him in Government.

When any ruling Elder is to be chosen, where an Eldership is constituted, let
it be done by them, with the consent and approbation of the people of that
Congregation, and that not for a limited time: Yet the exercise of their Office
may be so ordered by the Eldership, as that their civil employments be least
hindered thereby.

Where there are many ruling Officers in a particular Congregation, let some of
them more especially attend the inspection of one part, some of another, as may
be most convenient; and let them at fit times visit the several Families for
their spiritual good.

Let there be also Deacons to take special care for the relief of the poor,
who are likewise to be chosen by the Eldership, with the consent of the people
of that Congregation; and the continuance of them in that Office is to be
determined by the Eldership, with the consent of the Congregation, so as may
least hinder their civil employment.

These Officers are to meet together at convenient and set times for the well
ordering of the affairs of that Congregation, each according to his Office.

The number of Elders and Deacons in each Congregation, is to be proportioned
according to the condition of the Congregation.

Of Congregationall Elderships, or Assemblies for Governing in a particular
Congregation.
THE Congregationall Eldership consisting of the Minister, or Ministers, and
the other ruling Officers of that Congregation, has power as they shall see
just occasion to enquire into the knowledge and spiritual estate of any member
of the Congregation: To admonish and rebuke; To suspend from the Lords table;
though the person be not yet cast out of the Church. All which is agreeable to
the Word of God: Although the truth of conversion and regeneration be
necessary to every worthy communicant for his own comfort and benefit, yet
those only are to be by the Eldership excluded, or suspended from the Lords
Table, who are found by them to be ignorant or scandalous.

Where there are more fixed Ministers then one in a Congregation, it is
expedient, that they moderate by course in that Eldership.

Of Classical Assemblies.
WHen Congregations are divided and fixed, they need all mutual help one from
another, both in regard of their intrinsicall weakness, and mutual dependence:
as also in regard of Enemies from without.

The Scripture does hold forth, that many particular Congregations may be
under one Presbyteriall Government.

A Classical Presbytery is an Assembly made up of Ministers of the Word, and
other ruling Officers belonging unto several Neighboring Congregations, and
does ordinarily consist of all the Pastous and Teachers belonging those
several Congregations so associated, and of one of the other ruling Officers
at the least from every of these Congregations, to be sent by their respective
Presbyteries.

Let them meetionce every Month, or oftener, as occasion shall require, in such
place as they shall judge most convenient. And before they sit about other
business, let there be a Sermon or exposition of Scripture made by some
Minister of that Classis or Expectant, as they shall agree amongst themselves.

For the more orderly managing of such affairs as come before them, let there
be one Moderator chosen by the Classis at every meeting out of the Ministers
of the Word, who shall continue till the next meeting.

To the enabling them to perform any Classical act of Government or
Ordination, there shall be there present a major part at least of the
Ministers of the whole Classis.

It belongs unto Classical Presbyteries. To consider of, to debate and to
resolve according to Gods Word such cases of conscience, or other difficulties
in Doctrine, as are brought unto them out of their association, according as
they shall find needful for the good of the Churches.

To examine and censure according to the Word any erroneous Doctrines, which
have been either publicly or privately vented within their association, to the
corrupting of the judgments of men, and to endeavor the converting and
reducing of Recusants, or any others in Error or Schism.

To order all Ecclesiastical matters of common concernment within the bounds
of their association.

To take cognizance of causes omitted or neglected in particular Congregations,
and to receive appeals from them.

To dispense censures in cases within their cognizance, by Admonition,
Suspension, or Excommunication.

To admonish or further to censure scandalous Ministers whether in Life or
Doctrine, according to the nature of the offense, and that not only for such
offenses, for which any other Member of the Congregation shall incur any
censure of the Church (in which case he is to be censured by the Classis with
the like censure for the like offense) but likewise particularly for Simony,
entering into any Ministerial charge, without allowance of authority, false
Doctrine, affected lightness and vanity in Preaching, wilful neglect of
Preaching, or slight performance of it, wilful Non-residence from his Charge
without call or cause approved by the Classis, neglect of administration of the
Sacraments or other Ministerial duties required of him in the Directory of
Worship, depraving and speaking reproachfully against the wholesome orders by
authority settled in the Church, casting reproach upon the power of Godliness,
which he by his office ought chiefly to promote. Yet so as that no Minister be
deposed, but by the resolution of a Synod.

To examine, ordain, and admit Ministers for the Congregations respectively
therein associated, according to the advice formerly sent up to the honorable
Houses of Parliament.

Of Synodicall Assemblies.
SYnodicall Assemblies do consist of Pastors, Teachers, Church Governors, and
other fit Persons (when it shall be deemed expedient) where they have a lawful
calling thereunto.

These Assemblies have Ecclesiastical power and authority to judge and
determine controversies of Faith and cases of Conscience according to the Word.

They may also lawfully excommunicate and dispense other Church censures.

Synodicall Assemblies are of several sorts, viz. Provincial, National,
Oecumenicall.

Of Provincial Assemblies.
LEt Provincial Assemblies generally be bounded according to the civil
division of the Kingdom, into Counties: and where any very great Counties are
divided within themselves, let the Provincial Assemblies follow these
divisions, as in the Ridings of Yorkshire.

Provincial Assemblies consist of Delegats sent from Several Classes within
that Province; whose number shall exceed the number of any one Classical
Presbytery within that Province: And to that end, there shall be at the least
two Ministers, and two ruling Elders out of every Classis, and where it shall
appear necessary to increase the number, let it not exceed six of each from any
one Classis.

Let these Assemblies meet twice every year: And for enabling them unto any act
of Government, let there be a major part at least of the Ministers delegated
from the several Classes.

Of the National Assembly.
THe National Assembly consists of Ministers and Ruling Elders delegated from
each Provincial Assembly. The number of which delegats shall be three
Ministers and three Ruling Elders out of every Province, and five Learned and
Godly Persons from each University.

Let this Assembly meet once every year, and oftener if there shall be cause.

The first time to be appointed by the Honorable Houses of Parliament.

Of the subordination of these Assemblies.
IT is lawful and agreeable to the Word of God, that there be a subordination
of Congregationall, Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies for the
Government of the Church, that so appeals may be made from the inferior to
the superior respectively.

The Provincial and National Assemblies, are to have the same power in all
points of Government and censures, brought before them within their several
bounds respectively, as is before expressed to belong to Classical
Presbyteries within their several associations.

The DIRECTORY for Church censures.
CHurch censures and Discipline, for judging and removing of offenses, being of
great use and necessity in the Church, that the Name of God, by reason of
ungodly and wicked persons living in the Church be not blasphemed, nor his
wrath provoked against his people; that the Godly be not leavened with, but
preserved from the contagion, and stricken with fear; and that the sinners who
are to be censured, may be ashamed, to the destruction of the flesh, and saving
of the Spirit in the day of the Lord Jesus; We judge this course of proceeding
therein to be requisite.

The order of proceeding with offenders who before excommunication manifest
Repentance.
WHen the offense is private, the order of admonition prescribed by our Lord,
Mat. 18.15. is in all wisdom and love to be observed, that the offender may
either be recovered by Repentance; Or, if he add obstinacy or contempt to his
fault, he may be cut off by Excommunication.

If the sin be publicly scandalous, and the sinner being examined, be
judged to have the signs of unfeigned Repentance, and nothing justly objected
against it, when made known to the people, let him be admitted to public
confession of his sin, and manifestation of his Repentance before the
Congregation.

When the penitent is brought before the Congregation, the Minister is to
declare his sin, whereby he has provoked Gods wrath and offended his
People, his confession of it, and profession of unfeigned Repentance for it,
and of his resolution (through the strength of Christ) to sin no more, and
his desire of their Prayers for mercy, and grace to be kept from falling
again into that or any the like sin: Of all which the penitent also is to
make a full and free expression, according to his ability.

Which being done, the Minister, after prayer to God for the penitent, is to
admonish him to walk circumspectly, and the people to make a right use of his
fall, and rising again; And so, to declare that the Congregation rests
satisfied.

The order of proceeding to Excommunication.
EXcommunication being a shutting out of a Person from the Communion of the
Church (and therefore the greatest and last censure of the Church) ought not to
be inflicted without great and mature deliberation, nor till all other good
means have been assayed.

Such errors as subvert the Faith, or any other errors which overthrow the
power of Godliness, if the party who holds them, spread them, seeking to draw
others after him; and such sins in practice, as cause the Name and Truth of
God to be blasphemed, and cannot stand with the power of Godliness; and such
practices as in their own nature manifestly subvert that Order, Unity, and
Peace, which Christ has established in his Church; Those being publicly
known, to the just scandal of the Church, the sentence of Excommunication
shall proceed according to the Directory.

But the Persons who hold other errors in judgment about points wherein
Learned and Godly men possibly may, or do differ, and which subvert not the
Faith, nor are destructive to Godliness; Or that be guilty of such sins of
infirmity, as are commonly found in the Children of God; Or, being otherwise
sound in the Faith and holy in Life (and so not falling under censure by the
former Rules) endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace,
and do yet out of Conscience not come up to the observation of all those Rules,
which are or shall be established by Authority for regulating the outward
Worship of God, and Government of his Church, we do not decerne to be such
against whom the sentence of Excommunication for these causes should be
denounced.

When the sin becomes public and justly scandalous, the offender is to be
dealt with by the Eldership, to bring him to Repentance, and to such a
manifestation thereof, as that his Repentance may be public as the scandal;
But if he remain obstinate, he is at last to be Excommunicated, and in the
mean time to be suspended from the Lords Supper.

And whereas there be diverse and various judgments touching the power of
Excommunication and the proper subject thereof, we conceive that for clearing
of difficulties, avoiding of offenses, preservation of Peace and such like,
these following Directions are fit to be observed.

In the great and difficult cases of Excommunication, whether concerning
Doctrine or conversation, the Classical Presbytery upon the knowledge thereof,
may examine the person, consider the nature of the offense, with the
aggravations thereof: and as they shall see just cause, may declare and decerne
that he is to be excommunicated, which shall be done by the Eldership of that
Congregation whereof he is a member, with the consent of the Congregation, in
this or the like manner.

As there shall be cause, several public admonitions shall be given to the
offender (if he appear) and prayers made for him.

When the offense is so heinous that it cries to Heaven for vengeance, wastes
the conscience, and is generally scandalous, the censures of the Church may
proceed with more expedition.

In the admonitons, let the fact be charged upon the offender, with the clear
evidence of his guilt thereof; Then, let the nature of his sin, the
particular aggravations of it, the punishments and curses threatened against it,
the danger of impenitency, especially after such means used, the woeful
condition of them cast out from the favor of God and communion of the Saints,
the great mercy of God in Christ to the penitent, how ready and willing Christ
is to forgive, and the Church to accept him upon his serious repentance; Let
these, or the like particulars be urged upon him, out of some suitable places of
the holy Scriptures.

The same particulars may be mentioned in Prayer, wherein the Lord is to be
entreated to bless this admonition to him, and to affect his heart with the
consideration of these things, thereby to bring him unto true Repentance.

If upon the last admonition and Prayer there be no evidence nor sign of his
Repentance, let the dreadful sentence of Excommunication be pronounced, with
calling upon the name of God, in these or the like expressions.

Speak this in the third Person, if the party be absent.
Whereas thou N. have been by sufficient proof convicted of (here mention the
Sin) and, after due admonition and prayer remainest obstinate, without any
evidence or sign of true Repentance; Therefore, in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and before this Congregation, I pronounce and declare thee N.
Excommunicated, and shut out from communion of the Faithful. Let the prayer
accompanying Sentence to be this effect.

That God who has appointed this terrible Sentence for removing offenses, and
reducing of obstinate sinners, would be present with this his ordinance, to
make it effectual to all these holy ends, for which he has appointed it; that
this retaining of the offenders sin, and shutting him out of the Church, may
fill him with fear and shame, break his obstinate heart, and be a means to
destroy the flesh, and to recover him from the power of the devil, that his
Spirit may yet be saved; that others also may be stricken with fear, and not
dare to sin so presumptuously, and that all such corrupt leaven being purged
out of the Church (which is the house of God) Jesus Christ may delight to dwell
in the midst of them. After the denunciation of this Sentence the people are to
be warned, that they hold him to be cast out of the communion of the Church,
and to shun all communion with him. Nevertheless, Excomunication dissolveth
not the bonds of civil or natural relations, nor exempt from the duties
belonging to them.

This Sentence is likewise to be made known, Not only to that, but to any
other Classis or Congregation, as occasion shall require, by reason of his
abode or conversing with them.

The order of proceeding to Absolution.
IF after excommunication, the signs of Repentance appear in the
Excommunicated Person, such as godly sorrow for sin, as having thereby incurred
Gods heavy displeasure, occasioned grief to his brethren, and justly provoked
them to cast him out of their communion; together with a full purpose of heart
to turn from his sin unto God, and to reform what has been amiss in him;
with an humble desire of recovering his peace with God and his People, and to
be restored to the light of Gods countenance, and the communion of the Church;
He is to be brought before the Congregation, and there also to make free
confession of his sin with sorrow for it, to call upon God for mercy in
Christ, to seek to be restored to the communion of the Church; promising to God
new obedience and to them more holy and circumspect walking as becomes the
Gospel: He is to be pronounced in the name of Christ absolved and free from the
censures of the Church, and declared to have right to all the ordinances of
Christ, with praising of God for his Grace, and Prayer that he may be fully
accepted to his favor and hear joy and gladues, to this effect.

To Praise God who delights not in the death of a sinner, but that he may
repent and live, for blessing the ordinance of Excommunication, and making it
effectual by his Spirit to the recovering of this offender, To magnify the
mercy of God through Jesus Christ in pardoning and receiving to his favor, the
most grievous offenders, whenever they unsainedly repent and forsake their
sins.

To pray for assurance of mercy and forgiveness to this Penitent, and so to
bless his Ordinance of Absolution, that he may find himself loosed thereby,
and that the Lord would henceforth so uphold and strengthen him by his Spirit,
that being sound in the Faith, and holy in all manner of Conversation, God may
be honored, the Church edified, and himself saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus.

Then shall follow the sentence of Absolution, in these or the like words.

Whereas thou N. have for thy sin been shut out from the Communion of the
Faithful, and have now manifested thy Repentance, wherein the Church rests
satisfied, In the Name of Jesus Christ, before this Congregation, I pronounce
and declare thee absolved from the sentence of Excommunication formerly
denounced against thee, And do receive thee to the Communion of the Church, and
the free use of all the Ordinances of Christ, that thou may be partaker of
all his benefits to thy eternal salvation. After this Sentence of Absolution,
the Minister speaks to him as to a Brother, exhorting him to watch and pray,
or comforting him if there be need; the elders embrace him, and the whole
Congregation holds communion with him as one of their own.

Although it be the duty of Pastors and other ruling officers to use all
diligence and vigilance both by Doctrine and Discipline respectively for the
preventing and purging out such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, and scandals, as
tend to the detriment and disturbance of the Church: Yet because it may fall
out through the pride and stubbornness of offenders, that these means alone
will not be effectual to that purpose; It is therefore necessary, after all
this, to implore the aid of the Civil Magistrate, who ought to use his
coercive power for the suppressing of all such offenses, and vindicating the
discipline of the Church from contempt.

Of Ordination of Ministers.
BEcause no man ought to take upon him the office of a Minister of the Word
without a lawful Call, therefore, Ordination which is the solemn setting
apart of a person, unto some public Church office, is always to be continued
in the Church.

When he who is to be ordained Minister, has been first duly examined
touching his fitnes, both for life and Ministerial abilities, according to the
rules of the Apostle, by those who are to ordain him, and has been by them
approved, He is then to be ordained by imposition of hands and prayer with
fasting. But if any person be found unfit he is not to be ordanied.

It is agreeable to the word and very expedient, that such as are to be
ordained Ministers be designed to some particular Church, or other Ministerial
charge.

Ordination is the act of a Presbytery unto which the power of ordering the
whole work belongs; yet so as that the preaching Presbyters orderly associated
either in Cities, or in neighboring villages, are those to whom the imposition
of hands does appertain, for those Congregations within their bounds
respectively. And therefore it is very requisite that no single Congregation
which can conveniently associate, do assume to it self, all and sole power in
Ordination.

No Person or Persons may or ought to nominate, appoint, or choose any man to
be a Minister for a Congregation, who is not fit and able for that work: And
if any unfit man be nominated to the Classical Presbytery, they are to refuse
to admit him.

When any Minister is to be ordained for a particular Congregation, or
translated from one place to another, the people of that Congregation to which
he is to be ordained or admitted, shall have notice of it, and if they show
just cause of exception against him, he is not to be ordained or admitted. And
in the mean time till one be admitted, the Presbytery shall provide for the
supply of the Congregation.

The Congregation, if they conceive themselves wronged by any act of the
Presbytery, shall have liberty to appeal to the next Synod, which upon
hearing of the matter shall judge as the cause shall require.

The Directory for Ordination of Ministers.
IT being manifest by the word of God that no man ought to take upon him the
office of a Minister of the Gospel until he be lawfully called and ordained
thereunto, and that the work of Ordination is to be performed with all due
care, wisdom, gravity, and solemnity; we humbly tender these Directions as
requisite to be observed.





The Rules for examination are these.
1. That the party be dealt with in a Brotherly way, with mildness of spirit,
and with special respect to the gravitie, modesty, and quality of every one.
2. He shall be examined touching his skill in the Original tongues, and the
trial to be made by reading the Hebrew and Greek Testaments, and rendering some
portion of them into Latin; And if he be defective in them, enquiry shall be
made the more strictly after his other learning; And whether he has skill in
Logic and Phylosophie. 3. What Authors in Divinity he has read, and is best
acquainted with; And trial shall be made of his knowledge in the chief grounds
of Religion, and of his ability to defend the Orthodox Doctrine contained in
them, against all unsound and erroneous opinions, especially those of the
present age: of his skill in the sense and meaning of such places of Scripture
as shall be proposed to him, in cases of Conscience, in the Chronology of
Scripture, and the Ecclesiastical History. 4. If he has not preached in
public, with approbation of such as are able to judge, he shall at a competent
time assigned him, expound before the Presbytery such a place of Scripture as
shall be given him. 5. He shall also within a competent time, frame a discourse
in Latin upon such a Common place or Controversy in Divinity as shall be
assigned him, and exhibit to the Presbytery such Theses as express the sum
thereof, and maintain a Dispute upon them. 6. He shall Preach before the
People, the Presbytery or some of the Ministers of the Word appointed by them,
being present. 7. The proportion of his gifts in relation to the place unto
which he is called, shall be considered. 8. Beside the trial of his gifts in
Preaching, he shall undergo an examination in the premises two several days
or more, if the Presbytery shall judge it necessary. 9. And as for him that
has been formerly ordained a Minister, and is to be removed to another
charge, he shall bring a Testimonial of his Ordination, and of his abilities
and Conversation, whereupon his fitness for that place shall be tried by his
Preaching there, and (if it shall be judged necessary) by a further
examination of him.
several days, and to converse with the people, that they may have trial of
his gifts for their edification, and may have time and occasion to inquire
into, and the better to know his life and conversation.





who is now to be ordained concerning his faith in Christ Jesus, and his
persuasion of the Truth of the Reformed Religion according to the Scripture;
his sincere intentions and ends in desiring to enter into this Calling; his
diligence in Prayer, Reading, Meditation. Preaching, Ministering the
Sacraments, Discipline, and doing all other Ministerial duties toward his
charge; his zeal and faithfulness in maintaining the Truth of the Gospel and
Unity of the Church against Error and Schism; his care that himself and his
Family may be unblameable and examples to the flock; his willingness and
humility in meekness of Spirit to submit unto the admonitions of his Brethren
and Discipline of the Church, and his resolution to continue in his duty
against all troubles and persecution.





Thankfully acknowledging the great mercy of God, in sending Jesus Christ for
the Redemption of his People, and for his ascension to the right hand of the
Father, and thence pouring out his Spirit, and giving gifts to Men, Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and Teachers, for the gathering and building up
of his Church, and for fitting and inclining this man to this great Work; To
entreat him to fill him with his holy Spirit, to give him (whom in his Name we
thus set apart to this holy Service) to fulfill the Work of his Ministry in all
things, that he may both save himself and the People committed to his charge.
the Lord, according to their solemn promise made before. And so by prayer both
commencing Him and his Flock to the grace of God, After the singing of a
Psalm, let the Assembly be dismissed with a Blessing.

England, which we hold for substance to be valide, and not to be disclaimed by
any who have received it; Then there being a cautious proceeding in matter of
examination, let him be admitted without any new Ordination.

Scotland, or in any other Reformed Church, be designed to a Congregation in
England, he is to bring from that Church to the Presbytery here, within which
that Congregation is, a sufficient Testimonial of his Ordination, of his life
and conversation while he lived with them, and of the causes of his removeall,
And to undergo such a trial of his fitness and sufficiency; And to have the
same course held with him in other particulars, as is set down in the rule
immediately going before touching examination and admission.



to it, by any of the Presbytery, or any appertaining to any of them, upon
what pretense soever.

Thus far the ordinary rules and course of Ordination in the ordinary way. That
which concerns the extraordinary way, requisite to be now practiced, follows.

London, be designed by public authority; who being associated may ordain
Ministers for the City, and the Vicinity, keeping as near to the ordinary rules
forementioned as possibly they may. And let this association be for no other
intent or purpose, but only for the work of Ordination.



London, or some others in the Countries.



Cornelius Burges Prolocutor, pro tempore. Henry Roborough, Scrib. Adoniram
Byfield Scrib.


FINIS.

