(...) A DISCOVRSE OF ETERNITY, Collected and Composed for the Common good.

Being necessary for all seasons, but especially for this time of calamity and
destruction.

The sinners in Zion are afraid, a fear is come upon the Hypocrites: who
amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with
the everlasting burnings?

Esaias. 33.4. He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life, and he that
obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Ioh. 3.36. Printed at London by George Miller, for Christopher Meredith, at
the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

To the Christian Reader
IF any man would know the Patron of this discourse, let him understand that it
belongs to Every body. For there is not a man under heaven, be he King or
Subject, Noble or Ignoble, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or Free, but lives
unavoidably under the law of Death, and within the Pale of Eternity. Now as all
men are equally enrolled into this book of Eternity, so must they of
consequence be equally interessed in this discourse. Therefore I commend these
short Meditations of a long Eternity for the favor of protection (as in right
they appertain) to Every body. But will every one countenance them with a
friendly welcome? Certainly, such entertainment may rather be wished then hoped
for. This Eternity (whereof I treat) finds, for the most part, but slender
countenance, and cold respect amongst the sons of men. For where is the man of
so settled and well composed temper, that can fix and terminate his thoughts
upon that everlasting state which abides him in the life to come? That can
orderly frame, and readily dispose his heart to search into it, and his tongue
to discourse of it, and his will to affect it? I doubt not but flashes of
Eternity, and transient thoughts thereof do often swim in the brain, and
straggle about the heart of a sensual worldling; but there they lodge not,
they take not up their rest. The covetous man soon strangles them in his money
bags, the drunkard drowns them in his fulcups, the Epicure swallows them with
his dainty and superfluous fare, every man in his way strives to keep that
from his heart here, which he cannot possibly deliver his soul from hereafter,
his endless Eternity. Thus are we unhappily ingenious to deceive our selves,
witty to invent new ways, to put off the melancholy consideration of the evil
day. We plod daily onward toward our long home, but we think not of any
reckonings till we come to our journeyes end: we fear not the pit, till we be
irrecoverably plunged into it, we never know the true worth of time, nor price
to the desert, our golden hours, until they be everlastingly lost and gone;
and then, alas, those precious days which we have prodigally expended in the
lusts of our flesh, and vanity of our eye, we shall infinitely desire to
redeem, (were it possible) even with tears of blood. Oh then whosoever thou
art, examine with due care the state of thy soul: if thy lust be thy life, and
thy sensuality thy joy, then gull not thy soul with hope of pardon. Imagine not
to find two heavens, one upon earth, another above it, assure thy self, though
thou make with the Eagle thy nest on high, and seat thy habitation as it were
in the clouds, yet thy highness will not free thee from the stroke of death,
nor deliver thy soul from the nethermost hell. Now if there be any man so
unmercifull to his soul, that (notwithstanding all that is, or shall be said)
will desperately on in his cursed way; I say no more but this, He that is
filthy, let him be filthy still. The smart of this Eternity they that will not
believe shall feel.

The Contents of the first Book.
CHAP. 1. Containing an Introduction to the ensuing discourse. 2. Containing a
description of Eternity, with a brief declaration of the nature and condition
of it. 3. Expressing how all men do naturally believe this Eternity. 4.
Explaining how nature has represented and shadowed out Eternity to us in some
of the Creatures. 5. Containing a short digression, touching the Eternity of
the damned. 6. Wherein the question is answered, Wherefore a finite sin is
recompensed with an infinite punishment? Wherein also is further showed, that
the Severity of Gods Justice therein, does no way diminish the greatness of
his Mercy.
The Contents of the second Book.
CHAP. 1. Containing an Exhortation to Holiness, grounded upon the
consideration of Eternity. 2. Showing that there is no other way, nor possible
means to attain to the true Eternity, but by a confident affiance upon the
Mercy of God in Christ. 3. Certain conclusions drawn from the serious and
devout consideration of Eternity. 4. Directions for the better ordering of our
lives in the way to a happy Eternity.
By the word procure p. 76. l. 22. I re^ate to a reward of grace, not of debt.

THE FIRST CHAPTER, Containing an Introduction to the ensuing Discourse.
Fecisti nos ad te, domine, and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec requiescat in
te. Aug. lib. 1. Conf. cap. 1.
THere is nothing can fully satisfy the mind of Man but that which is above
man: all the treasures and riches under Heaven cannot make up a proportionable
object for the soul. For that which must terminate the desires of so excellent
and divine a nature, must be of a correspondent and like condition with it,
that is, infinite and immortal. Now no sublunary blessings extend thus far:
All worldly happiness, and earthly delights have their changes, and have their
death. They are short in their continuance, and uncomfortable in their end. For
they leave us, when we leave the world, and they nothing avail us in the day
of trial, when our bodies shall descend into the slimie valley, and our souls
return to God that gave them, then all the choicest comforts of this life
glide away from us as the stream, and the sun of our joy will set for ever.
Our beauty, wherein we have so much prided our selves, shall turn into
rottennes, our mirth into wormwood, our glory into dust. Now if this be the
condition, if such the state of our best pleasing contentations here below, how
undiscreetly improvident of our souls welfare should we be, to bound ou^
affections on the things of this world? what a madness beyond admiration, were
it in us, to trifle out our time, to waste and wear out our most precious
days in the vanities under the funne, as if God had placed us here on earth,
like the Leviathan in the Sea, to take our pastime in it, to ingulfe our souls
into the sensual pleasures of this life, as if we had neither hope nor
expectation of a life to come? what an intolerable stupiditie were it, for the
short fruition of a momentary content here, to plunge our selves for
everlastingnes into a sea, as it were, of fire and brimstone, where we shall
see no ^ankes, and feel no bottom? Me thinks the serious considera, son
hereof, should even cut the ^eart, and damp the mirth, and wound the very soul
of the most glorious and self pleasing worldling, whose life is nothing but a
change of recreations, to think upon his fading state, his flowing condition,
his declining joy, his dying life, and endless eternity, to see how all
things in him, and about him go speedily forward in a most sensible
declination, to behold with his eyes, how his goods, and his greatness, his
livings, and his life, and all the most precious delights which his sensual
heart enjoyes, are already winged as it were for their flight, and must shortly
bid him an everlasting farewell. And then what shall be his stay, where shall
be his shelter, what will remain to be done, but with that sad and disconsolate
Heathen, to shut up all in that hopeless and helpless lamentation, Anxius
vixi, dubious morior, heu, quo vado? I have squandered out my life in an
unfruitful way, I have lived unresolvedly, and die doubtfully, and now whither
away O my soul? woe is the and alas for evermore. And such is the bitter close,
and uncomfortable end of all those who go desperately on in the ways of their
hearts, and in the sight of their eyes, and make not God their strength; though
their excellency mount up to the Heavens (says Job) and their heads reach unto
the clouds, yet shall they perish for ever as their dung, and the eye which
has seen them shall do so no more, Job. 20.6. O then how deeply does it
concern us, to raise up our desires to things above, to six our hearts upon
the true rock, ^o draw our waters of comfort from the everliving fountain, to
trust so much more on God, by how much we have less on earth to trust to. Now
for our better encouragement to this duty, and to the end we may the more
easily unloose our affections from the imbracements of this world, it will not
be unworthy our labor to meditate a while upon the nature of that Eternity
which does unavoidably abide for us either in horror or happiness in the life
to come.

CHAP. II. Containing a description of Eternity, with a brief declaration of
the nature and condition of it.
Eternity is an infinite, endless, bottomless gulf, which no line can
faddome, no time can reach, no age can extend to, no tongue can express. It is
a duration always present, a being always in being, it is one perpetual day,
which shall never see an Evening. Infinite are the descriptions of the
Ancients, and diverse their expressions, touching this Eternity. The Egyptians
conceiving that God was eternal, and his duration and being to be properly
termed Eternity, represented the divine power by a Circle, which had neither
beginning nor end. And hence it was that the Ancient Romans erected Temples,
which they dedicated to their Gods in a circular figure. Thus Numa Pompilius
devoted a round Temple to the Majesty of Vesta. And Augustus Caesar the like
in honor of all the Gods. Pythagor as the better to express that God was
eternal, commanded his Scholars that so often as they accommodated themselves to
the worship of God, they should turn themselves round. The Turks every
morning ascend into an high Tower built in the fashion of the Egyptian
Pyramides, where they devoutly salute their God and Mahomet, crying with a loud
and roaring voice, Deus semper fuit, semperque erit, God always has been, and
ever will be. Mercurius Trismegistus, the most famous among the Philosophers,
represented God the true Eternity by an intellectual sphere, whose Center was
every where, but without any circumference, because he was the beginning and
end of all things, not bounded within any compass, nor terminated in any
limits. It was an usual custom among the Nasomons, an ancient people in
Africa, that they coveted to dye sitting, and would always be buried in the same
posture, sitting in Cells underneath the earth, and this they did to signify by
that unmovable gesture, that they should now sing a requiem from the business
of this troublesome world, and had now arrived at the haven of eternal
quietness. Thus we see how these miserable heathen, who had no other light but
nature, no other guide but those lame and corrupted principles, which were left
in them after the fall, did notwithstanding, according to their broken and weak
apprehensions, tire out themselves in the expression of Eternity, and how ever
they were unhappily ignorant in the ways of God in this life, yet they
earnestly labored to know what should become of themselves hereafter, and to
find out the state of the life to come: Oh how justly might I (were it not a
digression!) take up a lame^tation, and deplore the wretched condition of our
times, how short do we fall, even of the perfection of Heathens? how few are
there in comparison of the generallity of people, that cast forth so much as a
thought upon Eternity? we live here as if there were no life hereafter. Our
Earth is our Heaven, and our pleasures our Paradise, we crown our heads with
rose buds, we eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet, and say in our hearts,
no evil shall happen to us, and yet when we have done all, Omnes humanae
consolationes sunt desolationes, Hearts ease will not grow in this earthly
garden, the true rest will not be found, but in the true place, the eternal
Jerusalem, sound and entire contentment has no rooting in this world. For as
one has it excellently, Dispone and ordina omnia secundum tuum velle and
videre, and non invenies, nisi semper aliquid pati debere, aut sponte aut
invite, and ita crucem sem per invenies.
Dispose and marshall all things to thine own hearts desire, yet shall thou
(do what thou can) still meet with some cross or pressure in the way. Since
it is so, let us not then determinate our affections in these earthly things,
which are of no continuance, but let us send our hearts before us to those
heavenly mansions, where they shall be crowned with fullness of happiness, and
shall swim in streams of pleasures for evermore. Certainly there is no true
rest but that which is eternal, and the sweetest refreshment our souls can
find in this world, consists in the serious meditation of the joys to come,
in devoting our selves and all we have to his service, from whom we have them,
in trusting to him, and relying on him. For out of God the soul finds no
resting place to set her foot on, but every where storms and waves, death and
hell abide her: when we have improved our contentments to the very height of
our desires, when we have attained as much happiness as the world can give us,
yet then may we be cut off perchance in the midst of our days, when our
breasts are full of milk, and our bones full of marrow: or suppose we spinne
the thread of our life to a longer day, and God crown us here with the
blessings of his left hand, the comforts of this life, and length of years, yea
though all things favor our longer continuance in this world, yet in the end
time and age will ruin us. We shall bring our years to an end, like a tale
that is told, and shall vanish away like a shadow. Though we live many years,
and in them all we rejoice, yet in the end we shall remember the days of
darkness, says Solomon, and the time shall come that the eye which saw us,
shall see us no more. Soles occidere and redire possunt, nobis cum occidet
semel brevis lux, nox est perpetuo una dormienda. Cat.
The sun sets, and rises again, but we alas, when our glass is run, and
the short gleam of our summers day is spent, shall never return till our last
summons, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear it shall live, and come forth of their graves, they that have done good
to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection
of condemnation, both to Eternity, and then shall follow that large day, that
shall never shut in, that infinite continuation of time that shall never end,
that unlimited Eternity, which ever has been, and is, and will be the same for
ever, when the Sun shall no more yield her light by day, nor the Moon her
brightness by night, but God shall be our light, and the Lord our glory. But
oh the unhappy condition of our age, who is there that ponders these things
with a digested meditation, that looks into the state of his soul with a
serious eye, and considers his ways? That endeavors to lay a good
foundation for the time to come? we stand at the door of Eternity, and while we
live, we are every day entering into it, its but a stroke of death, and we are
gone, even in a moment, and whither? from our short and fading delights, to an
endless, easelesse gulf, where our worm shall never die, nor our fire shall
never out. Now let all those who swim in the streams of their voluptuousness,
putting far from them the evil day, who labor to expel from their hearts, and
to stifle in the bud the sad consideration of their approaching infelicities,
let them (I say) know, that they may fall into this vast gulf of Eternity, when
they least suspect it; into which, when once they have unhappily plunged
themselves, they may desire redemption, but shall not find it. Postquam istinc
excessum fuerit, nullus poenitentiae locus, nullus satisfactionis effectus Cyp,
It shall be one of their torments, to know they shall never be out of torment.
All the gold of Ophir cannot purchase them one minute of relief from their
unexpressible miseries. But now, even now is the jubilee, now is the accepted
time, now is the promulgation of pardon, there remains nothing for our parts,
but to sue it forth: we need not many hundred of years or number of days to
redeem our misspent time, and to wash out our contracted pollutions, no, one day
will, through Gods gracious favor, and loving indulgence, procure more mercy
here, then Eternity of time can obtain hereafter, one sigh from a true
sorrowful heart here, shall prevail to discharge more debts, then infinite
ages shall acquit or satisfy for hereafter. Here God with patience expects our
repentance, but if we abuse his forbearance, and come not in, hereafter with
trembling we shall abide his judgment,

Let us therefore be wise in time, and remember our Creator in the days of
our youth, before the evil days come, and the years approach, wherein we shall
say, we have no pleasure in them, before our dust return into the womb from
whence it came, and our lungs be locked up into the breathles earth, before
that black and gloomy day, the day of death and dissolution appear to us, the
which (if our timely repentance here prevent not our doom) will seal up our
souls to eternal darkness. Let us consider that wheresoever we are,
whatsoever we go about, Immanifestu^, omnia autem manifestans, per omnia
apparet and in om^ibus.
we stand every minute of our time in the glorious presence of an *
incomprehensible majesty, whose bright and most piercing eye, is ten thousand
times clearer then the Sun, who knows all hearts, sees all actions,
understands all counsels, views all persons, there is not a word in the tongue,
not a thought in the heart, not a spark of lust in the flesh, though never so
softly blown, and secretly kindled, but he beholds it altogether, he is all ear
to hear, all hand to punish, and when and where he please, all power to
protect, and all grace to pardon, he that finds not his mercy, shall feel his
fury: and who amongst us can dwell with devouring fire? who amongst us can
dwell with everlasting burnings?

CHAP. III. Expressing how all men do naturally believe this Eternity.
Within these hundred years many nations have been discovered, and many are
discovered still, which were unfound in former ages. Amongst them some have
been found to live without law, without King, but yet none without some
knowledge of God, and of some everlasting being in the world to come. What
moved the Brackmans in India, and the Magies amongst the Persians, to begin and
end their undertakings with prayers to God? What moved Publius Scipio never to
enter into the Senate house before he had ascended the Capitol, avowing that
principle as constantly in his practice, as he did in his knowledge, A Jove
principium? What made Caligula (which threatened the air if it rained on his
game-plaies) yet, to run under his bed, and wrapp his cap about his head at a
clap of thunder? What moved Attillius Regulus (who had no other teacher then a
natural illumination) to prefer the obligation of his oath before the safety
of his life, and rather then he would break his engaged word and promise to the
Carthaginians, expose himself to all the torments that the cruelty and malice
of his enemies could inflict upon him? What moved the Saguntines, a people of
Arragon, to that undaunted resolution of theirs, who having plighted their
faith and loyalty by solemn oath to the Romans, chose rather to entomb
themselves voluntarily in a fire, which they made in their Market place, then
to break their faith to the said Romans, which they had so solemnly swore and
sacredly avowed under their protection? what, I say, could move these mere
naturalists to such a fear of an oath, to such a trembling at Gods judgments,
to such austerity, and care, and censorious circumspection in all their ways
and actions, but that they naturally apprehended what they truly and distinctly
understood not, viz. Some immortal happiness and everlasting being? and this
they conceived was beyond the mountains, or above them, or in some other
world, they knew not where, according as their several fancies led them.

Certainly they would never have so much undervalued their earthly
contentments, and sold all the comforts of this life (as some of them did) at
so cheap a rate, but that they trusted to some future rest of more enduring
substance after this life, and comfortably expected the immortal fruition of
such joys as should abundantly countervaile the loss of all their pleasures.
When I revolve in my mind the Stoicall reservednesse, the moderation, the
unconquerable courage of these miserable Heathens, when I see Cleombrotus in
hope of immortality to tumble himself voluntarily down a hill, when I see
Socrates smile upon his hemlock, and sullen Scevola burn off his own hand
without ever gnashing his teeth at it, when I see Marcus Cato scorn his own
life, because his enemy gave it him, and tear off the salve from his bleeding
sides, which his own sword had peirced: When I thus behold these unhappy souls
in the light of nature, to conquer nature it self, and to build these their
resolutions upon no other ground, but the slender hope of some unknown
contentment in the life to come, me thinks these magnanimous acts of theirs,
however they are not for the imitation of us Christians, yet do they tend to
our condemnation. Their hope did exceed their knowledge, and our knowledge does
exceed our practcie. God has revealed to us the immortality of the soul, and
the eternity to come, in a far more clear and perspicuous manner, then ever
to the heathen Idolaters, and yet we less regard it: what should more affect
us here, since our li^e is but a vapor, then to know what shall become of us
hereafter? and yet the consideration hereof lies like a weight of lead upon our
souls; and we judge the very thought hereof a burden. We readily apprehend
such things as concern us in this world: our honors, our preferments, our
pleasures we look on with a cheerful eye: but alas, with how slow and dull a
pace do we proceed in the pursuit of our future blessedness? we meet with many
stops in our way, many turnings in our journey: and the truth is, we must not
expect to arrive at so happy a haven without some storms; but what are these to
Eternity, that long day that shall never shut in; that unum perpetuum hodie,
that beginning ever in beginning, in which the blessed do everlastingly enjoy
their happiness, and renew their pleasures, and the damned are always dying,
and yet never dye? O that the meditation of this our future state could sink
deep enough into our hearts, that we would make that the object of our thoughts
here, which must be the object of our accounts hereafter, that the sense of our
sins were the chief matter of our sorrows, then should we enjoy an eternity
hereafter, boundless for time, endless for happiness, where our joys should
be such, as should neither change nor perish.

CHAP. IV. Explaining how Nature has represented and shadowed out Eternity to
us in some of the creatures.
NOw to the end we should be the farther encouraged unto the inquisition of
eternity, God has not only planted the knowledge hereof in the hearts of the
Heathens, but has also represented it in the nature of the creatures. For if
we search with a narrow eye into the secrets of nature, how many things shall
we find in the world, as lively resemblances, shadowing as it were, and
tracing out unto us this eternity? Solinus reports of a stone in Arcadia, which
being once inflamed burns perpetually. And of this matter or the like, were
your burning lamps made, which continued (as Histories speak) so many hundred
years in ancient Sepulchers. Like hereunto, in the nature of it, is your Linum
vivum, a certain kind of linen known in India, which is uncombustible, nay, it
is not only not consumed by the fire, but it is as it were cleansed, and
washed, and purified by the heat thereof; and hence it was that the bodies of
the ancient Roman Emperors, when they were to be buried according to the
funeral rites of those times, were shrouded up into such linen, to preserve
their ashes and to avoid a confusion and mixture of their bodies with common
dust.

Behold, here nature it self suggests an eternity to thy soul, while it
presents to thee such things as the fire cannot consume, many other such
Symboles and representations of immortality may be found in the book of the
creatures. The Salamander lives in the fire, and perishes not. Those famous
hills in Sicily have been on fire continually, beyond the memory of man, and
yet remain whole and unconsumed. The like we read of that Oleum
incombustibile, (as Historians call it) an oil that ever burns, but will never
waste; and of the matter of this was that burning torch composed, which was
found in Tulliola, daughter of Cicero her sepulcher: which (as story speaks)
continued burning fifteen hundred years. These and many other shadows and
traces of eternity God has vouchsafed us, to stir up our dead and drousy
hearts, to a more exact inquisition, and serious consideration of the time to
come: For in the book of the creature, we may see the power of the Creator,
and out of these particular works of his, we may understand that, that God
which has endowed nature with such admirable qualities, can give the flesh
also such a condition, that it shall endure, according to his wise
dispensation, either torments, or happiness for evermore.

Now then, to draw all this to an issue, since it is undoubtedly true, that God
has provided an everlasting being, for the souls of men in the world to come:
since he has engraven the knowledge hereof, as with an iron pen in the
consciences of the Heathen, since he has given us so many lively resemblances,
and traces thereof in the secrets of nature, and in the works of his creation.
Oh how should the meditation of this take up our deepest thoughts, our refinest
affections? how should this cause us to reflect upon our souls; to ponder our
ways, and with an impartial eye look into our own estates, and seriously
consider with our selves, whether are we in the number of those that are become
Kings and Priests unto God, and have our hearts enlightened with the
supernatural life of grace and godliness, or lie we yet polluted in our own
blood?

Oh, how can man be at rest and quiet in his mind, till he be assured and
secured in this particular, since that upon it depends his everlasting estate
in another world? our days we see are woven with a slender thread, our time
short, our end uncertain, and when the oil in our lamps is spent, and our
glass run out, then we flee in a moment to an everlasting being, Ex unico
momento pendet duplex aeternitas.
either in horror or happiness, where we shall receive according to the works
of our hands. If we have approved our selves sincere in Gods service, just in
our actions, diligent in our callings, faithful in our promises: we shall then
attain the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls: and the conscience of
our well spent life, shall at that dismal day replenish our souls with
abundance of consolations; Then all our tears shall be wiped from our eyes; what
we have sowed in sorrow, we shall reap in joy, when we have finished our
course, and ended our combat with sin and death: then shall our crown be
sure, our victory glorious, and our triumph Eternal; our grave shall be but as
a sweet refreshing place to our wearied bodies, and death shall be our
day star, to everlasting brightness.

But on the other side; if we have in the whole course of our warfare here,
expended our precious time in the service of sin and Satan, and crumbled away
the best and choicest of our years in the desires of the flesh, and sports of
vanity; if our lusts have been our law, and we have traded in pleasure all our
days, then hear our dreadful doom: Our mirth will be turned into wormwood,
and our joy into heavines: all our delights in this earth shall vanish as the
flower, our sun shall set in a cloud, and our days of jollity and contentation
shall irrecoverably be involved and turned into perpetual darkness.

CHAP. V. Containing a short digression touching the eternity of the damned.
ANd here it will not be unseasonable, nor any digression from the point in
hand, to consider with our selves, for our better encouragement to the ways of
holiness, the condition of that eternity which the damned have in Hell. O the
unhappy and ever deplorable state of those poor souls, who feel nothing for the
present, but wrath and vengeance, and can expect nothing to come, but the
vialls of Gods indignation to be poured on them, in a fuller measure for ever
hereafter! And that which adds abundant weight to their miseries, Nec qui
torquet, aliquando fatigatur; nec qui torquetur, aliquando moritur, Bernard,
meditat. cap. 3,
is; they shall burn, but not diminish; they shall lie buried in their flames,
but not consume; they shall seek death, but shall not find it: they shall
desire it, but it shall flee from them: their punishment consists not in the
indurance of any proper or peculiar pain, but in the accumulation and heap of
innumerable torments together. All the faculties of the soul, all the senses of
the body shall have their several punishments, and that which is more,
unseparable, and more then that, eternal: There shall be degrees in their
torments, but the least shall be infinite. For as the wrath and displeasure of
God toward them is everlasting, so shall their pressures be. They enjoy an
eternity like the Saints, but not the Saints eternity; for their eternity shall
begin in horror, and proceed in confusion: their eternity shall purchase and
yield to them, no other fruit but yellings and lamentations, and woe. Their
eternity is such as turns all things into its own nature: for all things where
the damned do inhabit, are eternal. The fire is eternal: for the breath of
God like a river of brimstone has kindled it, and it shall never go out night
nor day; but the smoke thereof shall ascend for ever. The worm is eternal, for
the conscience of the damned shall be everlastingly tormented with the sense of
their sin: Their worm dies not, (says the Prophet) and their fire never
goes out. The prison wherein they are enclosed is eternal. The prayers of the
Church could open the prison doors to Peter, but no prayers can pierce these
walls, no power can overthrow them, no time can ruin them; out of Hell is no
redemption, no ransom, no delivery, Cruciantur damnati, cruciantur in
aeternum. This is the last sentence of the Judge, his irrevocable decree, his
immutable and eternal Judgment on the damned, which shall nevever be
reversed: Adesse intolerabile, abesse impossible.
there is no appeal will lie from this Judge; there is no reversing this
judgment, when the sentence is once past, it stands for eternity; Hence it was
that the ancient Church repeated this sentence often in their divine service,
Peccantem me quotidie, and non penitentem, timor mortis conturbat, quia ex
inferno nulla est redemptio: Whilst I daily sin, but repent not daily as I
ought, the fear of death amazeth me, because after this life ended, out of Hell
is no redemption. The blood of Christ shed on Golgotha, is fully sufficient to
save all mankind, but it belongs not to the damned. If therefore the yoke of
repentance seem not sweet to thee, (says St Bernard) think on that yoke which
thou shall be sure to suffer, which is, Go ye cursed into eternal fire. But
the most deplorable thing which is eternal in hell, is, the irrevocable loss
of the beatificall presence of God, the eternal privation of Gods sight, the
uncomfortable want whereof, does more grieve their hearts, and wound their
afflicted souls, then all their bodily torments. Thus we see the unhappy estate
and condition of the damned in the other world, and how the highest link in all
this chain of sorrows, wherewith they are environed, is the miserable
perpetuity of their torments, when their restless thoughts have carefully
run through many thousands of years, yet will they not then enjoy one day, one
little hour, one minute of rest and respiration: Everlasting darkness is
their portion, they begin and end alike, with weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Now since this is certainly true, is it possible for man so to degenerate into
a beast, as to believe these things, and not to tremble? Can the knowledge of
these things swim in our brain, without a serious and found digestion of them
into our hearts? when we know, and stand convinced, that inexplicable,
eternal, endless, easelesse horrors, without true and unfeigned repentance,
abide us hereafter; and on the other side we know not, nor can possibly
discern, with how speedy and swift a foot our end approaches, nor how
suddenly we shall be summoned to give the world our everlasting farewell. How
can so sad and important consideration as this, possess our thoughts, and not
torment them? Or how can this choose but imbitter our dearest pleasures, and
cross our indulgence to our sensual affections? Did we but reason a while
with our souls, and every one of us in a particular application say within
himself: I am here floating like a ship in the sea of this world, ballasted on
every side with the cares, and disquietings, and miseries of this life, and I
sail on with full course toward the haven of Eternity: one little blast is
able to plunge me irrecoverably into this bottomless gulf, where one hours
torment will infinitely exceed, (for the pain of it) an hundred years bitter
repentance. And shall I now thus standing upon the very battlements of hell,
melt in my delights, cheer up my self in the days of my youth? shall I tire
out my spirits, trifle out my precious time, rob mine eyes of their beloved
sleep, for such things, to the which the time will come, and is hastening
onward, when I must bid an everlasting farewell? Me thinks the through
meditation of our future state should even strangle our sensual joys in us,
and withdraw our hearts from the embracements of this world, especially when we
shall to our endless sorrow understand, our dearest contents must close, at
the last, in death and confusion, and all our precedent pleasures, shall yield
us no other fruit, but their bitter remembrance, to augment our sorrows.

CHAP. 6. Wherein the question is answered, wherefore a finite sin, is
recompensed with an infinite punishment: wherein also is farther showed, that
the severity of Gods justice therein, does no way diminish the greatness of
his mercy.
NOw here arises the question to be resolved; How comes it to pass, that our
merciful and gracious God, who is so infinite in his goodness, and so
abundant in his love, whose praises the Prophet David amplifies in his 136.
Psalm, twenty seven times together, with this conclusion, for his mercy
endures for ever: how can it stand, that this our God, whose mercy is exalted
above all his works, should be thus infinitely merciful, and yet so infinitely
just too, as to inflict upon a finite sin, an infinite punishment, that he
should continue millions of years, yea, to everlastingnes, in the avengement of
those sins, which were committed as it were in a moment of time, so that he
who has offended but temporally, should be bound to suffer pains eternally? I
answer, we shall sufficiently vindicate and clear Gods righteous dealing
toward us herein, if we measure his justice but by our own rules: Scelus non
temporis longitudine, ^ed iniquitatis magnitudine metiendum est. Aug. de
Civitat. Dei lib. 21. cap 11.
* for does any law proportion out the time of punishment to that measure of
time only, in which the offense is committed? Shall the prisoner lie no longer
in the Goal, then he was committing his villainy? Do not we here amongst us
often see some offenses which were suddenly thought of, and as soon executed,
yet punished with endless, datelesse banishments, which in comparison to this
life, bear a proportion with eternity? Now if the wisdom of man does follow
this rule in proportioning of punishments, weighing offenses by the foulnes of
the fact; Shall we deny God the righteous Judge of all the world, the same
liberty over the works of his own hands? Again, if this will not satisfy our
inquisitive minds, let us but take our own hearts to task, and sift them to
the bottom, and impartially weigh what a world of pollution, and deceit, and
perverseness, is lodged in them: and then certainly, we shall find matter
enough against our selves without farther inquiry, for our endless
condemnation: our own consciences will testify to the confusion of our faces,
that just is the Lord, Nec injusta ejus gratia, nec crudelis potest esse
justitia. Aug. de Civit, De^ lib. 21. cap. 11.
and just are his Judgments, that all the ways of the Lord are mercy and
truth, that his grace is not unjust, nor his Justice cruel. Add hereunto,
that the fault, of its own nature, is infinite, because it is a sin against an
infinite majesty. Gods Justice being infinite, the violation therereof by
sin, must needs contract an infinite debt; because in sinning we rob God of
his glory, which we must needs repay him again: Now the satisfaction of an
infinite debt, must needs be infinite, either in respect of time, or measure.
And because a finite vessel is not able to hold or comprehend an infinite
wrath, forasmuch as we cannot bear Gods indignation, propter immensitatem
doloris, we must of necessity satisfy his Justice, duratione temporis; the
long continuance of our sufferings, must supply what is wanting in the weight
of our punishments. Again, he that dies in his sin without repentance, offends
as much as if he had sinned eternally: quia omnis peccator est in aeternum, si
in eternum vixisset, in aeternum peccasset; i.e. had he lived eternally, his
sin had extended to the length of his days, Peccandi voluntatem non amisit,
sed vitam. Greg.
* for a man sooner cease to live, then to love his sin, and therefore God
may justly after many thousand years torments in Hell, iterate their torments
to the damned: because if they had longer abode in their sinful flesh, they
would still have perpetuated their sinful transgressions. Oh let not then
sinful flesh contend with its maker, let not us prye into the Heavens, not
curiously search into the secrets of Gods will, to find a reason of the
obligation of a sinner to perpetual punishment, but rather in the lowlines of
our hearts, cry out with Daniel, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but
to us open shame, because we have rebelled against thee: let us cast down our
souls at the foot of his grace, and humbly acknowledge in the sense of our
deformities, that just is the Lord, and just are his judgments. Our weak
understandings can no way fathom the depth of his counsels; his wisdom is
unsearchable, and all his ways are truth: but did we truly apprehend the
nature of our sins, we would never repine at the weight of Gods Judgments.
For whereas God made man a noble creature, both beautiful and glorious, and
after stamped on him his own Image, righteousness and true holiness, how
strangely has his sin disrobed him of all his excellencies? what rebellion
has it settled in all his members? what stains and pollutions has it wrought
in all his faculties? It is our sin which has unjoynted the confederacies, and
societies of the dumb creatures, and has armed them with an antipathy and
rebellion one against another. It is sin which has so strangely altered the
manners and conditions of our times, that has turned men's brows into brass,
and their hearts into stones, and their hands into violence, and their tongues
into Scorpions. It is sin which has ushered in these sad divisions into our
Church and state, and drawn out such streams of blood in every corner of the
land, and made the foundations of the kingdom tremble. It is sin that is the
fountain and source of all those errors, schisms, heresies, strange opinions
that are lately sprung up amongst us. And surely we may write it one of the
saddest of our miseries, and that which will fall heavily somewhere in the end
(if some great humiliation prevent not the judgment) that these things are
suffered without control. And here give me leave a little to vent my troubled
thoughts, Though I wander from the point in hand, yet for Sions sake I cannot
hold my peace. Have we not sworn, have we not deliberately, publicly in the
open Congregation, in the sight of Angels and men; and with as grave and sad
solemnity, as wisdom could devise, lifted up our hands to the most high God,
saying that we would sincerely, really, and constantly, by the grace of God in
our several places and callings, endeavor the extirpation of Heresy, Scisme,
and whatsoever should be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of
Godliness. Yet notwithstanding this deep engagement on our souls. How many
fearful errors, what unheard of fancies do uncontrollably abound in every
corner of the land? Does not every man act what seems good in his own eyes? Is
not every wanton we impunitively suffered to make an idol of his own way,? and
to draw Disciples after him? Me thinks its worthy our most serious thoughts,
how sadly, how compassionately the reformed Churches do resent our home
distractions. See what the Walachrian Churches have writ to our Reverend
Assembly of Divines, upon this occasion. Judicent conscientientiae vestrae,
quomodo omnium Heresium genus inultum permitti, multiplicia schismatum sem ina
impune spargi, and prophana errorum dogmata, passim in vulgus proferri possint
in illa civitate, quae tam expresso, sancto, severo juramento sese coram Deo
devinxit, ad omnes errores, heresesschismata de domo Dei ejicienda.
* Let your own consciences judge (say they) h^^ Heresies of all kinds can
pass unpunished? manifold seeds of Schism be spread without control, and
profane Doctrines of errors be commonly vented in public in that City, which
by so express, so sacred so severe an Oath, has bound it self in the presence
of God, to cast out all Heresies, Errors, Schisms, out of the house of God.
Hence ye may observe how loud a peal our Church divisions ring through out the
world; Our friends pity us, our foes deride us, and neuters stand amazed at our
doings: and certainly God is not pleased with our ways. For God is the God of
order, and not of confusion; the God of peace, not of division.

In vain it is to expect any happy, or peaceful days, or that we shall see a
well grounded settlement in Church and state, so long as turbulent spirits have
so much line and latitude to their fancies. And surely it is now high time, it
is high time for us all in our several places, since we stand every day
hovering between time and eternity, to mind our sacred vows, and to lay our
solemn Covenants closely to our hearts, and ask our consciences, how faithfully
we have performed them; especially in the particular wherein we now insist.

Errors in opinion are of as dangerous consequence, as errors in practice; and
therefore happy would it be for the kingdom, if they that move in the highest
Spears would all come in as with one shoulder, and make it the chiefest
business of their souls, that the Lord may be one, and his name one through
the Kingdom. Now if you tell me I here digress from the point in hand, I
readily grant it: for these distracted times have amazed me, and obstructed me
in my way. But now I return You see the dismal fruits of sin, what
destruction it has wrought in all the earth? what havoc in our State? what
confusion in the Church? what rentings of affections in the hearts of men?

Oh that we did seriously consider of, and soundly digest the meditation of
these things? For had we but hearts to understand, and eyes to see the
deformity of our sins, and did unpartially compare the stain and pollution of
them, with the pureness of Gods nature, and the brightness of his Majesty* how
should we be confounded in our souls, with the sight of our own filthiness?
How ready should we be rather to admire Gods patience, then question his
severity? How should we tremble at his glorious Majesty, and dread his power,
and justly fear what we have worthily deserved, his everlasting judgment: but
if now on the other side we advisedly look into Gods gracious proceedings
toward us, and his loving indulgence in restraining his incensed displeasure,
notwithstanding our infinite provocations, and in showing us a way to escape
his fury; I know not whether we shall find greater cause to vindicate his
justice, or admire his mercy. For true it is, as says Saint Augustine, Deus
adeo bonus est, ut malum nunquam sincret, nisi adeo potens suiflet, ut ex malo
bonum eliceret. Aug.
So good is our God, that he would never have suffered us to fall, had not his
power been such, that he could extract matter out of our sinfulnes, to advance
his own glory. Oh how unsearchable, how bottomless, how surpassing the
apprehension of men and Angels is the love of God toward us! whither can we
go? which way can we cast our eyes, where we shall not behold the admirable
footsteps of his mercy? If we look upward, his mercy reaches unto the
Heavens, says David: If downward, they that go down into the deep, see the
wonders of God, says the same Prophet, and his mercies in the great waters. If
round about us, those that put their trust in the Lord, mercy embraces them on
every side. And hence it is that the Apostle Saint Paul to the Ephesians, so
diversely amplifies the love of God in several places of that Epistle, by
sundry appellations or epithetes, as his love, his great love, his abundant
love, his love passing knowledge: again, the riches of his glory, the riches of
his grace, the riches of his mercy; God who is merciful says the Apostle, who
is rich in mercy through his love, his great love, even when we were dead by
sins, has quickened us together in Christ, Ephesians. 2.4. The Apostle also in
the same Epistle, and first chapter, expresses the Lord, great in his power,
abundant in his wisdom, but rich, exceeding rich in his mercy, And why rich in
mercy only? Is not the Lord rich in Angels, rich in the Saints, rich in the
Heavens? Has he not created the Clouds, founded the Seas, wisely composed the
whole frame of nature? And is he yet rich only in mercy? True it is; the earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: all that we have, all that we are, is
his, but his mercy has an excellency in it above all his creatures; yea (If I
may so speak) obove all his attributes, above his Justice; Mercy (says the
Apostle) rejoices against condemnation: Above his power; Jacob wrestled with
God and overcame him; above his greatness: for such was the unexpressible
condiscention of the Almighty, that although he were high and excellent, and
inhabited eternity, yet did he humble himself, to behold things done in Heaven
and earth; for there is nothing does more illustrate Gods omnipotency, then his
mercy. It was no marvail that God should make the Heavens, because he is power
it self; or that he should frame the earth; because he is strength it self; or
that he should govern the times; because he is wisdom it self; or that he
should give breath to all creatures, because he is life it self; But herein
chiefly is God to be magnified, that he who is infinitely just, should yet be
merciful to sinners; yea, to sinners while they wallow in their blood, while
they rest in sins, while they have no eye to look after him, no heart to
embrace him, no foot to follow him, no tongue to glorify him, but lie woefully
plunged in the dregs of their pollutions? Oh the unspeakable goodness of our
God, who has so graciously invited those sheep, who are so unhappily strayed
from him; nay, who does with a Omnipo, tentissima facilitate homines ad seipsum
convertit Deus, and volentes exnolentibus facit. Aug. ad vita.
loving violence, irresistably call those who have trampled on his graces, and
rejected his love. But what should move the Creator of all things, who has
been thus infinitely provoked, who is armed both with power to strike, and
means to be avenged, to compassionate his enemies? Certainly, there is, there
can be no other reason alleged, but that which David so often iterates,
because he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever. But me thinks I hear
the afflicted soul bewail it self: here is a fountain of mercy indeed, had I
heart to draw out of it: Can his goodness extend to me, who am nothing but
worms and dust, and wounds and sores, and corruptions? Who can give him no
oblation but my sins, no sacrifice but my sorrow. What confidence now can I
have in this love? What strength in this mercy? Who ever thou art, that art
thus, and no better disposed to receive the grace of thy God, bring forth this
small provision, offer this sacrifice upon the Altar. Since thou have nothing
else to part with, surrender up thy sins, yield him thy lusts, renounce thy
whole interest in thy sinful delights, in thy immoderate affections Nullius
rei tantum in inferno est, quantum propriae voluntatis. Alsted.
and then thy sorrowful spirit shall be a sacrifice to God, thy wounded and
broken heart he will not despise; I am with him, says the Lord, who is of an
humbled spirit, and that trembles at my words. We have his own word for his
mercy, we have his promise for it, we have his oath for it. He is faithful
says the Apostle, who has promised; he is faithful, he cannot deny himself.
Supe rate seipsum potest desertos miserando, negare seipsum non potest
miscricordiam deserendo.
He may overcome himself by pitying the forsaken ones, but he cannot deny
himself, by forsaking his pity. For how can he deny himself to us, who has
given himself, for us? How can he deny us his mercy, who has given us his life?

The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF ETERNITY.
CHAP. I. Containing an exhortation to holiness, grounded upon the
consideration of Eternity.
THe very soul and life of Christianity, consists in the life of a Christian^
as for outward formalities, they plausibly serve to show forth a good man to
the eye of the world, but cannot make him such; it is true, external actions
adorn our professions: but it is, where grace and goodness seasons them,
otherwise where the sap, and juice and vigor of religion is not settled in the
soul, a man is but like a goodly heart-shaken Oak, whose beauty will turn into
rottenesse, and his end will be the fire. It was the saying of Machiavell; that
the appearance of virtue was more to be desired then virtue in self. But
Socrates ^meer naturalist, advised better, who said, the good man is only wise.
Certainly our glorious shows, and high applauses, and exaltations amongst the
sons of men, will prove but miserable comforters in the close of our age,
when the days of darkness come. O then as we respect the eternal welfare of
our poor souls, let us be what we would seem. Letus tume our words into
actions, Q^alis videri, vis talis esse debes. Gerh Med.
our knowledge into affection, and our speculation into practice. Let us not
only in a general and confused manner acknowledge God, but rather labor to
know him; Let us not think it enough to believe that Christ came as a Savior
into the world, but endeavor rather by a peculiar, personal, and applicative
faith to make him our own.
Alas what avails it my soul* that Christ shed forth his blood for the sins
of many; i^ he died not for me? What joy to my heart, that Christ is risen for
the justification of sinners, if he be not my portion? what comfort to my
distressed conscience, that Christ is come a light into the world, if I sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death? What confidence of protection can I have
from hence, Non prodest Christi resurrectio, nisi in te quoque Christus
resurgat Gerh. Med. Sitscopus vitae Christus, quem s quaris in via, ut
assequaris in parria.
that Christ is a careful shepherds over his flock, if I am none of that sheep
fold? Other let it be the chief desire of our souls, and the utmost extent of
our endeavors, not only to confess Christ, but to bring him home to our
hearts, to feel him, to affect him, to live in him, to depend on him, to be
conformable to him: let us willingly hear, and cheerfully follow the voice of
that sweet guide, who is both the way, and the journies end; that loving
Physician who comes to our wounded consciences with healing in his wings; that
meek and tender Lamb, who powered forth for us tears of anguish, and tears of
love; tears of anguish to redeem our souls, and tears of love to compassionate
our miseries. Now what a pressing persuasion have we here to live unto him, who
thus died for us; to make him our joy who has borne our sorrows; to fix him in
our hearts, who for our sakes was fixed to the Cross? ^otus tibi figatur in
cord, qui totu sprote figeb^tur in c^uce.
How should we mourn in our souls, and weep in secret for him? quem totus
mundus, tota element^ lugebant, at whose sufferings the graves opened, the
Sun shut in his light, the earth trembled, and the whole frame of Heaven in
his nature and kind expressed its sorrow. One of the Rabins, when he read what
bitter torments the Messiah should suffer, when he came into the world, (cried
out) veniat Messiah, at eg^ non videam, Let the Messiah come, but let me not
see him. Did his torments seem so dismal to the spectator, what were they then
in the sufferer? If so ghastly to the sight, what were they in the sustaining?
But what should we do now? Shall we rail on Judas that betrayed him, or on
Peter that denied him, or the Jews that pierced him, or the Apostles that
forsook him? No, no, let us look into our own hearts, examine our own ways. Do
we not make his wounds bleed afresh with our sins? do we not nayl him to the
Cross again with our pollutions? do we not grind him in our oppressions, and
as it were massacre him in our murders? What sin have we ever forsaken for
his sake? what inordinate affection have we abandoned for his love? Can we say,
and say truly, that we ever spared a dish from our bellies, or one hour from
our sleep, or one fashion from our backs, for his sake? and do we thus requite
our Redeemer? Was Christ all in gore blood for our sins, and shall we swim in
pleasure? Did Christ endure such contradictions of sinners, and cannot we put
up a slight disgrace. Deus tuus parvus factus est, and tu te magnificas, exina
nivit se magests, and tu vermiculus intumescis.
Was Christ stretched on the Cross, and shall we stretch our selves on beds of
down? Did Christ such down vinegar for us, and shall we surfeit with plenty? Was
Christ crowned with thorns, and shall we crown our selves with Rose buds? O let
it shame us, to bear so dainty a body under so doleful a head. And think we
with our selves, surely sin against God must needs be more, then men commonly
esteem it, for which no way of expiation could be made, but by the bitter
passion of Christ. Oh then let us not think any thing to dear for him, who
thought nothing to dear for us. We have an inestimable price, a glorious
inheritance set before us, let us carefully embrace all those means that may
further our progress: as the hearing of the Word, receaving of the Sacrament,
earnest and constant prayer to Almighty God: Let us strive as we ought, press
forward with all violence. The woman in the Gospel which was so long visited
with her bloody issue, it was her holy Victa est ad violentiam, quia violenta
ad victoriam.
violence and pressing our Savior, that procured health for her body, and
pardon for her soul; Let this be our endeavor, let us never think our selves
far enough in the way to Heaven, but prepare our hearts still, and lay hold
on every advantage, that may further us in our journey. Behold now is the
acceptable time, now is the day of Salvation, whilst you have time then do
good unto all: whilst you have the light, walk as children of the light: Judge
thy self here, that thou be not judged of the Lord hereafter. Let not thy eyes
slumber, nor thy temples take any rest, till tho^ have found our an habitation
in thine heart, for the mighty God of Jacob. Remember him, as David did, in thy
bed, and think upon him when thou art waking: God said of the Church of
Thyatira, I gave her time to repent of her fornication, and she repented not. O
let us not give our good God the like occasion, to second the same complaint
against us. Behold, God now graciously calls us, and offers us his mercy: He
stands at the door and knocks: Hear his sweet acclamation; Open unto me, my
sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is full of dew, and my
locks with the drops of the night, Song of Solomon. chap. 5. What a strange
humiliation is here, for the king of kings to wait to have mercy! Let us arise
and open speedily to our beloved: to day while it is called to day, let us
hear his voice, let us not put off our time, as Felix did St Paul, go for
this present time, and when I have a convenient leisure, I will hear thee, as
if the time present were not the fittest. Let us not stifle the checks of our
consciences, or say, as Festus to Agrippa, to morrow thou shall hear him. Non
quaerit Deus dilationem in voce corvina, sed confessionem in gemitu columbino.
All procrastinations in this case are dangerous. Let us therefore take hold of
salvation, whilst occasion serves us. If we shut out our welbeloved, he will be
gone. Therefore let our hearts even melt within us, whilst he speaks to us in
his word. If we answer not when he calls us, then shall we call, and he will
not answer. The Stork and the Crane, and the Swallow in the air know their
seasons, and observe their appointed times, how much more should man,
especially since times and moments, how long we shall enjoy them, are not in
our own power, but in the power of God. The Angel in the Revelation swore by
him, that lives for ever, that time should be no more. The time past can never
be recalled, let us therefore take the present time: For the time past was and
is not, the time present is, but shall not be, and of the future, we can
promise to our selves no fruition. But alas such is our blindness, such an
obduration is grown over our hearts, that we understand these things, but feel
them not; we have them swimming in our minds, but embrace them not in our
affections. The best of us may take up that complaint of Saint Augustine, Teneo
in memoria, scribo in charta, sed non habeo in vita. Aug.
* who averred of himself, that his desires were better the^ his practice. Our
vows are in Heaven, but our hearts on earth; our desires are toward our home,
but our endeavors flagge in the way, and we faint in our journey: we have
Heavenly hopes, but earthly affections; we all covet after happiness, but we
would take no pains for it; we would enjoy Christ in his benefits, but we
refuse to partake with him in his sufferings; volumus assequi Christum, sed non
sequi, we would share willingly with our Savior in his Crown, but not in his
combat; nay, oftentimes we instance God for such graces as we are loath to
obtain: like Saint Augustine, who prayed for continency with a proviso, Lord,
give me continency, but not yet; nay such is our intolerable sinfulness, and
pollution of heart, that at the same instant, when our hands are lift up to God
for the pardon of old sins, our heads are working in the contriving of new;
as Salvian has it, dum verbis praeterita mala plangimus, sensu futura
meditamur. Thus we draw nigh to God with our lips, when our hearts are far
from him, our affections are buried in the things of this life. Excellent is
that saying of Isidorus, Regnum hoc ^empiternum, ex omni part beatum est,
omnibus promissu^, and tamen de illo altum inter nos silentium, quotus quisque
enim est qui de hoc commemorat, hoc uxori, hoc liberis, toti hoc familiae
inculcat? Isid. ^oelum negligimus, terram non retinemus, Dei favorem non
acquirimus, mundi perdimus.
The Kingdom of Heaven, says he, is eternal, blessed every way, and promised
to all men, but who is there almost that spends one moment in the serious
meditation of it? What man is there that ever talks to his wife, to his
children, to his family of such a Kingdom? We can riot in the praises of our
native soil, but we blush to speak of, and are ashamed to commend our true
country, our everlasting home. In our dealings about the things of this life,
our understandings are ready enough to apprehend them, and our hearts to
entertain them, and our tongues to discourse of them; but in things that belong
to the eternal salvation of our souls, how deep is our silence, how flow our
speech, how unskilful our expressions?

Thus we forsake Heaven for these things, which at last will forsake us, and
trifle out our time in things that will not profit us. How far are men now
adays from that sweet resolution of Saint Hierome? Let others, says he, live
in their statues, in their costly monuments: I had rather have St Paul's Coat
with his Heavenly graces, then the purple of Kings with their Kingdoms.

O that we would look thus lowly upon our selves; we are Christians in
profession, O let us be such in practice: seeing that God has made us stewards
of his treasures, let us improve them to the benefit of our brethren. Has God
given us abundance of his blessings? Let us not hide our talents in a napkin:
let us send our good works before us into Heaven: these slender gifts, which
thou do cheerfully distribute in this world, will procure thee an eternal
compensation in the world to come. That sweet speech of Saint John is worth
observation, blessed are those that dye in the Lord, they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. When our dearest friends, our sweetest
pleasures, our most glorious titles of honor, the world it self, yea even our
life it self shall glide away like a river, and turn to dust, then shall our
good works follow us, non transeunt opera nostra (says one) sicut transire
videntur, sed velut aeternitatis semina jaciuntur; our good deeds die not with
us, but they are sown in earth, and spring in Heaven; they are an
inexhaustible fountain, that shall never be dried up: a durable spring, that
shall never fail. They are acts of time, short in their performance, yet
eternal in their recompense; they build up for us, through the mercies of our
God, an everlasting foundation for the time to come.

Lo then here we have set before us viam ad regnum, the way to our eternity;
let us go on herein without intermission; press forward with violence, and
strive to attain the crown. Opulentia nimis multa est aeternitas, sed nisi
perseveranter quaesita nunquam inver itur B^rnard
Eternal joy is an abundant treasure, an everlasting wealth, but it is not
given, save to them that seek it; yea that seek it with their whole hearts.
Certainly did we as truly know, as we shall one day undoubtedly feel the bitter
fruit, that our lukewarm profession, our gross stupidity, and utter neglect
of our everlasting state, will produce and procure us in the end, all our
thoughts and language, all our affections and inclinations would be more
eagerly employed, and more faithfully exercised in our preparations for that
building given of God, a house not made with hands, but eternal in the
Heavens. Oh how senseless are we, how stupid in our selves, Illud propter quod
peccamus, amittimus, and pecca^um ipsum retinemus.
and wickedly injurious to our own welfare, who for a small gain, a sading
pleasure, a fugitive honor wound our consciences, and hazard our souls, to
stand as it were on the brink of hell?

The whole world, promised for a reward, cannot persuade us to endure one
momentary torment in fire: And yet in the accustomed course of our lives we
dread not, we quake not at everlasting burnings. But o thou delicious and
dainty soul, who cherishest thy self in the joy of thy heart, and the delight
of thine eyes, whose belly is thy God, and the world thy Paradise! O, bethink
thy self betimes, before that gloomy day, that day of clouds and thick
darkness, that day of desolation and confusion approach, when all the
inhabitants of the earth shall mourn and lament, and all faces (as the Prophet
Joel speaks) shall gather blackness, because the time of their judgment is
come. Alas, with what a doleful heart, and weeping eye, and drooping
countenance, and trembling loins, will thou at the last and great Assize look
upon Christ Jesus, when he shall most gloriously appear with innumerable Angels
in flaming fire, to render vengeance on them that know him not? What a cold
damp will seize upon thy soul, when thou shall behold him, whom thou have all
thy life long neglected in his ordinance; despised in his members, rejected in
his love; when thou shall see the judgment seat, the books opened, Fiet
apertio librorum, scilicet conscientiarum, quibus merita and demerita
univ^rsorum, sibi ipsis and caeteris, innotescent.
thy sins discovered, yea all the secret counsels of thy heart, after a
wonderful manner, manifested and laid open to the eye of the whole world? What
horror and perplexity of spirit will possess thee, to view and behold, but
the ry solemnities and circumstances, which accompany this Judgment; when
thou shall see the Heavens burn, the Elements melt, the earth tremble, the sea
roar, the sun turn into darkness, and the moon into blood? And now what
shall be thy refuge, where shall be thy succor? shall thou reign, because
thou cloathest thy self in Cedar? shall thou be safe, because with the Eagle
thou have set thy neast on high? O no, it is not now the greatness of thy
state, nor the abundance of thy wealth, nor the privilege of thy place, nor
the eminency of thy worth, or wit, or learning, that ca^ avail thee ought,
either to avoid thy doom, or prorogue thy judgment. All states and conditions
of men are alike, when they appear at this bar. There the Prince must lay
down his crown, and the Pear his robes, and the Judge his purple, and the
Captain his banner; All must promiscuously attend to give in their accounts,
and to receive according to that they have done, whether it be good, or whether
it be evil. Here on earth great men, and glorious in the eye of the world, so
long as they can hold their habitations in the earth, have both countenance to
defend, and power to protect them from the injuries of the times: but when the
dismal face of that terrible day shall show it self, then shall they find no
eye to pity, nor arm to help, nor palace to defend, nor rocks to shelter, nor
mountains to cover them from the presence of him that sits upon the throne, and
from the wrath of the lamb. Give me the most insolent spirit, the most
undaunted soul, that now breaths under the cope of Heaven, who now fears not
any created nature, no not God himself, yet when he shall hear that terrible
sound, Arise ye dead and come to judgment, how will his heart even melt, and
his bowels quiver within him; when he shall have his severe judge above him,
and hell beneath him, and his worm within him, and fire round about him. O then
whosoever thou art, die unto thy sins, and unto thy pleasures here; that thou
may live to God hereafter; * Sic tibi cave, ut caveas teipsum.
go out of thy self, judge and condemn thine own soul, for thy sins against
God in this world, that so thou may comfortably receive thy sentence of
absolution in the world to come. Let us learn to be wise in time; let our
sorrow for sin anticipate and prevent our punishment; satius est and suavius
font purgari quam igne: In inferno exomlogesis non est* nec paenitentia tunc
tritibui potest, consumpto tempore paenitendi.
He that grieves not heartily for his transgressions here, shall woefully smart
for them hereafter. In hell there is no redemption for the time past, no
confession, no repentance, but a sad and heavy exchange, and most uncomfortable
translation, from a short and passing joy, to an endless, easelesse punishment.

Surely all the pressures and vexing distempers, that befall us in this life;
all the crosses, which the envy, either of men or evil Angels can throw upon
us, are nothing, if compared to eternal miseries. Sapienti nihil magnum videri
potest, cui aeternitatis nota est magnitudo. What if with Saint Paul I
underwent labors and perils, hunger and thirst, injuries and reproaches, what
is all this to eternity?

What if I did bear in my flesh the most exquisite pains and bitter torments,
that created nature is capable of, yet what were all this to eternity? For all
the adversities and alterations, which happen to us under the sun, have their
periods, which they cannot pass: however they disquiet us for the time, yet as
the Prophet Daniel says, the end shall be at the appointed time, God will
perform that which he has appointed for me, says Job: yet usque ad tempus
haec omnia, the end shall be at the appointed time. But of this eternity there
will be no end, no bounds can limit it, no time shall determine it. Certainly,
first or last there will happen to thee such an evening, as shall have no
morning to follow; or else such a morning, as shall never see the close of the
sun: And therefore let not the vanishing cares, and tra^sitorie disquietings of
this world over deeply possess thy heart; but rather let the whole stream of
thy meditations run upon thy latter end; that at the time of thy dissolution;
(thy affection being wholly alienated from the world) thy thoughts may ascend
before, whither thy soul is coming after: So shall thy sufferings here, make
way for thy crown hereafter.

But how few, o how few, I say, are there that weigh these things? How few do
make it their daily task to meditate on the evils to come? They credit not such
reports; for they care not to believe what they are unwilling to practice:
Hence it is that they go on so securely in their course, as if there were no
heaven, no hell, no God, no eternity. Thus we naturally desire our days should
be as happy as they are long, and being miserably insensible of the sorrows to
come, we rashly expose our selves to an irrevocable downfall. Nos tales, qui
mortis nostrae neque negotium ridentes exequimur. Greg.
Without sense or sorrow we run merrily to hell, where we shall everlastingly
feel what we did never fear, death and darkness, weeping and gnashing of
teeth. O how different are our times from those of our Ancestors? They were not
more rigidly superstitious, then we are vainly secure.

How did they pine their bodies, and afflict their souls, crucify their most
precious lusts, forsake their friends, their lands, their inheritance, yea
their Crowns and Kingdoms; nay which is more, through the rigid and austere
observation of their strict and severe laws, expose themselves to the hazard
and danger of their dearest lives, and thrust themselves as it were out of the
world, and forgo all society with men? And wherefore all this, but that they
might disburden themselves the better by these means from all earthly
allurements; settle and dispose their hearts in a good preparation toward
their home; and to enliven their affections, and inflame their minds to a more
serious contemplation of the joys to come? Me thinks the consideration of
these former times, should strongly invite us to a more serious meditation of
our future state, especially if we remember how swiftly our days draw to an
end, and how soon we are involved into everlasting darkness. For alas, what is
our life here, Tota haec vita unius horulae mors est, one hour at the last will
swallow up all our live-long days. Let us the^ not fear being so near our
home, let no storms affright us, being so near our haven: let us examine our
accounts, and cast up our reckonings, that we may be able to give up a good
account at the last day. Certain it is, what ever we go about; whatsoever, be
the scope of our endeavors; we every day come nearer to the end of our course,
every hour is a new step onvvard.

So soon as ever a man enters this mortal life, he begins a constant journey
unto death, quicquid temporis vivitur, de spatio vivendi tollitur: i. e. Each
part of time that we pass, cuts off so much from our life, and the remainder
still decreaseth; So that our whole life is nothing but a course or passage
unto death, wherein one can neither stay nor slack his pace. This we know, our
daily experience does confirm this truth: and yet do we persist as securely, as
ever in our trade of sin: Aegre abstrahimur ab ijs quibus assuescimus, i. e.
we are hardly drawn from those things which custom and time has inured us
unto. It is a grievous burden to a licentious heart to be drawn off from
dainty fare, full cups, and good company. We lie as dead men, and senseles in
our damned pollutions, even drowned in our voluptu ousnes, like brute beasts,
filled up, and pampered for the day of slaughter. Thus with the full stream of
our endeavors we plod on in the habitual course of provoking the patience of
a long suffering God, without any sense of our sin, until our short days
begin to shut in, and our evening approach; at which time the weakness of our
bodies, and the strength of our sins, make us as unable to repent, as we were
before unwilling We many times, through the incitement of some good motion,
begin well, but fail in the execution; Fatemur crimina, sed sic fatemur, ut
in ipsa confessione non dolemus. Calv.
we make fair promises, but we do not second them in our practice; but let us
not deceive our selves, God will not be mocked, non verbis paenitentia agenda,
sed actu: let us not promise God better obedience with our lips, then we
perform with our hearts. Be not rash to vow a thing before God, but when thy
word has past thy lips, then be as careful to perform, as thou wast forward
before to promise.

Lastly, let us always follow that holy counsel given in Ecclesiasticus, In
all thy actions think upon thy latter end, and thou shall never do amiss: and
that of the Prophet David, keep innocence, and do the thing that is right; for
that shall bring a man peace at the last: peace with God, peace with men, and
peace with our own conscience. In the world, says our Savior, shall ye have
trouble, but in me ye shall have peace. The world is our sea, but Christ is our
haven; the world is our warfare, but Christ is our rest: the world is full of
storms, but Christ is our peace; in me you shall have peace. Hence it was, that
the Saints of God always have taken exceeding joy in their tribulation;
because Christ was their comfort and peace: he sweetened all their sorrows.
Solus is charum non amittit, cui ille charus est qui non amittitur.
Hence it was that Saint Augustine so resolutely brake forth; Hic ure, hic
seca, modo in aeternum parcas; he regarded not what pressures God laid upon
him: So he vouchsafed patience here, and heaven hereafter. What ever we do or
can suffer in this life, the abundance of our eternal joy, shall infinitely
recompense the weight of our sorrovves: Our light afflictions, which are but
foramoment, do cause unto us a far more excellent and exceeding weight of
glory. Our combat here is short, but our triumph eternal. And who would not
endure a few crosses and windings in his way, when he knows they will bring
him to his journeys end? Who would not, for a little season, expose himself to
the mercy of the waves, Impossible est, ut in utroque seculo beatus sis, ut in
caelo and in terra appareas gloriosus. Hier.
to be tossed on the Sea, when he is assured, with S. Paul, to come safely to
the shore?

Besides we must not expect to establish our happiness here, and to enjoy our
heaven hereafter. It is impossible a man should flow in his delights in this
world; and then drink at the fountain of everlasting bliss in the world to
come.

O then let us embrace the conflict, that we may obtain the Crown. Melior est
modica amaritudo in faucibus, quam aeternum tormentum in visceribus: i. e. a
little gall in the mouth is not so painful, as continual torments in the
bowels. Far better it is to sum up our reckonings here, then to have our
debts upon the score hereafter; Vna hora erit gravior in paena, quam centum
anni in amarissima paenitentia. Thomas de Kemp.
far better to unloose our souls, from the immoderate embracements of the
comforts of this world, and to endure the straits and pinchings of a more
reserved course for sixty or seventy years in this life, then be eternally
tormented for ever more.

Saint Chrysostom has an excellent expression to this purpose: Suppose a man,
says he, much desiring sleep, and in his perfect mind, had an offer made him
of one nights sweet rest, upon condition to be punished a hundred years for it:
would he accept (think you) of his sleep upon such terms? Now look what one
night is to an hundred years, the same is the life present, compared with that
to come: Nay look what a drop of water is to the sea; the same, and no more is
a thousand years to Eternity. Who then of sound judgment, for the short
fruition of a transitory contentment in this life, would expose himself to the
horror of eternal flames in the life to come? And therefore whiles we have our
abode in this vale of misery, we should always pray with Saint Bernard, grant
us, Lord, that we may so partake of temporal felicities, that we may not lose
eternal. All things under the Sun have their alterations and changings, but
things above are permanent, and of an enduring substance. He that can be
secure, and sure of the happiness to come, builds up his house upon a firm
foundation. How small a model of time, how short a period is the longest life,
when once it is finished? Recollect with thy self, says Saint Augustine, the
years that are passed from Adams time until now; turn over the whole
Scripture, and the time since the fall will seem but as yesterday. For what are
the times past? If thou had lived from Adams day till this hour; Da, Domine,
ut sic possideamus temporalia, ut non perdamus aeterna. Omnia ei salva sunt,
cui salva est beara a^ternitas.
thou would easily have judged, that this life has no perpetuity in it,
which flees away so swiftly. For what is the life of any man, suppose the
longest age? It is but like the morning dew, like the twinkling of an eye, in a
trice it is gone. I have seen an end of all perfection, says David. But here, o
Christian, let me deal more plainly with thee; thou will readily acknowledge
all things under the frame of Heaven are perishing, and Heaven is thy thought,
Eternity is thine aim. Now if it be so, why art thou then so dull in thy course
of holiness, so frozen in thy zeal, so inclinable to every motion of sin, so
easily overcome by every incitement to wantonness, never more calm and
unseasonably patient, then when thy affections should be enflamed, and thy
heart kindled with a just indignation in Gods cause? and on the other side,
never more fretting, whining and unquiet, then when thou should be meek and
patient, and cheerfully disposed under the burden of afflictions? How can it be
that we should have eternity in our minds, and yet live no better in our
manners? Now that we may the easier discern the deceitfulnes of our hearts
herein; let us examine our selves by the example of Jacob. This Patriarch Jacob
served his uncle Laban seven years for Rachel his daughter, and the greatness
of his affection toward her, made that time seem but as a few days. (To apply
this:) Thou art a Servant, as Jacob was, but thou serves not such a Master as
Jacob did, thou serves not man, but God, thy maker and a faithful rewarder;
thou serves not for a wife, but for a kingdom; not for an earthly contentation,
but for an heavenly habitation: And yet behold the short affliction of one day
can enervate thy love, and unlock thy affections from God and heaven: Every
cross accident stops thee in thy course, every little sorrow disquiets thy
soul, and lessens thy contentment. Behold here, measure by the example of Jacob
the strength of thy love: Jacob could serve seven years with chearfulnes for a
wife; but thou can hardly serve thy God so many days with a true affection
for Heaven: For reckon up all the nights thou have: spent in prayer, sum up
all the days that thou have worn out in religious exercises, and can thou
then truly say to God as Jacob did to his uncle, In thy service night and day
have I macerated my body with heat and cold, and my sleep departed from mine
eyes; twenty years have I labored in thy service: could thou say thus, and
say it truly, o then what would be the end of thy labor, what would thy reward
be? not flocks of cattle, not the daughters of Laban, but God himself would be
thy exceeding great reward, thy life and happiness; He would be unto thee every
thing that thy heart can desire or long for; Thy soul should flow, and even
melt in abundance of spiritual delights.

But now take a little view of thine own vileness, thy own nakedness, thy utter
disability to any thing that may be truly called good. Thy hands are feeble to
Gods work, thy feet are slow to Gods temple, thine eyes are seared, or shut up
toward heaven; But for the works of flesh and Satan, thy heart is hot to envy,
thy mind prone to revenge, thy tongue voluble to blaspheme, thy affections
even glued and incorporated, as it were, into sensual embracements; And is
this to serve God for Heaven? shall the blessedness of the Saints, and the
glory of Angels, and the joy, and fruition of God himself, be powered out upon
such works as these? Do thou thus requite thy maker?

O consider, consider, I say, thy ways in time; labor to serve God, as Jacob
did: labor to approve thy self as faithful to God, as Jacob was to his uncle
Laban: And if the weight of the labor discourage thee, or adversity oppress
thee, or prosperity seduce thee; then lift up thine eyes to heaven, as Jacob
did to his Rachel: Let heaven be thy love, thy spouse, the delight of thine
eyes, the joy of thy heart; Behold, thy Rachel is fair, and lovely, Heaven is
both beautiful and glorious: Let thy desires go before, whither thou meanest
to hasten after: suffer for a season thy light affliction, having an eye to the
recompense of reward; yet and but a little while, and thou shall approach the
haven, where thou shall enjoy so much the more happiness, Eo dirigendus est
spiritus, quo aliquando est iturus.
by how much the deeper thou have drunk in sorrow; and by how much the more
ardent thy affections have been toward God in this life, the more abundant
shall thy reward be in the life to come; then shall thy crosses prove thy
gains, and that wellspring of joy which shall ever rise in thy heart, shall
swallow up all thy sorrows.

CHAP. II. Showing that there is no other way, nor possible means to attain to
the true eternity, but by a confident affiance upon the merey of God in Christ.
SUch and so deplorable is the condition of every man, considered in his
corrupted and degenerated state, that albeit he be able by that small spark of
natural illumination, which is left in his mind, to see as in a glass,
darkly and obscurely an eternity to come; yet is he utterly ignorant of the
true way thereunto, neither has he any possibility in nature to find it out:
He is in no better state then the poor creeple at the pool of Bethesda, who saw
the waters that could heal him before his eyes, but found no means to help him
into them. For that sound and perfect knowledge of the true way, which man was
adorned with in his first creation, is wholly lost and extinguished in him, he
is now a mere stranger from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. dead in trespasses
and sins, Ephesians. 1.2. reprobate to every good work, Tit. 1.16. his very mind
is defiled, Tit. 1.15. his wisdom is death, Romans 8.6. Nemo aliunde Deo placet,
nisi ex eo quod ipse dona. verit.
He is no more able of himself to lead a holy life, acceptable to God, then a
dead man is to perform the actions of one that is alive. Being thus disrobed of
all spiritual endowments and saving grace: how shall he attain to that joyful
Eternity, which his soul (as I have said) may long for, but can no way reach?
Certainly, there is no light to lead him, but that Si Christum habes,
aeternitatem per Christum in te habes. Alst.
light of the world; no way for him to take to, but that new and living way,
even him, who has styled himself, the way, the truth, and the life; no rock to
cleave to, but this strong foundation; no name under Heaven to be saved by, but
this, even this alone, Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, and the same for
ever. He, and he alone is the only sure, effectual, infallible means of our
salvation: He alone is the true High Priest, who was once offered to take away
sins, and after that entered into the true sanctuary, the very Heaven, to
appear in the fight of God for us, where he is able perfectly to save them,
which come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
them. Heb. 7.26. He alone is the ground of our hope, the crown of our glory,
and the strength of our confidence. Oculum tuum Domine non excludit cor
clausum, nec manum tuam repellit duritia homi. number. Aug.
It Is he alone, who by the sweet influence of his grace, and by the secret
working of his spirit, can (when he will,) and does (when he please) subdue and
bring under the most obdurate, gainsaying, and rebellious heart, to a
cheerful, willing, and ready obedience to his heavenly will. O the infinite
and inexpressible tenderness of our loving Savior to wards us! When we, like
sheep, had gone astray, his mercy reduced us: When we lay wallowing in our
blood, his pity refresht us: When we were dead in our sins, his death did
revive us: and here we may truly say with David, his mercy reaches to the
Heavens. From the Heavens came the price of our redemption. We were not,
neither could we be redeemed by the blood of bulls and goats, by thousands of
rivers of oil, by the cattle that are upon a thousand mountains. It was not the
treasures of the world, the power of men or Angels could purchase this freedom,
nothing could cleanse us, but the blood of the Lamb: He was that fountain,
opened for sin, and for uncleanness; He was that Son of righteousness, that
came with healing in his wings. His were the wounds, that healed our sores; his
was the back, that bare our sorrows; his was the price, that quit our scores;
he assumed our flesh to redeem us here, and he reigns as a king to crown us
hereafter. Now what remains after all this to be done on our parts? Let us rest
on this Anchor, let us flee to this hold, and build on this foundation: For no
other foundation can any man lay, then that which is laid, Jesus Christ. Let us
cast our souls into the arms of our Savior: In brachijs Salvatoris mei and
vivere vole, and mori eupio, says S. Bernard: O let this be our desire: Now
the gate is open, let us not defer the time of entrance: Now is the
acceptable time, let us not procrastinate the season: Now he offers his mercy,
he shows his long sufferance, let us not turn his grace into wantonness; let
us follow the counsel of the son of Sirach: Eccles. the 5. Make no long
tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day: For suddenly
shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou shall be
destroyed, and thou shall perish in time of vengeance. But alas, far
otherwise it is with us in our practice: Magna pars vitae elabitur male
agentibus, maxima nihil age^tibus, tota aliud agentibus.
A great portion of our time is crumbled away in doing ill, a greater part in
doing nothing, and our whole life in doing that which we should not, or in
matters (as we say) upon the by. And as Archimedes was secure and busy about
drawing lines on the ground, when Syracuse was taken: so is it with us. Now
that our eternal safety lies at stake, we lie puzling in our dust, I mean, in
our worldly negotiations: But for our eternity shortly approaching, we seldom
or rarely think of it. We are, like Martha, trouble about many things, when one
thing is necessary: But this one thing is that, which of all other things is
least regarded, and in the last place. We seldom seek heaven, till death does
summon us to leave the earth: we have many evasions to gull our own hearts,
many excuses to procrastinate our repentance; like Dionysius the Sicilian king,
who to excuse himself for the present delivery of the golden garment, which he
took from his god Apollo, answered, that such a robe as that was, could not be
at any season of the year useful to his god: it would not keep him warm in the
winter, and it was too heavy for the summer: So many there be, says S.
Ambrose, who play with God, and with their own soul. You must not (say they)
seek for the vigor and life of Religion in the hearts of young men; For youth,
as the proverb is, must have his swinge: neither can you expect it in the
company of the aged: for their age, and those distempers, which accompany it,
make them a burden to themselves, and dulls the edge of their intentions unto
all their serious undertakings. Thus both the summer and the winter of our age
are unfit for Gods service: But let us not thus cheat ourselves. If God be God,
let us follow him; let us not put off the day of reconciliation, and say in our
hearts, To morrow we will do it, when yet we cannot tell, what shall be to
morrow: for what is our life? It is even a vapor, that appears for a little
time, and afterward vanishes away. Hence it was that Macedonius, being
invited a day before to a feast, replied to the messenger, Why does thy Master
invite me for to morrow, whereas for this many years I have not promised to my
self one days life? Nemo mortem satis cavet, nisi qui semper cavet.
No man dreads death as he ought, but he that always expects his summons; and
therefore we may truly judge such men woefully secure, and wilful contemners of
the future good, who can go to their beds, and rest on their pillows in the
apprehension of their known sins, without a particular humiliation for them.
For how often does a sudden and unexpected death arrest men? We see and know in
our daily experience, many lay themselves to sleep in health and safety, yet
are they found dead in the morning. Thus suddenly are they rapt from their
quiet repose to their irrecoverable judgment, perchance from their feathers to
flames of fire; such is the frail condition of our brittle lives, within the
small particle of an hour, live, and sicken, and die: yet so gross is our
blindness, that from one day to another, nay, from one year to another, we
triflingly put off the reformation of our lives, until our last hour creepes
on us unlookt for, and dragges us to eternity.

Saint Augustine, striving with all his endeavors against the backwardnes and
slownes of his own heart to turn to the Lord, bitterly complained within
himself, Quamdiu, quamdiu, cras, cras? Quare non hac hora finis turpitudinis
meae? How long (says he) o how long shall I delude my soul with to morrows
repentance? Why should not this hour terminate my sinfulness? We are every
minute at the brink of death, and every hour, that we pass through, might prove
(for ought we know) the evening of our whole life, and the very close of our
mortality. Now if it should please God to take away our souls from us this
night (as suddenly falls out to some) what would then become of us? In what
Eternity should we be found? Whether amongst the damned, or the blessed?
Happy were it for us, if we were but as careful for the welfare of our souls,
as we are curious for the adorning of our bodies: if our clothes or faces do
contract any blot or soiling, we presently endeavor to cleanse the same: But
though our souls lie inthralled in the pollutions of sin, this alas we feel
not; it neither provokes us to shame, nor moves us to sorrow. Wherefore let us
look into our hearts with a severer eye: Let the shortness of our days stir
us up to theamendment of our sinful lives; and let the hour, wherein we have
sinned, be the beginning of our reformation, according to that of Saint
Ambrose, Agenda est paenitentia, no^ solum sollicire, verumetiam mature.
Our repentance must be, not only sincere, but timely also: whilst we have
the light, let us walk as children of the light: Let us not any longer cheat
our souls in studying to invent evasions or pretenses for our sins; but rather
lay open our sores, and seek to the true Physician, that can heal them. All the
creatures under the sun do naturally intend their own preservation, and desire
that happiness, which is agreeable to their nature: only man is negligent,
and impiously careless of his own welfare. We see the Heart, when he is stricken
and wounded, looks speedily for a certain herb, well known unto him by a kind
of natural instinct; and when he has found it, applies it to the wound. The
swallow, when her young ones are blind, knows how to procure them their sight
by the use of her Celandine: But we alas are wounded, yet seek for no remedy;
we go customarily to our beds, to our tables, to our good company; but who is
he that observes his constant course of prayer, of repentance, of hearty and
sincere humiliation for his sins? We go forward still in our old way, and jogge
on in the same rode: Though our judgment hasten, hell threaten, death stand ar
the door, yet we thrust onward still; and in dulcem declinanamus lumina somnum:
But alas, miserable souls as we are, can we embrace quiet rests and
uninterrupted sleeps with such wounded consciences? Can we be so secure, being
so near our ruin?

But you will say, we have passed already many nights without danger; no
sickness in the night has befalne us hitherto, why then should any fear of
death amaze or trouble us?

Admit all this, yet, be not too confident; one hour may accomplish that, which
a thousand years could not produce: and think with your selves, what a little
distance there is, between your souls and death: Let me ask the strongest of
men on earth, what certainty of life can thou promise thy self, seeing that
either a little bone in thy throat may choke thee, or a tile from thy house may
brain thee, or some malignant air may poison thee, Tu te prius abreptum
miraberis, quam metueres abripiendum.
and then where art thou? There are a thousand ways, whereby suddenly a man
may come to his end; and certain it is, that Mors illa maxim improvisa est,
cujus vita praecedens non fuit provida, i.e. that death is the suddenest, which
is not ushered in with a foregoing preparation. It is therefore a special
point of wisdom to think every day our last, yea to account every hour the
period of our lives. For look how many pores there are in the body, so many
windows are there to let in death: yea, we carry our deaths continually about
us in our bosoms; and who can promise himself his life till the evening? Death
does not always send forth her harbingers to give notice of her coming; she
often presses in unlookt for, and suddenly attacheth the unprovided soul.
Watch therefore, because ye know neither the day, not the hour: work whilst ye
have the day; for the night comes, wherein no man can work: look toward thy
evening, and cast thy thoughts upon that long Eternity; Death first or last
will apprehend thee: expect it therefore at every turn, and of this assure thy
self, Q^alis quisque in hac vita moritur, talis in die novissimo judicabitur.
as death leaves thee, so shall judgment find thee. How improvidently secure
then are those, who set up their rest in the comforts of this life, and
overly-regard their eternal welfare? This is the general carelessness of our
times.

If a man have a perpetuity but of five shillings yearly rent, what travel,
and pains, and sweat, what beating of his brain and exhausting of his treasure
will he run through, before he will lose one dram of his right? Yet our eternal
inheritance is cast behind us, and undervalued as a trifle, not worth the
seeking, and this shows our small love to our home: for we little esteem of
that which we take small pains for. All other things, which conduce to our
temporal well being, we seek with circumspection, and enjoy them with content,
but matters of Eternity we conceive of, as things far distant from us, we
scarcely entertain them in our thoughts. We busy not our understandings in the
search of those things which we see not: things present and obvious to our
sight do best affect us. We are ill sighted upward, weak and dim eyes have we
toward heaven.

The truth of this appears even in children, who presently even from the
cradle, drink in the rudiments of vice; they learn to swear, riot, drink, and
the like enormities with the smallest teaching; but they are utterly indisposed
to any virtuous inclinations. They soon apprehend what belongs to the
curiosity of behavior, and deportment of the body, and the fashions of the
times; Hoc discunt omnes ante Alpha and Beta puelli; but for Heaven and that
Eternity, they are wholly averse from it, they are utterly incapable of the
things above; they carry about them, as the liverie of their first parents, not
only an indisposition, but a very opposition to goodness: And whereas for
other employments and undertakings, they have certain natural notions in them,
bending their intentions to natural works, some one way, and some another; yet
they have not so much as any apprehension of the things of God. Homo sine
gratia praeter carnem nihil sapit, intelligit aut potest.
Thus it is with children, and thus it is with all men, even those of the
ripest, and most piercing understanding, until the light of Gods Spirit has
shined on the hearts, and powerfully wrought some spiritual holy dispositions
in in them. The natural man (says the Apostle) neither does, nor can discern
the things that are of God. O how infinitely miserable and deplorable is his
state, who having neither knowledge of the true life, nor possibility of
himself to find it out: Cum exul sit a patria exultat in via.
yet runs on securely in his damned way, until he fall woefully and
irrecoverably into the pit, where he will not have, (no not when he has
uncomfortably worn out millions of years) the least intermission of sorrow, or
drop of comfort, or hope of pardon? Here on earth malefactors condemned to die,
have this comfort (though wretched) that one hour commonly terminates all their
griefs in this life: but the torments of the damned are not concluded in an
age; nay, the end and period of ten thousand years will not end their sorrow:
And this is it which adds more to their sufferings, even their unhappie
knowledge of the perpetuity of them; they have not so much as any hope of
releasment.

Hope in this life has such a power in it, that it can yield some comfort in
the midst of trouble; the sick man, whilst his soul is in him, he has hope,
but after this life, this small refreshment is denied the damned, all their
hope is turned into desperation. The prophet Daniel, cap. 4.14. heard the voice
of an holy one crying, Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off
his leaves, and scatter his fruit, nevertheles leave the stump of his root in
the earth. Thus it is with men in this world, says Ambrose, their leaves and
their flowers are shaken; their delights are taken from them; but the roots
remain, and their hope is not abolished. But it is not so in hell; (says he)
There both flower and stump; nay, and even all hope too, are banished away from
them. The day of the Lord, says the prophet Malachi, shall burn them up, and
leave them neither root nor bra^ch. The very hope, says Salomo^, of the wicked
shall perish; what should this teach us, but whilst our hope remains, to improve
our few days to our best adva^tage, to make straighter paths to our selves, to
abridge our inordinate appetites, in some measure of their vain and fruitless
joys; and with all the power of our affections strive to attain that haven,
where no billow shall affright us, no storms astonish us, no perils endanger
us? Then shall our dissolution prove our gain, and our death our glory: if
otherwise we persist wilfully in the paths of our voluptuousnes, and solace our
selves in the vain joys of our own hearts, and in the sight of our eyes;
certainly it will be bitterness in the later end. Ext^ema gaudii luctus occupat.
All our earthly delights will glide away lik a swift river: The rejoicing of
the wicked is short, says Job, and the joy of a sinner is but for a moment:
Though his excellency mount up to the heaven, and his head reach unto the
clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his dung, but the righteous is like a
strong mountain, and he shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

Wherefore to draw to a conclusion, just occasion might here be taken for
deploring the negligence, and unhappy condition of our times. Where are there
any that take into their thoughts the due consideration of the time to come?
Sic plerique vivimus ac si f^bula^sset omni^ aeternitas.
Where shall we find any truly provident for immortality? we so live as though
we conceived of Eternity but as of a fable, or a dream; the sweet allurements
of sin do so strangly beguile many, that by gentle degrees they obliterate,
and extinguish in them all love of virtue, and the very inclinations themselves
to any thing, that may be truly termed good.

But let us no longer delude our selves, by fancying a perpetuity on earth,
behold the judge stands before the door: Mome^to fiet, quod tota doleat
aeternitas. Ante oculos prae omnibus habeamus diem ul^^ mum, and momentis
singulis supplicia timeamus dolorum aeternoru^.
The strongest holds in the World will not be able to detain us one minute,
when God shall be pleased to call for our souls: and therefore let us, before
all things, have continually in our sight the last day: and let us every moment
fear the punishment of eternal pains.

CHAP. III. Certain conclusions drawn from the serious and devout consideration
of Eternity.
The first conclusion.IF they, who run on in any notorious sin, Confecto
demum scelere, ejus magnitudo intelligitur.
did but rightly weigh how fast they go toward the Eternity of torments,
(since that by the least command or stroke of God, they may be unavoidably
hurled to death and destruction:) Certainly they would not, for all the
kingdoms in Europe, for all the treasures of Asia, nay not for the whole
world, defer their repentance one hour; much less would they go so
confidently to their beds, without fear or horror, being so near the pits
brink, and lying in the danger of so great a sin: For what would it profit a
man, to win the whole world, and lose his soul? wherefore who ever thou art,
Nulli parcas, ut soli parcas animae, Omnia si perdas animam servare memento:
what ever become of all other things, yet have a special care for the
salvation of thy precious soul.

II. Our heads are filled with care in these strait and pinching times, how we
shall live in the world, when our souls should be more inquisitive? how we
shall live out of the world, when death has landed us in eternity. For what
matters it, how short our stock of provisions be here, where we are breaking up
house, and on the point of departing? A man that comes to an Inn, if he meet
with hard fare, course lodging, it never troubles him: for it is, says he, but
for a night, I shall away next morrow; so our habitations in this world, are
but like Jonahs gourd, they shelter us but (as it were) for a night; I care not
formans day (says the Apostle) and in truth wherein is it to be regarded? for
what is man's day to eternity? What is it to that God with whom we must live for
ever? Therefore care we not whether our sails be high or low, or what vain men
think of us, but what the eternal God thinks of us: and what we shall be
thought of in that Kingdom, where we must live and abide for ever.

III. Did faith give men as clear a sight of spiritual things, as sense does
of temporal, what manner of lives would they live? how would they be exalted
in the world above the world? I have lost, says one, the favor of such and
such great men: but is there not ten thousand times more sweetness in the favor
of God? These spoiling times, says another, have bereaved me of wife,
children, estate, what ever was near and dear unto me; well, but is not the
Author of all thy comfort alive still? and will not the light of the fun
content thee, though all thy candles be put out? cheer up, man, bare Christ is
wealth enough; if God be thy portion, thou injoyest infinitely more, then the
world can lend thee: For all creature comforts have but their measure, and
proportion of goodness in them: no creature has all good in it; Clothes serve
but to warm us, meat to nourish us, houses to shelter us, physic to recover
us, but God has all good in himself: he is sight to the blind, health to the
sick, liberty to the captive, light to them that sit in darkness, all things to
all men. They that put their trust in the Lord, says David, Shall want no
manner of thing that is good. This is very full, no manner of thing that is
good: mark what God said to Abraham, I am thy exceeding great reward; God is a
reward, an exceeding great reward to his people; when you take in any creature
comfort, you do but sip at Gods bounty: but when you taste of God himself, oh
then you have a fulness indeed. In thy presence is fulness of joy, and at thy
right hand, there is pleasure for evermore.

IV. We carry immortal souls about us, and therefore we should have immortal
aims, immortal ends. When Satan shall tender any thing as lovely to thy
apprehension, say to him, will thy pleasure, thy security, thy ease, to which
thou invitest my soul, abide for ever? I cannot be happy but in an eternal
good. That which must fill up all the chinks of my soul, must be a pure good, a
total good, and an eternal good. If the good I do enjoy, be not pure and all
good, then some thing must be wanting, and there will be imperfection: and
though it be pure and all good, yet if not unchangeably so, then it is but like
a candle, which at last will be extinguished: and the consideration that it
must end, will diminish my happiness, and abate my joy. But sure I am, my
Saviors counsel is sweet and saving, and incloseth fulness of comfort in it;
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that which endures to
eternal life. Since a portion may be had in dyamonds, why should I set my
heart on lumber?

V. Some begin to live, when they are about to dye, and this estate is
perilous: and some do dye before they begin to live, and this estate is
desperate; the speediest work is safest, when thou tradest for eternity. Too
late providence is often seconded with everlasting repentance.

6. Many there are, Caesi ad aeternitatem adeunt, ex qua nunquam exibunt.
who run headlong, and blindfold to their long home, like the rich glutton in
the Gospel, which never began to open his eyes and look upwards, till he was
in torment: All the while he lived on earth, his eyes were shut up, and when it
was too late, namely when he was thrown to hell, then began he to look upward
and about him.

So many now adays they go on in a pleasing and easy way; And In via nemo
errat, sed in fine viae, via pluribus placet, sed displicet and terret viae
t^rminus.
they are never sensible that they are out of the way, till they arrive at the
end of their journey. All the misery lies in the close of the day, For out of
the pit is no redemption: when once the soul is split upon this rock, it gives
to the world his everlasting farewell, according to that of Job. cap. 7.9. as
the cloud vanishes and goes away; so he that goes down to the grave, shall
come up no more, he shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place
know him any more.

VII. It is recorded of Lazarus, that after his resurrection from the dead, he
was never seen to laughed; The stream of his affections were now turned into
another channel; his thoughts were fixed in heaven, though his body was on
earth: and therefore Aeternis inhianti in fastidio sunt omnia transitoria, Bern.
he could not but slight temporal things, when his heart was bent toward
eternal. Oh, that we could work our hearts and souls to a vehement thirst
after Christ, the true eternity! For if Christ be our end, our joy shall be
endless, nullo fine regnabis cum Christo, si Christus tibi finis.

VIII. The mind of man is so much the more sensible of the evil present, by
how much less it meditates on the good to come. For he that looks toward the
reward, will vilify the sufferings. Saint Austin runs on sweetly in his
meditations upon this subject; Eternal labor, says he, is but an equal
compensation for an eternal rest. But if thou should endure this eternal
labor, thou could never arrive at that eternal rest: Therefore has the
mercy of God ordained thy sorrows to be temporal, that thy joys may be
eternal; and yet, says he, Ubi est cogitatio Dei? nimis profundae factae sunt
cogitationes Dei. Aug.
who is there, that thinks on God as he ought? Such thoughts are irksome to us;
But for temporal vanities we think of them with delight; and enjoy them with
contentment: Now, says he, look in and about thy self, Noli gaudere ut piscis,
qui in sua exultat esca, nondum enim traxit hamum piscator. Aug.
see where thou art; God has his hook in thy nostrills, and can pluck thee up
when he pleases: and though he suffer thee (according to thy calculation) a
long time, yet what is the longest time of man to eternity? Yea though thou
should lengthen out thy days to many hundred of years; yet still thou art
transitory, and exposed to the common condition of all men. Then fix thy heart
on God, and so enjoying that eternity, thou shall make thy self eternal; and
be not discouraged for thy tribulations, and daily disquietings in this world:
for such is gods love, such his abundant kindness toward his elect; that he
Ideo Deus terrenis faeli citatibus amaritudinem miscet, ut alia quaeratur
faelicitas, cujus dulcedo non est fallax.
corrects them, to the end they might not be condemned with the world
hereafter. Be not therefore (I say) cast down with any crosses whatsoever, that
may befall thee in this life; for the things that are present, are temporal,
but the things to come are eternal. When we see the friends of this world, the
eager embracers of the comforts of this life, upon every summons of death
strive to defer, what they cannot utterly avoid, their corporal
dissolutions; oh how great care, what indefatigable diligence, what restless
endeavors should we use, that we might live for ever? Let us again, and again,
meditate on these things, and with due care foresee eternity, before we
unexpectedly fall into it. Certain it is, Omnia transeunt, fola restat and non
transibit aeternitas.
all things pass away in this life, only eternity has no period: let us
redeem the time, and work while we have the day: for if we neglect good duties
here, we shall never regain the like opportunity hereafter. This life (says
Nazianzen) is as it were our fairday or market day, let us now buy what we
want, while the fair lasts; while we have time, let us do good unto all men:
Tu dormis sed tempus tuum non dormit, sed ambulat imo volat. Been illis qui sic
vivunt, sicut vixisse se volunt cum motiendum erit faciantque eaquae in
aeternitate constituti fecisse se gaudebu^^. Amb.
Happy is the man that so lives here, that the remembrance of his well-spent
life, may yield him joy hereafter; For otherwise levis hic neglectus, aeternum
fit dispendium, i.e. A small neglect in the ordering of our time in this world,
will be seconded with an eternal loss in the world to come.

IX. Death is the ending of our days, not of our life. For when our day shall
close, and our time shall be no more, then shall our death conduct us to a
life, which will last for all Eternity: For we dye not here to dye, but to live
for ever. Therefore the best guide of our life, is the consideration of our
death: and he alone leads a life answerable to his Christian profession, who
daily expects to leave it. Me thinks 'its strange, men should be so
industriously careful to avoid their death, and so carelessly improvident of
the life to come, when as nothing makes death bad, but that estate which
follows it: but the reason is, we are spiritually blind and see not, nor know,
in this our day, the things that belong to our peace. We have naturally neither
sight nor feeling of the joys to come. But when God shall enlighten the
darkness of our minds, and reveal his son in us, when once the day
dawneth, and that day star arises in our hearts, o then our death will be
our joy, and the rejoicing of our hearts, then shall we infinitely desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. Let us therefore with unwearied endeavors
labor to bring Christ home to our hearts, and to keep him there. Let us dye to
our selves, and to our lusts here, that so in the world to come, we may
everlastingly live unto Christ and in him.

Some directions for the better ordering of our lives, in the way to a happy
eternity.
Sin and grace are both eternal, both reach to eternity; and so do all the
actions that proceed from either. Hence it follows, that a gracious life, is
the beaten pathway to a glorious eternity. Therefore to the end thy Being
hereafter may be as happy, as it must be long: take in these directions.

In all thy dealings amongst the sons of men, be that thou seem; amuse not
the world with flourishes, labor not to be more outwardly glorious, then
inwardly sincere. Alas, what a melancholy piece of business will it prove in the
end, to be a man of praises, as it were, for a day: and afterward (if
repentance prevent it not,) to be a man of sorrows for ever? to have this life
comfortable, and eternity miserable? What ever thy hand shall find to be done,
cast first in thy thoughs: Whether durst I act this same thing, were I now to
die? Quicquid agis, quicquid suscipis, tecum prius cogita, number tale aliquod
ageres, si hac hora esset moriendum.
Its good to live by dying principles. A frequent arraignment of thy heart,
will render thy life comfortable, thy death peaceful, thy eternity glorious,
and shelter thee from many snares and temptations, which otherwise sin and
Satan would cast upon thee.

When thou set upon any religious duty, seriously weigh with thy self, what
the temper of thy heart is toward it. Oh what a sad thing is it, (if
judiciously balanced,) to think I have begun, and ended a holy duty, before a
most holy God, but felt not what I spoke. My heart was sealed up: labor
therefore above all things, whilst thy soul in any exercise is in communion
with God, to keep thy affection on the wing, and strive not so much to be long
winded, as heart-wounded in thy petitions, as knowing assuredly, that when once
thy devotion is flatted, (though thy speech do continue,) thy prayer is done.

We live in dismal days, fire and sword rage round about us, yet our greatest
enemies lodge in our bosom. Labor thou by thy prayers and pains to master thy
corruptions: Then cruel cut throats, though they may pull thy heart from thy
body, can never take God from thy heart, then death it self, (that king of
terrors) need not affright thee, because hereby thy soul is but let out of a
cage, and her out going from this life, is but an in going to a better.

When once thou have devoted thy self to the service of God, thou will find
thy heart to be a very busy thing. Thou will ever and anon be forcing thy self
upon vows and resolution, to do more for God, to fight more eagerly, more
effectually against thy worser self; but remember this by the way, that
self-confidence is an inlet to often failings; Therefore engage Christ with
thee, in all thy purposes: and let S. Paul's. profession, in this particular, be
thy instruction, and digest it into practice; I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me.

There is now adays much wording of religion in the world, but favor and
frowns, like strange byasses, do frequently twist men round; and this is the
garb of these unhappy times; but to avoid intanglements of this nature, study
to be quiet, and meddle with thine own business: (and as it is said of humble
men,) be thou more troubled with thy self, then with all the world besides.
Live (as thou can,) a disingaged man. Innocence, and Independency, are
prevalent means to keep the soul close to God.

I have done with directing thee: the Lord direct us all, that our reformation
may be answerable to our incoms of mercy, otherwise, though all our enemies
were destroyed, yet shall we find divisions enough at home to ruin us.

X. Now that we may be the better encouraged to raise up our endeavors to the
attainment of this happy eternity; Let us in a word consider the abundant, and
the ever-flowing happiness in the world to come; Neither eye has seen, nor ear
has heard, nor tongue can express the joys that God has provided for them
that love him. Saint Augustine being ravished with the desire of this life
breaks out with an inflamed affection: U^^nullum erit malum, nullum latebit
bonum.
how great shall that happiness be, where there can be no unclean thing, where
no good can be wanting; where every creature does praise and admire his
Creator, who is all in all things? How great shall that reward be, Fraemiun
virtutis critipse, qui virtutem dedit.
where the river of virtue shall be himself the reward of virtue? how great
shall that abundance be, where the author of all plenty shall be unto me life
and soul, and raiment, health, and peace, and honor, and all things; yea the
end and complete object of all my desires? For in his presence is the fulness of
joy, and at his right hand there is pleasure for evermore. How great shall that
blessedness be, where we shall have the Lord our debtor, who has promised to
reward our good deeds; where we shall have the Lord for our portion, who will
be to us, (as he was to Abraham) our exceeding great reward? How great shall
that light be, where the Sun shall no more shine by day, nor the moon by
night; where God shall be our light, and the Lord our glory? How great shall
that possession be, where the heart shall possess whatsoever it shall desire,
and shall never be deprived of its possessions? Here will be to the Saints an
abundant, everlasting, overflowing banquet; no grief can accompany it, no
sorrow succeed it. Here is joy without sadness, rest Quies motus no^ appetitus.
without labor, wealth without loss, health without languor, abundance
without defect, life without death, perpetuity without corruption. Here is the
beatificall presence of God, the company of Saints, the society of Angels. Here
are pleasures, which the minds of the beholders can never be wearied with;
they alvvaies see them, and yet always rejoice to see them: These are the
flagons of wine, which comforted up David, when he cried out, According to the
multitude of the sorrows which I had in my heart, thy comforts have refreshed
my soul: In coelo est vita ver^ vitalis, In heaven, and only in Heaven is the
true life: For there our memories shall live in the joyful recordation of all
things past; our understandings shall live in the knowledge of God; our wills
shall live in the fruition of all excellencies that they can wish for, all our
senses shall abound in their several delights. Here is that white stone, which
Saint John speaks of, even glory and immortality to them that overcome. Here
is that water of life, which our Savior speaks of, whereof whosoever drinks
shall never thirst again. Here is that river, the springs whereof make glad the
hearts of men: And how earnestly are we invited to these delights; come buy,
wine and oil without money? Heaven is at sale, and thou may buy if thou will,
and shrug not at the greatness of the price, give but thy self to God, and
thou shall have it. And who would not abandon his honors, his pride, his
credit, his friends, nay himself? Who would not be willing to pass through the
gates of hell, and endure infernal torments for a season, so he might be
certain of so glorious and eternal an inheritance hereafter? Let all the
devils in hell (says Saint Augustine) beset me round; let fastings macerate my
body; Coelum venale est, nec multum exaestues propter pretij magnitudine (...)
te ipsum da, and habebis illud. Aug.
let sorrows oppress my mind; Bone Jesu qui par cendo sae prus nos a te
abijcis, feriendo effice ut ad te redeamus Ger. med.
let pains consume my flesh, let watchings dry me, or heat scorch me, or cold
freeze and contract me; let all these, and what can come more, happen unto me,
to I may enjoy my Savior. For how excellent shall the glory of the just be?
how great their joy, when every face shall shine as the sun; when our Savior
shall martial the Saints in their distinct orders, and shall render to every
one according to his works? O were thy affections rightly settled on these
heavenly mansions, how abject and underneath thee would thou esteem those
things, which before thou setst an high price upon? As he which ascends an high
mountain, when he comes to the top thereof, finds the middle steps low, and
beneath him, which seemed to be high to him while he stood in the bottom; so he
which sends his thoughts to heaven, however he esteemed of the vanishing
pleasures of the world, when his heart lay grovelling on the earth below, now in
this his transcendency he sees them under him, and vilisies them all in regard
of heavenly treasures. Let us therefore cheerfully follow that advice of a
reverend Father: Quod aliquando per necessitatem amittendu^ est, pro aeterna
remuneratione sponte est distribuendum.
Let us here willingly part with that for heaven, which we must first or last
necessarily leave upon earth, and let all the strength of our studies, and the
very height of our endeavors be dispended for the attainment of Eternity. For
certain it is howsoever we live here like secure people of a secure age, and
however we waste out the strength and flower of our days, as if we should
never account for it; yet our judgment is most sure; and shall not be avoided:
The sentence of the Judge will be one day most assuredly published, and shall
not be revoked: We must all appear (says Saint Paul) before the judgment seat
of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Then shall our wickedness be
brought to light, which now lies hid in darkness. I saw the dead (says Saint
John, Revel. 20.12.) both great and small stand before God, and the books were
opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead
were judged of those things which were written in the books, according to their
works; and whosoever was not found witten in the book of life, was cast into
the lake of fire. Thus it is evident, every man shall give up his account;
every soul shall first or last come to his reckoning: Multorum vocatio,
paucorum electio, omnium retributio; Many are called, few chosen, but all
rewarded according to their deeds. Oh then let us prepare our selves to meet
our God; let us come before him with fear, and tremble at his judgments. Fear
not him, (says our Savior) who when he has killed the body, can do no more,
but fear him, who can cast both soul and body to hell; I say, him fear. Oh how
many of the Saints of God trembled and quaked, when they have meditated upon
the last judgment? Hierom says, as often as I think of that day, how does my
whole body quake, and my heart within me tremble? Cyril says, I am afraid of
hell, because the worm there dies not, and the fire never goes out: I
horribly tremble (says Bernard) at the teeth A dentibus bestiae infernalis
contremis^: quis dabit oculis meis fontem lachrymarum, ut prc eniam fletibus
fletu^ and stridorem dentium?
of that infernal beast. Who will give to mine eyes (says he) a fountain of
tears, that by my weeping here I may prevent vveping and gnashing of teeth
hereafter? And have the Saints of God thus shrunk at the thoughts of hell? how
should then the loins of the wicked quake and tremble?

Come now thou profane wretch, of a profane age, who at every word almost
that drops from thy irreligious mouth, speak damnation to thy soul:
bealching out ever and anon, these or the like execrable speeches, Would I were
damned if I knew this or that; God damn me body and soul, if I do it not.
Alas, alas, seems it a light thing in thine eyes, to play with flames, to
sport thy self with everlasting burnings? Tell me, do thou know, or did
thou ever cast it in thy thoughts, what a condition it is to be damned? Hear a
little and tremble; Thou shall there, to thy greater horror and amazement, see
much joy, but never feel it: for thou shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and thou thy self thrust out, Luke.
6.13.28. As touching thy company: Though here on earth, thou would not
perchance be hired to lodge one night, in a house haunted with spirits, yet
there thou must inhabit with unclean devils for evermore, Matthew. 25.41. And to
conclude in this thy cursed estate thy heart and tongue shall be full of
cursings and blasphemies. Thou shall blaspheme the God of heaven, for thy pains
and sores, thou shall curse those that were the means to bring thee thither;
curse the time that ever thou lost so many golden opportunities of getting
grace, that thou have heard so many sermons, and no whit bettered by them.
Curse thy self, that slightest so many wholesome reproofs, which might have
happily been improved to the saving of thy soul. Say now (desperate fearles
sinner) can thou be content in the apprehension of these miseries, to curse
thy self again to the nethermost of hell? or on the contrary, do thou now
begin to be ashamed and confounded in thy self, and is thy conscience
affrighted with the ugly face of thy sins, and of those bitter torments that
abide them? Know then, thou have to deal with a God, who when thou art truly
moved for thy sins, an mourn for thy sufferings, Jer. 31.20. Thou have to deal
with a God, who will meet thee when thou approachest to him, if thou work
righteousness, and remember him in his way, Isa. 64.5. Thou have to deal with a
God, who does account it his strange work to punish, Isa. 28.21. And he does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, Lam. 3.33. Yea, thou
have to deal with a God, who has graciously proclaimed to the whole world,
that he delights to show mercy: yea, with his whole heart, and with his whole
soul, Jer. 32.41. Oh then be wise now for thy soul in time, and think it a
mercy, that thou art yet on this side hell. And whatever thou judge thy self
worthy to be condemned for, at that terrible bar, condemn thy self for it
before hand, that the Lord may say, I will not judge this man, because he has
judged himself already. And be assured, where man's conversion begins, there
Gods displeasure makes its period.

Excellent is that advice of Saint Gregory, weigh (says he) and consider the
errors of thy life, while thy time serves; Tremble at that strict judgment to
come, while thou have health, lest thou hear that bitter sentence, ( Go ye
cursed) go forth against thee, when it is too late. Did man know what time he
should leave the world, carnal wisdom would prompt him, to proportion his
time, some to pleasure, and some to repentance. But he that has promised
pardon to the penitent, has not assured the sinner of an hours life. Culpam
tu^m (du^ vacat) pe^sa, and districtione^ su u^ judicij (du^ v^les) exhorresce,
ne tunc amaram sententian^^^udias; cum null lis fletib^ evadas.
Since therefore we can neither prevent, nor foresee death, let us always
expect it, and provide for it. Let us dye to our sins here, that we may live
to Christ hereafter, and let us suffer with Christ in this world, that we may
rejoice and reign with him in the world to come. When we depart this life, we
go to an eternity, to an eternity, I say, which shall never end, never, never,
me thinks this word, never, has a mountanious weight in it; to an eternity
which makes every good action infinitely better, and every evil action
infinitely worse. Oh the unhappines and everlasting woe of those men, who
prefer the small and trifling things of this life, before the eternal weight
of glory hereafter: who to enjoy the short comfort of a miserable life here,
are content to lose the presence of God, and society of Angels for ever
hereafter.

FINIS.

