THE PRETENDERS: OR, The Town Unmaskt. A COMEDY. Acted at the Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields. By His Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mr. Dilke.

Ficta Voluptatis Causa sint proxima veris. LONDON, Printed for Peter Buck, at
the sign of the Temple, near the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, School.

Newly published the two last new Tragedies, viz. Caligula Emperor of Rome, by
Mr Crown. False Discovery, or Love in Ruins, a Tragedy; with a Preface in
answer to Mr Dryden's Copy of Verses, prefixed to a Comedy, called Heroic Love.

TO THOMAS BARNARDISTON, Esquire OF Ketton in Suffolk.
SIR,
AFter a Poet has made his appearance upon the Stage, the next thing he
generally does, is to take his station in some great man's Antichamber; there
to screw himself into a protection for his Play, with a Paper stufft full of
Bombast-encomiums of his new Patrons high Merits and wonderful Qualifications:
Which perhaps, till that time, were as little heard of in the world, as the
Poet was known to his thus applauded Maecenas.

The business of this Dedication to you, Sir, is quite otherwise; for as I have
the honor to be very well known to You, so I take this opportunity, as well to
express the sentiments of my esteem for You, as to publish my thanks for past
Obligations. A poor Tribute indeed! But as it is my present All, so it is wholly
at your service.

And now, while I am paying my Addresses to a Barnardiston, methinks I have as
copious a subject to enlarge upon as I could wish. But lest* I should seem to
incur the reflection I have thought fit to make on others, I shall only hint at
what I could not possibly omit. I should exasperate the Country You live in,
should I not take notice with what a due regard they have all sixth their Eyes
upon You. Nor is there any question to be made, but that in this their
well-grounded hopes, You will even outdo their Expectations. And tho
Lincolnshire as well as Suffolk claims an Interest in You, yet the latter has
that to say of your Family, which can scarce be paralleled in any other.

That Ketton should have been the continued Mansion House of seven and twenty
Sir Thomas Barnardistons, successively from Father to Son, with but the
interruption of one Sir Nathaniel, Your great Grandfather, is a thing highly
remarkable. And since the Honor of Baronet is but of late date in the world,
no doubt but that badge of Knighthood was still conferred upon these brave
Ancestors of Yours for their fidelity to the Crown* and as a reward for the
services they severally afforded their respective Princes. This noble train of
Sir Thomas's is at present closed with the now Sir Thomas Barnardiston, your
truly honorable Father, a person every way so conspicuous, that he has no
occasion for the least touch of a Poet's varnish, to gloss over his true and
real worth. All that I shall say upon this account is, that being so well
acquainted with that tender Union and Correspondence that is betwixt you, I may
safely answer for your joining with me in an O Vtinam sero in Coelum Redeat!
After this may your Lineage run the length of time; and may Ketton never want a
Barnardiston for its Proprietor, till the world wants a Mortal for its
Inhabitant.

Thus, Sir, as I began my Epistle in a method something uncustomary for one of
my profession; and having all along forborne to harangue you with fulsome
Flattery, so I shall beg leave to conclude without so much as side glancing a
single Compliment upon my self, and let me tell you, that is a great piece of
self-denial in a Poet of this Age. I am confident, that as you would be apt to
scorn me for the one, so you would laugh at me for the other. If I can find out any
value to put upon my self, it is not in respect of my performances, but for the
good fortune I have to be,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most obliged Servant, Tho. Dilke.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN
Lord Courtipoll. A vain empty-skull'd Lord, pretending himself to be highly
interested at Court, and consulted in all State Affairs. A keeping Gallant to
Mrs. Minx. Mr. Thurmond. Sir Wealthy Plainder, A Rich close Curmugeon,
pretending to be wholly decayed in his Fortunes. A private Cully to Mrs. Minx.
Mr. Underhill. Sir Bellamour Blunt, A plain downright Speaker. A Country
Gentleman, of good sense and knowledge. In love with Ophelia. Mr. Kynaston.
Vainthroat, A loose talkative Gentleman of the Town. Mr. Bowman Broakage, A
poor Bankrupt Merchant, pretending himself to be very rich. A pretender to the
Widow. Mr. Trefuse. Captain Bownceby, A blustering casheer'd Subaltern Officer,
pretending himself a Captain. Another pretender to the Widow. Mr. Bright.
Nickycrack, A sly knavish fellow, who pretends to all the honesty imaginable.
Mr. Bowen. Prim, Lord Courtipoll's Valet de Chamber, a poor Scoundrel, but
pretending himself to be of a Gentleman's Family. Mr. Baily.
WOMEN.
Widow Thoroshift, Left low in the World, but setting up for a vast Fortune,
Mrs. More. Minx, Her Sister, a cunning intreaguing Coquet, who pretends to have
been bred altogether in the Country. Kept by Lord Courtipoll. Mrs. Peryng.
Ophelia, Daughter to Sir Wealthy Plainder; a virtuous young Lady, privately in
love with Sir Bellamour Blunt. Mrs. Bowman. Sweetny, Sister to Nickycrack: a
Boarding Landlady. A fawning dissembling Hypocrite, pretending to much Piety
and Devotion. Mrs. Lee. Nibs, A Servant-maid in the Family. A cunning tattling
wench, but a great pretender to secrecy. Mrs. Lawson. Doll, Servant to Minx;
of the same pretention as her Mistress. Mrs. Willis.
SCENE Covent Garden.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken By Mr. Bowen, coming upon the Stage in a great huff, followed by a
Prompter, with a Paper in his hand; and by a Boy with a Bottle and Glass. I
Will Not speak this Prologue -- Go tell him so;
If he no Wit, I can some Manners show.
I curse the Critics! Rail at Men of Sense;
Gadzooks I wonder at his impudence.
Besides --
He should have chose some tender Cherub face,
Whose melting smiles could so bewitch the place,
That might have forced him to a state of Grace.
Such a queer Phiz as mine, on my Salvation,
Will ne^re retrieve him from his late Damnation.
And yet methinks, I Am loath to lose him quite,
First let me drink, then try to do him right.
Takes the Glass. Here you Gall'ry Spankers: a Health to those
That value Brawn, and scorn the Lath-backt Beaus.
Those City Ladies who to quench a flame,
From their own Counters spring the lusty game.
Drinks. Fills again. Next to all sound Masks. Yup Kecks not one drop will down,
This plainly shows there is none in all the Town.
Fills it up. Come a Bumper to th'Pit -- No doubt but you
Expect from me, a Health entirely new.
Your thoughts I would not willingly forestal;
If this Play's damned, Confusion to ye all.
Drinks. Fills again. To the side boxes Sirrah, be sure you fill me nicely now,
While I on either side profoundly bow.
Gad, sure to Men of so much Grace and Feature,
There should be left a spice of Human Nature.
Then let your Goodness more conspicuous be,
And don't you snuff at every fault you see.
So may your Mistresses be over kind,
And none of all your Imperfections find.
Drinks. Till thus you stand, full of your selves possessed,
But leave good drudging Sparks to do the rest.
Takes another. Now on my Knees, I Will veneration pay,
And heartily Drink, ( Drinks.) To what I durst not say.
In short, Ladies --
Thus does our Poet for your mercy sue,
Rising up. And swears he dreads no other Stars but you.
THE PRETENDERS: OR, The Town Unmaskt.
ACT I. Scene Convent-Garden Piazza's.
Sir Bellamour Blunt and Vainthroat, in Riding habits, as just come to Town.
Vain. WEll, Sir Bellamour, how shall we dispose of our selves, now we are
arrived at this glorious Town of London?


Sir Bell. Why faith, Vainthroat, I Am not well acquainted with the Town; but by
what I do know, thou may e'n choose what corner of it thou think fit, and
yet never want objects for either Ridicule or Detraction; and those are thy two
darling faculties.


Vain. Lord, Sir, why should you say that of me, who am the nicest man living
of all peoples Reputations?


Sir Bell. Reputation! I Would undertake there would not be a single grain of such
a thing in the Universe, were it in the power of thy Tongue to blast it.


Vain. Come, Sir Bellamour, I must tell you, that you have got a damned
unbecoming quality, to speak always what you think, it is the absurdest thing
that a Gentleman of this age can be guilty of.


Sir Bell. Would it not be more absurd, either to speak without thinking, or
impudently to belie a man's own opinion?


Vain. Not at all I vow; I find you are, as you say your self, not well
acquainted with the Town: why all Gentlemen of good assurance and right Town
breeding, first never think of what they say, and then don't care one ^a^thing
whether a syllable of it be truth or not.


Sir Bell. For that reason I Will avoid all Town Company, to prevent being shockt
with the insolence of Lies, or stunned with the eternal sputter of Nonsense.


Vain. At the present we'll wave disputes -- Let Us settle our selves into
convenient Lodgings, get splendid Equipages; and then Beau it about the Town.


Sir Bell. What the Devil do mean by that foolish word, Beau?


Vain. Why faith the title and qualifications of a Beau, have long been the
standing mark for the random shot of all the Poets of the Age. And to very
little purpose. -- The Beaus bravely stand their ground still e'gad -- The
truth on it is, they are a sort of case-harden'd animals, as incapable of
Scandal, as they are insensible of any impression either from Satyr or good
Sense.


Sir Bell. And prithee how must these case-harden'd animals be distinguished?


Vain. Barring Reflection, I believe the best way to be adquainted with the
whole Tribe of 'em, would be to get a general Register drawn from all the
Persumers Shop-books in town -- Or which is more scandalous, to examine the
Chaulks in all the Chair-mens Cellars about the Pallmall; where each morning
the poor fellows sit, looking pensively upon their long scores, shaking their
heads and saying -- Ah! how many times have we trotted with such a powdered Son
of a nine Fathers, from the Chocolate-house to the Play, and never yet saw a
groat of his Money.


Enter Nickycrack. Nick. Mr Vainthroat you are welcome to Town, you are the
only person living that I most wanted a sight on; I vow and protest you are,
upon my honesty.


Sir Bell. I never yet heard a man call his honesty to witness, but he proved a
damned Rogue at bottom. -- This fellow has Rascal stamped upon his very
countenance.


[Aside. Vain. Honest Nickycrack, thou art come very opportunely -- You may at
present be assisting to us.


Nick. O Lord, in whatever lies in my power, you know, Sir, that you may assure
your self of me -- Is this your friend, pray Sir?


Vain. It Is Sir Bellamour Blunt, Sir: a person highly worth your acquaintance.


Nick. Sir Bellamour Blunt, I am yours, with all the integrity, sincerity, and
uprightness an honest heart is capable of containing -- Pray, Sir, how can I be
most serviceable to ye.


Sir Bell. By going about your business, Sir.


Vain. You must pardon this Gentleman's abrupt speaking, it is his way Mr
Nickycrack.


Nick. Then the Gentleman's way of speaking suits punctually with my way of
acting, which is always honest and downright.


Sir Bell. Were I to guess at your actions by your looks, I Would sooner cut out my
Tongue, than speak a syllable that should correspond even with your bare
conceptions.


Vain. Fie, Sir Bellamour, prithee leave this strange moroseness. -- Come
honest Nickycrack, can thee advise us to any good Lodgings?


Nick. O dear, Sir, my Sister Sweetny here just by, has the best convenience of
Lodging and Boarding of any woman in Town -- And she, you know, Sir, is a good
woman; a woman, tho I say it, of much true Piety and Devotion.


Sir Bell. I Will hold my life on it, she is a Bawd by her Character.


Vain. Why suppose she were, does not a person of that necessary function
deserve a more tender expression -- As that such a Lady is a most obliging
officious Virginity-Broaker, Them me if she ben't the charitablest creature in
the Kingdom -- Whenever ye design to villi^y, you must be sure to let it be
tout en Ridicule, ah, ha, ha. And thus you may modishly be allowed to to
bespatter any body.


Sir Bell. I Would as soon disguise my person to be a base and barbarous Assassin,
as I would my thoughts by telling a Lie.


Vain. Prithee what Company is there at your Sister's at present?


Nick. O Lord, Sir, we are never without good Company; there is the fine Widow
Thoroshift, a vast fortune; and her pretty Country bred innocent Maiden Sister,
Mrs. Minx.


Vain. Very well, I know 'em.


Nick. And just now Sir Wealthy Plainder and his beautiful Daughter Ophelia,
have made an addition to the Family.


Vain. Sir Wealthy Plainder, and his Daughter Ophelia! Do you hear, Sir
Bellamour; the very persons we came up to Town withal. I am confident you need
no farther inducement. -- Go Nickycrack, get our Rooms ready, and we'll order
our things thither, and follow immediately.


Nick. Sir I shall be proud of obeying your Command.


[Exeunt Sir Bell. and Vain Enter Captain Bownceby. Capt. Ha! My Dear, have I
found thee? I have been upon the hunt for ye, with greater vigor than ever I
yet pursued an Enemy; and that you may imagine was never with any small heat. --
Come faith you must assist me.


Nick. In what, good Captain Bownceby? What is the mighty business?


Capt. Why the mighty business is love -- And who the Devil would think a man
of my rough temper, a Soul of that fierceness as mine is, should e're be
flexible to the beck of a little, puny, blind brat?


Nick. Good Captain, the Object?


Capt. The Object of my uncontrollable passion, is the VVidow Thoroshift: I
know you have an interest in her -- And let me perish if it shall not be worth thy
while.


Nick. Ha! Pimp for a Soldier in time of Peace, ah that is damned cool work
e'faith.


Capt. Pox! I understand ye. -- You shall not want your encouragement, tho I sink
my Arrears three parts in four for you.


Nick. Captain, I have business at present: but assure your self you may
command me in any thing, so your intentions be just and honorable; for all the
world knows that Mr. Nickycrack will not act otherwise than what is becoming an
honest man.; and as such, I am noble Captain Bownceby's very humble Servant. --
Oh! Yonder Is Nibs, the trusty Servant-maid, walking this way, she can better
inform you in your present concerns. -- I am yours, Sir.


[Exit. Enter Nibs. Capt. Sweet Mrs. Nibs, I Will be short and Soldier-like with
you. Know then that the suze of my Vitals is fired by the lighted Match of your
Mistresses Beauty; and if it be not quickly extinguished by her cooling P^mp of
Pity, dry up my blood, if I shall not be blown into the air; and there burst into
millions of fiery atoms.


Nibs. Sir, I Will endeavor to answer you as a Captain ought to be answered:
I Will say but little, but what I do say shall be to the purpose. I say, that a
Servant that is entrusted with the concerns of a Family, ought always to have
Discretion stand Sentinel upon her lips, there strictly to guard the port of
her utterance. For my part, I scorn to let my tongue, Weathercock like, wag
with the breath of every impertinent enquirer: If I see with one eye; I wink
with the other: and whatever I hear, is that very moment barricado'd within the
precincts of this Breast: and mum's the word; and tho I say it, that should not
say it, and all that --


Capt. Nay prithee Nibs, halt, halt, halt I say. -- Come, let us to the purpose,
I^expect very soon to be a Colonel, and I Will give you my parole of honor to
make that man a Captain that you shall think fit to make your Husband, deal but
sincerely with me, and let me know how things stand?


Nibs. Well Sir, what is it you would know?


Capt. Why I would know who pays Court to the Widow?


Nibs. O Lord! all the world: Who pays Court to a rich Widow? Why Courtiers
without Estates, Country-Gentlemen damnably in debt, unbenefic'd Divines.
Officers without Posts, Doctors without Patients, Lawyers without Clients,
Tradesmen without Stocks, younger Brothers without either Fortunes or Employs,
Beaux upon their last legs, cast Stallions, and begga^ly Poets; and there is the
greatest part of the world, I Am confident on it.


Capt. Blood and Brimstone, Nibs, prithee leave this eternal chattering, and
tell me who is my most dangerous Rival.


Nibs. Why then, Sir, as I hope to be a Captains Lady, for once I will divulge
-- There Is one Mr. Broakage, a wealthy Merchant, who attacks her vigorously.


Capt. Hell and furies! Bombs and Bilboa Blades! May rank Coward be imprinted
on this dreadful Countenance, if I don't go raise the Siege instantly -- How! A
City-drone stand in competition with a daring warlike Hornet? Ha!


Nibs. He Is wonderful rich; and you know that is a prevailing accomplishment in
the business of Love -- He has Colonies in all our P^antations, Cargoes in all
our Trading bottoms, and Shares in all our Banks.


Capt. Ha! I Will go this moment and depopulate all his Plantations, sink all his
Ships, and blow up all his Banks.


Nibs. Oh brave Captain!


Capt. I Will Carbonade the Dog full of ghastly Wounds, then with my charming
Widow in my arms, I Will mount my triumphal Chariot, and drag his mangled Carcass
around the utmost limits of the Universe.


Nibs. Well said Captain!


Capt. I Will first go to the Widow, and if I find there be occasion, I Will put
this tremendous sentence of mine in execution the very moment afterward. Parch
my puddings if I don't.


[Exit. Nibs. Ha, ha, ha.


Enter Nickycrack. Nick. Nibs, what has the Captain deserted?


Nibs. Why faith, I have been whetting his Courage, and spurring him in his
amor with the VVidow -- And you know there is no time to be lost in that
business.


Nick. Gad it is true, for if we don't dispose of her in less than four and
twenty hours, I Am confident the Tallymen will be for disman^ing of her -- And
should every Bird setch her own Feathers, I doubt the poor Widow Thoroshift
would be left as bare as AEsop's Daw -- But first I Will to the Commissaries
Office, and make some enquiry after this thundering Captain Bownceby.


Nibs. Pray do Mr Nickycrack, for as times go now there are near as many that
take the names of Captain upon 'em, as there are Soldiers in the Kings Army.


Nick. It Is true; for a stiff cockt-up Hat, close twisted Peruke, and a
tuckt-in Cravat --


Nibs. A brandy pimpled face, impudent look, and a hoarse voice. --


Nick. A score of new coined Oaths, and half as many drunken Catches --


Nibs. A great brass hilt Sword, and an Oaken Plant with a dirty Ribbon in it
--


Nick. A blue pair of Breeches and red Stockings --


Nibs. Are sufficient to gain any man the title of a Captain, tho perhaps he be
but a Bailiffs Follower --


Nick. Or the scoundrel Bully to a Widows Coffee-House in a blind Alley.


Nibs. And indeed there is as much occasion that you should go to the Change and
make some enquiry after Mr Broakage, that so we may be ready to snap at that
which proves the best bargain.


Nick. That Is right again; for it is as difficult to guess at the substance of a
Merchant by his figure in the world, as it is to know the true grief of a young
Widow, by the dismal appearance of her mourning Veil.


Nibs. Or at the real intentions of a blushing Virgin, when she sets her mouth
in print, and says No to a good proffer --


Nick. Or as it is to know the age of a Beau, without having first consulted
the person that shaves his empty Noddle, or his Operator, to be informed,
whether this European Monster is not obliged to the great African one, for the
whiteness of his Teeth --


Nibs. Or to know his natural imperfections, unless his Valet de Chamber be
workt to a Confession, what suppliments his Beauship makes use of, to correct
the deficiencies of his Shape and Complexion.


Nick. Right e'gad, as whether his nice jutting backside be real flesh and
blood, or only an artificial Cusheon of quilted Cotton --


Nibs. Or whether the calves of those pretty Legs he struts upon, do not owe
their original to some ingenious Artists amongst the Stocking-Weavers in
Spittle Fields.


Nick. Ha! Yonder Is the Widow, and my Sister Sweetny coming this way from their
evenings devotion.


Nibs. A fine trade indeed, Prayer-Books in their hands, and the World, Flesh,
and the Devil in their hearts.


Enter Widow Thoroshift, Sweetny, with Books in their hands. Nick. (
approaching them) Madam Thoroshift I am your Servant -- Sister Sweetny I have
just recommended to you a couple of new Lodgers; I believe they are by this
time got to your house.


Sweet. Pray who are they?


Nick. Why there is Mr Vainthroat, a person that we all know, and his friend Sir
Bellamour Blunt, such a morose piece of Knighthood that I never yet saw; should
he chance to go into your Cellar, he would endanger sowring your Beer, more than
all the Thunder of a hot Summer -- But no matter for that, he is a man of
substance, and that is enough for our purpose.


Sweet. I have heard of him; but is Mr Vainthroat come to Town? I vow I am glad
on it, for he is a pure man.


Wid. Mr Vainthroat indeed is most excellent company amongst the women; he
knows all the scandalous news about Town, especially that part of it, that is
most necessary for us to know, as when the close-fisted Steward fills his
Masters Fob for him, and thinks fit to entrust him with the management of three
or four hundred of his own Guineas.


Sweet. Or when the City Merchant, after a lumping bargain by inch of Candle,
comes to lavish away a hundred pieces amongst our Bon^ Roba's of Covent Garden.


Nick. Or when an Inns-of-Court Spark confesses a Statute to raise five hundred
pounds, upon the reversion of his Fathers Manor house, to make his last
flourish withal -- And when that is fairly snackt by Bawds, Pimps, and
Strumpets, the vain Coxcomb sneaks over the Water into the bounds of the Kings
Bench, and there dozes away the remainder of his Life, with fulsome Flip, and
nasty Mundungus.


Wid. Nay, he has always pretty stories of the women too.


Sweet. Ay so he has, Madam; and you know it is the delight of our Souls to hear
others of our own Sex reflected on.


Wid. So it is, Mrs Sweetny, A^, ha, ha, I laughed heartily when he told me how
my Lady Rampabout uses to infuse Opium into her Husbands Tea, and when the good
old Knight is fast asleep in his chair of ease by the fire side, she very
fairly receives her friendly visits without any danger of a discovery.


Sweet. Ha, ha, ha: And I laughed as heartily when he told me of a certain
Fleetstreet Dame, that had got a Receipt to give her Husband the nasty Northern
distemper, by dressing his Shirts with a white Powder, that so she might have a
pretense to lie alone, and there entertain the caresses of her lusty long
limbed f^re-man of the Shop.


Omn. Ha, ha, ha.


Sweet. But good lack, alack! how came we to enter into this discourse before
we had laid our Prayer-books out of our hands?


Wid. Come, come, as long as there is no body but our selves, it is well well
enough.


Nick. But pray let us leave this chit chat, and mind the main chance: Madam
Thoroshift you shall not fail to have an account of the true estimate of your new
Lovers.


Wid. Mr Nickycrack, I am wonderfully obliged to you.


Nick. In the first place I will go to my Lord Courtipolls, about your Sister,
Madam Minx's concern, by this time I suppose he may be come from Court: I Will
secure you, I Will bring him along with me.


Wid. Pray do, Sir, and besure you urge the business home to his Lordship, make
him sensible of all the incident charges of a lying-in bout.


Nick. Nay faith he is not unsensible of such matters; for I believe his
Lordship has paid for fifty lying-in bouts, where he has had no farther concern
but for the bare credit on it.


Wid. The truth on it is, his politic vanity makes him the most accomplished
Cully in the Kingdom.


Nick. I Will undertake there is never a Crack in Town, if she reports that she
was first debaucht by my Lord Courtipoll, but is sure to receive a gratuity
from his Lordship, for telling that most obliging lie.


Sweet. It Is pity indeed, that his mighty business at Court about State affairs
would not allow us more of his company.


Nick. He business at Court! it is all pretenses, all pretenses ^aith, Sister.
It Is true, he goes every day thither, but has nothing to do there, but to walk
out of one Room into another, which indeed he does with a wouderful deal of
politic gravity. And as for his being consulted in State affairs, I dare swear
his opinion was never asked, tho it were only to know the qualifications of his
neighbor in the Country, who solicited hard at Court to be made a Worshipful
Justice.


Sweet. Well, it is time for me to go, and give a welcome to my new guests.
Madam, will you please to walk?


[Exeunt Wid. and Sweet. Enter Prim. Prim. Mr. Nickycrack, my Lord has urgent
business with you, and would speak with you immediately.


Nick. Mr Prim, I was this moment coming to pay my humble Deveirs to the most
noble Lord Courtipoll, and now at his Lordships command, I Will fly* I Will fly to
his honorable presence.


[Exit. Prim. Mrs Nibs, I congratulate the cheerful ruddiness of your
Complexion, and must own, that I find a fresh spring of joy begin to flourish
in my Bosom, by the warm influence of your bright shining Eyes -- Gad that was
finely spoke, and very much like a Gentleman.


[Aside. Nibs. Pray, M^ Prim, don't exercise your Court flattery upon me.


Prim. Not a syllable of flattery, Gad Them me -- May I forfeit the honor of my
Family, if I have not a great veneration for you.


Nib^. Your Family! Pray what Family are you of, Sir?


Prim. What Family? I am of the ancient Family of the Prims of Prim Castle,
upon Chivet Hills, on the Borders of Scotland; and would have you to know, tho
I serve a Peer of the Realm, yet I Would scorn to serve the best Commoner in the
three Kingdoms. Upon the word of a Gentleman you may believe me.


Nibs. Ha, ha, ha, I could tell this pitiful scoundrel another story if I
pleased -- But that I Will reserve to another opportunity -- [Aside] Well, Mr
Prim, I am sorry I cannot stay at present, and pay you the honor that is due
to you, and to the ancient Family of the Prims of Prim Castle (...) B^t I shall
leave you in good hands; so^ I see Madam Minx's Maid, honest Country Doll,
coming this way, and so I am worthy Mr Prims most obedient.


[Exit. Enter Doll. Prim. Mrs Dorothy.


Doll. Mistress Dorothy! pray Mistress me no Mistresses; I am plain Country
Doll.


Prim. Then sweet Country Doll, may base ignominy taint the blood of me, if you have not something in your face that looks very charming.


Doll. Charming! what is charming, I never heard such a word in all my breath,
not I.


Prim. Pretty Innocence! -- why prithee Doll, how do they make love in the
Country?


Doll. Why in it Country, if John oasts a Motion to Joan, and Joan she likes it,
then Joan gis John't Sillabub, Then John teakes Joan to the Alehouse, and gis
her Plumb Ceake and Ale, where m'aps ater't first Flagon, John slaps Joan or't
face, then Joan she is dugged. But after the other por or two all is well again;
and Joan she promises to meet John at night upon Measters Hay Mow, where a
hun^er't to one but Joan she proves with Chilt. Then Joan she fetches John
for it the Justice, and Justice ater't hearing whole story, makes John marry
Joan, and there is an end of tat business.


Prim. Ha, ha, ha, very pretty I vow.


Doll. Now pray Measte^ Prim, will yo tell one how yo maken Love in London.


Prim. That I will Doll to the best of my power. In the first place, Great men
make haughty love with their titles and honors -- Elder Brothers just come to
their Estates, make taring love, with gaudy Liveries and gilt Coaches --
Statesmen and men of business, make solid love with formal shrug and politic
grimace. And your Citizens make sordid love, with paultry Presents from their
well-stockt Purses.


Doll. Good, pray go on.


Prim. Officers of the Army make thundering love, with Vollies of Oaths and
Curses. And the Beaus make as apish and impertinent love with their Combs and
Snuff boxes, as the Wits do tiresome and whining love, with their Songs and
Elegies.


Doll. So, very well.


Prim. Your cropt-ear'd Prentices make sneaking love, with stealing into
Abigal's pocket either an Orange stuffed with Cloves, or a good slice of
Ginger-bread -- Pert dapper Pages, and spruce Valet de Chambres, make teazing
love with ruffling of Heads and hawling of Petticoats. In fine, your Bullies,
and Troopers, make barbarous love, by knocking down their Dowdies, and enjoying
them in a swoond.


Doll. O Gemini gemini, did one ever hear the like on it? -- But pray when will
yore Lord come and make love again with my Mistress? Poor Soul! he has brought
her to a fine pass a my word; she is either longing or puking all the day long,
so she is.


Prim. My pretty Dolly, my Lord will not fail of being with her this evening; and
as soon as they are Chamber'd, thee and I will go and solace our selves over a
glass of Wine at the Tavern.


Doll. Marry but don yo think that I will trust my self? that would be fine
work indeed.


Prim. In token that I Will do nothing but what is becoming a Gentleman, I Will
make my dear Rustic Cherub a Present of this Diamond Ring.


Doll. O Lord, O Lord, a Diamond Ring on Doll's Finger, how that will look when
I goo a into the Country, to rake ater't Cart or milk Kye again.


Prim. It was presented me by a great Courtier, and I hope Doll you will accept
of it from my hands, as an inviolable pledge of my just and honorable
pretensions.


Doll. In troth Measter Prim, it shall go hard, but that I Will make you amends
some way or other -- Ods so, here comes my Mistress.


Enter Minx. Minx. How now Doll, why are you not at home doing what I bad you?


Doll. I was just a gooing forsooth.


Minx. Nay, now stay and go along with me -- Mr Prim what does my Lord
Cou^^^p^'l mean, never to see a body again.


Prim. M^dam Minx, I was coming to acquaint your Ladyship that his Lordship
will be with you immediately. I Will assure you Madam, that my Lord languishes
with impatience, till he h^s once more sacrificed his bleeding heart at the
shrine of your most illustrious beauty -- Gad I shall rival my Lord with pure
dint of Eloquence.


[Aside. Minx. Sackerfize and Lusters, I don't know what you mean by such words
not I, we are not used to such gibberish in the Country -- Pray go tell him
that my heart is ready to burst for him, that I have almost cried my eyes out,
that I Will neither eat, drink, nor sleep till I have seen him.


Prim. Madam, upon the unblemisht fidelity of a Gentleman, I Will punctually
deliver your Ladyships commands.


Minx. Well Doll, have thee been playing thy Country part with Prim, ha?


Doll. To a hair e'faith, Madam; the Puppy has just given me a Diamond Ring to
go with him anon to the Tavern.


Minx. Let me see it. Upon my Soul'tis right, and it is high time for me to look
to my hits too, and fix his Lord -- This evening in spite of fate I Will hook
him into settlement. What signifies his Lordships paying for Lodging and Diet,
and some little nasty Pr^esents of a Gown and Petticoat once a month or so. A
musty Quietus Judge would give me as much as that comes to, besides the
assurance of a Legacy of broad Gold, that the old Toast had palm'd when he sat
upon the Bench for perverting of Justice.


Doll. Indeed, Madam, it is true, I know a Lady that has three times as much
only for scratching the Poll of a Gouty Citizen.


Minx. A woman of pleasure is worse than an Indian Slave, that has not a
Settlement at her own Command. A Quality Mistress should keep her Coach, a
brace of Footmen, and a leash of young Gallants at least.


Doll. Pray, Madam, be ruled by me, get the writings drawn, according as my
Lord has already given you the particulars. And when you have workt up his
passion to a glowing pitch, then of a sudden take upon you to be peevishly coy,
and don't so much as let him squeeze your hand, till he has first squeezed the
Wax.


Minx. Don't question Doll, but I Will manage him as a Cull of the first head
ought to be managed.


Doll. Do so, Madam.


Tears mixed with Smiles, will not fail to do the feat;
And Country Minx may prove a London cheat.
End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE A Room in Mrs. Sweetny's House.
Sir Weal. Plainder, Mrs. Sweetny and Ophelia walking off at some distance.


Sir W. P. PRay Landlady Sweetny, let me recommend to your care my Daughter
Ophelia there -- My Daughter, who I may justly say is --


Sweet. Is! Sir Wealthy Plainder? she is the mirror of Beauty, the pride of
Mankind, the glory of her Sex, and the wonder of the Age; she is --


Oph. Struck with amazing confusion to be thus flattered. Oh how odious a
creature is a fawning Hypocrite.


[Aside. Sir Weal. I Will say this for Ophelia, that she is an excellent Huswife
-- You must know, do you mind, that I have bred her to be --


Oph. A slave to a miserable parent


[Aside. Sir Weal. To be, I say, exquisitively officious in the affairs of the
Family. She shall clarify Whey, make Nettle Porridge, and Barley-broth, with
ever a Girl in the Kingdom.


Oph. This indeed is a true bill of fare of our late Country Diet.


[Aside. Sir Weal. Now look ye Mrs Sweetny, if you can find me out some
substantial Tradesman, that will take my Daughter purely for her intrinsic
value, and expect nothing with her, I may perhaps be persuaded to part with her.


Oph. Here Is a Parents affection; and yet he is every moment thund^^ing in my
ears fi^ial duty, forsooth.


[Aside. Sir Weal. Well, at present I have some business of consequence to
dispatch, I Will therefore leave her with you: but be sure that amongst your many
pious instructions, ply her home with the fifth Commandment, descant well upon
that I say; so that reverend old age may keep its lawful Sovereignty.


Sweet. O good, Sir, what small Talent I have either in argument or eloquence,
shall certainly be employed for the service of Sir Wealthy Plainder, and for
the real good and essential benefit of pretty Madam Ophelia here -- I Will take
care she shall accompany me to my daily Devotions.


Sir Weal. Devorions! As for Devovions, do you mind me, I do not think it is a
pin matter. If she asks me blessing, do you see, it is enough, it is enough in
all conscience.


Oph. And that I should go without, were the purchase of it any more than a
bare God a mercy.


Sir Weal. Well, mind what I have said, and so, do ye see, fare you well. Da,
da, Daughter.


[Exit. Sweet. Come, pretty Madam Ophelia, now you and I are together in
private, we may take the liberty to open our Souls freely. Dissimulation is a
loose upper garment, that may be laid aside at pleasure.


Sir Bellamour appears at a distance. Oph. Now the old Cockatrice begins to
appear in her proper colors.


[Aside. Sweet. You are young, Madam, and consequently must have wishes; soft,
young, tender wishes, which wishes may be satisfied, so it be within the rules
of descretion.


Oph. If discretion direct our wishes, I am confident they can never tend to
any thing that is vicious -- Well, since it is not in the power of Mankind to
shock my principles, or tarnish my virtue, I Will for once counterfeit a levity,
and see what she would be at ( Aside.) I must confess, Mrs Sweetny, that I do
believe the shackles of ignorance to be the greatest burden that can be imposed
upon us Mortals. I am therefore very willing to surrender my self to ye, that I
may be better instructed.


Sweet. That Is my good Girl, do thee know what love is, Child?


Oph. Not very well: But I have heard it is something that of a sudden plays and
dances about the heart, and from thence gradually trickles along the Veins,
till having diffused itself into subtle rays, i^ steals out at the corners of
the Eyes to reach the object of desire.


Sweet. Ah, ha, ha, a pretty notion truly of Loves first Onset. But I must tell
you, that were Love to do nothing else, than what is performed by ineffectual
glances Well, I Will say no more, these are many gay, young, Sparks about the
Town. Let opportunity show ye further -- What think you of Mr Vainthroat that
came up to Town with you? Ah! He Is a pure man* -- Od, so, see where he comes.
How do you do, good Mr Vainthroat, after your Journey?


Vain. Pretty well, Madam, but methinks I want to divert my self with some of
my old hearty Bottle friends.


Sweet. And pray cannot you no way divert your self with us that are Women?


Vain Faith, Madam, not easily; for generally you that are Women, either
affectation makes you troublesome, pride makes you imperious, or an over
easiness makes you nauseous.


Oph. Such tempers are often assumed, Sir, when at so cheap a rate a woman can
free herself from some of your impertinent and coxcombly addresses.


Sweet. I thought Mr Vainthroat had been better bred, than to express himself
in general terms, before particular Company, especially before a Lady every way
so deserving, as is Madam Ophelia here.


Vain. O Lord, Madam, I am sufficiently acquainted with the bright Ophelia^s
perfections, to except her from the whole Sex.


Oph. I am sure not a Member of the Sex, ought ever to value what is said by a
public Detractor.


Vain. Detraction! why it is by that alone that I have insinuated my self into
the intimate acquaintance of all the Women of Quality about the Town.


Sweet. Come, Mr Vainthroat, you shall atone for your Fault by giving us a
Song.


Vain. With all my heart, Madam; but I wish by that means I do not commit a
greater.


SONG.
THE Riddle of Nature,
Is a Female Creature;
She Is graciously proud,
Maliciously good,
And her business is to be idle.
The mysterious Toy,
If she weep it is for joy,
And when she beguiles,
It Is done with her smiles,
He Is mad then that bites of the Bridle.
Sweet. O fie upon you, for you're a sad man -- Have you seen Madam Thoroshift
yet, Mr Vainthroat.


Vain. Yes, faith, ha, ha, ha, poor Widow, I pity her e'gad, if she lets that
Tenement of hers stand a little longer uninhabited, it will be difficult for
the next possessor to make good repairs.


Sweet. I Will promise you, Sir, she does not want applications, but her prudence
makes her cautious -- Come, shall us walk into the Dining Room, by this time I
believe my Lord Courtipoll may be come.


[Exeunt. Enter Sir Bellamour Blunt. Sir Bell. It Is done! it is done. That heart
that till now never felt a single throb, is become all over pangs -- I must
own, that at first sight I thought her beautiful; and what I have now
overheard, assures me that her virtue is inestimable. -- Oh Ophelia.


Re-enter Ophelia at a distance. Oph. By hard shift I have slipped the Company of
that wicked Seducer. And now I ll retire to my chamber, to enjoy the true
pleasure of thinking.


Sir Bell. Bless me! She Is here ( starting.) Madam.


Oph. Sir.


Sir Bell. Do ye discover nothing by my looks?


Oph. Indeed, Sir Bellamour, I always thought you looked something cynical: And
I believe you are now running mad.


Sir Bell. My passion, I must confess, is something furious. Love is a sort of
madness.


Oph. The knowledge of your Distemper is half your cure, Sir?


Sir Bell. Will you suffer your pity to assist in the cure?


Oph. I am not credulous enough to think that you have any occasion for it. --
However, I cannot stay to discuss the point with you at present.


Sir Bell. Why so? where are you going then?


Oph. I Will soon try his reality. ( aside.) May you be trusted, Sir?


Sir Bell. Indeed I may, Madam.


Oph. Then know I Am going to my Chamber, to fetch my Mask, Hood and Scarf, and
so jaunt it a little.


Sir Bell Jaunt it! -- What Is the meaning of that?


Oph. Why that is to take a Hackney Coach, scowr from Playhouse to Playhouse,
till I meet with some young Fellow that has power enough to attack me, stock
enough to treat and present me, and folly enough to be laughed at for his pains.


Sir Bell. Sure that Devils impliment, my Landlady, has not already induced her
unexperienced youth.


[Aside. Oph. Have you any thing else to say to me, Sir?


Sir Bell. A great deal, Madam.


Oph. Then when I have nothing else to do, I Will hear you; and so (...) loving
Sir Bellamour.


[Exit. Sir Bell. Well, tho I am not cut out for a soft Lover, I have a
resolution that is capable of persevering. And if I mistake not, I do already
make plain discoveries through the thin veil of my Mistresses pretenses; so
that till a farther opportunity, I shall rest satisfied that I have ad^serving
object for my pas^ion, and entrust to her and fate for a suitable success.


[Exit. Enter Captain Bownceby, and Widow Thoroshift. Wid. Pray Captain, what
do you think the world would say on me, should I bestow my self and fortune on
a person --


Capt. Halt, halt good Madam: before you say a word on my person, pray be so
kind as to view me well Do but mind this capacious Breast; these robust
Shoulders, the sturd^^ss of my Chi^e, the bre^^h of my Ga^kins, the true turn
and symetry of my Limbs, and the length of my Foot.


Wid Your person I must confess is not despicable, but then, Sir, your ^^^ion,
where you may come to expose your l^fe --


Capt. Halt. halt again. I say, if (...) once cope with my Widow, adieu Scarlet
E'saith. If ever I spill drop of blood in the Field more, may my (...) be food
for Ravens, and my Bones lie blanching upon a Country Common.


Wid. But then Captain, without an Estate where is an equivolent for my Fortune?


Capt. An equivolent, Madam! Why this person of mine that you have al^eady
viewed, is more than equivolent for an Earldom, if inherited by a puny
Lanthorn-back^t Chitty-fac't Stripling.


Wid Look ye, Captain, I question not but you know that I am addressed to by Mr
Broakage, a wealty Merchant; and I have no sooner mentioned him, but see where
he comes, for the present Ill leave you together.


[Exit. [Angrily. Capt. Sir?


Bro. Sir.


Capt. Did you never hear of Captain Bownceby?


Bro. I have heard of several Captain Bowncebys, Captain Hackums, and Captain
Kick and Cuffs. And what then, Sir?


Capt. I find this Mungrel has got Beef and Pudding in his paunch, and I
believe dare sight ( aside.) I say, Sir, do you know what Captain Bownceby can
do if he pleases?


(very loud) Bro. I know what the Law will suffer him to do; and if he does
more than that --


Capt. What then, Sir?


Bro. Then, Sir, his big looks may chance to dwindle into a Tyburn grin.


Capt. Ay, Sir, ay Sir, it is well you have got Tyburn on your side, or let me
tell you, Mr Broakage should not have outlived his last words, scar^y my
Carcass if he should.


Enter Nibs. Nibs. Gentlemen the Widow has overheard your high words, and sent
me to tell you, that if you don't this moment accommodate your differences, and
embrace as friends, she will never see the face of either of you while she
breaths again; therefore if you have any value for her, I hope you will not
dispute the executing her Commands.


Capt. Mrs Nibs, the Widow shall be obeyed by Captain Bownceby, and all the
Bowncebys in Christendom.


Bro. And by me Benjamin Broakage, and all the Broakages in the Universe.


Capt. Honest Mr Broakage!


Bro. Dear Captain Bownceby!


(They embrace) Nibs. A couple of Coxcombs!


[Aside. Capt. You shall for the future command me and all my Weapons, even
from my Bagonet to my Back-sword.


Bro. And you my Purse, from the Decus's to the Jacobus's.


Capt. Is it so? Gad then it shall not be long before I borrow Money of him, I Will
promise him.


[Aside. Nibs. Come Gentlemen, what think ye of strengthening your friendship
with a Health to the Widow, and so binding your bargain with a Bottle?


Amb. With all my heart, Mrs Nibs.


Nibs. Come along then.


[Exeun^. Enter Minx and Doll, followed by Sir Wealthy Plainder. Minx. What the
dickings is the matter with ye, to be always thus teazing a body when you come
to Town?


Sir Weal. Matter my Minky! Why I love my Minky. Piddy my Minky let me go a
little into die Chamber widdee; wou't a my Minky?


Minx. My Chamber! don't you think I^ll let any thing in the shape of Man enter
my Chamber doors?


Sir Weal. Odsboblikins let me go in any other shape then: Tie a Collar about
my neck and lead me thither in the shape of Towzer, if dow tinkst fit, my
Minky. Nay, I Will be die Pussy-cat, die Puppy-dog, die any ting, my little pity
Minky.


Minx. None of these shapes will do indeed, Sir Wealthy.


Sir Weal. Shall I come then, like another Jove, in the shape of -- ( Chinks a
Purse of Gold) Do thou hear the blessed chink, hea Gi^l?


Minx. Alack Sir, you have such winning ways with you.


Sir Weal. I call, and I call, catch Minky; edad there be Purse and all, my
Child a grace, there is Gold for thee. -- Edad I Am old Sir Wealthy still, tho
I Have sold my Estate, plead poverty to the world, and have swore my self not
worth a groat, on purpose to avoid paying the Kings Taxes.


Minx. A very conscientious Commonwealth^-man truly. (aside) Well, Sir, I have
bethought of a way take to you into my Chamber unsuspected -- Doll, go and
fetch hither one of your quondam Country Habits, she and I will dress you up,
and if my Lord Courtipoll comes, I Will pretend you are my old Nurse just come
out of the Country -- But be sure, whatever you do, don't ye discover your
self, if you do, you will ruin me for ever.


Sir Weal. E'dad this is a pure contrivance: And never Nurse hugged a Bantling,
as I Will hug thee for this invention. ( hugs her) Ah my Minky.


Doll. Come, come strip off your Jerkin, and let us dizen you.


(They dress him up in women's Clothes. Minx. Hold up your head Gammer, and mump
and simper a little.


Sir Weal. Nay I believe I shall not wholly unbecome a woman's Dress, for I have
features, Chicken; features, tho I say it, that are not altogether despicable
-- See, see how I can roll my Eyes about; and then pout out a plump under-lip,
that would make the mouth of a Hermit to water again.


Minx and Doll. Ah, ha, ha,


Minx. Now if any body ask you any questions, take your Apron thus, -- drop two
or three Curtzies, and say, I forsooth, and No forsooth.


Sir Weal. I Will warrant ye, let me alone for I forsooths and No forsooths.


Doll. O Lord Mistress! does not Measter look just like Joan the Ale-wife, at
our Churchyard style?


Enter Nickycrack, followed by Lord Courtipoll and Prim. Nick. Madam Minx,
here is my Lord Courtipoll.


Ld Court. Oh! my dear Country puggy.


( Embraces Minx. Minx. O my Lord! why would you stay so long from a body?


Ld Court. We men of business, my dear Pug, lie under that heavy curse to have
our pleasures give way to our toyls. And now I talk of business, let me
consider a little. ( pauses.) -- If so -- Ay, ay, then it must be so -- Here
Prim, disperse my Footmen. Let one wait at the Secretaries Office, another at
the Admiralty, and the rest at the Foreign Ministers, that I may have speedy
notice where my assistance is required


[ Exit Prim. Nick. So, under this pretense the Servants are now set at
liberty, and each man may go visit his own Pug if he pleases, and so follow the
present blessed vocation of their politic Lord and Master.


Aside. Ld Co^r. Who Is this you have got with you, Pug?


Minx. It Is my Nurse, my Lord, that is just come out of the Country.


Ld Cour. Bless me! did ever such a sweet Creature as thee art, suck at the
breast of such a Horse-fac't Dame as this is? But hold, I^ll go ask her after
some affai^^ in the Country, that may in some measure relate to the State. Let
me consider -- Good woman, is there store of Acrons this year, ha?


Nick. A notable politic State question truly.


[Aside. Minx. Nurse, why don't ye answer my Lord? -- I find the poor old woman
is in a quandery, I believe she never saw a Lord before.


Ld Cour. On my Soul that may very well be. -- Nay, I my self have known a
whole monthly meeting of Country Justices struck so dumb at the grandeur of my
presence, that it was scarce within the power of Stale Beer to set their
Tongues a moving again. -- But come what say ye, old Mrs Chue cud, are Acrons
plenty or not, ha?


Minx. Nurse, why don't ye answer, my Lord.


Sir Weal. Yes, forsooth.


Ld Court. Then we may expect our Venison to be fat, if my Dog of a Keeper have
the grace to keep the Parish Hogs out of the Park. -- But hold, let me consider
-- Now for some Domestic Intelligence: Is the Widow your Sister married yet?
ha, Pug?


Minx. She Is not sped yet, but o'restockt with Suitors, as we sen in the
Country.


Ld Cour. Pretty Pug, thy Country language does become thee. But hold, let me
consider once again -- I profess there ought to be a Statute of Restriction
relating to the Widows of this Kingdom; they are generally so damned cunning in
their Amors, that half a score of Widows are sufficient to enslave all the
young fellows about the Twon.


Nick. Ah, my Lord, the young fellows about the Town are not so easily enslaved
in this age of Liberty.


Enter Sweetny and Ophelia. Sweet. O my Lord Courtipoll, I cannot but with
Reverence acknowledge the high honor your Lordship does my house, in letting
its mean roof shadow a person of so much worth, goodness and wisdom, as is the
Lord Courtipoll.


Ld Cour. Oh Mrs. Sweetny, you are always so lavish in your expressions! -- Ha!
Bless me! I Am Planet-struck -- Never was an Astrologer more amazed at the
discovery of a new Star, than I am at the sight of that beautiful creature --
Pray, Mrs. Sweetny, by what name and title must I salute this fair Angel?


Sweet. It Is the beautiful Madam Ophelia. my Lord, Daughter to Sir Wealthy
Plainder.


(Lord Co^^^ipoll stand^ musing. Nick. So, my Lord I find is embarking himself
for another piece of Gallantry. -- His politic Lordship f^lls as naturally
into new amors, as a Town Bully runs himself into fresh Rencounters. -- Minx,
Minx, ply thy stumps, or all is lost, faith girl.


Minx. My Lord, my Lord, you forget to bring your Pug the Lapdog you promised
her, so you do. -- ( Runs to Sir Wealthy) Either take your Daughter away this
moment, or never expect to see the face of me again -- ( Runs back to Lord
Court.) Come, my Lord, will you go along with your Pug, and see how far I have
workt upon the Petticoat I showed you, when you were here last. -- Why don't ye
speak to your Pug?


Ld Court. I profess I was within my self deciding an intricate State question,
and find it must be so.


Sir Weal. ( aside to Ophelia.) Hussy I command you to retire. I say be gone
instantly.


Ophel. What would this dry chopp'd Hag have? -- Pray good woman don't you nose
me at this rate.


Sir Weal, Ye young Baggage don't ye know me?


Ophel. I Am resolved I will not know him at present ( aside.) What means this
saucy queen to blow her filthy breath in my face, ha?


Sir Weal. Ye young Jade you, I Am your Father: But if ye discover me look to it.


Ophel. Alas the poor woman is beside her senses I find.


Sir Weal. Hussy I Will thump your Jacket for this. I could find in my heart to
tear ye in pieces.


Grins and clenches his fists at her. Ophel. Here, pray let somebody lay hold
on this Mad woman, she talks of tearing me in pieces.


Nick. lays hold on Sir Weal. Ld Court. What Is the matter, what is the matter
with the Nurse, ha?


Minx. Alas, alas! the poor Nurse is sometimes troubled with fits, and I fear
she is now fallen into one.


Sweet. Hold her down, hold her down Brother Nickycrack; and Doll do you run
and fetch the Bottle of Spirit of Hartshorn, run quickly.


Doll runs and brings a Bottle. Nick. O pox! I find the Nurse proves to be the
old Fornicator Sir Wealthy Plainder, (aside.) So so, I find she begins to
recover. -- Come, now let me alone with her, I Will take her, and give her a turn
or two in the Air, and a dram of Aqua Mirabilis, which is the life of an old
woman, and I Will warrant ye all will be well again.


Exeunt Nick. and Doll leading out Sir Weal. Oph. I must go see however, that
they don't carry the business too far, as bad as he is.


[Exit. Ld Court. What has this newborn Star left our Hemisphere already, ha?


Minx. Go, go my Lord, I find you don't love your Pug, that ye don't; if you
did, you would never have stood and stared upon a strange face at that rate,
indeed you would not.


Ld Cour. Not love my Pug? By the Soul of Matchiavel but I do, and that is the
greatest oath a Statesm^n can swear by -- Were I, my Dear, to gaze upon crowds
of Angels, and should my Pug be amongst them, she alone should have the last
and fixing look.


Sweet. There Is a kind Lord for ye. Come, my Lord, by this time I suppose
Supper waits for your Lordship.


Ld Court. Come along then. -- And after that I and my charming Pug here,


In amorous sports will so Di^^^ely toy,
The God of Love shall clap his wings for joy.
End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Scene continues a Room in Sweetny's House*
Sir VVealthy Plainder and Nickycrack. Sir Weal. AH Mr Nickycrack, is it not a
hard case for me that am but a poor Commoner, thus to be rivall'd by a Lord.


Nick. Lord, Sir Wealthy Plainder, why would ye not discover your self and
concerns to me? -- All the world knows the sincerity of honest Nickycrack.


Sir Weal. Alas, alas! in this case there can be no remedy but patience. Now
must I forsooth even draw in my Horns, sneak off and dance Attendance, tho I am
sure to enter into a Steel course to cure my self of the Spleen for it.


Nick. Come, Sir Wealthy, do but open your self-freely, and I Will engage to
assist ye.


Sir Weal. Open my self, I that I will with all my heart, and my Purse too,
I Will promise ye -- I am not that indigent person I pretend my self, but am as
rich in reality as a Chemist is in fancy -- There, Nickycrack, take this as an
earnest of my future intentions.


(gives money. Nick. O Lord, Sir, I am now linkt to your service by the very tie
of gratitude: and so to the point, Sir; I very well know your affections for
Mrs Minx, and have already thought of an Expedient, that if you be but
consenting, shall soon put ye in quiet possession of the charming Fair.


Sir Weal: Ah my dear Boy, propose it, propose it I say, and never doubt my
consent.


Nick. The business is this, I perceived my Lord Courtipoll fixed his eye upon
your Daughter Ophelia, and then he lickt his Lips, bit his Thumbs, sighed, and
pressed his sides with his Arms thus.


Sir Weal. Very good.


Nick. Now, Sir, if you be but consenting, that we shall endeavor to work up
her inclinations.


Sir Weal. Inclinations! 'Sbud, I say she shall have inclinations if that be
all. I Will undertake to enjoin it by force of power paternal.


Nick. A speci^l Father e'saith


Aside. Sir Weal. VVork^ up quoth a! E'gad in this case she shall be workt up,
and workt down too, I Will promise her that.


Nick. Not so fierce, pray Sir, women are of a perverse and refractory temper,
and their wills must by gentle and insinuating means be suppled into?
compliance, and not rashly forced by violence. This I Will do, I Will first go and
engage my Sister Sweetny on our side, and don't ye doubt the effects.


Sir Weal. Prithee do, my dear Boy, about it this moment I beg thee ( smuggles
him) So, now begone, Sirrah. ( Exit. Nick.) I can (...) think what a happy
thing it was, that I had a pretty Daughter to (...) me out at this dead lif^ --
Well, I find Children may one time of other be worth their rearing.


Enter Sir Bellamour Blunt and Vainthroat. Vain. Ha, ha, ha, Sir Bellamour in
love, pleasant enough e'faith: why an amor, man, will sit as awkardly upon
thee, as a good suit of Clothes does upon an uncouth Country Squire -- But see
yonder is your Father-in-law that is to be.


Sir Bell. Rot him, he is a Brute.


Vain. However, you must be civil to him on the account of Ophelia -- Your
Servant, Sir Wealthy, how goes it with our fellow Traveller?


Sir Weal. How can it go well with any Gentleman that is decayed in his
Fortunes, and as it were turned loose into the world, especially such a base
degenerated world as this is?


Vain. Faith I believe the world is as it used to be.


Sir Bell. I am of your opinion, the rich dread disasters, and the poor contemn
'em. Fools wonder at what wise men foresaw. -- And potent Knavery depresses and
preys upon meritorious honesty; and so it was always, I believe.


Vain. As for the female part of the world, I Am sure it is as it should be.


Sir Weal. How is that, pray Sir?


Vain. Why the dear charming Creatures are so coming, that there is not one in
fifty but Cuckolds her Husband before she has him -- As thus Sir, when once a
young couple have entertained a correspondence, and that correspondence ripens
into warm desires, and those desires require fruition, then she immediately,
for the security of Reputation, marries another, on purpose to give her Spark
an opportunity to reap the Blessings freely -- And that is Cuckoldom before
Marriage for ye, at least it is so intentionally*


Sir Bell. And pray Sir why could not the Lovers themselves have marry^d?


Vain. O Pox! that were the way to have had the joys palled upon their hands
immediately. Marriage joys, foh!


Sir Bell. Vainthroat you are a horrible censorious fellow; and abundantly too
general in thy reflections ^elating to the fair Sex. Sir Wealthy Plainder, if
you please, a word with you.


Sir Weal. Your pleasure, Sir.


Sir Bell. You have a Daughter, Sir.


Sir Weal. I have so: And it is well I have, as the case stands, I can tell you
that Sir.


Sir Bell. I must tell you, I think her extremely Beautiful.


Sir Weal. So much the better for my purpose still, Sir.


Sir Bell. In short, I love her.


Sir Weal. And to be as short as you, you are not like to have her, nor have I
any thing to give her, Sir.


Sir Bell. My affections are above a bargain.


Sir Weal. And below the mark, I Will tell ye that.


Sir Bell. How so, Sir, I hope our qualities are equal.


Sir Weal. In short, I have engaged her to a person above your quality.


Sir Bell. Who Is that, pray Sir?


Sir Weal. Why then to be plain with you, it is to my Lord Courtipoll.


Sir Bell. Lord Courtipoll! why he is married.


Sir Weal. Married! What then, ha, ha, ha, may not he have occasion for my
Daughter for all that? Ha, ha, ha, married, that is a good one e'faith.


Sir Bell. What does the old Rogue mean, would he prostitute his own Daughter?


(Aside. Sir Weal. Sir, I must beg your pardon, for I am this moment going to
see them fairly put together: and so your servant.


Exit. Sir Bell. Oh horrid Monster! however, I don't question but the young
Ladies Virtue will stand the shock, and baffle the intentions of this villain,
and so render herself the most adorable Creature upon the face of the Earth.


Enter Nibs. Sir Bell. Mrs Nibs, you seem to have discretion, and I believe you
may be confided in.


Nibs. Sir, I Will endeavor to merit your good opinion, by any service you shall
please to command me -- In the first place you may be assured of my secrecy.


Sir Bell. Pray Sweetheart accept of this small token, [Gives money] I doubt
not but that you are acquainted with the affairs of the Family.


Nibs. That I am, Sir; there is nothing that is done, said, or scarce thought
of under this Roof, that is unknown to your very humble Servant Nibs Trusty.


Sir Bell. Then, Mrs Nibs Trusty, I need not tell ye that there are at present
base things in agitation.


Nibs. I know what you mean, tho I will say but little. Madam Ophelia is to be
sacrificed to the pleasures of my Lord Courtipoll, to gratify her old doting
Fathers passion for Mrs Minx, his Lordships present kept Mistress.


Sir Bell. I find your intelligence is authentic.


Nibs. I am not unac^^ainted neither with your pretensions to the beautiful
Ophelia -- What is it now you would have me do?


Sir Bell. Only to give me a punctual notice of proceedings.


Nibs. I Will do it on the forfeiture of my life. And more than that, I Will assist
ye to countermine any Plots that shall be laid against the young Lady's Honor
-- You seem to be a man of worth, and I have sound ye a person of Generosity,
therefore assure your self that in your affairs I Will be as diligent as a
Court-Procurer, and as secret as a Mother Midnight. This moment I Will see how
things go on: and so I am Sir Bellamour's most humble Servant. Exit.


Sir Bell. But come, prithee Vainthroat give me some account of this Lord
Courtipoll, and look you deal sincerely.


Vain. Ha, ha, ha, What, Knight, art stung already with that pestiferous Viper
Jealousy?


Sir Bell. I Am not distrustful, but cautious.


Vain. Why then, Sir, upon my word my Lord Courtipoll is a dangerous Rival,
Folly and Profuseness are taking qualities among the Ladies. And faith they are
in the right on it; for how can a Woman better secure her pleasures, than when
she commands the Purse of a liberal Fool?


Sir Bell. For my part, I shall not think him dangerous; for I Am confident Ophelia
has Discretion enough to laugh at his Folly, and a sufficient stock of Virtue
to despise the baseness of his Bribes.


Vain* Come, Sir Knight, that you may shake off this moody amorous temper, I Will
entertain you with a Song and Dance.


1.
LEt never dull sorrow our joys invade,
But for ever let us follow the toping trade:
Let a merry merry Song
Drive the Current of Time along;
He Is a Prince of a Man
That doubles his Span,
And makes it a Cubit long.
2.
Call Harry to fetch us more Bottles in,
Don't tarry, since to Revel we thus begin:
Let Us tipple tipple on,
Till the Moon and Stars are gone;
It Is a meeting divine,
When our faces so shine,
That they Rival the Rising Sun
A Dance. Vain. So, very well -- To morrow you shall range the Town along with
me* A Wench and a Bottle is a certain Antidote against the poison of Love: But
for the present let us go and divert our selves with the follies that this
Family of ours can afford us.


Exeunt. Enter Captain Bownceby Drunk. (A Table with Candle^.) Capt. Toll,
doll, di, da, doll. ( Roars out of Tune.) Huzzah, Victoria, Victoria! Ha, ha,
ha; He drink with me, a peddling Prig, 'sbud I Have laid him as dead as a
Door-nail. And now for the Widow, By the Soul of a Culverin, I could in this
humor make Love like a Dragon. -- Come, faith I Will go practice a little. Here
shall stand the Widow, ( Sets a Chair out) and here shall stand the Whelp
Broakage, sneaking up in this corner; ( Sets his Perriwig upon his Cane in the
corner) stand there, you Hell-hound: and if you dare but to look toward me,
during the Adoration I shall pay my Charming Goddess here, I Will that moment
tear out of your head those Sacrilegious Eye Balls -- Now I Will begin; Madam,
tho I Have long been a Man of Terror, and have made Conflagrations, Plundering,
Rapes, and Throat-cutting my sport and diversion, yet for the sake of your dear
self, I Will now, like a second Hercules, fling by my Club and take up the
Distaff -- The roaring Lion shall clap his Tail betwixt his Legs, and become a
fawning Spaniel to lick the dust off your Ladyships Shooe-soles -- But first,
Madam, let me beg leave to sacrifice yonder is sniveling Whore^ bird, up in the
corner there, to my own vengeance, and for your Ladyships honor. ( Draws his
Sword, and goes to the Cane and Perriwig) Come along then; by the fiery breath
of a Demi-Cannon, I Will murder this Whelp and Bacon this very minute, that I
will, you Villain, ye Mongril, you Lick-spit Cur ye. ( Lays about him with his
Sword) I Will mince your flesh for ye, and so feed young Jackdaws with the
morsels -- So, so, now I think 'twill be convenient to repose my self a little
after this plaguey fatigue.


(Sheaths his Sword, sits down in the Chair, and falls asleep. Enter Nickycrack
and Nibs. Nick Nibs, Nibs, what is the matter with the Captain here, he is
fallen fast asleep.


Nibs. Why I left him and Mr Broakage in the Buttery, drinking the Widows
health upon a reconciliation, and I find they have made one another drunk.


Nick. E^gad let us play him some trick or other, and try to startle this
undaunted Hero.


Nibs. With all my heart. We will take out the Candles, and get the Trumpets
my Lord Courtipoll has brought to rattle him awake of a sudden, and see how
he will bear it.


Nick and Nibs take out the Candle, Trumpets sounds a Charge. Capt. ( starting
up) Good Lord where am I, or what is become of me. ( Re-enter Nickycrack with a
Candle) Ah! good dear Sir, tell me where I am, or what is become of me.


Nick. It Is I, Captain Bownceby, it is I, your friend Nickycrack.


Capt. Then I find I have been dreaming all this while.


Nick. But why this cold sweat? why all this fear, good Captain?


Capt. Why would ye have a man have courage in his sleep, that is a jest
indeed. Now I am awake, Mr Nickycrack, I must tell you, that there is nothing
upon the face of the earth, that can terrify Captain Bownceby; nay, I defy the
King of Terrors himself, and all his Hellborn Guard de Corpse. But hark ye, dear
Nickycrack, prithee tell me how do think my affairs stand with the VVidow?


Nick. On my Soul, as you can wish your self. Ah Captain! I have heard her
speak very feelingly of that graceful person of yours.


Capt. Very like so I vow, for I took care to make her view me distinctly. And
what if I take an opportunity to palm the true dimensions uodn her? ha, Boy.


Nick. Now Is your time to bear up briskly: Your Rival Mr Broakage is dead drunk
in the Buttery; and I Will contrive to secure him for one hour at the least,
don't question it.


Capt. Egad then I Will go strike her home. I Will first go wash and tallow, and
then -- Have at thy Coat, old VVidow.


(Sings and Dances. Nick. But Captain, methinks you're somethiug forgetful of
your faithful servant, Mr. Nickycrack.


Capt. Not at all, I protest Sir. Ods life man, the Arrears are not yet paid,
when they come in thou shall swim in Money: by the bar^el of a Blunderbuss thou
shall, my Boy.


Nick. But Sir, if you please, in the mean time to sign this small Note, it
will encourage the work strangely.


Capt. That I will my Lad, I Will sign it as freely as ever I signed a false
Muster-Roll. Let me see it.


(Signs the Note.) Nick. So, Sir, now away to the Widow, and Heavens prosper
ye; in the mean time I Will take care of Mr Broakage.


Capt. Then faith I Will lose no time -- Adieu.


Exit. Enter Nibs. Nick. Well Nibs, I have got the Captain in black and white
here; and now I Will go try to get the Merchant under the same circumstances.


Nibs. I have been examining the Merchants Cargo for him.


Nick. Well! and how, was he richly laden?


Nibs. Hang him, I Will be far enough if he is not a Bankrupt, he had not one
souse of Ready in's pocket.


Nick. What Bills had he Child?


Nibs. Bills he had indeed, of Taylour, Surgeon, Landlady, Cook, and Landress,
but not one single Bill of Credit.


Nick. The less favor he is like to find at my hands, I Will promise him. Come,
let us go order matters to the best advantage. Exeunt.


Enter (...) Courtipoll following Ophelia. A Table and Chairs. Ld Court. Hold!
let me consider! what shall I say first? -- Oh now I have it. Do you know who I
am, Madam, ha?


Oph. It Is in vain to be in earnest with this politic Blockhead. I Will e'n play
upon the fool to make my self diversion. ( aside) -- You, Sir, are a person of
noble quality.


Ld Cour. Right, Madam, I am so. -- And pray, Madam, how came you to know that
I was a man of noble quality, ha?


Oph. Your mein and person bespoke you so, my Lord.


Ld Court. Very like so, I vow -- Gad I Will try her parts a little farther, (
aside.) And do you know what I am famous for?


Oph. No doubt, for your wisdom, my Lord.


Ld Court. Ay, say ye so? -- Why should you think so, pray, ha?


Oph. By the solemn air of your countenance, my Lord.


Ld Court. By the soul of Matchiavel, she is a mere Sybil, ( aside.) What then
do you think me most fit for; ha, Madam?


Oph. To sit at the Helm of Government, and steer the State, my Lord.


Ld Cour. O bless me! I vow Madam you're a person of the clearest apprehension
that ever I yet conversed withal. Should I have a Son by you, I Would forfeit my
honor if he did not bid fair for the Crown of Poland, should there chance to
be an Election by the time he came of age. But now to the business in hand:
Come, pray let us sit down, and I will make love to you as becomes a Statesman,
by asking of some politic questions. ( They sit down, my Lord pauses a while)
-- Ay that will do. Pray, Madam, which side do you lie on when you settle your
self to sleep? ha, Madam.


Oph. What can the Coxcomb mean by this? however, at the present, I Am resolved
to humor him. ( aside.) -- I always sleep on my left side, my Lord.


Ld Court. Then I am the happiest man in the world, I find the Heavens are
propitious to our Amors; for you must know I always sleep on my right, so that
I, each night ^laspt within thy circling arms, shall coo, pur, and murmur out
my love with the greatest transports imaginable.


Oph. This I must confess, was a rapture worthy a Politician.


Aside. Ld Court. But hold, let me consider once again! -- Ay, if so, then that
may very well be.


Oph. Ha, ha, ha, if this be politic Love, it is a very cool way of proceeding.


Aside. Enter. Minx struggling with Sir Wealthy Plainder, and boxing him. Minx.
Hold out of the way, you old doting fool ye.


Sir Weal. Odslifelikius she has made my ears sing again; what a plaguey
strength did the young vixon strike withal.


Minx. So so, is this going to see a Packet opened? You a person of quality,
and tell a lie.


Ld Cour. You mistake, Pug, a Statesman cannot tell a lie, he only gives out
false intelligence to amuse and gain advantage.


Minx. A fig for a Statesman, don't tell me of a Statesman, never a Statesman
in Christendom shall abuse me. Don you think to leave me in this condition,
without providing either for me or my burden here. By jenkins before I will be
served so, I Will take up the Fire-sork and crack the very skull of you, so I
will.


Ld Court. Patience, patience, Pug -- E'gad I Will comply, for it may be a fatal
thing for a Politician to receive a very small blow, if it chance to hit in the
right place.


Minx. Come, come away, will you? The Lawyer waits for you, will you go in and
seal the Writings, or no?


Ld Court. That I will, my Pug, I never designed otherwise.


Minx. Come along then. Come, Sir Wealthy, you shall go and be witness.


Sir Weal. With all my heart, Madam; ods life, if his Lordship delivers I Will
take possession e'faith.


[ Ex. Ld Court. Minx. and Sir Weal. Enter Nibs. Nibs. I guest, Madam, at your
uneasiness, and therefore soon contrived your relief.


Oph. And I guess who employed ye, and therefore shall take care to keep you in
the dark.


Aside. Nibs. Did not you find his Lordship very troublesome and impertinent?


Oph. Not at all. How can a person of his quality be thought troublesome, or a
man of his parts be reckoned impertinent.


Nibs. I scarce believe you to be serious. I know you, Madam Ophelia, to have a
better judgment; but there is a person in the world, tho I Will say nothing of
him, who has no small esteem for you, and is really a man of parts, an honest
Gentleman, whose pretensions are honorable: what think you of Sir Bellamour
Blunt, Madam?


Oph. I think he is a Hog, ameer Hog; who do you think would be troubled with
his moroseness?


Nibs. It is his true notion of things, and the sincerity of his principles
that makes him so downright, both in his discourse and actions: but here he
comes, let him speak for himself.


Enter Sir Bellamour Blunt. Sir Bell. Are you now at leisure to hear me, Madam?


Oph. No, nor never will be at leisure to hear any body but my Lord


Courtipoll. Well Sir, if you have any business at Court, I may perhaps prevail
with my Lord Courtipoll to intercede for you.


Sir Bell. Thank my Stars, my business there is equal to his interest, which --.


Oph. Hold, no reflections upon a noble Courtier, pray Sir? They ought to be
above censure.


Sir Bell. Nay his Lordship may be a great Courtier as far as I know. Gay fools
often serve for the ornamental furniture of a Court -- Tho this is not my
business at present. Now I have an opportunity I must tell you, that I have a
strong and sincere passion for you.


Oph. Passion! Ha, ha, ha. And I must tell you that I have a strong and sincere
aversion to all manner of passion, especially a foolish lovepassion. It Is a
turbulent storm of the mind, that raises a short blustering disorder, but soon,
alas, flags into a cool regardless calm.


Sir Bell. Mine, Madam, is of a temperament that promises duration.


Oph. Many things that are very promising, meet with strange alterations before
their events.


Sir Bell. Have you had any account of this Lord Courtipoll?


Ld Cour. Yes, yes, he has kept a Mistress, and what by that? we are not to
expect Saints about the Town in this Age -- The very bulchin Country Calf, that
till the age of one and twenty sucks the Teat, and bleats at the heels of his
Lady Dam, soon finds an opportunity to lick the face of some homely Heifer or
other.


Sir Bell. Do ye know that he is Married, and what function you are designed for?


Ophel. The thoughts of this, I must confess, in spite of my pretensions,
shocks the very soul of me, and fires me all over with Indignation. (Aside.)
Enter Sir Wealthy Plainder.


Sir Weal. O fie, O fie, come along with me, Hussy, quickly.


Nibs. Sir, Sir, your Perriwig is a fire, your Perriwig's afire, I say.


Sir Weal. Where, where?


(As he flings off his Hat and Perriwig, rubs his Head, and jumps about,
Ophelia steals off another way. Nibs. It Is out now, Sir: And all is well again.


Sir Weal. ( looking about.) Where Is Ophelia?


Nibs. She Is stepped in before you, Sir.


Sir Weal. Edad then I Will after her.


Exit. Sir Bell. Was there ever such a barbarous horrid fellow, as this Sir
Wealthy?


Nibs. Come, Sir Bellameur, all will go well, I Will warrant you. I can see as
far into a Millstone as another body: and can foretell the success of an Amor
better than e're a Fortune Tellers in the Kingdom: Tho I love to say but little,
I don't question but I shall bring all things about, and give you the
possession of both the Lady and a considerable Fortune into the bargain, out of
her Fathers concealed Treasure. For tho I never do discover Secrets, yet I must
tell you, that, for all Sir Wealthy pleads poverty at this rate, yet the old
Rogue is as rich as a Jew. You shall not want my assistance I promise ye, Sir
Bellamour. But mum's the word, not one syllable more. And for your comfort,


At Games of Love, where Lovers tug most hard,
It Is trusty Nibs that proves the surest Ca^d*
End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Scene continues a Room in Mrs. Sweetny's House.
Widow Thoroshift and Sweetny. Sweet WEll, and pray Madam what proceedings is
there in your grand affair of Love?


Wid. Indeed Mrs. Sweetny I Am at last drove to take my choice of two Extremes,
either to be stripped, and flung into durance, by the force of Law Temporal* or
to be divested of all freedom, and deliver my self into Matrimonial bonds, by
the power of Law Spiritual.


Sweet. If you will be advised by me accept of the latter, for in that the tie is
mutual: And your knowledge of the world will direct you to loose your own hands
at pleasure.


Wid. Then as to my choice of persons, whether I shall take that palpable Fool
of a Captain, or the shrewd suspected Knave of a Merchant.


Sweet. Where there is a plentiful Estate a Fool may be very convenient* But in
your circumstances the Merchant, that, no doubt, is well acquainted with all
manner of subtle Tricking, would, I think, be the fitter Match.


Wid. They have both my promise to dispatch the business this very night, and
they equally confide in it.


Sweet. I must tell you, dear Madam, that I look upon both of 'em of very
uncertain worth. I wish you would take Courage, prune, bristle, and display
your Charms so, that you might entangle the affections of honest Sir Bellamour
Blu^t; he is a man of a known value.


Wid. Alas his gruffship is already visibly fastened: Don't you see how he
^lounces about after the tail of your new guest Ophelia?


Sweet. Here comes his friend Vainthroat, we'll engage him in the business?


Enter Vainthroat. Sweet. Where have you been, good Mr Vainthroat, we have
wanted you strangely.


Vain Why faith, Madam, I have been, like an out-lying Deer, browsing about a
little in fresh pasture* and am now very coolly returned within the pale again.


Sweet. Come, sweet Sir, what think ye of promoting a Match betwixt the Widow
here and your friend Sir Bellamour.


Vain. Ha, ha, ha, promote do ye call it? I think there is not three pence
difference in the piece of service, either to promote a friend six ^ounds up an
Execution-Ladder, or as many steps toward Matrimony.


Sir Bellamour Blunt appears at a distance, walking in a melancholy posture.
Vain. sings in a Ballad tone.


But see where walks the doughty Knight,
Who all in doleful guise,
Metes out the time of sable night.
With Tears dropped from his Eyes.
Widow, Widow, I vow yonder is Champion seems to lie under some dire Enchantment,
prithee go try whether you have ever a Spe^^ about you that is powerful enough
to set him at liberty.

Wid. I Will use my endeavor to unshackle him: But it shall be with design to
secure him within a Circle of my own* I promise him a that.


Aside. Sweet. Come, sweet Madam Thoroshift, you shall show a Female prowess in
attacking this sour Knight of the Lees. I Will conduct you into the Lists, and
leave you to manage the Combat as you see convenient. (Sweetny and Widow walk
up toward Sir Bellamour.) I hope honest Sir Bellamour will not think much to be
left alone with a handsome young Widow. Pray let me enjoin you that Love be the
subject of your discourse, and look that you handle the matter warmly -- Come
Mr. Vainthroat let us leave them together.


Exeunt Sweet. and Vain. Wid. But do ye think, Sir, there is no Charms in the
world that equals Ophelia's? To my knowledge there is a certain person, that,
without offense, for Features, for Complexion, for Shape, for Air, for Mien;
nay more, one that knows how to --


Sir Bell. Render herself Ridiculous, by a nauseous, false commendation.


Wid. Come, come, a Woman of Discretion, and of a kind, complying temper, as I
know who is, will bear with any thing that comes from Sir Bellamour Blunt. --
Will you suffer --


Sir Bell. The Rack rather than this Impertinence -- What the Devil would this
woman have?


Wid. Have you to recollect your self, and consult your Reason. Do but think
how mean a spirited thing it is, not to resent the slights and affronts of a
young wanton Coquet; and how ungenerous 'twou'd be, not to caress the sincere
and obliging offers of a person --


Sir Bell. Who in Confidence epitomizes her whole Sex.


Wid. How, Confidence! I find you are one of those tame fools that love to be
ill used. And since you thus basely refuse my kind and tender Compassion for
you, I Will make you smart under the lash of my Vengeance.


Sir Bell. As long as I Am got clear of your Smiles, I Will stand the Battory of
your Frowns at a distance. And so faith Lady I shall take my advantage, and
sheer off.


Exit. Wid. Was there ever any thing so provoking? A dull insensible Log:
Efaith I Will plague him for this, I^ll warrant him.


Enter Nibs running. Nibs. Ah Madam, Madam, we^^e all undone, undone; yonder is
the Mob up in the City, ravishing at such a rate, you never heard the like
on^t. They say there is not a Female left undefiled twixt Algate and Ludgate.


Wid. Then for my part, I believe the worshipful the Mob have but left them as
they found them.


Nibs. O Lord, O Lord! why what, Madam, do ye offer to make a jest of Ravi^hing?


Wid. Why it always was a jest, a mere jest, Nibs. I never yet saw it only
represented on the Stage, but it created a satisfactory titt'ring amongst all
the Females in the house.


Nibs. I have told my Lord Courtipoll of it, and he is going up into the City
with all the haste imaginable.


Enter Lord Courtipoll and Prim. Ld Court. Come, now I Will show the world how
serviceable I can be to a State upon an emergent occasion.


Nibs. O good my Lord make haste, to be ravished by a parcel of nasty
Kennel-rakers would be insufferable, were it to be by Gentlemen it were nothing.


Prim. Alas, poor thing.


Wid. But what my Lord, do ye mean to Drawcancer it, and singly encounter
Multitudes?


Ld Court. No, no, Madam, I Will promise you I don't mean to strike a stroke, I
know better things* In the first place I Will make Speeches. Thus I Will begin: My
loving Friends and dear Countrymen. As for the rest I may trust my genius to
direct that happy Talent I have in Oratory. Madam, your Servant. But hold! E're
I go, pray Mrs Nibs do you take this Ring, and whilst it is warm with these
three kisses, present it to the fair Ophelia, and let her put it on her middle
finger on her left hand. And having also solemnly kissed it three times, let her
lay it close to her heart, and then put up some ejaculations for her
adventurous Lord Courtipoll. Such mysteries as these were always thought
requisite amongst the ancient Politicians, upon the undertaking of any grand
affair. Madam, your Servant. Come along (...).


Exeunt Ld Courtipoll and Prim Wid. Nibs, what have you done with my brace of
Lovers, I am resolved I Will soon decide the point in controversy. But first
I Will to my Chamber, to meditate Revenge upon this base fellow Sir Bellamour, to
slight proffered Caresses is an injury that a woman is never able to forgive.


Exit. Nibs. And I shall take care to blunt the edge of your malice on this
occasion, I Will promise you.


Enter Nickycrack. Nick. Ha, ha, ha, yonder is my Lord marched up into the City
to quell the Mob, forsooth.


Nibs. Have NOT I managed this project rarely? I have sent his Lordship on this
fools errand, so that my generous friend Sir Bellamour might have the greater
freedom to prosecute his Amor with Ophelia.


Nick. Faith 'twas well contrived, and I Will assist thee in any thing with all
my heart, Girl.


Nibs. Come along then.


Exeunt. Enter Minx and Doll* Minx. Now Doll I am a little at ease; my
Settlement is not only a sufficient maintenance for my self, but for any Spark
that I shall best fancy; so that I may now when I think fit, turn honest with a
safe Conscience.


Doll. And your humble Servant Country Doll here is jumping into preferment
apace. In the first place, I am to be married to superabundantly nice Mr. Prim,
and by that means I shall forthwith commence Gentlewoman, and become acquainted
with people of Quality: Then, no doubt, upon the discovery of some private
qualifications that I am Mistress of, I shall soon be resorted to by the
greatest men in the Kingdom. Madam, shall I beg a small favor at your
Ladyships hands, says one Lord. It lies in your Ladyships power to relieve a
person in very great distress, says another Lord. Oh how I Will bristle when they
come cringing to me for a Cast of my function.


Minx. Gad a mercy Doll.


Doll But what have you done, Madam, with Sir Wealthy Plainder? Certainly he is
not to be neglected till he is a little better fleeced.


Minx Hang him, an old rivell^d skin impotent Cur, a bundle of dried Kexes
would be a better bed fellow.


Doll. What the Devil signifies his Carcass, so his Purse be but proli^ick.


Minx. Well Doll, I Will freely remit both his Carcass and Purse too into your
hands, manage him as you think convenient; you may easily contrive to personate
me, there is no danger that he can make any discovery of the cheat.


Doll. Faith then I Will about it immediately, I Will go send him a challenge in
your name, appoint some convenient place, and should he prove backward, and
refuse to bleed freely, I Will first rifle the old Rogue, then beat him into
better manners. I know he carries two or three hundred pieces always about him,
and I will rip the very Wasteband of his Breeches for him, but I Will find it
out; such a sum as that will furnish me a small secret Apartment with an
Indian Pallet-Bed, and a large Glass at the head on it, a set of Dutch Nudities,
a Silver Chocolate Pot, and a Punch Bowl, and some other pretty utensils that
are absolutely necessary for one of my employ.


Minx. Ha, ha, I fancy Doll thou't become thy promotion very well, indeed thou
have something in thy face that looks very reverend.


Doll. Nay I am confident I shall be as punctual in all the formalities of my
Calling as any body. I can double my Chin, pout out a wanton Lip, wag the Head,
and tip the wink, as well as e're a standing Bawd in Christendom.


Minx O rare Madam Dorothy.


Doll. Well, Madam, with your leave I will now go look after Sir Wealthy
Plainder, and manage that affair.


Minx. Do so Doll, and I will go see how my Sister Thoroshift goes on in her
business.


Exeunt. Scene changes to the Garden by Moonlight, Enter Sir Bellamour Blunt.
Sir Bell. Yonder Is the Arbor that trusty Nibs promised to decoy Ophelia too.
It Is to be hoped that the serenity of the night, and the sweetness of the
place, may so becalm her bosom, that it will be the more susceptible of the
soft inspirations of love.


(Goes into the Arbor. Enter Sir Wealthy Plainder with a small Trunk, Sir
Bell. peeping out of the Arbor. Sir Weal. So, under this Bench will I conceal
my dear, dear Treasure here, ( Kisses and hugs the Trunk.) till the damned
ravenous Mob be quelled. Sure no body sees me but the Moon yonder, and a my
Conscience, Madam Luna scorns to tell tales: had she been a blab of her Tongue,
the Gods would never have chose her out for a Midwife -- So, now I Will to my
Minky, and recreate the flesh a little. I Will make the young Jade practice a
thousand pretty Dalliances; she shall rub my Ears, clap my Cheeks, scratch my
Knees, and tickle me under the short Ribs, e'faith, Ee, e, e, e, I Will show her
how, I Will show her how presently.


Exit. Sir Bellamour Blunt comes out of the Arbor. Sir Bell. A pox of thy
damned lascivious hide, for an old doting Letcher -- However, methinks this
proves very lucky. I may certainly, with all the justice in the world, carry
off this old villains beloved Wealth -- And so constitute my self Trustee for
the much wronged Ophelia.


Carries the Trunk into the Arbor. Enter Ophelia and Nibs. Nibs. Here is a
lovely night, Madam; the Sky looks clear and glorious, the Air is fresh, and
the Banks are fragrant.


Oph. The night is pleasant indeed, and the place agreeable.


Nibs. And very suitable for Love Adventures, is it not, Madam?


Oph. The truth on it is, this might be a proper Scene for some of the idle
Romantic Stories we meet withal in Novels -- As when Olimpia, lying under the
constraint of severe Parents, being wholly debarred the object of her
affections, restless in bed, she slips on a loose Garment, takes her Lute, and
steals gently forth into the Garden, where, having burdened the ambient Air
with pressing sighs, and long complain to the regardless Plants, at length the
lovely Nymph warbles out some soft and killing words made of her absent Swain.
Celadon, concealed in an adjacent Arbor, surpised with the unlookt for
harmony, rushes out of his melancholy covert, flings himself at the feet of his
charming Goddess, and there expires in the highest Transport of an amorous
passion.


She speaks this slightingly, as ridiculing the matter. Nibs. And would not
this, Madam, look very prettily, were it to be performed in reality? Pray let
me beg of you to begin the story at the Song, and see how fate may order the
Consequences.


Oph. I will not deny you a Song, Nibs, but I believe the story as you call it,
is like to begin and end with it.


SONG.
ALL things seem deaf to my complaints,
In vain I roam the Groves along.
Hear me ye Loves departed Saints,
That to Elizyan shades are gone.
If to my faithful Celadon I prove not true,
Let it be both our dooms never to come to you.
Sir Bellamour rushes hastily from the Arbor, and flings himself at the Feet
of Ophelia. Oph. ( shreiks out.) O -- h! what piece of rudeness is this?


Nibs. Ha, ha, ha, It Is your faithful Celadon, Madam, expiring in the
transports you just spoke of. And now to go on with the Novel. Olimpia, struck
at the sudden amazement of her unexpected Celadon, continues for some time
silent as the night, and senceless as a statue, till recollecting the
sufferings of her faithful Swain, a relenting pity soon seizes her trembling
heart, pity the kind harbinger of triumphant Love. What then should ensue, but
a whole train of Tears, Fires, Flames, Raptures, and so forth, which are things
that never admit of a witness. I shall therefore beg leave to drop a hasty
Curtzie, ( Curtzies) and so withdraw.


Exit running. Sir Bell. ( rising.) Thou dear charming Creature!


Ophel. Ha, ha, ha; what, have you been all this while studying of that Speech
-- There Is a flight with all my heart.


Sir Bell. And must my passion for ever be the subject of your Raillery?


Ophel. Your passion, I suppose, is like other men's, of the same continuance as
your courtship.


Sir Bell. Could I suppose my self capable of altering my esteem by a
possession, I Would sooner tamely surrender my breast to be possessed by Furies, nay,
by Envy itself, the worst of Fiends, rather than urge you one syllable farther.


Ophel. So, so, I find your are resolved to take a share in the Novel; this is
all Romantic to the highest degree.


Sir Bell. I Am not used to any thing but truth, Madam.


Surlily Ophel. Pray don't be angry, good Sir; and I Will give you a piece of
truth in return to your truth, you so much boast of -- You must know then that
my affections are at present a little upon the float; they may in time fix, and
come to a sediment, then if a draught of the dregs of Love will go down with
your Constitution, I may perhaps have a dose or two at your service. And so
adieu, sweet Sir Bellamour.


(Going off. Sir Bell. (laying hold of her.) Hold, Madam.


Oph. How dare you be so saucy? Unhand me I say, or may I never --


Sir Bell. ( loosing her) No imprecations I beseech you Lady, what I have to
say nearly concerns your interest.


Oph. Out with it quickly then.


Sir Bell. Do but step into this Arbor with me, and there --


Oph. There you will play the Satyr perhaps, 'twill concern my interest truly, to
give you an opportunity to proceed farther with this brutish force you have so
rudely began.


Sir Bell. Don't you thus wrong the innocence of my thoughts.


Oph. If your intentions be just, why cannot you make this grand discovery you
pretend to, here in the place where we now are?


Sir Bell. Stay but a moment and I Will convince ye.


[Goes into the Arbor. Oph. What can he be gone for? -- Be it what it will, I
am resolved I will not stay to be convinced, satisfying a curiosity has ever
been very fatal to our Sex.


Exit, Re-enter Sir Bellamour with the Trunk. Sir Bell. Ophelia, Ophelia.


Widow Thoroshift above at a Window. Wid. That must be Sir Bellamour's voice.
I Will take this opportunity and fling him the Letter I have prepared.


(Flings out a Letter. Sir Bell. Ha! ( Taking up the Letter) Whence can this
come I wonder^ it may perhaps contain what a Virgin modesty might refuse to
discover face to face. ( Opens the Letter) I can by Moonlight perceive that
it is subscribed Ophelia, ^tho I cannot in this place read the Contents -- I am
impatient to read it.


Exit. Wid. So, the bait he swallows greedily, and I Will take care to ho^k him.


Withdraw^. Enter Doll. Doll. This is the place appointed; and ^m confident the
old Dotard will punctually answer my Defiance -- I vow here he comes already.


Enter Sir Wealthy Plainder. Sir Weal. Minx, Minx, Minky, Minky, ha! sure
yonder must be Petticoats that are sailing about there: 'Sboblikins if they be,
I will make 'em fly presently. Why Minky, Minky*


Doll. So, this Arbor is a convenient place for the execution of my design --
Here, here, Sir Wealthy


(Calling softly.) Sir Weal. Where, where?


(Answering int the same tone. Doll slips into the Arbor, and Sir VVealthy
follows her.) Sir Weal. ( within) A hey! why Hussy, what a murrain ar't a
doing. Nay Minky, don't play the fool with a body at this rate.


Re-enter Doll with Sir VVealthy's Breeches. Doll. So, there let the old
bearded Goat stand and cool himself a little; it is to be hoped before morning,
the Cuffs brisk thoughts of wenching may be pretty well over -- Now I will go
strike up a merry bargain with Mr Prim as soon as he pleases: and as I have
already taken possession of the Breeches, so to his sweet comfort, shall he
find, that I will make bold to wear 'em stoutly, that I will.


Exit. Enter Nickycrack and Minx. Minx. If I should agree to the proposals you
make me, Mr Nickycrack, I fear upon the least dissatisfaction betwixt us, you
would be very apt to fling in my Dish, a spice of my former practices.


Nick. Ah, no, no, not in the least, Mrs Minx -- Come, pray let us be brief in
the matter. You have now a pretty Income, for which you may please to remember,
that I have been in some measure serviceable to you. I my self am not without a
reasonable stock of Ready, with which I don't doubt but I shall riggle my self
into some employ or other. And we will live so sweetly.


Minx. And pray what employ do you think would best suit with your Genius?


Nick. My Genins, indeed, will require some very honest employ. What think you
of a Tax-Collector, a Military Pay Master, a Change-Broaker, or a Solicitor in
Parliament?


Minx. A parcel of very conscientious Callings, truly.


Sir Weal. ( bawling out within.) Ho -- lo Minx, why what the Devil at't a
doing, and who is that thou have got with thee?


Nick. Hark! Some body calls out, let us go see who it is?


Minx. I protest it is Sir Wealthy Plainder, by all means let us unloose him. (
They go into the Arbor and lead out Sir VVealthy with his hands bound) Why
what is the matter Sir Wealthy, in the name of wonder what have they done to ye?


Sir Weal. Prithee leave fooling at this rate, give me but my Breeches again
and all shall be well, faith Child. Then Minky, we'll go into thy Chamber, and
there we will fairly unrip 'em. Every tenth piece shall be thy own freely, and
for each piece I Will have a tubbers at bowls in a Summers day. Ta Doll, di, da,
doll, di, da, doll.


[Sings and dances. Minx. Ha! Now I smoke the business. Ha, ha, ha, he is
uncas'd I find. He may Ta doll, di, da, doll long enough before Doll will
refund again, I Will warrant her. [aside] Sir Wealthy, I cannot imagine what you would
be at. Mr Nickycrack and I are but just come into the Garden, and how you come
tied after this manner, and what you have had done to ye, I know no more than
the man in yonder is Moon, not I, I Will promise ye.


Nick. I profess Sir Wealthy I don't know what to think of your Ta, doll, di,
da, doll; for my part I Am afraid your Worship is at present something Lunatic.


Sir Weal. Why, what a pox! would you both persuade me out of my Christian
name? Had not I a Letter from you, Mrs. Minx, to meet you here in the Garden?
and accordingly I came. You beckoned, and called me into this Arbor, tied my
hands for me, and then run away with my Breeches.


Minx. Not one syllable of this is truth, by jenkins; now you make a body swear.


Nick. In short, Sir Wealthy, you are either disturbed in your brain, or have
been most horribly abused; for, upon my salvation, this Lady and I have been
together for this half hour, and were but just come into the Garden as you
called out.


Sir Weal. O Lord, O Lord! such doings as these would make my Brains burst
about my Ears, tho my Scull were ho^p'd with Steel. May the Gods send I find
all safe under the Bench. ( Looks under the Bench, then flings it down in a
rage) Hell, Furies, Blood, Fire, Death, Destruction; and what is worst of all,
Woman, Woman, Woman. I run, I burn, I fly; I Am here, I Am there. I Am every
where, I Am no where, nor never will be any where again.


(Runs off, tearing like a madman. Nick. Why, what is the Devil in Sir Wealthy?


Minx. I believe Legion himself has possessed him: He seems at present even too
mad for Bedlam.


Nick. Had I but a grant of his body, I Would cage him up e'faith, and show him
about the Country for the Wild Man.


Minx. You had best prevail with my Lord Courtipoll, to beg him for you.


Nick. Ay that would be wise work indeed, to set on a Fool to beg a Madman.


Minx. Prithee Mr Nickycrack, let us go in and examine Doll about this business,
I believe she is able to unravel the whole matter.


Nick. Madam, if you think convenient, I^d rather be for tying a knot of our
own, than unravelling fifty of other peoples.


Minx. Why look ye, Mr Nickycrack, I hope you will give me half an hours time to
consider of your proposals. I am not unthoughtful of your former favors. And
can at present assure ye, that I hate to be ungrateful. But what requires the
most expedition is my Siste^ Thoroshift's business.


Nick. Madam, I Have employed Mr. Plodder, my chief Implement of Intelligence,
and expect his return every minute. I am confident that by his means I shall
know the value of the Merchants stock; and of the substance of the Soldiers
preferment to a single grain.


Minx. Well, when that is effected then the Parson goes to work, and Marriage
you know is a fruit, that like Nuts generally grows in clusters.


Nick. And egad as soon as the Bough is shak^d, I^ll be ready with my open arms
to take into my bosom the dear sweet Nut that falls to my share*


Embracing Minx. Minx. That you may, Mr Nickycrack, and get at the Kernel
without endangering your Teeth by cracking the shell.


Nick. Phoo! pox of cracking of shells, what care I for cracking of shells.


Who most depends upon a Maidenhead,
Is at the best, but by a Phantom led.
The end of the fourth Act.
ACT V.
Scene A Room in the House.
Sir Bellamour Blunt with a Letter. Sir Bell. ( Reads.) SIr, considering the
usage I meet withal from the most unnatural of Parents, and being in some
measure acquainted with the honorable character you maintain in the world, I
have at length resolved to confide in your pretensions, and commit my self
wholly into your custody, not doubting but I shall meet with a reception worthy
your self, and suitable to the present exigencies of your distressed Refugee,
Ophelia

At the end of the Gallery leading to the Backstairs when the clock strikes one.

Oh happy Summons! This is the place, and I am confident it draws near the
time. ( The Clock strikes) There goes the blessed stroke, from this minute I Will
date my account of bliss, which may be Gods multiply till the sum equals the
extent of my passion.


Enter Widow Thoroshift Maskt, Captain Bownceby, and Broakage, watching her at
two several doors. Sir Bell. (Running to her and embracing her) Ophelia! I am
not able to say more. But --


Enter Captain Bownceby at a distance. Capt. Hell and Hand-granades! I have
watched to fine purpose, to be at length an eye witness of the loss of my
Mistress -- No, I ll first be ramm'd into the mouth of a Cannon, and be
discharged against my Enemy, with my heels foremost, to kick the breath out of
his Stomach. ( Goes up to Sir Bellamour.) Who are you, Sir, that dare show this
familiarity with a Lady to whom Captain Bownceby make pretensions. If you think
fit, Sir, to dispute my Title, you shall find it writ in legible Characters
upon this invincible Bilboa Blade. ( Draws his Sword, retires to some distance
and flourishes it.) Do ye see, do ye see, Sir?


Sir Bell. If you will walk a little nearer, Sir, you shall see me break your
Bilboa Blade about the ears of you, and imprint its Characters upon your Skull;
I am confident it is soft enough to take the impression.


Capt. Ha! A rough Dog! I fear this: what a damned sour look he has?


Enter Broakage. Bro. Gad I ll venture out. Captain I see you are like to be
engaged, and tho we are Rivals as to the Widow yonder, yet, with your leave, we
will join our Forces against the common Enemy.


(Draws his Sword. Capt. With all my heart, honest Broakage. Come, prithee do
thee march in the Front, and let me bring up the Rear. By my experience in War
I Will undertake to make good the Retreat, should we chance to be over-press'd.


Bro. No, pray Captain do you take the honor of leading, because you know how
to give the Onset with advantage.


Capt. Nay, good Mr Broakage.


Bro. Nay, dear Captain.


Capt. I protest you shall.


(Putting each other forward by turns. Bro. I vow it must be you.


Capt. What if we first parley, and make our demands in form, and upon refusal,
then fall on?


Bro Do so, Captain.


Capt. Hark you, Sir, will you surrender the VVidow, or not?


Sir Bell. Pray, Madam Ophelia let me beg of you to withdraw for a moment,
whilst I correct the insolence of these two Coxcombs.


Capt Death and Thunderbolts! it is none of Ophelia, it is the Widow Thoroshift.


Bro. Odsniggers, Sir, it is the VVidow Thoroshift; do but look, and if it does
not prove so, we'll be content you shall bear her off; and we our selves will
attend your Triumph in chains.


Sir Bell. ( looking earnestly upon the Widow.) Ha! am I imposed upon? since
it is so, Gentlemen, pray take the Lady, I will surrender before you draw down
your Artillery. I must confess I look upon the Fort so battered, that its not
worth the keeping.


Exit. Wid. Am I not only discovered, but affronted with a second contempt?
Villain I will have thy blood.


(Offers to snatch the Captains Sword.) Capt. and Broa. ( laying hold on her.)
Patience, patience, good Lady.


Wid. Loose me, ye Poltroons ye. Had either of you the respect for me you
pretend to have, or the least dram of Courage, you would a ster him, and cut
his Throat this moment.


Bro. Captain, Captain, you understand the business, prithee after him, and
fet^^ back his head to expiate for his saucy crime.


Capt. Brimstone and Blunderbuss Bullets, Madam, had I thought it manners to
have done it before you, I Would have whipped it off before he had stirred a step.
But if your Ladyship pleases to lay me any night in Ambuscade under his Bed, if
I leave him an inch of neck to tie his Cravat upon in the morning, may I end my
days under a Hedge, and have my Eyes closed with Caterpillars.


Broa. And after that, Madam, if ever he troubles your Ladyship more, I Will
undertake to decoy him aboard a Ship, and so Spirit him away to one of my
Plantations.


Wid. Gentlemen, now my passion is something over, I am ready to acknowledge
that I am equally obliged to both of you, for thus espousing my Quarrel. --
It Is a miserable case that I am forced to keep my self on fair terms with such
a couple of ninny Lovers as these. ( aside) Gentlemen, I am now going to see
trusty Nibs married. She has got one of our Modern-Play Lovers, that lies in
wait for her, and yet knows nothing of the matter.


Capt. And then, Madam.


(whispers her in one ear.) Broa. And then, Madam.


(Runs and whispers her in the other.) Capt. You are very civil, Mr. Broakage,
thus to take out of one ear what I whispered into the other.


Wid. No jarring, Gentlemen, on penalty of my eternal displeasure. As soon as
Nibs is married, we'll get together, and dance till morning.


Capt. Captain Bownceby shall be ready to attend your Ladyship, with evry Caper
five foot high.


(Capers.) Broa. And your obedient Slave, Mr. Broakage, shall Coupee and Coulee
to your Ladyship, as dexterously as a Beau does to himself at the great Glass in
the Chocolate-house.


Wid. These Beaus have a fine time on it, when such Blockheads as thee must have
a fling at 'em. ( aside.) Gentlemen, I am your servant


Ex. Wid. Capt. Now, Sir, the common danger is over, what if we about again as
we were?


Broa. You are in the right, I protest, Captain; but first let us embrace. Your
Servant, noble Captain. Exeunt. Capt Your Servant, sweet Mr Broakage -- Now
mind to turn short upon your left heel at the word of command. To the right
about^ march.


[They face about at the same time and march off Enter Ld Courtipoll,
Vainthroat, and Sweetny. Sweet. I vow I am glad to see your noble Lordship safe
returned; how generously it was done, thus to expose your precious person for
all our safeties.


Ld Court. As it happened there was no danger, the business only proved a Match
at Football in Moor-Fields, but I have been so plagued with the insolence of
onstables, not one of the Scoundrels would kn^w me to be a man of quality; but
after abundance of barbarous usage, I was hurried before a City Magistrate, who
at first very hastily sent word, that we^e I the best m^n in the Kingdom I must
be secured till morning. But at length upon much solicitation, he and his wife
examined the business, and upon her command I was set at liberty Upon my honor
she was a very prett^ woman, and took occasion to draw up her Breasts, mump her
Mouth, and say, she believed I was a person of quality by my white Hand and
diamond ^^ng.


Sweet. O goodness! sure every body may know that by your graceful deportment.


Vain. It is fifty to one, my Lord, but you will have her at Court e're long a
soliciting Knighthood for her Husband, and then --


Ld Court. Then I Will take care she shall succeed e'faith. And when the beast of
her Husband has his shoulders loaded with a Sirdom, it shall be my business to
give the addition of a corniferous badge, and adorn his front with a courtly
Cuckoldom -- But Mrs Sweetny, where is Ophelia?


Sweet. Alas poor young Lady, she is very dutifully attending upon her Father --
Sir Wealthy, my Lord, is of a sudden run quite besides himself. See where she
comes along with him.


Enter Sir Wealthy Plainder very melancholy, attended by Ophelia. Oph. Will you
be pleased, Sir, to take a little repose?


Sir Weal. No, Child, lust and villainy never sleep.


(very gruff.) Sweet. Good lack, what is to be done with him, see how strangely
thoughtful he looks.


Sir Weal. Be gone, Ophelia, there is a cup of Poison by you, nay, the deadly
draught was prepared by thy Fathers own hand; be gone I say.


Oph. This sudden care of me is wondrous strange; by this my Father rather
seems to have recovered than lost his senses. ( aside) I^ll go try what account
I can get of the occasion of all this.


Exit. Vain. Why how now old fellow, what art run mad?


Sir Weal. Yes, young Coxcomb, I am mad.


Vain Then here is one shall match thee faith. ( aside.) My Lord, a person of
your universal knowledge, may find out the nature of this Gentleman's distemper,
and by that means a recovery may be thought on.


Ld Cour. Ha? let us see what is to he done with him; why if the Gentlemas Noddle
has sprung a Leak, the best way will be to ply the pumps. Mr Vainthroat, do you
take the other arm, and I will manage this, and let us work him a little.


Sir Weal. ( flying from 'em) Loose me, thou fantastic Vanity, thou finished
folly.


Ld Court. You are very familiar with your betters, methinks good Mr Mad man.


Sweet. Its a sign indeed the poor Gentleman's distraction is very great, he
could never have thought that your Lordship could possibly have been a fool
else.


Ld Court. Let us consider Mr. Vainthroat -- By what I can apprehend of him he
only affects a surly humor, and under the pretense of madness takes the
liberty of being saucy; prithee let us laugh him out on^t.


Vain. With all my heart, my Lord, say what you will, I will have a laugh at
your service -- I think I may safely promise that, for the Coxcomb is scarce
capable of saying any thing but what is very ridiculous, and yet has the vanity
to think a man laughs at the gayety of his parts.


Aside Ld Court. Ha, ha, ha, what, Sir Wealthy has my quondam Mistress put thee
thus in the dumps. Its a sign thou were a Madman to venture coming after a man
of my quality -- Mr Vainthroat.


Vain. My Lord. Oh -- ha, ha, ha. S'bud I Would forgot to laugh at the right stop.


Aside. Ld Court. Come Knight, prithee cheer up Man, I Will make thy posterity
amends for thy misfortunes, I Will infuse into Ophelia, such a stream of sense
and solidity, that she shall become the mother of a Generation distinguished by
the name of the Matchiavellian Courtipollions.


Vain. Ha, ha, ha, there I was ready for you, my Lord.


Sir Weal And I am as ready to despise both your impertinences.


Ld Court. I find nothing will move the sullen Sot, prithee for Ophelia's sake,
see him safe to his Chamber, while Mrs Sweetny and I go and push on my affairs
with the Virgin that I have now upon my hands


Exeunt Ld Court and Sweet. Vain. Like a man of your quality


(mimicking Ld Courtipoll) Enter Nickycrack. Nick. O Sir Wealthy, I was looking
for you. Pray don't give way to this strange sort of splenatick humor; do but
walk in, and you will soon find how matters stand.


Sir Weal. What care I how matters stand, I could now, with a steady unconcern,
see the crazy props of Nature slip their hold, and all this giddy world stagger
into eternal Confusion.


Exit. Nick. Ha! what is the old Rogue turned Stoic?


Vain. Faith I can*t tell what to make of him, not I -- But Nickycrack I am in
expectation of flinging of Stockings, and lapping of Sack-possets, and so
forth. Is there any thing to be done to night or not?


Nick. Yes faith, there will be tickling work anon; you shall see me take my
turn too.


Vain. E'gad it shall go very hard but I Will have some tickling amongst ye. Bite
of the Bridle as soon as you will, I Will take my turn in the Saddle I Will warrant
ye.


Nick. See here comes one couple already; the finical Mr Prim has very nicely
espoused honest Country Doll.


Enter Prim leading Doll. Vain. Joy to thee Doll. What has the Court then
struck a lasting Covenant with the Country?


Nick Yes indeed, poor Doll here has at length been bribed to betray herself
into the bonds of Matrimony.


Prim. Gentlemen, no more plain Doll, I beseech you, I am confident she can now
lay a just claim to the title of Madam Prim, and I hope that term will not in the
least damnify your voices in the expression, Gentlemen; prithee my dear, mind
my way of talking, you must now strive to leave off your Country Dialect, and
give to every word you speak, a pretty gentile courtly twang


Enter Nibs. Nick. Here Is Mrs Nibs, I dare say is married too, by the solemn
paw she takes, and by that pretty blush which she cunningly assumes, to bid a
formal adieu to what she has long parted withal. Is it not so, Mrs Nibs?


Nibs. Yes indeed, I am fast enough; but what is the jest, is, the man that has
married me, knows not a syllable of the business.


Vain. If half the Husbands in the Kingdom were to be kept in the same
ignorance, ^ my Conscience they would have reason enough to think themselves happy
fellows. Were I to advise you, I*d never let him know it, lest he should repent
his bargain, ha forsooth?


Nibs. Pray, Mr Vainthroat, for the future, vouchsafe to let your Forsooths be
Madams when you speak to me, for I assure you I have married a man of Honor.


Nick. You will not pretend to take place of Madam Prim I hope.


Nibs. Madam Prim! Ha, ha, ha, that is a good one e'faith.


Prim. Pray, Madam, why this public derision of a person that has married a
Gentleman.


Nibs. A Gentleman, ha, ha, ha. Had my Husband no better a pretense to his
gentility, I should blush to hear my self Madam'd. If you will give me leave, I
can give you an exact account of your pedigree.


Vain. By all means let us hear it.


Nibs. Well, then, I don't love to say much, but what I do say shall be to the
purpose. Jacob Scout, the Beadle of Cripplegate Parish, will be ready at any
time to justify upon Oath what I am going to say. You must know then, that this
very Gentleman who pretends himself of Prim Castle in the borders of Scotland,
was not many years since a squauling bantling, laid in a Hand-basket upon a
Bulk in Woodstreet, and being taken care of by the Parish, old Scout the Beadle
was his Godfather, and afterward --


Prim. You're a base Detractor of my Honor, and I Will have you --


Vain. Nay, hold, hold, let us hear the full charge before you make your reply,
good Mr Prim.


Nibs. Afterward I say, this Gentleman Mr Prim, when he was grown a little up,
was put in among the Blue-coat Boys, and my Lord Courtipoll being one day a
visiting Christ's-Hospital, his Lordship discovering something in the youths
face that promised a future dexterity in the subtle vocation of pimping, he was
pleased to entertain him in his service, where he has continued ever since.


Prim. O them her discovery.


(Biting his Thumbs. Vain. and Nick. Ha, ha, ha.


Doll. E'faith Nibs, if I ben't even with you for thus publicly exposing Mr
Prim, I Will be bound to forfeit all the famous qualifications of my Sex, and be
a scandalous Apostate to the whole race of Womankind.


Vain. Nay, not so, pray child, that would be the way to baulk the Devil of his
due, and it is pity he should be wronged of one single Member of the Sex.


Nick. I find Mr Prim, your Lady does not require much instruction in her
speech: methinks her Dialect is very courtly of a sudden.


Vain. No, nor in any thing else relating to the Town, I Will pass my word for it.
I dare say Madam Prim here, knows as much of assignation, snapping, fastening,
loosening, and counterfetching, with all the numerous turns of Jilting and
Coquetry, as well as ever a Hackney Coach-plyer, Pit-padder, or
Gallery-galloper about the Town of London.


Prim. Death! is it so too?


(Stamping and biting his nails. Nick. and Vain. Ha, ha, ha.


Enter Captain Bownceby singing. Capt. The danger is over, the danger is over;
Ta, doll, di, da, da, ra.


Nick. How came you empty handed then? where is the Bride?


Capt. She Is safe enough boy, you shall see her betwixt a pair of Sheets with
me presently, and if you lie near me, you shall hear me a thundering it away, a
hammering out of young Hercules's, ye dog you.


Vain. Gad they will be very wooden ones if they are like their Father.


Aside. Nick. But if you have got the Widow, Captain, pray what have you done
with the Merchant?


Capt. Ah poor Broakage, I cannot imagine what will become of the puppy, it is
fifty to one but he has already knotted his Garters, and is gaping about for
some convenient noosing place or other.


Nick. Here he comes e'faith, as merry as your Worship.


Enter Broakage Singing. Bro. Now, now the Fight is done; Ta, di, doll, da, ra,
da. The Widow^s mine own, faith boys. Now, Mr Captain, you may march about your
business as soon as you please, ha, ha, ha.


Capt. Why what^s the fellow distracted, ye Nehemian Ninnyhammer you, I say I
have married the Widow.


Bro Why ye Belzebubbian Blunderbus ye, I say I have married the Widow*


Nick. You are both very confident of the matter, methinks, be it how it will,
it is time for me to look after my own Match: but to prevent disputes in my
case, you shall see me enter with my Bride in my hand I^ll warrant ye.


Exit. Nibs. No quarrelling, pray Gentlemen, since you have both married the
Widow, why should you fall out about the matter?


Capt. What say thou, Jeronimo? Peace or War, the Olive branch or the Bilboa
Blade?


Bro. Why faith Captain, let us have a Truce at the least, since we have both
courted her in amity, and married her in amity, e'^e let us both keep her in
amity -- Here comes the Lady, pray let her decide the business.


Enter Widow Thoroshift. A Table and Candles. Vain. Madam, here is a great
Controversy, which of these two Gentlemen does your Ladyship design to own for
a Husband?


Wid. To deal plainly with you, it is scarce in my power to tell; they were both
so urgent for privacy, that having neither light to discern, nor speaking loud
enough to distinguish a voice, all that I know is, that a Husband I have; but
which of these two Gentlemen it is --


Bro. It Is me, by Jerico.


Capt. By Jerico, ye sneaking Whores-bird. It Is me by. Jove, Madam, and all the
rest of the thundering powers above.


Wid. That will soon be decided by the contents of this little Ceremonial
Implement.


(Showing a Ring. Vain. Pray then let that little Ceremonial Implement, as you
call it, clear this matter in dispute.


Wid. It shall so, Sir, I Will read the Motto, then let the Gentleman from whose
hands I reeeiv^d it, claim me for his own lawful Spouse till death does us
part. ( Reads.) The Widow's my own, Flesh, Blood, and Bone.


Bro. E'gad so she is, and accordingly I Will take possession.


Capt. Why what the Devil then (...) of mine, ha?


Wid. That, good Captain, you shall know presently. Nibs, read the poesy of
your Ring.


Nibs. ( Reads) I swear by my Courage, I Will rummage your Stowage.


Capt. Hell, Blood, and Furies, thy Stowage! why what a pox shall I get by
that, ha?


Omn. Ha, ha, ha.


Nibs. Your Servant, sweet Captain, indeed you promised I should be a Captains
Lady, but I did not think you were so kind to design me for your self, good
Captain -- Come, Sir, don't be discouraged, I^ll undertake to do those good
offices for you with your General, that shall make you bownce forward in
preferment at a strange rate.


Vain. Like enough, faith Nibs, your bowncing in the business may do much. A
nights service for a General in the Trenches, will do more for the Captain^s
advancement, than his own service in Siege Trenches all his life time* But here
comes a couple hand in hand that have made sure work. [ Enter Nickycrack
leading Minx] And here comes ano^^er couple, tho the Lady at present seems to
carry it a little too shy for a Wife


Enter Ophelia, followed by Sir Bellamour with a Trunk. Sir Bell. I have ^old
you, Madam, how I came to discover it, and knowing what usage you have met
withal, I did believe my self bound in justice to secure it. Here it is for you,
( Gives her the Trunk.) Its value I know not. If you think my concern for your
Interest merits a good esteem for you, I shall look upon my self over-paid.


Oph I am not, Sir, to be bribed into an esteem; but here comes my Father, to
whom I suppose it may properly belong, I shall therefore take care to restore
it.


Enter Sir Wealthy Plainder. Oph. Here is something, Sir, which this Gentleman,
Sir Bellamour Blunt, would willingly f^rce upon me, knowing that it is my duty
to acquaint you with what offers are made me, I humbly remit it into your hands.


Sir Weal. ( Taking the Trunk) Ha! is it so? Well Child, this I shall take care
on, and if you think good to make the Gentleman any acknowledgement for his
piece of service, pray do it with your person, if Sir Bellamour will accept of
you without the Casket.


Sir Bell. Most willingly, Sir Wealthy.


Oph. Then I must blushing own, that my inclinations suits with my Fathers
commands; and my only regret is, that so deserving a Gentleman as I believe Sir
Bellamour to be, should meet with so poor a bargain.


Sir Bell. Madam, I love you, and the possessing the object beloved, is, I
think, the greatest treasure that this world affords.


Enter Ld Courtipol. Vain. Here Is strange coupling, my Lord, of a sudden; your
Virgin too has given you the slip, e'faith, and tho not Parson-fetter'd, yet
she ha^ fairly surrenderd herself in order to it.


Ld Court. Ay! say you so? then it must be so.


Knocking without, Doll goes off, and immediately returns with a Letter. Doll
Here Is a Letter directed to Mr Nickycrack, to be delivered with all the speed
imaginable.


Nick I guess from whence it comes; but be the Contents what they will it comes
too late for prevention. ( Looking in the Letter.) O miserable, miserable news
I protest! for my part I have not power to read it.


Vain. ( Taking the Letter.) Let me see it, I^ll read it read it out contain
what it will. ( Reads, Sir, as soon as possibly I could get my full
intelligence I have sent you this, to give you an account, that Captain
Bownceby, as you call him, is no Captain, but a blustering Subaltern Officer
that was casheer^d for ^owardice


Capt. Blood and Fireballs! Furies and Fugacies.


(raves about. Doll. Ha, ha, ha, alas poor Nibs! you are a Captains Lady,
forsooth, and have married a man of Honor, ha, ha, ha.


Vain. But to proceed ( Reads.) As for Mr Broakage, he is no Merchant, but has
been employed by the Jews to drive some rooking bargains upon the Change, where
he is at present so far out of Credit, that is apprehended, I believe his ears
must atone for his former practices.


Your Servant, Peter Plodder, Intelligencer. Bro. A curse upon his Plodship!


Nick. Why what out of countenance, Mr Broakage, why it is but moving into one
of your foreign Plantations man, hah?


Wid. Come cheer up, Mr Broakage, to tell ye truth my circumstances are as bad
as yours can be, and since we have trickt one another, there is no remedy now,
but to rest satisfied, and lay our heads together, how we may sham old
Creditors, collogue in with new ones, make a ^earing figure, and so trick all
the world besides


Nick. I hope, my Lord, I have no ways incurred your Lordships displeasure, by
taking possession of a Relict of your Lordships.


Ld Court. What my Country Pug married, ha?


Minx. Your Country Pug knows as much of the Town as another body; and tho by
my Country pretensions, I have made shift to ^^ll your Lordship out of a
Settlement, yet I do not question but I shall make as just a Wife to Mr
Nickycrack here, as any sits at my Lady Mayoress^s Table, at a Lord Mayors
Feast.


Vain. That I believe you may, Madam, and hold on dealing with the Court into
the bargain.


Ld Court. Ha! since you are so pert, Mrs Minx, I can satisfy you that your
Settlement is not worth one farthing, it is drawn upon an Estate that I can make
no Title to.


Nick. O fie! I hope not so, my Lord, that can never be acted like a man of
Honor.


Ld Court. But it can be acted like a State^man tho, and that is my pretensions,
Sir.


Sir Weal. Now good people, give a Mad man leave to speak: I have at length
observed, that for the procuring of this Devil of Wealth we stick at no
Baseness, and the possessing it does generally serve to foment our Villainies. I
will therefore before all these witnesses voluntarily part with my greatest
store, and put it into the hands of a Gentleman, that if I mistake not, is
Master of such virtuous inclinations, that will direct him in the right use of
it. Here, Sir Bellamour, (Gives him the Trunk) let what is in here serve to
guild Matrimony, and make the bitter dose of woman go down the better.


Vain. Then Joy to my old friend, Sir Bellamour Blunt, and to his beautiful
Ophelia. If there can be such a thing as Felicity in a married state, it must
certainly be found in such a well matched pair as these.


Wid. As far as I find, here is every body well matched.


Ld Court. Come then, let us grace these solemnities with a Dance: but the next
Virginity Game I undertake, shall be played with more politic Caution, I Will
pawn my Honor for it.


A DANCE Nick. Now Gentlemen, let each man to bed with his own Wife.

And however most of us --
May branded seem, for being old offenders,
In feats of Love let none be bare pretenders.

EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. MOOR.
THE writing Plays, a sort of Lott'ry is,
There Is many Blanks for one good lucky Prize.
Our Author hopes he has your humor hit,
And now by me his Proxy does submit
To own this placethe Judgment Seat of Wit.
But does avow no Critics vote is good;
Butchers are never returned in case of Blood
Whoever for Justice does on them rely,
Does the same thing as Council with a Spy.
Let each free soul, his proper Verdict tell,
And pin no faith on Critic Infidel.
'Twas your applause first drew the Poet in;
Will Not you then spare whom y^u enticed to (...)?
In comic Socks still let him trip (...) Stage,
And stigmatize the follies of the age.
Till by your smiles he has such vigor won,
May make him dare to draw the Buskin on.
High in expense who ud not his utmost do,
When he is to treat such gallant Guests as you?
If once he gets you, he has wor^^ his ends;
You are the worst of foes, but best of friends.
Let ranting Coxcombs scorn an Audience fro^^,
He only writes, who writes to please the Town.
FINIS.

