THE HISTORICAL LIBRARY OF Diodorus the Sicilian.

In Fifteen BOOKS.

The First FIVE, Contain the Antiquities of Egypt, Asia, Africa, Greece, the
Islands, and Europe.

The Last TEN, An Historical Account of the AFFAIRS of the Persians, Grecians,
Macedonians, and other Parts of the World.

To which are added, The FRAGMENTS of DIODORUS that are found in the
BIBLIOTHECA of Photius: TOGETHER With those Published by H. Valesius, L.
Rhodomannus, and F. Vrsinus.

Made English, By G. BOOTH, of the City of Chester, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for Awnsham and John Churchil, at the
Black-Swan in Paternoster Row, and Edw. Castle next Scotland-Yard Gate. M D C
C.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE, Earl of Warrington.
THIS Translation of Diodorus, (the Fruits of some vacant Hours,) when first
attempted, was as early designed by a Dedication to be shrouded under the
Shelter and Protection of Your Lordship's Honorable Father, whose Public
Spirit ever prompted him to those Generous and Worthy Actions, (without
Self-seeking,) that might any ways Advance and Further the Public Good, in the
Preservation of the Peace and Happiness of his Country. Besides the Honor of
his particular Respect to my self, his Noble Imitation of the Patterns of
Virtue here presented, so far Encouraged me, as not in the least to doubt of a
Favorable Acceptance; especially from him who breathed (as it were) the same
Spirit and Soul with those Noble Hero's (that are long since gone) for the
Defense of the Laws and Liberties of his own Country, as they in their several
Generations did in theirs. As Your Lordship therefore is an Immediate Branch of
that Honorable Stock, and next in Succession to his Estate; so I hope, and
have great Reason to believe his Virtues, and Generous Qualifications, as well
as his Honor and Lands, are Your Lordship's Inheritance: In Confidence
therefore of the like Acceptance, as from him, I entreat Your Lordship's
Favorable Entertainment of this Greek Stranger, (now Clothed, as well as I
could, in an English Dress.) He Will be no Burden, but a Diverting and
Profitable Companion, useful not only to the Expert General, and Honest
Statesman, but to all Degrees for a Prudent Conduct of their Lives, by Examples
of other Men's Harms. In all which Respects, that it may be Serviceable to the
Public, and, as such, Accepted and Approved by Your Lordship, is the Ambition
of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Affectionate Kinsman, And Humble Servant, G.
BOOTH.

TO THE READER.
SO many are the Encomiums of History, both by Ancient and Modern Authors, that
little or nothing can be further added to what is already extant upon that
Subject; and therefore I shall wave troubling my Self or the Reader with
Discourses of that kind, but leave every Judicious Person to his own
Experience, which is the best Judge, and will give the surest Testimony to the
Truth of these Commendations. He that rests barely in the Matter of Fact
related in History, pleases his Fancy for a Moment while he is Reading, but
never Improves his Judgment to make it Useful in Conversation, or in the
Management of Public Affairs. He gains no more than Children by hearing a
Winter Tale, and Strange Stories of this brave Hero, and that mighty Giant, who
did Wonders in the Land of Vtopia. The Profitable Reader is He that not only
seeks to please his Fancy, but makes use of his Reason in observing chiefly the
Wonderful Providence of God, in Ruling and Governing the World in all Ages to
this day; His Setting up, and Pulling down of States, Kingdoms and Empires in
certain Periods of Time; His Justice in punishing Wickedness, and therein the
Confirmation of his Truth and Holiness; to see and consider his Wisdom, in
Ordering and Disposing of one Event for the Effecting of his Purpose in
another. To observe the Causes, Progress, and End of this or that Accident,
this War, that Revolution, this Success and that miserable Disaster, are the
main and chief Ends and Designs of Reading of History; whereby the
Understanding and Memory are not only furnished with Notions of Things done,
and long since past; but the Judgment is improved with that Moral Prudence (and
sometimes Religious too) as to be careful to avoid the Rocks others have before
split upon; and to imitate the Virtue and honorable Actions of others, (at
least for the sake of Reputation that attends upon them in this World.) Here
may be found Examples which may justly put Christians to the Blush, who come
not up to the Moral Virtues of poor Heathens heretofore famous (upon that
account) in the Ages wherein they lived; as Themistocles for his Faithfulness
to his Country, Aristides for his Justice, Scipio for his Chastity, Cato for
his Sobriety, and several others for Eminent and Virtuous Qualifications. As to
this present Author, and his History, he is well known among the Learned to be a
Treasury of Ancient History. Amongst others, Henry Stephen, in his Tract of
Diodorus, gives him this honorable Encomium: Quantum Solis lumen inter
Stellas, tantum inter Omnes, quotquot ad nostra tempora pervenerunt, Historicos
(si utilitas potius, quam voluptatis aurium habenda est ratio) noster hic
Diodorus eminere dici potest. And Justin Martyr, and some others, call him the
most famous Author of all the Greek Historians. Amongst other Excellencies of
this Author, he is peculiarly observable to have a Regard and Respect to the
Providence of God in the Affairs of the World; and is the Only ancient Author
that takes notice in the Course of his History of the Times, wherein the most
famous Historians, Philosophers and Poets flourished. Our Author himself lived
about Threescore Years before our Savior's Birth, in the time of Julius
Caesar, and the Reign of Augustus; and writ a General History from the
beginning of the World to his own time, in Forty Books called the Historical
Library, of which only Fifteen are extant, the rest lost by the Injury of Time.
The Five first are properly the Mythological Part of the History, more
uncertain, and full of Egyptian and Grecian Fables; but very useful for the
Understanding of Ancient Authors, and the Knowledge of the Assyrian Monarchy.
They give an Account of the Affairs of the World from the Beginning of Time
(known to the Heathens) to the Trojan War exclusively: The Five next in order
are perished, which is the reason the Eleventh Book immediaelty follows, which
begins with the Expedition of Xerxes into Greece, and from thence the History
is continued in Five Books to the beginning of the Reign of Philip King of
Macedon, Father of Alexander the Great; and from the Reign of Philip in Five
more, to the Expedition of Seleucus Nicanor in Capadocia, containing an Account
of Things done for the space of 179 Years.

The Books are divided into Chapters, for the Ease of the Reader, who may
thereby the better Pause and Breath when he thinks fit; and to supply a
Chronological Table in the Ten last Books, the distinction of Times is observed
in the Margin, both by the Olympiads, and the Christian Era; for the Relations
in the first Five Books, were long before the Olympiads began, and the History
is so ancient, that the certain Times of Persons and Things there related, are
for the most part unknown or very uncertain.

To the present Translation, is added that of the Excerpts or Pragments of some
of those Books of Diodorus Siculus that are lost, Collected by Photius in his
Bibliotheca, and by others, annexed at the end of the Edition of Diodorus
Published by Rhodomannus. You have here likewise a further Addition of Valesius
his Excerpts, Published by him in the Year of Our Lord 1634.

After the Fragments, there is a Supplement taken out of Quintus Curtius and
Arrianus, to fill up a great Chasm in Diodorus, lib. 17. p. 557. where that
part of his History is lost. As those Authors had their Materials from him, (as
is not doubted among the Learned) so it is but a piece of common Gratitude to
help him over the Ditch by a Staff made out of his own Pile. That the Matter
contained in this Supplement is that which is wanting in Diodorus, is apparent
not only from some Part of the broken History that is there, but from the Index
immediately before the 17th Book in Rhodomannus's Edition, where the Heads of
the Subject Matter are to be found in their Order together, but nothing of 'em
in the Body of the History. The said Heads are placed over every distinct
Subject in the said Supplement.

But as to the Translation of the Whole, it may be very well expected some
Apology should be made, or Reason given, for Translating the Five first Books,
which appeared in the English Tongue above Forty Years ago. To give therefore
Satisfaction in that Particular, we can truly and sincerely say, it was not
undertaken without some Regret, not willing to seem a captious Censurer of
other Men's Labors; therefore to obviate that Suspicion, we are willing to be
an Advocate to excuse what was before done in this Kind, as to those Five
Books; for the Errors and Defects that appear in the former Translation, are
chiefly occasioned by an old Latin Edition of Diodorus, whereunto the
Translator wholly applied himself, having at that time (without doubt) no
better an Edition to direct him. At the first it was designed to have spared so
much time, because they had been before Translated, but often hearing the
former Censured, and a new Translation desired of those Five Books (which through
a Mistake are divided by the old Latin Edition into Six, by taking the First
Book to be two, because it is in two Parts) we were the more inclined, and at
length resolved to endure the Toil, though withal we might, perhaps, fall under
Censure, in undertaking to Reform the Errors of another, and yet prove as much,
if not more Faulty in the same Things our selves.

But whatever it be, here we Present it to the Judgment of the Ingenuous
Reader, together with the other Books, entreating him to accept what he Judges
worthy his Approbation, and, with a Favorable Censure, to pass by the Errors
and Mistakes he may espy in the Perusal. As for the Carping Momus, if the whole
were in all respects Exact and Complete, (which were a Vanity to pretend,) it
were far more likely from such to meet with a Cavilling Sarcasm, than to be
Indulged with any Favorable Acceptance.

Note: The Pages placed in the Margin, are the same with Stephanus his Edition,
to which Authors generally refer; and by these, any thing may be readily found
in Rhodomannus his Edition.

Note also: That from Page 1, to Page 69, and also from Page 508, to Page 640,
there wants (by Mistake of the Press) the Pages in the Margin that refer to the
Greek Copy.

ERRATA.
PReface, Book 1. Line 29. read the return of the Heraclides. Page 1. line 25.
for is, read and. p. 2. l. 19. r. incredible. p. 8. l. ult. r. every place. p.
10. l. 12. r. Mysteries. p. 12. l. 36. r. at Nysa in Arabia. p. 54. l. 36. r.
Success. p. 63. l. 45. for not, read hot. p. 70. l. 1. for Jupiters, r.
Interpreter. p. 71. l. 34. add these words, and then followed Arsaeus, who
reigned 40 years. p. 91. l. 3. r. along. p. 127. in the Margin, for 1688. r.
1288. p. 133. l. 5. r. lurrying. p. 147. l. 41. r. dropped him. p. 148. in the
Margin, r. before Christ 1254. p. ibid. l. 49. r. Argo before he took her. p.
162. l. 12. r. Brothers. p. 169. l. 2. r. Teeth. p. 183. l. 1. for the Island,
r. and. p. 206. l. 12. r. Themisteuein. p. 207. l. 28. r. God. p. 220. l. 45.
dele they should. p. 234. l. penult. r. none of the. p. 246. l. 9. r. Some
Authors say, that Xerxes. p. 255. l. 1. r. were freed. p. 260. l. 3. r. This
Law. p. 267. l. 1. r. Wreaths. p. ibid. l. 10. dele had. p. 269. l. 17. r. in
it much. p. 274. l. 29. r. second time. p. 282. l. 34. r. Creek Criseus. p.
293. l. last save 4, r. subjoined. p. 299. l. 10. r. premising. p. 312. l. 39.
r. if we are. p. 314. l. 11. for trusts, r. suggests. p. ibid. l. 37. r. was
here. p. 319. l. 17. dele his. p. 332. l. 46, 47. r. was new possessed. p. 336.
l. 37. r. sent to by. p. 347. l. 17. r. the sole. p. 350. l. 13. r. and the
taking up of the. p. 362. l. penul^. dele with. p. 363. l. 9. for new, r. now.
p. 364. l. 6. r. Etna. p. 366. l. 41. r. Chirosophus. p. 379. l. ^1. r. Marius.
p. 189. l. 19. aole because. p. 432. l. 1. r. this their Army. p. 474. l. 19.
r. for he had. p. 481. l. antepenult. dele was by. p. 486. l. 40. r.
straightened. p. 499. in the Contents, r. Hermias. p. ib. l. 45. dele of. p. 509.
l. 19. r. set upon. p. 512. l. 3. r. baffling. p. 517. l. 42. r. Ariobarzanes.
p. 517. l. 53. r. Cleomantis. p. 532. l. 2. r. Towers and two Flankers, p. 535.
l. 50. r. Antixyes, and Rheomitres. p. 545. l. 39. r. encounter. p. 556. l. 9.
r. sent against him. p. 562. the 7th l. from the bottom, r. Four thousand. p.
568. l. 14. r. the River. p. ibid. l. 16. r. in a Line. p. 578. l. 12. r. by
his Messengers. p. ibid. l. 36. r. when the Ambassadors. p. ibid. l. 37. dele
yet. p. 588. l. 7. r. at stake. p. 624. in the Margin, r. (...); and (...). p.
627. l. ult. dele the first and. p. 629. in the Margin, r. seven Quarts. p.
638. l 31. r. upon his. p. 652. l. 17. r. the return. p. 663. l. 4. dele of. p.
665. l. 27. add the. p. ibid. l. 34. r. settle. p. 666. l. 7. r. near his
Quarters fortified his. p. 680. l. 25. r. into. p. 683. l. 47. for But, r. Out.
p. 693. l. 13. r. by Cables. p. 700. l. 1. r. forced them. p. 702. l. 38. r.
Colophonians. p. 782. l. 3. r. Tryphon' s Name. p. ibid. legate. 34. r.
Saturninus. p. 784. line 31. r. too little to be. p. 785. l. 40. r. joined with
them. p. 786. l. 45. add above. p. 790. l. 34. add the. p. 794. l. 5. r. which
were. p. 796. l. 21. dele the second his.

THE CONTENTS Of the First Five Books of Diodorus the Sicilian.
BOOK I.
Chap. 1. OF the first Generation of Men. How the World first began. Men's first
manner of Life, and who were the first Men. First Men in Egypt. Who were the
most ancient Gods of Egypt. Of their Demigods. Sol, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter,
Juno, Vulcan, reigned in Egypt. Of Osiris and Isis. the Acts of Osiris and
Isis. Hermes his Inventions. Osiris prepares for his Expedition through the
World, and to that end raises a great Army. Page 1 Chap. 2. The Continuation of
Osiris his Expedition through Ethiopia; all Arabia, India, and Europe: Buried
by Isis and Mercury. How he was killed. His Death revenged by Isis and Orus.
Two Bulls, Apis and Mnevis, worshipped in Egypt. Places discussed where Osiris
and Isis were buried. Stories of the Egyptian Priests. Their Tears, Lunar
Tears, Giants, Laws about Marriage. Osiris and Isis, their Pillars and
Inscriptions. Colonies out of Egypt. 7 Chap. 3. The Description of Egypt. Of
the Lake of Serbon. The Nature of the River Nile. The Cataracts. The Mouths of
Nile. The Fruits of Egypt. The Beasts, Crecodile, etc. Several Opinions
concerning the Inundation of Nile. 14 Chap. 4. The first way of Living of the
Egyptians: Gods and Demigods, their Reigns in Egypt. The ancient Kings of
Egypt, Moenis, etc. Their several Works. Thebes built by Busitis. The stately
Sepulchers, Obelisks, and Temples there. A Description of Osymanduas his
Sepulcher. Memphis built by Uchoreus. Moeris his Lake. Sesostris or Sesoosis,
his famous Expedition, and great Works. 22 Chap. 5. The Acts of Sesostris the
Second: Of Ammosis, Actisan, Mendes, Proteus or Cetes, Remphis, Chemmis, (the
great Pyramids built by him:) Cephres, Mycerinus Bocchoris, Sabach. The Reign
of Twelve Kings in Egypt. Psammeticus Saites, one of the Kings, gained the
whole; Two hundred thousand of his Army forsake him, and settle thmeselves in
Ethiopia. Apries succeeds long after. Amasis rebels, and next succeeds; and
Apries is strangled by the People. Amasis the last King, to the time of the
Conquest of Egypt by Cambyses. 31 Chap. 6. The Customs of the Egyptians. Of
their Kings: As their hourly Employment, Sacrifices, Diet, etc. Burials.
Division of Egypt. Their Trades in Egypt. Courts of Justice; their
Law-Proceedings. The several Laws of Egypt; Beasts and Birds adored as Gods in
Egypt, as Lions, Wolves, Cats, the Bird Ibis, Kites, etc. Costs in their Burial
of these Creatures. Reasons given of this Adoration. 36 Chap. 7. Why the
Crocodile is worshipped? Some sorts of Herbs and Roots not eaten. Why other
Creatures are worshipped? The manner of their Burials. The Lawmakers in Egypt.
Learned Men of Greece made Journeys into Egypt, as Orpheus, Homer, Plato,
Solon, Pythagoras, etc. Several Proofs of this, as their Religious Rites,
Fables, etc. in Greece of Egyptian Extraction. The exquisite Art of the
Stone-Carvers in Egypt. Page 46
BOOK II.
Chap. 1. NInus, the first King of Assyria, his Acts; invades Babylonia, Media,
and over-runs several other Countries. Nineveh built by him; the Description of
it; Marries Semiramis; Her Descent. Derceta, the Philistines Dagon. His
Expedition against Bactria; He dies. Semitamis builds Babylon, and several
strange Works there, as a Passage under Water, Jupiter's Temple, etc. Hanging
Gardens in Babylon. A vast Stone cut out. The strange Property of a Morass. Her
several Expeditions. The wonderful Lake in Ethiopia; Their Burials there.
Semiramis's Expedition into India; Her Mock-Elephants. Her Expedition proves
fruitless. She surrenders her Kingdom to Ninyas her Son: Her End. 53 Chap. 2.
Ninyas succeeds Semiramis: His close and slothful manner of Life. The Reign of
Sardanapalus: His Luxury and Effeminacy: His Epitaph: Deposed by Arbaces the
Mede: And the Assyrian Empire overturned. Nineveh razed. 64 Chap. 3. Of the
ancient Chaldeans, and their Philosophy. The Planets, and their Course. The
Empire of the Medes, and their Kings. A Description of India. The ancient
Manners and Customs of the People. Their Laws; Tribes; Description of Scythia.
Of the Amazons. Of the Hyperboreans. 69 Chap. 4. A Description of Atabia the
Desert. Happy, etc. Metals, Precious Stones, Beasts, etc. AD scription of
Taprobana in the Southern Ocean, now called Ceylon or Zeilan: The strange
Things there: How discovered by Iambulus. 78
BOOK III.
Chap. 1. OF the Ethiopians: Their Letters, Laws, Arms, Religion, Funerals: The
Description of several Parts of the Country. Manner of making of Gold. Of the
Icthyophages, their several sorts and ways of Living. 85 Chap. 2.
Chelonophages: The manner of taking Sea-Tortoises: The Cetivores, or
Whale-Eaters. The Seacoasts over against Babylon; Their manner of taking of
Fish. The Rizophages, or Root-Eaters. Those called Spermaphages, and
Hylophages, Hylogones or Hunters, their taking of wild Beasts: The
Elephant-Fighters; how they are taken: The Simoes, Struthophages, Acridophages
or Locust Eaters; their miserable Deaths. Cynomolges. The Country of the
Troglodites. Wild Beasts: The terrible wild Bull: Serpents; that great one
brought alive to Alexandria. 94 Chap. 3. A Description of the Coasts and
Countries on both sides the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea. The Perfumes of Arabia
the Happy. The Fortunate Islands. A Description of part of Lybia: The Spectras
near the Syrtes. 102 Chap. 4. Of the Amazons of Africa: Their Acts: Rooted out
by Hercules, and the Gorgonians by Perseus. The Atlantides, and the Gods among
them. The Original of the Titanes. The Acts of Basilea, or Cybele, said to be
born in Phrygia. The Original of Atlas and Saturn. A long Account given of
Bacchus, and the several Bacchuses there were. The Description of the Grota in
Nysa, where he was brought up. The building of the Temple of Hammon by him. The
several Herculeses. The Monsters Aegides and Camps killed by Minerva and
Bacchus. Page 110
BOOK IV.
Chap. 1. WHat the Grecians say further of Bacchus. The Story of Priapus. Of
Hermophroditus. Of the Muses. The Birth of Hercules; and his Twelve Labors
enjoined him by Eurystheus. His wandering Expeditions through Africa, Spain,
France, Italy, Sicily; His setting up two Pillars at Gades, and his other Acts
by the way. The Story of Orpheus. 127 Chap. 2. An Account of Atlas, and his
Daughters called Atlantides and Hesperides. Amazons routed by Theseus in
Attica. The further Acts of Hercules; goes against Laomedon King of Troy, and
other Acts. The Story of Meleager Son of King Oeneus. Amalthae's Horn. Hercules
his further Acts: His Death by a poisoned Shirt. 141 Chap. 3. Of the Argonauts,
Medea and the Daughters of Pileus. How the Argonauts gained the Golden Fleece.
The Pranks of Medea. The Acts of Jason. The Cruelty of Pelias toward Jason's
Kindred; How he was killed by his Daughters through Medea's Charms. Medea burns
the King of Corinth's Palace, and him in it. The miserable End of Jason. Of the
Heraclidae, and their return to Peloponnesus. 148 Chap. 4. The Acts of Theseus:
The Minotaur in Crete: Androgeos, the Son of Minos murdered by Aegeus. Ariadna,
Daughter of Minos, in love with Theseus; Ariadna's Crown. Aegeus, King of
Athens kills himself. Theseus his Death. The War of Thebes by the Seven
Captains. The Epigoni renew the War. Pedigrees of the Heroes at Troy: Of the
Centaurs, and Lapithae. The Pedigrees of Aesculapius, Aeacus, Ajax, Pelops,
Tantalus, Oenomeus; Dardanus his Posterity to Priam King of Troy. 159 Chap. 5.
Of Daedalus and his Works in Crete, Sicily, and elsewhere. His Flight into
Sicily; Minos invades Sicily; The manner of his Death there. The Famous Temple
of the Curetes or Corybants in Sicily, built by the Posterity of the Cretians
that came there with Minos. The Pedigree of Aristaeus; his Acts; his Son
Actaeon. Of Eryx: Venus her Temple in Eryx in Sicily; the Fame of it. Of
Daphnis the Shepherd; a Description of the Herean Mountains. Of Orion. Of the
Straight of Messina. 168
BOOK V.
Chap. 1. A Description of Sicily: The Aeolide Islands, or Lipari Islands; Of
Malta, Gaulus, Cercina, Corsica, Sardinia, Pityusa, and the Baleares. 176 Chap.
2. Of Madera, Britain, Gallia, Celtiberia, Iberia, and Tyrrhenia; and of the
Inhabitants, and their Laws and Customs. 184 Chap. 3. Of Gredosia: Of the Isles
of the Arabian Sea: Of the Holy Island: Of Panchaea: Of Samothracia: Of Naxus,
Syme, Nausus, Calydna, Nisyrus, Carpathus. Of Rhodes, and of Chersonesus. 194
Chap. 4. Of Crete; The first Inhabitants: Of the Idaei Dactyli; Of Jupiter,
Saturn, Hyperion, Prometheus, Mnemosyne, Themis, Ceres, Neptune, Pallas:
Jupiter's Race, as the Muses, Vulcan, Mars, etc. Of the ancient Hercules,
Britomartis, Pluto, Rhadamanthus his Justice. Of Lesbos; Deucalion's Flood: Of
the Blessed Islands; Of Tenedos, and the Cyclades. 204
THE CONTENTS Of the Last Ten Books of Diodorus the Sicilian,
BOOK XI.
Chap. 1. OF Xerxes his Expedition into Greece; and the Fight at Thermopyle,
and Sea Fight at Salamis. Page 215 Chap. 2. How the Carthaginians invaded
Sicily, and were routed by Gelon: And the time of Pindar the Poet. 226 Chap. 3.
The Victory of the Greeks over Mardonius at Platea. 230 Chap. 4. Of the Fight
with the Persians by the Grecians at Mycale in Ionia. Herodotus ends with this
Fight, and taking of Sestos. 233 Chap. 5. The Death and Commendation of Gelo of
Syracuse, and the Rebuilding of Athens by the Policy of Themistocles. 235 Chap.
6. The enlarging of the Haven at Athens by Themistocles. The Treason of
Pausanias; And the Justice of Aristides. 237 Chap. 7. Hiero, King of Sicily,
prepares to besiege Agrigentum; Discovers the Treason of them of Himera to
Thero their Prince; Expels the Cataneans and Naxians. 240 Chap 8. The
Lacedaemonians quarrel with the Athenians for the Dominion of the Sea. 241 Chap.
9. Hiero breaks the Power of the Hetruscans by Sea. 242 Chap 10. The War
between the Tarrentines and the Japigians. ibid. Chap. 11. The Death of Thero
Prince of Agrigentum, and the Tyranny of his Son Thrasydeus, who abdicated the
Government, and killed himself. Three hundred of the Family of the Fabii slain
at one time. 243 Chap. 12. The Malice of the Lacedaemonians against
Themistocles, and his Banishment: His Praise. 244 Chap. 13. Cymon, the Athenian
General, gains many Places for the Athenians: Routs the Persians by a Stratagem
at Eury medentum. 247 Chap. 14. A great Earthquake in Sparta; The War upon them
by the Helots and Mycenians. 248 Chap. 15. The War between the Argives and the
Mycenians. 249 Chap. 16. The Death of Hiero. 250 Chap. 17. Thrasybulus, King of
Syracuse, deposed by force of Arms for his Tyranny. 250 Chap. 18. The Murder of
Xerxes by Artabanus. 251 Chap. 19. The War between the Athenians and Aegineaus.
252 Chap 20. The Egyptians revolt from the Persians. New Troubles in Sicily.
ibid. Chap. 21. Persians Expedition into Egypt. Wars in Sicily. 254 Chap. 22.
The War between the Epidaurians and Athenians. Page 255 Chap. 23. The War
between the Corinthians and Megareans. 256 Chap. 24. The War between the
Athenians and Boetians. 257 Chap. 25. The Athenians invade the Spartans by
Tolmides. 258 Chap. 26. The War in Sicily between the Aegestines and the
Lilybeans. The Custom of Writing upon an Olive Leaf the Names of such as were
to be banished in Sicily, called Petalism. 259 Chap. 27. Pericles makes an
Inrode into Peloponnesus: Besieged Sicyon. Phaylus in Sicily made Admiral
against the Tyrrhenian Pirates: Is corrupted and banished. The Original of the
Palici: And the Stories of the Temple, and Wonders of the Craters in Sicily.
260 Chap. 28. The Contests between Deucetius and the Agrigentines. His strange
Submission to the Syracusians, who sent him to Corinth, with Promise to supply
him with Necessaries. 262
BOOK XII.
Chap. 1. CYmon the Athenian Admiral, his Expedition into Cyprus. Peace
concluded between the Persians and Athenians. Cymon dies in Cyprus. 264 Chap.
2. Megarians revolt from the Athenians, and are beaten. The Athenians revolted
at Cheronea by the Beotians. Many Cities revolt. Peace concluded. 265 Chap. 3.
The War between the Agrigentines and Syracusians in Sicily. The War between
them of Crotona and the Siberites. Sibaris razed. The building of Thurium:
Charondas his good Laws in Thurium: His remarkable Death. The Laws of Zaleuchus
of Locris. 266 Chap. 4. Of the Decemviri in Rome chosen to make Laws. War
between the Thurians and Tarentines. A sad Story of the Daughter of one Lucius
Virginius in Rome, which caused a Disturbance and great Sedition. Law of the
Twelve Tables. Peace all over the World. 272 Chap. 5. War between the Samians
and Melesians. A Sedition in Samos, which revolts from the Athenians. War in
Sicily by the Syracusians against the Trinacrians 273 Chap. 6. Corinthian War
against Corcyra. Potidea revolts from the Athenians. Quarrels in Thurium.
Meton's Year. Heraclea in Italy built. Potidea besieged by Phormio. 275 Chap.
7. Of the Peloponnesian War. Potidea revolts; besieged by the Athenians, and is
surrendered upon Articles. Nicias made the Athenian Admiral. Gorgia, an
excellent Orator, sent from Leontine in Sicily to Athens. A Peace concluded,
after the War had continued ten Years. 278 Chap. 8. Continuation of the
Peloponnesian War. War by the Romans against the Fidinates, for putting their
Ambassadors to death. Quarrels between the Aegistines and the Selinuntines in
Sicily. Expedition of the Athenians against Sicily under Nicias, being the 16th
Year of the Peloponnesian War. 293
BOOK XIII.
Chap. 1. THE Athenian Fleet equipped out for Sicily. Alcibiades accused:
Flies: Is condemned: Goes to Sparta out of Italy. Syracusians send for Aid to
Lacedemon: Gylippus is sent to them. Battle at Syracuse. 300 Chap. 2. The
Lacedaemonians invade Attica. Fight at Sea between the Syracusians and
Athenians. Eurimedon and Demosthenes arrive in Sicily. A Plague in the Athenian
Camp. Another Fight between the Syracusians and Athenians; the latter routed at
Sea: The Athenians ruined in Sicily: Nicholaus his long Oration; Gylippus his
Answer. Page 303 Chap. 3. Diocles instituted Laws for Sicily: Suffered by one
of his own Laws. Three hundred appointed to Govern in Athens Athenians beaten
at Sea by the Lacedaemonians at Oropus. Alcibiades recalled from Banishment. 315
Chap. 4. The Government by Four hundred abrogated in Athens: The Victory by the
Athenians over the Lacedaemonians at Sea, between Sestus and Abydos. The Persian
Garrison driven out of Antandris by the help of the Lacedaemonians. Twenty two
years of the Peloponnesian War ended. Here Thucydides ends his History. 317
Chap. 5. Commotions in Sicily. Carthaginians invited thither by the Aegistines.
A Sea Fight at Dardanum between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. A Sedition in
Corcyra. The Sea Fight at Cyzicum; and at Cleros by Land, wherein the Athenians
were Victors. 320 Chap. 6. The Spartans seek for Peace. The Speech of Endius.
The Athenians refuse. 325 Chap. 7. Hannibal the Carthaginian invades Sicily.
The miserable Destruction of Selinunte. The Ruin likewise of Himera. The Acts
of Hermocrates in Sicily. 326 Chap. 8. Thrasybulus assaults Ephesus. The
Lacedaemonians besiege Pylus; and surrendered. Calcedon besieged by Theramenes;
and afterward Byzantium, which was betrayed to Alcibiades. 331 Chap. 9
Theramenes and Alcibiades return to Athens; are admired by the People. Lysander
made General by the Lacedaemonians. Antiochus, one of the Athenian Generals,
beaten at Ephesus in a Sea Fight. Agis surprises part of the Walls at Athens,
but was beaten off Alcibiades accused for assaulting Cuma, a Confederate City.
Conon made Admiral in his Place. 333 Chap. 10. Hermocrates killed at Syracuse,
attempting to surprise it. 336 Chap. 11. The Acts of Callicrates, the
Lacedemonian General. The Fight at Sea in the Harbor at Mitylene, between
Conon and Callicratides. 337 Chap. 12. Therma built in Sicily by the
Carthaginians; They raise Forces to invade Italy: They land in Sicily. The
noble Temple in Agrigentum: The ancient Grandeur of that City: The Riches of
Gellias, a Citizen there, and some others. Agrigentum besiege'd. The
Syracusians under Daphneus rout the Carthaginians near Agrigentum. Imilcar
seizes the Syracusian Fleet, and takes all the Provision going to Agrigentum,
which was afterward quit by the Inhabitants: Their miserable Condition. The
Phalarian Bull. 339 Chap. 13. The Syracusian Officers accused. Dionysius made
General of the Syracusians: He moves to have the Exiles recalled: He Is invested
with the sole Command: At length by several Artifices gains the Sovereignty.
345 Chap. 14. The famous Battle of Argineuse at Sea, wherein the Athenians were
Victors: The Officers accused for not burying the Dead. The Speech of Diomedon.
The Death of Sophocles and Euripides. 348 Chap. 15. Lysander made sole Admiral
of the Lacedemonian Fleet: He takes Caramium. The Ruin of the Athenian Fleet at
Aegos Potamos. Athens taken by Lisander. The end of the Peloponnesian War. 352.
Chap. 16. Agrigentum sacked by Imilcar the Carthaginian. The Carthaginians
besiege Gela. Dionysius goes to the Aid of Gela. The Skirmishes before Gela.
Camarina deserted by order of Dionysius. The Soldiers enraged at Dionysius: He
hastens to Syracuse. Imilcar makes Peace with Dionysius, and returns to
Carthage. The end of the first Carthaginian War with Dionysius. 354
BOOK XIV.
Chap. 1. A Peace between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. The Athenians
disagree about the manner of their Government; The Government by 30; The
Cruelty of the 30 Tyrants, and especially toward. Theramenes. Page 358 Chap.
2. Dionysius his Project to strengthen himself in the Sovereignty of Sicily.
Syracusians revolt; are dispersed. 360 Chap. 3. Lacedaemonians establish an
Oligarchy in every City. Dionysius disarms the Syracusians. Alcibiades killed;
manner of his Death. Clearchus his Tyranny in Bizantium; the Battle at Porus by
him against his Countrymen the Lacedaemonians. Lysander's Project to out the
Heraclidae of the Sovereign Power. 361 Chap. 4. Dionysius his Actions in
Sicily. The Oropians subdued by the Thebans. The Lacedaemonians quarrel with the
Elians. Dionysius fortifies the Epipodae. 364 Chap. 5. The War between Cyrus
and his Brother Artaxerxes King of Persia. Cyrus Routed. The Grecian Forces in
Straits: their brave Behavior: and long and troublesome March out of Persia
into Greece. 366 Chap. 6. Thrasybulus opposes the 30 Tyrants. The cruelty of
Psamnificus King of Egypt, toward his old friend Tamos that fled to him for
succor from the Persians. Darcyllidas sent General against the Persians into
Asia. Conon made Admiral of the Persian Fleet. 373 Chap. 7. The War between the
Rhegians and Dionysius. He prepares to make War upon the Carthaginians. Most of
the Cities submit to Dionysius. He returns to the Siege of Motya: Taken. Forces
sent from Carthage against Dionysius. A Sea Fight between the Carthaginians and
the Sicilians. Syracuse besieged. The Speech of Theodorus against Dionysius. A
grievous Plague in the Carthaginian Army. A great Destruction of the
Carthaginian Fleet in the Harbor of Syracuse. The miserable Condition of
Imilco in his own Country. The Troubles of the Carthaginians. 376 Chap. 8.
Agesilaus made General against the Persians by the Lacedaemonians, goes to
Ephesus: They send to the King of Egypt for Assistance. The Persians routed at
Sipylus by Agesilaus. Tissaphernes his head cut off in a Bath at Larissa. The
War between the Phoceans and Boetians. 392 Chap. 9. The Confederate War by the
Argives and others against the Lacedaemonians. The Battle at Aricas The fight at
Nemea. Pisander the Lacedemonian Admiral routed in a Sea Fight at Cnidus by the
Persian Fleet, commanded by Conon the Athenian. The Corinthian War against the
Lacedaemonians, and the great Sedition there. 394 Chap. 10. The Quarrel between
the Rhegians and Dionysius. Mago the Carthaginian settles Affairs in Sicily.
Routed at Abacena by Dionysius. Rhegium near surpised by Dionysius. The Acts
of Iphicrates at Corinth, Plias, and Sicyon. Amyntas lost his Kingdom of
Macedonia, but was restored. The Romans take Veii: Dedicate a Golden Cup to
Apollo. Their Ambassadors are taken by the Pirates of the Lipari Islands, but
discharged by Timastheus. 396 Chap. 11. The Acts of Thrasybulus the Athenian
General. The Carthaginians under Mago begin a new War in Sicily against
Dionysius. A Peace concluded. Rodes falls off from the Athenians. Evagoras
becomes King of Salamis in Cyprus, makes War against the Persians. The Acts of
Thimbro the Lacedemonian General in Asia. 398 Chap. 12. Dionysius his
Expedition against Rhegium. The War between the Lucanians and Thurians in
Italy. The Thurians cut off by their own Rashness. Leptines generously saved
those that swam to his ships, though he was a Friend to their Enemies. Dionysius
his second Expedition into Italy: besieges Caulonia, and routs Heloris. Makes
Peace with the Rhegians. Razes Caulonia to the ground, and transplants the
Inhabitants to Syracuse. Watches an occasion to be revenged on them of Rhegium.
Besieges it. He sends rich Chariots to the Olympic Games. His Poetry
ridiculed. 401 Chap. 13. The Peace of Antalcidas. The War by the Persians
against Evagoras in Cyprus. The miserable Condition of Rhegium. Surrendered. The
cruel Usage of Philo the Governor of Rhegium, and of his Son. The Expedition of
the Galls against Italy. The Romans routed by the Galls at the river Allia.
Rome taken by the Galls. Romans besieged in the Capitol. The Volsci revolt from
the Romans. The Galls routed by Marcus Furius in their Return. All cut off
afterward in the Plains of Trausium. 404
BOOK XV.
Chap. 1. THE Preface. Artaxerxes Expedition against Evagoras in Cyprus. The
Actions there at Sea and Land. The Lacedaemonians begin new Quarrels in Greece.
As first with Mantinea. Dionysius gives himself to Poetry. Peace concluded with
Evagoras by Orontes the Persian General. Terabazus brought to his Trial.
Judgment upon corrupt Judges. Terabazus acquitted. 409, 410 Chap. 2. Mantinea
besieged by the Lacedaemonians. Dionysius aims to gain the Islands of the
Adriatic Sea. The Parii built Pharos. Dionysius his Expedition into Hetruria.
Prepares for War against the Carthaginians. The Sicilians routed at Cronion.
The Quarrel between the Clazomenians, and them of Cuma about Leuca. The War
between Amyntas and the Olynthians. The Lacedaemonians seize the Citadel. Cadmea
at Thebes. Eudamidas breaks into the Olynthians Country. 414 Chap. 3. Polypidas
sent General by the Lacedaemonians against the Olynthians. A great Plague in
Carthage. The Boetian War. Cadmea retaken. A Confederacy of the Cities against
the Lacedaemonians. Cleombrotus attempts to surprise the Pyreum at Athens. The
Athenians seize Actea in Eubaea. Agesilaus enters Boetia. The Sea Fight at
Naxus. 418 Chap. 4. The Treballians make Incursions into Thrace. Chabrias the
Athenian General assassinated. The Thebans rout the Spartans at Orchomena.
Artaxerxes seeks to make Peace among the Grecians. Peace concluded. Thebans
only disagreed. The Commendation of Epaminondas. Seditions in several Cities of
Greece. 423 Chap. 5. The Persians send an Army into Egypt to reduce the
Revolters. Iphicrates a skilful Commander. Sedition at Zacynthus. Platea razed
by the Thebans. The Lacedaemonians seize upon the Island Corcyra. The Siege of
Corcyra raised by the Athenians under Cresides. Evagoras in Cyprus murdered by
an Eunuch. Dreadful Earthquakes and Inundations in Peloponnesus. A great Comet
seen in Greece. 425 Chap. 6. Artaxerxes sends again to make Peace among the
Grecians. All complied but the Thebans. The Spartans raise an Army against the
Thebans. Epaminondas made the Theban General. The famous Battle of Leuctra. The
terrible Seditions and Cruelites in Argos. Jason of Pherae stirs up the
Thessalians to gain the Sovereignty of Greece. Polydore Prince of Pherea in
Thessaly poisoned by his Brother Alexander. Plots to depose Alexander. King of
Macedonia treated with to that purpose. 429 Chap. 7. The Lacedaemonians send
Politropus into Arcadia: who is slain, and his Party routed by Lycomedes. An
Invasion by Epaminondas and Pelopidas into Peloponnesus. Sparta besieged. The
Antiquity and History of Messena in Greece. Pallane taken by Arcadians. A wall
drawn between Cenchrea and Lechcum to hinder the Thebans inroad into
Peloponnesus. Epaminondas breaks through into Peloponnesus. Assaults Corinth.
434 Chap. 8. Dionysius sends Galls and Spaniards to the assistance of the
Lacedaemonians. Pelopidas and Ismenias clapped up by Alexander Tyrant of Pherea.
The Boetians pursued by the Phereans: brought off by Epaminondas then a private
Soldier. The Fight between the Arcadians and Lacedaemonians. Dionysius falls
upon the Carthaginian Territories in Sicily. Dionysius dies. The cause of his
death. The cruelty of Alexander the Pherean at Schotusa. Epaminondas breaks
again into Peloponnesus. Coos peopled and Walled. The end of the Laconick and
Boetick War by the Mediation of the Persian King. 438 Chap. 9. New Stirs in
Greece. The Battle between the Eleans and Arcadians near Lassion. The Quarrel
between the Pisate and them of Elis about the Olympic Games. A Fight at the
Time and Place of the Games. The Thebans prepare a Fleet in order to gain the
Dominion at Sea. Rhodes, Chios, and Byzantium brought in to the Thebans by
Epaminondas. The Thebans make War upon Orchomenon. The Reason Orchomenon razed.
The Thessalians War with Alexander the Pherean. Pelopidas killed. His Praises.
441 Chap. 10. The War between the Tegeans and Mantineans, Boetians side with
the Tegeans. Epaminondas made General. The Battle at Mantinca, where
Epaminondas was killed, but the Lacedaemonians routed. The Commendation of
Epaminondas. 443 Chap. 11. A Defection from the Persians in Asia. Tachos King
of Egypt declares War against the Persians. The War between Tachos, and his
Son Nectabanus. The death of Artaxerxes Mnemon. Agesilaus routs the Egyptians
that pursued him: and restores Tachos to his Kingdom: Stirs again in Greece
after the Battle of Mantinea between the Megalopolitans and the neighboring
Towns. Peparethos besieged by Alexander of Pherea, He routs Leostenes at Sea.
Charietes the Athenian Admiral his Villainies. 473
BOOK XVI.
Chap. 1. PHilip an Hostage at Thebes: makes his Escape; beats the Athenians,
after makes Peace with them, subdues the Peons, and routs the Illyrians, and
makes Peace with them. 477 Chap. 2. The Actions of Dionysius the younger, in
Sicily and other parts. Dion's Flight to Corinth, and his Return to Sicily.
Andromachus peoples Tauromenum. The Civil Wars in Eubea. The Social War between
the Athenians and other Nations. Philip takes Amphipolis and other Cities. His
Policies to gain the Olynthians and other Places in Greece. 479 Chap. 3. Dion's
March, and Entering into Syracuse. Dionysius comes to the Island part of
Syracuse. Assaults the Wall erected from Sea to Sea: is beaten by Dion.
Alexander of Pherea murdered by his Wife and his two Brothers. Philip relieves
the Thessalonians from the two Brothers. 481 Chap. 4. The first rise of the
Brutii in Italy. Dionysius his Admiral invades the Leontines. A Fight at Sea
between Heraclides and Philistus Admirals, one of Dionysius, the other of Dion.
A Faction in Syracuse. Dion leaves the Syracusians. Their sad Condition.
Relieved by Dion. 484 Chap. 5. A Continuance of the Social War. Iphicrates and
Timotheus joined Admirals with Chrates by the Athenians. Iphicrates and
Timotheus accused by Chrates, and fined and removed. Chrates joins with
Pharnabasus and routs the Persians. The end of the Social War. Philip subdues
the Confederates. 487 Chap. 6. The Beginning of the Sacred War, or Phocian War.
Philomelus seizes the Temple at Delphos after he had routed the Locrians. How
the Oracle at Delphos was first discovered, and the beginning of the Tripode.
The Athenians and others join with Philomelus. 488 Chap. 7. The Battle at
Phoedra between Philomelus and the Locrians. The Parties engaged in the Phocian
War. The Battle between the Beotians and Phocians. Philomelus killed Onomarchus
made General. His Dream, Successes and Death. 490 Chap 8. Phayllus continues
the Phocian War, Aryca razed. Phayllus dies of a Consumption. War between the
Lacedaemonians and Megapolitans. Chaeronea taken by Phalecus. War between the
Persians Egyptians and Phenicians. Salamis in Cyprus besieged. The cruelty of
Artaxerxes Ochus toward the Sidonians. The Calamity of Sidon. 494 Chap. 9.
Evagoras beheaded in Cyprus. Artaxerxes marches against Egypt; and gains all
Egypt by the Policy of Mentor. Lost many of his Men at the Lake Sorbonis.
Mentor advanced. Mentor's Stratagem to subdue Hemias Prince of Atarne. Zena
raised by Philip. The King of Egypt abdicates his Kingdom and flies to
Aethiopia. 499 Chap. 10. Philip takes Olynthus and other Cities in the
Hellespont. The Athenians jealous of Philip and instigated by Demosthenes.
Philip's Policies. The value of the Riches taken out of the Temple at Delphos.
Dionysius sent presents to Delphos, and were taken by the Athenians. His Letter
to the Athenians. The Temple burnt. The end of the Phocian War. The Punishments
decreed by the Amph^tyons against the Phocians. The Miseries of the
Sacrilegers. Timoleon sent to Syracuse. 502 Chap. 11. Timoleons Expedition into
Sicily. The Carthaginians Army in Sicily. Dionysius returns to Syracuse, is
beaten by Hircelas; Hircelas gains Syracuse. Timoleon's escape from Rhegium.
Timoleon routs Hircelas, and gains Syracuse. Philip invades the Illyrians.
Dionysius expelled. Timoleon makes good Laws. Philip invades Thrace. 508 Chap.
12. The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The Preparations of the Carthaginians
against Timoleon. The remarkable Siege of Perinthus by Philip. Pexodorus
expells his Brother Adam from the Principality in Cana. Byzantium suddenly
besieged by Philip. 510 Chap. 13. The Athenians aid Byzantium. Philip raises
his Siege. The Carthaginians transport Forces into Sicily. The remarkable
Victory of Timoleon over the Carthaginians. The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The
Works of Hiero in Sicily. 512 Chap. 14. Elata taken by Philip: great
Consternation in Athens for fear of Philip. The Boetians join with the
Athenians through the Solicitation of Demosthenes. Python a famous Orator. The
Battle at Cheronea between Philip and the Athenians; Lycides the Athenian
General put to death. Philip rebuked by Demades; made General of Greece.
Timoleon dies. 515 Chap. 15. Philip consults the Oracle at Delphos. Philip
Marries his Daughter Cleopatra to the King of Epirus. Encouraged to the Persian
War by Neoptolemus his Verses. Philip's Pride. His Murder. The Cause of it, and
how it was done, and by whom. 517
BOOK XVII.
Chap 1. COnspiracies of the Cities against Alexander. The Athenians send
Ambassadors to Alexander to beg Pardon. He Is made General by the Amphictyons.
Attalus killed by Alexander's Command. The Wickedness of of Bagoas. Darius
commended. Raises Forces. A Description of Mount Ida. Alexander invades the
Illyrians and others. Thebes besieged by Alexander and razed. The Miseries of
Thebes. Prodigies. Alexander demands Demosthenes and others to be delivered up
to him by the Athenians: their Answer. He returns into Macedonia: and Feasts
his Soldiers. 521 Chap. 2. Alexander lands his Army in Asia. The Battle at
Granicum. The Forces of the Persians and of Alexander. Alexander kills
Spithrodates; near being killed by Rosaces. Miletus besieged and taken. Ada
Queen of Caria meets Alexander. Halicarnassus Besieged, Taken, and Sacked. The
strange Act of the Macedonians. 528 Chap. 3. Mytelene taken by Memnon Darius
his General; his Successes He dies. Charidemus the Athenian unjustly put to
Death by Darius. Alexander falls sick, recovered by Philippus. Alexander seizes
Alexander of Lyncestas upon his Mother's Letters. Alexander takes Issus. The
Memorable Battle at Issus, where the Mother, Wife, two Daughters and Son of
Darius were taken. Alexander's noble carriage toward them. Darius his Letters
and Offers to Alexander. Darius prepares another Army. 533 Chap. 4. Alexander
marches toward Egypt; Besieges Tire. Prodigies at Tire. The Tyrians bind
Apollo with golden chains. The Inventions of the Tyrians to defend themselves.
The advancement of Ballomynus a poor Man to be King of Tire. The Acts of Agis
and Amyntas; Amyntas killed, and all his Soldiers. Alexander takes Gaza by
Storm; presented by the Grecians. 538 Chap. 5 Alexander makes a Journey to the
Temple of Jupiter Hammon. He Is presented by the Cyreneans. The Description of
the place about the Temple. The wonderful Properties of the Fountain Solis. The
Building of Alexandria. Alexander's Answer to Darius his Ambassadors. Alexander
passes over the River Tygris with great Hazard. The Preparations on both sides
for Battle. The Persians routed at that famous Battle at Arbela. 542 Chap. 6.
The Grecians conspire to Revolt. Memnon rebels in Thrace. Antipater marches
against him. The Lacedaemonians raise an Army; are routed by Antipater, and Agis
their King killed. 547 Chap. 7. Alexander comes to Babylon. The wealth found
there. Views his Troops at Sitacana. Enters Susa. The Riches there. Thence goes
in the Country of the Uxians. Marches toward Persepolis. A Company of maimed
Greeks met Alexander; His Bounty to them. He takes Persepolis; gives it up to
the Plunder of the Soldiers. The Riches of the Citadel of Persepolis. Alexander
his Feast at Persepolis. Persepolis burnt at the Instigation of Thais. Darius
murdered. 548 Chap. 8. Bessus stirs up the Bactrians. Alexander discharges the
Greek Auxiliaries with Rewards. The River Stidoetes. He enters Hircania; Its
Richness: Enters the Mardis Country: Loses his brave Horse but is restored.
Thalestris the Amazon Queen meets him. He falls into the Effeminacy of the
Persians. Enters Drangina. A Plot against Alexander. Philotas and others put to
Death. Marches against the Arimispi. Subdues Arachosia. 552 Chap. 9. Alexander
marches against the Paromisades. His troublesome March. Comes to Mount Caucasus.
A Battle in Area by Alexander's Officers against Satibarzanes, who is killed in
a single Combat by Erigyus. Bessus brought to Alexander; his Punishment.
Alexander kills some Barbarians unexpectedly after they had surrendered their
City. He marches to the River Indus. Mophis his remarkable delivery up of
himself and his Army. 556 Chap 10. Alexander overcomes Porus. How Apes are
taken. Strange Serpents for Venom. Large Trees Marches against the Andrastians,
Catheri, and against Sopithes. The Custom of them under Sopithes. Indian Dogs.
Entertained by Phigeus. The Macedonians refuse to march against the Gandarides.
Alexander leaves Monuments behind him at the River Hyphasis. Nicaea built, and
Bucephalis. The Ibori present Alexander. Routs the Agalasians. In Danger in the
River Indus by Whirlpools. Marches against the Oxidracans and Mallians. The
King leaps off the Wall into the Town. A Duel between Coragus and Dioxippus.
The Sambestae submit to Alexander; and the Sodrans and Mastanians. Subdues
Musicanus, Porticanus, and Sambus. Poisoned Weapons. The King's Dream. Comes
into the Main Ocean. Comes into Gedrosia. The Savages of the People. His Army
near perishing in Gedrosia. Comes into Carmania. Punishes the Bormcial
Goremours. Nearchus returns. Islands covered at High-Tides. The strange Death
of Calanus. Alexander marries Statira. Harpalus his Luxury. He seizes with his
own Hand them that mutiny'd. 561 Chap. 11. Alexander mixes Twenty thousand
Persian Darters with his Army-Marches from Susa. Bagistames breeds abundance of
Horses. Hephestion dies at Ecbatana. The Lamian War. He invades the Cosscans.
Marches toward Babylon. The Caldean Astrologers dissuade him from coming
thither. He enters Babylon. 569 Chap. 12. Ambassadors come to Alexander from
all Parts. He buries Hephestion with great State. The Prodigies before
Alexander's Death. His Death. Darius his Mother starves her self. 570
BOOK XVIII.
Chap. 1. QUarrels about a Successor to Alexander. Aridaus made King. The
Provinces divided amongst the Chief Commanders. Matters contained in
Alexander's Note-Books. Meleager executed by Perdiccas. The Grecians revolt. A
Description of Asia. Pithon sent against the Revolting Grecians, who were all
cut off. The Lamian War: The Cause of it. Alexander's Epistle to the Exiles.
Leosthenes the Athenian General. Lamia besieged. Leosthenes killed. Antiphilus
placed in his room. 574 Chap. 2. Ptolemy gains Egypt: Leagues with Antipater.
Lysimachus enters Thrace. Leonatus comes to Relieve Antipater, and is routed.
The Grecians beaten at Sea. Perdiccas conquers Ariarathes Prince of Cappadocia,
Crucifies him, delivers the Province to Eumenes. The Grecians quite routed by
Craterus and Antipater. The Athenians at length submit after all the rest but
the Aetolians. The End of the Lamian War. The War in Cyrene by Thimbro.
Ophellas routs Thimbro. Cyrene gained by Ptolemy. Larinda sacked. The
Destruction of the Isaurians by themselves. Perdiccas affects the Kingdom of
Macedon. Is opposed by Antigonus. The Etolians blocked up by Craterus and
Antipater. Antigonus discover Perdiccas his Design. Peace made with the
Etolians. Perdiccas marches against Ptolemy into Egypt. 580 Chap. 3. The
Description of Alexander's Funeral Chariot. Ptolemy honored in Egypt.
Perdiccas prepares for Egypt against Ptolemy. Eumenes beats Neoptolimus, who
deserted. The Battle between Eumenes and Craterus, who was killed with
Neoptolemus. Combat between Neoptolemus and Eumenes. Perdiccas comes into
Egypt: Assaults the Fort called the Camel's Wall: His miserable Loss in the
River Nile: Is killed. Ptolemy makes Arrideus and Pytho Protectors of the
Kings. Eumenes condemned to die. The Etolians invade Thessaly. Polysperchon
routs the Etolians. The Provinces again divided by Arrideus. Antigonus besieges
Nora. Eumenes his Invention to Exercise the Horse. Ptolemy gains Syria and
Phoenicia and Nicanor. 586 Chap. 4. Antigonus routs Alcitas in Pisidia, and
takes Attalus. Alcitas received into Termessus, and there protected. He Is
murdered there Treacherously; his Body inhumanly used by Antigonus. Antipater's
Death. Antipater puts Demeas, one of the Athenian Ambassadors, to Death.
Polysperchon made Chief in Macedonia. Cassander conspires to out him. Antigonus
his Plots to be Sovereign of all. Arrideus secures himself in Phrygia: Besieges
Cyzicum. Antigonus goes to raise it. Eumenes got out of Nora by Antigonus his
Order. Antigonus his further Act. The various Fortunes of Eumenes. A Council in
Macedonia called by Polysperchon against Cassander. The Decree of the Council.
Polysperchon invites Olympias out of Epirus into Macedonia: Writes to Eumenes
to join with the Kings. 593 Chap. 5. Polysperchon courts Eumenes to assist the
Kings. Eumenes his Prudence amongst the Macedonian Captains. Ptolemy sends to
the Captains and others not to assist Eumenes. Antigonus contrives to kill
Eumenes; who marches into Phoenicia. Nicanor deceives the Athenians, and still
keeps Munychia, and subtly gets the Pyreum: Ordered by Olympias to deliver
the Pyreum and Munychia to the Athenians, but he shifts it off. Alexander, Son
of Polysperchon, enters Attica; secretly Corresponds with Nicanor, and
displeases the Athenians. Phocion's hard Usage at his Trial in Athens, is
Condemned, and Executed. Cassander arrives at the Pyreum. Polysperchon comes
against him, but returns. Besieges Megalopolis, but is there much Damnifi'd;
his Elephants spoiled by a Stratagem. A Sea Fight between Clitus and Nicanor.
Nicanor beaten. Clitus afterward routed by Nicanor, and is killed in his
flight to Macedonia. Antigonus goes after Eumenes. Eumenes near losing his Army
by the Breach of a Dyke in Babylonia. The Greek Cities revolt to Cassander. The
Athenians make Peace with him. He kills Nicanor. 599
BOOK XIX.
Chap. 1. A Gathocles his Parentage and Education. His Rise. His Stratagems.
His bloody Massacre at Syracuse. He gains the Sovereign Power. The Affairs of
Italy. Olympias returns into Macedonia by Polysperchon's Means. The Armies
revolt to her. Her Cruelties. She murders Eurydice and Arideus her Husband.
Affairs in Asia. Eumenes and Seleucus. Eumenes is joined by many of the
Captains. The number of their Forces. He comes to Susa. Attalus and others,
Imprisoned by Antigonus in a strong Castle, seeks to escape. Are afterward
besieged, and taken. 608 Chap. 2. Antigonus marches after Eumenes to Tigris.
Eumenes cuts off many of his Men at Pasitigris. Antigonus goes into Media.
Eumenes comes to Persepolis. The Description of Persia. Pencestes his great
Feast. Eumenes his Policy. His Tale of the Lion. Battle in Sareteceni between
Antigonus and Eumenes. Antigonus returns into Media. The Story of Cereus his
two Wives striving which should be burnt. Eumenes marches to Gabiene; Cassander
to Macedonia. Olympias goes to Pydna, is there besieged. The Epirots forsake
their King, and join with Cassander. Antigonus's design to surprise Eumenes,
who stops his March by a Stratagem. The last Battle between them in Gabiene.
Eumenes basely delivered up. Antigonus's return to Media. The dreadful
Earthquakes in the Country of Rhages. 615 Chap 3. The Inundations at Rhodes:
Antigonus kills Pitho, getting him into his Power by Dissimulation; then
marches into Persia. Revolters from Antigonus cut off in Media. He divides the
Asian Provences; and continues to destroy all the Argyraspides. Gets great
Treasure in Susa. Cassander besieges Olympias in Pydna: The great Distress to
which it was reduced. Amphipolis surrendered to Cassander: He kills Olympias:
Marries Thessalonices: Builds Cassandra: Imprisons Rhoxana and her Son
Alexander. His Expedition into Peloponnesus against Alexander the Son of
Polysperchon. The History of Thebes. Cassander rebuilds Thebes. 627 Chap. 4.
Antigonus his Army feasted by Seleucus in Babylon. Falls out with Seleucus, who
flies to Ptolemy, and is kindly received. Ptolemy, Seleucus, Cassander, and
Lysimachus, join against Antigonus. They send Ambassadors to him, who Winters
in Cilicia. He goes into Phoenicia, and there builds Ships: Besieges Tire. The
Praise of Phyla, Wife of Demetrius. Aristodemus raises Forces for Antigonus in
Peloponnesus. The Acts of Ptolemy, one of Antigonus his Captains. Antigonus his
Policy Tire delivered. The Agreement of Ptolemy's Captains, and the rest at
Cyprus. The Acts of Seleucus. A Fleet comes to Antigonus from the Hellespont
and Rhodes. Things done in Peloponnesus. Cassander's Acts there, and in Greece.
The great Victory by Sea and Land, obtained by Polyclitus, Seleucus his
Lieutenant: He Is Rewarded by Ptolemy. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. The
Romans War with the Samnites. 632 Chap. 5. The Acts of Aristodemus. Antigonus
his General in Peloponnesus: The D^means in Achaia seek to free themselves from
Cassander's Garrison: They take the Citadel. Alexander, Son of Polysperchon,
Assassinated. The Praise of Cratesipolis his Wife. The Acts of Cassander in
Etolia, and other Parts of Greece. The Cruelty of the Etolians. Cassander sends
an Army into Caria; and Aristotle with a Fleet to Lemnos. The Acts of
Cassander's Army in Caria. Antigonus leaves his Son Demetrius in Caria to watch
Ptolemy. His troublesome March into Asia. The Affairs of Sicily. Acrotatus his
Misgovernment and Cruelties in Sicily. The Acts of Agathocles. The Affairs of
Italy. 637 Chap. 6. Several Cities revolt. Lysimachus comes against them.
Philip, Cassander's General, routs the Epirots and Etolians. Cassander agrees
with Antigonus. Antigonus gains the Cities in Caria. Cassander's Acts in
Greece. Samnites routed by the Romans. Polemon sent by Antigonus into Greece to
set the Cities at liberty. The Acts of Antigonus and Cassander. Polemon's Acts
in Greece for Antigonus. Ptolemy goes against Cyrene, and Cyprus; then against
Demetrius. The Battle with Demetrius at Gaza. Ptolemy takes Tire. The Acts of
Antigonus his Commanders in Greece. The Epirots make Alcetas King, who is
beaten by Lysiscus, Cassander's General, and he is beaten again by the other.
Cassander goes against the Apolloniats. Seleucus recovers Babylon with a small
Army. Demetrius routs Cilles, Ptolemy's General. Ptolemy returns to Egypt,
first wastes Samaria, Gaza, Joppa, etc. Athaneus sent against the Nabatheans by
Antigonus. The Customs of the Arabians. Athaneus killed, and most of his Men.
Demetrius sent against them. Description of the Asphaltes, or Lake of Sodom.
Demetrius sent against Seleucus in Babylon. The Wars between the Romans and
Samnites in Italy. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. 641 Chap. 7. Cassander,
Ptolemy, and Lysimachus, make Peace with Antigonus. Cassander murders Rhoxana
and her Son. The Governors take the Style of Kings upon them. The Carthaginians
raise Forces against Agathocles. Four thousand Geloans murdered by Agathocles.
The Battle between Agathocles and Amilcar the Carthaginian at Himera.
Agathocles routed. Several Cities revolt from Agathocles. 654
BOOK XX.
Chap. 1. AGathocles designs to invade Africa: His Cruelty: Pursued in his
Voyage. An Eclipse of the Sun very great. Lands in Africa: Burns his Ships: His
Successes in Africa. Hanno and Bomilcar made Generals in Africa. Battle between
them and Agathocles, who routs them. Kills Hanno. His Stratagem by Owls. The
cruel Superstition of the Carthaginians in sacrificing their Children. The
Actions at Syracuse. Actions of Agathocles in Africa. The Acts of Cassander in
Macedonia. Polysperchon seeks to restore Hercules, Alexander's Son. The
miserable Destruction of Nichocles and his Family in Cyprus. The Wars of
Parysidas his Sons, King of the Cimerean Bosphorus. The Valor of Satyrus, one
of his Sons. His Death. The sad Death of Eumelus, another Son. Page 658 Chap.
2. The Acts of Ptolemy in Cilicia and elsewhere. Polysperchon murders Hercules,
Alexander's Son, by Instigation of Cassander. Amilcar taken, and put to Death
by the Syracusians: His Head sent to Agathocles in Africa. The things done in
Sicily. Archagathus, Agathocles Son, kills Lysiscus; He and his Son in great
Danger by the Army. Affairs of Italy. The Works of Appius Claudius: The Appian
way. Ptolemy comes to Corinth: His Acts there. Cleopatra, Alexander's Sister,
killed by the Governor of Sardis. The further Acts of Agathocles in Africa.
Ophellas decoyed, and cut off by Agathocles. Ophellas his troublesome March to
Agathocles. Lamia's Cruelty, and Story of her. Bomilcar seeks to be Prince of
Carthage, but is put to Death by the Citizens. Agathocles sends the Spoils of
the Cyrenians to Syracuse: Most lost in a Storm. Affairs in Italy. 668 Chap. 3.
Demetrius frees all the Grecian Cities; takes the Pireum at Athens. Demetrius
Phalerius flies to Ptolemy. Honors given to Demetrius in Athens. He sails to
Cyprus: His Acts there: Besieges Salamis. His great Engines. Ptolemy sails to
Cyprus. Sea Fight between Ptolemy and Demetrius, wherein Ptolemy is routed.
Antigonus takes the Title of King, and the like several other Captains.
Agathocles his Acts at Utica in Africa: Tied Prisoners to a great Engine. The
sorts of People in Africa. Xenodocus routed in Sicily by Agathocles his
Captains. Agathocles his Acts in Sicily. What was done by Archagathus in
Africa. Mascala inhabited by some Greeks that came from Troy. Apes, their
Custom among the Pithecusae. The Carthaginians draw out Thirty thousand Men out
of Carthage. Misfortunes to Agathocles his Captains in Africa. The Army blocked
up, and almost starved. Agathocles beats the Carthaginians at Sea near
Syracuse. His Captain Leptines Harrasses the Agrigentines. Agathocles Feasts
the Syracusians. His jocund Temper. His Cruelty. Routed in Africa. Carthaginian
Camp burnt. The Misfortune afterward to both Armies by one Cause. Agathocles
in Chains by his own Men. Steals out of Africa. The Soldiers kill his two Sons.
They make Peace with the Carthaginians. Agathocles his exceeding Cruelty at
Aegista, and afterward at Syracuse. 676 Chap. 4. Antigonus his March into
Egypt. A Tempest near Raphia, where he lost some of his Ships. He returns into
Syria. Dinocrates prevails in Sicily. Agathocles is willing to resign his
Government; but Dinocrates stands off. What was done in Italy. Antigonus his
War with the Rhodians. Rhodes besieged by Demetrius. Agathocles routs
Dinocrates his great Army with a few Men. His Cruelty to those that submitted
upon Terms, where he But chers Seven thousand. Dinocrates in favor with
Agathocles, and betrays all the Confederates. What was done in Italy. 688 Chap.
5. The Siege of Rhodes continued: The Acts of the Sea-Captains of the Rhodians.
Peace made with the Rhodians. The Acts of Agathocles in the Lipari Islands. The
Acts of Demetrius in Greece. The War between the Tarentines and Lucanians. The
Acts of Cleonymus the Spartan: Cassander sends to Antigonus to make Peace, who
refuses. Lysimachus joins with Cassander, and so does Ptolemy and Seleucus,
against Antigonus: He marches against Lysimachus. Demetrius's further Acts in
Greece. The Armies of Cassander and Demetrius. Demetrius leaves Greece, and
goes with his Army to his Father in Asia, after Peace made with Cassander. The
Misfortunes of Pleistarchus at Sea. Ptolemy besieges Sidon, but returns to
Egypt upon a false Report. Seleucus marches from Babylon with a great Army.
Page 695
THE PREFACE.
ALL Mankind are under a great Obligation of Gratitude to those that have
written Universal Histories; forasmuch as there has been an honorable Contest
amongst them by their Labors and Pains, to be helpful to others in the due
Conduct and Management of the common Affairs and Concerns of this present Life.
For whereas they usher in a sort of wholesome Instruction, without any hazard to
the Person; so they thereby also procure to their Readers, Art and Skill in
Politics, above the ordinary Rate, with great Ease and Security. For Knowledge
gained by Experience, though it brings a Man to an Aptness to be quick in
discerning what is most advisable in every particular case, yet such Knowledge
is attended with many Toyls and Hazards. And thus he that was Ulysses.
the most experienced Man among the Heroes, viewed many Cities, and came well
to understand and pry into the Minds and Tempers of Men; yet it was with many
Troubles and Misfortunes: But Knowledge of what was well or ill done by others,
gained by History, carries along with it Instructions, freed from those
Misfortunes that others have before experienced.

Besides, these Historians have used their utmost Diligence to reduce all Men
in their Consideration of them (who are united and related one to another in
the same common Nature and Original, though far distant each from other as to
Place and Time) under one and the same Head, and common Order, as if they were
Servants herein to the Divine Providence. For as Providence having marshalled
the Stars (visible to us) in a most beautiful Frame and Order, and likewise
conjoined the Natures of Men in a common Analogy and Likeness one to another,
incessantly wheels about every Age, as in a Circle, imparting to each what is
before by Fate shared out and allotted for them: So these Historians by
committing to Writing the common Actions of Men through the whole World, as if
they were the Affairs only of one City, represent their Labors as one entire
Account, and common Repertory and Treasury of Human Transactions. For it is a
desirable thing to be in a capacity to make use of the Mistakes of others, the
better to order the course of our own Lives, and in the various Events and
Accidents that may befall us, not to be then at a loss and seeking what is to be
done, but rather to be able to imitate what has been well done. And certainly
as to Council and Advice, all prefer Ancient Men before those that are Young,
because of their Prudence gained by a long Experience. But History goes as far
beyond the Knowledge of Old Men, as we are sure it does surmount all their
Experience in multitude of Examples. So that any Man may justly look upon it as
a thing most profitable and advantageous, to make use of this upon all
occasions and accidents of this Life. As for Young Men, it teaches them the
Wisdom and Prudence of the Old, and increases and improves the Wisdom of the
Aged: It fits Private Men for high Places; and stirs up Princes (for the sake
of Honor and Glory) to these Exploits that may immortalize their Names. It
incourages likewise Soldiers to Fight the more Courageously for their Country,
upon the hopes of Applause and Commendation after their Deaths. And as a Curb
to the Impious and Profane, it restrains them in some measure, upon the
account of being noted to Posterity, with a perpetual Brand of Infamy and
Disgrace.

What shall I say? In hopes of having the Memory of their good Acts recorded to
Posterity by Historians, some have built Cities; others have applied themselves
to the Promulgation of good and wholesome Laws: Many also upon this account, have
set their Wits at work to invent Arts and Sciences for the good of Mankind. And
whereas complete Happiness is made up of all Perfections centring in one;
History consequently is to bear away the Prize, which is the Cause of all those
commendable and glorious effects: For it is most certain, She is the Preserver
of the Virtues of Worthy Men to Posterity, and an eternal Witness to the
Cowardice and Impiety of others; and a Benefactor to all Mankind in general.
For if a fine spun Story consisting merely of Fictions told of things done
among the Spirits In Hell.
below, tends much to the promoting of Piety and Justice; how much more then
may we conclude that History, the most noble Assertrix of Truth, and very
Metropolis (as it were) of all Philosophy, may adorn the Manners of Men with
Principles of Justice and Honesty? For there is not a Man (through the
Infirmity of Human Nature) that lives scarce a moment of an entire Eternity,
but is extinguished and gone for ever after this Life; and with those who never
did any thing commendable in their Lifetime, all their Enjoyments and Comforts
perish with them. But those who have signalized themselves by virtuous Actions,
are made famous in every Age, their praises being proclaimed as it were by Or
by a Divine Mouth of History.
a Divine Voice from History.

I judge it therefore honorable and commendable, and a piece of admirable
Wisdom and Prudence, to purchase that Glory which is immortal, with Labors and
Sufferings that are but short and temporal. It Is confessed by all concerning
Hercules, that while he was here upon Earth, he voluntarily undertook great and
continual Labors, and ran through many Dangers, that by doing good to Mankind,
he might gain the Reward of an Immortal Fame. And as to other Men, some are
honored as Heroes, others Deify'd as Gods, and all by the help and advantage
of History, which has transmitted their Virtues to Posterity, and caused the
Remembrance of them to be immortal. Other Monuments endure but for a little
time, and are often ruined and destroyed by various Accidents; but the force
and vigor of History, pierces through the whole World, and Time it self (which
consumes all other things) is its Keeper, handing it down to Posterity for ever.

History likewise conduces much to make a Man Eloquent, than which nothing is
more commendable; for by this Grecians excel Barbarians, and the Learned those
that are Ignorant: And by this Art alone it is, that one single Person many
times prevails over Multitudes.

To conclude; Whatever is done, appears to be such either as to Quantity or
Quality, as the Eloquent Rhetorician is pleased to make it. And such we call
Good Men, Men of (...). Worthy Men of Language.
high Esteem for excellent Language, as those that by that Qualification have
attained to the highest pitch of Virtue. But this Art of Speaking well, is
divided into several Parts: That part which is Poetical, seems to delight more
than to profit the Auditor; that which relates to making of Laws, tends more to
Coertion than Instruction; and the other parts either contribute nothing at all
to our well-being; or they are as hurtful one way, as they are useful and
profitable another; and some of them even oppose the Truth with downright Lies.

But History only (wherein Words and Things agree) comprehends in Writing, what
is both pleasant and profitable; For who cannot discern, but that it persuades
to Justice; condemns the wicked and vicious; praises the good, and greatly
improves the Understanding of the Those that meet with it.
Readers? And therefore when we saw these sort of Writers deservedly in great
Esteem, we were stirred up to an earnest study of prosecuting the same Subject.

But when we seriously consider the Authors that have been before us, though we
highly approve of their Method and Design, as far as we may justly; yet we
conceive their Writings are not altogether composed to the due Measure of
Profit and Advantage as they ought to be. For whereas to profit the Reader,
it is necessarily requisite, that many and various Circumstances of Affairs be
related; many set forth the Wars only of one Nation, or one single City; for
very few have begun their Histories from Ancient Times, or have made it their
Business to write of the Affairs of all Nations in General, to these our Days.
And those that do, some of them fix no certain Time to the several Transactions
they write of; and others altogether pass over the Affairs of the Barbarians.
And some there are that never mention the Ancient Mythologies, but slip them
by, because of the Difficulty of the Subject. Some that have begun to write,
have been prevented by Death, and so have left their Works imperfect. And none
who have hitherto set themselves to this Business, have brought down their
History below the Times of the Macedonians: For some have broke off at Philip,
others at the Acts of Alexander, and others at his Successors or Posterity. And
although many great and considerable Actions since those Times, to these our
Days, have been upon the Stage; yet no Historian has hitherto undertaken to set
them forth in one entire Tract, by reason of the Tediousness of the Work. And
in regard that in those Writings which we have, the Times and Actions that have
been comprehended in them, are hudled together in several Volumes, writ by
various and several Authors, it is a very difficult matter either to understand,
or remember them.

Having therefore diligently perused and examined the Tracts of the several
Authors, I determined to compose one entire History, from which the Reader
might reap much Advantage, with little Labor and Pains: For he who endeavors
to the utmost of his power, to comprehend in his Writings, the memorable
Affairs and Actions of the whole World (as of one single City,) bringing down
his History from the most ancient Times to his own Age, though he set upon a
Work certainly very Laborious, yet he will perform that which, when finished,
will be undoubtedly most useful and profitable. For hence, every Man may, as
out of a common Fountain, draw what is convenient and serviceable for his own
private use. For as to them that have a desire to employ themselves in tumbling
and turning over so many Authors; first such cannot easily get so many Books
together as are necessary for their use; and then again by reason of the
differing Relations and multitude of Authors, they can scarcely understand the
Matters related.

But one General History, in one entire Tract, as it may be quickly and readily
perused, so the understanding of the subject matter, with far more ease goes
along with the Reading. Yea, this sort of History excels all others, as far as
the Whole is more useful than the Part; as the entire thing is more desirable
than that which is divided; and that which fixes the exact Periods of Time,
more than that which leaves the Time uncertain and unknown, when things related
were done.

Perceiving therefore that such a Work would be of mighty use and advantage;
but that it would require both a long Time, and a great deal of Labor and
Pains, we spent Thirty Years time in the Composing of it; and for that purpose
traveled through a great part of Asia and Europe, with many Hazards and
Difficulties, that we our selves might be Eyewitnesses of most of the Parts
and Places that were necessary for the carrying on of our Design in this Work.
For through the Ignorance of Places, not only common Writers, but even those
who are reputed the most Eminent, have committed many Errors and Mistakes. The
chief cause, and that which most helped forward the Design, (which, though
thought impossible, is now fully completed and perfected) was the strong and
constant desire we had of Composing such a Work. Many Helps likewise were
afforded to us at Rome, for the Carrying on of what we had undertaken in this
Kind. For that noble City, whose Power is stretched out as far as to the utmost
Corners of the Earth (being that we had been there a long time an Inhabitant)
furnished us with many things ready at hand for our purpose. For being born in
Agyrus in Sicily, and having in a great measure learnt the Roman Language, by
means of the frequent Commerce of Romans in that Island, I diligently collected
out of their Ancient Records, what I found concerning the memorable Actions of
this Empire.

We have begun our History with the Mythologies handed down to us, as well
those of the Grecians, as of the Barbarians, seriously weighing and
considering, as far as we were able, what every one of them have related of
things done in Ancient Times. Having now finished what was designed, though not
yet exposed to public view, before that be done, we shall declare something
briefly concerning the whole Work.

Our First Six Books, comprehend the Affairs and Mythologies of the Ages before
the Trojan War, of which the Three First, contain the Barbarian, and the next
following almost all the Grecian Antiquities. In the Eleven next after these,
we have given an Account of what has been done in every Place from the Time of
the Trojan War, till the Death of Alexander. In the Three and Twenty Books
following, we have set forth all other Things and Affairs, till the beginning
of the War the Romans made upon the Galls; at which time Julius Caesar the
Emperor (who upon the Account of his great Achievements, was surnamed A Divine
Person, or a God.
Divus) having subdued the Warlike Nations of the Galls, enlarged the Roman
Empire, as far as to the British Isles; whose First Acts fall in with the First
Year of the Hundred and Eightieth Olympiad, when Herodes A. M. 3896. Isaacson.
was chief Magistrate at Athens. But as to the Limitation of Times contained in
this Work, we have not bound those things that happened before the Trojan War,
within any certain Limits; because we could not find any Foundation whereon to
rely with any Certainty.

According to Appollodorus, we have accounted Fourscore Years from the Trojan
War, to the Return of Heraclides: From thence to the First Olympiad, A. M. 2848.
Three Hundred and Twenty Eight Years, computing the Times from the
Lacedemonian Kings. From the First Olympiad, to the beginning of the Gallick
War (where our History ends) are Seven Hundred and Thirty Years: So that our
whole Work (comprehended in Forty Books) is an History which takes in the
Affairs of Eleven Hundred Thirty Eight Years, besides those Times that preceded
the Trojan War.

We have been the more careful to premise these things, that the Reader might
have the clearer Prospect into the nature of the whole Tract; and that those
who commonly take upon them to polish and amend Books, may be at least
prevailed with not to corrupt other Men's Works. Whatever therefore through the
whole History is writ well, let no Man envy: What Slips there are (through
Ignorance) they that are more knowing, are very free to amend.

And now having finished what we thought fit to premise, we shall endeavor
actually to perform what we before promised, as to the Writing of the History.

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
Of the first Generation of Men. How the World first began. Men's first manner
of Life, and who were the first Men. First Men in Egypt. Who were the most
ancient Gods of Egypt. Of their Demy-Gods. Sol, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter, Juno,
Vulcan reigned in Egypt. Of Osiris and Isis. The Acts of Osiris and Isis.
Hermes his Inventions. Osiris prepares for his Expedition through the World,
and to that end raises a great Army.

WHAT Notions they had of the Gods who first instituted Divine Worship, and
what is fabulously related of every one of the Deities (because the Subject
requires much to be said) we shall distinctly set forth: And whatever we
conceive to be pertinent to the present History, we shall discourse of
severally and distinct, that nothing worth Observation may be omitted And we
shall here give an accurate Account (as far as the Antiquity of the matters
will admit) of the Generation and Original of Mankind, and of the Affairs and
Transactions of all Parts of the Known World, drawing down our History from the
most ancient Times.

Of the Origin therefore of Men, there are Two Opinions amongst the most Of the
Opinions of the first Generation of Men.
famous and authentic Naturalists and Historians.

Some of these are of Opinion, that the World had neither Gr. Without
Generation or Corruption.
Beginning, nor ever shall have End; and likewise say, that Mankind was from
Eternity, and that there never was a Time when he first began to be. Others on
the contrary, conceive both the World to be made, and to be corruptible, and
that there was a certain Time when Man had first a Being.

For whereas all things at the first were jumbled together, Heaven and Earth,
Of the Beginning of the World.
were in one Mass, and had one and the same Form: But afterward (they say)
when Corporeal Beings appeared one after another, the World at length presented
it self in the Order we now see; and that the Air was in continual agitation,
whose fiery part ascended together to the highest Place, its nature (by reason
of its Levity) tending always upwards; for which reason, both the Sun, and that
vast number of the Stars, are contained within that Orb. That the gross and
earthy Matter (clotted together by Moisture) by reason of its Weight sunk down
below into one Place, is continually whirling about; the Sea was made of the
Humid Parts; and the muddy Earth of the more Solid, as yet very meorish and
soft; which by degrees at first was made crusty by the Heat of the Sun; and
then after the Face of the Earth was parcht, and as it were firmented, the
Moisture afterward in many Places bubled up, and appeared as so many Pustles
wrapped up in thin and slender Coats and Skins; which may be even seen in
standing Ponds, and Marish Places, when after the Earth has been pierced with
Cold, the Air grows hot on a sudden, without a gradual Alteration. And whereas
Moisture generates Creatures from Heat, as from a Seminal Principle, things so
generated, by being inwrapt in the dewy Mists of the Night, grew and increased,
and in the Day solidated, and were made hard by the Heat of the Sun; and when
the Births included in those Ventricles had received their due proportion, then
those slender Skins being burst asunder by the Heat, the Forms of all sorts of
Living Creatures were brought forth into the Light; of which those that had
most of Heat mounted aloft, Gr. (...).
and were Fowl, and Birds of the Air; but those that were drossy, and had more
of Earth, were numbered in the order of Creeping things, and other Creatures
altogether used to the Earth. Then those Beasts that were naturally watery and
moist (called Fishes) presently hastened to the place connatural to them; and
when the Earth afterward became more dry and solid by the Heat of the Sun, and
the drying Winds, it had not power at length to produce any more of the greater
living Creatures; but each that had an Animal Life, began to increase their
Kind by mutual Copulation. And Euripides the Scholar of Anaxagoras, seems to be
of the same Opinion, concerning the first Generation of all things; for in his
Monalippe he has these Verses.

(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
A Mass confused, Heaven and Earth once were
Of one Form; but after Separation,
Then Men, Trees, Beasts of the Earth, with Fowls of the Air
First sprang up in their Generation.
But if this Power of the Earth to produce living Creatures at the first Origin
of all things seem credible to any; the Egyptians do bring Testimonies of this
Energy of the Earth, by the same things done there at this day. For they say,
that about Thebes in Egypt, after the overflowing of the River Nile, the Earth
Mice bred of Mud in Egypt.
thereby being covered with Mud and Slime, many Places putrify through the heat
of the Sun, and thence are bred multitudes of Mice. It is certain therefore,
that out of the Earth when it is hardn'd, and the Air changed from its due and
natural Temperament, Animals are generated. By which means it came to pass,
that in the first beginning of all things, various living Creatures proceeded
from the Earth. And these are the Opinions touching the Original of Things.

But Men, they say, at first, led a rude and brutish sort of Life, and wandered
Men's first manner of Life.
up and down in the Fields, and fed upon Herbs, and the natural Fruit of the
Trees. Their Words were confused, without any certain signification; but by
degrees they spoke articulately, and making Signs, and giving proper Terms to
every thing upon occasion; at length their Discourse became intelligible one to
another: But being dispersed into several parts of the World, they spoke not
all the same Language, every one using that Dialect proper to the Place, as his
Lot fell: Upon which account there were various and all sorts of Languages in
the World; and these Associations of Men, first planted all the Nations of the
World.

But forasmuch as what was useful for Man's Life, was not at the beginning found
out, this first Race of Mankind lived a laborious and troublesome Life, as being
as yet naked, not inured to Houses, nor acquainted with the use of Fire, and
altogether destitute of Delicacies for their Food. For not knowing as yet how
to house and lay up their Food, they had no Barns or Granaries where to
deposite the Fruits of the Earth; and therefore many through Hunger and Cold
perished in the Winter: But being at length taught by experience, they fled into
Caves in the Winter, and laid up such Fruits as were fit to keep; and coming by
degrees to the Knowledge of the usefulness of Fire, and of other Conveniences,
they began to invent many Arts, and other things beneficial for Man's Life.
What shall we say? Necessity was Man's Instructor, which made him skilful in
every thing, being an Ingenious Creature, assisted (as with so many Servants)
with Hands, Speech, and a Rational Soul, ready to put every thing in execution.
But what we have here said concerning the first Generation of Mankind, and his
way of living in old time may suffice, (...).
designing to keep within due Bounds.

And now we shall apply our selves to recount those things that have been done
in all the known Parts of the World, whereof there is any Memorial handed down
to us.

Who were the First Kings, we our selves can neither assert nor agree with Who
were the First Kings.
those Historians who affirm they know; for it is not possible that the Account
given of Affairs, should be so ancient as to be contemporary with the first
Kings; and if any should admit any such thing, yet it is apparent, that all the
Historians extant lived long after those Times. For the Greeks themselves are
not only in the dark concerning the Antiquity of Nations, but many of the
Barbarians also, who call themselves Natural Inhabitants, and boast themselves
to be the first of all other Men who have found out things beneficial to
Mankind, and to have committed to writing, things done among them many Ages
before. And as for us, we determine nothing certainly of the Antiquity of
particular Nations, nor which Nation is antienter than another, or how many
Years one was before another. But that we may attain the Scope and End we have
before designed, we shall distinctly set forth in these Chapters, what is
reported concerning things done in the several Nations, and the Antiquity of
them.

We shall first speak of the Barbarians; not that we judge them more ancient
than the Grecians (as Ephorus affirms) but that we are willing in the First
place to relate many considerable things of them, that when we come afterward
to the History of the Greeks, we may not confound their Antiquity with the
other which are of a foreign nature to them. And because the Gods are
fabulously reported to be born in Egypt, and the first Observation of the
Motion of the Stars is attributed to them, and that there are many remarkable
and famous Actions of renowned Men recorded to be done amongst them, we shall
begin with the Affairs of Egypt.

The Egyptians report, that at the beginning of the World, the first Men were
The first Men in Egypt.
created in Egypt, both by reason of the happy Climate of the Country, and the
nature of the River Nile. For this River being very Fruitful, and apt to bring
forth many Animals, yields of it self likewise Food and Nourishment for the
things produced. For it yields the Roots of Canes, the Fruit of the (...). A
Tree yielding most sweet and delicious Fruit. See Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 13. c.
17.
Lote-Tree, the Egyptian Bean, that which they call Corchorum, Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 21. c. (...).
Cors^on, and such like Rarities for Man's Food, always ready at hand.

And that all living Creatures were first produced among them, they use this
Argument, that even at this day, about Thebes at certain Times, such vast Mice
are bred, that it causes admiration to the Beholders; some of which to the
Breast and Fore-feet are animated and begin to move, and the rest of the Body
(which yet retains the nature of the Soil) appears without Form. Whence it is
manifest, that in the beginning of the World, through the Fertileness of the
Soil the first Men were formed in Egypt, being that in no other parts of the
World any of these Creatures are produced; only in Egypt these supernatural
Births may be seen.

And that we may sum up all in a word: If in the time of Deucalion's Flood, the
greatest part only of all living Creatures were destroyed, then of such as were
so preserved, its very probable that those in Egypt, especially, were of the
number, whose Inhabitants lie under the South Pole, and the Country for the
most part without Rain: Or if all that had Life generally perished (as some
affirm) and that the Earth produced Animals anew; yet they say, that
notwithstanding this, the chief production of things animated, is to be
ascribed to this Country. For they affirm, that if the Showers which fall in
any other Places, were warmed with the same Heat that is in Egypt, the Air
would be of that Temperature, as that it would aptly conduce to the Generation
of Animals, as at first, in the beginning of the World. For even at this day,
such Births may be seen (in the Waters that have lain long) over all the
watered Country of Egypt. For they affirm, that when the River returns into its
Channel, and the Sun dries the Mud, living Creatures are generated, some
perfect, others half formed, even cleaving to the Soil whence they are
produced. Osiris, Isis, Ceres, Oceanus and Minerva, the most ancient Egyptian
Gods.


The first Generation of Men in Egypt, therefore contemplating the Beauty of
the Superior World, and admiring with astonishment the frame and order of the
Universe, judged there were Two chief Gods that were Eternal, that is to say,
The Sun and the Moon, the first of which they called Osiris, and the other
Isis, both Names having proper Etymologies; for Osiris in the Greek Language,
signifies a Thing with many Eyes, which may be very properly applied to the Sun
darting his Rays into every Corner, and as it were with so many Eyes viewing
and surveying the whole Land and Sea, with which agrees the Poet,

(...). (...) Odys. (...) Ver. (...).

The Sun from's lofty Sphere all sees and hears.
Some also of the ancient Greek Mythologists call Osiris Dionysus, and surname
him Sirius, amongst whom Eumolphus in his Bacchanal Verses,

(...).
Dionysus darts his Fiery Rays.
And Orpheus; (...).

He Is called Phanetes and Dionysus.
Some likewise set him forth clothed with the spotted Skin of a Fawn (called
Nebris) from the variety of Stars that surround him.

Isis likewise being interpreted, signifies Ancient, that Name being ascribed
to the Moon from Eternal Generations. They add likewise to her, Horns, because
her Aspect is such in her Increase and in her Decrease, representing a Sickle;
and because an Ox among the Egyptians is offered to her in Sacrifice. They hold
that these Gods govern the whole World, cherishing and increasing all things;
and divide the Year into Three Parts (that is to say, Spring, Summer and
Autumn) by an invisible Motion perfecting their constant Course in that time:
And though they are in their Natures very differing one from another, yet they
complete the whole Year with a most excellent Harmony and Consent. They say
that these Gods in their Natures do contribute much to the Generation of all
things, the one being of a hot and active Nature, the other moist and (...),
Cold.
cold, but both having something of the Air; and that by these, all things are
both brought forth and nourished: And therefore that every particular Being in
the Universe is perfected and completed by the Sun and Moon, whose Qualities,
as before declared, are Five; A Spirit or quickening Efficacy, Heat or Fire,
Dryness or Earth, Moisture or Water, and Air, of which the World does consist,
as a Man made up of Head, Hands, Feet, and other parts. These Five they reputed
for Gods, and the People of Egypt who were the first that spoke articulately,
gave Names proper to their several Natures, according to the Language they then
spoke. And therefore they called the Spirit Jupiter, which is such by
Interpretation, because Jupiter, Spirit.
a quickening Influence is derived from this into all Living Creatures, as from
the original Principle; and upon that account he is esteemed the common Parent
of all things. And to this the most famous Poet of the Greeks gives Testimony,
where speaking of this God he says --

(...). Hom. (...)d. 8. Ver. 54^.

Of Men and Gods the Father.
Fire they called by Interpretation Vulcan, and him they had in Veneration as a
Great God, as he that greatly contributed to the Generation and Perfection of
Vulcan, Fire.
all Beings whatsoever.

The Earth, as the Common Womb of all Productions, they called Metera, as
Metera, The Earth.
the Greeks in process of time, by a small alteration of one Letter, and an
omission of Two Letters, called the Earth Demetra, which was anciently called
Gen Metera, or the Mother Earth, as Orpheus attests in this Verse.

(...).
The Mother Earth Demeter also called,
Brings forth most richly --
Water or Moisture, the Ancients called Oceanus; which by Interpretation is a
Oceanus, Water.
nourishing Mother, and so taken by some of the Grecians, of which the Poet
says thus,

(...). Hom. Ilia. 14. Ver. 302.

The Father of the Gods the Ocean is
Tethys the Mother called --
But the Egyptians account their Nile to be Oceanus, at which all the Gods were
Born. For in Egypt, only among all the Countries in the World, are many Cities
built by the ancient Gods, as by Jupiter, Sol, Mercury, Apollo, Pan, Elithia,
and many others.

To the Air they gave the Name of Minerva, signifying something proper Minerva,
Air.
to the nature thereof, and called her the Daughter of Jupiter, and counted a
Virgin, because the Air naturally is not subject to Corruption, and is in the
highest part of the Universe; whence rises the Fable, that she was the Issue of
Jupiter's Brain: They say she is called also Tritogeneia, or Thrice Begotten,
because she changes her natural Qualities thrice in the Year, the Spring,
Summer and Winter; and that she was called Glaucopis, not that she has Gray
Eyes (as some of the Greeks have supposed, for that is a weak Conceit) but
because the Air seems to be of a Gray Color, to the view. They report
likewise, that these Five Gods travel through the whole World, representing
themselves to Men sometimes in the shapes of Sacred living Creatures, and
sometimes in the Form of Men, or some other Representation. And this is not a
Fable, but very possible, if it be true, that these generate all things; and
the Homer.
Poet who traveled into Egypt, in some part of his Works, affirms this
Appearance, as he learnt it from their Priests,

(...)
(...)
(...).
The Gods also like Strangers come from far,
In diverse Shapes within the Towns appear,
Viewing Men's good and wicked Acts: --
And these are the Stories told by the Egyptians of the Heavenly and Immortal
The Earthly Gods of Egypt.
Gods. And besides these, they say there are others that are Terrestrial, which
were begotten of these former Gods, and were Originally Mortal Men, but by
reason of their Wisdom and Beneficence to all Mankind, have obtained
Immortality, of which some have been Kings of Egypt. Some of whom by
Interpretation, have had the same Names with the Celestial Gods, others have
kept their own proper Names. For they report that Sol, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter,
(surnamed by some Ammon) Juno, Vulcan, Vesta, and lastly, Mercury, reigned in
Egypt; and that Sol was the first King of Egypt, whose Name was the same with
the Celestial Planet called Sol.

But there are some of the Priests who affirm Vulcan to be the first of their
Vulcan the first Inventer of Fire.
Kings, and that he was advanced to that Dignity upon the account of being the
first that sound out the use of Fire, which was so beneficial to all Mankind.
For a Tree in the Mountains happening to be set on Fire by Lightning, the Wood
next adjoining was presently all in a Flame; and Vulcan thereupon coming to the
Place, was mightily refresht by the heat of it, being then Winter Season; and
when the Fire began to fail, he added more combustible Matter to it, and by
that means preserving it, called in other Men to enjoy the Benefit of that
which he himself was the first Inventer, as he gave out.

Afterward they say Saturn reigned, and married his Sister This Saturn is
judged upon good grounds to be Naoh. Boccard. Phaleg. lib. 1. c. 1. f. 1.
Stilling. Orig. Sacr. lib. 5. c. 5. Sect. 8.
Rhea, and that he begat of her Osiris and Isis; but others say, Jupiter and
Juno, who for their great Virtues, ruled over all the World. That of Jupiter
and Juno were born Five Gods, one upon every day of the Five Egyptian These
were Five Days added to the end of every Year, to make up their former Year to
consist of 365 Days. See the Reason, Orig. Sacr. 9^, 91.
intercalary Days. The Names of these Gods are Osiris, Isis, Typhon, Apollo and
Venus. That Osiris was interpreted Bacchus, and Isis plainly Ceres. That Osiris
married Isis, and after he came to the Kingdom, did much, and performed many
things for the common This Osiris was called Apis, and was King of Argos, and
afterward of Egypt. Vid. Strab. Plin. about the time of Jacob's leaving Laban,
Anno Mund. 2205, before Christ 1744. Hely. Cron. but by Isaacson, Ann. Mund.
2778.
Benefit and Advantage of Mankind. For he was the first that forbad Men eating
one another; and at the same time Isis found out the way of making of Bread of
Wheat and Barley, which before grew here and there in the Fields amongst other
common Herbs and Grass, and the use of it unknown: And Osiris teaching the way
and manner of Tillage, and well management of the Fruits of the Earth, this
change of Food became grateful; both because it was naturally sweet and
delicious, and Men were thereby restrained from the mutual Butcheries one of
another: For an evidence of this first finding out the use of these Fruits,
they allege an ancient Custom amongst them: For even at this day, in the time
of Harvest, the Inhabitants offer the first Fruits of the Ears of Corn, howling
and wailing about the Handfuls they offer, and invoking this Goddess Isis: And
this they do in return of due Honor to her for that Invention at the first. In
some Cities also, when they celebrate the Feast of Isis in a Pompous
Procession, they carry about Vessels of Wheat and Barley, in memory of the
first Invention, by the care and industry of this Goddess. They say likewise,
that Isis made many Laws for the good of Human Society, whereby Men were
restrained from lawless Force and Violence one upon another, out of fear of
Punishment. And therefore Ceres was called by the ancient Greeks, Themophorus
(that is) Lawgiver, being the Princess that first constituted Laws for the
better Government of her People.

Osiris moreover built Thebes in Egypt, with an Hundred Gates, and called it
Osiris built Thebes.
after his Mother's Name: But in following Times, it was called Diospolis, and
Thebes; of whose first Founder not only Historians, but the Priests of Egypt
themselves, are much in doubt. For some say that it was not built by Osiris,
but many Years after by a King of Egypt, whose History we shall treat of
hereafter in its proper place. They report likewise, that he built Two
magnificent Temples, and Dedicated them to his Parents, Jupiter and Juno; and
likewise Two Golden (...). Golden Temples.
Altars, the greater to the great God Jupiter; the other to his Father Jupiter,
who had formerly reigned there, whom they call Ammon. That he also erected
Golden Altars to other Gods, and instituted their several Rites of Worship, and
appointed Priests to have the Oversight and Care of the Holy things. In the
time of Osiris and Isis, Projectors and ingenious Artists were in great Honor
and Esteem; and therefore in Thebes there were then Goldsmiths and Braziers,
who made Arms and Weapons for the Killing of Wild Beasts, and other Instruments
for the husbanding of the Ground, and improvement of Tillage; besides Images of
the Gods, and Altars in Gold. They say that Osiris was much given to Husbandry,
that he was the Son of Jupiter, brought up in Nisa, a Town of Arabia the Happy,
near to Egypt, called by the Greeks Dionysus, from his Father, and the Place of
his Education. Homer.
The Poet in his Hymns makes mention of Nysa, as bordering upon Egypt, where he
says,

(...)
(...).
Far off from Phenice stands the Sacred Nyse,
Where Streams of Eygypt's Nile begin to rise,
On Mountain high with pleasant Woods adorned.
Here near unto Nyse, (they say) he found out the use of the Vine, and there
planting it, was the first that drank Wine; and taught others how to plant it
and use it, and to gather in their Vintage, and to keep and preserve it. Above
all others, he most honored Mercury, or Hermes his Inventions. This Mercury is
supposed to be Joseph, by Bochart. Vid. Crale, Court of the Gent. Part 1. lib.
1. c. 4. p. 45.
Hermes, one of an admirable Ingenuity, and quick Invention, in finding out
what might be useful to Mankind. This Hermes was the first (as they report)
that taught how to speak distinctly and articulately, and gave Names to many
things that had none before. He found out Letters, and instituted the Worship
of the Gods; and was the first that observed the Motion of the Stars, and
invented Music; and taught the manner of Wrestling; and invented Arithmetic,
and the Art of curious Of the exact framing of a Body.
Graving and Cutting of Statues. He first found out the Harp with Three
Strings, in resemblance of the Three Seasons of the Year, causing Three several
Sounds, the Treble, Base and Mean. The Treble, to represent the Summer; The
Base, the Winter; and the Mean, the Spring. He was the first that taught the
Greeks Eloquence; thence he is called Hermes, a Speaker or Interpreter. To
conclude, he was Osiris's (...).
Sacred Scribe, to whom he communicated all his Secrets, and was chiefly
steered by his Advice in every thing. He (not Minerva, as the Greeks affirm)
found out the use of the Olive Tree, for the making of Oil. It Is moreover
reported, that Osiris being a Prince of a public Spirit, and very ambitious of
Glory, raised a great Army, with which he resolved to go through all parts of
the World that were inhabited, and to teach Men how to plant Vines, and to sow
Wheat and Barley. For he hoped that if he could civilize Men, and take them off
from their rude and Beast-like Course of Lives, by such a public good and
advantage, he should raise a Foundation amongst all Mankind, for his immortal
Praise and Honor, which happened accordingly. For not only that Age, but
Posterity ever after honored those among the chiefest of their Gods, that
first found out their proper and ordinary Food. Having therefore settled his
Affairs in Egypt, and committed the Government of his whole Kingdom to his Wife
Isis, he joined with her Mercury, as her chief Councellor of State, because he
far excelled all others in Wisdom and Prudence. But Hercules his near Kinsman,
he left General of all his Forces within his Dominions, a Man admired by all
for his Valor and Strength of Body. As to those parts which lay near
Phaenicia, and upon the Seacoasts of them, he made Busiris Lord Lieutenant,
and of Ethiopia and Lybia, Anteus.

Then marching out of Egypt, he began his Expedition, taking along with him his
Brother, whom the Greeks called Apollo. This Apollo is reported to have
discovered the Laurel-Tree, which all Dedicate especially to this God. To
Osiris they attribute the finding out of the Ivy-Tree, and dedicate it to him,
as the Greeks do to Bacchus: And therefore in the Egyptian Tongue, they call
Ivy Osiris's Plant, which they prefer before the Vine in all their Sacrifices,
because this loses its Leaves, and the other always continues fresh and green:
Which Rule the Ancients have observed in other Plants, that are always green,
dedicating Myrtle to Venus, Laurel to Apollo, and the Olive Tree to Pallas.

It Is said, that Two of his Sons accompanied their Father Osiris in this
Expedition, one called Anubis, and the other Macedo, both valiant Men: Both of
them wore Coats of Mail, that were extraordinary remarkable, covered with the
Skins of such Creatures as resembled them in Stoutness and Valor. Anubis was
covered with a Dog's, and Macedon with the Skin of a Wolf; and for this reason
these Beasts are religiously adored by the Egyptians. He had likewise for his
Companion, The same with Cham.
Pan, whom the Egyptians have in great Veneration; for they not only set up
Images and Statues up and down in every Temple, but built a City in Thebides
after his Name, called by the Inhabitants Chemmin, which by interpretation is *
Cham called Pan.
Pan's City. There went along with them likewise those that were skilful in
Husbandry, as Maro in the planting of Vines, and Triptolemus in sowing of Corn,
and gathering in the Harvest.

CHAP. II.
The Continuance of Osiris's Expedition through Ethiopia, all Arabia, India and
Europe. Buried by Isis and Mercury. How he was killed. His Death revenged by
Isis and Orus. Two Bulls, Apis and Mnevis, worshipped in Egypt. Places
discussed where Osiris and Isis were Buried. Histories of the Egyptian Priests.
Their Tears, Lunar Tears. Giants. Laws about Marriage. Osiris and Isis, their
Pillars and Inscriptions. Colonies out of Egypt.

ALL things being now prepared, Osiris having vowed to the Gods to let his Hair
grow till he returned into Egypt, marched away through Aethiopia; and for that
very Reason it is a piece of Religion, and practiced among the Egyptians at this
Day, that those that travel Abroad, suffer their Hair to grow, till they return
Home. As he passed through Ethiopia, a Company of Satyrs were presented to him,
who (as it is reported) were all Hairy down to their Loins: For Osiris was a Man
given to Mirth and Jollity, and took great pleasure in Music and Dancing; and
therefore carried along with him a Train of Musicians, of whom Nine were
Virgins, most Excellent Singers, and expert in many other things (whom the
Greeks call Muses) of whom Apollo was the Captain; and thence called the (...).
Leader of the Muses: Upon this account the Satyrs, who are natuturally
inclined to skipping, dancing and singing, and all other sorts of Mirth, were
taken in as part of the Army: For Osiris was not for War, nor came to fight
Battles, and to decide Controversies by the Sword, every Country receiving him
for his Merits and Virtues, as a God. In Ethiopia having instructed the
Inhabitants in Husbandry, and Tillage of the Ground, and built several stately
Cities among them, he left there behind him some to be Governors of the
Country, and others to be Gatherers of his Tribute.

While they were thus employed it is said that the River Nile, about the
Dog Days Inundation of Nile.
(at which time it uses to be the highest) broke down its Banks, and
over-flow'd the greatest part of Egypt, and that part especially where
Prometheus governed, insomuch as almost all the Inhabitants were drowned; so
that Prometheus was near unto Killing of himself for very grief of heart; and
from the sudden and violent Eruption of the Waters, the River was called Aetos
in Greek, because an Eagle is quick, lively and swift.
Eagle.

Hercules, who was always for high and difficult Enterprises, and ever of a
stout Spirit, presently made up the Breaches, and turned the River into its
Channel, and kept in within its ancient Banks; and therefore some of the Greek
Poets from this fact have forged a Fable, That Hercules Shot through.
killed the Eagle that fed upon Prometheus his Heart. The most ancient Name of
this River was Oceames, which in the Greek pronunciation is Oceanus; afterward
called Eagle, upon the violent Eruption. Lastly, it was called Egyptus, from
the Name of a King that there reigned; which the Poet attests, who says,

(...).
In the River of Egyptus then I placed
The Galleys swift --
For near Thonis (as it is called) an ancient Mart Town of Egypt, this River
empties it self into the Sea.

The last Name which it still retains, it derives from Nileus, a King of those
Parts.

Osiris being come to the Borders of Ethiopia, raised high Banks on either side
of the River, lest in the time of its Inundation it should overflow the Country
more than was convenient, and make it marish and boggy; and made Floodgates to
let in the Water by degrees, as far as was necessary. Thence he passed through
Arabia, bordering upon the Red Sea as far as to India, and the utmost Coasts
that were inhabited: He built likewise many Cities in India, one of which he
called Nysa, willing to have a remembrance of that in Egypt where he was
brought up. At this Nysa in India, he planted Ivy, which grows and remains here
only of Nysa in India.
all other Places in India, or the Parts adjacent. He left likewise many other
Marks of his being in those Parts, by which the latter Inhabitants are induced
to believe, and do affirm that this God was born in India.

He likewise addicted himself much to hunting of Elephants; and took care to
have Statues of himself in every place, as lasting Monuments of his Expedition.
Thence passing to the rest of Asia, he transported his Army through the
Hellespont into Europe; and in Thrace he killed Lycurgus King of the
Barbarians, who opposed him in his Designs. Then he ordered Maro (at that time
an Old Man) to take care of the Planters in that Country, and to build a City,
and call it Maronea, after his own Name. Macedon his Son he made King of
Macedonia, so calling it after him. To Triptolemus he appointed the Culture and
Tillage of the Land in Attica. To conclude, Osiris having traveled through the
whole World, by finding out Food fit and convenient for Man's Body, was a
Benefactor to all Mankind. Where Vines would not grow and be fruitful, he
taught the Inhabitants to make Drink of Barley, little interior in strength
and pleasant Flavor to Wine it self. He brought back with him into Egypt the
most precious and richest things Beer anciently.
that ever place did afford; and for the many Benefits and Advantages that he
was the Author of, by the common Consent of all Men, he gained the Reward of
Immortality and Honor equal to the Heavenly Deities.

After his Death, Isis and Mercury celebrated his Funeral with Sacrifices and
other Divine Honors, as to one of the Gods, and instituted many Sacred Rites
mystical Ceremonies in Memory of the mighty Works wrought by this Hero, now
Deify'd. Anciently the Egyptian Priests kept the manner of the Death of Osiris
secret in their own Registers among themselves; but in aftertimes it fell out,
that some that could not hold, blurted it out, and so it came Abroad. For they
say that Osiris, while he governed in Egypt with all Justice imaginable, was
Murdered by his wicked Brother Typhon; and that This Osiris was mur^her'd about
the time Jacob with his whole Family came into Egypt: As (...) H^lvicus Cro.
An. Mund. 2239. Vid. Sir Walter Rawl. History, lib. 2. part 1. cap. 2. sect. 5.
That this Osiris was Misraim, the Son of Cham.
he mangled his dead Body into Six and Twenty Pieces, and gave to each of his
Confederates in the Treason a Piece, by that means to bring them all within the
same horrid Guilt, and thereby the more to engage them to advance him to the
Throne, and to defend and preserve him in the Possession.

But Isis, the Sister and Wife likewise of Osiris, with the assistance In the
time of this Orus, Jacob is said to come into Egypt. Sir Walter Rawl. lib. 2.
part 1. c. 2. sect. 5. Helvicus says in the time of Osiris, An. Mun. 2239.
of her Son Orus, revenged his Death upon Typhon and his Accomplices, and
possessed her self of the Kingdom of Egypt. It Is said the Battle was fought near
a River not far off a Town now called Antaea in Arabia, so called from Anteus,
whom Hercules slew in the time of Osiris. She found all the Pieces of his Body,
save his Privy Members; and having a desire to conceal her Husband's Burial,
yet to have him honored as a God by all the Egyptians, she thus contrived it.
She closed all the Pieces together, cementing them with Wax and Aromatic
Spices, and so brought it to the shape of a Man of the bigness of Osiris; then
she sent for the Priests to her, one by one, and swore them all that they
should not discover what she should then entrust them with. Then she told them
privately, that they only should have the Burial of the King's Body; and
recounting the many good Works he had done, charged them to bury the Body in a
proper place among themselves, and to pay unto him all Divine Honor, as to a
God. That they should Dedicate to him one of the Beasts bred among them, which
of them they pleased, and that while it was alive, they should pay it the same
Veneration as they did before to Osiris himself; and when it was dead, that
they should Worship it with the same Adoration and Worship given to Osiris. But
being willing to encourage the Priests to these Divine Offices by Profit and
Advantage, she gave them the Third part of the Country for the Maintenance of
the Service of the Gods and their Attendance at the Altars.

In memory therefore of Osiris's good Deeds, being incited thereunto by the
Commands of the Queen, and in expectation of their own Profit and Advantage,
the Priests exactly performed every thing that Isis enjoined them; and
therefore every Order of the Priests at this Day are of opinion that Osiris is
buried among them. And they have those Beasts in great Veneration, that were so
long since thus consecrated; and renew their Mournings for Osiris over the
Graves of those Beasts. There are Two sacred Bulls especially, the one called
Apis, and the other Apis and Mnevis.
Mnevis, that are Consecrated to Osiris, and reputed as Gods generally by all
the Egyptians. For this Creature of all others was extraordinarily serviceable
to the first Inventers of Husbandry, both as to the Sowing Corn, and other
Advantages concerning Tillage, of which all reapt the Benefit. Lastly, they
say, that after the Death of Osiris, Isis made a Vow never to Marry any other
Man, and spent the rest of her Days in an exact Administration of Justice among
her Subjects, excelling all other Princes in her Acts of Grace and Bounty
toward her own People; and therefore after her Death, she was numbered among
the Gods, and as such had Divine Honor and Veneration, and was buried at
Memphis, where they show her Sepulcher at this day in the Grove of Vulcan.

Yet there are some that deny that these Gods are Buried at Memphis; but near
the Mountains of Ethiopia and Egypt, in the Isle of Nile, lying near to a place
called Philas, and upon that account also named the Holy Field. They confirm
this by undoubted Signs and Marks left in this Island, as by a Sepulcher built
and erected to Osiris, religiously Reverenced by all the Priests of Egypt,
wherein are laid up Three Hundred and Threescore (...).
Bowls, which certain Priests appointed for that purpose, fill every Day with
Milk, and call upon the Gods by Name, with Mourning and Lamentation. For that
cause none go into the Island but Priests. The Inhabitants of Or of Thebais the
higher Egypt.
Thebes (which is the most ancient City of Egypt) account it a great Oath, and
by no means to be violated, if a Man swear by Osiris that lies buried at Philas.

The several parts therefore of Osiris being found, they report were buried in
this manner before related; but his Privy-Members (they say) were thrown into
the River by Typhon, because none of his Partners would receive them; and yet
that they were divinely honored by Isis; for she commanded an Image (...).
of this very part to be set up in the Temples, and to be religiously adored;
and in all their Ceremonies and Sacrifices to this God, she ordered that part
to be held in divine Veneration and Honor. And therefore the Grecians, after
they had learned the Rites and Ceremonies of the Feasts of Bacchus, and the
Noise and rude Shoutings at the Feasts of Bacchus.
Orgian Solemnities from the Egyptians in all their Myteries and Sacrifices to
this God, they adored that Member by the Name of Phallus.

From Mizraim the Son of Cham.
Osiris and Isis, to the Reign of Alexander the Great, who built a City after
his own Name, the Egyptian Priests reckon above These must be understood Lunary
Years of Thirty Days, as the Egyptians used to account. Vid. Plut. Numa, Lact.
lib. 2. c. 12. p. 118. Orus the Son of Osiris, was Born An. Mund. 1778.
Alexander's Conquest of Egypt, An. Mun. 3661. which is 1889 Years after, which
makes up 22996 Lunar Years, and 15 Days, which comes near to this Account of
Diodorus. Orig. Sacr. c. 5.
Ten Thousand Years, or (as some write) little less than Three and Twenty
Thousand Years. They affirm, that those that say this God Osiris was born at
Thebes in Boetia of Jupiter and Semele, relate that which is false. For they
say that Orpheus, after he came into Egypt, was initiated into the Sacred
Mysteries of Bacchus or Dionysus, and being a special Friend to the Thebans in
Boetia, and of great esteem among them, to manifest his Gratitude, transferred
the Birth of Bacchus or Osiris over into Greece.

And that the Common People, partly out of Ignorance, and partly out of a
desire they had that this God should be a Grecian, readily received these
Mysteries and Sacred Rites among them; and that Orpheus took the occasion
following to fix the Birth of the God and his Rites and Ceremonies among the
Greeks: As thus, Cadmus (they say) was born at Thebes in Egypt, and amongst
other Children begat Semele: That she was got with Child by one unknown, and
was delivered at Seven Months end of a Child very like to Osiris, as the
Egyptians describe him. But such Births are not used to live, either because it
is not the pleasure of the Gods it should be so, or that the Law of Nature will
not admit it. The Matter coming to Cadmus his Ear, being before warned by the
Oracle to protect the Laws of his Country, he wrapped the Infant in Gold, and
instituted Sacrifices to be offered to him, as if Osiris had appeared again in
this shape; and caused it to be spread abroad, that it was begotten of Jupiter,
thereby both to honor Osiris, and to cover his Daughter's Shame. And therefore
it is a common Report among the Grecians, that Semele, the Daughter of Cadmus,
was got with Child by Jupiter, and by him had Osiris.

In Aftertimes, Orpheus, by reason of his excellent Art and Skill in Music,
Orpheus.
and his Knowledge in Theology, and Institution of Sacred Rites and Sacrifices
to the Gods, was greatly esteemed among the Grecians, and especially was
received and entertained by the Thebans, and by them highly honored above all
others; who being excellently learned in the Egyptian Theology, brought down
the Birth of the ancient Osiris, to a far later time, and to gratify the
Cadmeans or Thebans, instituted new Rites and Ceremonies, at which he ordered
that it should be declared to all that were admitted to those Mysteries, that
Osiris was called Dionysus or Bacchus.
Dionysus or Osiris was begotten of Semele by Jupiter. The People therefore
partly through Ignorance, and partly by being deceived with the dazzling Luster
of Orpheus his Reputation, and with their good Opinion of his Truth and
Faithfulness in this matter (especially to have this God reputed a Grecian,
being a thing that humored them) began to use these Rites, as is before
declared. And with these Stories the Mythologists and Poets have filled all the
Theaters, and now it is generally received as a Truth not in the least to be
questioned. To conclude, The Priests say, that the Grecians have arrogated to
themselves both their Gods and Demy-Gods (or The Stories of the Heroes and Gods
the Grecians derived from the Egyptians.
Heroes,) and say that diverse Colonies were transported over to them out of
Egypt: For Hercules was an Egyptian, and by his Valor made his way into most
parts of the World, and set up a Pillar in Africa; and of this they endeavor
to make proof from the Grecians themselves. For whereas it is owned by all,
that Hercules assisted the Gods in the Giants War, it is plain that at that time
when the Grecians say Hercules was born, the Earth had not then strength to
produce Giants, neither were there any in those Days, that is to say, in the
Age next before the Trojan War; but rather (as the Egyptians affirm) at the
first Generation and Beginning of Mankind; from which Time the Egyptians
account above Ten Thousand Years; but from the Trojan War, not Twelve Hundred:
And according to this Computation of the Egyptians, a Club and Lion's Skin may
agree well enough with the ancient Hercules; for the use of Arms not being at
that time found out, Men fought with Clubs and Staves, and covered their Bodies
with Beasts Skins. This ancient Hercules they say was the Son of Jupiter, but
know not who was his Mother: But he who was the Son of Alemena, they affirm was
born above Ten Thousand Years after the other, and was called at first Alceus;
but afterward Hercules, not that he had that honorable Surname from Juno is
called by the Greeks, Heras, and Hercules, Heracles.
Juno (as Matris says) but assumed to himself the Name out of emulation,
desirous to do as great things as the ancient Hercules, and so to inherit as
well his Fame and Glory as his Name.

Moreover, the Grecians have a very ancient Tradition, which agrees with the
Egyptians, that Hercules freed the Earth from wild Beasts; which cannot
possibly be applied to him who flourished about the Times of the Trojans, when
most Parts of the World were free from such annoyances, by improvement of Lands
and Multitudes of Populous Cities. But the reduction of the World to a more
civil course of Living, agrees best with the ancient Hercules, when Men were as
yet vexed and plagued with wild Beasts; and especially in Egypt, whose upper
part is a Wilderness, and full of Wild Beasts at this very Day. And it is but
very reasonable to think that Hercules should mind the Prosperity and Welfare
of Egypt, his own Country, and free the Land from Beasts, and so deliver it
into the Hands of the Husbandman, to be improved by Tillage; and that upon this
account he was Honored as a God.

They report likewise, that Perseus was born in Egypt, and that the Grecians
have transferred from thence the Birth of Isis into Argos, inventing a Story
that she was the same with Io, who was metamorphosed into a Bull. And indeed
there are great Differences and Disputes concerning these Gods: For some call
the same Goddess Isis, others call her Ceres; some A Lawgiver.
Thesmophorus, others Luna, others Juno, and some by all these Names.

They term Osiris sometimes Serapis, sometimes Dionysus, and sometimes Pluto;
then again Ammon; sometimes Jupiter, and often Pan. There are some likewise
that say, Serapis is the same, whom the Grecians call Pluto.

The Egyptians report that Isis found out many Medicines for the Recovery of
Men's Health, being very expert in the Art of Physic, and contrived many
Remedies for that purpose; and therefore even now when she is advanced to an
immortal State, she takes pleasure in curing Men's Bodies, and to those that
desire her assistance, in their sleep she clearly manifests her presence, and
affords ready and effectual Relief to them that stand in need of it.

For clear proof of all this, they say, they have not only the usual Fables of
the Greeks, but the undoubted Evidence of the fact to confirm it; and that
almost the whole World bears Testimony to this, by the Respect and Honor they
pay to this Goddess upon the account of her great Fame in curing of Diseases:
For in Sleep she is present with Persons, and applies Remedies to the Sick, and
wonderfully cures those that are her Votaries. That many that have been given
off by the Physicians as incurable, have been restored by her; and that many
that have been blind and lame, who have sought to her for help, have been
perfectly restored to their former Sight, and Soundness of Body.

They say she found out a Medicine that would raise the Dead to Life, with Orus
the last of the Gods, King of Egypt.
which she not only raised her Son Orus, that was killed by the Titans, and
found dead in the Water, but by that Application made him Immortal. This Orus
was the last of the Gods that reigned in, Egypt, after the (...).
Translation of Osiris his Father. This Orus, they say, by interpretation is
Apollo, who being taught by his Mother Isis, the Art of Physic and Divination,
was very beneficial to Mankind in these respects.

The Egyptian Priests in their Computation of Time do reckon above Three and
Twenty Thousand Years from the Reign of Sol, to the passage of Alexander the
Great into Asia.

In their fabulous Stories they say, that the most ancient of their God's
reigned Twelve Hundred Years, and the latter no less than Three Hundred Years
apiece. Whereas this great number of Years seems incredible, some have not
stuck to affirm that the motion of the Sun not being then known, the Year was
reckoned according to the Course of the Moon; and therefore the Solar Year,
consisting Lunary Years, 30 Days a Month.
then but of Three Hundred Days, some of them were sure to live Twelve Hundred
Lunary Years; and even at this Day now that there are Twelve Months in the
Year, many live a Hundred Solar Years.

The like they say of them that reigned Three Hundred Years: For in their Time
(they say) the Year was made up of So that there was Three Years in one Solar
Year.
Four Months, every Four applicable to each of the Three (...), Times or
Seasons.
Seasons of the Solar Year, that is to say, Spring, Summer and Winter; which is
the reason that some of the Grecians call Years, Horas, Seasons; and Historical
Annals, Horography.

The Egyptians moreover among their Fables report, that in the Time of Isis,
there were Men of vast Bodies, whom the Grecians call Giants, and whom they
place in their Temples in prodigious Shapes, who are whipped and scourged by them
that Sacrifice to Osiris. Some idly give forth, that they sprang from the
Earth, when at first it gave Being to Living Creatures. Others report, that
from many extraordinary things done by Men of strong Bodies, the Fables and
Stories of Giants arose. But in this most agree, that for the War they raised
against the Gods, Jupiter and Osiris, they were all destroyed.

It was a Law likewise (they say) in Egypt, against the Custom of all other
Nations, that Brothers and Sisters might Marry one with another, which
accordingly was prosperous and successful in the Marriage of Isis, who married
her Brother Osiris, and after his Death made a Vow never to marry any other
Man; and after she had revenged her Husbands Death upon his Murderers, she
governed the Kingdom, and reigned justly all her Days; and did good universally
to all sorts of People, obliging them with many and extraordinary Benefits and
Advantages. And for her sake it is a Custom among them, that they honor a
Queen, and allow her more Power and Authority than a King: And in their
Contracts of Marriage Authority is given to the Wife over her Husband, at which
time the Husbands promise to be obedient to their Wives in all things.
Obedience to Wives in Egypt.


Isis was Buried at Memphis, where at this day her Shrine is to be seen in the
Grove of Vulcan: Although some affirm, that these Gods lie Buried in the Isle
of Nile, at Philas, as is before said. Neither am I ignorant that some Writers
say, their Sepulchers are at Arabia; whence Dionysus is called Nysaeus; there
they say is a Pillar erected to each of the Deities with Inscriptions of Sacred
Letters upon them; in one of which, that belonging to Isis, are these Words --
I am Isis, Queen of all this Country, the Scholar of Mercury: What Laws I have
made, none ought to disannul. I am the Eldest Daughter of the Youngest God,
Saturn. I am the Wife and Sister of King Osiris. I am she that first found out
Corn for Man's use. I am the Mother of King Orus. I am she that arises in the
Dog Star. The City Bubastus was built in memory of me. Farewell, rejoice O Egypt
that was my Nurse, that brought me up.



Upon Osiris's Pillar are these that follow. My Father was Saturn, the Youngest
of all the God's. I am Osiris, that led an Army through all the Nations, as far
as to the Deserts of India, and in the Countries lying to the North, as far as
to the Head Springs of the River Ister; and to other Parts, as far as to the
Ocean. I am the Eldest Son of Saturn, a Branch of a famous noble Stock, Cousin
German to the Day. There Is not a Place in the World where I have not been; and
what I have discovered, I have imparted to all.



So much of the Inscriptions on the Pillars (they say) may be read, the rest is
defaced and worn out through length of Time. Thus therefore many disagree
concerning the Sepulchers of these Gods, because the Priests, who were secretly
instructed in the perfect Knowledge of these matters, would not suffer them to
be spread abroad, out of fear of those Punishments that such were liable unto,
who revealed the Secrets of the Gods.

They report, that afterward many Colonies out of Egypt were dispersed over
Colonies out of Egypt.
all parts of the World: That Belus (who was taken to be the Son of Neptune and
Lybra) led a Colony into the Province of Babylon, and fixing his Seat at the
River Euphrates, Consecrated Priests, and according to the custom of the
Egyptians, freed Babylonians.
them from all public Taxes and Impositions. These Priests the Babylonians
call Caldeans, who observe the Motions of the Stars, in imitation of the
Priests, Naturalists and Astrologers of Egypt. That Danaus likewise took from
thence another Colony, and planted them in Argos, the most ancient City almost
of all Greece. And that the People of Cholchos, in Pontus, and the Cholchians,
Jews. (...). Circumcision.
Jews lying between Arabia and Syria, were Colonies out of Egypt; and that
therefore it is an ancient Custom among these Nations, to Circumcise all their
Male Children after the Rites and Customs received from the Egyptians. That the
Athenians likewise are a Colony of the Athenians, The Saits of the City Sais
near one of the Mouths of Nile in Delta, in the lower Egypt.
Saits, which came out of Egypt, and are their Kindred, they endeavor to prove
by these Arguments; (That is to say) That they only of all the Greeks call the
City Astu, from Astu a City among those People of the Saits: And that for the
better Government of the Commonwealth, they divide their People into the same
Ranks and Degrees as they in Egypt do, to wit, into Three Orders; the first of
which are called The Nobility.
Eupatride, employed for the most part in studying the Liberal Arts and
Sciences, and are advanced to the highest Offices and Places of Preferment in
the State, as the Priests of Egypt are. The Second Order of Men are the Rustic
and Country People, who are to be Soldiers, and take up Arms upon all
occasions for the Defense of their Country, like to those who are called
Tillers of the Ground.
Husbandmen in Egypt, who furnish out Soldiers there. In the Third Rank are
reckoned Tradesmen and Artificers, who commonly bore all the necessary and
public Offices, which agrees exactly with the Orders and Usage among the
Egyptians.

They say likewise, that there were some of the Athenian Generals that came
Captains out of Egypt. Vid. Plutarch Theseus.
out of Egypt. For they affirm, that Peteos the Father of Menestheus, who was a
Captain in the Trojan War, was an Egyptian, and afterward was King of Athens.
That the Athenians had not Wit enough to find out the true reason why Two
Natures were ascribed to him; for every Man knows that he was called Half a
Beast, that is, half a Man, and half a Beast; and the true ground was, because
he was a Member of Two several Commonwealths, a Grecian and a Barbarian. The
Fourth King of Athens, time of the Exodus of the Children of Israel.
Erechtheus likewise, one of the Kings of Athens, they say was an Egyptian,
which they prove by these Arguments, viz. That whereas there was a great
Drought (as all confess) almost over all the World, This seems to be the Seven
Years Famine. Scarcity all over the World but in Egypt.
except Egypt only (because of the peculiar property of the Place) which
destroyed both Men and the Fruits of the Earth together, Erechtheus transported
a great quantity of Corn to Athens out of Egypt, because they and the Egyptians
were of the same Kindred; with which Kindness the Citizens were so affected,
that they advanced him to the Kingdom. After which, he instituted the
Festivals, and taught the Egyptian Rites and Mysteries of Ceres in Eleusina.

They say moreover, that it is reported upon good ground, that the Goddess her
self came into Attica at that time when Corn and other goodly Fruit in her Name
were transported thither; and that therefore it seemed as if she had again
renewed the Invention of Seed, as she did at the beginning. Likewise that the
Athenians themselves confess, that in the Reign of Erichtheus, when the Drought
had burnt up all the Fruits of the Earth, Ceres came thither and gave them
Corn. And that the Rites and Mysteries of this Goddess, were then begun in
Eleusina, and that the Sacrifices and ancient Ceremonies, both of the Athenians
and Egyptians, are one and the same: And that they took the original of their
Priests or Magistrates of Athens.
Eumolphide from the Egyptian Priests, and their Heralds from their Pastaphori,
Egyptian Priests, who carried the Coat of Venus, whose Name was Pastos.
Pastophori. Further, that only the Grecians swear by the Name of Isis, and
that in all their Manners and Customs, they are altogether like the Egyptians.
These and many other such like Arguments they bring to maintain this Colony,
more (I think) out of Ambition, because of the Glory and Renown of that City,
than any ground of Truth they have for their Assertion. To conclude, the
Egyptians say, that many Parts of the World were planted by their Ancestors, by
Colonies sent from thence, by means of the State and Grandeur of their Kings,
and the vast number of their People. Which Reports not being supported with
sufficient Arguments, nor attested by credible Authors, we think 'em not worthy
of any further Account. But thus much we thought fit to say of the Egyptian
Theology.

CHAP. III.
The Description of Egypt. Of the Lake of Serbon. The Nature of the River Nile.
The Cataracts; the Mouths of Nile. The Fruits of Egypt. The Beasts, Crocodile,
etc. Several Opinions concerning the Inundation of Nile.

AND now we shall endeavor to treat distinctly of the Country it self, and the
River Nile, and other things worthy of Remark. The Land of Egypt almost all
lies wholly to the South, and is naturally fortified, and the most pleasant
Country of any of the Kingdoms round about it. For on the West it is defended by
the Deserts of Libya, full of Wild Beasts, running out a vast way in Length;
where the Passage is both difficult, and extremely hazardous, through want of
Water, and other Provision. On the South it is environed with the Cataracts of
Nile, and the Mountains adjoining. For from the Country of the Troglodites, and
the higher Parts of Ethiopia, for the space of Five Thousand and Five Hundred
Furlongs, there is no passing either by Land or Water, without such a measure of
Provision as a King himself could only be furnished with. Those Parts toward
the East, are partly secured by the River, and partly surrounded by the Deserts
and by the Marshes called the Lake of Serbon, Plin. Na. Hist. lib. 5. c. 1^.
In his time but a small Lake, said to be once 50 Miles in compass.
Barathra. For there is a Lake between Coelo-Syria and Egypt, very narrow, but
exceeding deep, even to a Wonder, two Hundred Furlongs in length, called
Serbon: If any through Ignorance approach it, they are lost irrecoverably; for
the Channel being very narrow, like a Swadling-band, and compassed round with
vast heaps of Sand, great quantities of it are cast into the Lake, by the
continued Southern Winds, which so cover the Surface of the Water, and make it
to the view so like unto Dry Land, that it cannot possibly be distinguished;
and therefore many unacquainted with the nature of the Place, by missing their
way, have been there swallowed up, together with whole Armies. For the Sand
being trod upon, sinks down and gives way by degrees, and like a malicious
Cheat, deludes and decoys them that come upon it, till too late when they see
the mischief they are likely to fall into, they begin to support and help one
another, but without any possibility either of returning back, or escaping
certain Ruin; for sinking into the Gulf, they are neither able to swim (the Mud
preventing all motion of the Body) nor in a capacity to wade out, having
nothing firm to support them for that purpose; for Sand and Water being mixed
together, the Nature of both is thereby so changed, that there is neither
fording, nor passing over it by Boat. Being brought therefore to this pass,
without the least possibility of help to be afforded 'em, they go together with
the Sand to the Bottom of the Gulf, at the very Brink of the Bog; and so the
Place agreeable to its nature is called Barathrum, a deep Gulf.
Barathrum.

Having spoken of the Three Boundaries of Egypt, by which it is distinguished
from the rest of the Continent, we now proceed to the next.

The Fourth side is near surrounded with a The Medeterranean.
vast Sea, without any Harbors, being a very long and tedious Voyage, and very
difficult to find any place of Landing. For from Parcetonium in Africa, to
Joppa in Coelo-Syria, for the space almost of Five Thousand Furlongs. Eight
Hundred Miles.
Five Thousand Furlongs, there is not one safe Harbor to be found, except
Pharus. Then again all along the Coasts of Egypt, the Sea is full of Rocks and
Sands, not discernible by Mariners unacquainted with the Places; so that when
they look upon themselves as safe, and to have escaped the danger of the Seas,
and make with great joy to Land (wanting skill to steer aright) they are on a
sudden and unexpectedly shipwrackt. Others inconsiderately, because they cannot
see the Land, in regard it lies so low, are carried either into the Bogs, or to
the Deserts. And in this manner is Egypt naturally guarded on every side. It Is
of a long Form or Shape; that part that lies along to the Seacoast stretches
forth it self in length 320 Miles.
Two Thousand Furlongs; but to the South it runs almost 960 Miles.
Six Thousand Furlongs. It was anciently the most Populous Country in the
World, and at this day not inferior to any. It was formerly full of Famous
Towns, and had in it above Eighteen Thousand Cities, as is to be seen registered
in their Sacred Records: And in the time of Ptolemy Lagus, there were reckoned
above Three Thousand, which remain still to this day. Once they say in a
General Account taken of all the Inhabitants, they amounted to Seven Millions;
and at this time are no less than Three Millions of People. And therefore they
say that their Kings by the help of such a Multitude, left behind them in their
great and wonderful Works, eternal Monuments of their state and grandeur; which
we shall by and by distinctly treat of: But at present we shall speak of the
nature of Nile, and of the property of the Soil.

Nile runs from the South toward the North from Spring-heads hitherto unknown,
The nature of Nile.
for they are in the utmost Borders of Ethiopia, where by reason of the vast
Deserts, and Extremity of Heat, there is no coming. It Is the greatest of all
other Rivers, and runs through many Countries, and therefore has many large
Turnings and Windings, sometimes making its Way to the East and Arabia, and
then again to the West and Lybia. For it runs down from the Mountains of
Ethiopia, till it empties it self into the Sea, at least 1920 Miles.
Twelve Thousand Furlongs, accounting the several Windings it makes in the way.
In its Course it makes many Islands; amongst many others in Ethiopia, one
remarkable for its Greatness, called Meroes, About 3 Miles.
Two and Twenty Furlongs broad. But in the lower Places its swelling Waves grow
narrower, and the Current divides it self into Two Channels toward the
Continents that lie on either side the Island. One of the Currents bends
toward Africa, and is at length swallowed up in a Bed of Sand of an incredible
Depth: The other makes its Course toward Arabia, on the other side, and falls
into deep Guts and vast Bogs, inhabited round by diverse Nations; entering at
last into Egypt, it keeps no direct Course, but turns and winds here and there
in some Places Ten Furlongs in breadth, in others less, sometimes running
toward the East, then to the West, and sometimes back again to the South. For
Mountains stand on both sides the River, and take up a large Tract of Ground;
and the River forcing it self with great violence against strait and narrow
Precipices, the Water is driven back, and flows over the Neighboring Fields;
and after it has run a considerable way toward the South, it returns at length
to its natural Course. And though this River is thus remarkable above all
others, yet this is especially observable in it, that its Stream runs calm and
smooth, without any violent Surges, or tempestuous Waves, except at the
Cataracts; a Place of Cataracts.
Ten Furlongs being so called, running down in a Precipice, in a straight and
narrow Passage amongst steep Rocks; the whole is a rugged shelvy Gulf, where
there lie many great Stones, like huge Rocks. The Water dashing violently
against these Rocks, is beaten back, and rebounds the contrary way, by which
are made wonderful Whirlpools, and by the repeated Influx, the whole Place is
covered with Froth and Foam, to the no small amazement of the Beholders: For
the River there runs down with as quick and violent a Current, as an Arrow out
of a Bow. Sometimes it happens that (these Rocks, and the whole Gulf being
covered with the vast quantity of Waters of the Nile) some Ships driven with
contrary Winds are hurried down the Cataract, but there is no possibility of
Sailing up against it, the force of the Stream baffling all the Art of Man.
There are many Cataracts of this kind, but the greatest is that in the Confines
of Ethiopia and Egypt.

How the River Nile makes several Islands near Ethiopia (amongst which Meroe
Meroe.
is the chief) is before declared. In this Island is a Famous City of the same
Name, which Cambyses built, and called it after the Name of his Mother Meroe.
This Island is said to be of the shape of a Shield, and for Greatness exceeding
all the rest of the Islands in those Parts, being 3000 Furlongs is about 360
Miles.
Three Thousand Furlongs in Length, and a Note, Above he says it was but 22
Furlongs broad; now 1000, which is about 120 Miles.
Thousand in Breadth, having in it many Cities, of which Meroe is the Noblest.
The Island is surrounded toward the Coasts of Lybia with vast Heaps of Sand,
all along close to the River, and toward Arabia run along steep rocky
Mountains. It Is said there are in it Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron and Brass, a
great number of Ebony Trees, and all sorts of precious Stones. To conclude,
there are so many Islands made by this River, that it is scarce credible. For
besides those Islands in that part of Egypt called Delta, there are (they say)
Seven Hundred, some of which the Ethiopians inhabit, and sow with Millet;
others are so pestered with Serpents, (...), Cynocephales, Monkies that have
Heads like Dogs, are fierce and cruel, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. c. 54.
Baboons, and all Kinds of hurtful Beasts, that it is dangerous to come into
them.

The River Nile parting it self into several Channels in Egypt, makes that part
called Delta, so called from the shape resembling that d.
Greek Letter. The Two Sides of this Delta are fashioned by the Two extreme
Branches of the River; the Foot of this Letter is the Sea, where the Seven
Mouths of Nile disgorge themselves. The Mouths of Nile.
For there are Seven Places called Mouths, through which it empties itself into
the Ocean. The first lying to the most Eastward Channel, is at Pelusium, called
Now Damiata. 1. Pelusian. 2. Tanitian. 3. Mendesian. 4. Pathmetian, or Fatnian,
by Strabo. 5. Sebinnitian, 6. Bolbinitian. 7. Canopian.
Pelusaicum; the Second Taniticum; the Third Mendesium; the Fourth Phatniticum;
the Fifth Sebenyticum; the Sixth Bolbitinum, and the last Canopicum or
Herculeum, as some call it. There are some other Mouths made by Art, of which
it is not material to write. At every of the Mouths is a City built on either
side of the River, defended with strong Guards and Bridges on each Bank. From
Pelusaicum as far as to the Arabian Gulf, and the Red Sea, is a Canal cut out.
Necos the Son of Psameticus, was the First that began this Work, Attempt to cut
through the Isthmus to the Red Sea.
and after him Darius the Persian carried it on, but left it unfinished, being
told by some that if he cut it through the Isthmus, all Egypt would be drowned,
for that the Red Sea lay higher than Egypt. The last Attempt was made by
Ptolemy the Second, who cut a Sluice cross over the Isthmus in a more convenient
Place, which Ptolemy's River.
he opened when he had a mind to Sail down that way, and then presently after
shut up again; which Contrivance proved very useful and serviceable. The River
which runs through this Cut is called Ptolemy, after the Name of the Maker.
Where it falls into the The Red Sea.
Sea, there is a City built called Asinoe, now Azirus.
Arsinoe. Delta is of the shape of Sicily: Both sides are Seven Hundred and
Fifty Furlongs in length, and the Foot which lies along the Seacoast, is
Thirteen Hundred Furlongs.

This Island has in it many Dikes and Sluices cut by Art, and is the most sweet
and pleasantest part of Egypt; for being inricht and watered by the River, it
produces all sorts of Grain and other Fruits; and by the Yearly overflowing of
the River, the Face of the Ground is still continually renewed, and the
Inhabitants have an easy way to water it by means of a certain Engine, invented
by Archimedes the Syracusian, which from its Form is called A Snail's Shell.
Choclia. And whereas the Nile flows gently over it, it brings along with it
much Soil, which resting in low and hollow Grounds, makes very rich Marshes.
For in these Places grow Roots of several Tastes and Savours, and Fruits and
Herbs of a singular nature and quality, which are very useful both to the Poor,
and those that are Sick; for they do not only afford plentifully in every Place
things for Food, but all other things necessary and useful for the Life of Man.
There grows in great Plenty Lotus, of Lotus, Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 13. c.
17. Ciborium.
which the Egyptians make Bread for the nourishment of Man's Body. Here Is
likewise produced in plenty Ciborium, called the Egyptian Bean. Here are diverse
sorts of Trees, amongst which those called Persica, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 13.
c. 9. Sycamore, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 13. c. 7. Bates.
Persica, whose Fruit is of wonderful sweetness: This Plant was brought out of
Ethiopia by the Persians, when Cambyses conquered these Places. The Sycamore
(or Egyptian Fig Tree) some of them bear Mulberries, others a Fruit like unto
Figs, and bear all the Year long; so that a Man may satisfy his Hunger at any
time. After the falling of the Waters of the River, they gather the Fruits
called Bates, which for their sweet and delightful Taste are at Entertainments
served up at last Course as delicious Deserts.

The Egyptians make a Drink of Barley, called Zythus, for smell and sweetness
Zythus.
of Taste not much inferior to Wine. They make a Liquor like Oil for the
feeding of their Lamps, of the Juice of a Plant which they call Cici. There are
Cici.
many other Plants which grow in Egypt of admirable use, which would be too
tedious here to enumerate.

The River Nile breeds many Creatures of several Forms and Shapes, amongst The
Beasts of Nile. Crocodile, Vid. Plin. lib. 8. c. 25.
which, Two are especially remarkable, the Crocodile and the Horse as it is
called: Amongst these the Crocodile of the least Creature becomes the greatest;
for it lays an Egg much of the bigness of that of a Goose, and after the young
is hatched, it grows to the length of Sixteen Cubits, and lives to the Age of a
Man: It wants a Tongue, but has a Body naturally armed in a wonderful manner.
For its Skin is covered all over with Scales of an extraordinary hardness; many
sharp Teeth are ranged on both sides its Jaws, and Two of them are much bigger
than the rest. This Monster does not only devour Men, but other Creatures that
come near the River. His Bites are sharp and destructive, and with his Claws he
tears his Prey cruelly in Pieces, and what Wounds he makes, no Medicine or
Application can heal. The Egyptians formerly caught these Monsters with Hooks,
baited with raw Flesh; but of later times, they have used to take 'em with
strong Nets like Fishes; sometimes they strike them on the Head with Forks of
Iron, and so kill them. There Is an infinite Multitude of these Creatures in the
River and the Neighboring Pools, in regard they are great Breeders, and are
seldom killed. For the Crocodile is adored as a God by some of the Inhabitants;
and for Strangers to hunt and destroy them is to no purpose, for their Flesh is
not eatable. But Nature has provided relief against the increase of this
destructive Monster; for the Ichneumon, as it is called (of the Bigness of a
little Dog) running up and down Ichneumon;
near the Waterside, breaks all the Eggs laid by this Beast, wherever he
finds them; and that which is most to be admired, is, that he does this not for
Food or any other Advantage, but out of a natural Instinct for the mere Benefit
of Mankind.

The Beast called the Hippopotamus, or Seahorse, Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8.
c. 25.
River Horse, is Five Cubits long, Four Footed, and cloven Hoof'd like to an
Ox. He has Three Teeth or Tushes on either side his Jaw, appearing outward
larger than those of a Wild-Boar; as to his Ears, Tail and his Neighing, he is
like to a Horse. The whole Bulk of his Body is not much unlike an Elephant; his
Skin is firmer and thicker almost than any other Beast. He lives both on Land
and Water; in the Day time he lies at the Bottom of the River, and in the Night
time comes forth to Land, and feeds upon the Grass and Corn. If this Beast were
so fruitful as to bring forth Young every Year, he would undo the Husbandman,
and destroy a great part of the Corn of Egypt. He Is likewise by the help of
many Hands often caught, being struck with Instruments of Iron; for when he is
found, they hem him round with their Boats, and those on Board wound him with
forked Instruments of Iron, cast at him as so many Darts; and having strong
Ropes to the Irons, they fix in him, they let him go till he loses his Blood,
and so dies: His Flesh is extraordinary hard, and of ill digestion. There Is
nothing in his inner Parts that can be eaten, neither his Bowels, nor any other
of his Intrails.

Besides these before mentioned, Nile abounds with multitudes of all sorts of
Abundance of Fish in Nile.
Fish; not only such as are fresh taken to supply the Inhabitants at hand, but
an innumerable Number likewise which they salt up to send Abroad. To conclude,
no River in the World is more Beneficial and Serviceable to Mankind, than Nile.

Its Inundation begins at the Summer June 10th.
Solstice, and increases till the Sept. 10th.
Equinoctial in Autumn; during which time he brings in along with him new Soil,
and waters as well the Tilled and Improved Ground, as that which lies waste and
untilled, as long as it pleases the Husbandman; for the Water flowing gently
and by degrees, they easily divert its Course, by casting up small Banks of
Earth; and then by opening a Passage for it, as easily turn it over their Land
again, if they see it needful. It Is so very advantageous to the Inhabitants,
and done with so little pains, that most of the Country People turn in their
Cattle into the sowed Ground to eat, and tread down the Corn, and Four or Five
Months after they reap it. Some lightly run over the Surface of the Earth with
a Plow, after the Water is fallen, and gain a mighty Crop without any great
Cost or Pains: But Husbandry amongst all other Nations, is very laborious and
chargable, only the Egyptians gather their Fruits with little Cost or Labor.
That part of the Country likewise where Vines are planted after this watering
by the Nile, yields a most plentiful Vintage. The Fields that after the
Inundation are pastur'd by their Flocks, yield them this advantage, that the
Sheep Yean twice in a Year, and are shorn as often. This Increase of the Nile
is wonderful to Beholders, and altogether incredible to them that only hear the
Report; for when other Rivers about the Solstice fall and grow lower all Summer
long, this begins to increase, and continues to rise every day, till it comes
to that height that it overflows almost all Egypt; and on the contrary in the
same manner in the Winter Solstice, it falls by degrees till it wholly return
into its proper Channel. And in regard the Land of Egypt lies low and Champain,
the Towns, Cities and Country Villages that are built upon rising-ground (cast
up by Art) look like the Islands of the Cyclades: Many of the Cattle sometimes
are by the River intercepted, and so are drowned; but those that fly to the
higher Grounds are preserved. During the time of the Inundation, the Cattle are
kept in the Country Towns and small Cottages, where they have Food and Fodder
before laid up and prepared for them. But the common People now at liberty from
all Employments in the Field, indulge themselves in Idleness, feasting every
day, and giving themselves up to all sorts of Sports and Pleasures. Yet out of
fear of the Inundation, a Watch Tower is built in Now Grand Cairo.
Memphis, by the Kings of Egypt, where those that are employed to take care of
this concern, observing to what height the River rises, send Letters from one
City to another, acquainting them how many Cubits and Fingers the River rises,
and when it begins to decrease; and so the People coming to understand the Fall
of the Waters, are freed from their fears, and all presently have a foresight
what plenty of Corn they are like to have; and this Observation has been
Registered from time to time by the Egyptians for many Generations.

There are great Controversies concerning the Reasons of the overflowing of
Controversies about the overflowing of Nile.
Nile, and many both Philosophers and Historians have endeavored to declare
the Causes of it, which we shall distinctly relate, neither making too long a
Digression, nor omitting that which is so much banded and controverted. Of the
Increase and Spring-heads of Nile, and of its emptying of it self at length
into the Sea, and other properties peculiar to this River above all others,
though it be the greatest in the World, yet some Authors have not dared to say
the least thing: Some who have attempted to give their Reasons, have been very
wide from the Mark. For as for Hellanicus, Cadmus, Hecataeus, and such like
ancient Authors, they have told little but frothy Stories, and mere Fables.
Herodotus above all other Writers very industrious, and well acquainted with
General History, made it his Business to find out the Causes of these things,
but what he says, is notwithstanding very doubtful, and some things seem to be
repugnant and contradictory one to another. Thucydides and Xenophon, who have
the reputation of faithful Historians, never so much as touch upon the
Description of any Place in Egypt. But Ephorus and Theopompus, though they are
very earnest in this matter, yet they have not in the least discovered the
Truth.

But it was through Ignorance of the Places, and not through Negligence, that
they were all led into Error. For anciently none of the Grecians, till the time
of Ptolemy Philadelphus, ever went into Ethiopia, or so much as to the utmost
Bounds of Egypt. For those Places were never frequented by Travelers, they
were so hazardous, till that King marched with a Grecian Army into those Parts,
and so made a more perfect Discovery of the Country.

No Writer hitherto has pretended that he himself ever saw or heard of any one
else that affirmed he had seen the Spring-heads of Nile: All therefore
amounting to no more but Opinion and Conjecture, the Priests of Egypt affirm
that it comes from the Ocean, which flows round the whole Earth: But nothing
that they say is upon any solid grounds, and they resolve Doubts by things that
are more doubtful; and to prove what they say, they bring Arguments that have
need to be proved themselves.

But the Troglodites (otherways called Molgii) whom the scorching Heat forced
Bolgii.
to remove from the higher Parts into those lower Places, say, that there are
some Signs whence a Man may rationally conclude, that the River Nile rises from
Streams which run from many Fountains or Spring-heads, and meet at last in one
Channel, and therefore to be the most fruitful and richest River of any that is
known in the World.

The Inhabitants of the Isle of Meroe (who are most to be credited upon this
account) are far from inventing so much as any probable Arguments; and though
they live near to the Place in controversy, are so far from giving any certain
account of this matter, that they call Nile, Astapus, which in the Greek
Language, signifies Water that issues out of a Place of Darkness; so that they
give a Name to the River to denote their Ignorance of the Place whence it
springs: But that seems the truest Reason to me, that looks to be furthest from
Fiction and studied Contrivance. Yet I am not ignorant, that Herodotus who
bounds Lybia both on the East and West with this River, does ascribe the exact
Knowledge of it to the Africans, called Nasamones, and says, that Nile rises
from a certain Lake, and runs through a large Tract of Ground down all along
through Ethiopia: But neither are the Sayings of the Africans in this behalf
(as not altogether agreeable to Truth,) nor the affirmation of the Writer (who
proves not what he says) to be of absolute credit. But enough concerning the
Spring-heads and Course of Nile, let us now venture to treat of the Causes of
the Risings of this River.

Thales, who is reckoned one of the Seven Wise Men of Greece, is of Opinion
that the Etesean Winds that beat fiercely upon the Mouth of the River, give a
Yearly Winds.
check and stop to the Current, and so hinder it from falling into the Sea,
upon which the River swelling, and its Channel filled with Water, at length
overflows the Country of Egypt, which lies flat and low. Though this seem a
plausible Reason, yet it may be easily disproved. For if it were true what he
says, then all the Rivers which run into the Sea against the Etesean Winds
would overflow in like manner; which being never known in any other part of the
World, some other Reason and more agreeable to Truth must of necessity be
sought for. Anaxagoras the Philosopher ascribes the Cause to the melting of the
Snow in Ethiopia, whom the Poet Euripides (who was his Scholar) follows, saying
thus --

(...)
(...)
(...)
The pleasant Streams of th'River Nile forsakes,
Which flowing from the Negro's parched Land,
Swells big when the melting Snow to th'River takes,
Comes furling down and overflows the Strand.
Neither is it any hard Task to confute this Opinion, since it is apparent to
all, that by reason of the parching Heats, there is no Snow in Ethiopia at that
time of the Year. For in these Countries there is not the least Sign either of
Frost, Cold or any other effects of Winter, especially at the time of the
overflowing of Nile. And suppose there be abundance of Snow in the higher Parts
of Ethiopia, yet what is affirmed is certainly false: For every River that is
swelled with Snow, fumes up in cold Fogs, and thickens the Air; but about Nile,
only above all other Rivers, neither Mists gather, nor are there any cold
Breezes, nor is the Air gross and thick. Herodotus says, that Nile is such in
its own nature, as it seems to be in the time of its Increase; for that in Our
Winter.
Winter, when the Sun moves to the South, and runs its daily Course directly
over Africa, it exhales so much Water out of Nile, that it decreases against
Nature; and in Summer when the Sun returns to the North, the Rivers of Greece,
and the Rivers of all other Northern Countries fall and decrease; and therefore
that it is not so strange for Nile about Summer time to increase, and in Winter
to fall and grow lower. But to this it may be answered, that if the Sun exhale
so much moisture out of Nile in Winter time, it would do the like in other
Rivers in Africa, and so they must fall as well as Nile, which no where happens
throughout all Africa, and therefore this Author's Reason is frivolous; for the
Rivers of Greece rise not in the Winter, by reason of the remoteness of the
Sun, but by reason of the great Rains that fall at that time.

Democritus the Abderite says, that the Northern Countries, and not those
toward Democritus.
the South (as Anaxagoras and Euripides say) are subject to Snow; for that it is
clear and evident to every Body, that in the Northern Parts, Drifts and Heaps
of Snow lie congealed at the time of the Winter Solstice; but in Summer, the
Ice being melted by the heat of the Sun, the Land becomes very wet, which
causes many thick Mists to appear upon the Hills from the Vapors rising from
the Earth. These Vapors, he says, are driven about by the Etesean Winds, till
they fall upon the highest Mountains, which are (as he affirms in Ethiopia) and
by the violent impression they make upon the Tops of these Mountains, great
Storms and Showers of Rain are occasioned, which about the time of the Etesean
Winds cause the River to rise. But if any will diligently observe the time and
season of the Year when this falls out, he may easily answer this Argument; for
Nile begins to swell at the time of the Summer Solstice, when there are no
Etesean Winds; and after the Autumnal Equinox, when those Winds are past, it
falls again. Inasmuch therefore as certain Experience to the contrary, answers
all Arguments be they never so probable, the Man's diligence and ingenuity is to
be commended, but his Affirmations and Opinions by no means to be relied upon:
And I wave this, that it is evident that the Etesean Winds come as often from
the West, as from the North. For not only the North-East Winds called Aparctie,
but those of the North-West Plin. Not. His. lib. 2. c. 47.
called Argeste, go under the name of the Etesean Winds. And whereas he affirms
that the greatest Mountains are in Ethiopia, as it wants proof, so likewise all
grounds for credit and belief, as is evident from the thing itself.

Ephorus, who gives the last account of the thing, endeavors to ascertain the
Ephorus.
Reason, but seems not to find out the Truth.

The whole Land of Egypt (says he) is cast up from the River, and the Soil is
of a loose and spungy nature, and has in it many large Clifts and hollow
Places, wherein are abundance of Water, which in the Wintertime is frozen up,
and in the Summer issues out on every side, like Sweat from the Pores, which
occasions the River Nile to rise. This Writer does not only betray his own
Ignorance of the nature of Places in Egypt, that he never saw them himself, but
likewise that he never was rightly informed by any that was acquainted with
them. For if the overflowing of Nile should proceed from Egypt it self, it
could not flow above the Land of Egypt, where it passes through Rocks and
Mountainous Places. For as it takes its Course through Ethiopia for above the
space of Six Thousand Furlongs, it is at its full height before ever it reach
Egypt, and therefore if the River Nile lie lower than the Caverns of congested
Earth, those Clefts and hollow Places must be above, toward the Superficies of
the Earth, in which it is impossible so much Water should be contained. And if
the River lie higher than those spongy Caverns, it is not possible that from
hollow Places, much lower than the River, the Water should rise higher than the
River. Lastly, who can imagine that Waters issuing out of Holes and hollow Parts
of the Earth, should raise the River to such a height, as to overflow almost
all the Land of Egypt? But I let pass this vain Imagination of Casting up the
Soil, and lodging of Waters in the Bowels of the Earth, being so easily to be
confuted. The River Meander has cast up a great Tract of Land in Asia, whereas
at the time of the Rising of Nile, nothing of that kind in the least can be
seen.

In the same manner the River Archelous in Arcadia, and Cephesus in Beotia,
which runs down from Phocea, have cast up great quantities of Earth, by both
which the Writer is convicted of falsity: And indeed no Man is to expect any
certainty from Ephorus, who may be palpably discerned not to make it his
business in many things to declare the Truth. The Philosophers indeed in
Memphis have urged strong Reasons of the Increase of Nile, which are hard to be
confuted; and though they are improbable, yet many agree to them. For they
divide the Earth into Three Parts, one of which is that wherein we inhabit;
another quite contrary to these Places in the Seasons of the Year; the Third
lying between these Two, which they say is uninhabitable by reason of the
scorching heat of the Sun; and therefore if Nile should overflow in the
Wintertime, it would be clear and evident, that its Source would arise out of
our Zone, because then we have the most Rain: But on the contrary being that it
rises in Summer, it is very probable that in the Country opposite to us it is
Wintertime, where then there is much Rain, and that those Floods of Water are
brought down thence to us: And therefore that none can ever find out the
Head-Springs of Nile, because the River has its Course through the opposite
Zone; which is uninhabited. And the exceeding sweetness of the Water, they say,
is the Confirmation of this Opinion; for passing through the Torrid Zone, the
Water is boiled, and therefore this River is sweeter than any other in the
World; for Heat does naturally dulcorate Water. But this Reason is easily
refuted; for its plainly impossible that the River should rise to that height,
and come down to us from the opposite Zone; especially if it be granted that
the Earth is round. But if any yet shall be so obstinate as to affirm it is so
as the Philosophers have said, I must in short say it is against and contrary to
the Laws of Nature.

For being they hold Opinions that in the nature of the things can hardly be
disproved, and place an inhabitable part of the World between us and them that
are opposite to us; they conclude, that by this device, they have made it
impossible, and out of the reach of the Wit of Man to confute them. But it is
but just and equal, that those who affirm any thing positively, should prove
what they say, either by good Authority or strength of Reason. How comes it
about that only the River Nile should come down to us from the other opposite
Zone? Have we not other Rivers that this may be as well applied to? As to the
Causes alleged for the sweetness of the Water, they are absurd: For if the
Water be boiled with the parching Heat, and thereupon becomes sweet, it would
have no productive quality, either of Fish or other Kinds of Creatures and
Beasts; for all Water whose Nature is changed by Fire, is altogether incapable
to breed any living thing, and therefore being that the Nature of Nile
contradicts this decoction and boiling of the Water, we conclude that the
Causes alleged of its increase are false.

The Opinion of Oenopides of Chios is this: The Waters (say he) that are under
the Earth in Summertime, are cold, and warm in the Winter, as we see by
experience in deep Wells; for in a sharp Winter they are the least cold, but in
Summer they are the coldest of any other time; and therefore, says he, there is
good reason that Nile in the Winter should grow low and contracted, because the
Heat in the Bowels of the Earth exhales much of the Water, which cannot be
supplied, in regard no Rains fall in Egypt. But in Summertime, when the Waters
that lie deep in the Earth are no longer exhaled, then the Channel of the
River, according to the order of Nature, fills without any obstruction. But to
this it may be answered, that many Rivers in Africa, whose Mouths lie parallel
with this River, and run the like Course, yet overflow not like Nile. For on
the contrary they rise in Winter, and fall in Summer, which clearly evinces his
Falsity, who endeavors with a show of Reason to oppose the Truth. But to the
true cause, This is now found to be the true Reason at this day.
Agartharchides of Cnidus comes nearest. For he says, that in the Mountainous
parts of Ethiopia, there are Yearly continual Rains From the 10th of June to
the 10th of September.
from the Summer Solstice to the Equinox in Autumn, and therefore there is just
cause for Nile to be low in the Winter, which then flows only from its own
natural Spring-heads, and to overflow in Summer through the abundance of Rains.
And though none hitherto have been able to give a Reason of these Inundations,
yet he says his Opinion is not altogether to be rejected; for there are many
things that are contrary to the Rules of Nature, for which none are able to
give any substantial Reason. That which happens in some parts of Asia, he says,
gives some confirmation to his Opinion. For in the Confines of Scythia, near
Mount Caucasus, after the Winter is over, he affirms, that abundance of Snow
falls every Year for many Days together: And that in the Northern Parts of
India, at certain Times, there falls abundance of Hail, and of an incredible
Bigness: And that near the River Hydaspis; in Summertime, it rains
continually; and the same happens in Ethiopia for many Days together; and that
this disorder of the Air whirling about, occasions many Storms of Rain in
Places near adjoining; and that therefore it is no wonder if the Mountainous
Parts of Ethiopia, which lies much higher than Egypt, are soakt with continual
Rains, wherewith the River being filled, overflows; especially since the
natural Inhabitants of the Place affirm, that thus it is in their Country. And
though these things now related, are in their nature contrary to those in our
own Climates, yet we are not for that Reason to disbelieve them. For with us
the South Wind is cloudy and boisterous, whereas in Ethiopia it is calm and
clear; and that the North Winds in Europe are fierce and violent, but in those
Regions low and almost insensible.

But however (after all) though we could heap up variety of Arguments against
all these Authors concerning the Inundation of Nile, yet those which we have
before alleged shall suffice, lest we should transgress those Bounds of
Brevity which at the first we proposed to our selves. Having therefore divided
this Book, because of the Largeness of it, into Two Parts (having before
determined to keep within moderate Bounds) we shall now end the first part of
this Treatise, and continue in the other, those things that are further
remarkable in Egypt coherent with those before, beginning with the Actions of
the Kings of Egypt, and the ancient way of Living among the Egyptians.

THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST BOOK OF Diodorus the Sicilian.
CHAP. IV.
The First way of Living of the Egyptians: Gods and Demy-Gods their Reigns in
Egypt. The ancient Kings of Egypt, Menis, etc. Their several Works. Thebes
built by Busiris. The stately Sepulchers, Oblisks and Temples there. A
Description of Osimanduas's Sepulcher. Memphis built by Uchoreus. Meris's Lake.
Sesostris or Sesoosis his famous Expedition, and great Works.

THE First Book of Diodorus is divided into Two Parts by reason of the
Greatness of it; the First whereof is as a Preface to the whole Work, and in
which an Account is given of what the Egyptians say concerning the Beginning of
the World, of the first Creation of the Universe, and of those Gods that built
Cities in Egypt, and called them after their own Names; of the First Men, and
their ancient way of Living; of the Worship of the Gods, and the building of
Temples by the Egyptians. Moreover of the Situation of Egypt, and what strange
things are related of Nile; the Causes of its Inundation, and the various
Opinions of Philosophers and Historians concerning it: Wherein likewise is set
down the Confutations of the several Writers. In this we shall handle and go
through those matters that have a dependence upon the former.

After we have distinctly set forth the ancient way of Living among the
Egyptians, we shall then begin with their first Kings, and declare the Acts of
every one of them successively down to Amasis.

They say the Egyptians in ancient Times fed upon nothing but Roots and Herbs,
Their first way of Living.
and Colewort Leaves, which grew in the Fens and Bogs, having first tried the
Taste of them: But above all and most commonly, they fed upon the Herb called
Agrostis, because it was sweeter than any other, and was very nourishing to
Men's Bodies: And it is very certain, that the Cattle much covet it, and grow
very fat with it. At this Day therefore Superstitious Persons in memory of its
usefulness when they Sacrifice to the Gods, they worship them with their Hands
full of this Herb: For they conceive Man from the frame of his Nature and
(...), from his lightness.
frothy Constitution, to be a watery Creature, something resembling the Fenny
and Marish Ground, and that he has more need of moist than of dry Food. They
say the Egyptians afterward fell to another Course of Diet, and that was
eating of Fish, wherewith they were plentifully supplied by the River,
especially after the Inundation; when it was returned within its former Bounds:
And they eat likewise the Flesh of some Cattle, and clothed themselves with
their Skins. That they made their Houses of Reeds, of which there are some
Marks amongst the Shepherds of Egypt at this day, who care for no other Houses,
but such like, which they say, serves their turn well enough. Afterward in
process of time, after many Ages, they fell to those Fruits which were made
more apt and fit for Man's Food, amongst which was Bread made of Lotus, which
invention some attribute to Isis, others to Menas, one of the ancient Kings:
The Priests indeed do make Mercury.
Hermes the Inventer of all Arts and Sciences, but say, that their Kings found
out all things necessary for the Support of Men's lives; and therefore that
Kingdoms anciently were not inheritable, but given to such as had been most
useful and serviceable to the People, thereby either to induce their Kings to
be kind and beneficial to all their Subjects, or for that (as most agreeable to
the Truth) it was a Law registered in their Sacred Records commanding them so to
do.

At the first (as some of them, i. e. the Priests have fabulously reported) the
The Kings of Egypt.
Gods and Heroes.
Demy-Gods reigned in Egypt for the space almost of Eighteen Thousand Years,
the last of which was Orus, the Son of Isis. Afterward they say that Men
reigned there for the space of Fifteen Thousand Years, to the Hundred and
Eightieth Ant. Chapter 58.
Olympiad, at which time I my self came into Egypt in the Reign of Ptolemy
Dionysius the Younger, before Christ, 58, reigned with Cleopatra the Year
before Christ, 49.
Ptolemy, who took upon him the Name of Dionysius the Younger. Most of their
Kings were Natives of the Country. There were a few in the mean time that were
Ethiopians, Persians and Macedonians. Four of them that were Ethiopians,
reigned not in a continued Line, but at several times, for the space of Thirty
Six Years or thereabouts: From the time that Cambyses conquered the Nation, the
Persians reigned for the space of a Hundred Thirty Five Years, reckoning the
Defections of the Egyptians within the time occasioned by the intolerable
Cruelty of the Governors, and their Impiety against the Egyptian Gods. Last of
all, the Macedonians tul'd there for the space of Two Hundred Seventy Six
Years. The rest of the Princes were Egyptians, to the number of Four Hundred
and Seventy Men, and Five Women. The Egyptian Priests keep Registers in their
Temples of all their Kings successively from many Generations past; to what
Greatness and Majesty every one of them arrived; what were their particular
Tempers and Inclinations, and their Actions in their several times. To write
particularly of every one of them, as it would be tedious, so it would be
altogether superfluous, inas much as many things concerning them are
insignificant, and of no use; and therefore we have limited our selves to treat
only of those Matters that are most remarkable and worthy remembrance.

After the Gods (they say) Menas was the First King of Egypt. He taught the 1.
Menas the First King after the Gods.
People the Adoration of the Gods, and the manner of Divine Worship; how to
adorn their Beds and Tables with rich Clothes and Coverings, and was the first
that brought in a delicate and sumptuous way of Living.

Many Ages after, reigned Gnephachthus, Father of Bocchoris the Wise; who
leading 2. Gnephachthus.
an Army into Arabia, through many barren and desert Places, his Provision
failed, so that for the space of one day he was forced to take up with such
mean Food as the common People, among whom he happened then to be, could supply
him with, which he eat so heartily, and relisht with so much delight, as for
the future he forbad all Excess and Luxury, and cursed that King who first
brought in that Sumptuous and Luxurious way of Living; and this change and
alteration of Meat and Drink and Bedding was so delightful to him, that he
ordered the Curse before mentioned, to be entered in the Sacred Records in the
Temple of Jupiter at Thebes; which was the chief Reason why the Fame and
Reputation of Menas became to be clouded in future Generations.

They say, the Posterity of Gnephachthus, to the number of Fifty Two, reigned
for the space of Fourteen Hundred Years; in which time there is found nothing
worthy of Remark.

Afterward reigned Busiris, and Eight of his Posterity after him; the last of
3. Busiris.
which (of the same Name with the First) built that great City which the
Egyptians call The City of the Sun.
Heliopolis, the Greeks Thebes; it was in Circuit a About 20 Miles. Thebes
built.
Hundred and Forty Furlongs, adorned with stately public Buildings,
magnificent Temples, and rich Donations and Revenues to Admiration; and that he
built all the Private Houses, some Four, and others Five Stories high. And to
sum up all in a word, made it not only the most beautiful and stateliest City
of Egypt, but of all others in the World. The Fame therefore of the Riches and
Grandeur of this City was so noised abroad in every Place, that the Poet Homer
takes notice of it in these Words --

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
-- Nor Thebes so much renowned, Hom. Illiad. lib. 9.

Whose Courts with unexhausted Wealth abound,
Where through a Hundred Gates with Marble Arch,
To Battle Twenty Thousand Chariots march.
Although there are some that say it had not a Hundred Gates; but that there
were many large Porches to the Temples, whence the City was called
Hecatompylus, a Hundred Gates, for many Gates: Yet that it was certain they had
in it Twenty Thousand Chariots of War; for there were a Hundred Stables all
along the River from Memphis to Thebes toward Lybia, each of which were
capable to hold Two Hundred Horses, the Marks and Signs of which are visible at
this day: And we have it related, that not only this King, but the succeeding
Princes from time to time, made it their Business to beautify this City; for
that there was no City under the Sun so adorned with so many and stately
Monuments of Gold, Silver and Ivory, and multitudes of Colossus's and Obelisks,
cut out of one entire Stone. For there were there Four Temples built, for
Beauty and Greatness to be admired, the most ancient of which was in Circuit
Almost Two Miles.
Thirteen Furlongs, and Five and Forty Cubits high, and had a Wall Four and
Twenty Foot broad. The Ornaments of this Temple were suitable to its
Magnificence, both for Cost and Workmanship. The Fabric has continued to our
Time, but the Silver and the Gold, and Ornaments of Ivory and Precious Stones
were carried away by the Persians, when Cambyses burnt the Temples of Egypt. At
which time they say those Palaces at Persepolis and Susa, and other Parts of
Media (famous all the World over) were built by the Persians, who brought over
these rich Spoils into Asia, and sent for Workmen out of Egypt for that
purpose. And it is reported, that the Riches of Egypt were then so great, that
in the Rubbish and Cynders there were found and gathered up above Three Hundred
Talents of Gold, and of Silver no less than Two Thousand and Three Hundred.

There, they say, are the wonderful Sepulchers of the ancient Kings, which for
Sepulchers.
State and Grandeur far exceed all that Posterity can attain unto at this Day.
The Egyptian Priests say that in their Sacred Registers, there are entered
Seven and Forty of these Sepulchers; but in the Reign of Ptolemy Lagus, there
remained only Seventeen, many of which were ruined and destroyed when I my self
came into those Parts, which was in the Hundred and Eightieth Olympiad. And
these things are not only reported by the Egyptian Priests out of their Sacred
Records, but many of the Gr^cians who traveled to Thebes in the time of Ptolemy
Lagus, and writ Histories of Egypt (among whom was Hecateus) agree with what we
have related. Of the First Sepulchers (wherein they say the Women of Jupiter
were buried) that of King Osymanduas was Ten Furlongs in Circuit, at the
entrance of which they say, was a Portico of various colored Marble, in length
Two Hundred Foot, and in height 67 Foot. (...). 16 Cubits high; i. e. 44 Foot.
Five and Forty Cubits; thence going forward, you come into a foursquare Stone
Gallery, every Square being Four Hundred Foot, supported instead of Pillars,
with Beasts, each of one entire Stone, Sixteen Cubits high, carved after the
antique manner. The Roof was entirely of Stone, each Stone Twelve Foot
Eight Cubits broad, with an Azure Sky, bespangl'd with Stars. Passing out of
this Perystilion, you enter into another Portico much like the former, but more
curiously carved, and with more variety. At the Entrance stand Three Statues,
each of one entire Stone, the Workmanship of Memnon of Sienitas. One of these
made in a fitting posture, is the greatest in all Egypt, the measure of his
Foot exceeding Seven Cubits; the other Two much less than the former, reaching
but to his Knees, the one standing on the right, and the other on the left,
being his Daughter and Mother. This Piece is not only commendable for its
greatness, but admirable for its Cut and Workmanship, and the Excellency of the
Stone; in so great a Work there is not to be discerned the least Flaw, or any
other Blemish.

Upon it there is this Inscription -- I am Osimanduas King of Kings; if any
would know how great I am, and where I lie, let him excel me in any of my Works.



There was likewise at this Second Gate, another Statue of his Mother, by her
self, of one Stone, Twenty Cubits in height; upon her Head were placed Three
Crowns, to denote she was both the Daughter, Wife and Mother of a King. Near to
this Portico they say there was another Gallery or Piazzo, more remarkable than
the former, in which were various Sculptures representing his Wars with the
Bactrians, who had revolted from him, against whom (it is said) he marched with
Four Hundred Thousand Foot, and Twenty Thousand Horse; which Army he divided
into Four Bodies, and appointed his Sons Generals of the whole.

In the first Wall might be seen the King assaulting a Bulwark, environed with
the River, and fighting at the Head of his Men against some that make up
against him, assisted with a Lion in a terrible manner, which some affirm is to
be taken of a true and real Lion, which the King bred up tame, which went along
with him in all his Wars, and by his great strength ever put the Enemy to
flight. Others make this Construction of it, that the King being a Man of
extraordinary Courage and strength, he was willing to trumpet forth his own
praises, setting forth the Bravery of his own Spirit, by the representation of
a Lion.

In the Second Wall was carved the Captives dragged after the King, represented
without Hands and Privy Members; which was to signify that they were of
effeminate Spirits, and had no Hands when they came to fight.

The Third Wall represented all sorts of Sculptures and curious Images, in
which were set forth the King's sacrificing of Oxen, and his Triumphs in that
War.

In the middle of the Peristylion, open to the Air at the top, was reared an
Altar of shining Marble, of excellent Workmanship, and for largeness to be
admired.

In the last Wall were Two Statues, each of one entire Stone, Forty Foot.
Seven and Twenty Cubits high: Near to which Three Passages opened out of the
The Gallery or Cloister.
Peristylion, into a stately Room supported with Pillars like to a Theater for
Music; every side of the Theater was Two Hundred Foot Square. In this there
were many Statues of Wood, representing the Pleaders and Spectators looking
upon the Judges that gave Judgment. Of these there were Thirty carved upon one
of the Walls. In the middle sat the Chief Justice, with the Image of Truth
hanging about his Neck, with his Eyes closed, having many Books lying before
him: This signified that a Judge ought not to take any Bribes, but ought only
to regard the Truth and Merits of the Cause.

Next adjoining was a Gallery full of diverse Apartments, in which were all
sorts of Delicate Meats ready dressed up. Near hereunto is represented the King
himself, curiously carved and painted in glorious Colors, offering Gold and
Silver to the Gods; as much as he yearly received out of the Gold and Silver
Mines. The Sum was there inscribed (according to the Rate of Silver) to amount
unto Thirty Two Millions of Three Thousand and Two Hundred times Ten Thousand
of Mina's, every Mina 3l. 2s. 6d. That is, Ninety Six Millions of Pounds Sterling,
and Sixteen Thousand Millions of Crowns.
Minas. Next hereunto was the Sacred Library, whereon was inscribed these
Words, viz. The Cure of the Mind. Adjoining to this were the Images of all the
Gods of Egypt, to every one of whom the King was making Offerings peculiarly
belonging to each of them, that Osiris and all his Associates who were placed
at his Feet, might understand his Piety toward the Gods, and his Righteousness
toward Men. Next to the Library was a stately Room, wherein were Twenty Beds
to eat upon, richly adorned; in this House were the Images of Jupiter and Juno,
together with the Kings: And here it is supposed the King's Body lies interred:
Round the Room are many Apartments, wherein are to be seen in curious Painting,
all the Beasts that are accounted Sacred in Egypt. Thence are Ascents to the
top of the whole Monument of the Sepulcher, which being mounted, appears a
Border of Gold round the Tomb of Three Hundred Sixty Five Cubits in Compass,
and a Cubit thick; within the Division of every Cubit, were the several Days of
the Year engraven, with the natural rising and setting of the Stars and their
Significations, according to the Observations of the Egyptian Astrologers. This
Border, they say, was carried away by Cambyses and the Persians, when he
conquered Egypt. In this manner they describe the Sepulcher of King Osimanduas,
which seems far to exceed all others both for Magnificence and Curiosity of
Workmanship.

The Thebans boast they were the most ancient Philosophers and Astrologers of
Astrology of the Thebans.
any People of the World, and the first that found out exact Rules for the
improvement both of Philosophy and Astrology, the Situation of their Country
being such as gave them an Advantage above others, more clearly to discern the
rising and setting of the Stars: And that the Months and Years are best and
most properly ordered and disposed by them; for they measure their Days
according to the Motion of the Sun, and not of the Moon; and account Thirty
Days to every Month, and add Five Days and a quarter to every Twelve Months;
and by this means they complete the whole Year; but they add no intercalary
Months, nor substract any Days, as it is the Custom of many of the Greeks. But
these of Thebes seem most accurately to have observed the Eclipses of the Sun
and Moon, and from them do so manage their Prognostications, that they
certainly foretell every particular Event.

The Eighth of this King's Race, called after the Name of his Father Vchoreus,
Vchoreus, the Builder of Memphis.
built Memphis, the most Famous City of Egypt. For he chose the most convenient
Place for it in all the Country, where Nile divides it self into several
Branches, and makes that part of the Country called Delta, so named from the
shape of the Greek Letter d Delta.
Delta, which it resembles. The City being thus conveniently situated at the
Head of the River, commands all the Shipping that sail up it. He built it in
Circuit a Hundred and Fifty Furlongs, and made it exceeding strong and
commodious in this manner: For Nile flowing round the City, and at the time of
its inundation covering all round on the South Side, he casts up a mighty
Rampart of Earth, both for a Defense to the City against the raging of the
River, and as a Bulwark against an Enemy at Land; on every other side likewise
he dug a broad and deep Trench, which received the violent Surges of the River,
and filled every Place round the Rampart with Water, which fortified the City
to Admiration.

This Place was so commodiously pitched upon by the Builder, that most of the
Kings after him preferred it before Thebes, and removed the Court thence to this
Place: From that time therefore the Magnificence of Thebes began to decrease,
and Memphis to increase to the Times of Alexander King of Macedon, who built a
City called after his own Name, near the Sea, and planted it with Inhabitants,
Alexandria.
which all the succeeding Kings of Egypt still made it their business to
enlarge: For some so beautified it with Royal Palaces, some with Ports and
Arsenals, and others with magnificent Buildings and rich Donations, that it is
judged by most to be Second, if not the first City of the whole World.

But we shall treat of this particularly in its proper Time and Place. But the
Builder of Memphis after he had finished the Rampart and Trench, built Palaces
not inferior to others, built elsewhere; yet much below the state and grandeur
of the former Kings. For the Inhabitants of this Country little value the short
time of this present Life; but put an high esteem upon the Name and Reputation
of a Virtuous Life after Death; and they call the Houses of the Living, Inns,
because they stay in them but a little while; but the Sepulchers of the Dead
they call Everlasting Habitations, because they abide in the Graves to infinite
Generations. Therefore they are not very curious in the building of their
Houses; but in beautifying their Sepulchers they leave nothing undone that can
be thought of.

Some have thought that the City of which we have but just now spoken, was The
Name of Egypt.
so called from the Daughter of the Founder, and tell a Fabulous Story, that
the River Nile, in the shape of a Bull fell in love with her, and begat
Egyptus, famous among the Inhabitants for his admirable Virtue, from whom the
whole Country was called Egypt; for coming to the Crown by Descent, he was
exceeding kind to his Subjects, just and diligent in all his Affairs, and
therefore was judged justly to merit Honor and Esteem from all, and for his
gracious Disposition generally applauded.

After the Death of this King, and Twelve Descents, Miris came to the Crown of
Egypt, and built a Portico in Memphis toward Miris or Maris his Lake. See
Herodotus, Euterpe, lib. 2. c. 149.
the North, more stately and magnificent than any of the rest. And a little
above the City, he cut a Dyke for a Pond, bringing it down in length from the
City Three Hundred and Five and Twenty Ten Schaenes, every Schaene 32 Furlongs,
is about 48 Miles, but some say a Schaene is 60 Furlongs, then it is 90 Miles
and upwards.
Furlongs, whose use was admirable, and the Greatness of the Work incredible.
They say it was in Circuit Three Thousand and Six Hundred Furlongs; and in many
Places Three Hundred Foot in depth. Who is he therefore that considers the
greatness of this Work, that may not justly ask the Question, How many Ten
Thousand Men were employed, and how many Years were spent in finishing it?
Considering the Benefit and Advantage (by this great Work) brought to the
Government, none ever sufficiently could extol it, according to what the Truth
of the thing deserved. For being that Nile never kept to a certain and constant
height in its Inundation, and the fruitfulness of the Country ever depended
upon its just proportion, he dug this Lake to receive such Water as was
superfluous, that it might neither immoderately overflow the Land, and so cause
Fenns and standing Ponds, nor by flowing too little, prejudice the Fruits of
the Earth for want of Water. To this end he cut a Trench all along from the
River into the Lake, Fourscore Furlongs in length, and (...) Three Plethras.
Three Hundred Foot broad; into this he let the Water of the River sometimes
run, and at other times diverted it, and turned it over the Fields of the
Husbandmen, at seasonable times, by means of Sluices which he sometimes opened,
and at other times shut up, not without great labor and cost; for these Sluices
could not be opened or shut at a less Charge than Fifty Talents. This Lake
continues to the Benefit of the Egyptians for these purposes to our very Days,
and is Now in being, Eight Leagues in compass only.
called the Lake of Myris or Meris to this Day.

The King left a place in the middle of the Lake, where he built a Sepulcher
and Two Pyramids, one for himself, and another for his Queen, a Furlong in
Height; upon the Top of which he placed Two Marble Statues seated in a Throne,
designing by these Monuments to perpetuate the Fame and Glory of his Name to
all succeeding Generations. The Revenue arising from the Fish taken in this
Lake, he gave to his Wife to buy her Sweet Ointments, and other fine things.
Pins, which amounted to a Talent of Silver every Day. For there were in it Two
and Twenty sorts of Fish, and so vast a number were taken, that those who were
employed continually to salt them up (though they were multitudes of People)
could hardly perform it. And these are the things which the Egyptians relate of
Myris.

Seven Descents after (they say) Sesostris in the time the Israelites were in
Egypt. Sir Walter Rawl.
Sesoosis reigned, who excelled all his Ancestors in great and famous Actions.
But not only the Greek Writers differ among themselves about this King, but
likewise the Egyptian Priests and Bards. Vsh. Ann. says he was the Son of
Amenophis, that was drowned in the Red Sea, in the Year of the World 2513, and
this Expedition was the Nine First Years of the Children of Israel's being in
the Wilderness, Vsh. Ann. p. 20.
Poets relate various and different Stories concerning him: We shall relate
such as are most probable and agreeable to those Signs and Marks that are yet
remaining in Egypt to confirm them. After his Birth his Father performed a
noble Act, and becoming a King; he caused all throughout Egypt, that were born
the same Day with his Son, to be brought together; and together with his Son to
be bred up with the same Education, and instructed in the same Discipline and
Exercises, conceiving that by being thus familiarly brought up together, and
conversing one with another, they would be always most loving and faithful
Friends, and the best Fellow Soldiers in all the Wars. Providing therefore
every thing for the purpose, he caused the Boys to be exercised daily in the
Schools with hard and difficult Labors; as that none should eat till he had
run a 27 Miles.
Hundred and Fourscore Furlongs: And by this means when they came to be at Men's
Estate, they were fit either to be Commanders, or undertake any brave or noble
Action, both in respect of the vigor and strength of their Bodies, and the
excellent Endowments of their Minds.

Sesostris in the first Place being sent with an Army into Arabia, by his
Father, (with whom went his Companions that were bred up with him) toiled and
troubled himself with the hunting and killing of Wild Beasts; and then having
at last overmaster'd all his Fatigues and wants of Water and Provision, he
conquered all that barbarous Nation, which was never before that time subdued.
Afterward being sent into the Western Parts, he conquered the greatest part of
Lybia, being as yet but a Youth. Coming to the Crown after the Death of his
Father, encouraged by his former Successes, he designed to subdue and conquer
the whole World. Some report that he was stirred up by his Daughter Athyrte to
undertake the gaining of the Empire of the World; for being a Woman of an
extraordinary Understanding, she made it out to her Father, that the Conquest
was easy: Others encouraged him by their Divinations, foretelling his
Successes by the Intrals of the Sacrifices, by their Dreams in the Temples, and
Prodigies seen in the Air.

There are some also that write that when Sesoosis was born, Vulcan appeared to
his Father in his Sleep, and told him that the Child then born should be
Conqueror of the Universe; and that that was the reason why his Father
assembled all of the like Age, and bred them up together with his Son, to make
way for him with more ease to rise to that height of Imperial Dignity: And that
when he was grown to Man's Estate, fully believing what the God had foretold, he
undertook at length this Expedition.

To this purpose he first made it his chief Concern, to gain the love and good
will of all the Egyptians, judging it necessary in order to effect what he
designed, so far to engage his Soldiers, as that they should willingly and
readily venture, nay lose their Lives for their Generals, and that those whom
he should leave behind him, should not contrive or hatch any Rebellion in his
Absence: To this end therefore he obliged every one to the utmost of his power,
working upon some by Money, others by giving them Lands, and many by free
Pardons, and upon all by fair Words, and affable and courteous Behavior. He
pardoned those that were condemned for High Treason, and freed all that were in
Prison for Debt, by paying what they owed, of whom there was a vast Multitude
in the Goals.

He divided the whole Country into Thirty Six Parts, which the Egyptians call
Provinces.
Nomi; over every one of which he appointed a Nomarchus.
Governor, who should take care of the King's Revenue, and manage all other
Affairs relating to their several and respective Provinces. Out of these he
chose the strongest and ablest Men, and raised an Army answerable to the
greatness of his Design, to the number of Six Hundred Thousand Foot, and Twenty
Four Thousand Horse, and Seven and Twenty Thousand Chariots of War: And over
all the several Regiments and Battalions, he made those that had been brought
up with him Commanders, being such as had been used to Martial Exercises, and
from their Childhood hot and zealous after that which was brave and virtuous,
and that were knit together as Brothers in Love and Affection, both to the King
and one to another; the number of whom were above Seventeen Hundred.

Upon these Companions of his, he bestowed large Estates in Lands, in the
richest Parts of Egypt, that they might not be in the least want of any thing,
reserving only their Attendance upon him in the Wars.

Having therefore rendezvouz'd his Army, he marched first against the
Ethiopians, Sesostris's Expedition.
inhabiting the South, and having conquered them, forced them to pay him
Tribute of Ebony, Gold, and Elephant's Teeth.

Then he sent forth a Navy of Four Hundred Sail into the Red Sea, and was the
first Egyptian that built long Ships. By the help of this Fleet, he gained all
the Islands in this Sea, and subdued the bordering Nations as far as to India.
But he himself marching forward with his Land-Army, conquered all Asia: For he
not only invaded those Nations which Alexander the Macedonian afterward
subdued, but likewise those which he never set foot upon. For he both passed
over the River Ganges, and likewise pierced through all India to the main
Ocean. Then he subdued the Scythians as far as to the River Tanais, which
divides Europe from Asia; where they say he left some of his Egyptians at the
Lake Meotis, and gave Original to the Nations of Colchis; and to prove that
they were originally Egyptians, they bring this Argument, that they are
circumcised after the manner of the Egyptians, which Custom continued in this
Colony as it did amongst the Jews. In the same manner he brought into his
Subjection all the rest of Asia, and most of the Islands of the Cyclades.
Thence passing over into Europe, he was in danger of losing his whole Army,
through the difficulty of the Passages, and want of Provision. And therefore
putting a stop to his Expedition in Thrace, up and down in all his Conquests,
he erected Pillars, whereon were inscribed in Egyptian Letters, called
Hieroglifics, these Words -- Sesoosis, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
subdued this Country by his Arms.



Among those Nations that were stout and warlike, he carved upon those Pillars
the Privy Members of a Man: Amongst them that were cowardly and fainthearted,
the secret Parts of a Woman; conceiving that the chief and principal Member of
a Man would be a clear Evidence to Posterity of the Courage of every one of
them. In some Places he set up his own Statue, carved in Stone (armed with a
Bow and a Lance) above Four Cubits and Four Hands in height, of which stature
he himself was.

Having now spent Nine Years in this Expedition, (carrying himself courteously
and familiarly toward all his Subjects in the mean time) he ordered the
Nations he had conquered, to bring their Presents and Tributes every Year into
Egypt, every one proportionable to their several Abilities: And he himself with
the Captives and the rest of the Spoils (of which there was a vast quantity)
returned into Egypt, far surpassing all the Kings before him in the greatness
of his Actions and Achievements. He adorned all the Temples of Egypt with rich
Presents, and the Spoils of his Enemies. Then he rewarded his Soldiers that
had served him in the War, every one according to their Desert. It Is most
certain that the Army not only returned loaded with Riches, and received the
Glory and Honor of their approved Valor, but the whole Country of Egypt reapt
many Advantages by this Expedition.

Sesoosis having now disbanded his Army, gave leave to his Companions in Arms,
and Fellow Victors, to take their ease, and enjoy the Fruits of their Conquest.
But he himself fired with an earnest desire of Glory, and ambitious to leave
behind him eternal Monuments of his Memory, made many fair and stately Works,
admirable both for their Cost and Contrivance, by which he both advanced his
own Immortal Praise, and procured unspeakable Advantages to the Egyptians, with
perfect Peace and Security for the time to come. For beginning first with what
concerned the Gods, he built a Temple in all the Cities of Egypt, to that God
whom every particular place most adored; and he employed none of the Egyptians
in his Works, but finished all by the labors of the Captives; and therefore he
caused an Inscription to be made upon all the Temples thus, None of the Natives
were put to labor here. It Is reported that some of the Babylonian Captives,
because they were not able to bear the fatigue of the Work, rebelled against
the King; and having possessed themselves of a Fort near the River, they took
up Arms against the Egyptians, and wasted the Country thereabouts: but at
length having got a Pardon, they chose a Place for their Habitation, and called
it after the Name of that in their own Country, Babylon. Upon the like occasion
they say that Troy situated near the River Nile, was so called: For Menelaus,
when he returned from Ilium with many Prisoners, arrived in Egypt, where the
Trojans deserting the King, seized upon a certain strong place, and took up
Arms against the Greeks, till they had gained their Liberty, and then built a
famous City after the name of their own. But I am not ignorant how Ctesias the
Cretian gives a far different account of these Cities, when he says, that some
of those who came in former times with Semiramis into Egypt, called the Cities
which they built, after the Names of those in their own Country. But it is no
easy matter to know the certain truth of these things: Yet it is necessary to
observe the different Opinions concerning them, that the Judicious Reader may
have an occasion to inquire, in order to pick out the real Truth.

Sesoosis moreover raised many Mounts and Banks of Earth, to which he removed
all the Cities that lay low and in the plain, that both Man and Beast might be
safe and secure at the time of the Inundation of the River. He cut likewise
many deep Dykes from the River, all along as far as from Memphis to the Sea,
for the ready and quick conveying of Corn and other Provision and Merchandise
by short Cuts thither, both for the support of Trade and Commerce and
maintenance of Peace and Plenty all over the Country: And that which was of
greatest moment and concern of all, was, that he fortified all Parts of the
Country against Incursions of Enemies, and made it difficult of access; whereas
before the greatest part of Egypt lay open and exposed either for Chariots or
Horsemen to enter. But now by reason of the multitude of Canals drawn all along
from the River, the Entrance was very difficult, and the Country not so easily
to be invaded. He defended likewise the East side of Egypt against the
Irruptions of the Syrians and Arabians, with a Wall drawn from Ielusium through
the Deserts, as far as to Heliopolis, for the space of a Thousand and Five
Hundred Furlongs. He caused likewise a Ship to be made of Cedar, Two Hundred
and Fourscore Cubits in length, gilded over with Gold on the outside, and with
Silver within; and this he dedicated to the God that was most adored by the
Thebans. He erected likewise Two Obelisks of Polished Marble, a Hundred and
Twenty Cubits high, on which were inscribed a Description of the large Extent
of his Empire, the great value of his Revenue, and the number of the Nations by
him conquered. He placed likewise at Memphis, in the Temple of Vulcan, his and
his Wives Statues, each of one entire Stone, Thirty Cubits in height, and those
of his Sons, Twenty Cubits high, upon this occasion. After his return from his
great Expedition into Egypt, being at Pelusium, his Brother at a Feast having
invited him, together with his Wife and Children, plotted against his Life; for
being all overcome by Wine, and gone to rest, he caused a great quantity of dry
Reeds (long before prepared for the purpose) to be placed round the King's
Pavilion in the Night, and set them all on Fire; upon which the Flame suddenly
mounted aloft; and little assistance the King had either from his Servants or
Lifeguard, who were all still overloaden with Wine: Upon which Sesostris with
his Hands lift up to Heaven, calling upon the Gods for help for his Wife and
Children, rusht through the Flames and escaped; and so being thus unexpectedly
preserved, he made Oblations as to other of the Gods (as is before said) so
especially to Vulcan, as he by whose Favor he was so remarkably delivered.

Although Sesostris was eminent in many great and worthy Actions, yet the most
stately and magnificent of all, was that relating to the Princes in his
Progresses. For those Kings of the conquered Nations, who through his Favor
still held their Kingdoms, and such as had received large Principalities of his
free Gift and Donation, came with their Presents and Tributes into Egypt, at
the times appointed, whom he received with all the Marks of Honor and Respect;
save that when he went into the Temple or the City, his Custom was to cause the
Horses to be unharnest out of his Chariot, and in their Room Four Kings, and
other Princes to draw it; hereby thinking to make it evident to all, that there
was none comparable to him for Valor, who had conquered the most potent and
famous Princes in the World. This King seems to have excelled all others that
ever were eminent for Power and Greatness, both as to his Warlike
Achievements, the number of his Gifts and Oblations, and his wonderful Works
in Egypt.

After he had reigned Three and Thirty Years, he fell blind, and wilfully put
an end to his own Life; for which he was admired not only by Priests, but by
all Sesostris his Death.
the rest of the Egyptians; for that as he had before manifested the Greatness
of his Mind by his Actions, so now his End was agreeable (by a voluntary Death)
to the Glory of his Life.

The Fame and Renown of this King continued so fresh down to Posterity, that
many Ages after, when Egypt was conquered by the Persians, and Darius the
Father of Xerxes would set up his Statue at Memphis above that of Sesoosis, the
Chief Priest in the debating of the matter in the Conclave boldly spoke against
it, declaring that Darius had not yet exceeded the noble Acts of Sesoosis. The
King was so far from resenting this, that on the contrary he was so pleased and
taken with this freedom of Speech, that he said he would endeavor (if he lived
as long as the other did) to be nothing inferior to him; and wished them to
compare things done proportionable to the time, for that this was the justest
examination and trial of Valor. And thus much shall suffice to be said of
Sesoosis.

CHAP V.
The Acts of Sesostris the Second. Of Ammosis, Actisanes, Mendes, Proteus or
Cetes, Remphis, Chemmis (the great Pyramids built by him) Cephres, Mycerinus,
Bocchoris, Sabach. The Reign of Twelve Kings in Egypt. Psammetichus Saites, one
of the Kings, gained the whole; Two Hundred Thousand of his Army forsook him,
and settle themselves in Ethiopia. Apries succeeds long after. Amasis rebels,
and next succeeds; and Apries is strangled by the People. Amasis the last King,
to the time of the Conquest of Egypt by Cambyses.

THE Son of Sesostris succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, and took upon him
Sesostris the Second, called Phero, by Herodotus.
the same Name, yet performed nothing remarkable by his Arms; but the
Affliction and Misery that befell him was observable; for he became blind, as
his Father did before him, deriving the Malady either from his Father in his
Birth, or as a Judgment upon him for his Impiety against the River, against
which (as its fabulously reported) he threw his Javelin; whereupon falling
under this Misfortune, he was forced to apply himself for help to the Gods,
whom he sought to appease with many Offerings and Sacrifices for a long time
together, yet could find no Relief, till at the end of Ten Years he was
directed by the Oracle to go and worship the God of Heliopolis, and wash his
Face in the Urin of a Woman that Herodot. lib. 2. c. 11.
never had known any other Man besides her own Husband. Hereupon he began with
his own Wife, and made trial of many others, but found none honest except a
Gardener's Wife, whom he afterward married when he was recovered. All the
Adulteresses he caused to be burnt in a little Village, which from this
Execution the Egyptians called the Holy Field, to testify his Gratitude to the
God of Heliopolis for this great Benefit. At the Command of the Oracle he
erected Two Obelisks, each of one entire Stone, Eight Cubits in breadth, and a
hundred in height, and dedicated them to the Deity.

After this Sesostris the Second, were many Successions of Kings in Egypt, of
whom there is nothing worth remark to be found. But many Ages after, Ammosis
came Ammosis.
to the Crown, who carried it Tyrannically toward his Subjects. For he put
many to Death against all Law and Justice, and as many he stripped of all they
had, and turned them out of their Estates, and carried himself haughtily and
proudly in every thing toward all Persons he had to deal with. This the poor
oppressed People endured for a time, while they had no power to resist those
that overpowered them. But as soon as Actisanes King of Ethiopia invaded him
(having now an opportunity to discover their Hatred, and to revenge themselves)
most of his Subjects revolted from him, so that he was easily conquered, and
Egypt became subject to the Kings of Ethiopia.

Actisanes bore his Prosperity with great Moderation, and carried himself
kindly Actisanes.
and obligingly toward all his Subjects. Against Robbers he contrived a
notable Device, neither putting them that were guilty to Death, nor wholly
acquitting or discharging them from Punishment. For he caused all that were
guilty, to be brought together from all parts of the Country, and after a just
and strict inquiry, and certain Knowledge of their Guilt, he ordered all their
Noses to be cut off, and banished them into the utmost parts of the Desert; and
built a City for them, called from the cutting off of the Noses of the
Inhabitants, Rhinocorura, which is situated in the Confines of Egypt and Syria,
in a barren Place, destitute of all manner of Provision. All the Country round
about is full of Salt and brackish Ponds, and the Wells within the Walls,
afford but very little Water, and that stinking and very bitter. And he sent
them to this Place on purpose that they might not for the future do any more
hurt, nor lie lurking and unknown among other Men. But being banished to such a
barren Place, void almost of all things necessary for the support of Man's Life
(Men naturally Contriving all manner of Arts to prevent starving) they wittily
found out a way to supply their Wants. For they cut up out of the Neighboring
Fields, Reeds, and flit them in several pieces, and made long Nets of them, and
placed them several Furlongs all along upon the Shore, with which they caught
the Quails (which came flying over Sea Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 10. c. 23.
the Description of these Quails.
in great Flocks) and by that means sufficiently provided for themselves.

After this King's Death the Egyptians recovered their Liberty, and set up a
King of their own Nation to rule over them, Mendes.
Mendes (whom some call Marus) who never undertook any Warlike Design, but made
a Sepulcher for himself called a Labyrinth, not to be admired so much for Its
greatness, as it was unimitable for its Workmanship. For he that went in, could
not easily come out again, without a very skilful Guide. Some say that Dedalus,
who came into Egypt, admired the Curiosity of this Work, and made a Labyrinth
for Minos King of Creet, like to this in Egypt, in which they fabulously relate
the Minotaur was kept. But that in Creet was either ruined by some of their
Kings, or came to nothing through length of Time, but that in Egypt continued
whole and entire to our Days.

After the Death of this Mendes, and Five Generations spent (during which time
there was an Interregnum) the Egyptians chose one Cetes, of an ignoble
Extraction, Proteus, Cetes.
to be their King, whom the Grecians call Proteus; this fell out in the time of
the Trojan War. This Prince, they say, was a To have knowledge of the Winds.
Magician, and could transform himself sometimes into the shape of a Beast,
other times into a Tree, or Appearance of Fire, or any other Form and Shape
whatsoever. And this agrees with the Account the Priests of Egypt give of him;
from his daily Converse with the Astrologers, they say, he learnt this Art. The
Greeks raised this Story of Transformation, from a Custom amongst the Kings;
for the Egyptian Princes used to wear upon their Heads (as Badges of their
Royal Authority) the shapes of Lions, Bulls and Dragons; and sometimes to fix
upon their Heads Sprouts of Trees, Fire and strong Perfumes of Frankincense,
and other sweet Odours. And with these they both adorned themselves, and struck
a Terror and Superstitious Awe into the Hearts of their Subjects at one and the
same time.

After the Death of Proteus, his Son Remphis succeeded him, who spent all his
Remphis.
Time in filling his Coffers, and heaping up Wealth. The poorness of his
Spirit, and his sordid Covetousness was such, that they would not suffer him to
part with any thing, either for the worship of the Gods, or the good of
Mankind; and therefore more like a good Steward than a King, instead of a Name
for Valor, and noble Acts, he left vast Heaps of Treasure behind him, greater
than any of the Kings that ever were before him: For it is said he had a
Treasure of Four Hundred Thousand Talents of Gold and Silver.

After this King's Death, for Seven Generations together, there reigned
successively a Company of Kings, who gave themselves up to Sloth and Idleness,
and did nothing but wallow in Pleasures and Luxury; and therefore there is no
Record of any great Work, or other thing worthy to be remembered that ever any
of them did, except Nile, who called the River after his own Name, which was
before called Egyptus. For being that he cut many Canals and Dikes in
convenient Places, and used his utmost endeavor to make the River more useful
and serviceable, it was therefore called Nile.

(...) Chembes.
Chemmis the Eighth King from Remphis, was of Memphis, and reigned Fifty Years.
He built the greatest of the Three Pyramids, which were accounted amongst the
Seven Wonders of the World. They stand toward Lybia About 20 Miles. Pyramids.
Hundred and Twenty Furlongs from Memphis, and Five and Forty from Nile. The
Greatness of these Works, and the excessive Labor of the Workmen seen in them,
do even strike the Beholders with Admiration and Astonishment. The greatest
being Apiece, took up on every Square Seven Plethras.
Seven Hundred Foot of Ground in the Basis, and above Six Hundred Foot in
height, spiring up narrower by little and little, till it come up to the Point,
the Top of which was Three Yards.
Six Cubits Square. It Is built of solid Marble throughout, of rough Work, but
of perpetual Duration: For though it be now a Thousand Years since it was built
(some say above Three Thousand and Four Hundred) yet the Stones are as firmly
joynted, and the whole Building as entire and without the least decay, as they
were at the first laying and Erection. The Stone, they say, was brought a long
way off, out of Arabia, and that the Work was raised by making Mounts of Earth;
Cranes and other Engines being not known at that time. And that which is most
to be admired at, is to see such a Foundation so imprudently laid, as it seems
to be, in a Sandy Place, where there is not the least Sign of any Earth cast up,
nor Marks where any Stone was cut and polished; so that the whole Pile seems to
be reared all at once, and fixed in the midst of Heaps of Sand by some God, and
not built by degrees by the Hands of Men. Some of the Egyptians tell wonderful
things, and invent strange Fables concerning these Works, affirming that the
Mounts were made of Salt and Saltpeter, and that they were melted by the
Inundation of the River, and being so dissolved, every thing was washed away but
the Building it self. But this is not the Truth of the thing; but the great
multitude of Hands that raised the Mounts, the same carried back the Earth to
the Place whence they dug it; for they say there were Three Hundred and Sixty
Thousand Men employed in this Work, and the Whole was scarce completed in
Twenty Years time.

When this King was dead, his Brother Cephres succeeded him, and reigned Six
Cephres, Chabryis. Supposed to Reign in the time of David, and the beginning of
Solomon's Reign, Helv-Chron. 42.
and Fifty Years: Some say it was not his Brother, but his Son Chabryis that
came to the Crown: But all agree in this, that the Successor, in imitation of
his Predecessor, erected another Pyramid like to the former, both in Structure
and Artificial Workmanship, but not near so large, every square of the Basis
being only a Furlong in Breadth.

Upon the greater Pyramid was inscribed the value of the Herbs and Onions that
were spent upon the Laborers during the Works, which amounted to above Sixteen
Hundred Talents.

There Is nothing writ upon the lesser: The Entrance and Ascent is only on one
side, cut by steps into the main Stone. Although the Kings designed these Two
for their Sepulchers, yet it hapen'd that neither of them were there buried.
For the People being incensed at them by the reason of the Toil and Labor they
were put to, and the cruelty and oppression of their Kings, threatened to drag
their Carkases out of their Graves, and pull them by piecemeal, and cast them
to the Dogs; and therefore both of them upon their Beds commanded their
Servants to bury them in some obscure place.

After him reigned Mycerinus (otherwise called Cherinus) the Son of him who
Mycerinus.
built the first Pyramid. This Prince began a Third, but died before it was
finished; every square of the Basis was (...) Three Plethras.
Three Hundred Foot. The Walls for fifteen Stories high were of black Marble
like that of Thebes, the rest was of the same Stone with the other Pyramids.
Though the other Pyramids went beyond this in greatness, yet this far excelled
the rest in the Curiosity of the Structure, and the largeness of the Stones. On
that side of the Pyramid toward the North, was inscribed the Name of the
Founder Mycerinus. This King they say detesting the severity of the former
Kings, carried himself all his Days gently and graciously toward all his
Subjects, and did all that possibly he could to gain their Love and Good Will
toward him; besides other things, he expended vast Sums of Money upon the
Oracles and Worship of the Gods; and bestowing large Gifts upon honest Men whom
he judged to be injured, and to be hardly dealt with in the Courts of Justice.

There are other Pyramids, every Square of which are Two Hundred Foot in the
Basis; and in all things like unto the other, except in bigness. It Is said that
these Three last Kings built them for their Wives.

It is not in the least to be doubted, but that these Pyramids far excel all
the other Works throughout all Egypt, not only in the Greatness and Costs of
the Building, but in the Excellency of the Workmanship: For the Architects
(they say) are much more to be admired than the Kings themselves that were at
the Cost. For those performed all by their own Ingenuity, but these did nothing
but by the Wealth handed to them by descent from their Predecessors, and by the
Toil and Labor of other Men.

Yet concerning the first Builders of these Pyramids, there is no Consent,
either Uncertain who built the Pyramids.
amongst the Inhabitants or Historians. For some say they were built by the
Kings before mentioned, some by others.

As that the greatest was built by Armeus, the Second by Ammosis.
Amasis, and the Third by Maronas.
Inaronas: But some say that this last was the Sepulcher of one Rhodopides, a
Curtesan, and was built in remembrance of her, at the common Charge of some of
the Governors of the Provinces, who were her Amors.

Bocchoris was the next who succeeded in the Kingdom, a Bocchoris, in the Reign
of Vzziab King of Judah, An. Mun. 3283, before Christ 766. Helv. Cron.
very little Man for Body, and of a mean and contemptible Presence; but as to
his Wisdom and Prudence far excelling all the Kings that ever were before him
in Egypt.

A long time after him, one Sabach an Ethiopian came to the Sabacon, or Sabaco,
taken to be so, who joined with Hoshea King of Isreal.
Throne, going beyond all his Predecessors in his Worship of the Gods, and
kindness to his Subjects. Any Man may judge and have a clear Evidence of his
gentle Disposition in this, that when the Laws pronounced the severest Judgment
(I mean Sentence of Death) he changed the Punishment, and made an Edict that
the Condemned Persons should Persons to work in Chains, instead of being put to
Death.
be kept to work in the Towns in Chains, by whose Labor he raised many Mounts,
and made many Commodious Canals; conceiving by this means he should not only
moderate the severity of the Punishment, but instead of that which was
unprofitable, advance the public Good, by the Service and Labors of the
Condemned. A Man may likewise judge of his extraordinary Piety from his Dream,
and his Abdication of the Government; for the Tutelar God of Thebes, seemed to
speak to him in his Sleep, and told him that he could not long reign happily
and prosperously in Egypt, except he cut all the Priests in Pieces, when he
passed through the midst of them with his Guards and Servants; which Advice
being often repeated, he at length sent for the Priests from all parts, and
told them that if he staid in Egypt any longer, he found that he should
displease God, who never at any time before by Dreams or Visions commanded any
such thing. And that he would rather be gone and lose his Life, being pure and
innocent, than displease (...) The Lord. Anarchy.
God, or enjoy the Crown of Egypt, by staining his Life with the horrid Murder
of the Innocent. And so at length giving up the Kingdom into the Hands of the
People, he returned into Ethiopia. Upon this there was an Anarchy for the space
of Two Years; but the People falling into Tumults and intestine Broyls and
Slaughters one of another, Twelve of the chief Nobility of the Kingdom joined
in a Solemn Oath, and then calling a Senate at Memphis, and making some Laws
for the better directing and cementing of them in mutual peace and fidelity,
they took upon them the Regal Power and Authority. After Twelve Kings reign
lovingly in Egypt. Herodot. lib. 2. c. 147.
they had governed the Kingdom very amicably for the space of Fifteen Years,
(according to the Agreement which they had mutually sworn to observe) they
applied themselves to the building of a Sepulcher, where they might all lie
together; that as in their Lifetime they had been equal in their Power and
Authority, and had always carried it with love and respect one toward another;
so after Death (being all buried together in one Place) they might continue the
Glory of their Names in one and the same Monument. To this end they made it
their business to excel all their Predecessors in the greatness of their Works:
For near the Lake of Myris in Lybia, they built a Apiece Monument of
Polished Marble, every square a Furlong in length, for curious Carvings and
other pieces of Art, not to be equaled by any that should come after them.
When you are entered within the Wall, there is presented a stately Fabric,
supported round with Pillars, Forty on every side: The Roof was of one entire
Stone, whereon was curiously carved Racks and Mangers for Horses, and other
excellent pieces of Workmanship, and painted and adorned with diverse sorts of
Pictures and Images; where likewise were portray'd the Resemblances of the
Kings, the Temples, and the Sacrifices in most beautiful Colors. And such was
the Cost and Stateliness of this Sepulcher, begun by these Kings, that (if they
had not been dethroned before it was perfected) none ever after could have
exceeded them in the state and magnificence of their Works. But after they had
reigned over Egypt Fifteen Years, all of them but one lost their Sovereignty in
the manner following.

Psammeticus Saites, one of the Kings, whose Province was upon the Sea Coasts,
Psammeticus. An. Mu. 3288. Ant. Chapter 669. 29 Year of Manasseth King of Judah.
traffickt with all sorts of Merchants, and especially with the Phenicians and
Grecians; by this means enriching his Province, by vending his own Commodities,
and the importation of those that came from Greece, he not only grew very
wealthy, but gained an interest in the Nations and Princes abroad; upon which
account he was envied by the rest of the Kings, who for that reason made War
upon him. Some ancient Historians tell a Story, That these Princes were told by
Herodotus, lib. 2. c. 151.
the Oracle, That which of them should first pour Wine out of a brazen Viol to
the God adored at Memphis, should be sole Lord of all Egypt. Whereupon
Psammeticus when the Priest brought out of the Temple Twelve Golden Viols,
plucked off his Helmet, and poured out a Wine Offering from thence; which when
his Colleagues took notice of, they forbore putting him to death, but deposed
him, and banished him into the Fenns, bordering upon the Seacoasts. Whether
therefore it were this, or Envy as is said before, that gave Birth to this
Dissension and Difference amongst them, it is certain Psammeticus hired
Soldiers out of Arabia, Caria and Ionia, and in a Field-Fight near the City
Moniemphis, he got the day. Some of the Kings of the other side were slain, and
the rest fled into Africa, and were not able further to contend for the Kingdom.

Psammeticus having now gained possession of the whole, built a Portico to the
East Gate of the Temple at Memphis, in honor of that God, and encompassed the
Temple with a Wall, supporting it with Colosses of Twelve Cubits high in the
room of Pillars. He bestowed likewise upon his Mercenary Soldiers many large
Rewards over and above their Pay promised them.

He gave them also a Place called Stratopedon to inhabit, and divided amongst
them by Lot a large piece of Land, a little above the Mouth of Pelusium, whom
Amasis (who reigned many Years after) transplanted to Memphis. Being therefore
that he had gained the Kingdom by the help of his stipendary Soldiers, he
entrusted them chiefly in the concerns of the Government, and entertained great
numbers of Strangers and Foreigners.

Afterward undertaking an Expedition into Syria (to honor the Foreigners) he
placed them in the right Wing of his Army; but out of slight and disregard to
the natural Egyptians, he drew up them in the Left; with which Affront the
Egyptians were so incensed, that above Two Hundred Thousand of them revolted,
and marched away toward Ethiopia, there to settle themselves in new
Habitations. At first the King sent some of his Captives after them, to make an
Apology for the Dishonor done them; but these not being hearkened unto, the
King himself with some of his Nobility followed them by Water. But they marched
on, and entered Egypt, near the River Nile, where he earnestly entreated them to
alter their purpose, and to remember their Gods, their Country, Wives and
Children: Psammeticu's Army revolt.
They all cried out (beating upon their Shields, and shaking their Spears) that
as long as they had Arms in their Hands, they could easily gain another
Country; and then turning aside the Flaps of their Coats, they showed their
Privy Members, bawling out, That as long as they were so furnished, they should
never want Wives or Children. Possessed with this Resolution and Magnanimity of
Mind, they despised every thing that by all others are highly prized and
valued, and settled themselves in a rich and fruitful Soil in Ethiopia, dividing
the Land amongst themselves by lot.

Psammeticus laid this greatly to heart, and made it his Business to settle the
Affairs of Egypt, and to increase his Revenues, and entered into League with
the Athenians and other Grecians, and was very kind and liberal to all
Strangers that came into Egypt. He was so taken with the Grecians, that he
caused his Son to be instructed in the Grecian Learning. He was certainly the
first of all the Kings of Egypt that encouraged Foreigners to traffic in his
Country, giving safe Conduct to all Strangers that sailed thither. For the
former Kings allowed no Strangers to come into Egypt, and if any did arrive,
they either put them to death, or made them Slaves: And it was the Churlishness
of this Nation, which caused all that noise among the Greeks concerning the
Cruelty and Wickedness of Busiris, though all was not true as it was related,
but the extraordinary Severity of the Country gave occasion to the raising of
those Fables.

After Psammticeus and Four Generations past, Apries reigned Two and Twenty
Apries.
Years. He invaded with mighty Forces, Cyprus and Phenicia, and took Sidon by
Storm; and through Fear and Terror of him, brought other Cities of Phenicia
into Subjection. And having routed the Cyprians and Phenicians in a great
Sea Fight, he returned into Egypt, laden with the Spoils of his Enemies. But
afterward sending an Army against Cyrene and Barca, he lost most of them; at
which those that escaped, were extraordinarily enraged; and suspecting that he
employed them in this Expedition on purpose to have them all cut off, that he
might reign the more securely over the rest, they all revolted. For Amasis, a
Amasis.
Nobleman of Egypt, being sent against them by the King, not only slighted the
King's Commands in endeavoring to make all whole again, but on the contrary
incited the Rebels to a higher degree of Rage and Indignation against him, and
turned Rebel himself, and was created King. And not long after, when the rest
of the People all went over to him, the King not knowing what to do, was (...)
to fly for Aid to the stipendiary Soldiers, who were about Thirty Thousand;
but being routed in a Field-Fight near to a Town called Marius, he was there
taken Prisoner and strangled.

Amasis having settled his Affairs in Egypt, so as he judged most conducing to
the public good, governed the Egyptians with all Justice and Moderation, and
by this gained the good Will of all the People. He conquered also the Cities of
Cyprus, and adorned the Temples of the Gods with many rich Gifts and Offerings.
Having reigned Five and Fifty Years, he died about the time Cambyses King of
Persia first invaded Egypt, in the Third Year of the Sixty Third Olympiad, in
which Olymp. 63. Ant. Chapter 523.
Parmenides of Camarina was Victor.

CHAP. VI.
The Customs of the Egyptians: Of their Kings. Of their Hourly Employment,
Sacrifices, Diet, etc. Their Burials. The division of Egypt. Their Trades in
Egypt. Courts of Justice. Their Law Proceedings. The several Laws of Egypt.
Beasts and Birds adored in Egypt, as Lions, Wolves, Cats, the Bird Ibis, Kites,
etc. Costs in their Burial of these Creatures. Reasons given of this Adoration.

SInce sufficient has been said of the Egyptian Kings from the most ancient
The Customs of the Egyptians.
Times, to the Death of Amasis, (leaving for a while what remains till a more
proper time) we shall now give a brief account of those Laws and Customs of the
Egyptians that are most to be admired, and may especially delight and profit
the Reader. For many of the ancient Customs of the Egyptians were not only
allowed by the natural Inhabitants, but were greatly admired by the Grecians,
so that every Learned Man earnestly coveted to travel into Egypt to learn the
Knowledge of their Laws and Customs, as things of great weight and moment: And
though the Country anciently forbad all reception to Strangers (for the Reasons
before alleged) yet some of the Ancients, as Orpheus and Homer, and many of
latter times, as Pythagoras the Samian, and Solon the Lawgiver, adventured to
travel thither. And therefore the Egyptians assirm that Letters, Astronomy,
Geometry, and many other Arts were first found out by them; and that the best
Laws were made and instituted by them. To confirm which, they allege this as
an undeniable Argument, that the Native Kings of Egypt have reigned there for
the space of above Four Thousand and Seven Hundred Years, and that their
Country for all that time has been the most prosperous and flourishing Kingdom
in the World, which could never have been so, if the Inhabitants had not been
civilized, and brought up under good Laws, and Liberal Education in all sorts
of Arts and Sciences. But we shall omit what Herodotus and other Writers of the
Egyptian History relate, who wilfully pursue and prefer prodigious Stories
before Truth, and relate a company of Fictions merely for Sport and Diversion
sake, and shall give an Account of such things as we have carefully perused and
examined recorded in their Books by the Egyptian Priests.

The First Kings of Egypt lived not after the way and manner of other Monarchs,
The way of Living of the First Kings of Egypt.
to do what they list, without Control; but in every thing conformed
themselves to their Laws, not only in the public Administration of the
Government, but in their daily private Conversation, and their very Meals and
Diet. For among their Attendants, they had neither Slaves for Servants, nor
such as were born in their Houses; but the Sons of the chiefest of the Priests
(after they attained to the Age of Twenty Years) brought up and educated more
nobly than any other of the rest of the Egyptians; that having such noble
Attendants upon his Person (of the best and highest Rank in the Kingdom) to be
always with him night and day, he might not do any thing that was base and
blameworthy. For no Prince is apt to be very wicked, except he have some ready
at Hand to encourage him in his Lusts.

There were Hours set apart in the Night as well as the Day, wherein the King
Hours set apart.
was to do something enjoined him by the Laws, and not to indulge himself in
his Pleasures.

When he rose in the Morning, the first thing he was to do, was to peruse all
the public Letters and Advices sent from all Parts, that he might order his
Concerns the better, by having perfect knowledge of all the Affairs of the
Kingdom. Then Washing himself, and putting on his Splendid Robes, and the
Ensigns and Badges of his Royal Authority, he went to Sacrifice to the Gods.

When the Victims were brought to the Altar, it was the Custom for the High The
Priests Prayers for the King.
Priest in the presence of the King and People standing round about him, to
pray with a loud Voice for the Health and Prosperity of the King, who
righteously ruled and governed his Subjects, wherein he recounted all the
Virtues of the Prince, his Piety toward the Gods, his kindness to his People;
how Continent, Just, Magnanimous and Faithful he was; how Bountiful, and what a
Master he was over all inordinate Appetites and Passions; how he was Mild and
Gentle in inflicing Punishments upon Offenders, less than their Deserts, and
Bountiful in distributing of his Rewards. When the Priest had uttered these and
such like Commendations, he at last pronounced a Curse upon all such Offenses
and Miscarriages as had been ignorantly committed; yet withal, clearing the
King, and laying all the Blame and Guilt upon his Ministers and Advisers. And
this the Priest did that he might thereby induce and persuade the King to an
Awe of the Gods, and to live so as might be pleasing to them; and likewise by
Praise and Commendation rather gently to win upon him, than by harsh and rugged
Rebukes to drive him to the practice of Virtuous Actions. Afterward when the
King had viewed the Intrals and Atton'd the Gods by Sacrifice. History read.
finished his Sacrifices, the Priests read out of the Sacred Records, the
Edicts, Laws and most useful and remarkable Actions of such as were most famous
in their Generations, that the Prince might seriously consider and ponder upon
what was most commendable in those Examples, and imitate them according to the
Rules there prescribed. For there were not only set Times allotted for dispatch
of public Business, and Administration of Justice, but likewise for taking of
the Air, Bathing, lying with the Queen, and almost every action of their Lives.

The Custom was likewise for the Kings to feed upon plain and ordinary Meat,
Diet.
as Veal and Goose, and to drink Wine according to a stinted measure, which
might neither overcharge their Stomachs, nor make them drunk. Such a moderate
Diet was prescribed, as that it seemed rather to be ordered by a Skilful
Physician for Health sake, than by a Lawmakers. It is indeed to be admired and
very strange, that the King should not be left to his liberty for his daily
Food; but much more is it to be admired, that he could not do any public
Business, Condemn or Punish any Man to gratify his own Humor or Revenge, or
for any other unjust Judgment not to be given to gratify the King's Passion.
Cause; but was bound to do according as the Laws had ordered in every
particular case. The Kings observing those Rules according to the ancient
Custom, were so far from thinking it dishonorable, or being uneasy under it,
that they looked upon themselves to live most desirable and happy Lives; and
judged that all other Men who inconsiderately indulged their natural Appetites,
did many things that were attended with great Losses, or apparent Hazards at
the least; yea, that some, though they know beforehand that what they were
about to do was ill and unjustifiable, yet overcome either with Love or Hatred,
or some other unruly Passion, committed the wicked act notwithstanding; and
therefore they were resolved to follow the Rules of living, before approved by
wise and prudent Men, and not to fall into the least Irregularity. The Kings
therefore carrying this even Hand toward ail their Subjects, were more beloved
by them than by their own Kindred and Relations: For not only all the Orders of
the Priests, but the whole Nation together were more concerned for the Health
and Prosperity of their Kings, than they were for their Wives and Children, or
their private Interests in their Goods and Estates; and therefore as long as
these wholesome Laws were observed amongst 'em, they preserved their Government
without stain or blemish for many Ages under the Kings beforementioned, living
in the height of all Worldly Happiness: And besides all this, were Conquerors
of many Nations, and grew exceeding rich, and their Provinces were beautified
with many stately magnificent Works, and their Cities adorned with many rich
Gifts of all sorts.

What the Egyptians performed after the Deaths of every of their Kings, clearly
evidences the great Love they bore to them. For Honor done him that cannot
possibly know it (in a grateful return of a former Benefit) carries along with
it a Testimony of Sincerity, without the least color of Dissimulation. For
upon Burial of the Kings.
the Death of every King, the Egyptians generally lament with an universal
Mourning, rend their Garments, shut up their Temples, inhibit Sacrifices and
all Feasts and Solemnities for the space of Seventy Two Days: They cast (...),
Dirt
Dust likewise upon their Heads, and gird themselves under their Breasts with a
Linen Girdle; and thus Men and Women Two Hundred or Three Hundred sometimes in
a Company, twice a Day go about singing mournful Songs in praise of the
deceased King, recalling his Virtues (as it were) from the very Grave. During
that time, they neither eat Flesh, nor any thing baked or heated by the Fire,
and abstain from Wine and all Sumptuous Fare: Neither dare any use Baths or
Ointments, Beds trimmed up, or indulge themselves with Women. But every one (as
if they had lost their dearest beloved Child) is in mourning and sadness, and
spends all these Days in Lamentation. In the mean time all things are prepared
in a stately manner for the Funeral, and the last day the Coffin with the Body
enclosed, is set at the Entrance into the Sepulcher: And there, according to
the Law, in honor of the Deceased, all the Actions of his Life are rehearsed,
where every one that will, has free liberty to accuse him. But all the Priests
set forth his Praise, mentioning all the noble Actions of his Life; and many
Thousands of People met together at the bringing forth of the Body (if the King
have ruled well) second the Priests with a tumultuous Cry and Noise of
Approbation: But if he have governed otherwise, they are hush and still: And
therefore many of the Kings (through the dislike of the People) have not been
honored with any Funeral Pomp or solemn Burial; upon which account the
succeeding Kings (not only for the Reasons beforementioned, but because they
fear the abuse of their Bodies after Death, and everlasting disgrace and
dishonor) have studied how to acquit themselves by just and Virtuous Actions.
These are the most remarkable Manners and Customs of the ancient Kings of Egypt.

The whole Land of Egypt is divided into several Parts, which the Greeks call
The Division of Egypt into Three Parts.
Nomoi, over every one of which is appointed a Lord Lieutenant or Provincial
Governor, who is entrusted with Administration of public Affairs in the
Province. The whole Country likewise is divided into Three Parts, whereof the
First is allotted to the Priests, who are highly reverenced, and are in great
Authority among the People, both for their Piety toward the Gods, and their
great Wisdom and Learning wherein they instruct the People. And out of their
Revenues, they provide Sacrifices throughout all Egypt, and maintain their
Families and Servants, and procure all other things necessary for themselves:
For they judge it not lawful by any means that the Worship of the Gods should
be altered (but always performed by them after the same manner) nor that those
who are the public Ministers of State should want any thing that is necessary.
For these are always at the King's Elbow, as the Chief of his Privy Counsel,
who assist, advise and instruct him upon all occasions. By the help of
Astrology, and viewing the Intrals of the Sacrifices, they Divine and foretell
future Events, and out of the Records in the sacred Registers from things done
in former times, they read profitable Lectures for present use and practice.
For it is not (as among the Grecians) that one Man or one Woman only executes
the Priest's Office, but in Egypt many are employed in the Sacrifices and
Worship of the Gods, who teach the same way and manner of Service to their
Children and Posterity. They are free from all public Taxes and Impositions,
and are in the Second place to the King in Honor and Authority. The Second
Portion belongs to the King, as his Revenue to support his Royal State and
Dignity, and maintain the Charge of his Wars, and to enable him to reward those
that have been eminent for their Virtue and public Service, with Gifts
according to their Deserts; and inasmuch as this Portion brings in a plentiful
Provision for all these purposes, the People are not (...), do not drown them.
oppressed with Taxes and heavy Impositions. The last Portion belongs to the
Soldiers, who at a word are ready at the King's Commands for every Expedition;
that they who venture their Lives in the Wars, being indear'd to their Country
by that plentiful share and proportion allotted them, may more cheerfully
undergo the hazards of War. For it would be an irrational thing to entrust the
safety and preservation of the whole, with them who have nothing in their
Country that is dear or valuable to them to sight for. And the chief Reason why
so large a share is allotted to them, is that they might more readily marry,
and by that means make the Nation more populous; and so there might be no need
of Foreign Aids and Assistances. Besides, that Children descended from
Soldiers, would be apt to imitate the valor of their Ancestors, and minding
Arms from their very Childhood, would at length (through their natural Courage
and Skill in their Arms) become unconquerable.

The Nation likewise is distinguished into Three other Classes and Orders of
Men, Shepherds, Husbandmen and Artificers. The Husbandmen take the Land (fit
for Tillage and bearing of other Fruits) of the King, the Priests and the
Swordmen, upon an easy Rent, and take up all their Time in this Business; and
because they are bred up from their very Infancy in Country Affairs, they are
the most Skilful Husbandmen of any other Nation in the World. For they know
exactly the Nature of the Land, the Inundation of the Waters, Seed-time and
Harvest, and the gathering in of the other Fruits of the Earth, partly from the
knowledge gained from their Ancestors, and partly from their own particular
Experience.

The way and manner of the Shepherds is the same, who being used to look after
the Flocks and Herds from Father to Son, make it their whole Employment to feed
and pasture them. They have indeed learnt many things from their Ancestors
concerning the best way of governing and feeding their Flocks, but not a few by
their own Study and Invention. And that which is chiefly to be admired, is that
their Industry is such in these matters, that they that keep Poultry and Geese,
not content with the ordinary way of breeding these Creatures (as amongst other
People) but by their Wit and Ingenuity cause them to increase to an infinite
number, for they do not suffer them to hatch, but to admiration force out the
Young with their Hands with so much Art and Skill, that it is done as
effectually as by Nature it self.

Arts and Trades likewise among the Egyptians are greatly improved and brought
All to follow their own Trades and no other.
to their highest perfection. For it is a Rule only among the Egyptians, that no
Mechanic or other Artificer is to be of any other Trade or Employment, or to
be reckoned up among any other Orders or Classes of the Commonwealth, than such
as by the Law is allowed, and taught them by their Parents; to the end that
neither Envy attending Magistracy, nor public Business of the State, or any
thing else might interrupt them in the diligent improvement of their Trades. In
other Places we see Artificers and Tradesmen busied about many other things,
and (to gratify their Covetousness) not to stick to any one Employment. For
some apply themselves to Husbandry, others to Merchandise, and some follow Two
or Three Trades at once. And many who run to the public Assemblies in Cities,
under a Democratical Government, by Bribes and Rewards enrich themselves, to
the damage and prejudice of the Commonwealth. But in Egypt if any Tradesman
meddle in Civil Affairs, or exercise any more than one Trade at once, he is
grievously punished. And in this manner the ancient Egyptians divided their
Commonwealth, and every Order took care to preserve themselves entire, as that
which they had learnt, and had been handed down to them from their Ancestors.
They Courts of Justice.
were likewise extraordinary careful concerning their Courts of Justice, for
they looked upon just Sentences and Decrees pronounced from the Seats of Justice
on both sides, to be of great weight and moment to the advancement of the
public good. For they knew very well, that Men's miscarriages would be best
reformed, if Offenders were duly punished, and the Injured and Oppressed
relieved: And on the contrary they foresaw, that if the Punishment due by the
Law to Malefactors could be bought off for Money, Favor or Affection, then
nothing but Disorder and Confusion would enter into all Orders and Societies of
Men among them: And therefore to prevent this (with good effect) they chose Men
of the greatest Reputation out of the Chiefest Cities to be their Judges: As
out of Heliopolis, Thebes and Memphis; which Assembly of the Judges was nothing
inferior to the Arcopagites in Athens, or the Senate at Sparta. Out of these
(being Thirty in number) they chose one the most eminent among them to be
President, and in his Room the City sent another. The Judges received their
Salaries from the King, but the President had the greatest Allowance; about his
Neck he wore a golden Chain, at which hung a Picture representing Truth, set
with precious Stones. When the President put on his Chain, it was a Sign then
he was about to hear Causes. And when the Eight Books wherein the Laws were
written were laid before The Law proceedings.
the Judges, it was the Custom that the Plaintiff exhibited his Complaint in
writing distinctly and particularly; setting forth wherein he was injured, and
how, and the value of his damage sustained. On the other side the Defendant or
the Party accused, after a Copy had of his Adversaries Libel, answered in
Writing to every particular, either by denying or justifying, or pleading
something in mitigation of Damages. Then the Plaintiff replied in Writing, and
the Defendant rejoined. After the Litigants had thus twice exhibited their
Libels, it was then the part of the Thirty Judges to consider amongst
themselves of the Judgment to be pronounced, and incumbent upon the President
To show that Truth was on his side.
to turn the Essigies of Truth toward one of the Litigants. And this was the
usual manner of Proceedings in their Courts of Justice among the Egyptians. For
it was judged, that by the Harangues of Lawyers, a Cloud was cast upon the
Truth and Justice of the Cause; inasmuch as the Arts of Rhetoricians, the
juggling Tricks of Dissemblers, and the Fears of them that are like to be
overthrown in their Cause, have wrought upon many to wave the strictness of the
Law, and to turn aside from the Rule of Justice and Truth: And indeed its often
found by experience, that Offenders brought to the Bar of Justice by the help
of a cunning Orator, or their own Rhetorical Flourishes (either through a
Fallacy put upon the Court, or taking Insinuations, or melting Compassions
wrought by the Speaker in the Judge) have escaped: Therefore the Egyptians
concluded, that if all the Accusation was put into Writing, and consideration
had barely of what was there set down, the Sentence would be more exact and
just. And so by that means crafty and ingenious Fellows would be no more
favored, than those that were more dull, nor the experienced Artist more than
those that were ignorant and unskilful, nor the audacious Liar more than those
that are modest and sincere; but all would have equal Justice, in regard
sufficient time was allowed by the Law, both for the Parties to answer each
other, and for the Judges to consider and give Judgment upon the Allegations of
both sides.

And since now we are come to mention the Laws, we conceive it will not be Laws
of Egypt.
foreign from our History to give an account of such Laws of the Egyptians as
are either remarkable for their Antiquity, or strange and different from all
other, or that may be any way useful and profitable to the studious Readers.

1. And in the first place, those were to dye who were guilty of Perjury, being
such as committed the Two greatest Crimes; that is, Impiety toward the Gods,
and Violation of Faith and Truth, the strongest Band of Humane Society.

2. If any upon the Road saw a Man likely to be killed, or to be violently
assaulted, and did not rescue him if he were able, he was to dye for it. And if
in truth he were not able to defend him, yet he was bound to discover the
Thieves, and to prosecute them in a due Course of Law. If he neglected this, he
was according to the Law to be scourged with a certain number of Stripes, and
to be kept without Food for Three Days together.

3. False Accusers were to suffer the same Punishment as those whom they falsely
accused were to have undergone, if they had afterward been convicted of the
Offense.

4. All the Egyptians were enjoined to give in their Names in Writing, to the
Governors of the Provinces, showing how and by what means, they got their
Livelihood. He that gave a false Account in such case, or if it appeared he
lived by Robbery, or any other unjust course, he was to dye; which Law it is
said Solon brought over out of Egypt into Athens.

5. He that wilfully killed a Freeman; nay, a very Bondslave, was by the Law to
dye; thereby designing to restrain Men from wicked Actions, as having no
respect to the state and condition of the Person suffering, but to the advised
act of the Offender; and by this care of Slaves, Men learnt that Freemen were
much less to be destroyed.

6. Parents that killed their Children, were not to dye, but were forced for
Three Days and Nights together to hug them continually in their Arms, and had a
Guard all the while over them, to see they did it; for they thought it not fit
that they should dye, who gave Life to their Children; but rather that Men
should be deterred from such Attempts by a Punishment that seemed attended with
Sorrow and Repentance.

7. But for Patricides, they provided a most severe kind of Punishment: For
those that were convicted of this Offense, were laid upon Thorns, and burnt
alive after that they had, first mangled the Members of their Bodies with sharp
Canes, Piecemeal about the bigness of a Man's Thumb. For they counted it the
most wicked Act that Men could be guilty of, to take away the Lives of them
from whom they had their own.

8. Those that were with Child, were not to be executed till they were
delivered, which Law was received by many of the Grecians, judging it very
unjust for the Innocent to suffer with the Offender, and Two to dye for the
Offense of one only. Besides, in as much as the Crime was maliciously and
advisedly committed, it was unreasonable that the Child that understood not
what was done, should undergo the same Punishment. And that which is of the
greatest Consideration, is, that it was altogether unjust (being the Mother was
only accused and condemned as guilty) the Child (Common both to Father and
Mother) should lose its Life; for that Judge is as unjust that destroys the
Innocent, as he that spares him that is guilty of Murder.

9. These are the Capital Laws which are chiefly worthy of Praise and
Commendation; Laws Military
as to others, those concerning military Affairs, provided that Soldiers who
ran away from their Colors or mutined, though they should not dye, yet should
be otherwise punished with the utmost Disgrace imaginable; but if they after
wipe off their Disgrace by their Valor, they are restored to their former Post
and Trust. By this inflicting of a Punishment more grievous than Death, the
Lawgiver designed that all should look upon Disgrace and Infamy as the greatest
of Evils: Besides it was judged, that those who were put to Death, could never
be further serviceable to the Commonwealth; but such as were degraded only
(through a desire to repair their Reputation) might be very useful, and do much
good service in time to come.

10. Such as revealed the Secrets of the Army to the Enemy, were to have their
Secrets revealed to Enemies Coining, Forgery, etc.
Tongues cut out.

11. They that coined false and adulterated Money, or contrived false Weights,
or Counterfeited Seals; and Scriveners or Clerks that forged Deeds, or razed
public Records, or produced any forged Contracts, were to have both their
Hands cut off, that every one might suffer in that part wherewith he had
offended in such a manner as not to be repaired during their Life; and that
others warned by so severe a Punishment, might be detered from the Commission
of the like Offense.

12. In Relation to Women the Laws were very severe: For he that committed Rape.
a Rape upon a Free Woman, was to have his Privy Members cut off; for they
judged that Three most heinous Offenses were included in that one vile Act,
that is, Wrong, Defilement and Bastardy.

13. In case of Adultery, the Man was to have a Thousand Lashes with Rods, and
Adultery.
the Woman her Nose cut off. For it was looked upon very sit, that the
Adulteress that trickt up her self to allure Men to Wantonness, should be
punished in that part where her Charms chiefly lay.

14. They say that Bocchoris made the Laws concerning Merchandise. As to these,
it was a Law, That if a Man borrowed Money, and the lender had no Writing to
show for it, and the other denied it upon his Oath, he should be quit of the
Debt; to that end therefore in the First Place, they were to sacrifice to the
Gods, as Men making Conscience, and tender and Scrupulous in taking of an Oath.
For it being clear and evident that he that swears often again and again, at
last loses his Credit, every Man to prevent that Mischief, will be very
cautions of being brought to an Oath. Moreover, the Lawgiver had this Design,
that by grounding a Man's Credit and Reputation wholly upon the Integrity of
his Life and Conversation, every one would be induced to honest and virtuous
Actions, lest he should be despised as a Man of no Credit or Worth. Besides, it
was judged a most unjust thing not to believe him upon his Oath in that matter
relating to his Contract, to whom Credit was given in the self same thing
without an Oath before.

15. For those that lent Money by Contract in Writing, it was not lawful to
Deb(...) Usury.
take Usury above what would double the Stock; and that Payment should be made
only out of the Debtors Goods; but his Body was not to be liable in any wise to
Imprisonment: And those were counted the Debtors Goods, which he had either
earned by his Labor, or had been bestowed upon him by the just Proprietors.
But as for their Bodies, they belonged to the Cities where they inhabited, who
had an Interest in them for the public Services, both in Times of Peace and
War; for that it was an absurd thing for him who was to venture his Life for
his Country, to be carried to Goal for a Debt by his Creditor (if it should so
happen) and that the public safety should be hazarded to gratify the
Covetousness of some Private Men. This Law seems to have been established in
Athens by Solon, which he called (...) Moderation of Usery.
Sisachthy, freeing all the Citizens from being imprisoned by their Creditors
for debt. And some do justly blame many of the Lawmakers of Greece, that they
forbad Arms, Plows and other things absolutely necessary for Labors, to be
taken as Pawns, and yet permitted them that should use them to be imprisoned.

16. There Is a very remarkable Law among the Egyptians concerning Theft. (...)
Those that enter into the List of Thieves, are to give in their Names to one
that is their Chief and Head, and whatever they steal, they engage to bring to
him. They that have lost any thing, are to set down in writing every
particular, and bring it to him, and set forth the Day, and Hour and Place,
when and where they lost their Goods. Every thing being thus readily found out,
after the things stolen are valued, the true Owner is to pay a Fourth part of
the value, and so receives his Goods again. For being it was not possible to
restrain all from Thieving, the Lawmakers found out a way that all might be
restored, except a small Proportion for Redemption.

The Egyptian Priests only Marry one Wife, but all others may have as many
Marriage.
Wives as they please; and all are bound to bring up as many Children as they
can for the further increase of the Inhabitants, which tends much to the
Well-being either of a City or Country. None of the Sons are ever reputed
Bastards, though they be begotten of a Bond-Maid, for they conceive that the
Father only begets the Child, and that the Mother contributes nothing but Place
and Nourishment. And they call Trees that bear Fruit Males, and those that bear
none Females, contrary to what the Grecians name them. They bring up their
Children with very little Cost, and are sparing upon that account to
admiration. For they provide for them Broth made of any mean and poor Stuff
that may easily be had; and feed those that are of strength able to eat it,
with the Pith of Flags called Papyre, with which they made Books, and therefore
sometimes called (...), a Book.
Bulrushes roasted in the Embers, and with Roots and Herbs got in the Fenns;
sometimes raw, and sometimes boiled, and at other times fried and boiled. Most
of their Children go barefooted and naked, the Climate is so warm and
temperate. It costs not the Parent to bring up a Child to Man's Estate, above
Twenty Twenty Drams amount to 12s. 6^.
Drams; which is the chief Reason why Egypt is so Populous, and excels all
other Places in magnificent Structures. The Priests instruct the Youth in Two
sorts of Learning; that which they call Sacred, and the other which is more
common and Ordinary. In Arithmetic and Geometry they keep them a long time:
For in regard the River every Year changes the Face of the Soil, the
Neighboring Inhabitants are at great difference among themselves concerning
the Boundaries of their Land, which cannot be easily known but by the help of
Geometry. And as for Arithmetic, as it is useful upon other occasions, so its
very helpful to the Study of Geometry, and no small advantage to the Students
of Astrology; for the Egyptians (as well as some others) are diligent Observers
of the Course and Motions of the Stars, and preserve Remarks of every one of
them for an incredible number of Years, being used to this Study, and to
endeavor to outvy one another therein from the most ancient Times. They have
with great Cost and Care observed the Motions of the Planets; their (...),
Periodical Motions from West to East, by force of the Primum Mobile.
Periodical Motions, and their (...), Sterigmus, their stops, and then return
like the Tropicks.
stated Stops, and the Influences of every one of them, in the Nativity of
Living Creatures, and what good or ill they foreshew; and very often they so
clearly discover what is to come in the Course of Men's Lives, as if they
pointed at the thing with the point of a Needle. They frequently presage both
Famine and Plenty; grievous Diseases likely to seize both upon Man and Beast;
Earthquakes, Inundations and Comets; and through long Experience they come to
the foreknowledge of such things as are commonly judged impossible for the Wit
of Man to attain unto. They affirm that the Chaldeans in Babylon are Egyptian
Colonies, and that their Astrologers have attained to that degree of
Reputation, by the Knowledge they have learnt of the Egyptian Priests.

The rest of the common People of Egypt (as we have before declared) are Arts.
trained up from their very Childhood either by their Parents or Kindred in all
manner of Arts and Trades whereby to get their Livelihood.

They teach but a very few to write and read; but Tradesmen especially learn
both. It Is not the Custom there to learn the Art of Wrestling or Music; for
they think that by the Exercise of daily Wrestling, the Youth improve in their
Strength but for a little time, and that with a great deal of Hazard, but gain
no Advantage at all as to the Health of their Bodies. And as for Music, they
look upon it not only unprofitable, but that it also makes Men soft and
effeminate.

To prevent Diseases they make use of Clysters and purging Potions, Abstinence
Physicians.
and Vomits, and this they repeat sometimes for several days together, and
other times every third or fourth day. For in all manner of Food (they say) the
greatest Part of it is superfluous, which breeds Diseases, and therefore the
aforesaid Method whereby the Root of the Disease is plucked up (they say) is a
mighty Help both to the Preservation and Recovery of Health. For the Physicians
have a public Stipend, and make (...) of Receipts prescribed by the Law, made
up by the Ancient Physicians; and if they cannot cure the Patient by them, they
are never blamed; but if they use other Medicines, they are to suffer Death, in
as much as the Lawmakers appointed such Receipts for Cure, as were approved by
the most learned Doctors, such as by long Experience had been found effectual.

The Adoration and Worshipping of Beasts among the Egyptians seems justly to
Beasts adored by the Egyptians.
many a most strange and unaccountable thing, and worthy Enquiry; for they
worship some Creatures even above measure, when they are dead as well as when
they are living; as Cats, Ichneumon, the Indian Rat, Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib.
29. c. 4. and lib. 8. c. 24. He kills Asps, and the Crocodile.
Ichneumons, Dogs, Kites, the Bird Ibis, a Bird the Egyptians pray unto when
they are troubled with Serpents, Plin. lib. 10. c. 28.
Ibis, Wolves and Crocodiles, and many other such like. The Cause of which I
shall endeavor to give, having first premised something briefly concerning
them. And first of all, they dedicate a piece of Land to every kind of Creature
they adore, assigning the Profits for feeding and taking care of them. To some
of these Deities the Egyptians give Thanks for recovering their Children from
Sickness, as by shaving their Heads, and weighing the Hair, with the like
Weight of Gold or Silver, and then giving that Money to them that have the Care
of the Beasts. To the Kites, while they are flying they cry out with a loud
Voice, and throw pieces of Flesh for them upon the Ground till such time as
they take it. To the Cats and Ichneumons they give Bread soakt in Milk,
stroaking and making much of them, or feed them with pieces of Fish taken in
the River Nile. In the same manner they provide for the other Beasts Food
according to their several kinds. They are so far from not paying this. Homage
to their Creatures, or being ashamed of them, that on the contrary they glory
in them, as in the highest Adoration of the Gods, and carry about special Marks
and Ensigns of Honor for them through City and Country; upon which Account
those that have the Care of the Beasts (being seen after off) are honored and
worshipped by all by falling down upon their Knees. When any one of them dye
they wrap it in fine Linen, and with Howling beat upon their Breasts, and so
carry it forth to be salted, and then after they have anointed it with the Oil
of Cedar and other things, which both give the Body a fragrant Smell and
preserve it a long time from Putrefaction, they bury it in a secret place. He
that wilfully kills any of these Beasts, is to suffer Death; but if any kill a
Cat or the Bird Ibis, whether wilfully or otherwise, he is certainly dragged away
to Death by the Multitude, and sometimes most cruelly without any formal Trial
or Judgment of Law. For fear of this, if any by chance find any of these
Creatures dead, they stand aloof, and with lamentable Cries and Protestations
tell every body that they found it dead. And such is the (...).
religious Veneration impressed upon the Hearts of Men toward these Creatures,
and so obstinately is every one bent to adore and worship them, that even at
the time when the Romans were about making a League with Ptolomy, and all the
People made it their great Business to caress and show all Civility and
Kindness imaginable to them that came out of Italy, and through Fear strove all
they could that no Occasion might in the least be given to disoblige them or be
the Cause of a War, yet it so happened that upon a Cat being killed by a Roman,
the People in a Tumult ran to his Lodging, and neither the Princes sent by the
King to dissuade them, nor the Fear of the Romans could deliver the Person from
the Rage of the People, though he did it against his Will; and this I relate not
by Hearsay, but was my self an Eyewitness of it at the time of my Travels
into Egypt. If these things seem incredible and like to Fables, those that we
shall hereafter relate will look more strange. For it is reported, that at a
time when there was a Famine in Egypt, many were driven to that strait, that by
turns they fed one upon another; but not a Man was accused to have in the least
tasted of any of these sacred Creatures. Nay, if a Dog be found dead in a
House, the whole Family shave their Bodies all over, and make great
Lamentation; and that which is most wonderful, is, That if any Wine, Bread or
any other Victuals be in the House where any of these Creatures die, it is a
part of their Superstition, not to make use of any of them for any purpose
whatsoever. And when they have been abroad in the Wars in foreign Countries,
they have with great Lamentation brought with them dead Cats and Kites into
Egypt, when in the mean time they have been ready to starve for want of
Provision. Moreover what Acts of Religious Worship they performed toward Apis
in Memphis, Or Mneus, an Ox dedicated to the Sun. Strabo, lib. 17.
Mnevis in Heliopolis, the Goat in Mendes, the Crocodile in the Lake of Myris,
and the Lion kept in (...), in Leontopolis.
Leontopolis, and many other such like, is easy to describe, but very
difficult to believe, except a Man saw it. For these Creatures are kept and fed
in consecrated Ground enclosed, and many great Men provide Food for them at
great Cost and Charge; for they constantly give them fine Wheat Flour,
Frumenty, Sweetmeats of all sorts made up with Honey, and Geese sometimes
roasted, and sometimes boiled; and for such as fed upon raw Flesh, they provide
Birds. To say no more, they are excessive in their Costs and Charges in feeding
of these Creatures; and forbear not to wash them in hot Baths, to anoint them
with the most precious Unguents, and perfume them with the sweetest Odours.
They provide likewise for them most rich Beds to lie upon, with decent
Furniture, and are extraordinary careful about their generating and coition one
with another, according to the Law of Nature. They breed up for every one of
the Males (according to their Kinds) the most beautiful She-mate, and call them
their Concubines or Sweet-hearts, and are at great Costs and Charges in looking
to them.

When any of them dye, they are as much concerned as at the Deaths of their
Costs of Burial of Sacred Beasts.
own Children, and lay out in Burying of them as much as all their Goods are
worth, and far more. For when Apis through Old Age died at Memphis after the
Death of Alexander, and in the Reign of Ptolomy Lagus, his Keeper not only
spent all that vast Provision he had made, in burying of him, but borrowed of
Ptolomy Fifty Talents of Silver for the same purpose. And in our time some of
the Keepers of these Creatures have lavisht away no less than a Hundred Talents
in the maintaining of them. To this may be further added, what is in use among
them concerning the sacred Ox, which they call Apis. After the splendid Funeral
of Apis is over, those Priests that have the Charge of the Business, seek out
another Calf, as like the former as possibly they can find; and when they have
found one, an end is put to all further Mourning and Lamentation; and such
Priests as are appointed for that purpose, lead the young * Ox through Or Bull.
the City of Nile, and feed him Forty Days. Then they put him into a Barge,
wherein is a Colden Cabin, and so transport him as a God to Memphis, and place
him in Vulcan's Grove. During the Forty Days before mentioned, none but Women
are admitted to see him, who being placed full in his view, pluck up their
Coats, and show their Privy Parts: After they are forbad to come into the Sight
of this New God. For the Adoration of this Ox, they give this Reason. They say
that the Soul of Osiris passed into an Ox; and therefore whenever the Ox is
Dedicated, to this very Day the Spirit of Osiris is infused into one Ox after
another to Posterity. But some say, that the Members of Osiris (who was killed
by Typhon) were thrown by Isis into an Ox made of Wood, covered with Ox-Hides,
and from thence the City Busiris was so called. Many other things they
fabulously report of Apis, which would be too tedious particularly to relate.
But in as much as all that relate to this Adoration of Beasts are wonderful and
indeed incredible, its very difficult to find out the true Causes and Grounds
of this Superstition. We have before related, that the Priests have a private
and secret account of these things in the History of the Gods; but the Common
People give these Three Reasons for what they do. The First of which is
altogether Fabulous, and agrees with the old Dotage: For they say, that the
First Gods were so very few, and Men so many above them in number, and so
wicked and Reasons given for this Adoration.
impious, that they were too weak for them, and therefore transformed
themselves into Beasts, and by that means avoided their Assaults and Cruelty.
But afterward they say that the Kings and Princes of the Earth (in gratitude
to them that were the first Authors of their well-being) directed how carefully
those Creatures whose Shapes they had assumed) should be fed while they were
alive, and how they were to be Buried when they were dead. Another Reason they
give is this: The ancient Egyptians, they say, being often defeated by the
Neighboring Nations, by reason of the disorder and confusion that was among
them in drawing up of their Battalions, found out at last the way of Carrying
Standards or Ensigns before their Several Regiments; and therefore they painted
the Images of these Beasts, which now they adore, and fixed 'em at the end of a
Spear, which the Officers carried before them, and by this means every Man
perfectly knew the Regiment he belonged unto; and being that by the Observation
of this good Order and Discipline, they were often Victorious, they afcrib'd
their Deliverance to these Creatures; and to make to them a grateful Return, it
was ordained for a Law, that none of these Creatures, whose Representations
were formerly thus carried, should be killed, but religiously and carefully
adored, as is before related. The Third Reason alleged by them, is the Profit
and Advantage these Creatures bring to the common support and maintenance of
Humane Life. For the Cow is both serviceable to the Plow, and for breeding
others for the same use. The Sheep yeans twice a Year, and yields Wool for
Clothing and Ornament, and of her Milk and Cream are made large and pleasant
Cheefes. The Dog is useful both for the Guard of the House, and the pleasure of
Hunting in the Field, and therefore their God whom they call Anubis, they
represent with a Dog's Head, signifying thereby that a Dog was the Guard both
to Osiris and Isis. Others say, that when they sought for Osiris, Dogs guided
Isis, and by their barking and yelling (as kind and faithful Associates with
the Inquisitors) drove away the wild Beasts, and diverted others that were in
their way; and therefore in celebrating the Feast of Isis, Dogs lead the way in
the Procession. Those that first instituted this Custom, signifying thereby the
ancient kindness and good Service of this Creature. The Cat likewise is very
serviceable against the Venomous Stings of Serpents, and the deadly Bite of the
Asp. The Ichneumenon secretly watches where the Crocodile lays her Eggs, and
breaks them in pieces, and that he does with a great deal of eagerness, by
natural instinct, without any necessity for his own support; and if this
Creature were not thus serviceable, Crocodiles would abound to that degree,
that there were no Sailing in Nile: Yea, the Crocodiles themselves are
destroyed by this Creature in a wonderful and incredible manner. For the
Ichneumenon rouls himself in the Mud, and then observing the Crocodile sleeping
upon the Bank of the River with his Mouth wide open, suddenly whips down
through his Throat into his very Bowels, and presently gnaws his way through
his Belly, and so escapes himself, with the Death of his Enemy. Among the
Birds, the Ibis is serviceable for the destroying of Snakes, Locusts and the
Palmer Worm. The Kite is an Enemy to the Scorpions, horned Serpents, and other
little Creatures, that both bite and sting Men to Death. Others say, that this
Bird is Deify'd, because the Augurs make use of the swift flight of these Birds
in their Divinations. Others say, that in ancient Time, a Book bound about with
a Scarlet Thread (wherein were written all the Rites and Customs of Worshipping
of the Gods) was carried by a Kite, and brought to the Priests at Thebes: For
which Reason the Sacred Scribes wore a red Cap with a Kite's Feather in it.

The Thebans worship the Eagle, because she seems to be a Royal Bird, and to
deserve the Adoration due to Jupiter himself. They say, the Goat was accounted
amongst the number of the Gods, for the sake of his Genitals, as Priapus is
honored among the Grecians: For this Creature is exceeding Lustful, and
therefore they say that Member (the Instrument of Generation) is to be highly
honored, as that from which all living Creatures derive their Original. They
say that these Privy Parts are not only accounted Sacred among the Egyptians,
but among many others, are religiously adored in the time of their Solemn Rites
of religious Worship, as those Parts that are the Causes of Generation. And the
Priests, who succeed in the Office, descended to them from their Fathers in
Egypt, are first initiated into the Service of this God. For this Reason the
Hobgoblins.
Panes and Satyrs are greatly adored among them, and therefore they have Images
of them set up in their Temples, with their Privy Parts erected like to the
Goat, which they say, is the most lustful Creature in the World. By this
Representation they would signify their Gratitude to the Gods, for the
Populousness of their Country.

The Sacred Bulls Apis and Mnevis (they say) they honor as Gods by the Command
of Osiris, both for their Usefulness in Husbandry, and likewise to keep up an
honorable and lasting Memory of those that first found out Bread-corn and
other Fruits of the EARTH.

But however, its lawful to sacrifice red Oxen, because Typhon seemed to be of
that Color, who treacherously murdered Osiris, and was himself put to Death by
Isis for the Murder of her Husband. They report likewise, that anciently Men
that had red Hair, like Typhon, were sacrifis'd by the Kings at the Sepulcher
of Osiris. And indeed, there are very few Egyptians that are red, but many that
are Strangers: And hence arose the Fable of Busiris his Cruelty toward
Strangers amongst the Greeks, not that there ever was any King called Busiris;
but Osiris his Sepulcher was so called in the Egyptian Language. They say they
pay divine Honor to Wolves, because they come so near in their Nature to Dogs,
for they are very little different, and mutually engender and bring forth
Whelps.

They give likewise another Reason for their Adoration, but most fabulous of
all other; for they say, that when Isis and her Son Orus were ready to join
Battle with Typhon, Osiris came up from the Shades below in the form of a Wolf,
and assisted them, and therefore when Typhon was killed, the Conquerors
commanded that Beast to be worshipped, because the Day was won presently upon
his Appearing.

Some affirm, that at the time of the Irruption of the Ethiopians into Egypt, a
great Number of Wolves flockt together, and drove the invading Enemy beyond the
City Elaphantina, and therefore that Province is called Of the City of Wolves.
Lycopolitana; and for these Reasons came these Beasts before mentioned, to be
thus adored and worshipped.

CHAP. VII.
Why the Crocodile is Worshipped. Some sorts of Herbs and Roots not Eaten. Why
other Creatures are Worshipped. The manner of their Burials. The Lawmakers in
Egypt. Learned Men of Greece made Journeys into Egypt, as Orpheus, Homer,
Plato, Solon, Pythagoras, etc. Several Proofs of this, as their Religious
Rites, Fables, etc. in Greece, of Egyptian Extraction. The exquisit Art of the
Stone-Carvers in Egypt.

NOW it remains, that we speak of the Deifying the Crocodile, of which many
Crocodil's why adored.
have inquired what might be the Reason; being that these Beasts devour Men,
and yet are adored as Gods, who in the mean time are pernicious Instruments of
many cruel Accidents. To this they answer, that their Country is not only
defended by the River, but much more by the Crocodiles; and therefore the
Thieves out of Arabia and Africa being afraid of the great number of these
Creatures, dare not pass over the River Nile, which protection they should be
deprived of, if these Beasts should be fallen upon; and utterly destroyed by
the Hunters.

But there is another Account given of these Things: For one of the Ancient
Menas pursued by his own Dogs, saved by a Crocodile.
Kings, called Menas, being set upon and pursued by his own Dogs, was forced
into the Lake of Miris, where a Crocodile (a Wonder to be told) took him up and
carried him over to the other side, where in Gratitude to the Beast he built a
City, and called it Crocodile; and commanded Crocodiles to be Adored as Gods,
and Dedicated the Lake to them for a place to Feed and Breed in. Where he built
a Sepulcher for himself with a foursquare Pyramid, and a Labyrinth greatly
admired by every Body. In the same manner they relate Stories of other Things,
which would be too tedious here to recite. For some conceive it to be very
clear and evident (by several of them not Eating many of the Fruits of the
Earth) that Gain and Profit by sparing has infected them with this
Superstition: for some never Taste Lentils, nor other Beans; and some never eat
either Cheese or Onions or such like Food, although Egypt abounds with these
Things. Thereby signifying that all should learn to be temperate; and
whatsoever any feed upon, they should not give themselves to Gluttony. But
others give another Reason; for they say that in the Time of the Ancient Kings,
the People being prone to Sedition, and Plotting to Rebel, one of their wise
and prudent Princes divided Egypt into several Parts, and appointed the Worship
of some Beast or other in every Part, or forbad some sort of Food, that by that
means every one Adoring their own Creature, and slighting that which was
Worshipped in another Province, the Egyptians might never agree amongst
themselves. And this is evident from the Effects; for when one Country despises
and contemns the Religious Rites and Customs of their Neighbors, this always
begets Heart-burnings among them. But some give this Reason for Deifying of
these Creatures: They say, that in the beginning, Men that were of a fierce and
beastly Nature herded together and devoured one another; and being in,
perpetual War and Discord, the stronger always destroyed the weaker. In process
of time, those that were too weak for the other (taught at length by
Experience) got in Bodies together, and had the representations of those Beasts
(which were afterward Worshipped) in their Standards, to which they ran
together when they were in a Fright, upon every occasion, and so made up a
considerable Force against them that attempted to assault them. This was
imitated by the rest, and so the whole Multitude got into a Body; and hence it
was that that Creature, which every one supposed was the cause of his safety,
was honored as a God, as justly deserving that Adoration. And therefore at
this day the People of Egypt differ in their Religion, every one Worshipping
that Beast that their Ancestors did in the beginning. To conclude, they say
that the Egyptians, of all other People, are the most grateful for Favors done
them, judging Gratitude to be the safest Guard of their Lives, in as much as it
is evident, that all are most ready to do good to them with whom are laid up
the Treasures of a grateful Mind to make a suitable Return. And for these
Reasons the Egyptians seem to honor and adore their Kings no less than as if
they were very Gods. For they hold that without a Divine Providence they never
could be advanced to the Throne; and being they can confer the greatest Rewards
at their will and pleasure, they judge them partakers of the Divine Nature. Now
though we have said perhaps more than is needful of their sacred Creatures, yet
with this we have set forth the Laws of the Egyptians, which are very
remarkable. But when a Man comes to understand their Rites and Ceremonies in
Burying their Dead, he will be struck with much greater Admiration.

For after the Death of any of them, all the Friends and Kindred of the
deceased throw Dirt upon their Heads, and run about through the City; mourning
Their Burials.
and lamenting till such time as the Body be interred, and abstain from Baths,
Wine and all pleasant Meats in the mean time; and forbear to cloth themselves
with any rich Attire. They have three sorts of Funerals: The Stately and
Magnificent, the Moderate, and the Meanest. In the first they spend a Talent of
Silver, in the second twenty About 62 l. 10 s.
Minas, in the last they are at very small Charges. They that have the Charge
of wrapping up and burying the Body, are such as have been taught the Art by
their Ancestors. These give in a Writing to the Family of every thing that is
to be laid out in the Funeral, and inquire of them after what Manner they would
have the Body interred. When every thing is agreed upon, they take up the Body
and deliver it to them whose Office it is to take Care of it. Then the Chief
among them (who is called the Scribe) having the Body laid upon the Ground,
marks out how much of the left Side toward the Bowels is to be incis'd and
opened, upon which the The Dissector.
Paraschistes (so by them called) with an Ethiopian Stone dissects so much of
the Flesh as by the Law is justifiable, and having done it, he forthwith runs
away might and main, and all there present pursue him with Execrations, and
pelt him with Stones, as if he were guilty of some horrid Offense, for they
look upon him as an hateful Person, who wounds and offers Violence to the Body
in that kind, or does it any Prejudice whatsoever. But as for those whom they
call the The Imbalmers.
Taricheutae, they highly honor them, for they are the Priests Companions, and
as Sacred Persons are admitted into the Temple. As Soon as they come to the
dissected Body, one of the Taricheutae thrusts up his Hand through the Wound,
into the Breast of the Dead, and draws out all the Intestins, but the Reins and
the Heart. Another cleanses all the Bowels, and washes them in Phaenician Wine
mixed with diverse Aromatic Spices. Having at last washed the Body, they first
anoint it all over with the Oil of Cedar and other precious Ointments for the
space of (...).
forty days together; that done, they rub it well with Myrrh, Cinnamon, and
such like things, not only apt and effectual for long Preservation, but for
sweet scenting of the Body also, and so deliver it to the Kindred of the Dead,
with every Member so whole and entire, that no Part of the Body seems to be
altered till it come to the very Hairs of the Eyelids and the Eyebrows,
insomuch as the Beauty and Shape of the Face seems just as it was before. By
which Means many of the Egyptians laying up the Bodies of their Ancestors in
stately Monuments, perfectly see the true Visage and Countenance of those that
were buried, many Ages before they themselves were born. So that in viewing the
Proportion of every one of their Bodies and the Lineaments of their Faces, they
take exceeding great Delight, even as much as if they were still living among
them. Moreover, the Friends and nearest Relations of the Dead acquaint the
Judges and the rest of their Friends with the Time prefixed for the Funeral of
such an one by Name, declaring that such a day he is to pass the Lake. At which
Time forty Judges appear and sit together in a Semicircle, in a Place beyond
the Lake; where a Ship (before provided by such as have the Care of the
Business) is haled up to the Shore, governed by a Pilot, whom the Egyptians
call Charon. And therefore they say, that Orpheus seeing this Ceremony when he
was in Egypt, invented the Fable of Hell, partly imitating them in Egypt, and
partly adding something of his own; of which we shall speak particularly
hereafter. The Ship being now in the Lake, every one is at Liberty by the Law
to accuse the Dead before the Coffin be put aboard; and if any Accuser appears
and makes good his Accusation, that he lived an ill Life, then the Judges give
Sentence, and the Body is debarred from being buried after the usual Manner;
but if the Informer be convicted of a scandalous and malicious Accusation, he is
very severely punished. If no Informer appear, or that the Information prove
false, all the Kindred of the Deceased leave off Mourning, and begin to set
forth his Praises; but say nothing of his Birth (as is the Custom among the
Greeks) because they account all in Egypt to be equally noble. But they recount
how the deceased was educated from a Child, his 1. Godliness, 2. Righteousness,
3. Sobriety commended by the Heathens.
Breeding till he came to Man's Estate, his Piety toward the Gods and his
Justice toward Men, his Chastity and other Virtues, wherein he excelled; and
they pray and call upon the infernal Deities to receive the deceased into the
Society of the Just. The common People take it from the other, and approve of
all that is said in his Praise with a loud Shout, and set forth likewise his
Virtues with the highest Praises and Strains of Commendation, as he that is to
live for ever with the just (...), in the infernal Region.
in the Kingdom of JOVE. Then they (that have Tombs of their own) interr the
Corpse in Places appointed for that Purpose; they that have none of their own,
build a small Apartment in their own Houses, and rear up the Coffin to the
Sides of the strongest Wall of the Building. Such as are denied common Burial,
either because they are in Debt, or convicted of some horrid Crime, they bury
in their own Houses; and in Aftertimes it often happens that some of their
Kindred growing rich, pay off the Debts of the deceased, or get him absolved,
and then bury their Ancestor with State and Splendor. For amongst the
Egyptians it is a Sacred Constitution, that they should at their greatest Costs
honor their Parents and Ancestors, who are translated to an Eternal
Habitation. It Is a Custom likewise among them to give the Bodies of their
Parents in Pawn to their Creditors, and they that do not presently redeem them,
fall under the greatest Disgrace imaginable, and are denied Burial after their
Deaths. One may justly wonder at the Authors of this excellent Constitution,
who both by what we see practiced among the living, and by the decent Burial of
the dead, did (as much as possibly lay within the Power of Men) endeavor to
promote Honesty and faithful Dealing one with another. For the Greeks (as to
what concerned the Rewards of the Just and the Punishment of the Impious) had
nothing amongst them but invented Fables and Poetical Fictions, which never
wrought upon Men for the Amendment of their Lives, but on the contrary, were
despised and laughed at by the lewder Sort. But among the Egyptians, the
Punishment of the bad and the Rewards of the good being not told as idle Tales,
but every day seen with their own Eyes, all Sorts were warned of their Duties,
and by this Means was wrought and continued a most exact Reformation of Manners
and orderly Conversation among them. For those certainly are the best Laws that
advance Virtue and Honesty, and instruct Men in a prudent Converse in the
World, rather than those that tend only to the heaping up of Wealth, and teach
Men to be rich.

And now its necessary for us to speak of the Legislators of Egypt, who
established Lawmakers in EGYPT.
such Laws as are both unusual elsewhere, and admirable in themselves. After
the ancient way of living in Egypt, which was (according to their own Stories)
in the Reigns of the Gods and Demigods; they say that Mnevis, a Man of an
heroic Spirit 1. Mnevis.
and famous in his Generation for a commendable Life, was the first that
instituted written Laws, feigning that he received them from Mercury, and that
from them would accrue great Benefit and Advantage to the public. The same
Device Minos used among the Grecians in Creet, and Lycurgus among the
Lacedaemonians; The first pretending he had them from Jupiter, and the other
from Apollo. This Contrivance, its said, has been made use of amongst diverse
other Nations, who have reapt much Advantage by observing such Laws. For its
reported, that among the A People in Sarmatia, in Muscovy.
Aramaspi, Zathrausles pretended he received his Laws from a good Genius; and
that Zamolxis amongst the People called the A People of Scythia.
Getes patronized his by Vesta; and among the Jews, that Moses alleged the God
called I AO to be the Author of his. And this they did either because they
judged such an Invention (which brought about so much Good to Mankind) was
wonderfully commendable and of a divine Stamp; or that they concluded the
People would be more observant out of a reverend Regard to the Majesty and
Authority of those who were said to be the Lawmakers. The second Lawmaker of
Egypt, they say, was Sasyches, a 2. Sasyches.
very wise and prudent Prince, who added to the former, and made excellent Laws
also relating to the Honor and Worship of the Gods. He Is reported to have
found out Geometry, and to have taught the Art of Astronomy. The third who they
cry up is Sesostris, who not only excelled all the Kings of Egypt in his
warlike 3. Sesostris.
Atchievments, but framed Laws for Military Discipline among the Egyptians, and
put every thing in due Order relating to Military Affairs.

The fourth Lawmaker they say was King Bocchoris; a wise and prudent Man, 4.
Bocchoris.
he established every thing that concerned the Kings, and prescribed exact
Rules and Laws for the making of Contracts. He was so wise and of so piercing a
Judgment in his Decisions, that many of his Sentences for their Excellency are
kept in Memory to this very day. He was (they say) of a very weak Constitution
of Body and extraordinary covetous.

After him King Amasis employed himself in the framing of Laws for the
Directions 5. Amasis.
of the Nomarchi in their several Governments, which reduced all the Provinces
of Egypt into due Order. It Is said, he was a most wise, just and good 3 or 4
years before the death of Nebuchadnezzar, before Christ, 567.
Man, for which he was advanced to the Throne by the Egyptians, though he was not
of the Blood Royal. It Is repored, that when the Eleans were about to celebrate
the Olympic Games, and sent their Ambassadors to him to advise them how they
might manage those Sports most justly, he answered, That the way to do that was
for none of the Eleans to be Parties in the Contest.

Polycrates, the petty King of Samos, entered into a League of Friendship with
him: But when he heard how Polycrates oppressed his own Subjects, and injured
Strangers that came into his Country, he sent Ambassadors to him to advise to
Moderation; but not being able to persuade him, he at length sent a Letter to
him to let him know he dissolved and renounced the League that was betwixt
them, saying, He was not willing forthwith to be involved in Grief and Sorrow,
for that he perfectly foresaw the miserable. Fall that would presently overtake
one who governed so tyrannically. He was greatly admired, they* say, by the
Grecians both for his kind and gentle Disposition, and for that what he said,
shortly after befell Afterward crucified by Oroetis, Governor of Sardis, Olymp.
64. Her. l. 3. c. 125.
Polycrates.

Darius, the Father of Xerxes, is said to be the sixth who made Laws for the
Government of the Egyptians. For with Hatred and Abhorrence of the Impiety
Cambyses his Predecessor for his profaning of the Temples in Egypt, he made it
his Business to approve his reverend Regard toward the Gods, and his Kindness
toward Men; for the familiarly conversed with the Egyptian Priests, and learnt
their Theology, and acquainted himself with the Things and Transactions
recorded in their Sacred Registers, whereby he came to understand the Heroic
Spirits of the Ancient Kings, and their Kindness toward their Subjects, which
caused him to imitate them in the like, and upon that Account he was so highly
honored amongst them, that while he was alive he gained the Title of a GOD,
which none of the other Kings ever did; and when he was dead, the People
allowed him all those Ancient Honors due and accustomed to be done to the
former Kings of Egypt after their Deaths. And these are the Men (they say) who
composed the Laws of Egypt that are so celebrated and cried up amongst other
People. But in Aftertimes (they say) many of their excellent Laws were
abrogated by the Macedonians, who came to be Lords and Kings of EGYPT.

Having now given an Account of these Things, it remains we should declare Many
Grecians traveled into Egypt.
how many wise and learned Men among the Grecians journey'd into Egypt in
Ancient Times, to understand the Laws and Sciences of the Country. For the
Egyptian Priests out of their Sacred Records relate, that Orpheus, Musaeus,
Melampodes, Daedalus, Homer the Poet, Lycurgus the Spartan, Solon the Athenian,
Plato the Philosopher, Pythagoras the Samian, Eudoxus the Mathematician,
Democritus the Abderite, and Oenopides the Chian, all came to them in Egypt,
and they show certain Marks and Signs of all these being there. Of some by
their Pictures, and of others by the Names of Places, or Pieces of Work that
have been called after their Names. And they bring Arguments from every Trade
that is used, to prove that every thing wherein the Grecians excel, and for
which they are admired, was brought over from Egypt into Greece. For they say,
that Orpheus brought over most of the Religious Rites and Ceremonies, both as
to what concerns the Celebration of the Orgia, and relating to his wandering up
and down, and the whole entire Fable of Hell; for that the Ceremonies and Rites
of Osiris agree in every thing with those of Bacchus, and that those of Isis
and Ceres are one and the same, differing in nothing but the Name. And whereas
he introduces the wicked tormented in Hell, the Elysian Fields for the pious
and just, and the fictitious Appearances of Ghosts (commonly noised abroad)
they say he has done nothing but imitated the Egyptian Funerals. And that the
feigning of Mercury to be the Conductor of Souls, was derived from the old
Egyptian Custom, that he who brought back the dead Body of Apis (when he came
to the Place) delivered it to him who represented Cerberus, which being
communicated by Orpheus to the Greeks, Homer in Imitation of him inserted it in
his Poem,

Cyllenius leads to the infernal Strand, Homer Odyss. lib. 24 in the beginning.

The Hero's Ghost armed with his golden Wand.
And then he adds,

They reach the Effluxes of the (...). Ocean. Ogilb.
swelling Seas,
Then Leuca's rock; thence on their Course they keep
To the Sun's Portals and the Land of Sleep,
When straight they come into a flowery Mead,
Where after Death departed Souls reside.
The Name (they say) of Oceanus here mentioned is attributed to the River Nile,
for so the Egyptians in their own Language call it; by the Sun's Portals is
meant Heliopolis; the Meadow feigned to be the Habitation of the dead (they
say) is the Place bordering upon the Lake called Acherusia, near to Memphis,
surrounded with pleasant Ponds and Meadows, with Woods and Groves of Lotus and
sweet Canes; and that therefore he feigned those Places to be inhabited by the
dead, because that many of the Egyptian Funerals, and such as were the most
considerable were there; the dead Bodies being carried over the River and the
Lake Acherusia, and there interred. And that other Fictions among the Grecians
concerning Hell agree with those things that are done in Egypt even at this
day. For the Ship which transports the dead Bodies is called Baris, and that
for the Fare an Halfpenny is paid to the Ferryman, who is called in their own
Country Language, Charon. They say likewise, that near to these Places is the
Temple of black Hecates, and the Gates of Cocytus and Lethe, made up with
brazen Bars; and besides these, that there is another Gate of Truth, next to
which stands the headless Image of Justice. There are many others of these
Grecian Fictions remaining still in Egypt, which both in Name and Practice
continue there to this day. For in the City of Acanthus, beyond Nile toward
Lybia, about (...), Fifty.
an hundred and twenty Furlongs from Memphis stands an Hogshead full of Holes,
into which (they say) three hundred Priests every day pour in Water carried out
of the River Nile. The This Fable of the Ass is feigned by Cratinus, an
Athenian Comedian who flourished in the 81. Olymp. he feigns one in Hell
twisting a Rope and an Ass gnawing in pieces what he had done. Whence the
Proverb, Contorquet piger funiculum. See Pausanias in Phoc. c. 29. where the
person twisting the Rope is called Ocnus, signifying Slothful. Funiculum
intorquet longum dextra impiger Ocnus. Moxque asina intortum ventre profunda
vorat. Alciat. Embl. 91.
Fable likewise of the Ass is acted at a solemn Festival not far from thence,
where a Man is twisting a long Rope, and many that follow him are as fast
undoing what he had before wrought.

The Egyptians further say, That Melampodes brought into Greece the Rites and
Solemnities of Bacchus, and the fabulous Story of Saturn and the Titans, and
the entire History of the Sufferings of the Gods out of Egypt. And they say
that Dedalus imitated the Labyrinth there, which remains to this very Day,
built at first by Mendes, or (as some report) by King Marus, many Years before
the Reign of Minos. They affirm likewise, that the ancient Statues of Egypt are
of the same size and proportion with those set up by Dedalus in Greece; and
that the stately Porch of Vulcan in Memphis, was the handiwork of Dedalus, and
that he was in such high Esteem among them, that they placed his Statue of Wood
(made by his own Hands) in the Temple; whom at length for his Ingenuity and
excellent Inventions, they honored as a God; for in one of the Islands
belonging to Memphis, a Temple dedicated to Dedalus is resorted unto by the
Inhabitants at this day.

That Homer came into Egypt, amongst other Arguments, they endeavor to prove
it especially by the Potion Helen gave Telemachus (in the Story of Menelaus) to
cause him to forget all his Sorrows past. For the Poet seems to have made an
exact Experiment of the Potion Nepenthes, which he says Helen received from
Polymnestes the Wife of Thonus, and brought it from Thebes in Egypt; and indeed
in that City even at this Day, the Women use this Medicine with good success:
And they say, that in ancient Times, the Medicine for the Cure of Anger and
Sorrow, was only to be found among the Diopolitans; Thebes and Diospolis being
by them affirmed to be one and the same City. And that Venus from an ancient
Tradition, is called by the Inhabitants, Golden Venus; and that there is a
Field so called, within the Liberties of Memphis: And that Homer derived from
Egypt his Story of the Embraces between Jupiter and Juno, and their Traveling
into Ethiopia; because the Egyptians every Year carry Jupiter's Tabernacle over
the River into Africa, and a few Days after bring it back again, as if the God
had returned out of Ethiopia: And that the Fiction of the Nuptials of these Two
Deities was taken from the Solemnization of their Festivals, at which time both
their Tabernacles adorned with all sorts of Flowers, are carried by the Priests
to the Top of a Mountain. To these they add, that Lycurgus, Solon, and Plato
borrowed from Egypt many of those Laws which they established in their several
Commonwealths. And that Pythagoras learnt his mysterious and sacred
Expressions, the Art of Geometry, Arithmetic, and Transmigration of Souls, in
Egypt. They are of Opinion likewise, that Democrates was Five Years in Egypt,
and in that time much improved himself in the Art of Astrology. So they say,
thet Oenopides by his familiar Converse with the Priests and Astrologers,
amongst other Advantages, gained especially the Knowledge of the Periodical
Motion of the Sun; and came to know that his Course is contrary to that of the
Stars: And that Eudoxus likewise by studying Astrology in Egypt, left many
useful Monuments of his Art behind him in Greece, for which his Name was
famous. Lastly, they say that the most famous Carvers of Images in Stone.
Statuaries of ancient Time lived amongst them for some time, as Telecles and
Theodorus, the Sons of Rhaecus, who made the Statue of Apollo Pythius in Samos;
for its said, that one half of this Statue was made by Telecles in Samos, and
the other part was finished by Theodorus in Ephesus; and that there was such an
exact Symmetry of Parts, that the whole seemed to be the Work of one and the
same hand: Which Art (they say) the Grecians were not at all acquainted with,
but that it was in frequent use among the Egyptians. For with them the exact
Cut of a Statue is not judged of by the Eye and Fancy (as it is by the Greeks)
but after that they have cut out the Stone, and wrought every part by it self,
then they measure the exact proportion of the whole, from the least Stone to
the greatest. For they divide the whole Body into One and Twenty Parts, and One
Fourth, which makes up the Symmetry and entire proportion. Upon which, after
the Workmen have agreed among themselves of the bigness of the Statue, they go
away, and every one of them carve their several Parts so exactly, according to
their just Proportions, that the singular skill of these Workmen is wonderful
and amazing. And thus the Of Apollo beforementioned.
Statue in Sainos which (according to the Art and Skill in Egypt) was cut in
Two from the Head to the Privities exactly in the middle, yet notwithstanding
was equally proportioned in every part. And they say, that it exactly resembles
the Statues in Egypt, having its Hands stretched out, and its Thighs in a
walking Posture. But we have now said enough of such things as are remarkable
and worthy of memory in Egypt. In the next Book (according to what we purposed
in the beginning of this) we shall give an account of things done elsewhere,
and of other Fables and Srories, beginning with the Actions of the Assyrians in
Asia.

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK II.
The PREFACE.
THE Former Book (being the First of the whole) contains the Affairs of Egypt;
among which are related what is fabulously reported of the Gods of Egypt, and
what strange and wonderful Accounts are given of the Nature of Nile, and other
things concerning that River. We have spoken there likewise of the Land of
Egypt, their ancient Kings, and their several Actions; and have added the
Building of the Pyramids, reckoned amongst the Seven Wonders of the World. We
have likewise set forth their Laws and Courts of Justice, and the strange
Adoration of Beasts in Egypt. Lastly, the manner of their Burials, and the
Greeks that were famous for Learning, and traveled into Egypt, and brought
over from thence many useful and profitable Arts and Sciences into Greece. In
this next Book we shall describe the things done in Asia in ancient times,
beginning with the Assyrian Empire.

CHAP. I.
Ninus the First King of Assyria: His Acts: He invades Babylonia, Media, and
overruns several other Countries. Nineve built by him; the Description of it;
Marries Semiramis; her Descent. Derceta the Philistines Dagon. His Expedition
against Bactria; he dies. Semiramis builds Babylon, and several strange Works
there; as a Passage under Water, Jupiter's Temple, etc. Hanging Gardens in
Babylon. A vast Stone cut out. The strange property of a Morass. Her several
Expeditions. The wonderful Lake in Ethiopia; their Burials there. Semiramis's
Expedition into India: Her mock Elephants. Her Expedition proves fruitless. She
surrenders her Kingdom to Ninyas her Son; her End.

ASIA was anciently governed by its own Native Kings, of whom there is no
History extant, either as to any memorable Actions they performed, or so much
as to their Names.

Ninus is the First King of Assyria that is recorded in History; Ninus, Ann.
Mun. 2737. Usher's Ann. Time of Deborah; but generally Chronologers make him
far more ancient, Ann. Mun. 2000, Ant. Chr. 1950, about the time of Abraham's
Birth.
he performed many great and noble Actions; of whom we have designed to set
forth something particularly.

He was naturally of a Warlike Disposition, and very ambitious of Honor and
Glory, and therefore caused the strongest of his Young Men to be trained up in
Martial Discipline, and by long and continual Exercise inured them readily to
undergo all the Toyls and Hazards of War.

Having therefore raised a gallant Army, he made a League with Arieus King of
Arabia, that was at that time full of strong and valiant Men. For that Nation
are constant Lovers of Liberty, never upon any Terms admitting of any Foreign
Prince: And therefore neither the Persian, nor the Macedonian Kings after them,
(though they were most powerful in Arms) were ever able to conquer them. For
Arabia being partly Desert, and partly parcht up for want of Water (unless it
be in some secret Wells and Pits known only to the Inhabitants) cannot be
subdued by any Foreign Force.

Ninus therefore, the Assyrian King, with the Prince of Arabia his Assistant,
with a numerous Army, invaded the Babylonians, then next bordering upon him:
For the Babylon that is now, was not built at that time; but the Province of
Babylon had in it then many other considerable Cities, whose Inhabitants he
easily subdued, (being rude and unexpert in Matters of War,) and imposed upon
them a Yearly Tribute; but carried away the King with all his Children
Prisoners, and after put them to Death. Afterward he entered Armenia with a
great Army, and having overthrown some Cities, he struck Terror into the rest,
and thereupon their King Barzanus seeing himself unable to deal with him, met
him with many rich Presents, and submitted himself; whom Ninus out of his
generous dissition, courteously received, and gave him the Kingdom of Armenia,
upon condition he should be his Friend for the future, and supply him with Men
and Provision for his Wars as he should have occasion.

Being thus strengthened, he invaded Media, whose King Pharnus coming out
against him with a mighty Army, was utterly routed, and lost most of his Men,
and was taken Prisoner with his Wife and Seven Children, and afterward
Crucified. Crucified.


Ninus being thus successful and prosperous, his Ambition rose the higher, and
his desire most ardent to conquer all in Asia, which lay between Tanais and
Nile; (so far does Prosperity and Excess in getting much, inflame the Desire to
gain and compass more.) In order hereunto, he made one of his Friends Governor
of the Province of Media, and he himself in the mean time marched against the
other Provinces of Asia, and subdued them all in Seventeen Years time, except
the Indians and Bactrians. But no Writer has given any Account of the several
Ninus Conquers several Countries.
Battles he fought, nor of the number of those Nations he conquered; and
therefore following Ctesias the Cnidian, we shall only briefly run over the
most famous and considerable Countries. He overran all the Countries bordering
upon the Mediterranean.
Sea, together with the adjoining Continent, as Egypt and Phenicia, Celo-Syria,
Cilicia, Pamphylia, Lycia, Caria, Phrygia, Mysia and Lydia; the Province of
Troas and Phrygia upon the Hellespont, together with Propontis, Bithynia,
Cappadocia, and the Barbarous Nations adjoining upon Pontus, as far as to
Tanais; he gained likewise the Country of the Caddusians, Tarpyrians,
Hyrcanians, Dacians, Derbians, Carmanians, Choroneans, Borchanians and
Parthians. He pierced likewise into Persia, the Provinces of Susiana, and that
called Caspiana, through those narrow Straits, which from thence are called the
Caspian Gates. He subdued likewise many other less considerable Nations, which
would be too tedious here to recount. After much toil and labor in vain,
because of the difficulty of the Passes, and the multitude of those Warlike
Inhabitants, he was forced to put off his War against the Bactrians to another
opportunity.

Having marched back with his Army into Syria, he marked out a Place for the
building of a stately City: For in as much as he had surpast all his Ancestors
in the glory and success of his Arms, he was resolved to build one of that
state and grandeur, as should not only be the greatest then in the World, but
such as none that ever should come after him should be able easily to exceed.

The King of Arabia he sent back with his Army into his own Country, with many
rich Spoils, and noble Gifts. And he himself having got a great number of his
Forces together, and provided Money and Treasure, and other things necessary for
the purpose, built a City near the River Euphrates, very famous for its Ninive
built.
Walls and Fortifications; of a long Form; for on both sides it ran out in
length above About 23 Miles.
an Hundred and Fifty Furlongs; but the Two lesser Angles were only Ninety
Furlongs apiece; so that the Circumference of the whole was About 74 Miles.
Four Hundred and Fourscore Furlongs. And the Founder was not herein deceived,
for none ever after built the like, either as to the largeness of its
Circumference, or the stateliness of its Walls. For the Wall was an Hundred
Foot in Height, and so broad as Three Chariots might be driven together upon it
in breast: There were Fifteen Hundred Turrets upon the Walls, each of them Two
Hundred Foot high. He appointed the City to be inhabited chiefly by the richest
Assyrians, and gave liberty to People of any other Nation, (to as many as
would) to dwell there, and allowed to the Citizens a large Territory next
adjoining to them, and called the City after his own Name Ninive.
Ninus.

When he had finished his Work here, he marched with an Army against the
Bactrians, where he married Semiramis; who being so famous above any of her Sex
(as in History it is related) we cannot but say something of her here in this
Place, being one advanced from so low a Fortune, to such a state and degree of
Honor and Worldly Glory.

There Is a City in Syria, called Ascalon, near which is a deep Lake abounding
Semiramis her Descent.
with Fish, where not far off stands a Temple dedicated to a famous Goddess
called by the Syrians This was the Philistines Dagon. Vid. Ovid. Met. lib. 4.
Derceto, she represents a Woman in her Face, and a Fish in all other parts of
her Body, upon the account following, as the most Judicious among the
Inhabitants report; for they say, that Venus being angry at this Goddess,
caused her to fall into a vehement pang of Love with a beautiful Young Man, who
was among others sacrificing to her, and was got with Child by him, and brought
to Bed of a Daughter; and being ashamed afterward of what she had done, she
killed the Young Man, and exposed the Child among Rocks in the Desert, and
through Sorrow and Shame cast her self into the Lake, and was afterward
transformed into a Fish; whence it came to pass, that at this very Day the
Syrians eat no Fish, but adore them as Gods. They say that the Infant that was
exposed, was both preserved and nourished by a most wonderful Providence, by
the means of a great Flock of Pigeons that nestled near to the Place where the
Child lay: For with their Wings they cherisht it, and kept it warm; and
observing where the Herdsmen and other Shepherds left their Milk in the
Neighboring Cottages, took it up in their Bills, and as so many Nurses thrust
their Beaks between the Infants Lips, and so instil'd the Milk: And when the
Child was a Year old, and stood in need of stronger Nourishment, the Pigeons
fed it with pieces of Cheese which they picked out from the rest: When the
Shepherds returned, and found their Cheeses picked round, they wondered (at
first) at the thing; but observing afterward how it came to pass, they not only
found out the cause, but likewise a very beautiful Child, which they forthwith
carried away to their Cottages, and made a Present of it to the King's
Superintendent of his Flocks and Herds (whose Name was Simma) who (having no
Children of his own) carefully bred up the Young Lady as if she had been his
own Daughter, and called her Semiramis, a denomination in the Syrian Language
derived from Pigeons, which the Syrians ever after adored for Goddesses. And
these are the Stories told of Semiramis.

Being now grown up, and exceeding all others of her Sex for the Charms of her
Beauty, one of the King's great Officers called Menon, was sent to take an
account of the Kings Herds and Flocks: This Man was Lord President of the
King's Council, and chief Governor of Syria, and lodging upon this occasion at
Simma's House, at the sight of Semiramis, fell in love with her, and with much
entreaty obtained her from Simma, and carried her away with him to Ninive,
where he Married her, and had by her Two Sons, Hypates and Hydaspes: And being
a Woman of admirable Parts as well as Beauty, her Husband was altogether at her
Devotion, and never would do any thing without her Advice, which was ever
successful.

About this time Ninus having finished his City (called after his own Name,)
Ninus's Expedition against Bactria.
prepared for his Expedition against the Bactrians; and having had experience
of the greatness of their Forces, the valor of their Soldiers, and the
difficulties of passing into their Country, he raised an Army of the choicest
Men he could pick out from all Parts of his Dominions'; for because he was
baffled in his former Expedition, he was resolved to invade Bactria with a far
stronger Army than he did before. Bringing therefore his whole Army together at
a General Randezvouz, there were numbered (as Ctesias writes) Seventeen Hundred
Thousand Foot, above Two Hundred and Ten Thousand Horse, and no fewer than Ten
Thousand and Six Hundred Hooked Chariots. This number at the first view seems
to be very incredible; but to such as seriously consider the largeness and
populousness of Asia, it cannot be judged impossible. For if any (not to say
any thing of the Eight Hundred Thousand Men that Darius had with him in his
Expedition against the Scythians, and the innumerable Army Xerxes brought over
with him into Grecce) will but take notice of things done lately, even as of
Yesterday, he will more easily credit what we now say. For in Sicily Dionysius led
only out of that one City of Syracuse, an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Foot, and
Twelve Thousand Horse; and lancht out of one Port, a Navy of Four Hundred Sail,
of which some were of Three Tire of Oars, and others of Five: And the Romans a
little before the Times of Hannibal, raised in Italy of their own Citizens and
Confederates, an Army little less than a Million of Fighting Men; and yet all
Italy is not to be compared with one Province of Asia for number of Men. But
this may sufficiently convince them, that compute the ancient Populousness of
the Countries by the present depopulations of the Cities at this day.

Ninus therefore marching with these Forces against the Bactrians, divided his
Army into Two Bodies, because of the straitness and difficulty of the Passages.
There are in Bactria many large and populous Cities, but one is more especially
Famous, called Bactria, in which the King's Palace, for greatness and
magnificence, and the Citadel for strength, far excel all the rest.

Oxyartes reigned there at this time, who caused all that were able, to bear
Arms, and mustered an Army of Four Hundred Thousand Men. With these he met the
Enemy at the Streights, entering into his Country, where he suffered Ninus to
enter with part of his Army: When he saw a competent number entered, he fell
upon them in the open Plain, and fought them with that resolution, that the
Bactrians put the Assyrians to flight, and pursuing them to the next Mountains,
killed a Hundred Thousand of their Enemies; but after the whole Army entered,
the Bactrians were overpowered by number, and were broken, and all fled to
their several Cities, in order to defend every one his own Country. Ninus
easily subdued all the rest of the Forts and Castles; but Bactria it self was
so strong and well provided, that he could not force it; which occasioned a
long and tedious Siege, so that the Husband of Semiramis (who was there in the
King's Camp) being Lovesick, impatient of being any longer without his Wife,
sent for her, who being both discreet and courageous, and endowed with other
noble Qualifications, readily embraced the opportunity of showing to the World
her own natural Valor and Resolution; and that she might with more safety
perform so long a Journey, she put on such a Garment as whereby she could not
be discerned whether she were a Man or a Woman; and so made, that by it she
both preserved her Beauty from being scorcht by the heat in her Journey, and
likewise was thereby more nimble and ready for any business she pleased to
undertake, being of her self a youthful and sprightly Lady; and this sort of
Garment was in so high esteem, that the Medes afterward when they came to be
Lords of Asia, wore Semiramis's Gown, and the Persians likewise after them.

As soon as she came to Bactria, and observed the manner of the Siege, how
Assaults were made only in open and plain Places most likely to be entered, and
that none dared to approach the Citadel, because of its natural Strength and
Fortisication, and that they within took more care to defend the lower and
weaker parts of the Walls, than the Castle where they neglected their Guards,
she took some with her that were skilful in climbing up the Rocks, and with
them with much Toil, passed over a deep Trench, and possessed her self of part
of the Castle; whereupon she gave a Signal to them that were assaulting the
Wall upon the Plain. Then they that were within the City being suddenly struck
with a Panick Fear at the taking of the Castle, in desperation of making any
further defense forsook the Walls.

The City being taken in this manner, the King greatly admired the Valor of
the Woman, and bountifully rewarded her, and was presently so passionately
affected at the sight of her Beauty, that he used all the Arguments imaginable
to persuade her Husband to bestow his Wife upon him, promising him as a Reward
of his Kindness, to give him his Daughter Sosana in Marriage: But he absolutely
refused; upon which the King threatened him, that if he would not consent, he
would pluck out his Eyes.

Menon hereupon out of fear of the King's Threats, and overpowered with the
Love of his Wife, fell into a distracted Rage and Madness, and forthwith hanged
himself. And this was the occasion of the advancement of Semiramis to the Regal
state and dignity.

Ninus having now possessed himself of all the Treasures of Bactria (where was
abundance of Gold and Silver) and settled his Affairs throughout the whole
Province of Bactria, returned with his Army to his own Country.

Afterward he had a Son by Semiramis, called Ninyas, and died leaving his Wife
Queen Regent. She buried her Husband Ninus in the Royal Palace, and raised over
him a Mount of Earth of a wonderful bigness, being Nine Furlongs in height, and
ten in breadth, as Ctesias says: So that the City standing in a Plain near to
the River Euphrates, the Mount (many Furlongs off) looks like a stately
Citadel. And it is said, that it continues to this day, though Nin^ve was
destroyed by the Medes when they ruined the Assyrian Empire.

Semiramis was naturally of an high aspiring Spirit, ambitious to excel all her
Predecessors in glorious Actions, and Semiramis builds Babylon.
therefore employed all her Thoughts about the building of a City in the
Province of Babylon; and to this end having provided Semiramis Reigned, Ann.
Mund. 2006, Ant. Chr. 2944. Petavius says, Abraham was born in the 24. h Year
of her Reign, lib. 1. c. 2.
Architects, Artists, and all other Necessaries for the Work, She got together
Two Millions of Men out of all Parts of the Empire to be employed in the
building of the City. It was so built as that the River Euphrates ran through
the middle of it, and she compassed it round with a Wall of Three Hundred and
Sixty Furlongs in Circuit, and adorned with many stately Turrets; and such was
the state and grandeur of the Work, that the Walls were of that breadth, as
that Six Chariots abreast might be driven together upon them. Their height was
such as exceeded all Men's belief that heard of it (as Ctesias Cnidius relates)
But Clitarchus, and those who afterward went over with Alexander into Asia,
have written that the Walls were in Circuit Three Hundred Sixty Five Furlongs;
the Queen making them of that Compass, to the end that the Furlongs should be
as many in number as the Days of the Year: They were of Brick cemented with
Bitumen, Asphaltes.
Brimstone; in height as Ctesias says Fifty Orgya, is 6 Foot; so 50 Crgya's is
100 Yards.
Orgyas; but as some of the later Writers report, but Fifty Cubits only, and
that the Breadth was but a little more than what would allow two Chariots to be
driven afront. There were Two Hundred and Fifty Turrets, in height and
thickness proportionable to the largeness of the Wall. It is not to be wondered
at, that there were so few Towers upon a Wall of so great a Circuit, being that
in many Places round the City, there were deep Morasses; so that it was judged
to no purpose to raise Turrets there where they were so naturally fortified:
Between the Wall and the Houses, there was a Space left round the City of Two
Hundred Foot.

That the Work might be the more speedily dispatched, to each of her Friends was
allotted a Furlong, with an allowance of all Expenses necessary for their
several Parts, and commanded all should be finished in a Years time; which
being diligently perfected with the Queen's Approbation, she then made a Bridge
over the narrowest part of the River, Five Furlongs in length, laying the
Supports and Pillars of the Arches with great Art and Skill in the Bottom of
the Water Twelve Foot distance from each other. That the Stones might be the
more firmly joined, they were bound together with Hooks of Iron, and the Joints
filled up with melted Lead. And before the Pillars, she made and placed
Defenses, with sharp pointed Angles, to receive the Water before it beat upon
the flat sides of the Pillars, which caused the Course of the Water to run
round by degrees gently and moderately as far as to the broad sides of the
Pillars, so that the sharp Points of the Angles cut the Stream, and gave a
check to its violence, and the roundness of them by little and little giving
way, abated the force of the Current. This Bridge was (...) wi^h ^reat ^oices
and Planks of Cedar, Cypress and Palm Trees, and was Thy(...) ^oot in breadth,
and for Art and Curiosity, yielded to none of the Works o^ (...). On either
side of the River she raised a Bank, as broad (...) great cost drew it out in
length an Hundred Furlongs. She built likewise Two Palaces at each end of the
Bridge upon the Bank of the River, whence she might have a Prospect over the
whole City, and make her Passage as by Keys to the most convenient Places in
it, as she had occasion. And whereas Euphrates runs through the middle of
Babylon, making its course to the South, the Palaces lie the one on the East,
and the other on the West Side of the River; both built at exceeding Costs and
Expense. For that on the West had an high and stately Wall, made of well burnt
Brick, 7 Miles and an half.
Sixty Furlongs in compass; within this was drawn another of a round
Circumference, upon which were portray'd in the Bricks before they were burnt,
all sorts of living Creatures, as if it were to the Life, laid with great Art
in curious Colors. This Wall was in Circuit Forty Furlongs, Three Hundred
Bricks thick, and in height (as Ctesias says) 50 Origia' s.
a Hundred Yards, upon which were Turrets an Hundred and Forty Yards high. The
Third and most inward Wall immediately surrounded the Palace, Thirty Furlongs
in Compass, and far surmounted the middle Wall, both in height and thickness;
and on this Wall and the Towers were represented the Shapes of all sorts of
Living Creatures, artificially expressed in most lively Colors. Especially was
represented a General Hunting of all sorts of wild Beasts, each Four Cubits
high and upwards; amongst these was to be seen Semiramis on Horseback, striking
a Leopard through with a Dart, and next to her, her Husband Ninus in close
Fight with a Lion, piercing him with his Lance. To this Palace she built
likewise Three Gates, under which were Banqueting Houses.
Apartments of Brass for Entertainments, into which Passages were opened by by
a certain Engine. This Palace far excelled that on the other side of the River,
both in greatness and adornments. For the outmost Wall of that (made of well
burnt Brick) was but Thirty Furlongs in compass. Instead of the curious
Portrature of Beasts, there were the Brazen Statues of Ninus and Semiramis, the
great Officers, and of Jupiter, whom the Babylonians call Belus; and likewise
Armies drawn up in Battalia, and diverse sorts of Hunting were there
represented, to the great diversion and pleasure of the Beholders. After all
these in a low Ground in Babylon, she sunk a Place for a Pond Apiece,
every Square being Almost 40 Miles.
Three Hundred Furlongs in length, lined with Brick, and cemented with
Brimstone, and the whole Five and Thirty Foot in depth: Into this having first
turned the River, she then made a Passage in nature of a Vault, from one Palace
to another, A Passage made under Water from one Palace to another.
whose Arches were built of firm and strong Brick, and plastered all over on
both sides with Bitumen Four Cubits thick. The Walls of this Vault were Twenty
Bricks in thickness, and Twelve Foot high, beside and above the Arches; and the
breadth was Fifteen Foot. This Piece of Work being finished in Two Hundred and
Sixty Days, the River was turned into its ancient Channel again, so that the
River flowing over the whole Work, Semiramis could go from one Palace to the
other, without passing over the River. She made likewise Two Brazen Gates at
either end of the Vault, which continued to the time of the Persian Empire. In
the middle of the City, she built a Temple to Jupiter, whom the Babylonians
Jupiter's Temple.
call Belus (as we have before said) of which since Writers differ amongst
themselves, and the Work is now wholly decayed through length of Time, there is
nothing that can certainly be related concerning it: Yet it is apparent it was
of an exceeding great height, and that by the advantage of it, the Chaldean
Astrologers exactly observed the setting and rising of the Stars. The whole was
built of Brick, cemented with Brimstone, with great Art and Cost. Upon the top
she placed Three Statues of beaten Gold of Jupiter, Juno and Rhea. That of
Jupiter stood upright in the posture as if he were walking; he was Forty Foot
in height, and weighed a Thousand Babylonish Talents. The Statue of Rhea was of
the same weight sitting on a Golden Throne, having Two Lions standing on either
side, one at her Knees, and near to them Two exceeding great Serpents of
Silver, weighing Thirty Talents apiece. Here likewise the Image of Juno stood
upright, and weighed Eight Hundred Talents, grasping a Serpent by the Head in
her right Hand, and holding a Scepter adorned with precious Stones in her left.
For all these Deities there was placed a Or Altar.
Common Table made of beaten Gold, Forty Foot long, and Fifteen broad, weighing
Five Hundred Talents: Upon which stood Two Cups weighing Thirty Talents, and
near to them as many Censers weighing Three Hundred Talents: There were there
likewise placed Three Drinking Bowls of Gold, one of which dedicated to
Jupiter, weighed Twelve Hundred Babylonish Talents, but the other Two Six
Hundred apiece; but all those the Persian Kings sacrilegiously carried away.
And length of Time has either altogether consumed, or much defaced the Palaces
and the other Structures; so that at this day but a small part of this Babylon
is inhabited, and the greatest part which lay within the Walls is turned into
Tillage and Pasture.

There was likewise a Hanging Garden (as it is called) near the Citadel, not See
Qu Curtius lib. 5. Sect. 1.
built by Semiramis, but by a later Prince, called Cyrus, for the sake of a
Curtesan, who being a Persian (as they say) by Birth, and coveting Meadows on
Mountain Tops, desired the King by an Artificial Plantation to imitate the Land
in Persia. This Garden was Four Hundred Foot Square, and the Ascent up to it
was as to the Top of a Mountain, and had Buildings and Apartments out of one
into another, like unto a Theater. Under the Steps to the Ascent, were built
Arches one above another, rising gently by degrees, which supported the whole
Plantation. The highest Arch upon which the Platform of the Garden was laid,
was Fifty Cubits high, and the Garden it self was surrounded with Battlements
and Bulwarks. The Walls were made very strong, built at no small Charge and
Expense, being Two and Twenty Foot thick, and every Sally-port Ten Foot wide:
Over the several Stories of this Fabric, were laid Beams and Summers of huge
Massy Stones each Sixteen Foot long, and Four broad. The Roof over all these
was first covered with Reeds, daubed with abundance of Brimstone; then upon
them was laid double Tiles pargeted together with a hard and durable (...),
Such as we call Plaster of Paris.
Mortar, and over them after all, was a Covering with Sheets of Lead, that the
Wet which drencht through the Earth, might not rot the Foundation. Upon all
these was laid Earth of a convenient depth, sufficient for the growth of the
greatest Trees. When the Soil was laid even and smooth, it was planted with all
sorts of Trees, which both for Greatness and Beauty, might delight the
Spectators. The Arches (which stood one above another, and by that means darted
light sufficient one into another) had in them many stately Rooms of all Kinds,
and for all purposes. But there was one that had in it certain Engines, whereby
it drew plenty of Water out of the River through certain Conduits and
Conveyances from the Platform of the Garden, and no body without was the wiser,
or knew what was done. This Garden (as we said before) was built in later Ages.

But Semiramis built likewise other Cities upon the Banks of Euphrates and
Tigris, where she established Marts for the vending of Merchandise brought from
Media and Paretacenes, and other Neighboring Countries. For next to Nile and
Ganges, Euphrates and Tigris are the noblest Rivers of all Asia, and have their
Spring-heads in the Mountains of Arabia, and are distant one from another
Fifteen Hundred Furlongs. They run through Media and Paretacena into
Mesopotamia, which from its lying in the middle between these Two Rivers, has
gained from them that Name; thence passing through the Province of Babylon,
they empty themselves into the The Persi Gulf.
Red Sea. These being very large Rivers, and passing through diverse Countries,
greatly enrich the Merchants that traffic in those Parts; so that the
Neighboring Places are full of Wealthy Mart Towns, and greatly advanced the
glory and majesty of Babylon.

Semiramis likewise caused a great Stone to be cut out of the Mountains of
Armenia, The gr(...) Stone (...) of the (...) tains by (...) ramis.
an Hundred and Twenty Five Foot in length, and Five in breadth and thickness;
this she conveyed to the River by the help of many Yokes of Oxen and Asses, and
there put it Aboard a Ship, and brought it safe by Water to Babylon, and set it
up in the most remarkable Highway as a wonderful Spectacle to all Beholders.
From its shape it is called an * Obelisk, and is accounted one of the Seven
Wonders of the World. Ob^los in Gre(...) signifies a S(...)
There are indeed many remarkable and wonderful things to be seen in Babylon;
but amongst these, the great quantity of Brimstone that there flows out of the
Ground, is not to be the least admired, which is so much, that it not only
supplied all their occasions in building such great and mighty Works, but the
common People profusely gather it, and when its dry, burn it instead of Fuel;
and though it be drawn out by an innumerable Company of People, as from a great
Fountain, yet it is as plentiful as ever it was before. Near this Fountain
there is a Spring not big, but very fierce and violent, for it casts forth a
Sulphurous and gross Vapor, which suddenly kills every living Creature that
comes near to it; for the Breath being stopped a long time, and all power of
Respiration taken away by the force of the Exhalation, the Body presently
swells so, that the Parts about the Lungs are all in a Flame.

Beyond the River there is a Morass, about which is a crusty Earth; if any
unacquainted Strange Properties of a Morass.
with the Place get into it, at first he floats upon the Top, when he comes
into the Middle he is violently haled away, and striving to help himself, seems
to be held so fast by something or other, that all his Labor to get loose is
in vain. And first his Feet, then his Legs and Thighs to his Loins are
benumbed, at length his whole Body is stupify'd, and then down he sinks to the
Bottom, and presently after is cast up dead to the Surface. And thus much for
the Wonders of BABYLON.

When Semiramis had finished all her Works, she marched with a great Army into
Her several Expeditions.
Media, and encamped near to a Mountain called Bagistan; there she made a
Garden twelve Furlongs in Compass: It was in a plain Champain Country, and had
a great Fountain in it, which watered the whole Garden. Mount Bagistan is
dedicated to Jupiter, and toward one side of the Garden has steep Rocks
seventeen Furlongs from the Top to the Bottom. She cut out a Piece of the lower
Part of the Rock, and caused her own Image to be carved upon it, and a Hundred
of her Guard that were Launceteers standing round about her. She wrote likewise
in Syriac Letters upon the Rock, That Semiramis ascended from the Plain to the
Top of the Mountain by laying the Packs and Fardles of the Beasts that followed
her one upon another.

Marching away from ence, she came to Chaone, a City of Media, where she
encamped upon a rising Ground, from whence she took notice of an exceeding
great and high Rock, where she made another very great Garden in the very
Middle of the Rock, and built upon it stately Houses of Pleasure, whence she
might both have a delightful Prospect into the Garden, and view the Army as
they lay encamped below in the Plain; being much delighted with this Place she
stayed here a considerable Time, giving up her self to all kinds of Pleasures
and Delights, for she forbore marrying lest she should then be deposed from the
Government, and in the mean time she made Choice of the handsomest Commanders
to be her Gallants; but after they had layn with her she cut off their Heads.

From hence she marched toward Ecbatana, and arrived at the Mountain Zarcheum,
which being many Furlongs in Extent, and full of steep Precipices and craggy
Rocks, there was no passing but by long and tedious Windings and Turnings. To
leave therefore behind her an Eternal Monument of her Name, and to make a short
Cut for her Passage, she caused the Rocks to be hewed down, and the Valleys to
be filled up with Earth, and so in a short time at a vast Expense laid the Way
open and plain, which to this day is called Semiramis's WAY.

When she came to Ecbatana, which is situated in a low and even Plain, she
built there a stately Palace, and bestowed more of her Care and Pains here than
she had done at any other Place. For the City wanting Water (there being no
Spring near) she plentifully supplied it with good and wholesome Water, brought
thither with a great deal of Toil and Expense, after this manner: There Is
Mountain called Orontes, twelve Furlongs distant from the City, exceeding high
and steep for the Space of five and twenty Furlongs up to the Top; on the other
side of this Mount there is a great Mear which empties it self into the River.
At the Foot of this Mountain she dug a Canal fifteen Foot in Breadth and forty
in Depth, through which she conveyed Water in great Abundance into the City.
And these are the Things which she did in Media.

Afterward she made a Progress through Persia and all the rest of her
Dominions in Asia, and all along as she went she plained all the Way before
her, levelling both Rocks and Mountains. On the other hand in Champain
Countries she would raise Eminences on which she would sometimes build
Sepulchers for her Officers and Commanders, and at other times Towns and
Cities. Throughout her whole Expeditions she always used to raise an Ascent,
upon which she pitched her own Pavilion, that from thence she might have a View
of her whole Army. Many Things which she performed in Asia remain to this day,
and are called Semiramis's Works.

Afterward she passed through all Egypt, and having conquered the greatest
Part of Lybia, she went to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, and there inquired of
the Oracle how long she should live; which returned her this Answer, That she
should leave this World and afterward be for ever honored by some Nations in
Asia, when Ninyas her Son should be plotting against her.

When she had performed these things, she marched into Ethiopia, and having
subdued many Places in it, she had an Opportunity to see what was there very
remarkable and wonderful. For they say there is a apiece Lake, a hundred
and sixty The wonderful Lake in Ethiopia.
Foot in Circuit, the Water of which is in Color like unto Vermilion, and of
an extraordinary sweet Flavor, much like unto old Wine; yet of such wonderful
Operation, that whosoever drinks of it goes presently mad, and confesses all
the Faults that ever he had been before guilty of; but some will scarce believe
this Relation.

The Ethiopians have a peculiar way of burying their Dead; for after they have
Burials in Ethiopia.
imbalm'd the Body they pour round about it melted Glass, and then place it
upon a An high form or block;
Pillar, so that the Corpse may be plainly seen through the Glass, as Herodotus
has reported the thing. But Ctesias of Cnidus assirms that he tells a
Winter-tale, and says that its true indeed that the Body is imbalm'd, but that
Glass is not poured upon the naked Body, for the Bodies thereby would be so
scorched and defaced that they could not possibly retain any likeness to the
dead: And that therefore they make an hollow Statue of Gold, and put the Body
within it, and then pour the melted Glass round upon this Statue, which they
set upon some high Place, and so the Statue which resembles the dead is seen
through the Glass, and thus he says they use to bury those of the richer Sort;
But those of meaner Fortunes they put into Statues of Silver; and for the poor
they make Statues of Potters Clay, every one having Glass enough, for there is
Abundance to be got in Ethiopia, and ready at hand for all the Inhabitants. But
we shall speak more fully of the Customs and Laws of the Ethiopians and the
Product of the Land and other things worthy of Remark presently when we come to
relate their Antiquities and old Fables and Stories.

Semiramis having settled her Affairs in Egypt and Ethiopia, returned with her
Army Her Expedition into India.
into Asia to Bactria: And now having a great Army, and enjoying a long Peace,
she had a longing Desire to perform some notable Exploit by her Arms. Hearing
therefore that the Indians were the greatest Nation in the whole World, and had
the largest and richest Tract of Land of all others, she resolved to make War
upon them. Stabrobates was at that time King, who had innumerable Forces, and
many Elephants bravely accoutred and fitted to strike Terror into the Hearts of
his Enemies. For India for the Pleasantness of the Country excelled all others,
being watered in every Place with many Rivers, so that the Land yielded every
year a double Crop; and by that Means was so rich and so abounded with Plenty
of all things necessary for the Sustenance of Man's Life, that it supplied the
Inhabitants continually with such things as made them excessively rich,
insomuch as it was never known that there was ever any Famine amongst them, the
Climate being so happy and favorable; and upon that account likewise there is
an incredible Number of Elephants, which for Courage and Strength of Body far
excel those in Africa. Moreover this Country abounds in Gold, Silver, Brass,
Iron and precious Stones of all sorts, both for Profit and Pleasure. All which
being noised abroad, so stirred up the Spirit of Semiramis, that (though she had
no Provocation given her) yet she was resolved upon the War against the
Indians. But knowing that she had need of great Forces, she sent Dispatches to
all the Provinces, with Command to the Governors to list the choicest young Men
they could find, ordering the Proportion of Soldiers every Province and
Country should send forth according to the Largeness of it; and commanded that
all should furnish themselves with new Arms and Armor, and all appear in three
years time at a general Randezvouz in Bactria bravely armed and accountred in
all Points. And having sent for Shipwrights out of Phoenicia, Syria, Cyprus,
and other Places bordering upon the Seacoasts, she prepared Timber for them
fit for the Purpose, and ordered them to build Vessels that might be taken
asunder and conveyed from place to place wherever she pleased. For the River
Indus bordering upon that Kingdom being the greatest in those Parts, she stood
in need of many River-boats to pass it in Order to repress the Indians. But
being there was no Timber near that River she was necessitated to convey the
Boats thither by Land from Bactria. She further considered that she was much
inferior to the Indians for Elephants (which were absolutely necessary for her
to make use of) she therefore contrived to have Beasts that should resemble
them, hoping by this Means to strike a Terror into the Indians, who believed
there were no Elephants in any place but in India.

To this End she provided three hundred thousand black Oxen, and distributed
the Flesh amongst a Company of ordinary Mechanics and such Fellows as she had
to play the Cobblers for her, and ordered them by stitching the Skins together
and stuffing them with Straw to imitate the Shape of an Elephant, and in every
one Mock-Elephants.
of them she put a Man to govern them, and a Camel to carry them, so that at a
distance they appeared to all that saw them as if they were really such Beasts.

They that were employed in this Work wrought at it night and day in a Place
which was walled round for the Purpose, and Guards set at every Gate, that none
might be admitted either to go in or out, to the end that none might see what
they were doing, lest it should be noised abroad and come to the Ears of the
Indians.

Having therefore provided Shipping and Elephants in the space of two years, in
the third she randezvouz'd all her Forces in Bactria. Her Army consisted (as
Ctesias says) of three Millions of Foot, 500000 (...), but in the margent,
(...), 200000.
two hundred Thousand Horse, and a hundred Thousand Chariots, and a hundred
Thousand Men mounted upon Camels with Swords four Cubits long. The Boats that
might be taken asunder were two Thousand; which the Camels carried by Land as
they did the Mock-Elephants, as we have before declared. The Soldiers made
their Horses familiar with these feigned Beasts by bringing them often to them,
lest they should be terrified at the Sight of them; which Perseus imitated many
Ages after when he was to fight with the Romans, who had Elephants in their
Army out of Africa. However this Contrivance proved to be of no Advantage
either to him or her, as will appear in the Issue herein a little after related.

When Stabrobates the Indian King heard of these great Armies and the mighty
Preparations made against him, he did all he could to excel Semiramis in every
thing. And first he built of great Canes four Thousand River-boats: For
abundance of these Canes grow in India about the Rivers and Fenns, so thick as
a Man can scarce fathom: And Vessels made of these Reeds (they say) are
exceeding useful, because they will never rot or be worm-eaten.

He was very diligent likewise in preparing of Arms and going from Place to
Place throughout all India, and so raised a far greater Army than that of
Semiramis. To his former Number of Elephants he added more, which he took by
hunting, and furnished them all with every thing that might make them look
terrible in the Face of their Enemies, so that by their Multitude and the
Compleatness of their Breastplates.
Armor in all Points it seemed above the Strength and Power of Man to bear up
against the violent Shock of these Creatures.

Having therefore made all these Preparations, he sent Ambassadors to
Semiramis (as she was on her March toward him) to complain and upbraid her for
beginning a War without any Provocation or Injury offered her; and by his
private Letters taxed her with her whorish Course of Life, and vowed (calling
the Gods to witness) that if he conquered her he would nail her to the Cross.
When she read the Letters, she smiled, and said, the Indian should presently
have a Trial of her Valor by her Actions. When she came up with her Army to
the River Indus she found the Enemies Fleet drawn up in a Line of Battle;
whereupon she forthwith drew up her own, and having manned it with the stoutest
Soldiers, joined Battle, yet so ordering the Matter as to have her Landforces
ready upon the Shore to be assisting as there should be Occasion. After a long
and sharp Fight with Marks of Valor on both sides, Semiramis was at length
victorious, and sunk a Thousand of the Enemies Vessels, and took a great number
of Prisoners. Puffed up with this Success she took in all the Cities and
Islands that lay in the River, and carried away a hundred Thousand Captives.
After this the Indian King drew off his Army (as if he fled for Fear) but in
Truth to decoy his Enemies to pass the River.

Semiramis therefore (seeing things fall out according to her wish) laid a
broad Bridge of Boats (at a vast Charge) over the River, and thereby passed
over all her Forces, leaving only threescore Thousand to guard the Bridge, and
with the rest of her Army pursued the Indians. She placed the Mock-Elephants in
the Front that the Enemies Scouts might presently inform the King what
Multitudes of Elephants she had in her Army: And she was not deceived in her
hopes; for when the Spies gave an Account to the Indians what a great Multitude
of these Creatures were advancing toward them, they were all in amaze,
inquiring among themselves, whence the Assyrians should be supplied with such a
vast number of Elephants: But the Cheat could not be long concealed, for some
of Semiramis's Soldiers being laid by the Heels for their Carelessness upon the
Guard (through Fear of further Punishment) made their Escape and fled to the
Enemy, and undeceived them as to the Elephants; upon which the Indian King was
mightily encouraged, and caused Notice of the Delusion to be spread through the
whole Army, and then forthwith marched with all his Force against the
Assyrians, Semiramis on the other hand doing the like. When they approached
near one to another, Stabrobates the Indian King placed his Horse and Chariots
in the Vanguard at a good distance before the main Body of his Army. The Queen
having placed her Mock-Elephants at the like distance from her main Body,
valiantly received her Enemies Charge; but the Indian Horse were most strangely
terrified; for in Regard the Phantasms at a distance seemed to be real
Elephants, the Horses of the Indians (being inured to those Creatures) pressed
boldly and undauntedly forward; but when they came near and saw another sort of
Beast than usual, and the smell and every thing else almost being strange and
new to them, they broke in with great Terror and Confusion, one upon another,
so that they cast some of their Riders headlong to the Ground, and ran away
with others (as the Lot happened) into the midst of their Enemies: Whereupon
Semiramis readily making use of her Advantage, with a Body of choice Men fell
in upon them, and routed them, forcing them back to their main Body: And though
Stabrobates was something astonished at this unexpected Defeat, yet he brought
up his Foot against the Enemy with his Elephants in the Front: He himself was
in the right Wing, mounted upon a stately Elephant, and made a fierce Charge
upon the Queen her self, who happened then to be opposite to him in the left.
And though the Mock-Elephants in Semiramis's Army did the like, yet they stood
the violent shock of the other but a little while, for the Indian Beasts being
both exceeding strong and stout, easily bore down and destroyed all that
opposed them, so that there was a great Slaughter; for some they trampled under
foot, others they rent in pieces with their Teeth, and tossed up others with
their Trunks into the Air. The Ground therefore being covered with Heaps of
dead Carcases and nothing but Death and Destruction to be seen on every hand,
so that all were full of Horror and Amazement, none durst keep their Order or
Ranks any longer. Upon which the whole Assyrian Army fled outright, and the
Indian King encountered with Semiramis, and first wounded her with an Arrow in
the Arm, and afterward with a Dart (in wheeling about) in the Shoulder,
whereupon the Queen (her Wounds not being mortal) fled, and by the Swiftness of
her Horse (which far exceeded the other that pursued her) she got off. But all
making one way to the Bridge of Boats, and such a vast Multitude of Men
thronging together in one strait and narrow Passage, the Queen's Soldiers
miserably perished by treading down one another under foot, and (which was
strange and unusual) Horse and Foot lay tumbling promiscuously one over
another. When they came at length to the Bridge, and the Indians at their
Heels, the Consternation was so great that many on both sides the Bridge were
tumbled over into the River. But when the greatest part of those that remained
had got over; Semiramis caused the Cords and Tenons of the Bridge to be cut,
which done, the Boats (which were before joined together, and upon which was a
great Number of Indians not in the Pursuit) being now divided into many Parts,
and carried here and there by the force of the Current, Multitudes of the
Indians were drowned, and Semiramis was now safe and secure, having such a
Barrier as the River betwixt her and her enemies. Whereupon the Indian King
being forewarned by Prodigies from Heaven and the Opinions of the Soothsayers,
forbore all further Pursuit. And Semiramis making Exchange of Prisoners in
Bactra returned with scarce a third part of her Army.

A little time after Semiramis being assaulted by an Eunuch through the
treacherous Contrivance of her Son, remembered the former Answer given her by
the Oracle at the Temple of Hammon, and therefore passed the Business over
without punishing of him who was chiefly concerned in the Plot: But surrendering
the Crown to him, commanded all to obey him as their lawful King, and forthwith
disappeared as if she had been translated to the Gods, according to the Words
of the Oracle. There are some which fabulously say she was metamorphos'd into a
Pigeon; and that she flew away with a Flock of those Birds that lighted upon
her Palace: And hence it is that the Assyrians Her End. But others say she was
killed by her Son Ninyas soliciting him to incestuous Embraces.
adore a Dove, believing that Semiramis was enthroned amongst the Gods. And
this was the * End of Semiramis Queen of all Asia, except India, after she had
lived Sixty two years, and reigned Forty two. And these are the Things which
Ctesias the Cnidian reports of her in his History.

Athenaeus, and some other Writers, affirm that she was a most beautiful
Strumpet, and upon that account the King of Assyria fell in Love with her, and
at first was taken into his Favor, and at length becoming his lawful Wife she
prevailed with her Husband to grant her the sole and absolute Authority of the
regal Government for the space of five days. Taking therefore upon her the
Scepter and royal Mantle of the Kingdom, the first day she made a sumptuous
Banquet and magnificent Entertainments, to which she invited the Generals of
the Army and all the Nobility, in order to be observant to all her Commands.
The next day having both great and small at her beck, she committed her Husband
to the Goal: And in Regard she was of a bold and daring Spirit, apt and ready
to undertake any great Matters, she easily gained the Kingdom, which she held
to the time of her old Age, and became famous for her many great and wonderful
Acts: And these are the Things which Historians variously relate concerning her.

CHAP. II.
Ninyas succeeds Semiramis: His close and slothful Manner of Life. The Reign of
Sardanapalus: His Luxury and Effeminacy. His Epitaph. Deposed by Arbaces the
Mede; and the Assyrian Empire overturned. Nineveh razed.

AFTER her Death Ninyas, the Son of Ninus and Semiramis, succeeded, and 3.
Ninyas.
reigned peaceably, nothing at all like his Mother for Valor and martial
Affairs. For he spent all his Time shut up in his Place, insomuch as he was
never seen of any but of his Concubines and Eunuchs; for being given up wholly
to his Pleasures, he shook off all Cares and every thing that might be irksome
and troublesome, placing all the Happiness of a King in a fordid Indulgence of
all sorts of Voluptuousness. But that he might reign the more securely, and be
feared of all his Subjects, every year he raised out of every Province a
certain number of Soldiers, under their several Generals, and having brought
them in the City, over every Country appointed such a Governor as he could most
confide in, and were most at his Devotion. At the end of the year he raised as
many more out of the Provinces, and sent the former home, taking first of them
an Oath of Fidelity. And this he did, that his Subjects observing how he always
had a great Army ready in the Field, those of them that were inclined to be
refractory or rebel (out of fear of Punishment) might continue firm in their
due Obedience. And the further Ground likewise of this yearly Change was, that
the Officers and Soldiers might be from time to time disbanded before they
could have time to be well acquainted one with another. For length of Time in
martial Employments so improves the Skill and advances the Courage and
Resolution of the Commanders, that many times they conspire against their
Princes and wholly fall off from their Allegiance.

His living thus close and unseen, was a Covert to the Voluptuous Course of his
Life, and in the mean time (as if he had been a God) none durst in the least
mutter any thing against him. And in this manner (creating Commanders of his
Army, constituting of Governors in the Provinces, appointing the Chamberlains
and Officers of his Household, placing of Judges in their several Countries, and
ordering and disposing of all other Matters as he thought sit most for his own
Advantage) he spent his Days in Nineve.

After the same manner almost lived all the rest of the Kings for the space of
Thirty Generations, in a continued Line of Succession from Father to Son, to
the very Reign of Sardanapalus; in whose time Sardanapalus. The Assyrian Empire
to Sardanapalus continued 1360 Years. This is Justin's Account, and agrees best
with the Holy Scriptures: So Velleius Paterculus agrees, and the Reign of Belus
or Nimrod, 55 Years. The beginning of his Reign falls in Ann. Mun. 1718. And
Sardanapalus his Fall, was in Ann. Mun. 3078, in the 19th of Jehu, 543 Years
before the Taking of Babylon by Alexander the Great, Ant; Chr. 872, Vid.
Helvicus's Chron.
the Empire of the Assyrians devolved upon the Medes, after it had continued
above Thirteen Hundred and Sixty Years, as Ctesias the Cnidian says in his
Second Book. But it is needless to recite their Names, or how long each of them
reigned, in regard none of them did any thing worth remembering, save only that
it may deserve an Account how the Assyrians assisted the Trojans, by sending
them some Forces under the Command of Memnon the Son of Tithon.

For when Teutamus.
Teutamus reigned in Asia, who was the Twentieth from Ninyas the Son of
Semiramis, it is said the Grecians under their General Agamemnon, made War upon
the Trojans, at which time the Assyrians had been Lords of Asia above a
Thousand Years. For Priam the King of Troy (being a Prince under the Assyrian
Empire, when War was made upon him) sent Ambassadors to crave aid of Teutamus,
who sent him Ten Thousand Ethiopians, and as many out of the Province of
Susiana, with Two Hundred Chariots under the Conduct of Memnon the Son of
Tithon. For this Tithon at that time was Governor of Persia, and in special
Favor with the King above all the rest of the Princes: And Memnon was in the
Flower of his Age, strong and courageous, and had built a Palace in the
Citadel of Susa, which retained the Name of Memnonia to the time of the
Persian Empire. He paved also there a Common Highway, which is called Memnon's
Way to this day. But the Ethiopians of Egypt question this, and say that Memnon
was their Countryman, and show several ancient Palaces which (they say) retain
his Name at this day, being called Memnon's Palaces.

Notwithstanding, however it be as to this matter, yet it has been generally
and constantly held for a certain Truth, that Memnon led to Troy Twenty
Thousand Foot, and Two Hundred Chariots, and signalized his Valor with great
Honor and Reputation, with the Death and Destruction of many of the Greeks,
till at length he was slain by an Ambuscade laid for him by the Thessalians.
But the Ethiopians recovered his Body, and burnt it, and brought back his Bones
to Tithon. And these things the Barbarians say are recorded of Memnon in the
Histories of their Kings.

Sardanapalus, the Thirtieth from Ninus, and the last King of the Assyrians,
exceeded Sardanapalus the Thirtieth King, and the last.
all his Predecessors in Sloth and Luxury; for besides that, he was seen of
none out of his Family, he led a most effeminate Life: For wallowing in
pleasure and wanton Dalliances, he clothed himself in Women's Attire, and spun
fine Wool and Purple amongst the throngs of his Whores and Concubines. He
painted likewise his Face, and decked his whole Body with other Allurements like
a Strumpet, and was more lascivious than the most wanton Curtezan. He imitated
likewise a Woman's Voice, and not only daily inured himself to such Meat and
Drink as might incite and stir up his lascivious Lusts, but gratified them by
filthy By Sodomy.
Catamites, as well as Whores and Strumpets, and without all sense of Modesty,
abusing both Sexes, slighted Shame, the concomitant of filthy and impure
Actions; and proceeded to such a degree of Voluptuousness and sordid
Uncleanness, that he composed Verses for his Epitaph, with a Command to his
Successors Epitaph.
to have them inscribed upon his Tomb after his Death, which were thus
Translated by a Cli(...), vide (...)neus, lib. 12. Clemens, lib. 2. Strom.
Grecian out of the Barbarian Language,

(...),
(...).
Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque exsaturata Libido. Cicero. Tusc. lib. 5.

Hausit, at illa jacent multa ac praeclara relicta. What once I gorged I now
enjoy, An Epitaph fitter for an Ox than a Man. says Aristotle.

And wanton Lusts me still employ.
All other things by Mortals prized,
Are left as Dirt by me despised.


Being thus corrupt in his Morals, he not only came to a miserable end himself,
but utterly overturned the Assyrian Monarchy, which had continued longer than
any we read of.

For Arbaces a Mede, a Valiant and Prudent Man, and General of the Forces
Arbaces.
which were sent every Year out of Media to Ninive, was stirred up by the
Governor of Babylon (his Fellow Soldier, and with whom he had contracted an
intimate familiarity) to overthrow the Assyrian Empire. This Captain's Name was
2 Kin. 20. (...). called Baladan, and Isa. 39. 1. Ush. Ann. 61. Ant. Chapter 747.
Belesis, a most Famous Babylonian Priest, one of those called Caldeans, expert
in Astrology and Divination; of great Reputation upon the account of
foretelling future Events, which happened accordingly. Amongst others, he told
his Friend, the Median General, that he should depose Sardanapalus, and be Lord
of all his Dominions. Arbaces hereupon harkening to what he said, promised him,
that if he succeeded in his Attempt, Belesis should be chief Governor of the
Province of Babylon: Being therefore fully persuaded of the truth of what was
foretold, as if he had received it from an Oracle, he entered into an
Association with the Governors of the rest of the Provinces, and by feasting
and caressing of them, gained all their Hearts and Affections. He made it
likewise his great business to get a sight of the King, that he might observe
the Course and manner of his Life; to this end he bestowed a Cup of Gold upon
an Eunuch, by whom being introduced into the King's Presence, he perfectly came
to understand his Laciviousness, and Esseminate course of Life. Upon sight of
him, he contemned and despised him as a Vile and Worthless Wretch, and
thereupon was much more earnest to accomplish what the Chaldean had before
declared to him. At length he conspired with Belesis so far, as that he himself
persuaded the Medes and Persians to a defection, and the other brought the
Babylonians into the Confederacy. He imparted likewise his Design to the King
of Arabia, who was at this time his special Friend.

And now the Years attendance of the Army being at an end, new Troops
succeeded, and came into their Place, and the former were sent every one here
and there, into their several Countries. Hereupon Arbaces prevailed with the
Medes to invade the Assyrian Empire, and drew in the Persians in hopes of
Liberty, to join in the Confederacy. Belesis in like manner persuaded the
Babylonians to stand up for their Liberties. He sent Messengers also into
Arabia, and gained that Prince (who was both his Friend, and had been his
Guest) for a Confederate.

When therefore the Yearly Course was run out, all these with a great number of
Forces flockt together to Nineve, in show to serve their Turn according to
custom, but in truth to overturn the Assyrian Empire. The whole number of
Soldiers now got together out of those Four Provinces, amounted to Four Hundred
Thousand Men. All these (being now in one Camp) called a Council of War in
order to consult what was to be done.

Sardanapalus being informed of the Revolt, led forth the Forces of the rest of
the Provinces against them; whereupon a Battle being fought, the Rebels were
totally routed, and with a great Slaughter were forced to the Mountains Seventy
Furlongs from Nineve.

Being drawn up a Second time in Battalia to try their Fortune in the Field,
and now faced by the Enemy, Sardanapalus caused a Proclamation to be made by
the Heralds, that whosoever killed Arbaces the Mede, should receive as a
Reward, Two Hundred Talents of Gold, and double the Sum to him (together with
the Government of Media,) who should take him alive. The like Sum he promised
to such as should kill Belesis, or take him alive. But none being wrought upon
by these Promises, he fought them again, and destroyed many of the Rebels, and
forced the rest to fly to their Camp upon the Hills. Arbaces being disheartn'd
with these Misfortunes, called a Council of War to consider what was sit
further to be done: The greater part were for returning into their own
Countries, and possess themselves of the strongest Places, in order to fit and
furnish themselves with all things further necessary for the War. But when
Belesis the Babylonian assured them that the Gods promised, that after many
Toyls and Labors they should have good Success, and all should end well, and
had used several other Arguments (such as he thought best) he prevailed with
them to resolve to run through all the hazards of the War.

Another Battle therefore was fought, wherein the King gained a third Victory,
and pursued the Revolters as far as to the Mountains of Babylon. In this Fight
Arbaces himself was wounded, though he fought stoutly, and slew many of the
Assyrians with his own Hand.

After so many Defeats and Misfortunes one upon the neck of another, the
Conspirators altogether despaired of Victory, and therefore the Commanders
resolved every one to return to their own Country. But Belesis, who lay all
that Night Star-gazing in the open Field, prognosticated to them the next day,
that if they would but continue together Five Days, unexpected Help would come,
and they would see a mighty change, and that Affairs would have a contrary
aspect to what they then had; for he affirmed, that through his Knowledge in
Astrology, he understood that the Gods portended so much by the Stars;
therefore he entreated them to stay so many days, and make trial of his Art,
and wait so long to have an Experiment of the Goodness of the Gods.

All being thus brought back, and waiting till the time appointed, News on a
sudden was brought that mighty Forces were at hand, sent to the King out of
Bactria. Hereupon Arbac^s resolved with the stoutest and swiftest Soldiers of
the Army, forthwith to make out against the Captains that were advancing, and
either by fair words to persuade them to a defection, or by Blows to force them
to join with them in their Design. But Liberty being sweet to every one of
them, first the Captains and Commanders were easily wrought upon, and presently
after the whole Army joined, and made up one entire Camp together. It happened
at that time, that the King of Assyria not knowing any thing of the Revolt of
the Bactrians, and puffed up by his former Successes, was indulging his Sloth
and Idleness, and preparing Beasts for Sacrifice, plenty of Wine, and other
things necessary in order to feast and entertain his Soldiers.

While his whole Army was now feasting and revelling, Arbaces (receiving
intelligence by some Deserters of the Security and Intemperance of the Enemy)
fell in upon them on the sudden in the Night; and being in due order and
discipline, and setting upon such as were in confusion, he being before
prepared, and the other altogether unprovided, they easily broke into their
Camp, and made a great Slaughter of some, forcing the rest into the City.

Hereupon Sardanapalus committed the charge of the whole Army to Salemenus his
Wife's Brother, and took upon himself the defense of the City. But the Rebels
twice defeated the King's Forces, once in the open Field, and the Second time
before the Walls of the City; in which last engagement Salemenus was killed,
and almost all his Army lost, some being cut off in the pursuit, and the rest
(save a very few) being intercepted, and prevented from entering into the City,
were driven headlong into the River Euphrates; and the number of the Slain was
so great, that the River was died over with Blood, and retained that Color for
a great distance, and a long course together.

The King being afterward besieged, many of the Nations (through desire of
Liberty) revolted to the Confederates; so that Sardanapalus now perceiving that
the Kingdom was like to be lost, sent away his Three Sons and Two Daughters,
with a great deal of Treasure into Paphlagonia, to Cotta the Governor there,
his most entire Friend; and sent Posts into all the Provinces of the Kingdom,
in order to raise Soldiers, and make all other Preparations necessary to
endure a Siege. And he was the more encouraged to this, for that he was
acquainted with an ancient Prophesy, That Nineve could never be taken by force,
till the River became the City's Enemy; which the more encouraged him to hold
out, because he conceived that was never like to be; therefore he resolved to
endure the Siege till the Aids which he expected out of the Provinces came up
to him.

The Enemy on the other hand grown more courageous by their Successes, eagerly
urged on the Siege, but made little impression on the Besieged by reason of the
strength of the Walls; for Ballistes to cast Stones, Testudos to cast up
Mounts, and Battering Rams were not known in those Ages. And besides (to say
truth) the King had been very careful (as to what concerned the defense of the
place) plentifully to furnish the Inhabitants with every thing necessary. The
Siege continued Two Years, during which time nothing was done to any purpose,
save that the Walls were sometimes assaulted, and the Besieged penned up in the
City. The Third Year it happened that Euphrates overflowing with continual
Rains, came up into a part of the City, and tore down the Wall Twenty Furlongs
in length. The King hereupon conceiving that the Oracle was accomplished, in
that the River was an apparent Enemy to the City, utterly despaired, and
therefore that he might not fall into the Hands of his Enemies, he caused a
huge Pile of Wood to be made in his Palace Court, and heapt together upon it
all his Gold, Silver, and Royal Apparel, and enclosing his Eunuchs and
Concubines in an Apartment within the Pile, caused it to be set on Fire, and
burnt himself and them together, which when the Revolters came to understand,
they entered through the Breach of the Walls, and took the City; and clothed
Arbaces with a Royal Robe, and committed to him the sole Authority, proclaiming
him King. When he had rewarded his Followers, every one according to their
demerit, and appointed Governors over the several Provinces, Belesis the
Babylonian, who had foretold his advancement to the Throne, put him in mind of
his Services, and demanded the Government of Babylon, which he had before
promised him. He told him likewise of a Vow that he himself had made to Belus,
in the heat of the War, that when Sardanapalus was conquered, and the Palace
consumed, he would carry the Ashes to Babylon, and there raise a Mount near to
his Temple, which should be an eternal Monument to all that sailed through
Euphrates, in memory of him that overturned the Assyrian Empire. But that which
in truth induced him to make this Request was, that he had been informed of the
Gold and Silver by an Eunuch (that was a Deserter) whom he had hid and
concealed: Arbaces therefore being ignorant of the Contrivance (because all the
rest beside this Eunuch, were consumed with the King) granted to him liberty
both to carry away the Ashes, and likewise the absolute Government of Babylon
without paying any Tribute. Whereupon Belesis forthwith prepared Shipping, and
together with the Ashes carried away most of the Gold and Silver to Babylon.
But when the King came plainly to understand the Cheat, he committed the
Examination and Decision of this Theft to the other Captains who were his
Assistants in the deposing of Sardanapalus. Belesis upon his Trial confessed
the Fact, and thereupon they condemned him to lose his Head. But the King being
a Man of a noble and generous Spirit, and willing to adorn the beginning of his
Reign with the Marks of his Grace and Mercy, not only pardoned him, but freely
gave him all the Gold and Silver which had been carried away; neither did he
deprive him of the Government of Babylon, which at the first he conferred upon
him, saying, That his former good Services did overballance the Injuries
afterward. This gracious Disposition of the King being noised abroad, he
thereby not only gained the Hearts of his People, but was highly honored, and
his Name famous among all the Provinces, and all judged him worthy of the
Kingdom, who was so compassionate and gracious to Offenders.

The like Clemency he showed to the Inhabitants of Nineve; for though he
disspers'd them into several Country Villages, yet he restored to every one of
them their Estates, but razed the City to the ground. Nineve razed.


The rest of the Silver and Gold that could be found in the Pile (of which
there were many Talents) he conveyed to Ecbatana the Seat Royal of Media.

And thus was the Assyrian Empire overturned by the Medes Ann. Mund. 3080.
Before Christ 868. Herodotus says, lib. 1. c. 95, but 520 Years from Ninus,
which Usher follows; so that Ninus falls in with the times of Deborah, as is
before observed, against the Stream of all Chronologers almost.
after it had continued Thirty Generations; from Ninus above Fourteen Hundred
Years.

CHAP. III.
Of the Ancient Chaldeans, and their Philosophy. The Planets and their Course.
The Empire of the Medes and their Kings. A Description of India: The ancient
Manners and Customs of the People. Their Laws; Tribes. A Description of
Scythia. Of the Amazons. Of the Hyperboreans.

HEre it will not be amiss to say something of the Chaldeans (as the
Babylonians call them) and of their Antiquity, that nothing worth Remark may be
omitted.

They being the most ancient Babylonians, hold the same station and dignity in
A Description of the Chaldeans.
the Commonwealth as the Egyptian Priests do in Egypt: For being deputed to
Divine Offices, they spend all their Time in the study of Philosophy, and are
especially famous for the Art of Astrology. They are mightily given to
Divination, and foretell future Events, and employ themselves either by
Purifications, Sacrifices, or other Enchantments to avert Evils, or procure
good Fortune and Success. They are skilful likewise in the Art of Divination,
by the flying of Birds, and interpreting of Dreams and Prodigies: And are
reputed as true Oracles (in declaring what will come to pass) by their exact
and diligent viewing the Intrals of the Sacrifices. But they attain not to this
Knowledge in the same manner P. 82.
as the Grecians do; for the Chaldeans learn it by Tradition from their
Ancestors, the Son from the Father, who are all in the mean time free from all
other public Offices and Attendances; and because their Parents are their
Tutors, they both learn every thing without Envy, and rely with more confidence
upon the truth of what is taught them; and being trained up in this Learning
from their very Childhood, they become most famous Philosophers, (that Age
being most capable of Learning, wherein they spend much of their time.) But the
Grecians for the most part come raw to this study, unfitted and unprepared, and
are long before they attain to the Knowledge of this Philosophy: And after they
have spent some small time in this Study, they are many times called off and
forced to leave it, in order to get a Livelihood and Subsistence. And although
some few do industriously apply themselves to Philosophy, yet for the sake of
Gain, these very Men are opinionative, and ever and anon starting new and high
Points, and never fix in the steps of their Ancestors. But the Barbarians
keeping constantly close to the same thing, attain to a perfect and distinct
Knowledge in every particular.

But the Grecians cunningly catching at all Opportunities of Gain, make new
Sects and Parties, and by their contrary Opinions wrangling and quarelling
concerning the chiefest Points, lead their Scholars into a Maze; and being
uncertain and doubtful what to pitch upon for certain truth, their Minds are
fluctuating and in suspense all the days of their Lives, and unable to give a
certain assent unto any thing. For if any Man will but examine the most eminent
Sects of the Philosophers, he shall find them much differing among themselves,
and even opposing one another in the most weighty parts of their Philosophy.
But to return to the Chaldeans, they hold that the World is eternal, which had
neither any certain Beginning, nor shall have any End; but all agree, that all
things are ordered, and this beautiful Fabric is supported by a Divine
Providence, and that the Motions of the Heavens are not performed by chance and
of their own accord, but by a certain and determinate Will and Appointment of
the Gods.

Therefore from a long observation of the Stars, and an exact Knowledge of the
motions and influences of every one of them, wherein they excel all others,
they foretell many things that are to come to pass.

The say that the Five Stars which some call Planets, but they Interpreters,
are most worthy of Consideration, both for their motions and their remarkable
influences, especially that which the Grecians call Saturn. The brightest of
them all, and which often portends many and great Events, they call Sol, (...).
Sol, the other Four they name Mars, (...)
Mars, Venus, (...).
Venus, Mercury, (...).
Mercury and Jupiter, (...)
Jupiter, with our own Country Astrologers. They give the Name of Interpreters
to these Stars, because these only by a peculiar Motion do portend things to
come, and instead of Jupiters, do declare to Men beforehand the good will of
the Gods; whereas the other Stars (not being of the number of the Planets) have
a constant ordinary motion. Future Events (they say) are pointed at sometimes
by their Rising, and sometimes by their Setting, and at other times by their
Color, as may be experienced by those that will diligently observe it;
sometimes foreshewing Hurricanes, at other times Tempestuous Rains, and then
again exceeding Droughts. By these, they say, are often portended the
appearance of Comets, Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, Earthquakes and all other
the various Changes and remarkable effects in the Air, boding good and bad, not
only to Nations in general, but to Kings and Private Persons in particular.
Under the Course of these Planets, they say are Thirty Stars, which they call
Counselling Gods, half of whom observe what is done under Stars, Counselling
Gods.
the Earth, and the other half take notice of the actions of Men upon the
Earth, and what is transacted in the Heavens. Once every Ten Days space (they
say) one of the highest Order of these Stars descends to them that are of the
lowest, like a Messenger sent from them above; and then again another ascends
from those below to them above, and that this is their constant natural motion
to continue for ever. The chief of these Gods, they say, are Twelve in number,
to P. 83.
each of which they attribute a Month, and one Sign of the Twelve in the
Zodiac.

Through these Twelve Signs the Sun, Moon, and the other Five Planets run The
Course of the Sun, Moon, and the Five other Planets.
their Course. The Sun in a Years time, and the Moon in the space of a Month.

To every of the Planets they assign their own proper Courses, which are
performed variously in lesser or shorter time according as their several
motions are quicker or slower. These Stars, they say, have a great influence
both as to good and bad in Men's Nativities; and from the consideration of their
several Natures, may be foreknown what will befall Men afterward. As they
foretold things to come to other Kings formerly, so they did to Alexander who
conquered Darius, and to his Successors Antigonus and Seleucus Nicanor; and
accordingly things fell out as they declared; which we shall relate
particularly hereafter in a more convenient time. They tell likewise private
Men their Fortunes so certainly, that those who have found the thing true by
Experience, have esteemed it a Miracle, and above the reach of Man to perform.
Out of the Circle of the Zodiac they describe Four and Twenty Stars, Twelve
toward the North Pole, and as many to the South.

Those which we see, they assign to the living; and the other that do not
appear, they conceive are Constellations for the Dead; and they term them
Judges of all things. The Moon, they say, is in the lowest Orb; and being
therefore next to the Earth (because she is so small,) she finishes her Course
in a little time, not through the swiftness of her Motion, but the shortness of
her Sphere. In that which they affirm (that she has but a borrowed light, and
that when she is eclipsed, it is caused by the interposition of the shadow of
the Earth) they agree with the Grecians.

Their Rules and Notions concerning the Eclipses of the Sun are but weak and
mean, which they dare not positively foretell, nor fix a certain time for them.
They have likewise Opinions concerning the Earth peculiar to themselves,
affirming it to resemble a Boat, and to be hollow, to prove which, and other
things relating to the frame of the World, they abound in Arguments; but to
give a particular Account of 'em, we conceive would be a thing foreign to our
History. But this any Man may justly and truly say, That the Chaldeans far
exceed all other Men in the Knowledge of Astrology, and have studied it most of
any other Art or Science: But the number of Years during which the Chaldeans
say, those of their Profession have given themselves to the study of this
natural Philosophy, is incredible; for when Alexander was in Asia, they
reckoned up Four Hundred and Seventy Thousand Years since they first began to
observe the Motions of the Stars. But lest we should make too long a digression
from our intended Design, let this which we have said concerning the Chaldeans
suffice.

Having now therefore spoken of the Assyrian Empire, and its Translation to the
Medes, we shall return to that part of our History from whence we broke off.

Whereas remarkable Authors have differed among themselves about the large
Empire of the Medes.
Empire of the Medes, we conceive we shall not stray from the Duty of true and
faithful Historians, if we compare the different relations of Writers one with
another.

Herodotus indeed, who lived in the time of Xerxes, says that the Assyrians
were conquered by the Medes after they had held the Empire of Asia for the
space of five Hundred Years: That thence for many Ages after there was no one
King that had the sole and absolute Authority of the Empire, but that the
Cities in every Place enjoyed their own Laws in a Democratical Government. At
length after the Course of many Years, he says one Cyaxares besieges Nineve,
and takes it An. Mun. 3348; about 3 or 4 years after the death of Josiah,
before Christ 600. Herod.
Cyaxares, renowned for his Justice, was advanced to the Throne; and that he
was the first that subdued the neighboring Nations to the Medes, and gave
beginning to that Empire; whose Posterity afterward brought under the
bordering Countries and enlarged their Dominions, and continued their Empire to
the time of Astyages (who was conquered by Conquered by Cyrus An. Mun. 3391.
Before Christ 557.
Cyrus and the Persians) of whom we shall now only give a touch in short, and
shall treat more distinctly and particularly hereafter when we come to the
Times more proper for this Purpose. For in the second year of the seventeeenth
Olympiad (as Herodotus says) Cyaxares was elected King by the Medes. But
Ctesias the Cnidian who was later then Herodotus, and lived about the time of
Cyrus his Expedition against his Brother A^taxarxes: (for being then taken
Prisoner (for his Skill in Physic) he was taken into the King's Favor, and
continued with him in great Honor and Esteem for the space of seventeen
years.) Out of the public Records (in which the Persians (by force of some Law
made for that Purpose) had in Order of Time noted and registered the ancient
Affairs and Things done in the Kingdom) he industriously picked out every thing
that was remarkable, and methodically composed them into an History, and
brought them over into Greece.

In this History he declares that after the Overthrow of the Assyrian Empire,
all Asia was under the Power of the Medes, and that Arbaces who overcame
Sardanapalus (as is before related) was sole Monarch, and that after he had
reigned eight and twenty years, his Son Mandauces succeeded him, who reigned
over all Asia fifty years. After him reigned Sesarmus thirty years; then Artias
Fifty; after whom succeeded Arbianes two and twenty years. In his time (its
said) a great War broke out between the Medes and the Cadusians upon the
Occasions following. One Parsodes a Persian, for his Valor, Prudence and other
Virtues, was a Man highly honored and dearly beloved of the King, and one of
the greatest Statesmen in the Kings Council.

This Man taking some Offense at a Sentence pronounced against him by the King,
fled with three Thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse to the Cadusians, where he
married the Sister of the most potent Man amongst them; and not only rebelled
himself, but persuaded the whole Nation of the Cadusians to a general Revolt,
and to stand up for their Liberties: Whereupon he was presently (upon the
Account of his noted Valor) made General of the War. And now hearing that
mighty Forces were preparing against him, he raised no less than two hundred
Thousand Men out of the Country of the Cadusians, and pitched his Camp upon the
Borders of the Province; and though King Arseus came against him with eight
hundred Thousand Men, yet Parsodes routed him and killed above fifty Thousand,
and drove the rest out of the Country. Upon this Victory he was so honored and
admired that the Inhabitants forthwith made him their King; after which he
vexed and tired out Media with continual Incursions, and wasted and destroyed
all Places round about him. His Name therefore being grown famous, and now
waxing old and drawing near to the End of his days, he enjoined his Successor
(with the Denunciation of most dreadful Execrations) never to make Peace with
the Medes, and if they did he wished that both the whole Nation of the
Cadusians and his own Posterity might be rooted out and perish together. And
for this Reason the Cadusians were ever after Enemies to the Medes, never
subject to their Kings, till Cyrus transferred the Empire to the Persians.

After the Death of Arsaeus.
Artaeus, Artynes was King of the Medes, and reigned two and twenty years;
after him A^^ibarnas fourteen years, in whose Reign the Parthians revolted and
delivered up both their City and Country into the Hand of the A People of
Scythia.
Sacae; whereupon arose a War between the Sacae and the Medes, which continued
many years, and after many Battles fought, and great Slaughter on both sides,
at length Peace was made upon these Conditions, That the Parthians should
return to their ancient Subjection, and that both sides should quietly whatever
enjoy they did P. 85.
before, and should ever after be Friends and Confederates. Zanara at that time
was Queen of the Sacae, a Woman of a warlike Spirit, far exceeding any of her
Sex among the Sacae for Courage and Activity in Martial Affairs. For this
Nation is remarkable for brave spirited Women that use to go out to the Wars as
Fellow Soldiers with the Men; and they say that this Virago was
extraordinarily beautiful, and admirable for Courage and Council in all her
Affairs. For she conquered the neighboring Princes who had proudly oppressed
the Sacae, and civilized the most part of the Country, and built many Cities,
and every way improved and enriched her People; and therefore the Citizens
after her Death in Gratitude for the many Advantages they enjoyed by her and to
preserve the Memory of her Virtues, built for her a Sepulcher far higher than
any of the rest. For they reared up for her a Pyramid Triangular from the
Foundation Three Furlongs broad on every side, spiring up in a sharp Point at
the Top a Furlong in Height. They placed likewise upon her Tomb a Colossus in
Gold representing her, and adored her as a Demi-Goddess, and performed all
other things with more State and Grandeur than to any of her Predecessors.

After the Death of Astibara King of the Medes, who died old in Ecbatana, his
Son Apandas (whom the Grecians call Astyages) succeeded, who being conquered by
Cyrus the Persian, the Empire devolved upon the Persians. Of which we shall
write distinctly in its proper Place.

Having therefore said enough (as we conceive) of the Empire of the Assyrians
and Medes, and the Differences among Writers concerning them, we shall pass
over to India, and give a particular Account of Things said to be done there.

INDIA is of a Quadrangular Form, one side lying toward the East, and India.
the other to the South, environed and washed by the great Ocean; that side on
the North is divided by the Mountain Hemodus from Scythia, where the Sacae
inhabit: The Fourth part toward the West, is bounded with the River Indus, the
greatest of all others next to the River Nile.

The whole Extent of India from East to West, is Eight and Twenty Thousand
Furlongs; and from North to South Two About 3200 Miles.
and Thirty Thousand Furlongs. The Extent of India being thus very large, it
seems most of any other part of the World to lie under the When the Sun enters
Capricorn, it is their Summer.
Tropic of (...). Rather under the Equinoctial Line.
Capricorn. And in many remote parts of India, the Sun casts no Shadow, neither
is the North Pole seen there in the Night, nor any of the Arctus.
Constellation called Arcturus, Arcturus, Charles' s Wain; i. e. toward the
South.
in the utmost parts; and for this reason they say, the Shadows bend toward
the South.

The Mountains of India abound with all sorts of Fruit Trees, and the Fields
every where clothed with Fruits of the Earth, full of pleasant Plains, watered
with many Rivers; so that the Country bears Two Crops in the Year. It breeds
likewise diverse sorts of Creatures, both Volatile and Terrestrial, for strength
and largeness remarkable above others. It affords plentiful Pastures for
multitudes of mighty Elephants, in so much as those kind of Beasts which are
bred there, are far stronger than those in Africa. And therefore many of them
being taken in Hunting, and inured to Martial Exercises, are of great use and
advantage to them for the obtaining of Victories. And such is the plenty there
of all sorts of Fruits, that the Men are taller and bigger than any elsewhere;
and the Air is so pure, and the Water so clear and wholesome, that by the help of
these natural Advantages, the Inhabitants are very quick and ingenious in any
Art or Profession. As the Earth is fruitful in the producing plenty of pleasant
P. 86.
Fruits, so in the Bowels of it are to be found all sorts of Metals: For it
abounds in Mines of Gold and Silver, Brass, Iron and Tin, and richly affords
all other things useful both as to Pleasure and Profit, and likewise for
Service in Times of War. Besides Corn, abundance of Millet grows there, being
richly watered by the overflowing of the Rivers: There Is likewise great store
of all sorts of Pulse and Rice, and that which they call Bosphorus, and many
other Fruits for the sustaining of Man's Life. To all these may be added many
other Fruits useful for Food, and likewise as many fit for the feeding of
Cattle, of which it would be too tedious to write particularly. And for this
reason it is said, that there is never any Famine in India, or want of Victuals;
for being that the Land there bears Two Crops every Year, once in the Winter
about the time of Wheat-seeding among other Nations, and the other about the
time of the Beginning of June.
Summer Solstice, when Rice, Bosporus, Sesamus and Millet are used to be sown;
at both these times the Indians reap very plentifnl Harvests. And if one
Harvest happens to miss, the other is sure to make amends for it. Besides there
are many Fruits which grow naturally of themselves, and the Marshes afford for
Men's Food, abundance of Roots of a most sweet and delicious Taste. For all the
Fields almost of the whole Country are watered in Summer time with the sweet
Waters of the overflowing Rivers, and with the Rains from Heaven, which fall
constantly at certain times every Year in the Summer; and the Roots in the
Marshes (especially of the Canes) are perfectly boiled by the heat of the Sun.
There are Laws likewise in India, which conduce much to the preventing of
Famine among them. Amongst other People, by Devastations in time of War the
Land lies untilled; but amongst the Indians, Husbandmen (as sacred) are never
touched, so that though the Armies fight and engage even under their very Noses,
yet they are never in the least prejudiced. For though the Armies on both sides
slaughter one another, yet they never hurt the Husbandman, as one who is a
Servant for the common good and advantage of them all; neither do they burn
their Enemies Country, or cut down their Trees or Plants.

Moreover in India are many great navigable Rivers which descend into the
Rivers. Ganges.
Plains from the Mountains in the Northern Parts (where they have their
Spring-heads) and at length all meet together and fall into the River Ganges,
which is Something above Three Mile.
Thirty Furlongs in breadth, and takes its Course from the North to the South,
and so empties it self into the main Ocean; passing by in its course the Nation
of the Gandarides lying on the East, where are bred Multitudes of most
monstrous Elephants. No Foreign King hitherto ever conquered that part of the
Country, all Strangers dreading the number and strength of those Creatures.
Even Alexander himself, who conquered all Asia besides, left only the
Gandarides untoucht. For when he came with his whole Army as far as to the
River Ganges, and had subdued all the Indians behind him, as soon as he
understood that the Gandarides had Four Thousand Elephants sitted and
completely furnished for War, he wholly desisted the further Prosecution of his
Design against them. Much like to the River Ganges is that called Indus, which
runs with a swift Course likewise from the North, and falls into the Ocean, and
divides India from the rest of Asia; and in Indus.
its Course through wide and spacious Plains takes in many Navigable Rivers,
amongst which the most famous are Hipanis, Hydaspes, and Arcesines. There are
many other Rivers also which pass through several Parts of India which enrich
the Country with pleasant Gardens, and all sorts of Fruits.

The Philosophers and Naturalists of this Country give this Reason why there P.
87.
are so many Rivers, and such plenty of Water in India. They say, that the
adjacent Countries, the Scythians, Bactrians and Arianians, lie higher than
India, whence (from good reason) they conclude that the Rains flowing down by
degrees into the lower Countries, so water them, that they make many large
Rivers: But above all the other Rivers of India, that they call Silla (which
springs from a Fountain of the same Name) has a peculiar property: For this
only of all the others will not admit any thing thrown into it to swim, but in
a wonderful manner swallows up every thing, and forceably draws it to the
bottom.

Moreover India being of the largest Extent of all other by far, is inhabited
by many different Nations (of whom none are Foreigners, but all natural
Inhabitants:) And they say that no Strangers ever planted amongst them, nor
they themselves ever sent forth any Colonies into other Countries; and they
tell Stories that anciently the Inhabitants fed only upon Herbs and Roots that
grow in the Fields, and clothed themselves with wild Beasts Skins, as the
Grecians did; and that Arts and other things conducing to the well-being of
Man's Life were found out by degrees, Necessity pressing upon a Creature that
was rational and ingenious, and had likewise the further helps and advantages
of Hands, Speech and quickness of invention to find out ways to relieve himself.

Some of the Learned of the Indians have given an account of the Antiquity of
their Country, of which it is our part here to say something in short.

They say, that in ancient Time, when Men lived scattered and dispersed here
and there, Bacchus with a great Army from the West, overran all India, which at
that time had no considerable City in it able to make any resistance; and that
a Plague (through the violent and parching heat) destroying many of his
Soldiers, (they say) that prudent General drew his Army out of the Plains to
the tops of the Mountains, where (by means of the cool Blasts of the refreshing
Air, and drinking of the Spring-Waters there at hand) they were restored to
their former Health; and that the Place where his Army was thus recovered, was
called the (...).
Thigh; hence the Grecians frame a Story of this God to this Day, that Bacchus
was bred in the Jupiter's Thigh.
Thigh. Afterward (they say) he diligently employed himself in sowing and
planting diverse Fruit Trees, and imparted the Art to the Indians, and found out
the use of Wine, and other things conducing to the comfort of Man's Life. He
built likewise stately Cities, and removed the Villages to more commodious
Situations; and instituted the manner of Divine Worship, and made Laws, and set
up Courts of Justice; and at last for the many excellent Inventions imparted to
the Indians, he was esteemed as a God, and obtained immortal Honors. They
report that he had a Regiment of Women in his Army, and that in the heat of
Battle he made use of Timbrels and Cymbals, the Trumpet being not at that time
found out: And that after he had reigned over all India for the space of Two
and Fifty Years, he died of extreme old Age, leaving the Kingdom to his Sons,
who enjoyed it, and their Posterity after them successively, till many Ages
after the Regal Authority was abrogated, and the Cities were governed by a
Democrasy. These are the things related of Bacchus and his Posterity by the
Inhabitants of the Mountainous parts of India.

They say moreover, that Hercules was born amongst them, and like the Greeks,
furnish him with a Club and a Lion's Skin; and for Strength and Courage that he
excelled all other Men, and cleared both Sea and Land of Monsters and Wild
Beasts: That of many Wives he begat many Sons, but one only Daughter. Among P.
88.
these Sons, when they were grown up, he divided India into equal Parts, and
appointed each to be King over their several shares, allotting likewise one
part of the Kingdom to his Daughter, whom he carefully brought up under his own
Eye. It Is said that he built many Cities, the most famous of which is called
Palibothra, in which he built a stately Palace, and planted it with a great
number of Inhabitants, and fortified it round with deep Trenches, filled with
Water from the River. And at length after his Death he was honored as a God.
His Posterity reigned for many Ages together, and performed many noble Actions;
but never made any Foreign Expeditions, or sent forth any Colonies into other
Parts; and though that after the Course of many Years, most of the Cities
reduced themselves under the power of a Democratical Government, yet there were
some of the Indians that flourished under a Monarchy, till the very time that
Alexander invaded that Country.

Although the Indians have Laws peculiar to themselves, differing from all
other The Indian Law concerning their Liberties.
People, yet one especially is most remarkable, instituted by their ancient
Philosophers, which is this:

It Is an established Law, That none amongst them should be a Servant; but that
every one being free, all should be honored with equal respect: For they that
know that they are neither to be superior nor inferior to any, are ready to
undergo all the Shocks of Fortune with Courage and Resolution. For it is a
Foolish thing to make Laws for an equality amongst all, and yet at the same
time to order inequality of Estates.

All the People of India are divided into Seven Ranks; the First is
Philosophers, The division of the People. 1 Tribe, Philosophers.
who are least in number, but chiefest in esteem: For they are free from all
public Offices; and are neither subject themselves to any, nor any subject to
them. Yet they are made use of by their Friends to offer Sacrifice for them
while they are alive, and to perform the solemn Exequies at their Funerals when
they are dead, as Persons who are greatly beloved of the Gods, and skilful in
Matters relating to the Affairs of the Dead in the Shades below; for which
piece of Service they are highly honored, and presented with many rich Gifts:
Especially they much advantage the Indians in general, at such times as being
admitted into the public Assemblies, at the beginning of every Year they
foretell Droughts, Rains, Winds and Diseases, and other things convenient and
useful for the Auditors to be informed of; for so both King and People being
forewarned of things to come, provide against them, and always prepare
something or other that may be of advantage to them in such cases.

And if any of the Philosophers prove afterward to be mistaken in his
Prognostication, he undergoes no other Punishment, save only that he is evil
spoken of, and is to be silent ever after while he lives.

The Second Rank or Tribe is of the Husbandmen; These are more in number 2d
Tribe, Husbandmen.
than any of the rest: These likewise are free from the Militia, and all
public Offices, and spend all their time and care about Tilling and Improving
the Lands.

No Enemy ever does them any Prejudice; but out of a due regard to the common
good, forbear to injure them in the least degree; and therefore the Land being
never spoiled nor wasted, yields its Fruits in great Abundance, and furnishes
the Inhabitants with plenty of Victuals and all other Provision. The Husbandmen
live in the Fields with their Wives and Children, and never meddle with the
concerns of the Cities. They pay the King his Tribute out of the Fruits of the
Ground: For all the Land of India belongs to the King, and no private Man has
any Land of his own. Besides the Tribute, the Fourth part of the Fruits are
paid to the King.

The Third Tribe comprehended the Herdsmen and Shepherds, and all sorts of 3d
Tribe, The Shepherds and Herdsmen.
feeders of Cattle; and these neither lived in the Cities nor Villages, but in
Tents, and by Hunting cleared the Land both of wild Beasts and hurtful Birds;
and by this Exercise all India was freed from Ravenous Creatures which abounded
in the Country, both Birds and wild Beasts of all sorts, that eat up and
devoured the Seed and Fruits of the Husbandman.

The Fourth Classis and Order of Men amongst them was made up of the
Mechanics, 4th Tribe, Artificers.
some of whom were employed in making of Arms, and others of Tools for Tillage
and Husbandry, and other serviceable Utensils. This Order is P. 89.
not only free from all Taxes and Impositions, but is allowed a yearly
proportion of Corn out of the King's Granaries.

The Fifth is the Militia (the Second for number) who in Times of Peace live
5th Tribe, Soldiers.
idle lives, and give themselves up wholly to their pleasures. All the
Soldiers with the War-Horses and Elephants are kept and maintained out of the
King's Treasury.

The Sixth Tribe are the Ephori, who are the Inquisitors, and have a diligent
6th Tribe, Ephori.
and observant Eye upon every thing that is done throughout all India, and upon
any discovery inform the King of what the know; and when there is no King, the
Princes and principal Ministers of state.

In the Seventh Rank are reckoned the Senators, such as have Place in the great
7th Tribe, Senators.
and General Councils: These are the fewest in number, but of greatest Dignity
for their Birth, and highest esteem for their Wisdom and Prudence. Out of these
are chosen the King's Privy Council, Governors of Provinces, Judges, Generals
of Armies in Times of War, and other Principal Officers.

These are the parts into which almost all India is divided.

It is not lawful for any to marry out of the Tribe to which he belongs, nor to
exercise any other Trade or Calling than that wherein he has been bred up, as
for a Soldier to employ himself in Husbandry or for an Artificer to turn
Philosopher.

India breeds the largest, most courageous and strongest Elephants of any
Elephants.
other Place. This Creature does not couple with the Female in any strange or
unusual manner (as some say) but as Horses and all other four-footed Beasts.

They go with young at the least Sixteen Months, at the most Eighteen. They 16
Months with Young.
bring forth for the most part (like Mares) but one at a time, which the Dam
suckles till it be Six Years old.

Most of the Inhabitants live very long; the Oldest attain to Two Hundred Years.

In India there are Magistrates appointed to take care of Strangers to see that
no Injury be offered them; and if any of them be sick these Magistrates provide
Physicians, and in all other respects are very careful of them; and if they
dye, they bury them; and whatever Goods or Moneys they leave behind, they give
it to their Kindred.

Their Judges are very diligent in deciding Suits brought before them; and
severely punish Offenders. But this short account shall suffice concerning
India and its Antiquities. And now we shall say something particularly of the
Scythians, which border upon the other.

The Scythians anciently enjoyed but a small Tract of Ground, but (through
their, Scythia, its Description.
Valor) growing stronger by degrees, they enlarged their Dominion far and
near, and attained at last to a vast and glorious Empire.

At the First a very few of them, and those very desplcable for their mean
original, seated themselves near to the River Araxes. Afterward one of their
ancient Kings, who was a warlike Prince, and skilful in Arms, gained to their
Country, all the Mountainous Parts as far as to Mount Caucasus, and all the
Champain Country, to the The Euxine Sea.
Ocean, and the Lake Maeotis, a Lake brancht from the Euxine Sea, now called
the Black Sea.
Maeotis, and all the rest of the Plain to the River Tanais. Then they tell a
Story, That a Virgin was born among them of the Earth, of the shape of a Woman
from the middle upwards, and of a Viper downwards: And that Jupiter begot of
her a Son called Scythes; they say, that from this Prince (being more eminent
than any of his Ancestors) the People were called Scythians: There were Two
Brothers that descended from this King, that were remarkable for Valor, the
one called Palus, and the other Napas. These Two Brothers, after many glorious
Actions done by them, divided the Country between them, and from their own
Names called one part of the Inhabitants Palians, and the other Napians.

Some time afterward their Posterity becoming famous and eminent for Valor
and martial affairs, subu'd many Territories beyond Tanais.

Then turning their Arms the other way they led their Forces as far as to the
River Nile in Egypt, and having subdued many Nations lying between, they P. 90.
enlarged the Empire of the Scythians as far as to the The Indian Sea.
Eastern Ocean one way, and to the Caspian Sea and the Lake of Maeotis another.

This Nation prosper'd still more and more, and had Kings that were very
famous; from whom the Sacans, the Massageties, and the Arimaspanis, and many
others called by other Names derive their original. Amongst others, there were
two remarkable Colonies that were drawn out of the conquered Nations by those
Kings; the one they brought out of Assyria, and settled in the Country lying
between Paphlagonia and Pontus; the other out of Media, which they placed near
the River Tanais, which People are called Sauromatians, who many Years after
increasing in number and power, wasting the greatest part of Scythia, and
rooting out all that they conquered, totally ruinated the whole Nation.
Afterward the Royal Line failing, they say, Women remarkable for Courage and
Strength of Body reigned instead of Kings. For in these Nations, Women like
Men, are trained up for the Wars, being nothing inferior to Men for Courage.

Henceforward many and great things were done by famous Women, not only in
Scythia, but in the neighboring Nations. For when Cyrus King of Persia the
most powerful Prince in his Age, led a mighty Army into Scythia, the Tomiris,
Justin.
Queen of Scythia routed the Persian Army, and taking Cyrus himself in the
Battle Prisoner, afterward Crucified him. And such was the Valor of the
Amazons, after they had thus strengthened themselves, that they not only
overran their Neighbors, but conquered a great part both of Europe and Asia.
But since now we have begun to speak of the Amazons, we conceive it not
impertinent if we here relate cursorily those things concerning them which for
the strangeness of the matter may seem to resemble Romantic Fables.

There was heretofore a Potent Nation seated upon the River Thermodon, governed
always by Women, as their Queens; in which the Women, like Men, managed all
their Martial Affairs. Amongst An Account of the Amazons, in Sarmatia, in Asia,
in the North part of Kussia, and beyond Northward.
these Female Princes (they say) there was one that excelled all the rest for
strength and valor, who got together an Army of Women, and having trained them
up in Martial Discipline, first subdued some of her Neighboring Nations;
afterward by her Valor growing more famed and renowned, she led her Army
against the rest, and Fortune favoring her Arms, she was so puffed up, that she
called her self The Danghter of Mars, and ordered the Men to spin Wool, and do
the Women's Work within Doors.

She made Laws also, whereby she enjoined the Women to go forth to the Laws of
the Amazons.
Wars, and the Men to be as Slaves, and do all the Servile work at Home.
Therefore when any Male Child was born, they broke their Thighs and Arms, to
render them useless and unfit for War: And for the Females they seared off the
right Breast, lest it should be an hinderance to them in Fight: And hence they
were called Without a Breast.
Amazons. At length grown eminent for Policy and Skill in Military Affairs, she
built a large City called Themiscyra, at the Mouth of the River Thermodon, and
beautified it with a stately Palace. She was very exact in Martial Discipline,
and keeping good Order: She first conquered all the Neighboring Nations, as
far as to the River Tanais; and having performed all these noble Exploits (they
say) in a Battle, she afterward fought, (having first signalized her Valor)
she ended her Days like an Hero. Upon her Death her Daughter P. 91.
succeeded her in the Kingdom, who imitating her Mother's Valor, in some
Exploits excelled her: For she caused the Girls from their very Infancy to be
exercised in Hunting, and daily trained up in Martial Discipline. Then she
instituted solemn Festivals and Sacrifices to be offered to Mars and Diana,
called Tauropoli. She advanced her Arms beyond Tanais, and brought under all
the Nations as far as to Thrace. Then returning to her own Country with a rich
Booty, she erected stately Temples to those Deities before mentioned, and
gained the Hearts of her Subjects by her easy and gentle Government.
Afterward she undertook an Expedition against them that lay on the other side
of the River, and added a great part of Asia to her Dominion, and extended her
Arms as far as to Syria.

After her Death, the Crown descended still to the next of Kin, and every one
in their time governed with great Commendation, and advanced the Honor and
Renown of the Amazons Kingdom.

Many Ages after (the Fame and Renown of the Amazons being spread Abroad all
the World over) they say, that Hercules, the Son of Jupiter and Alcmena, was
enjoined by This Euristheus was King of Mysena, who put Hercules upon all his
Difficulties, on purpose to destroy him.
Eurystheus to fight Hippolyta, the Amazon Queen, and to strip her of her Belt.
Upon which, he made War upon the Amazons, and in a great Battle routed them,
and took Hippolyta, and her Belt together, which so weakened them, that the
Neighboring Barbarians knowing their low Condition, despised them; and
remembering what ruin and destruction they had formerly made amongst them, so
wasted them with continual War, that not so much as the Name of Amazons is now
to be found any where in the World. For a few Years after Hercules's Time, the
Trojan War broke forth, at which time Penthesilia Queen of those Amazons that
were left, and Daughter of Mars (having committed a cruel Murder among her own
People) for the horridness of the Fact fled, and after the Death of Hector,
brought aid to the Trojans; and though she bravely behaved her self, and killed
many of the Greeks, yet at last she was slain by Achilles, and so in Heroic
Actions ended her Days. This, they say, was the last Queen of the Amazons, a
brave spirited Woman, after whom the Nation (growing by degrees weaker and
weaker) was at length wholly extinct: So that these later Ages look upon all
those old Stories concerning the valiant Acts of the Amazons, to be but mere
Fictions and Fables. Now since we have thus far spoken of the Northern Parts of
Asia, it is convenient to observe something relating to the Antiquity of the
Hyperborcans.

Amongst them that have written old Stories much like Fables, Hyperboreans.
Hecateus and some others say, that there is an This seems to be Britain.
Island in the Ocean over against Gall, (as big as Sicily) under the Artick
Pole, where the Hyperboreans inhabit, so called, because they lie Or rather
very far North.
beyond the Breezes of the North Wind. That the Soil here is very rich, and
very fruitful; and the Climate temperate, insomuch as there are Two Crops in
the Year.

They say that Latona was born here, and therefore that they worship Apollo
above all other Gods; and because they are daily saying Songs in praise of this
God, and ascribing to him the highest Honors, they say that these Inhabitants
demean themselves, as if they were Apollo's Priests, who has there a stately
Grove, and renowned Temple of a round Form, beautified with many rich Gifts.
That there is a City likewise consecrated to this God, whose Citizens are most
of them Harpers, who playing on the Harp, chant Sacred Hymns to Apollo in the
P. 92.
Temple, setting forth his glorious Acts. The Hyperboreans use their own
natural Language: But of long and ancient time, have had a special Kindness for
the Grecians; and more especially for the Athenians, and them of Delos. And
that some of the Grecians passed over to the Hyperboreans, and left behind them
diverse (...) Things dedicated to the Gods.
Presents, inscribed with Greek Characters; and that Abaris formerly traveled
thence into Greece, and renewed the ancient League of Friendship with the
Delians.

They say moreover, that the Moon in this Island seems as if it were near to
the Earth, and represents in the face of it Excrescences like Spots in the
Earth. And that Apollo once in Nineteen Years comes into the Island; in which
space of time, the Stars perform their Courses, and return to the same Point;
and therefore the Greeks call the Revolution of Nineteen Years, the Great Year.
At this time of 19 Years, the Great Year.
his appearance (they say) that he plays upon the Harps, and sings and daunces
all the Night from the 10th of March.
Vernal Equinox, to the rising of the In September.
Pleiades, solacing himself with the Praises of his own successful Adventures.
The Sovereignty of this City, and the care of the Temple (they say) belongs to
the Boreades, the Posterity of Boreas, who hold the Principality by Descent in
a direct Line from that Ancestor.

CHAP. IV.
A Description of Arabia the Desert, Happy, etc. Metals, Precious Stones,
Beasts, etc. A Description of Taprobana in the Southern Ocean, now called
Ceylon or Zeilan. The strange things there. How discovered by Iambulus.

HAving now finished these foregoing Relations, we shall bend our Discourse to
the other Parts of Asia not yet spoken of, and chiefly to Arabia. Arabia.


This Country is situated between Syria and Egypt, and is divided into several
Nations. On the East the Arabians, called the Nabateans, inhabit a Tract partly
Nabateans, a Desert, dry and barren Country.
Desert, and in other Parts without Water, and very little of it there is that
bears any Fruit; and therefore the Inhabitants live by Robbing and Stealing,
and for that end roving up and down the Countries far and near, they vex the
Inhabitants with their continual Incursions and Robberies, it being a very
difficult matter to subdue them. For in the dry Country, they have Wells dug
in convenient Places, unknown to Strangers, whither they fly for refuge, and
are safe: For knowing where the Waters lie hid and private, upon opening of the
Wells they are largely supplied; but Strangers, who pursue them (unacquainted
with those Fountains) either perish for Thirst, or falling into many other
Disasters, and quite tired out, scarcely ever return home: And therefore these
Arabians (being that they are not to be conquered) are never enslaved, nor ever
admit any Foreign Prince over them, but preserve themselves continually in
perfect Liberty; and therefore neither the Assyrians anciently, nor the Medes
and Persians, nor the very Macedonians themselves, were ever able to conquer
them; who, though they often marched with great Forces against them, yet they
ever failed in their Designs.

In the Country of the Nabateans, there is a Rock strongly Fortified, to which
there is an Ascent but one way, through which a few only at a time mount up to
cast down their Fardles. There Is likewise a large The Lake of Sodom, or
Dead-Sea and Asphaltes.
Mere which produces Brimstone, from whence they raise no small Revenue: It Is
60 Miles.
Five Hundred Furlongs in length, and Betwixt 7 and 8 Miles. Josephus in lib.
of the Wars of the Jews, Book 5, c. 5. says it is 580 Furlongs long, and 150
broad, extending in length to Zoar in Arabia.
Sixty in breadth: The Water for Smell stinks, and is bitter in Taste, so that
neither Fish, nor any other living thing used to the Water can live there.
There are indeed great Rivers, whose Waters are exceeding sweet, which empty
themselves into the Lake, and yet it stinks howsoever. Every Year the Brimstone
rises up out of the middle of the Mere, some Pieces Two, and others Three
Plethras Square in quantity. The greater Pieces the Inhabitants call Plethra
200 or 300 Foot.
Bulls, and the lesser Calves. When the Brimstone swims upon the Water, it
represents at a distance the form of an Island. There are apparent Signs of
casting The Lake Asphaltes, or Sodom. P. 93.
up of the Brimstone Twenty Days before; for every where round the Lake for
many Furlongs distant, a Steam arises with a stinking smell, and all Gold,
Silver, or Brass near those Places, change their natural Color; but return to
their former, when all the Brimstone is exhaled. And in as much as all Places
near adjoining are corrupted with a Fire and stinking Stench, it infects Men's
Bodies with Diseases, and shortens their days. However this Region abounds with
Palm Trees, because it is watered with wholesome Rivers and Springs. In a Valley
thereabouts grows that which they call Balsam: Whence they gain a plentiful
Revenue, in regard this Plant grows in no other Parts of the World; which
affords likewise excellent Medicines for the Use of the Physician.

The other Arabia adjoining to this barren and dry Country Arabia, so far
excels Arabia the Happy.
it, that for its Fruitfulness and Plenty of all other good things its called
Arabia the Happy. It plentifully produces The Bark of a sweet Cane.
Calamus and Mastick, and other Aromatic Plants, and breaths out all sorts of
fragrant Smells from the Trees, and abounds with diverse kinds of sweet Gums,
which distill from them. The furthest Parts Mastick, Greek (...), Schinus.
likewise of Arabia produce Myrrh and Frankincense (so grateful to the Gods)
which is carried all the World over.

Upon the Mountains grow in abundance not only Firs and Pine-trees, but tall
Cedars, Junipers and the Tree called Gyratus.
Agyreus; and many other fruitful Plants, which yield not only a pleasant
Tastle, but a most sweet and delicious Smell to those that come near them. The
very Nature of the Soil it self is odoriferous and useful for sweet Perfumes;
and therefore in some Places of Arabia in digging of the Ground they find
sweet-scented Veins of Stone Metal, which furnish the Inhabitants Metals.
with large Quarries, who build Houses of the Stone cut out of these Delphs;
and when the Rain falls upon them, the Metal in the Stone melts, and runs
within the Joints of the Building, and so binds all together, that the Wall
seems to be all of one Piece. In Arabia are found Mines of pure Gold called
(...)
Gold without Fire: For it is not extracted out of the little Pieces of drossy
Metal by melting in the Fire as in other Places, but its pure and refined at
the first digging it out of the Earth, every Piece about the Bigness of a
Chestnut, and of so bright and glorious a Color that this Gold adds an
exceeding Beauty and Luster to the most precious Stones that are set in it.

ARABIA is so rich in all sorts of Cattle, that many Provinces (employing
themselves only as Herdsmen and Shepherds) live fully and contentedly without
the Use of Corn. That Part joining upon Asia breeds vast Multitudes of
exceeding great wild Beasts; for the Lions and Leopards here are far more for
Number, and larger and stronger than any in Africa; to which may be added those
they call the Babylonian Tigers. It produces likewise Beasts of a double
Nature, and mixed Shape; amongst whom are those that are called Ostrich-Camels.
Struthocameli, who have the Shape both of a Camel and an (...) Vid. Plin. Not.
Hist. I. 10. c. 1.
Ostrich. For in the Bulk of their Bodies they are as big as a Camel newly
foal'd, having upon their Heads small Hairs and great and black Eyes; in Shape
and Color they are like to Camels, having long Necks, and very short Beaks
turning inwards, and sharp at the Point; they have Wings also of soft and hairy
Feathers; they are supported with two strong Thighs, and are cloven hoofed, so
that this Creature seems to be both terrestrial and volatile, a P. 94.
Land-Beast and a Bird: But being not able to fly by reason of the Bulk of her
Body, she runs upon the Ground as swift as if she flew in the Air; and when she
is pursued by Horsemen, with her Feet she hurls the Stones that are under her,
with that Force as if they were sent out of a Sling, and many times kills the
Pursuers with the Blows and Strokes they receive. When she is near being taken,
she thrusts her Head under a Shrub or some such like Cover; not (as some
suppose) through Folly and Blockishness, as if she would not see any or be seen
of them, but because her Head is the tenderest Part of her Body she seeks to
secure that Part all manner of ways she can; for Nature teaches all Creatures
to seek not only to preserve themselves but their Kind; through a natural
Instinct and Love of Life prompting them to perpetuate their Species by a
constant Propagation.

Those Creatures called Cameleopards partake of both kinds, as is denoted by
Camel-leopards. Vid. Plin. Na. Hist. lib. 8. c. 18.
their Name. They are indeed less then Camels, and lower crested; but in their
Heads and Eyes like unto Leopards: In the Bulch upon their Backs they resemble
Camels; but in Color, Hair, and in the Length of their Tails they are in
Nature Leopards.

There are likewise bred Tragelaphi, Buffels. Tragelaphi, Goat Hearts bred near
the River Phasis in Colchis. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. c. 33. Buffels or Buffs.
Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. c. 34.
Tragclaphi and Buffels, and many other Creatures of a double Shape, partaking
of several Natures; which would require a long Discourse to describe every one
of them particularly. For its very reasonable to conceive that by the vivifying
Heat of the Sun in the Southern Parts of the World many sorts of wonderful
Creatures are there bred. And upon this Account it is that there are Crocodiles
and River-horses in Egypt; and great Numbers and diverse sorts of Elephants,
Serpeuts and other Beasts, and (amongst the rest) Dragons of an unusual Bigness
and Fierceness in Ethiopia and the Deserts of Africa; and for the same Reason
it is that there are Elephants in India more than elsewhere for their Number,
and excelling all others in Strength and the Bulk of their Bodies. In these
Parts also are produced by the Influence of the Sun, not only several kinds of
living Creatures, but diverse sorts of precious Stones commendable both for the
Variety of Precious Stones.
their Colors, and their sparkling Luster and Beauty.

Crystal (they say) is produced of the purest Water congealed and hardened, not
Crystal.
by Cold, but by the Power of the Sun; so that it continues for ever, and
receives many Shapes and Colors according as the Spirits are exhaled.

The The Emerald of a green Color: and so the Beryl, but sometimes of a Gold
Color.
Smaragdos and Beryl (as they are called) which are found in the Copper-Mines
are said to have their Color from their Mixture with Sulphur: And that the
Chrysolite of a Golden Color.
Chrysolite produced by the Heat of the Sun, receives its Tincture from an hot
and fiery Exhalation. And therefore its said that those Stones called
Pseudocrists, counterfeit Gold or counterfeit Golden Color.
Pseudocrists are made of Crystal calcined by the Goldsmiths Fire. By the Heat
of the Sun likewise are produced Rubies called Carbuncles.
Rubies, which differ one from another as there is more or less Light enclosed
in them in the Concretion. And for the same Reason Birds Feathers differ in
Color, so that some are all over of a Purple Dye, others only spotted here and
there. For some things seem red, others yellow, some green, and many of a
golden Color, according to their Position to the Light. To conclude, P. 95.
innumerable sorts of Colors (very difficult to be reckoned up) are occasioned
by this Means; which we see is done by the Reflection of the Sun's Beams upon
the Rainbow. Whence the Naturalists do agree, that even the various Colors of
Things above proceed from their Diversity of Heat, the lively Operation of the
Sun causing their several Forms and Shapes; and that the various Colors of
Flowers, and even of the Earth it self proceed from the Efficacy of the Sun,
whose natural Operations the Arts of Men (as Nature's Scholars) do imitate,
framing Variety of Colors in Painting and Embroidery: And that as Colors are
formed by Light, so Smells of Fruits, Variety of Tastes, Greatness of living
Creatures, and the natural Constitution of every Thing, and the several
Properties of the Earth are caused by the Heat of the Sun, which makes both the
Earth and Water fruitful with its cherishing Heat, and is the Parent of every
Creature; and therefore neither the Marble of Paros, nor any other Stone (though
never so admirable) are comparable to the Stones in Arabia, which exceed all
others for Luster, Weight and Delicacy. This singular Property (as I have said)
every thing is clothed with by the Power of the Sun in this Region: For by its
Heat it concretes, by Exhalation hardens, and by its Light beautifies.

Hence it is that Birds are of a hot Nature, swift of Flight, and decked most
with Variety of Colors in those Regions that are directly under the Scorching
Heat of the Sun.

For in the Province of Babylon are bred many Peacocks, beautified with various
Colors; and in the Eastern Parts.
furthest Parts of Syria, Parrots, Porphyrio, see Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 10. c.
46.
Porphyrios, Meleagrides, sorts of Turky-Cocks or Hens in Africa, into which
the Sisters of Meleager were transformed for their immoderate Mourning for him.
Ovid. Met. lib. 8. Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 10. c. 26.
Meleagrides, and many strange Birds of various Natures and Colors. The like
may be said of other Parts of the World, where the Climate is the same; as of
India, the Parts about the Red Sea, of Ethiopia, and some Parts of Africa. But
the Eastern Parts being richer and more fruitful breed larger and more noble
Creatures.

Those Creatures that are bred in other Countries have Natures agreeable to the
Goodness of the Soil. So as to the Trees, the Date Trees.
Palm Trees of Africa bear but small and indigested Fruit: But in Coelo-Syria
the Dates which they call Cariots, so called because the wine made of the Juice
is hurtful to the Head. Plin. N. H. l. 13. c. 4.
Cariots, excel all others for pleasant Juice, Sweetness and Largeness. Yet in
Arabia and in the Province of Babylon grow far larger than those, in Quantity
fix Fingers round, some of a yellow, some scarlet, and others of a purple Dye,
delightful both to the Eye and grateful to the Taste. The Palm Trees are very
tall, straight and smooth to the Top. The Branches grow near to Plin. Not.
Hist. l. 13. c. 4.
the Head, but not all in the like Manner. For some have their Branches growing
round them on every side here and there and between them, the Fruit bursting
out in Clusters through the Bark. Others represent a burning Lamp, their
spiring Branches surrounding only one Part near the Top. Others whose Boughs
clasp on every Part round the Tree, and guarded on both sides with a double row
of tender Sprouts, represent something painted or inscribed.

That Part of Arabia lying to the South is called Arabia the Happy; the
Arabians Arabia the Happy.
that inhabit the inner Parts, live Pastoral Lives, and in Tents. They have
great Herds of Cattle, and are continually in vast and large Pastures. That
Region which lies between them and Arabia the Happy, is Desert, without Water,
as Arabia the Desert.
we have before observed. The Places toward the West are sandy Deserts, so
that all that travel there direct their Course (as Mariners at Sea) by the
Artic Pole.
Bear P. 96.
Star. The other Part of Arabia stretching toward Syria is full of Husbandmen
Sandy Arabia.
and diverse sorts of Merchants. These by their Traffic and Merchandise by
importing and exporting plentifully furnish all other Parts round about, with
what things they want. That Part bordering upon the Ocean lies about Arabia the
Happy, and there (by many Rivers falling down together) are made many large
Ponds and Lakes up and down in the Country: And because large Tracts of Ground
are watered by the Rivers and the Rains that fall in the Summer time, they have
a double Harvest. This Place breeds Troops of Elephants and other Beasts of
vast Proportion, and likewise of double Shapes and strange Kinds; and also
abundance of tame Cattle, especially Oxen and Sheep, which have very great and
thick Tales. There are there bred in like manner a sort of Camels far beyond
all others (both Hairy and smooth.
bare and rough) and the Bulch upon their Backs twice as big as any others, and
therefore they are called Doublebulch'd.
Dityles. Some of these bring in great Profit both by their Milk and their
Flesh. Others, accustomed to Burdens, will carry Ten Medimnas.
twenty Bushels of Corn upon their Backs; which being of smaller Bodies, but
swifter than the rest, are used to running, and dispatch a vast Tract of
Ground, especially in the dry and desert Country.

These Beasts are useful in times of War; for in Battles they carry two Archers
sitting back to back, the one to oppose them that attack them in the Front, and
the other to repulse such as fall upon them in the Rear. Although this
Discourse of Arabia and the Things there bred and produced may perhaps seem to
be too tedious, yet the observing Reader may find in it many things worthy to
be known.

And now we purpose to say something briefly of a certain Island lying in the
Southern Ocean, and of the Wonders there, Taprobana, now Ceylon or Zeilan, in
Scripture called Ophir, as Bocha^^ proves.
giving first an exact Account by what Means it came to be discovered.

There was one Iambulus, from his Youth studious and learned. After the Death
of his Father (who was a Merchant) he applied himself likewise to that Calling;
but as he traveled through Arabia to This Island described by Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 6. c. 22. The Discovery by Iambulus.
that Part of the Country where Spices most abounded, he and all his Company
fell into the Hands of Thieves.

And first he was made a Shepherd, together with another of his Fellow
Captives. Afterward he was again taken by Ethiopian Skulkers, and carried away
into the Maritime Parts of Ethiopia. And they were thus stolen and carried
away, that (being Strangers) by them they might purge and expiate the Land. For
the Ethiopian Inhabitants there had a Custom anciently used among them, and
appointed by the Oracles of the Gods Twenty Generations before, that is, Six
Hundred Years (every Generation comprehending Thirty Years a Generation.
Thirty Years) that the Land should be purged by Two Men that were Strangers.
They prepared therefore a little Ship, yet sufficient to endure the Storms at
Sea, and easily to be governed by Two Men: Upon this Ship they put the Men on
Board, with Six Months Provision, that (according to the direction of the
Oracle) they might sail away in a direct Course toward the South, in order to
arrive at a Fortunate Island, where they might find People that were gentle and
kind, with whom they might live happy lives. And that if they arrived safe at
the Island (they told them) their own Nation, from whence they came, should
enjoy Peace and Prosperity for Six Hundred Years to come. P. 97.


But if they were affrighted with the length of the Voyage, and should return
again, they told them, that like impious Wretches, and destructive to the
Nation, they should undergo most severe Punishments. Then they say the
Ethiopians kept a Festival upon the Sea-shoar, and after splendid Sacrifices,
crowned the Purgators with Garlands, and sent them away, and so perfected the
Purgation of the Nation. These Two Men (they say) being tossed for Four Months
together, having passed over a vast Ocean (after many Storms and hardships at
Sea) at last arrived at the Island designed in the Fourth Month.

The Island is of a round Form, About Eight Hundred Miles.
Five Thousand Furlongs in Compass. When The shape of the Island.
the Men drew near to Shore, some of the Inhabitants came to meet them, and
brought the Ship into Harbor: Whereupon many more flockt in, and thronged
about the Strangers, wondering how ever they got thither; however they
courteously received them, and entertained them with what their Country could
afford.

The Inhabitants are much unlike to us in these Parts of the World, both as to
The Inhabitants.
their Bodies, and their way of living; but among themselves, they are for Form
and Shape like one to another, and in stature above Six Foot.
Four Cubits high. They can bend and turn their Bones somewhat like unto
Nerves; and as the Nervous Parts after motion ended, return to their former
state and position, so do their Bones. Their Bodies are very tender, but their
Nerves far stronger than ours, for whatever they grasp in their Hands, none are
able to wrest out of their Fingers. They have not the least Hair in any part of
their Bodies, but upon their Heads, Eyebrows, Eyelids and Chins; all other
Parts are so smooth, that not the least Down appears any where. They are very
comely and well shaped, but the Holes of their Ears are much wider than ours,
and have something like little Tongues growing out of them. Their Tongues have
something in them singular and remarkable, the Effect both of Nature and Art;
for they have partly a double Tongue, naturally a little divided, but cut
further inwards by Art, so that it seems two, as far as to the very Root, and
therefore there is great variety of Speech among them, and they not only imitate
Man's Voice in articulate Speaking, but the various Chatterings of Birds, and
even all sorts of Notes as they please; and that which is more wonderful than
all, is, that they can speak perfectly to two Men at once, both in answering to
what is said, and aptly carrying on a continued Discourse relating to the
subject Matter in hand; so that with one part of their Tongue they speak to
one, and with the other part to the other.

This Island is under a most excellent and moderate Climate (lying near rather.
under the The Climate.
Equator) neither scorcht with Heat, nor pincht with Cold; there they have
ripe Fruit all the Year long, as the Himer.
Poet says,

(...),
(...).
Apples and Pears always both ripe and green,
With Grapes and Figs may ever there be seen.
The Days and Nights are there always of an equal length; neither is there any
Shadow at Noonday, because the Sun is directly in the Zenith over head. They
live divided into Tribes, according to their Kindred, and into distinct
Societies; Divided into T(...)s.
yet so as that there are not above Four Hundred admitted into any one Tribe or
Society. They live in Meadows where they are plentifully supplied with all
things necessary for Food by what the Earth produces. For the Fertility of the
Soil, and the Temperature of the Air is such, that Corn (more than enough)
grows there of it self. Plenty of Calamus likewise is produced there, whose
Fruit is like to (...)ed E^^e.
white Vetches: When they have gathered it, they steep in it hot Water, till it
puffs up to the bigness of a Pigeons Egg; then bruising it, and rubbing Their
Bread.
it skilfully in their Hands, they knead it into Dough, and then bake and eat
it, being exceeding sweet and delicious Bread to the Taste. There are there
both hot and cold large Baths, both for the curing and preventing of
Distempers, being Baths. P. 98.
exceeding sweet and pleasant. They are learned in all sorts of Sciences,
especially in Astrology. They use Eight and Twenty particular Letters, for the
signifying what they mean, and Seven Characters, every one of which are formed
Characters. Long lived.
Four manner of ways. They live long generally, without ever being Sick, to an
Hundred and Fifty Years of Age.

Those that are lame, or have any other weakness or infirmity of Body
(according Customs and Laws.
to the severe Law of their Country) they put to Death. They write not cross
over the Sheet as we do, but begin at the top of the Leaf, and go on in one
direct Line down to the Bottom. They have a Law that they may live to such a
certain number of Years, and when those are run up, they dispatch themselves by
a strange kind of Death; for there is an Herb of a double nature, that grows
among them, upon which, if any one lies down, he silently passes away and dies,
without any sense of pain, as if he were in a sweet Sleep. They never marry,
but make use of Women promiscuously, and breed up the Children so begotten (as
common to them all) with equal care and affection to one as well as to another.
The Children while they are tender Infants are often changed by the Nurses,
that they cannot be known by their Mothers; and therefore by that means there
being no Ambition among them, they live in great concord and amity, without any
Seditions or Tumults. There are Beasts among them very small, but of an
admirable property as to their Flesh, and the excellent virtue that is in their
Blood. Their A little Beast strange.
Bodies are round, and something like to a Tortoise, divided by Two Streaks
which run down the Back; at each end of every Streak they have an Eye and a
Mouth; so that they have Four Eyes to see with, and Four Mouths to feed with;
but the Meat they eat, is conveyed through one Throat, and hence into the
Belly, the common Receptacle of all: And so in like manner they have but one
Gut, nor but one of every other of the inner Parts: They have many Feet placed
round their Bodies, and make use of them to go on what side they will. There Is
a marvelous virtue in the Blood of this little Creature, for it presently at an
instant closes all Cuts and gaping Wounds in every Body that has still life in
it; and if a Hand, or any other Member of that kind (that is not Vital) be cut
off, by the application of this Blood (while the Wound continues green) it
heals up again.

Each Society of these Inhabitants do keep many great Birds of a singular
Nature, Great Birds carry Children.
by which they try the Courage of their Children; for they place them upon the
Birds Backs, and as many of them as sit fast when the Birds take their Flight,
they bring up; but those that faint and are terrified, they throw away, as such
that can never endure hardship any long time, nor have any generous Spirit in
them.

In every Tribe or Society, the eldest governs the rest as King, and all yield
him perfect Obedience: If the first put himself to Death (according to the Law)
after he has lived a Hundred and Fifty Years, the next to him in age succeeds
in the chief Command and Authority.

The Sea that surrounds this Island is very rough, and causes very great and
high Tides, but the Water is fresh and sweet. The The Pole Artick.
Bear Star, and many other visible with us, are never seen here.

These Islands are Seven in number, equal in bigness one to another, and of the
Here seems something to be wanting. Their Frugality.
same distance one from another, and the same Laws and Customs are used in all
of them: And though these Islands afford plenty of Provision out of the natural
growth of the Country to all the Inhabitants, yet they use them not
luxuriously, but are frugal, and gather only so much as will serve their turns.
They do indeed cook for themselves Flesh-meat, and all other sorts of Victuals
both roasted and boiled, but as for Sauces, and other delicate Inventions of
that kind by Cooks, and the various Tastes and Savours contrived for curious
Pallats, they are altogether ignorant of them.

For Gods they worship especially the whole frame of Heaven, because it
comprehends Worship.
all things; and next to that the Sun, and then all the Celestial Bodies. By
various ways of Fishing and Fowling, they catch Fish and Fowl of all sorts. P.
99.
There are among them abundance of Fruit Trees, and Vines, and Olive Trees,
whence they draw great quantity of Oil and Wine.

Here are exceeding great Serpents, which yet do no harm to any; nay, their
Great Serpents.
Flesh is good Meat and very sweet. They make their Garments of a soft and fine
Cotton, contained in certain Reeds and Canes. This Cotton they dye with the
Shell-Fishes called Ostreses, made up in Balls, and mixed and wrought amongst
the Wool, and so with great pains make themselves Garments of a Purple Color.

It produces living Creatures of different Natures from all others, and even
incredible because they are unusual.

Their way of Feeding is according to a prescribed Rule; for they do not eat
all Diet.
sorts of Meats together at one and the same time, nor the same always; but
upon some certain Days Fish, other Fowl, sometimes the Flesh of Land-Cattel, at
other times Olives, and on other Days, very low and mean Diet. They help one
another in their Callings and Employments by turns: Some employ themselves in
Fishing; others in Manufactures, and others in other things useful and
profitable to the Commonwealth. Some at certain times do exercise public
Offices, except those that are grown old. Upon their Festival Days, and times
of Invocation upon their Gods, they celebrate their Praises both in
Acclametions and Songs; especially the Sun, to whom they devote themselves and
their Islands.

Their Dead they carry to the Sea-shoar at the Fall of the Tide, covering them
Burials.
with a little Sand, that at the time of Full Sea heaps of Sand may be raised
higher upon them.

Those Canes whence they gather Fruit to eat, are the Compass of a Crown in
thickness; they say, that toward the Full of the Moon they increase, and
toward the New Moon they proportionably decrease.

The Water of their hot Springs is sweet and wholesome, and ever continues warm,
never growing cold, unless it be mixed with Wine or cold Water.

After Iambulus with his Companion had continued in this Island Seven Years,
they were (as wicked and vile Fellows) ejected. Having therefore their Ship
fitted out, and furnished with Provision, they set Sail, and after they had
continued their Voyage for above Four Months together, they fell at length upon
the Sandy shallows of India, where Iambulus his Companion was drowned, and he
himself was afterward cast upon a certain Village, and forthwith carried away
by the Inhabitants of the Place, to the King, then at a City called Polybothia,
many Days Journey distant from the Sea; where he was kindly received by the
King, who had a great love for the Grecians, and was very studious in the
liberal Sciences. At length (having obtained Provision from the King) he first
sailed into Persia, and thence safely arrived in Greece. This Iambulus
committed all these Adventures to Writing, and gave an account of many things
relating to the Affairs of India, before unknown to Strangers. But having now
performed what we promised in the beginning of this Book, we shall here make an
end.

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK III.
The PREFACE. P. 100.

THE First of the Two Books preceding, contains the Acts of the ancient Kings
of Egypt, and the Fabulous History of the Egyptian Gods: Of those things
reported of the River Nile; of their Fruits, diverse kinds of Beasts, the
Situation of the Country, and of their Laws and Courts of Justice. In the
Second are comprehended the Affairs of Asia, the Acts of the Assyrians in
ancient Times, and amongst them the Birth and Advancement of Semiramis; how she
built Babylon, and many other Cities, and invaded the Indians with a mighty
Army. We have treated there likewise of the Caldeans, and their Art in
Astronomy. Of Arabia, and the wonderful things there: Of the Amazons: And
lastly, of the Hyperboreans, and the Island Taprobana. In this ensuing Book
pursuing such things as are coherent with those that went before, we shall
treat of the Ethiopians and Africans, and of the Atlantic Islands.

CHAP. I.
Of the Ethiopians: Their Letters, Laws, Arms, Religion, Funerals: The
Description of several Parts of the Country. Manner of making of Gold. Of the
Ichthyophages, their several sorts, and way of Living.

THE Ethiopians say that they were the First Men that ever were in the World,
and that to prove this, they have clear Demonstrations: For they say, they are
Natives of the Country, and not Strangers that came to settle there, and are
therefore by the general Consent almost of all Men called Born in the Land.
Autochthones; and that in every Man's Opinion, it is most probable that those
that inhabit the Near the Pole Antartick
South, were the first Living Men that sprung out of the Earth. For being that
the heat of the Sun at the first exhaled the Moisture of the Earth, and in the
first production of all things, influenced it with a quickening Virtue, they
say it is very rational to conclude, that those Places next to the Sun, should
be the first Parents of all Living Creatures.

It Is affirmed among them, that they were the first that instituted Religious
Worship, and pompous Sacrifices, with solemn Assemblies, and other things used
in the Service, and to the honor of the Gods; and they hold that the
Sacrifices of the Ethiopians are the most acceptable to the Gods of any other;
and in Testimony hereof, they produce the most ancient Poet, and of greatest
Authority amongst the Grecians, who in his Iliads introduces Jupiter with the
rest of the Gods traveling into Ethiopia to the Anniversary Sacrifice, and
solemn Festival prepared for them by the Ethiopians.

(...) Homer Iliad. lib. 1. v. 424.

(...)
For Jove and all the Gods are gone to Feast
With pious Ethiopians in the West.
And they say it is very evident, that the Gods reward them for their Piety, for
that they were never brought into subjection to any Foreign Prince, but always
remained a free People, and at perfect Peace among themselves. And although
many, and those most Potent Princes likewise, have invaded, yet none have
succeeded in their Attempts. For Cambyses making in upon them with mighty
Forces, was in danger both to have lost his Life and his whole Army. And
Semiramis (who was so famous both for her Skill and Success in Arms,) having
but entered a little way into Ethiopia, presently saw it was to no purpose to
think of conquering that Nation.

Hercules likewise, and Bacchus, who ran through the whole World, forbore only
the Ethiopians, being awed by the Piety of that People, and discouraged with
the difficulty of the Attempt.

The Ethiopians likewise say, that the Egyptians are a Colony drawn out from P.
101.
them by Osiris; and that Egypt was formerly no part of the Continent, but a
Sea at the beginning of the World; but that afterward it was by degrees made
Land by the River Nile, which brought down Slime and Mud out of Ethiopia. And
that that Country was made dry Land, by heaps of Earth forced down by the River
(they say) is apparent by evident Signs about the Mouths of Nile. For always
every Year, may be seen fresh Heaps of Mud cast up at the Mouths of the River
by the working of the Sea, and the Land increased by it. Moreover they affirm,
that most of the Egyptian Laws, are the same with those in Ethiopia, the Colony
still observing the Customs of their Ancestors; and that they learnt from the
Ethiopians the Custom of Deifying of their Kings, and their Care and Costs in
their Burials, and such like things used amongst them: Besides the making of
Statues, and the Characters of their Letters. For whereas the Egyptians have
common and ordinary Characters used promiscuously by all the Inhabitants, and
likewise those they call Sacred, known only by the Priests, privately taught
them by their Parents; yet the Ethiopians use both those sorts without any
difference or distinction. The several Colleges of the Priests (they say)
observe one and the same Order and Discipline in both the Nations. For as many
as are so consecrated for Divine Service, are wholly devoted to Purity and
Religion, and in both Countries are shaven alike, and are clothed with the
like Stoles and Attire, and carry a Scepter like unto a Plow-share, such as
their Kings likewise bear; with high crowned Caps tufted at the Top, wreathed
round with Serpents called Asps; by which is seemed to be signified, that those
who contrive any thing against the Life of the King, are as sure to dye, as if
they were stung with the deadly Bite of the Asp. Many other things they report
of their Antiquity, and of a Colony of them heretofore carried away into Egypt,
of which it is unnecessary further to write.

But lest we should omit things that are ancient and remarkable, it is fit
something Hieroglyphics.
should be said of the Ethiopick Characters, and of those which the Egyptians
call Hieroglyphics.

The Ethiopick Letters represent the Shapes of diverse Beasts, Parts and Members
of Men's Bodies, and Artificers Tools and Instruments. For by their Writing they
do not express any thing by composition of Syllables, but by the signification
of Images and Representations, the meaning of them being engraven and fixed in
the Memory by use and exercise. For sometimes they draw the Shape of a Kite,
Crocodile or Serpent, sometimes the Members of a Man's Body, as the Eye, the
Hand, the Face, and such like. The Kite signifies all things that are quickly
dispatched; because this Bird flies the swistest almost of any other. For Reason
presently applies it by a suitable Interpretation to every thing that is
sudden and quick, or of such nature, as perfectly as if they had been spoken.
The Crocodile is the Emblem of Malice: The Eye the preserver of Justice, and
the Guard of the Body. Amongst the Members of the Body, the Right Hand, with
open Fingers signifies Plenty, the Left with the Fingers close Preservation,
and custody of Men's Goods and Estates.

The same way of reasoning extends to all other Parts of the Body, and the
forms of Tools and all other things; for being that they diligently pry into
the hidden signification of every thing, and have their Minds and Memories
daily employed with continual Exercise, they exactly read and understand every
thing coucht within the Hieroglyphics.

A great part of the Ethiopian Laws differ very much from other Nations,
especially The Laws of the Ethiopians.
those which concern the Election of their Kings: For they pick out the best of
their Priests out of every Rank and Order, and whomsoever of those so chosen,
their Revelling God (which they carry about according to Custom) does first lay
hold on, the People they make King, and forthwith fall down upon their Knees,
and worship as a God, and render him other Honors, as he to whom the Authority
of the chief Magistrate is committed by Divine Providence.

Being so elected, he orders the Course of his Life according as the Law has P.
102.
prescribed; and governing in all other respects according to the Customs of
the Country; he neither confers Rewards, nor inflicts Punishments upon any, but
according to the ancient Laws ratified and approved by his Ancestors from the
beginning.

It is a Law among them, That no Subject shall be put to Death, nor Condemned
to Dye, though he be never so guilty: But one of the Sheriffs.
Lictors is sent to the Criminal, bearing before him the Badge or Sign of
Death; upon sight of which, the Party goes Home, and kills himself. It is not
lawful to change his Punishment by wilful Banishment, and flying into other
Countries, as it is the Custom of the Greeks. And therefore they report, that
one once preparing to fly out of Ethiopia, after the Sign of Death was sent to
him by the King, that his Mother discerning his Design, fastened her Garter
about his Neck, and he never in the least lifted up his Hands to hinder her,
but underwent all till he was strangled to Death, lest he should leave behind
him a Blot and Stain upon his Kindred and Family. And above all, that Custom is
most strange, which relates to the Death of the Kings; for those Priests that
are employed in the Service of the Gods at Meroe, who are here of greatest
Authority, whenever they please, they send a Messenger to the King,
commanding him to put himself to death; for that such is the pleasure of the
Gods, and that it is not lawful for any to despise the Commands of the Gods;
adding also other Reasons, which a plain and honest Mind, inured to an ancient
and constant Custom (and not being furnished with sufficient Arguments to
evince the unreasonableness of the Commands) is easily induced to believe.

And so in former Ages, the Kings without force or compulsion of Arms, but
merely bewitched by a fond Superstition, observed the Custom; till Ergamenes a
King of Ethiopia, who reigned in the time of Ptolomy the Second (bred up in the
Grecian Discipline and Philosophy) was the first that was so bold as to reject
and despise such Commands. For this Prince assuming the Spirit and Courage
becoming a King, marched with a considerable Body of Men to the Place (very
difficult of access) where stood the Golden Temple of the Ethiopians, and there
cut the Throats of all the Priests; and having abolished that ancient barbarous
Custom, reformed what appertained to the Service of the Gods, in such manner as
he thought fit. There is moreover a strange and wonderful Law amongst the great
Officers of the King's Household, which continues, they say, to this very day.
For it is a Custom amongst the Ethiopians, that if the King be maimed or
debilitated upon any occasion in any Member of his Body, all his
Houshold-Servants do the same thing to themselves. For they hold it a base and
unworthy thing, that if the King be lame, for his Servants to attend upon him
with whole and sound Limbs, and not all to be lame as well as he. And that it is
a thing most unworthy of true and firm Friendship, not to sympathize and bear a
share both in Prosperity and Adversity, in Sorrow and Sadness, and in the pains
and deficiencies of the Body. They say moreover, that it is a Custom for the
King's Domestic Servants, to put themselves to Death when their Kings dye, and
such Death they account honorable, and as a Testimony of their sincere love to
their Prince; and therefore it is no easy matter for the Ethiopians to
assassinate any of the King's Friends, being that both they and the King are
careful and solicitous for the mutual preservation of each other.

These are the Laws of those Ethiopians that inhabit the Capital City, and the
Island Meroes, and those Tracts that lie next unto Egypt. But there are many
other Ethiopian Nations, whereof some dwell on both sides the River Nile, and
in P. 103.
the Islands in the River; others border upon Arabia, and some are seated in
the heart of Africa. The greatest part of these, especially those in and about
the River, are Blacks, flat Faced, of curled Hair, exceeding fierce and cruel,
and in their Manners like Beasts, not so much in their natural Temper, as in
their studied and contrived pieces of wickedness. Their whole Bodies are filthy
and nasty, and their Nails long like wild Beasts, and cruel one toward
another. They have a shrill Voice, and in regard they are never taught by any
how to lead a more civilized Course of Life (in that way of Education as others
are) they mightily differ from us in all their Manners.

Some of them carry Shields made of the raw Hide of an Ox, and short Lances:
Others Darts with forkt Points; sometimes they use Bows of Wood 8 Foot.
Four Cubits long, and discharge their Arrows, by forcing the Bow with the help
of their Foot; and when their Shafts are spent, they fall on with A great Stake
burnt at one end. Clothes.
Clubs. They arm likewise their Women, till they attain to such an Age; many of
whom use to hang a Brass Ring at their Lips. Some of them never wear any
Clothes, but go naked all their Lives long, and shelter themselves from the
scorching heat of the Sun, only with such helps and defenses as in their way
they can meet withal. Some of them cut off Sheeps Tails, and bind them about
their Loins to cover their Privities: Others make use of Beasts Skins for this
purpose. Some there are that are clothed round their Loins with Breeches made
of the Hair of their Heads; for the nature of the Ground is such, that the
Sheep carry no Fleeces.

Their Meat is a certain Fruit that grows about the Pools and Marshes: Some
pluck off the tender Branches of small Trees, and with them cover themselves
from the heat of the Southern Sun. Some sow Sesamus and Lotus: And others live
upon certain tender Roots of Canes. And many of them that are good Archers,
maintain themselves with abundance of Fowl they kill. But most of them live
upon Flesh, Milk and Cheese. Those that inhabit the Parts above Meroes, have
Two Opinions concerning the Gods.

Some of them say they are eternal and incorruptible: Amongst which, they
Religion.
reckon the Sun, Moon, and the entire Universe. Others they conceive were at
first Mortal Men, but for their Virtue and their Benefits procured to Mankind,
purchased immortal Honor. They especially worship Isis, Pan, Hercules and
Jupiter, whom they account to be the greatest Benefactors to Mankind. But some
few of the Ethiopians are of opinion, that there are no Gods at all: And these
fly to the Marshes from the Sun when it rises, as from an implacable Enemy.

They have Laws likewise different from all other Nations about their Funerals.
Some throw their Dead into the River, as looking upon that to be the best sort
Funerals.
of Burial. Others by pouring upon them melted Glass, keep them in their
Houses; because they think it not convenient or decent that their Countenances
should not be known by their Kindred, or that they should be forgotten by their
Posterity. Some bury them in Earthen Coffins, about their Temples; and to swear
by their Names, is counted the most Sacred Oath. Those that are most Beautiful
some of of them choose to be their King, judging that Regal Power and Beauty are
always the Gifts of Fortune. Others entrust the Royal Power in the Hands of the
most industrious Shepherds, as such as would make it their business to take
most care for the good of their Subjects. Others bestow the Kingdom upon those
that P. 104.
are richest, judging such only most able by their Riches, to supply the wants
of their People.

There are others that are for the advancing them to the Throne, who are most
approved for their Valor; because they judge those that are Conquerors to be
most worthy of Honor.

That part of the Country in Lybia that borders upon Nile, is the most pleasant
The Description of the Parts of the Country.
and richest for all manner of Provision; for the Morasses afford the most
advantageous shelters against the parching heat of the Sun; and therefore the
Ethiopians and Africans quarrel, and are at continual Wars one with another for
the possession of that Place. Herds likewise of Elephants out of the higher
Lybia (as some write) come down into those Parts, because of the abundance of
Pasture, and the sweetness of it. For there are wonderful Morasses, abounding
in all sorts of Food all along the Banks of the River, and here they are held
by the Mouth, when they taste the sweetness of those Reeds and Canes that grow
here, and so eat up the Food of the Inhabitants; and therefore the People are
forced to resort to these Places for Relief (being Shepherds and living in
Tents) making that their Country where they can find the most Plenty.

The Herds of Elephants of which we before hinted, leave the upper Parts for
want of Pasture, which is presently burnt up there by the heat of the Sun. For
by reason of the scorching Heat, and want both of Spring and River-water, the
Grass is parcht up, and none to be had.

Some write, that in the Deserts and other wild Places (as they are called) are
bred a World of Serpents of a wonderful bigness. These (they say) with great
fury and violence, set upon the Elephants at the brink of the Waters, clasping
themselves in many Circles round their Thighs, and sticking fast there so long,
as that at length the Beasts (tired out by their great and weighty bulk) fall
down in a foaming Sweat to the ground; upon which, others in multitudes coming
in, they presently devour them, and that with ease; the poor Creatures being so
unweldy, as scarce able to move themselves. If for some Reason or other, they
succeed not in their Attempt, (out of eagerness to their natural Food) they
pursue not the Elephants to the Rivers Bank before mentioned. For they say
these vast Serpents avoid all they can the open Fields, and abide about the
Feet and hollows of the Mountains in deep Holes and Caves: And hence it is,
that they leave not those Places so fit for their shelter and defense, Nature
teaching every Creature to make use of that which is most helpful to it, and to
avoid what is hurtful.

And thus much we have thought fit to say of the Ethiopians and their Country:
And now something is to be said of the Historians: For many have written such
things concerning Egypt and Ethiopia, as deserve not the least credit, in as
much as the Authors were either too easy to believe Lies, or else in sport and
for diversion invented them themselves.

But Agatharchides of Cnidus in his Second Book of the Affairs of Asia,
Artemidorus the Ephesian, in his Eighth Book of Geography, and some others that
were natural Egyptians, who have written Histories of the things herein before
by us related, have in their Writings nearly pursued the Truth. And I my self
in the time of my Traveling and Sojourning in Egypt, associated with many of
the Priests, and conferred with many Ambassadors and others sent out of
Ethiopia, whence having exactly come to the knowledge of every thing, and
having likewise examined the several Relations of the Historians, have framed
and molded my History, so as to suit with those things wherein all of them did
agree and consent.

But this shall suffice to be said of the Western Ethiopians.

We shall now speak a little of those inhabiting the Southern Parts, and
toward the Red Sea. But it is fit first that we say something of the making of
Gold in these Parts.

In the Confines of Egypt and the neighboring Countries of Arabia and Ethiopia
P. 105. Manner of making Gold.
there is a Place full of rich Gold-mines, out of which with much Cost and Pains
of many Laborers Gold is dug. The Soil here naturally is black, but in the
Body of the Earth, run many white Veins, shining with white Marble, and
glistering with all sorts of other bright Metals; out of which labourious
Mines, those appointed Overseers cause the Gold to be dug up by the labor of a
vast Multitude of People. For the Kings of Egypt condemn to these Mines,
notorious Criminals, Captives taken in War, Persons sometimes falsely accused,
or such against whom the King is incensed; and that not only they themselves,
but sometimes all their Kindred and Relations together with them, are sent to
work here, both to punish them, and by their Labor to advance the Profit and
Gain of the King. There are infinite numbers upon these Accounts thrust down
into these Mines, all bound in Fetters, where they work continually, without
being admitted any rest Night or Day, and so strictly guarded, that there is no
possibility or way left to make an escape. For they set over them Barbarians,
Soldiers of various and strange Languages, so that it is not possible to
corrupt any of the Guard, by discoursing one with another, or by the gaining
Insinuations of a familiar Converse.

The Earth which is hardest and full of Gold, they soften by putting Fire under
it, and then work it out with their Hands: The Rocks thus softn'd, and made
more pliant and yielding, several Thousands of profligat Wretches break it in
pieces with Hammers and Pickaxes. There Is one Artist that is the Overseer of
the whole Work, who marks out the Stone, and shows the Laborers the way and
manner how he would have it done. Those that are the Strongest amongst them,
that are appointed to this Slavery, provided with sharp Iron Pickaxes, cleave
the Marble-shining Rock by mere Force and Strength, and not by Art or Slight of
Hand. They undermine not the Rock in a direct Line, but follow the bright
shining Vein of the Mine.

They carry Lamps fastn'd to their Forheads to give them Light, being otherways
in perfect Darkness in the various windings and turnings wrought in the Mine;
and having their Bodies appearing sometimes of one Color, and sometimes of
another (according to the nature of the Mine where they work) they throw the
Lumps and Pieces of the Stone cut out of the Rock upon the Floor. And thus they
are employed continually without intermission, at the very nod of the Overseer
or Tax-master, who lashes them severely besides. And there are little Boys that
attend upon the Laborers in the Mine, and with great labor and toil gather up
the Lumps and Pieces hewed out of the Rock as they are cast upon the Ground,
and carry them forth and lay them upon the Bank. Those that are about Thirty
Years of Age take a Piece of the Rock of such a certain quantity, and pound it
in a Stone Mortar with Iron Pestels till it be as small as a Vetch, then those
little Stones so pounded are taken from them by Women and older Men, who cast
them into Mills that stand together there near at hand in a long Row, and Two
or Three of them being employed at one Mill, they grind it so long till it be
as small as fine Meal, according to the pattern given them. No care at all is
taken of the Bodies of these poor Creatures, so that they have not a Rag so
much as to cover their Nakedness, and no Man that sees them can choose but must
commiserate their sad and deplorable Condition. For tho they are Sick, Maimed
or Lame, no rest no intermission in the least is allowed them: Neither the
weakness of Old age, nor Women's Infirmities are any plea to excuse them; but
all are driven to their work with Blows and Cudgelling, till at length overborn
with the intolerable weight of their misery, they drop down dead in the midst
of their insufferable Labors; so that these miserable Creatures always expect
worse to come than that which they then at present endure, P. 106.
and therefore long for Death as far more desirable than Life.

At length the Masters of the Work take Stone thus ground to Powder, and carry
it away in order to the perfecting of it. They spread the Mineral so ground
upon a broad Board somewhat hollow and lying shelving, and pouring Water upon
it, rub it and cleanse it, and so all the Earthy and Drossy part being
separated from the rest by the Water, it runs off the Board, and the Gold by
reason of its weight remains behind. Then washing it several times again, they
first rub it lightly with their Hands; afterward they draw up the Earthy and
Drossy Matter with slender Spunges gently applied to the Powdered Dust, till it
be clean pure Gold. At last other Workmen take it away by Weight and Measure,
and these put it into Earthen Urns, and according to the quantity of the Gold
in every Urn, they mix with it some Lead, Grains of Salt, a little Tin and
Barley Bran. Then covering every Pot close, and carefully dawbing them over
with Clay, they put them in a Furnace where they abide Five Days and Nights
together; then after a convenient time that they have stood to cool, nothing of
the other matter is to be found in the Pots but only pure refined Gold, some
little thing diminished in the weight.

And thus is Gold prepared in the Borders of Egypt, and perfected and
completed with so many and so great toyls and Vexations. And therefore I
cannot but conclude that Nature itself teaches us, that as Gold is got with
Labor and Toil, so its kept with difficulty; creates every where the greatest
cares; and the use of it mixed both with Pleasure and Sorrow.

Yet the invention of those Metals is very ancient, being found out, and made
use of by the ancient Kings.

Now we shall treat of those Nations that lie scattered among the Coasts of the
(...). Arabian Gu(...) Ichthyophages. Fish-(...)
Red Sea, and through Troglodyta and the Southern parts of Ethiopia.

And First we shall speak of the Ichthyophages who inhabit the Sea Coasts all
along as far as from Carmania and Gedrosia to the uttermost point of the Red
Sea, which runs up into the Land an incredible long way, and at the entrance
into it lies bounded on one side with Arabia the Happy, and with the Country of
the Troglodites on the other.

Some of the Barbarians go stark naked, and their Wives and Children are as
common among them as their Flocks and Herds. They know nothing either of
Pleasure or Sorrow but what is natural, like Bruit Beasts, and have no
apprehension either of Good or Evil. They inhabit not far from the very brink
of the Sea Shore, where there are not only deep Caves, but Craggy Cliffs, and
strait and narrow Valleys divided naturally into many crooked Windings and
Turnings; which being of their own nature useful to the Inhabitants, they make
up the passages both in and out with heaps of great Stones, and make use of
those Places instead of Nets to catch their Fish. For when the Tide comes in
and overflows the Coasts (as it does twice every Day about the Third and Ninth
Hour) and the Sea covers the Strand up to the Brinks of the Banks, together
with the Tide it brings in a Vast number of all sorts of Fish within the Land,
which at the first are kept within those parts next to the Sea, but afterward
for Food disperse themselves about those hollow Caverns; but when the Tide
ebbs, and the Water by degrees leaves the hollows, and reflows through those
heaps of Stones, the Fish within those Caverns are left destitute of Water.
Upon which all the Barbarians (as if they were roused up by one general shout)
with their Wives P. 107.
and Children Flock to the Place. Yet they divide themselves into several
Companies, and each run with an hideous shout to their several Places as if a
Prey were suddenly and unexpectedly presented to them. Then the Women and
Children gather the little Fish next to the shore; and throw them upon the dry
Land, as fast as they can gather them; and the Men, and more able people busy
themselves in catching the great and strong Fish; for the Sea not only casts up
the huge Lobsters, Lampreys and Dog-Fish, but also the Sea Calves, and many
such like both of strange names and shape. They Master not these Creatures with
Arms made by the Artist, but strike 'em through with the sharp Goats Horns, and
wound and cut them with rough Stones broken off from the Rock. For Necessity in
every thing instructs Nature what to do, and readily complies with that which
seems most useful and advantageous in the present exigency.

After they have got their number in heaps together, they carry away their
Booty, and put all they have caught into Stone Pots turned toward the South:
the Fish being, as it were even by Fire, Fried by the heat of the Sun, after a
small time they turn them upon the other side, then they take 'em by the Tails
and shake 'em, and the Flesh thus scalded and softened by the Sun falls off; but
the Bones they heap together in one place; and keep 'em for their use as shall
be hereafter related. Then they boil their Flesh in a little Stone Pot for a
certain time, mixing with them the seed of a Fruit called Paliurus, a Plant
bearing a red Fruit, of a pleasant Taste. (...). Not. (...). l. 1^. c. 1^.
Paliurus. By working of this together it becomes a Lump of one and the same
color, and this seems as if it were a Sauce to their Meat. At last this that
is thus brought into a Body, they spread upon long Tiles, and lay it forth to
dry in the Sun; which after it has been dried a little (lying down together)
they merrily feed upon, and eat not according to Weight and Measure but as
every one thinks fit, making their natural Appetite the measure of their
Repast. For they have always enough of this store to resort unto, as if Neptune
performed the Office of Ceres. Yet sometimes the Sea rises so high, that all
the Shoars are overflowed for many Days together, so that none dare attempt to
come near; in the mean time therefore (wanting food) they first gather
Shellfish of such a vast magnitude, as that some of them weigh Four Minas.
These they break in Pieces with huge great Stones, and eagerly guttle up the
raw Fish in them, which are in Taste much like (...)
Oysters.

If by Storms and Winds the Sea continues long in a high Tide, and that they
are hindered from taking of Fish by Tempestuous Weather, they first (as is said
before) betake themselves to the Shellfish; and when these fail, they run to
the heaps of Bones; and from among them pick out those that are fresh and
moist, and divide 'em one joint from another, and some they presently grash in
Pieces with their Teeth, and others that are more hard they bruise with Stones
and Feed upon them like so many Beasts in their Dens. And thus they provide dry
Food for themselves: And as to that which is moist and juicy, their use of it
is wonderful and past belief. For they Fish continually for Four Days
successively, in the mean time eating merrily together in great Flocks and
Companies, congratulating one another with harsh and untuneable Songs without
any Melodious Harmony: Then they fall promiscuously, as every Man's Lot chances
to company with their Women, for procreation sake; minding no business, nor
taking any care for any thing, having so much plenty ready at hand. But the
Fifth Day, they (...). ^^8.
go in Droves to get Drink, to those Tracts lying under the Feet of the
Mountains, where are many Springs of Sweet Water, whither likewise the No(...).
Shepherds drive their Flocks for the same purpose. Neither do they differ much
from Herds of Cattle, as they go making a horrid noise, without any articulate
Voice: In this Procession the Mothers carry their sucking Children continually
in their Arms, and the Fathers after they are weaned; but after they are Five
Years old, they run before their Parents very jocant and playful, as if they
were going to some delightful and pleasant Recreation. For not being of a
froward and discontented Temper, they place their chiefest good in having
sufficient to supply their necessities, never seeking any further addition to
their happiness in gaining more. When they come to the Shepherds watering
Places, they gorge themselves with Water to that degree, that when they return,
they can scarce go, they are so heavy and unweldy.

All that Day they eat nothing, but every one lies grovelling upon the Ground
like a Drunken Man, with their Bellies almost burst, and scarce able to breath.
And the next Day they fall a feeding upon their Fish; and this course and round
they run in this manner of feeding all the days of their Lives. But those
People who live thus within the strait narrow Caves near to the Sea-shoar, by
reason of the plainness and meanness of their Diet, though they are scarce ever
Sick, yet are far shorter lived than our own Countrymen.

As for those other that live further beyond the Gulf, their way of Living is
Gulf of the Red Sea.
much more strange, who naturally never covet any Drink, nor are affected with
any Passion: For their Lot falling to be in the Deserts, in Places unfit for
Humane Habitation, they feed plentifully, by catching of Fish, but matter not
any other Food; and in regard they eat their Fish slaby, and almost raw, they
are so far from coveting Drink, that they know not what it is to drink. They
are therefore contented with what Providence has provided for them; accounting
themselves happy in this respect, that they are not affected with that
troublesome Passion, the sense of want. And that which is most to be admired,
is, that they so far exceed all other Men in freedom from boisterous Passions,
that what we shall now relate is scarce credible. But many Egyptian Merchants,
who in their Voyage through the Red Sea, have arrived at the Country of the
Ichthophages, have avowed it to me to be a certain truth, that they are not in
the least moved with any thing. And Ptolemy the Third, who had a great desire
to hunt the Elephants that were bred in that Country, sent Simia, one of his
Friends to view the Place; who being furnished with sufficient Provision for
his Journey, exactly and diligently observed the manner of those Nations lying
along the Sea-shoar, as Agatharchides of Cnidus the Historian relates. Amongst
other things he says, that the Ethiopians in those Parts are not affected with
any disturbing Passion; that they never use to drink, nor have the least
appetite or inclination thereunto, for the Reasons before mentioned. He affirms
moreover, that they have no Converse or Discourse with any Stranger, nor are
moved or concerned at the sight of any, but fixing their Eyes upon them, are no
more moved or affected, than as if no Person at all were near them. Nay, if
they be assaulted (he says) with drawn Swords they will not stir; and though they
are hurt and wounded, yet they are not in the least provoked. Neither are the
Common People at all concerned, when any of the rest are hurt or injured; but
many times when their Wives and Children are killed before their Eyes, they
stand insensible as if nothing of prejudice were done to them, showing no sign
either of Anger or Compassion; and therefore they say, they speak not a word,
but act a part with a mimick gesture of their Hands, as they use to do upon
such an occasion. And that which is most of all to be admired, the Pho^^.
Sea Calves (which are very familiar with them) like Men, help them to catch
Fish. These different and distinct People are yet exceeding Faithful one P. 109.
to another, in securing one another's Children from harm and prejudice, and
preserving their several Habitations from force and incroachment; and though
they are of different Stocks, yet they peaceably and affectionately converse
one with another, without offering the least injury on either side.

And though this way of Living together be somewhat strange, yet through long
custom, and constant use and practice, or because they find it necessary and
conducing to their mutual advantage, it is still continued among them to this
day.

These Nations inhabit not after the manner of the other Ichthiophages, but
have diverse sorts of Dwellings according as their several Circumstances fall
out to be; some live in Caves lying most commonly to the North, by which they
have the advantage of being refreshed not only by the depth of the Covert, but
by the cooling Breezes of the Northern Air. For those toward the South scorch
like a Fiery Furnace, and by reason of the violent heat no Man can endure them.
Others that cannot otherwise furnish themselves with Caves that lie Northward,
gather the Ribs of Whales (which the Sea casts up in abundance) and then
bending them, tie 'em together at both ends, and cover them with Sea-grass, and
so rest under those, guarded from the parching heat of the Sun, as by the Cover
of a shady Arch; which Art and Contrivance they are taught by their own
Necessities.

A Third sort of Lodgings these Ichthiophages have are these; about those
Places grow abundance of Fir-trees, which are watered by the Sea, and bear very
thick Leaves, and Fruit like unto Chestnuts: The Boughs and Leaves of these
Trees, they interlace one within another, and so make for themselves a thick
and close Shade, and live merry and jocund Lives, under this their new Canopy,
both in Land and in Water at one and the same time, being hereby guarded from
the Sun by the shade of the Trees, and the natural heat of the Place being
mitigated by the continual Fluctuations of the Sea, and their Bodies refresht
with the cooling Air of some Winds that blow at certain Seasons. But to proceed
as to the Fourth sort of Dwellings.

In this place there has been from the beginning of Time, a vast heap of Moss,
like a Mountain, cast up by the Sea, which is so firm by the constant heat of
the Sun, that its become solid and cemented together with Sand. In this they
dig Caves of a Man's height, that part over-head they leave for a Roof, but
below they make long Passages or Galleries to go in or out, one over against
another. Here they abide with ease, protected from the heat of the Sun; and
about the Time the Tide comes in, out they start, and then for that time employ
themselves in Fishing; and at the ebbing of the Tide, after they have fed
deliciously together upon the Fish they have caught, they fly again to their
several Caves. They bury their Dead only at the time of Low Water; and at that
time they cast their Carcases upon the Shore, and there let them lie uncovered,
to be carried away by the next Tide. And so after all, having spent all their
Days in a strange and unusual Course and way of Living, they themselves at last
in their Burials become Food for the Fishes.

But there is one Nation of the Ichthiophages whose Habitations are so strange,
that inquisitive Men are very much pulled about them. For some of them dwell
upon steep and dangerous hollows which time out of mind have been unaccessible
to Mankind, as far as appears: For over their Heads are exceeding high Rocks,
rugged and steep every way; and on both sides they are blockt up with
unpassable Precipices; and before, the Sea is a Guard and Boundary to them, so
that the best Footman cannot come at them. Neither have they any use or so much
as P. 110.
knowledge of any Boats or Ships as we have. Hence (the thing being so
intricate and doubtful) we may justly conclude that they are There at the
first, and never elsewhere.
Aborigines, and were ever in this Place without any certain time of their
First Generation; which some Naturalists doubt not to affirm of all other Works
of Nature whatsoever. But for as much as the perfect Knowledge of things of
this nature are far above our Comprehension we may easily conclude, that those
know but little, who are the most inquisitive, and soaring so high as to know
all; who may perhaps tickle Men's Ears with a probable Fancy, but never really
attain to the Knowledge of the Truth.

CHAP. II.
Chelonophages: The Manner of taking Sea Tortoises. The Cetivores or Whale
Eaters. The Sea Coasts over against Babylon; their Manner of taking of Fish.
The Rizophages or Root Eaters. Those called Spermaphages and Hylophages,
Hylogones or Hunters; their taking of wild Beasts: The Elephant Fighters; how
they are taken: The Simoes, Struthophages, Acridophages or Locust Eaters; their
miserable Deaths. Cynomolges: The Country of the Troglodites. Wild Beasts: The
Terrible Wild Bull: Serpents; That great one brought alive to Alexandria.

SOmething likewise is to be spoken of the Shellfish-eaters.
Chelonophages, to show the whole Course and Manner of their way of living.

There are a vast number of Islands in the Ocean near to the Continent, very
small and of a low Situation, barren both as to Tillage and the natural Fruits
of the Earth. Amongst these Islands (because they are so near one to another)
there are no Storms or Tempests: For the Force of the Waves are broke by the
Promontories of these Islands that shoot out into the Sea, and therefore
abundance of Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 9. c. 10.
Sea Tortoises lie in and about these Places, seeking Relief under the Covert
of this calm and quiet Shelter. In the Night they lie at the bottom of the
Water feeding, but in the Day time appear above Water in that Part of the Sea
that flows through the midst of the Islands, and lie sleeping with their Shells
erect, exposed to the Sun, and seem to resemble a little Skiff turned with the
Keel upwards; for they are of a wonderful Bigness, no less than a small
Fisher's Boat.

The Barbarians that inhabit these Islands, taking the Opportunity, quietly and
silently swim to these Sea Tortoises, and assailing them on both sides; some
they thrust forward to the Shore, others they lift up till they have turned
them upon their Backs; then they that are on each side guide and direct the
Creature to land like a Ship by the Stem, lest the Tortoise should turn it self
again, and so by its natural Strength in swimming escape from them into the
Sea: And while they are thus employed, one of the Company swims to Shore before
with a long Rope tied at one end to the Fish, and then draws him to Land, those
that assisted at the taking of him following close after. When he is brought
into the Island, they fry the Fish a little while in the Sun, and then feed
upon it merrily together. The Shells being in shape like to Boats are very
useful to the Inhabitants; for they use them both to fail in to the Continent
to get fresh Water; and likewise for Roofs to cover their Cottages, turning the
hollow Parts downwards. So that Nature's Bounty has provided for them by one
Gift many useful Advantages as Food, Vessels, Shipping and Habitations.

Not far off from these upon the Sea Shore in the Continent dwell other
Barbarians far different from the others in their way of living; for they feed
upon C^tivori.
Whales cast up by Chance by the Sea. Sometimes they have Plenty of Food by
Reason of the vast Proportion of these Creatures; but at other times for want
of them they are almost starved; and are forced through want of Food to gnaw
Pieces of old stinking Bones, and to suck the Ends of the rotten Ribs.

So many are the Nations of the Ethiopians who feed upon Fish; and this is the
manner of their living, concluding this Account in a brief and summary way.

But the Sea Coasts over against the Province of Babylon border upon a fruitful
The Sea coasts over against the Province of Babylon.
Country abounding in all sorts of Fruit Trees, where there is such Plenty of
Fish, that they are more than the Inhabitants can consume: For upon the Sea
shore they set such a number of Canes, and so interwoven one within another,
that they are like to a Net spread all along by the Seaside. In every of which
Works, there are many little Portals wrought and interlac'd with Reeds, and are
tossed this way and that way with an easy Motion. These open by the Tide, when
the Sea flows in upon the Land, and when it returns into the Channel they shut
again. So that through these Portals with the Efflux of the Sea the Fish slip
every day, and when it ebbs they are left behind, because they cannot pass with
the Water through those Canes thus knit and wrought together: And therefore
near to the Seaside sometimes may be seen Heaps of Fish panting for want of
Water, which those that have the Care and Oversight of this Business, gather
and carry away. Hence P. 111.
they have both Plenty of Food, and raise a large Revenue beside. Some of the
Inhabitants, when the Shore is dry and the Country lies flat, draw broad Sluices
from the Sea many Furlongs to their Cottages, at the ends of which they place
Wears made of Twigs, which open when the Tide comes in, and shut again when the
Sea goes out; And then the Water flowing through the narrow Mouths of the
Portals, the Fish remain behind in the Sluices, and there they take out every
time as many as they have occasion to use.

Having gone through all those People bordering upon the Seacoasts as far as
from the Province of Babylon to the Red Sea, we shall now proceed to give an
Account of the other Nations.

In Ethiopia above Egypt near to the River Asa, inhabit a People called
Rizophages, Rizophages.
who get up the Roots of the Canes that grow in the Marshes, and first wash
them very clean: Then they bruise and pound 'em with Stones till they are soft
and pliant; afterward they lay a handful of 'em in the Sun till they are
broiled, and this is the Food they live upon all their days. But though they live
in Plenty and are at constant Peace one with another, yet they are miserably
infested and often fallen upon by the Lions that abound in those Parts: For the
Air being scorching hot, they come out of the Deserts into the Rizophages
Country, both for shelter from the Heat, and to hunt the lesser Beasts for
Prey; so that when the Ethiopians come out of the Marshes they are torn in
Pieces by these Creatures; for being unarmed they are unable to withstand the
Strength of the Lions: And the whole Nation would certainly be utterly
destroyed if Providence had not provided a Remedy in this Case; for about the
beginning of the Dog Days, when there is not the least Wind, there comes in such
a Multitude of Gnats (larger than those that are commonly seen) that the
Inhabitants are forced to fly into the Marshes and so avoid them: And the
Lions partly tormented by their biting and stinging of 'em, and partly
terrified with their humming and buzzing run far away out of the Country.

Next to these are those Nations called Hylophages and Spenmatophages. The last
of these gather in great Plenty Fruits which fall from the Trees in the Summer
time, and so feed on them without taking any further Pains. The rest of the
Year they feed upon a certain sweet Herb which grow in the shady Valleys: Which
being a solid Plant, and having a Stalk like to a Turnip, it sufficiently
supplies the want of other necessary Food.

But the Hylophages, together with their Wives and Children, go into the Fields
Hylophages, Wood-eaters.
and climb the Trees, and feed upon the Buds and tender Branches; and by
constant Usage and Practice are so nimble in getting up to the Top of the
highest Branch that it seems almost incredible. They skip from Tree to Tree
like so many Birds, and mount up upon the slenderest Branches without the least
Hazard. For being very slender and light body'd People, if their Feet fail,
they catch hold with their Hands; nay, if they fall down from the very Top they
are so light they get no harm. They easily chew every juicy Twig of the Tree,
and as easily concoct them. They always go naked, and make use of their Wives
promiscuously, and therefore all their Children they look upon to be common
amongst them. They sometimes quarrel one with another for Places of Habitation;
Their Arms are Clubs, with which they both defend themselves and pound in
Pieces their conquered Enemy. Many of them are often famished to Death when
they grow P. 112.
blind, being deprived of so necessary a Member for the procuring of Sustenance.

The next adjoining Country is inhabited by the Ethiopian Hylogones, Born in
the Woods.
Hylogones called Hunters, who are indeed but few, but live after a peculiar
and strange manner, answerable to their Name; for the Land being infested with
multitudes of wild Beasts, is very terrible to live in, and very little running
Water is to be found; therefore for fear of the Beasts the Inhabitants sleep
all Night in Trees; and in the Morning they go to the Pools of Water with their
Arms, where they hide themselves among the Boughs, and spy in the mean time out
of the Trees: Then when the Sun grows hot, the wild Bulls and Leopards, and a
great Number of other wild Beasts come running to the Waters (being scorched
with Heat and Thirst) and do so gorge themselves with drinking, that they are
ready to burst, upon which the Ethiopians leap out of the Trees and set upon
the Beasts (that can scarcely stir or move) with Clubs burnt at the end, Stones
and Darts, and kill 'em with ease: Thus dividing themselves into Companies,
they finish their Pursuit, and feed together upon the Prey they have caught:
Very rarely it is that any of them are killed, even by the fiercest or
strongest of them; but by slight they overcome might. If they miss of their
Prey, they wash the Skins of those they have formerly taken, and lay them upon
a Fire made for the Purpose, and scorching off the Hair under the Ashes, and
dividing the Skin amongst themselves, with this hard Fare they satisfy their
Hunger. They teach the Boys to cast Darts exactly to hit a Mark, and if they
miss, they suffer them not to eat. And by this Means (through pinching Hunger)
they become excellent Archers.

Not far from these, toward the West inhabit the Ethiopians, that are called
Elephant fighters.
Elephantomachies. They dwell in large and woody Forests; where from the Tops
of the highest Trees they diligently observe the Motions and Walks of the
Elephants. But they set not upon the entire Troops at once (for that were to
little Purpose) but with wonderful Courage single them out as they come near to
them. For when the Beast approaches to the right side of the Tree, where he
that watches for him lies hid, just as the Elephant passes by, he catches, hold
of his Tail with his Hands, and clasps his Feet close to his left Thigh: Then
with his Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 8. c. 8.
right Hand he lays hold of a sharp Ax (bound upon his Shoulder and managable
by one Hand) and with that gives him one Wound after another whereby he cuts
the Nerves and Sinews of the Elephant's right Ham, guiding and governing his
Body in the mean time by his right Hand. This Feat is performed with that
admirable Quickness and Activity, as if the Combat had been designed to be
ended no otherwise than by the Loss of one of their Lives. For what could be
expected (since the Nature of the thing cannot admit of any other Conjecture)
but either the Man must dye or the Beast be overcome? The Beast being thus
Hamstrung, not able to turn himself round by reason of the Slowness of his
Motion, sinks sometimes on that side where he is wounded and falls down, and
together with himself kills the Ethiopian. Sometimes the Elephant dashes the
Man against a Tree or a Stone, and with his Weight presses upon him till he has
killed him. Some of the Elephants overmaster'd (through the Smart and Torment
of their Wounds) never regard him that wounds them, but run so long up and down
the Plain, till the Ethiopian behind by his continual hacking and cutting in
one and the same place, cuts his Sinews in pieces, and at length altogether
disables him and brings him down: Whereupon the Ethiopians run in flocking, and
cutting of Collops of his Flesh while he is yet alive, feed and feast
themselves merrily together. P. 113. The Manner of taking Elephants.


Some of the neighboring Ethiopians take the Elephants without any Danger of
their Lives at all, overcoming Force by Slight. For this Creature when he is
full, after feeding, differs from all other four-footed Beasts in disposing of
himself to Sleep. For he cannot bend his Knees and lie down, but sleeps leaning
his Body to the side of a Tree; so that the Tree by his frequent resort to it
and pressing upon it, withers and rots; there being therefore many Signs and
Footsteps of the Elephant's Walks by which the Hunters of this Prey discover
where he rests himself, they having found out the Tree, saw it a little above
the Ground till it be almost ready to fall, then rubbing out the Marks of their
Feet they go away before the Elephant comes there, who afterward in the
Evening being full fed, makes to his usual Resting Place; and as soon as he
leans with the Weight of his whole Body to the Tree, down it falls, and the
Beast along with it, and there lies all Night with his Heels upward, for he
cannot possibly rise. As soon as it is day, they that sawed the Tree come to the
Place, and there kill the poor Creature without any Hazard, and build
themselves Huts, where they stay till they have eaten him up.

Next to these Nations upon the West inhabit those Ethiopians called Simoes: To
the South lie the Nation of the Struthophages; for among them is a sort of Bird
Simoes.
of a mixed Nature, partly a Fowl and partly a Beast, and thence it has its
Name. Struthophages.
She Is little less than the greatest Heart: Nature has formed her with a long
Neck, a round Body with Wings, but a tender and small Head, yet she has strong
Thighs Ostrich.
and Legs, and her Feathers are forkt; and she is so heavy and unweldy that she
cannot fly above the Earth; but she runs along with that Swiftness that she
scarce touches the Ground. With a brisk gale of Wind she mounts up her Wings
and makes forward as swift as a Ship with her Sayls spread under Sail. Against
the Pursuer she defends her self with flinging of Stones; which she throws with
that Violence out of her Feet as out of a Sling; but when the Wind is low, her
Wings flag, and so being deprived of that natural Help, she is easily taken.
There are a great Number of those Birds; and by diverse Arts and Devices the
Barbarians easily take Multitudes of them, and feed upon their Flesh and make
use of their Skins both for Vestments and Coverlets for Beds.

But when these Struthophages are set upon by the Ethiopians called Simoes, for
Arms they use the Horns of the The Oryx is a Beast as big as a Roe-buck, which
has a Horn as sharp as it will pierce Brass.
Oryxes, with which they repel the Assaults of their Enemies. For they are very
great and sharp at the Ends, and these sort of Beasts do there so abound that
their Horns are found scattered up and down, and so they become of special use
to the Inhabitants.

A little distant from these are the Acridophages, bordering upon the Deserts;
Acridophages. Locust-eaters.
lesser they are than other Men, of lean and meager Bodies, and exceeding
black. In these Parts in the time of the Spring the South Winds rise high and
drive an infinite Number of Locusts out of the Desert, of an extraordinary
Bigness, furnished with most dirty and nasty colored Wings; and these are
plentiful Food and Provision for them all their days. They have a strange and
peculiar way of catching of them; for in their Country there is a large and deep
Vale extending far in P. 114.
length for many Furlongs together, all over this they lay Heaps of Wood and
other combustible Matter, of which they have Plenty in every Place, and when
the Swarms of Locusts are by the Force of the Winds driven thither, then some
of the Inhabitants go to one Part of the Valley and some to another, and set
the Grass and other combustible Matter on Fire, which was before thrown among
the Piles; whereupon arises a great and suffocating Smoke, which so stifles the
Locusts, as they fly over the Vale, that they go not much further before they
fall down dead to the Ground. This Destruction of them is continued for many
days together, so that they lie in great Heaps: The Country being full of Salt,
they gather these Heaps together and season 'em sufficiently with this Salt,
which gives them an excellent Relish, and preserves them a long time sweet
without the least Putrefaction, so that they have Food ever ready at hand from
these Insects during all the rest of the Year: For they neither concern
themselves with Flesh or Fish (being far remote from the Sea) nor have any
other Provision for their Support and Sustenance. They are a little sort of
People, very swift of Foot, but exceeding short lived, for they that live the
longest never exceed forty: And as the Manner of their Their miserable Death.
Death is strange and wonderful, so it is sad and most miserable: For when they
grow old, winged Lice breed in their Flesh, not only of diverse Sorts but of
horrid and ugly Shapes. This Plague begins first at the Belly and Breast, and
in a little time eats and consumes the whole Body. He that is seized with this
Distemper, first begins to itch a little, as if he had the Scab, Pleasure and
Trouble being mixed together. But afterward when the Lice begin to break out at
the Skin, abundance of putrid Matter (accompanied with intolerable sharp
Pa(...)) issues out with them. Hereupon the sick Person so tears himself in
Pieces with his own Nails, that he sighs and groans most lamentably, and while
he is thus scratching of himself, the Lice come pouring out in such Abundance
one after another as out of a Vessel full of Holes, and thus they miserably
close and end their Days. Whether this proceeds from the Nature of their Food
or the Temper of the Air is uncertain.

Upon this Nation there borders a large Country, rich in fair Pastures, but
desert and uninhabited; not that there never were any People there, but that
formerly when it was inhabited, an immoderate Rain happened which bred a vast
Company of Spiders and Scorpions: And (as they write) these Creatures did so
increase that though at the first the whole Nation attempted to destroy these
implacable Enemies of their Country, yet they were not able to master them (for
whosoever was bit or string with them, immediately fell down dead) so that not
knowing where to abide, or how to get Food, they were forced to fly to some
other Place for Relief. And this is not at all incredible, for we are assured
by very good and substantial Historians, that far more strange and wonderful
Things than those have happened in the World. For in Italy Field-mice bred in
such vast Numbers, that they forced the Inhabitants out of the Country. In
Media great Flocks of Sparrows ate up all the standing Corn, so as the People
were forced to remove elsewhere. The People called Autariats, were forced by
Frogs bred in the Clouds, which poured down upon them instead of Rain, to
forsake their Country, and fly to these Parts where they are now settled. And
who is there that is not well acquainted by Ancient Histories, how among those
many Labors Hercules undertook to eternize his Name, his driving out those
devouring Birds out of the Marshes of Stymphalides was one? And some Cities of
Lybia were altogether P. 115.
depopulated by Lions, breaking in upon them. And these Instances we have given
to convince those that are apt to question whatsoever Historians relate that
seem strange and unusual. But to return to the orderly Course of our History.

The Southern Border is inhabited by Men whom the Grecians call Cynomones; but
Cynomones, or Cynomolges, Dog-hunters.
by the neighboring Barbarians they are called in their own Country Language
Wild Ethiopians. They wear long Beards, and keep up numbers of fierce Dogs to
get them Food. For from the beginning of the Summer Solstice to the middle of
Winter, an innumerable number of Indian Oxen come into their Country; the
Reason of it is unknown. For its uncertain whether they fly from cruel wild
Beasts, which in Troops set upon them, or that they do it for want of Pasture,
or upon some other Accident (the Effect of Nature, the Parent of all Wonders)
which Man's Reason cannot comprehend. These Oxen are so numerous, that the
Inhabitants are not able to master them; therefore they loose their Dogs upon
them, and by hunting 'em take many, of which they eat some fresh, and others
they salt up.

Many other Beasts they kill with these masty Dogs, and by this Means live upon
Flesh. The Nations that lie furthest South live the Lives of Beasts under the
Shapes of Men.

But it yet remains to speak of two other Nations; the Ethiopians and the
Troglodites: But of the Ethiopians mention is made elsewhere, and therefore now
we shall treat of the Troglodites. The Grecians call them Shepherds.
Nomades, for they live Pastoral Lives in the Manner of Shepherds; and are
divided into Tribes under a Monarchical Government, and enjoy their Wives and
Children in common, except only the Wife of the King; yet if any of them happen
to lie with her, he is only fined by the King in a certain Number of Sheep.

When the Etesian Winds blow (at which time there falls abundance of Rain) they
feed upon Milk and Blood mingled together, and boiled for a little time.
Afterward when the Pastures are burnt up with the scorching Heat of the Sun,
they fly into the low Marshes, where they often fight one with another for
convenient Pastures for their Flocks: Those Cattle that grow old or are sick,
they knock on the Head, and eat them; and from these always they have their
Food and Sustenance: And therefore they never call any Father and Mother, but
only a Bull, an Ox, a Goat or a Sheep, of which they call the Males Fathers,
and the Females Mothers, because they have their daily Food from these and not
from their Parents. Their ordinary Drink is a Liquor strained out of the Plant
called Bearing a red Fruit.
Paliurus: But the Drink ^or the Noblemen and Persons of Quality, is made of
the Juice of a Flower no better than the worst of our Wines. Because of their
Cattle they often shift and remove from one Pasture to another, and are very
cautious and careful not to stay long in one Place.

Their whole Bodies are naked, except about their Loins, which they cover with
Beasts Skins. All the Troglodites are circumcised like the Egyptians, except
those who by reason of some Accident are called Cripples; for these only, of
all Circumcision.
those that inhabit these Streights, have from their Intancy that Member (which
in others is only circumcised) wholly cut off with a Razor. Among the
Troglodites those called Megabareans for Arms bear round Shields made of Ox raw
Hides, and Clubs bound round with Iron at the thick ends; the rest are armed
with Bows and Spears.

When they are dead they tie them Neck and Heels with the Twigs and Branches of
the Plant Paliurus; then they carry the Body to the Top of a Hill, where with
great Sport and Laughter they pelt it with Stones till it be covered over; and
then they stick up a Goats Horn upon the Heap, and so leave it without the P.
116.
least Sense of Pity or Compassion. They fight not one with another out of any
Spleen or Rage one against another, like the Grecians, but merely for their
flourishing Pastures. In the beginning of their Fights they make their Onsets
with throwing of Stones; after some Wounds given on both Sides they fall to it
with their Bows and Arrows, whereupon great Numbers are slain in a short time.
For by long Experience they become good Marksmen, and being all naked are
exposed to every Shot. At length their old Women by their Entreaties put an end
to their Conflicts (whom they greatly reverence, for it is unlawful to do them
the least Harm) and therefore as soon as they see them come toward them, they
cease casting their Darts immediately, and all are quiet.

When they grow so old that they cannot follow the Flocks, they tie themselves
by their Necks to an Oxes Tail, and so put an end to their days: And if any
defer his Death, any one as a Friend may first admonish him, and then if he
does it not, the other may cast a Rope about his Neck and strangle him. In the
like manner its lawful to put to Death any that become lame, or are seized with
any desperate and incurable Distemper. For they count it the highest and
greatest Offense for any one to love his Life when he is able to do nothing
worth living. And therefore all the Troglodites are of sound Bodies and of a
strong and healthful Age, none exceeding Threescore. But this shall suffice
concerning the Troglodites. Yet if this Account seem strange to any, and this
Manner of living incredible, let but the Climate of Scythia be compared with
that of the Troglodites, and then this our Relation may easily gain Belief. For
there is so great a Difference between our Climate and theirs of which we write,
that the different Natures being weighed and considered distinctly are scarce
credible. For in some Places of Scythia by the Extremity of Cold the greatest
Rivers are so frozen, that vast Armies and Chariots may pass over them; and
Wine and other Liquors do so congeal that they must be cut with Knives and
Hatches. And most strangely and wonderfully Men's Fingers and Toes drop off with
rubbing against their Clothes, and their Eyes grow dark and dim. Neither can
the Fire cast any Warmth or Heat; and by the Force of Cold even brazen Statues
are burst asunder; and at these Seasons they say the Clouds are so thick and
gross, that there is neither Thunder nor Lightning in those Parts. Many other
Things there happen which seem incredible to the ignorant, but are intolerable
to them that feel them by Experience. But in the utmost Coasts of Egypt and the
Troglodites the Sun is so scorching hot at Midday that two standing together
cannot see each other by reason of the Thickness of the Air. Neither is it safe
for any to go without Shoes in these Parts, for if they do the Soles of their
Feet are presently blister'd all over: And except Men have something ready to
drink to quench their Thirst, they forthwith faint and dye, the violence of the
heat quickly exhaling all the moisture out of a Man's Body: And moreover, if
any do put Meat and Water into a Brazen Pot, and set it in the open Sun, it is
presently boiled without Fire and Fuel. But the Inhabitants of both these
Countries are so far from seeking to avoid these uncomfortable Circumstances,
that they choose rather to be as it were ever dying here, than to be forced to
live another sort of Life elsewhere. And thus every Country is beloved by its
own natural Inhabitants, and a long usage, even from the time of Childhood,
overcomes the inconveniences of an intemperate Climate. These great differences
of P. 117.
Climates are sometimes not far asunder; for from the Lake Meotis (where some
of the Scythians inhabit, in the midst of extreme Cold, and biting Frost,) many
with a fair Wind sail to Rhodes in Ten Days time; thence in Four Days more,
they reach to Alexandria; thence crossing the River Nile, they recover Ethiopia
(most commonly) the Tenth Day; so that it is not above Four and Twenty Days sail
from the coldest to the hottest Climates in the World. And therefore it is no
wonder that there is such diversity of Food, Manners and Bodies so far differing
from ours, when there is so great a Contrariety of Climates in so small a
distance one from another.

Having given a distinct account of Nations, and their strange and unusual
Manners and Customs; something now is to be said particularly concerning the
wild Beasts bred in those Countries.

There Is bred in Ethiopia, a Creature, called from the nature of the Beast, a
Rhinoceros, Rhinoceros, so called from a Horn in his Nose.
for Courage and Strength equal with the Elephant, but not so tall. His Skin is
exceeding hard, and of the color of Box. He has a flat Horn growing out a
little above his Nostrils as hard as Iron. He Is always at war with the Elephant
for his Pasture, and for that purpose whets his Horn against a great Stone; in
the Conflict he gets under the Belly of the Elephant, and cuts and gashes him,
as if it were with a Sword; and by this means his Enemy bleeds to death, and
thus he destroys many of them. But if the Elephant prevent him from coming
under his Belly, he catches the Rhinoceros up in his Trunk, and easily
overcomes him, being far stronger in Body, and wounding deeper with the Strokes
of his Tushes.

Sphinges are Marmozites, Plin. Not. His. lib. 8. c. 44.
Sphinges are bred near to the Troglodites in Ethiopia, not much unlike those
which the Limners draw, save that they differ only in being rough. They are of
a gentle nature, very docible, apt to learn any thing presently that is taught
them.

Those that are called Cynocephales, Baboons, Heads like Dogs, Plin. ib.
Cynocephales, resemble ugly faced Men, and are continually snarling and
grumbling. This Creature is exceeding cursed, never to be tamed, and from his
Eyebrows looks with a most surly Countenance. The Females are extraordinary
remarkable, for having their Privy Parts continually hanging down out of their
Body.

The Beast called Cepus.
Cepus, so named from the beauty of his Body, and the comeliness of Proportion.
He has the Face of a Lion, and in all other Parts is like to a Panther, except
that for his bigness he is as large as a Deer. Of all these strange A wild
Bull. Carnivorus,
Beasts none's so fierce as the Wild Bull, which Feeds upon Flesh, and is
altogether invincible: he is larger than any tame Bull, and as Swift as any
Horse, and his Mouth is Wide even up to his Eyes: He Is exceeding red, his Eyes
grayer than a Lions, and Sparkling in the Night like Fire. His Horns have a
wonderful property, for he can move 'em as well as his Ears, and when he Fights
keeps them fast and immovable. His Hair contrary to all other Beasts, stands on
end, He Is so exceeding Fierce that he will set upon the strongest Creature
whatsoever, and Feeds upon the Flesh of such as he destroys. He destroys the
Flocks and Herds of the Inhabitants, and in a terrible manner Fights with
Troops of Shepherds and whole Armies of Dogs at once. It Is said his Skin is
impenetrable; and therefore tho many have attempted to Kill him, yet none were
ever able to efect it. If he fall into a Pit, or be taken any other way by
Snares or Ginns P. 118.
laid for him, he Choaks and Stiffles himself with his unrully Rage, and will
not suffer any Man to come near him tho never so gently: And therefore the
Troglodites justly account this Beast the strongest of all other; to whom
Nature has given the stoutness of a Lion, the swiftness of a Horse, and the
strength of a Bull; and which cannot be conquered with the Sword, which subdues
all other things.

There Is another Creature among the Ethopians called a Crocut, of a mixed
nature, Crocuts.
between a Dog and a Wolf, more fierce than them both, and exceeding all others
for his Tearing and Biting. Let the Bones be never so great, he presently
grashes them in Pieces and digests them immediately as soon as they come into
his Stomach. Some Historians (who love to tell strange things) report that this
Beast will imitate the Voice and Speech of a Man, which we cannot in the least
credit.

The Inhabitants bordering upon the Deserts, say that there are in these Parts
Serpents.
diverse sorts of Serpents of an incredible bigness; for those that say they
have seen some a hundred 50 Yards.
Cubits long, are looked upon to be Liers, not only by me, but by every one
else. But to gain the more credit to their fabulous Relation, they add a Story
far more absurd and impropable. For they say, that when these vast Creatures
lie rould up in a Round in the open Plain, every Circle lying one upon another,
they seem like Hills to them that are at a distance. But who can easily believe
there are any such monstrous Creatures?

But we shall say something of the greatest Serpents (that ever were seen)
which The great Serpent brought to Alexandria.
were brought to Alexandria in Nets, discoursing by the way of the manner of
the hunting and taking them.

For Ptolemy Philadelphus.
Ptolemy the Second being very much given to the hunting of Elephants, for that
purpose encouraged with great Rewards many that were skilful Hunters of the
strongest wild Beasts, and not sparing Costs (in gratifying the pleasure he
took in this kind) he got together great multitudes of Elephants, which he
trained up for his Wars; by which means many strange Beasts which were never
seen before, became known to the Grecians.

Upon these Considerations some of the Huntsmen, knowing the generosity and
bounty of the King in his Rewards for things of this nature, agreed together
with the hazard of their Lives to bring if it were but one of these monstrous
Serpents, alive to the King to Alexandria. It was a bold and difficult
undertaking; but Fortune crowned the Enterprise, and Prosperity effected the
Attempt. They spied a Serpent lying in the standing Pools Thirty Cubits long,
still and quiet (as it used to do at all other times, save when he spied any
Beast come to the Water to drink, and then he suddenly leapt out, and with his
wide Jaws, and the winding himself round about their Bodies, held them so fast
as that they could never escape.)

Hereupon these persons considering he was so very long, and naturally dull and
slow, conceived some hopes of catching him in Gins and Chains, having all
things ready and prepared for the purpose; but the nearer they came to him, the
more they were terrified, and when they saw his Eyes kindle like sparks of
Fire, his Tongue slapping about his Jaws, his terrible Hissing, the sharpness
of his Scales, his rusling among the Reeds and Bushes when he began to stir
himself, the greatness of his terrible Teeth, his horrible Aspect and high
Round whereunto he had wound himself, they grew wan and pale with excessive
fear, and with trembling Hands cast the Gin upon his Tail; upon which, as soon
as it touched him, the Monster roul'd about with a terrible hiss, and lifting up
himself above the head of the First that approacht him, he snapt him up, and
tore him in Pieces. The Second he caught by the winding of his Tail at a great
P. 119.
distance when he was making away, and (winding himself round him) held him
fast round the middle of his Belly. Hereupon the rest were so affrighted, that
away they fled; however, they did not so leave the Monster, for the hopes of
the King's bounty overcame the fear of the imminent danger; and therefore what
they could not do by Force they endeavored to effect by Art, making use of
this following Contrivance. They made a Toil of Bulrushes, in shape like to a
Bosom Net, large enough to receive and hold the Beast; observing therefore his
Hole, and the time when he went out to Feed, and when he returned, as soon as
he was gone forth to hunt for his usual Prey, they stopped up the mouth of his
Den with great Stones and Earth, and near to it dug another Hole, and there
Placed the Toil made of Bulrushes just over against the Mouth of the Hole, that
the Entrance might be plain and open. Then as he returned from Feeding, the
Darters, Slingers and a great Number of Horsemen with Trumpeters and other
Assailants set upon him, and the Monster (as he came nearer to them) pricked up
his Head far above the Heads of the Horsemen, but none of the whole Troop of
Hunters durst come near him, being made cautious by the former misfortune; but
many cast Darts at him all at once at a great distance; so that by the sight of
the Horses, multitude of great Dogs, and the noise of Trumpets, they terrified
the Beast, and pursued him cautiously by degrees, till he came to his Hold,
lest by pressing too hard and close upon him, he should be too much provoked
and enraged.

Now approaching near to the mouth of the Den, before prepared for him, they
all at once made a great noise with beating upon their Arms; and so with such a
multitude of Men, and the noise and sound of Trumpets, they exceedingly
terrified the Monster, who not finding his former Hold, and fearing the
Hunters, flies into the mouth of that which was open and near at hand. In the
mean time while he was filling the Net, by rouling of himself round in it, some
forthwith rid up with full speed to the Place, who (before the Beast could wind
up himself) tied up the mouth of the Net, which was to the Top made very long
on purpose for quickness of dispatch in this business. Then with all speed they
put Roulers under the massy weight of the Net, to lift it up, and so drew it
forth. The Serpent being thus shut up, hiss't most dreadfully, gnawing the
Bulrushes with his Teeth, and tossing himself to and fro as if he were just
leaping out of the Net, which the Hunters exceedingly fearing he would do, drew
him out upon the ground, and by often pricking him in the Tail, caused him to
snap and bite there where he was most sensible of pain. At length they brought
him to Alexandria, and presented the Beast to the King; a most strange Monster,
and almost incredible. And to admiration this Creature was afterward made
tame: For keeping him low in want of Food, he abated in his fierceness, so as
by degrees to be very gentle. Ptolemy liberally rewarded the Hunters; and kept
and fed the Serpent thus tamed; a most wonderful sight to all Strangers that
traveled into his Kingdom.

It may not therefore be judged altogether incredible (or accounted for a
Fable) what the Ethiopians have related, since so vast a Monster has been
exposed to open view. For they affirm that there have been seen Serpents
amongst them of that extraordinary bigness, that they have not only devoured
Cows and Bulls, and other Beasts of that size, but have even fought with
Elephants themselves: P. 120.
For they so wrap themselves round their Thighs, and hold them so fast, that
they are not able to move or stir, and pricking up their heads from under the
Elephants Trunk, and looking direct upon them full in the Face with the fiery
Rays that dart out of their Eyes, strike them blind, so that they fall down to
the Ground as if they were struck with a flash of Lightning, and when they are
down they tear them in Pieces.

And now since we have given a clear and sufficient account of Ethiopia and
Troglodita, and the bordering Countries as far as to the Torrid Zone, and of
the Southern Coasts and Climates of the Red Sea, and the Atlantic Ocean, we
shall proceed to the Description of the other parts bordering upon the Red Sea.
Arabian Gulf, which we have learnt partly from the public Records in
Alexandria, and partly from those that have seen the Places themselves. For
this part of the inhabited World, as likewise the British Isles, and the Places
lying far to the North, are the least known of any other. But we shall describe
those Northern parts which border upon the Frigid Zone, together with the
British Isles, when we come to treat of the acts of Caius Caesar, who enlarged
the Bounds of the Roman Empire, as far as to those parts, and by his means we
come to the Knowledge of all those Countries which were altogether unknown to
us before.

CHAP. III.
A Description of the Coasts and Countries on both sides the Arabian Gulf, or
Red Sea. The Perfumes of Arabia the Happy. The Fortunate Islands. A Description
of part of Lybia: The Spectras near the Syrtes.

THe The Red Sea.
Arabian Gulf (as it is called) empties it self into the Southern Ocean, and
stretches out many Furlongs in length; where it falls into the Sea its both
bounded with Arabia and Troglodita. It Is breadth both at the Mouths, and where
it is lost in the Sea, is about Fifteen Furlongs. But from the Port of Panormus,
the opposite Shore, is one Days sailing: The greatest breadth is at Mount
Tyrceus, and Macaria, where the Sea is very rough and tempestuous; nor can Land
be seen from one side to another; from thence it grows narrower, till it fall
into the Ocean.

In the Sea are many great Islands, between which the Passage for Ships is very
narrow, and the Water very rough. And this in short is the Situation of this
Gulf. We shall begin at the That is, next the Ocean.
utmost Parts of this Sea, and describe the Coasts on both sides, and what is
remarkable in each, as if we were sailing along.

And first, we shall give an account of the Coast on the Westward.
Right Hand, the Seat of the Troglodites: The Troglodites take up all this part
as far as to the vast Deserts. All along the Shore on this right side from the
City of Arsinoe, Mariners meet with many Rivers of Salt Water, pouring down
from the Rocks into the Sea.

After the passing these running Fountains, appears a Mountain in a vast and
large Plain of a red Color, which dazles the Eyes of all those that look
earnestly upon it. At the Foot of this Mountain is a Lake, with an Entrance of
many windings and turnings into it, known by the Name of Venus.
Aphrodites; in this are Three Islands, Two of which abound with Figs and
Olives; but the Third has neither; yet breeds great numbers of those Birds they
call M^leogrides.

From hence you sail through a vast Gulf called (...). Acathar(...)s.
Filthy, or Acathartus, and near unto it is an exceeding deep Current, making a
Peninsula, carrying Ships through a narrow straight into the open Sea on the
other side. In sailing along by these Places, there lies an Island, surrounded
with a deep Sea, Fourscore Furlongs in length; called the Ophiodes.
Serpents Island, because that in former times it abounded P. 121.
with diverse sorts of dreadful Serpents; but in aftertimes, by the diligence
of the Kings of Alexandria, it was so improved, that now there is not the least
sign of any such Beast there. But it is not to be omitted for what Reason this
Island was with so much charge improved: The chief reason was, for that in this
Island was found the Topaz, a resplendent Stone, of a delightful Aspect, like
to Glass, of a Golden color, and of admirable brightness; and therefore all
were forbidden to set footing upon that Place; and if any landed there, he was
presently put to death by the Keepers of the Island. These Keepers were few,
and lived a most miserable Life. And lest the Stones should be stolen and
carried off, there was not a Ship left there; and if any by chance pass near to
these Places, (out of fear of the King) they sail away as far off as they can.
The Provision that is imported, is commonly soon spent, and there is nothing to
be had that grows naturally in the Island; and therefore when their Store grows
low, all the Inhabitants of the Village sit upon the Shore, waiting and longing
for the arrival of the Provision Ships; and if they stay longer than ordinary,
the People are driven to the utmost desperation.

This Stone grows in the Rocks, darkened by the brightness of the Sun; it is not
seen in the Day, but shines bright and glorious in the darkest Night, and
discovers it self at a great distance. The Keepers of the Island disperse
themselves into several Places to search for this stone, and wherever it
appears, they mark the Place, with a great Vessel of largeness sufficient to
cover the sparkling Stone; and then in the Day time, go to the Place, and cut
out the Stone, and deliver it to those that are Artists in polishing of 'em.

Then sailing on further from these Parts, appear many of those Nations called
the Ichthuophages, dispersed along the Sea-shoar; and many likewise of those
Troglodites called Shepherds.
Nomades; several Mountains likewise present themselves in this Course, as far
as to the Haven called Sotera.
Safe-Port, which gained this Name from some Grecians that first sailed into
these Parts, and there arrived safe.

Thence passing on, the Gulf begins to grow narrower, and bends its Course
toward Arabia: And the peculiar property of the Places is such, that both the
nature of the Sea, and the Soil seem to be changed; for the Land appears very
flat and low, without any Hills or Rising Ground, and the Sea seems to be muddy
and green all over, and is not above Three Orgia's, every Orgia Two Yards.
Two Fathom and an half deep. The Greenness there is not ascribed to the nature
of the Water, but to the abundance of Moss and Sea-Grass that grows at the
bottom, and casts their Color through the Water.

This part is very safe and commodious for small Ships with Oars, because the
Sea is there very calm, and no roughness of the Waves for many Leagues; and
there they take abundance of Fish. But the Mariners that transport Elephants,
run into great and desperate Hazards by reason of the strong built Ships they
use for that purpose, and the depth of Water they draw. For oftentimes they are
so driven by the violence of the Winds, at full Sail in the Night time, that
they are either split upon the Rocks, or stranded upon some of the deep sanded
Necks of Land thereabouts; and it is no going for the Mariners out of the Ship,
because the Ford is above the height of any Man: Neither can they force the
Ship in the least forward with their Poles: And although they throw all
overboard but their Victuals; yet (even while they have Provision) they are
reduced to the utmost Extremities; for neither Island, Promontory or Ship is to
be seen P. 122.
in these Parts, being desert, and seldom frequented by Mariners.

And to the other Inconveniences, this further is an Addition, the violent
Waves on a sudden raise up such heaps of Sand out of the Channel, and so
enclose the Ship, as if Men on purpose had fixed it to some Continent: Being
plunged into this Calamity, at first they only gently and modestly breath out
their Complaints to a doleful Wilderness, which regards them not, yet not
altogether desparing of deliverance.

For often by the raging working of the Sea, the Ship is mounted up on high
above the heaps of Sand, and so the poor Creatures that were in this desperate
Condition are unexpectedly (as by some God, assisting them out of an Engine)
delivered. But if this help from God do not intervene, when their Provision
grows low, the stronger throw the weaker overboard, that the Meat that is left
may last the longer for the support of those few that remain: But at length,
when all hope of safety is gone, and Provision spent, these few die far more
miserably than those that perished before. For these in a moment of time, give
up that Breath which Nature had given them, but those (by prolonging their
Misery, and dividing as it were their Sorrows into several parts) dye at last
with more lingering Torments. The Ships being in this miserable manner deprived
of their Pilots and Mariners, continue a long time as so many Solitary
Sepulchers; and at length being buried in heaps of Sand, their lofty Masts and
Main-Yards remain only Spectacles to move Compassion in them that see them afar
off. For by the King's Command, the Monuments of these Misfortunes are not to
be touched, but are to remain as Sea-marks to Mariners to avoid those dangerous
Places. It has been an ancient Report among the Ichthuophages (the Inhabitants
of those Tracts) continued down to them from their Forefathers, that by a
mighty reflux of the Sea (which happened in former days) where the Sea is thus
green, the whole Gulf became dry Land, and appeared green all over, and that
the Water overflowed the opposite Shore, and that all the Ground being thus
bare to the very lowest bottom of the Gulf, the Water by an This seems to be
the Passage of the Israelites over the Red Sea.
extraordinary high Tide, returned again into the ancient Channel.

The Navigation from Ptolemais, not in Phaenicia, but that bordering upon the
Red Sea.
Ptolemais to the Promontary of Taurus, has been described when we spoke of
Ptolemy's Pleasure in hunting of Elephants: From Taurus the Sea Coasts turn
toward the East.

Here from the time of the Summer, to the Winter Solstice, A further
Description of the Country of the Troglodites.
the Sun casts the shadow to the South, contrary to what it does with us. This
Country is watered with Rivers flowing down from the Psebarian Mountains (as
they are called) and is divided into many spacious Plains, which produce
Mallows, Cardanum, and extraordinary Palm Trees, and diverse other Fruits of an
unsavory Taste, altogether unknown to us. The South parts of this Country are
full of Elephants, wild Bulls, Lions and other wild Beasts. In passing over to
this Coast, there lie several Islands in the way, which are altogether barren
as to any Fruit that is grateful, but in them are bred strange sorts of Birds,
and wonderful to view and observe. From hence sailing forward, the Sea is
exceeding deep, and abounds with mighty great Whales, which yet do no harm,
unless any (by chance) run upon their erected Finns; for they cannot pursue the
Ships, because when they rise up toward the top of the Water, they are struck
blind by the brightness and splendor of the Sun. These are the utmost Bounds
of Troglodita (known to us) environed with the Psebarian Promontaries.

And now we shall pass over to the other side of the Gulf, and take a view of
The Arabian side of the Red Sea.
the Regions lying toward Arabia, beginning again at that part of the Sea
which is called Neptunium. P. 123.
Neptunium, because Ariston erected there an Altar in honor of Neptune, when
Ptolemy sent him to discover the Arabian Coast as far as to the Ocean. From
thence to the Month of the Gulf is a place along the Seacoast of great esteem
among the Inhabitants for the profit it yields them; it is called the Garden of
Palm Trees, because they abound there, and are so very Fruitful, that they
yield sufficient both for pleasure and necessity. But the whole Country next
adjoining, is destitute of Rivers and Brooks, and lying to the South, is even
burnt up with the heat of the Sun; and therefore Where the Palm Trees grow.
this fruitful Tract that lies amongst dry and barren Regions (far remote from
Tillage and Improvement,) and yet affords such plenty of Food and Provision, is
justly by the Barbarians dedicated to the Gods. For there are in it many
Fountains, and running Streams as cold as Snow, by which means the Region from
one side to the other is always green and flourishing, and very sweet and
pleasant to the view. In this place there is an ancient Altar of hard Stone,
with an Inscription in old and illegible Characters; where a Man and a Woman
(that execute here the Priests Office, during their Lives) have the charge of
the Grove and Altar. They are Persons of Quality and great Men that abide here,
and for fear of the Beasts, have their Beds (they rest upon) in the Trees.

The Mariner passing by this Country of Palms, arrives at an Island near to a
Promontory of the Continent, which is called the Island of Phocarum Insula.
Sea-Calves, from the great multitudes of those Creatures that frequent this
Place. The Sea here so abounds with them, that it is to the admiration of the
Beholders.

The Promontory that shoots out toward this Island, lies over against Petra in
Arabia and Palestine. It Is said that the Gerrheans and Mineans, bring out of
the higher Arabia, Frankincense and other odoriferous Gums into this Island.

The Coast next adjoining, has been anciently inhabited by the Marranians, and
afterward by the Garyndaneans their Neighbors, who got possession in this
manner.

At the Festival celebrated every Fifth Year in the Palm Country, a great
Concourse Garyndanians destroy the Marranians.
of the Neighbors meet together from all Parts; both to Sacrifice Stallfed
Camels to the Gods of the Grove; and likewise to carry some of the Spring Water
that rises there, back into their own Country, which they say is Physical.

The Garyndanians taking the opportunity when the Marranians were gone to the
Feast, cut the Throats of all those that remained at Home, and lay in wait for
those that returned, and in their way homeward, slew all them likewise; and so
the Country being by this means depopulated, they divided that fruitful Region,
and those rich Pastures for Flocks and Herds, by Lot amongst themselves.

But this Coast has very few Harbors in it by reason of the many vast
Mountains that lie all along as they sail; from whence is presented to the
view, such variety of Colors, that they afford a most wonderful and delightful
Prospect to the Passengers at Sea as they sail along.

The Promontory of Alainites next salutes them that sail on forward, full of
Alainites, Nabateans.
Towns and Villages inhabited by the Arabians called Nabateans: They possess a
large Country all along the Seacoast, and go far likewise up into the Land:
This Tract is very Populous, and exceeding rich in Cattle. Once they lived
justly and honestly, content with the Sustenance they had from their Flocks and
Herds; but after that the Kings of In Egypt. The Ptolemies.
Alexandria allowed liberty to Merchants to traffic in the Red Sea, they not
only robbed them that were Shipwrackt, but provided little Skiffs, and acted the
Pirates, and spoiled all other Merchants that traffickt in those Seas, imitating
the Taurians of Pontus in cruelty and inhumanity. But afterward being beaten
in a Fight at Sea by some Galleys sent out against them, they were punished
according to their Demerits.

After the passing of these Tracts, follows a flat Champain Country, watered in
every part, which (by the advantage of the many Springs and Fountains that are
in it) abounds in rich Pastures, and produces great plenty of (...),
Clavergrass, vid. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 18. c. 16. P. 124.
Medica and Lotus, as high as a Man. Here in these Pastures are fed not only an
infinite number of Cattle of all sorts, but of wild Camels, Hearts, Red and
Fallow Deer. This extraordinary Plenty, invites out of the Deserts, Lions,
Wolves and Leopards, with whom the Shepherds and Herdsmen are forced to have
Conflicts Night and Day for the preservation of their Flocks and Herds: And
thus the richness of the Country, occasions Mischief and Prejudice. For Nature
often distributes her Gifts with a mixture of good and evil.

In sailing further along by this Champain Country, the Gulf offers to the view
something strange and wonderful: For it shoots up with a bending Course into
the Inland Parts, Five Hundred Furlongs in length, walled in on both sides with
high and steep Rocks, so that both the Entrance and Passage is very difficult.
For the Rocks that lie under Water, so stop up the Entrance, that it is scarce
possible to enter into the Gulf, or come out; and by the continual dashing of
the Floods with the violence of the Winds beating upon the Shore, it foams
terribly, and rages on every side the Rock.

The People that inhabit these Parts, are called Bizomenians, and live upon
wild Bizomenians.
Beasts taken in hunting. Here Is a Sacred Temple in high veneration among all
the Arabians.

To the Shore of these Tracts, are adjoining Three Islands, which have many
Ports: The first which is Desert, they say is consecrated to Isis. There remain
the Foundations of the ancient Buildings and Pillars, whereon are Inscriptions
in barbarous Characters; the rest are as much defaced and ruined, yet they are
shaded with Olive Trees planted here and there, much different from ours.

Beyond these Islands, there are steep Rocks hard to pass all along the Shore,
for the space of a Thousand Furlongs. For there is neither Port nor Ancorage for
Ships, nor any Wood which can afford any necessary Relief to Mariners, be they
in never so great wants and extremities. To this Shore adjoins a Mountain
roof'd over with craggy Rocks of a stupendous height; and at the foot, are
many sharp Shelves which lie under water; and behind them, many winding
Hollows, worn wide by the raging Waves dashing one upon another; and the Sea
being very deep, when a Storm beats upon them, and the Water rebounds, they
make a noise like a mighty Thunder; and part of the Waves dashing against those
huge Rocks, mount up in a Curl, and foam to admiration; and part being
swallowed up within these Caverns, cause such a terrible Whirlpool, that they
that are driven (against their wills) near to these Places, are ready to dye
for Fear. The Arabians called Thamudenians inhabit this Coast.

Next adjoining to this Perilous Sea, is a mighty great Gulf, which washes many
Islands disper'd in it here and there to the view, not much unlike to the
Little Islands near Acarnania in Greece.
Echinades.

All along this Coast which is very long and broad, lie high Heaps of black
Sand.

Thence sailing forward, is presented to the view, a Or an Isthmus, or
Chersonesus.
Peninsula, where there is the most famous Port of any mentioned by Historians
called Carmutha Port.
Carmutha. For it lies under a large Key, where the Gulf as it inclines to the
West, is not only wonderfully pleasant to the view, but far more commodious
than any other.

A Woody Mountain hangs over it a Hundred Furlongs in compass. The Mouth of the
Haven is Two Hundred Foot broad, affording a very calm and safe Harbor, where
Two Thousand Sail may ride: The Water moreover is exceeding good and sweet, a
large River emptying itself into it. In the middle of it lies an Island full of
good Water, and fit for gardening. To conclude, it is in every respect like to
the Port at Carthage, called Cothon, the Commodiousness of which we shall speak
of in its proper place. By reason of the quietness and sweetness P. 125.
of the Water, abundance of Fish come into it out of the Ocean.

Sailing forward, appear Five exceeding high Mountains, spiring up like the
Mountains like Pyramids.
Pyramids of Egypt, so close as if they all united into one at the Point:
Thence the Gulf appears in a round Form, surrounded with large and high
Promontories: In the very middle of which rises a Hill, in form of a Table,
upon which stand three Temples of a wonderful Height, dedicated to Gods unknown
indeed to the Greeks, but in great honor and veneration with the Inhabitants.
Hence the Coast shoots out forward a long way, abounding with Fountains and
fresh Water. On this Coast is the Mountain Chabnus, covered over with diverse
shady Woods. The Country lying at the Foot of the Mountain, is inhabited by
Arabians, called Debae, who employ themselves in feeding Herds of Camels, which
they make use Debae.
of in their most weighty Concerns: For they ride upon these when they charge
their Enemy; carry upon them their Victuals, and use them upon every speedy
dispatch; they drink their Milk, and feed upon their Flesh; and with their
Dromedary Camels, they presently run over all the Country. There runs a River
through the Country, which carries along with it such abundance of Golden Sand,
that at the Mouth of it where it falls into the Sea, the Soil seems to shine
and glister like Gold; but the making and refining of Gold is altogether
unknown to the Inhabitants. They entertain not all sorts of Strangers, but only
the Beotians and the Peloponesians, by reason of the ancient familiarity of
Hercules with this Nation, as they have fabulously received it from their
Ancestors.

The Region next adjoining to this, is inhabited by the Alilaeans and
Gasandians, Alilaeans, Gasandians.
another People of Arabia, which is not so burning hot as those near unto it,
but often covered with thick Clouds, whence fall Snow, and seasonable Showers,
which moderate the Heat of the Air. The Land there is rich, and capable of
bringing forth any kind of Grain or Fruit whatsoever, but through the
unskilfulness of the Inhabitants who addict themselves chiefly to Fishing, the
Ground is not tilled and improved as it ought. Abundance of Gold is got there
out of several Hollows in the Earth, not refined by melting of little Pieces,
but growing there pure naturally, which from the nature of it is called Gold
without Fire.
Apyros. The least Piece of it is as big as an ordinary Nut-Kernel, the
greatest not much bigger than a large Nut. The Inhabitants wear them about
their Arms and Necks, interlac'd with several bright sparkling Stones. But as
they abound in Gold, so they are as much wanting in Iron and Brass, and
therefore they exchange Gold with the Merchants, for the like weight in Iron
and Brass.

Next to these inhabit those Arabians called Carbi, and next to them the
Sabeans, Carbi Sabeans. Arabia the Happy.
the most populous of any of the Arabians, for they possess Arabia the Happy,
exceeding rich in all those things which we esteem most precious, and for
breeding of Cattle of all sorts, the most fertile Country in the World; for the
whole Country is naturally perfumed all over, every thing almost growing there,
sending forth continually most excellent Odours. On the Seacoasts grow Balsom
and Cassia, and another Herb of a strange and peculiar property, which while
it is fresh, is delightsom and strengthening to the Eyes, but kept a while,
presently loses its virtue. Higher in the heart of the Country, are shady Woods
and Forests, graced and beautified with stately Trees of Frankincence and
Myrrh, Palm Trees, Calamus and Cinnamon, and such like Odoriferous Plants. For
none can enumerate the several natures and properties of so great a multitude,
or the P. 126.
excellency of those sweet Odours that breath out of every one of them. For
their Fragrancy is such, that it even ravishes the Senses with delight, as a
thing divine and unutterable; it entertains them that sail along by the Coast
at a great distance with its Pleasures and Delights. For in Springtime the
Winds from off the Land waft the Air perfumed with the sweet Odours of Mirrh,
and other Odoriferous Plants, to those Parts of the Sea that are next to them.
And these Spices have nothing of a faint and languishing Smell, as those that
come to our Hands; but a strong and vigorous Odor that strongly pierces all
their Senses to the utmost of their Capacity: For the Wafts of Air dispersing
the Perfumes of these Odoriferous Plants, abundance of pleasant, healthful and
strange variety of Scents (proceeding from the richest Spices) are conveyed to
them that Sail near unto the Coast. For this sweet smell, comes not from Fruit
bruised in a Mortar (whose strength is in a great measure decayed) or from
Spices made up in diverse sorts of Vessels for Transportation; but from the
ripeness of the Fruit as it grows, and from the pure and divine Nature of the
Plant it self. So that they that have the advantage of these sweet Odours, seem
as if they were entertained with that feigned Meat of the Gods called Ambrosia;
since those excellent Perfumes cannot have a Name ascribed them transcending
their worth and dignity.

Yet Fortune has not imparted to Men an entire and unmixt Felicily in these
things, but has joined some inconveniences with these Advantages, to correct
them who (through a constant Confluence of Earthly Blessings) have usually
despised and slighted the Gods. For these fragrant Forests abound with Or Fiery
Serpents. So Agatharchides, in Plutarch: Symp. lib. 8. c. 9. Concerning the
little Serpents.
Red Serpents of a Span long, whose Bite is deadly and incurable. They strike a
Man with a violent Assault, leaping up in his very Face, leaving him besmeared
with his own Blood.

There Is something very remarkable amongst these People, as to them that have
been long sick: For being that things of a more than ordinary piercing
operation pass quick through the Pores of the Body, and so discuss the stubborn
Matter, there follows a dissipation of Humors, and the Party becomes curable:
Therefore they burn Brimstone mixed with Goats Hair under the Noses of the Sick,
that by a contrary smell they may discuss and drive out those sweet and
fragrant Odours that have overpowered the Spirits of the Sick; for that which
is good in it self, is profitable and delightful, used moderately and
seasonably; but an immoderate enjoyment, and beyond a due proportion of time
loses the benefit and advantage of the Blessing bestowed.

The Capital City of this Nation is called Or Sa^^, from Seba, the eldest Son
of Ch^^.
Sabas, and stands upon an high Hill: They are governed by Kings who inherit
the Crown by Descent; yet the Honor allowed them by their Subjects is such, as
that they are in some respects, notwithstanding in a sort of Bondage and
Slavery: For though they seem to be priviledg'd in this, that they have a
Sovereign and absolute power in making of Laws, and are not to give an account
of any of their Actions to their Subjects; yet they are as unhappy in this,
that they are never to stir out of their Palace, for if they do, the People
stone them to Death, for so they are commanded by an ancient Oracle.

This Nation net only excels all the Neighboring Barbarians in Wealth, but all
other People whatsoever, for plenty of every thing that is accounted precious.
For in their Traffic for a thing of a very small weight, they receive a
greater Sum of (...) any other Merchants that sell Goods for Silver.

Being therefore that they never were conquered by reason of the largeness of
their Country, they flow as it were in Streams of Gold and Silver, especially
at Sabas, the Seat Royal of their Kings: Their Vessels, and all their Cups are
of Gold and Silver, and likewise their Beds, Chairs and Stools have their Feet
of Silver; and all other their Household Stuff is so sumptuous and magnificent,
that it is incredible. The Portico's of their Houses and Temples, are some of
them overlaid with Gold, and Silver Statues are placed upon some of the
Chapiters of the Temples. The Doors and Roofs of their inner Rooms, are adorned
with many Golden Bowls, set with precious Stones. The like wonderful cost they
are P. 127.
at throughout their whole Building, adorning them in some Parts with Silver
and Gold, in others with Ivory and precious Stones, and other things of great
value. For they have enjoyed a constant and uninterrupted Peace for many Ages
and Generations, being very far remote from those whose Covetousness prompts
them to advance their Gain by the Riches of others.

The Sea there, is of a very white color, so that a Man may as justly wonder
at the strangeness of the thing, as be inquisitive what should be the cause.

Near hereunto are the Fortunate Islands, full of walled Towns; where all the
Fortunate Islands.
Sheep and Cattle are exceeding white, and none of the Females bear any Horns.
The Merchants from all parts resort to these Islands, especially from Potana,
built by Alexander the Great, upon the Banks of the River Indus, that there
might be a commodious Port Town for shipping upon those Coasts: But of this
Country and its Inhabitants we have said enough.

And now we are not to omit what Wonders are seen there in the Heavens: What is
said of the Bear.
North Pole, is greatly to be admired, and puts all Mariners at a stand. For
during the Month which the Athenians call December.
Memacterion, none of the Seven Stars are seen about the Bear, till the first
Watch of the Night; and in January.
Posidion not till the Second: In the following Months, few of these (i'ts
said) are seen by them at Sea, nor any of the Planets at all. As for the rest,
some of them seem to be greater at the time of their rising, than they do with
us; others not to rise and set in the same manner. Nor that the Sun (as with
us) enlightens the Air upon the approach of it is rising, but even while its
dark night, strangely and on a sudden appears, darting forth his refulgent
Rays: And therefore there both Day and Sun appears together. They say it rises
out of the middle of the Sea like a burning Coal, and shoots forth great Sparks
of Fire, and appears not in a round form (as it seems to do with us) but like
to a Pillar something thicker than ordinary toward the Head; and that it
shines not bright, nor casts forth any Rays till one a Clock, but glows like
Fire in the Night without Light; at Two a Clock it resembles the form of a
Shield, and sends forth on a sudden, a fiery scorching Light, even to
admiration. But near the time of it is setting, it is effects are contrary; for
during the space of Two (or as Agatharchides of Cnidus says) Three Hours before
(which is the most pleasant part of the Day to the Inhabitants) he both
inlightens the World by his Rays, and abates in his Heat as he sets by degrees.

The West, South, North-west and East Winds, blow here, as in other Parts of
the World; but the South Winds never blow, nor are ever known in Ethiopia. But
in Troglodita and Arabia, the South Winds are so exceeding hot, that they
sometimes set whole Woods on Fire; and though the Inhabitants run into their
Cottages for shelter, yet they faint and pine away with Heat; therefore North
Winds are justly judged the best, which run through the whole Earth, and are
always cool and refreshing.

Having now given an account of these Countries, it will well agree with the
Lybia.
Course of our History, to describe Lybia, bordering upon Egypt; for in Cyren,
the Syrtes, and in the Mid-lands, inhabit Four sorts of Africans: Those called
Nasomones possess the Parts toward the South; the Auchises the West: The
Marmarides inhabit that large Tract lying between Cyrene and Egypt, as far as
to the Seacoast: The Macae the most populous of all the rest, have their
Habitations near the Syrtes.

Some of these beforementioned People are Husbandmen, as having Fertile P. 128.
Lands, fit for all sorts of Tillage: Others are Shepherds and Herdsmen, who
employ themselves in feeding of Cattle, and maintain themselves and Families by
that means. Both sorts are under a Kingly Government, not living altogether
like wild Beasts or unciviliz'd. A Third sort there is, that are neither
subject to any King, nor have any Knowledge of good or bad, or regard to right
or wrong, but live continually upon Spoil and Robbery: They make sudden
Eruptions out of the Deserts: These rob and steal whatever is in their way, and
then presently make away back to their former lurking Holes.

All these rude Lybians lie in the Fields in the open Air, and live like wild
Beasts, contriving how they may be most cruel: They affect neither Dainty Food,
nor Civil Raiment, but are clothed in Goats Skins.

Their Princes have neither City or Town, but live in Towns.
Castles near Rivers sides, where they lay up all their Stores. They command
all their Subjects once a Year to take an Oath of Allegiance: Those that are
obedient and observant of them, they protect as Friends and Associates: Those
that refuse to submit, they condemn to dye, and prosecute them with Fire and
Sword, as Thieves and Robbers. Their Arms are suitable to the nature of their
Country and their own Disposition; for being nimble, and inhabiting a Country
for the most part Champain, they go to the Field in times of War, each with
their Darts, and a Bag filled with Stones. But they use neither Sword nor
Helmet, nor any other Arms, but make it chiefly their Business to be quick and
nimble in pursuing and retreating; and therefore are very active in running,
and slinging of Stones; Care and continual Exercise improving natural Habits.
They are neither just nor faithful to Strangers in any of their Compacts.

The Country about Cyrene is a fat Soil, and very Fertile: It not only abounds
in Corn, but in Wine and Oil, Fruit Trees and Pastures, and is watered with
many Rivers.

But those Parts that lie far South, are barren and dry, without Water, and
look like the Sea, where there is no variety of Objects, but all on every side
Waste and Desert; over which there is no possibility of passing, and therefore
there is neither Bird, nor Four-footed Beast to be seen, except it be Deer or
Oxen: Neither is there so much as any Plant, or any thing else for the Eye to
fix upon; for the Parts further up into the Land (for a long way together) are
all full of Heaps of Sand. And as it is destitute of all things for the support
of Man's Life, so it abounds as much in Serpents of all shapes and sizes,
especially those which they call Cerestes; whose Bites are Mortal, and they
themselves of the same color with the Sand; and therefore not being discerned
or distinguished from the Soil, many (treading upon them unawares) run the
hazard of losing their Lives.

It Is reported that this sort of Serpents once entered Egypt, and depopulated a
great part of the Country.

There Is likewise a strange and wonderful thing often happens in this Country,
both in the Deserts, and that part lying near to the Syrtes. For some time, and
most commonly in calm Weather, there appear in the Air the shapes of diverse
living Creatures, some standing still, others moving; some flying, others
pursuing; and are of that monstrous bigness, that they greatly terrify such as
are ignorant of the nature of them. Some of them pursue Men, and when they take
hold of them, a Chilness with a Trembling seizes upon all parts of their
Bodies; and therefore Strangers unaccustomed to such things, are ready to fall
down dead with fear; but the Natural Inhabitants (being used to them) regard
them P. 129.
not.

Some Natural Philosophers endeavor to give a Reason of these strange
Apparitions, which look indeed like mere invented Fables: They say that there
are never any Winds in this Country, and if there be any, they are very small
and inconsiderable, and that the Air is often so wonderfully serene, that it is
altogether without the least motion, in regard that near those Parts, there are
neither Woods, deep Valleys, nor swelling Hills; neither are there any great
Rivers that run through the Country, nor any sort of Grain or other Fruits that
grow there; and therefore there is nothing from whence any Vapors can arise,
which are the Productive matter of Winds. The Air therefore being thick in this
dry and sandy Region, the same things happen here in Lybia, as do upon Rainy
Days elsewhere, where in the Clouds, various Shapes and Forms may be observed:
Because the Air being concreted, transforms it self into many Shapes, which
being wasted up and down with gentle Gales, and with often brushing one upon
another, are consolidated, and carried about hither and thither.

At length when the Air is serene and calm, these Phenomenon by their weight
fall to the Earth in that shape, that each have accidentally before received;
and being that there is nothing at hand to dissolve it, what sort of Living
Creature soever it meets with, it cleaves to it.

And as for that motion to and fro which they seem to have (they say) it is not
directed by any voluntary faculty; for that it is impossible any inanimate
things should have a Will either to fly or pursue; but the Living Creatures to
which they adhere, are the secret Causes of their several Motions.

For in their going forward, they drive the Air before them, and therefore the
Spectrum, which is made up of Air, seems gradually to go forward, and resemble
one that flies; and by the Rule of Contraries, when the Body to which it
approaches goes back, the Resemblances appear as if they pursued; for as much
as being but empty and airy Images, they are attracted by the more solid
Bodies; for by the force of the attraction the other way, they move again
toward the fore-parts of the Body attracting; and whether the flying animated
Bodies turn or stand still, the Spectrum is still with it; and then it is no
strange thing, or unreasonable for the Image to dissolve, when it joins to a
solid animate Body, and so by diffusing it self to affect it with a chilling
Cold.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Amazons of Africa. Their Acts: Rooted out by Hercules; and the
Gorgonians by Perseus. The Atlantides, and the Gods among them. The Original of
the Titanes. The Acts of Basilea, or Cybele, said to be born in Phrygia. The
Original of Atlas and Saturn. A long Account given of Bacchus; and the several
Bacchus's there were. A Description of the Grota in Nysa, where he was brought
up. The Building of the Temple of Hammon by him. The several Hercules's. The
Monsters, Aegides and Camps killed by Minerva and Bacchus.

HAving now run over those things before mentioned, it will be pertinent in
Amazons.
this place to relate what is reported concerning the ancient Amazons of
Africa: For many have been persuaded into this Error, as to believe that there
never were any but those that inhabited upon the Banks of Thermodon in Pontus;
but in truth it is quite otherwise; for those in Africa were far more ancient
and famous than any of the rest.

Though we are not ignorant that the Account to be given of these will seem
very strange, and a mere Novelty to the Readers, being that the Race of those
Amazons were extinct long before the Trojan War; but these Virago's about the
River Thermodon, flourished not long before these our Days: For what wonder is
it that the latter (the knowledge of whom is so fresh) should seem more
renowned than the more ancient who are altogether unknown (through length of
Time) to the greatest part of Mankind?

For as much therefore as many things are reported of them both by the ancient
Poets and Historians, and also by many later Authors, we shall likewise
endeavor to give a distinct and orderly Account of their Actions; following
the Example of Dionysius, who writ the History of the Argonauts and Bacchus,
and many other Actions performed in ancient Times.

In Africa there was not only one Race of Women who were famous for Valor and
Warlike Exploits: For we are informed that the Gorgones (against whom Perseus
made War) for Courage and Valor were eminent: How famous P. 130.
and potent they were, may be gathered hence, in as much as that Perseus.
Son of Jupiter (the most eminent Hero among the Grecians in his time) made
choice of this Expedition as the greatest and most noble Enterprise. And as for
the Amazons, of whom we are now about to write, their Valor was most eminently
remarkable, if we compare them with the greatest Spirited Women of our own
Times.

In the Western Parts of Africa, upon the Borders of those Tracts that are
inhabitable, there were anciently a Nation under the Government of Women, whose
Manners and Course of Living were altogether different from ours. It was the
Custom for those Women to manage all matters of War, and for a certain time
keeping themselves Virgins, they went out as Soldiers into the Field, and after
so many Years run up in their warfare, they accompanied with Men, for the
preservation of Posterity; but the Magistracy and all public Offices, they
kept wholly in their own Hands; and the Men (as the Women do with us) looked to
the Household Affairs, submitting to whatever was thought sit to be done by the
Wives; and were not upon any terms admitted to intermeddle in Martial Affairs,
or to Command, or be in any public Authority, which might any ways encourage
them to cast off the Yoke of their Wives.

As soon as any Child was born, they delivered it to the Father to nurse it up
with Milk and other Meat agreeable to its Age. If it were a Girl, they seared
off its Paps, lest they should be burthensom when they grew up; for they looked
upon them to be great hindrances in Fighting; and from the searing of their
Paps, the Grecians called them Amazons.

It Is reported, they inhabited an Island called Hisperia, because it lies to
the West near to the Morass called Tritonides: This Fen they say, is near to
the Ocean which surrounds it, and is called Tritonides, from a River that runs
into it, called Triton. This Morass borders upon Ethiopia, under the greatest
Mountain in those Parts, called by the Grecians Atlas, extending it self to the
Ocean.

This Island, they say, is very large, abounding with all sorts of Fruit Trees,
which supply the Inhabitants with Food: That they have many Herds of Cattle,
and Flocks of Sheep and Goats, which feed their Possessors both with their Milk
and Flesh: But that they had no sort of Corn, for that in those Times they knew
not what it was.

These Amazons therefore, for Valor eminent above all others, and heated with
an ambitious desire of War, first subdued all the Cities of this Island (except
one called Mena, accounted Sacred) inhabited now by the Ethiopians, called
Ichthophages: It Is often scorched with many Eruptions of Fire, which break out
of the Earth, and its Bowels are inricht with precious Stones, which the
Grecians call Carbuncles.
Anthraces, Sardonixes.
Sardes and Emeraulds.
Smaragdos.

Afterward having subdued many of the Neighboring Africans and Numidians,
they built a great City in the Morass of Triton, which for the shape of it was
called Chersonesus.

Then being further instigated by their innate Valor and Courage, they
attempted greater Matters, and invaded many other Countries. And first they set
upon them upon Mount Atlas, a soft sort of People, who enjoyed a rich Country
full of great Cities; among whom (in those Parts bordering upon the Ocean) the
Gods first had their Original, as the Grecians fabulously report, of whom a
particular Account shall be given hereafter.

To this end, when Merina was Queen of the Amazons, she raised an Army of
Merina Queen of the Amazons. P. 131.
Thirty Thousand Foot, and Two Thousand Horse, for they were very exact and
diligent in Training up Horses for the War. The Armor they wore for Coats of
Mail, were the Skins of vast Serpents, with which sort of Creatures Africa
abounds. But for offensive Arms, they carried Swords, Darts and Bows, in which
they were so expert, that with these they not only broke their Enemies
Battalions; but when they pursued them upon their Flight, they were sure to hit
their Mark.

Entering therefore the Country of the Atlantides, in a Battle they routed them
Atlantides.
that inhabited Cercenes, and pursued them so close, that they entered pell-mel
with them that got within the Walls, and took the City: And to strike a greater
Terror into their Neighbors, they executed horrid Cruelties upon the
Conquered; for they put all the Men to the Sword, and having razed the City to
the Ground, carried away Captive all the Women and Children. The noise of this
Destruction being spread all over the Country, the rest of the Atlantides
(being struck with a Pannick Fear) submitted, and delivered up all their
Cities: Whereupon Merina received them all into her Favor, and made a League
with them, and in the room of that which was destroyed, built another City,
calling it after her own Name, and peopled it with the Captives, and with such
as were willing to come there to inhabit.

In the mean time being presented by the Atlantides with many rich Gifts, and
decreeing to her (with a general Consent) many high Honors, she not only
graciously accepted those Marks of their Kindness, but promised she would for
the future endeavor to merit the good Opinion of the whole Nation.

Being therefore often infested by their envious Neighbors the Gorgans, Merina
to gratify the Atlantides (who addressed themselves to her for that purpose)
with an Army invaded the Country of the Gorgons, where joining Battle with
them, the Engagement was smart, in which the Amazons got the day, and killed
great numbers of their Enemies, and took Three Thousand Prisoners: The rest
flying into Woods, Merina (designing utterly to root up the Nation) endeavored
to set the Woods on Fire; but not being able to effect it, she returned with
her Army into the Confines of her own Country, where by reason of her late
Victory, being secure and careless in setting her Watch, the Prisoners killed
many of her Amazons with their own Swords as they were asleep; but at length
being surrounded by the whole Army (fighting it out to the last) they were
every Man killed upon the spot. Then Merina erected Three Funeral Piles, and
burnt up all those of her Army that were slain, and raised up as many Mounts of
Earth over them, which are at this day called the Amazon's Sepulchers.

The Gorgonians notwithstanding, were afterward of great Power, till the Reign
of Medusa, at which time they were conquered by Perseus. At length both they
and the Amazons were utterly extinct by Hercules The Gorgonians rooted out by
Perseus, and the Amazons by Hercules. Perseus destroyed the Gorgonians in the
time of Crideon, An. Mund. 2657, before Christ, 1291.
at the time when he traveled into the Western Parts, and erected the Pillar
in Africa. For it was a thing intolerable to him, who made it his business to
be renowned all the World over, to suffer any Nation to be governed any longer
by Women.

It Is reported likewise, that by an Earthquake, the Tract toward the Ocean,
opened An Earthquake.
its Mouth, and swallowed up the whole Morass of Triton.

Merina likewise overran a great part of Africa, and passing into Egypt, made a
League with Orus the Son of Isis, who then reigned there. She made War also
upon the Arabians, and destroyed many of them: Afterward having subdued Syria,
the Cilicians met her with Presents, and submitted themselves; whom (upon the
account they of their own accord, gave up all into her Hands) she by an Edict
ordained to be a free People; and for that reason they are called the free
Cilicians to this Day. Afterward having conquered the Nations about Mount
Taurus (who were both Men of strong Bodies, and stout Hearts) she descended
through P. 132.
the greater Phrygia to the The Mediterranean.
Sea; thence passing through the Maritime Tracts, she put an end to her
Expedition at the River Caicus: Out of her new Conquests, she picked out the
most convenient Places for the building of Cities, and built many there, among
others one after her own Name; the rest she called after the Names of the chief
Commanders of her Army, as Cymes, Pitanes, and Prineia, situated upon the
Seacoasts; others she built up higher into the Continent.

She possessed her self likewise of several Islands, particularly Lesbos, where
she built Mitylene, calling it after the Name of her Sister, who went along
with her in the Expedition. Whilst she was busy in taking other Islands, she
was endangered by a Storm at Sea, where offering up her Prayers to the Cybele;
or Vesta, the Mother of the Gods.
Mother of the Gods for deliverance, she was driven upon a certain Desert
Island, which she consecrated to the beforementioned Goddess, being admonished
so to do by a Dream; and there she erected Altars, and offered magnificent
Sacrifices. This Island is called Samothracia, which according to the Greek
Dialect signifies the Sacred Island. But there are some Historians that say, it
was formerly called Samos; and from some Thracians that came to inhabit there,
Samothracia. After that the Amazons were returned into the Continent, they
fabulously report, that the Cybele.
Mother of the Gods (being delighted with this Island) placed there her Sons,
called the Corybantes. In the Records of their Sacred Mysteries, it is declared
who was their Father; and she her self, (they say) taught them the Rites and
Mysteries that are now in use in that Island, and instituted and appointed a
Sacred Grove, and an inviolable Sanctuary.

About these times (they say) one Mompsus, a Thracian, banished by Lycurgus
King of Thrace, with an Army invaded the Country of the Amazons: His Associate
was one Sipylus, who was likewise Banished out of Scythia, bordering upon
Thrace. They with Sipylus and Mompsus overcame the other in a Battle, in which
Merina the Amazon Queen, and many more of the Amazons were slain. In process of
Time (after the Thracians had overcome them in several Engagements,) they say
that those that remained of the Nations of the Amazons, retired into Lybia. And
such was the end of the Amazonian Expedition out of Africa.

And now since we have made mention of the Atlantides, we judge it not
impertinent to relate what the Atlantides fabulously report concerning the
Genealogy of the Gods, not much differing from the Fables of the Greeks.

The Atlantides inhabited a Rich Country, bordering upon the Ocean, and were
Atlantides, the Gods born among them.
esteemed to excel all their Neighbors in civil Reception and Entertainment of
Strangers; and they boast that the Gods were born amongst them, and say that
the most famous Poet amongst the Grecians does confirm this their Assertion,
where he brings in Juno speaking thus --

(...)
(...)
The utmost bounds of Earth far off I see,
Where Thetys and Ocean boast to be
The Parents of the Gods. --
They say that Vranus was their first King, who caused the People (who then
Vranus, Heaven or Coelum, or Coelus.
wandered up and down) to dwell in Towns and Cities, and reducing them from a
lawless and savage Course of Life, taught them to use and lay up the Fruits of
the Earth, and many other things useful for Man's Life. It Is said he had under
his Dominion, the greatest part of the World, especially toward the West and
the Northern Parts: And that being much addicted to Astrology, he
prognosticated many things that were come to pass in the World; and measured
the Year according to the Course of the Sun, and the Months according to the
Motion of the Moon; and divided the Days into Hours, and therefore the People,
as at that time ignorant of the constant motion of the Stars, did so admire his
Prognostications, P. 133.
that it grew into a common Opinion among them, that he was a God; and when he
was dead, (by reason of his Deserts, and Art in Astronomy) they honored him as
a God.

The Starry Heaven was called after his (...), Ouranos.
Name, because that he was so familiarly acquainted with the Rising and setting
of the Stars, and other things happening in the Etherial World; and for that his
Merits transcended all the Honors that could be attributed to him, he was
called the Eternal King of the Universe.

They report that this Vranus had Five and Forty Children by several Wives, and
Eighteen of these were by one Titea, who had each of them a peculiar Name, but
all in Common called Titanes, from their Mother Titea, who for her Wisdom The
Titanes.
and Beneficence was after her Death reputed a Goddess by those whom she had
obliged by her Kindnesses, and was called Terra.

Of Vranus and Titea were born several Daughters, of whom Two were most famous
above the rest, Basilea and Rhea, by some called Pandora. Basilea being the
Eldest (and most Prudent and Discreet) bred up her Brothers with the care and
affection of a Mother, and therefore was called the Great Mother.

After the Death of her Father, by the general Suffrage of the People and
Consent Basiled.
of her Brothers she was elected Queen, being as yet a Virgin, and remarkable
for her Modesty and Chastity. She was long unwilling to marry; but afterward
(desiring to leave Heirs of her own Body to succeed in the Kingdom) she married
Hyperion one of her Brothers, whom she most dearly loved, by whom she had two
Children, Helio, that is, the Sun.
Helio and Selene, that is, the Moon.
Selene, who for their Beauty and Modesty were the Admiration of all; her other
Brothers (they say) partly out of Envy at the Issue, and partly out of fear
lest Hyperion should assume the Kingdom entirely to himself, committed a
notorious wicked Act; for entering into a Conspiracy, they assassinated Hyperion
and drowned Helio (then a tender Infant) in The River Po, in Italy.
Eridanus.

Upon the Discovery of this sad Disaster, Selene, who passionately loved her
Brother, threw her self down headlong from the Housetop; and the Mother, while
she was seeking for her Son at the River side, with Grief fell asleep, and
dreamt that she saw Helios standing by her to comfort her, and wished her not
to grieve too much and afflict her self for the Death of her Children; for the
Titanes should execute due Revenge upon the Malefactor, and that he and his
Sister by the Providence of the Gods were to be deify'd, so as that which
before was called the Holy Fire in Heaven should then be called Helios is in
Greek the Sun.
Helios, and that which before had the Name of Mean should then be termed Luna
the Moon. Selene is in Greek the Moon.
Selenes.

When she awaked she told her Dream, and repeated all her Misfortunes, and then
entreated her Subjects that they would adore her deceased Children as Gods, and
that none for the future would come near her.

Presently afterward in a furious Rage of Madness (taking her Daughters
gingling Gewgaws) she wandered up and down, with her Hair dishevelled about her
Ears, and playing like a mad Woman upon a Timbrel and Cymbal, she was even a
Terror to the Spectators: And while every body pitied her miserable Condition,
and some attempted to lay hold on her, there arose on a sudden a terrible Storm
of Rain, Thunder and Lightning, and she was never seen after. The People
hereupon admiring this Prodigy, began to transfer the Name of Helios and Selene
(in Honor of them) to the Sun and the Moon in the Heavens; and being persuaded
that the Mother was a Goddess, they erected Altars, and (with the noise of
Timbrels and tinkling of Cymbals, and other things agreeable to her
Circumstances) offered Sacrifices, and instituted other divine Rites and
Ceremonies in Honor of her.

But however Phrygia is said to be the Birthplace of this Goddess: For the
Inhabitants P. 134.
fabulously report, that Meones heretofore reigned in Phrygia and Lydia, and
that he married Dyndima, and upon her begat a Daughter, which he unnaturally
exposed in the Mountain Cybelus: And that there, by a divine Providence,
Leopards and other fierce and wild Beasts, nourished the Child with their own
Milk: But Shepherdesses thereabouts observing what was done, and (admiring the
Strangeness of the thing) took away the Child, and called it, from the Place,
Cybele. The young Lady growing up both in Strength and Years, was admired
Cybele.
by all for her Beauty, Modesty and Ingenuity: For she was the first that
invented the Pipe, composed of many Reeds, and the Timbrel and Cymbal in Sports
and Dances: She taught likewise how to cure (by purging) Diseases both in
Children and Cattle.

For her extraordinary Love to Children, whom she often restored to Health, by
singing and lulling them in her Arms, she was called by all Matter montana.
The Mother of the Mount. Marsyas the Phrygian (they say) was very much with
her, and the chiefest of all her Lovers: This Man, it is said, was mighty
ingenious, and wonderfully chaste. His Ingenuity they gather hence, that
imitating the Sound of a Pipe composed of many Reeds, he found out how one
single Pipe might make the same Harmony: And as an Argument for his Chastity
(they say) he never had to do with any Woman all the days of his Life.

Cybele being now ripe of Years, loved a young Man, one of the Natives, first
called Attis, afterward Papas: This Youth she accompanied with, and was got
with Child, about which time she was owned by her Parents, and received by her
Father into his Palace, as a Virgin: But being afterward informed of the
Miscarriage of his Daughter, caused Attis and her Nurses to be put to Death,
and their Bodies to lie exposed without Burial: Whereupon (they say) Cybele
(through the Love she bore to the young Man, and overwhelmed with Grief for her
Nurses) fell into a furious Madness, and ran out into the Fields, where all
alone with her Hair about her Ears she filled the whole Country with the noise
of her Timbrel, and her Wayling and Lamentations. But Marsyas pitying her
miserable Condition, and prompted thereunto by the Remembrance of his ancient
Love and Kindness he had for her, followed her wherever she went; and coming
together at length to Bacchus in Nysa, found there Apollo, then in great Esteem
for his Skill in playing upon the Harp, invented by Mercury. There Marsyas
contended with Apollo who should be accounted the greatest Artist, and the
Nysians were to be the Judges. And first Apollo played only upon his Harp. But
Marsyas as soon as he had winded his Hoboy (tickling their Ears with the
Novelty of the Melody, and the Sweetness of his Notes) seemed far to excel his
Rival. Then they made a Match that they should both make a Second Trial of
their Skill before the Judges: Apollo therefore leading the way, first began as
before, and added to the melodiousness of his Harp, the Harmony of his Voice,
and by that means gained the Victory over the Applause formerly wan by the
Hoboy. At which Marsyas was in a Rage, and said, that he was highly injured in
not being allowed the pre-eminence, for that they ought to judge by the Art in
playing, and not in the Voice and in singing, and that according to that Rule,
Trial should be made, and Judgment given concerning the Melody and Harmony
between the Harp and Hoboy; and that it was unjust to lay in the balance Two
Arts against one. To which it is said, Apollo answered, that he did no more than
the other; for that Marsyas did the same thing, when he tuned his Hoboy with
his Breath, and therefore either both ought to be allowed the same Privilege,
or both should be restrained P. 135.
from making use of their Mouths, and their Hands only should be the
Instruments of evidencing the excellency of their Art and Skill. What Apollo
said, seemed most just and reasonable to all the Auditors. Then there was a
Third Contest between them, in which Marsyas was again overcome: But Apollo was
so incensed with his vying with him, that he flayed him alive: But presently
after he was so sorry for what he had done, that he broke in pieces all the
Strings of his Harp, and destroyed that Music which he himself had invented.
But it was afterward revived; for the Muses restored the (...).
Mean, Linus the String called the (...).
Tenor, and Orpheus and Thamyris the Two Strings called the (...).
Base, and next to the Base.

They say that Apollo consecrated both the Harp and Hoboy to Bacchus, and left
them in his Cave; and afterward falling in love with Cybele, wandered up and
down with her as far as to the Hyperborean, signifies very far North; by which
the Ancients use to express the furthest Parts of the World.
Hyperborean Mountains.

And whereas there was a Plague and Famine in Phrygia, the Phrygians inquired
at the Of Apollo at Delphos.
Oracle how they should be freed from the Calamity they lay under, It Is said
the God commanded them to bury Attis, and adore Cybele as a Goddess.

The Phrygians therefore (because they could not find any part of his Body
through length of time since he was killed) made a Statue for him, which they
followed as to his Burial, with Howling, Lamentations, and other honorable
Ceremonies proper for his Funeral, and so made an Atonement for their former
Offense; which Solemnity they constantly observe to this very Day; and offer
Yearly Sacrifices to Cybele, who formerly erected Altars to the Gods there. In
honor of this Cybele, they built a magnificent Temple in Pesinunte, a City of
Phrygia, and instituted solemn Sacrifices, and Divine Worship to her, which
Work was advanced by the assistance of King Midas. They Placed Leopards and
Lions standing by the Statue of the Goddess, because it was generally believed
she was nursed up by them. And these are the things which the Phrygians and the
Atlantides, the Inhabitants of the Coasts bordering on the Ocean, do report of
this Mother of the Gods.

After the Death of Hyperion, they report that the Children of * Coelus divided
Vranus.
the Kingdom amongst themselves; amongst whom Atlas and Saturn were the most
renowned. The Country bordering upon the Ocean, fell by lot upon Atlas, who
called the People there Atlantides, and the greatest Mountain in the World
Atlas, after his own Name.

They say, that he was an excellent Astrologer, and was the first that
discovered the Knowledge of the Sphere; whence rose the common Opinion, that he
carried the World upon his Shoulders; noting by this Fancy, his Invention and
Description of the Sphere. The most eminent among his many Sons, was Hesperus,
for Piety toward the Gods, and Justice and Kindness toward his Subjects.
Being upon the Top of Mount Atlas to observe the motion of the Stars, he
suddenly vanished in a Tempest. The People hereupon much lamenting the loss of
him, that they might for ever honor him, called the Brightest Hesperus the
Morning Star.
Star in the Heavens after his Name.

Atlas likewise had Seven Daughters, who were all called after their Father's
Name Atlantides; but their several proper Names were Maia, Electra, Taygeta,
Asterope, Merope, Halcyone, and Celaeno. All these were got with Child by
several Heroic Princes, and even by some of the Gods themselves, and bore
diverse Sons who were the first Ancestors of several Nations, and for their
virtuous Qualifications, were afterward called Gods and Demy-Gods.

So Maia the Eldest, was got with Child by Jupiter, and bore Mercury, the
Inventor of many Arts and Sciences for the use of Mankind.

All the rest likewise had Sons who were famous in their Times, some of which
gave beginning to whole Nations, others to some particular Cities; and
therefore not only some of the Barbarians, but likewise some among the Greeks,
refer P. 136.
the Original of many of the ancient Heroes, to these Daughters of Atlas; for
they were in great Reputation for Wisdom and Justice; and therefore when they
were Dead, were adored as Goddesses, and fixed in the Constellation of the The
Seven Stars.
Pleiades.

Nymphs were commonly called Atlantides, because Nymphs is a general Term in
this Country applied to all Women.

They say that Saturn the Brother of Atlas, was extraordinary Profane and
Covetous; and Marrying his Sister Rhea, he begat Jupiter, afterward surnamed
Olympus. There was another Jupiter the Brother of Coelus, and King of Crete,
but much inferior for Glory and Renown to the later: For this later was Lord of
the World; but the ancient Jupiter was only King of the Island before-nam'd,
and had Ten Sons whom they called Curetes, and called the Island Ida, after the
Name of his Wife, where he himself was buried, the Remains of whose Sepulcher
are to be seen at this Day.

However the Cretians relate several Stories of these Jupiters, of whom we
shall write distinctly when we come to their History.

Saturn reigned (they say) over Sicily, Africa and Italy, and enlarged his
Dominion over all the Western Parts of the World, and by Garrisons and strong
Forts placed in convenient Places, kept his Subjects every where within the
Bounds of their Duty: And hence it is, that at this very Day in the Western
Parts of Sicily, the high Mounts that are to be seen here and there, are called
Saturn' s Castles. Jupiter.
Cronia.

Jupiter (they say) was the Sun of Saturn, who contrary to what his Father did
before him, carried himself justly and courteously toward all, and therefore he
was called Father by all his Subjects. He succeeded in the Kingdom either as
given up to him by his Father, or set upon the Throne by his Subjects out of
hatred to his Father: And though Saturn afterward by the help of the Titans,
made War upon his Son, yet Jupiter overcame him in a Battle, and so gained the
Kingdom: And afterward he ran through the whole World, doing good to all
Mankind: And because he was of a strong Body, and endowed with all virtuous
Qualifications of Mind, he easily conquered the whole World. He chiefly made it
his Business to punish the Impious, and to do good to all his People: And
therefore (after he left the World) he was called Zeus.
Zena, from Life, because he was the first that taught Men to live well: And
therefore they of whom he had deserved well, rewarded him with this Honor,
that he was unanimously by all placed in the highest Heavens, and called a God,
and Supreme Lord of all the Earth. And this is the full Account (distinctly
related) of all the Gods mentioned and recorded by the Atlantides.

And for as much as before in the account we gave of the Egyptian Antiquities,
we came in the Course of the general History, to the Genealogy of Bacchus,
(whom B(...)s.
the Greeks call Dionysius) and his Acts --

We conceive it sit here to add what the Grecians have delivered to Posterity
concerning this God: But in regard the ancient Fabulous Historians and Poets
have given different Accounts of Bacchus, and have related many monstrous
Stories, it is very difficult to set forth truly his Genealogy and Acts. For
some say, there was but one Bacchus.
Dionysius, others that there were Three. But some say there never was any such
Man, but conceive that Wine is to be taken for Dionysius. We shall therefore in
short, run over distinctly what is said by every one of them.

The Naturalists who speak of this God, and call Wine Bacchus, say, that the
Earth amongst other Plants, naturally produced the Vine, and that it was not
planted or found out at the first by any whatsoever. In Confirmation whereof,
they P. 137.
instance in wild Vines, which in many places at this day bear Grapes of
themselves, as well as if they were husbanded and improved by the Care and
Industry of Men: And that Bacchus was by the Ancients called Two Mo(...)
Bimeter, because when the Vine is planted in the Earth, and begins to grow,
that is to be esteemed the First Birth: The Second, when it shoots forth
Branches, and puts forth Fruit, and brings them to Ripeness and Perfection; and
so the First Birth of this God is to be judged to proceed from the Earth, and
the Second from the Vine it self.

The Fabulous Writers likewise feign a Third Generation of Bacchus, that he was
the Son of Jupiter and Ceres, and that some Men of the Earth pulled him in
Pieces, and boiled his Parts; and that Ceres gathered his Members together
again, and renewed and revived him. Which Fictions the natural Philosophers
explain according to natural Reason; for he is said (they say) to be the Son of
Jupiter and Ceres, because the Vine is nourished by the Earth, and the Rain
from Heaven, and so produces Fruit; whence comes Wine, by pressing of the
Grape. That the boiling of his Members, signifies the manner of ordering the
Wine, which many boil to make it more strong and fragrant. That his Members
were pulled in pieces by Earthly Men afterward, and joined together again, and
he restored to his former State, denotes no more, but that after the Vintage
and pruning of the Vines at the season of the Year, the Earth causes them to
flourish again, and to be as fruitful as ever they were before. For it is
certain, that by Ceres the ancient Poets and other Fabulous Authors meant the
Mother Earth: And agreeable hereunto, are those things that are delivered in
the Verses of Orpheus, and which are exhibited in the celebration of the Sacred
Mysteries, which it is not lawful for any ordinary Person particularly to treat
of.

In the same manner the Naturalists explain his being the Son of Semele; for
they say, that the Earth was by the Ancients called Thion and Semele; From the
Greek Word Somne, which signifies Splendid or Beautiful.
Semele, because the Worship of this Goddess was splendid and pompous; and
Thyon from the frequent Called by the Greeks Thysias, and Thyelas.
Sacrifices which were offered to her.

He is feigned to be begotten of Jupiter, Twice, because it being supposed that
the Vines with other Plants, were destroyed in Deucalion's Flood, and that it
afterward sprung up again, therefore when this God appeared again, as if he
had sprung up by a Second Birth, he was feigned to be born out of Jupiter's
Thigh. And these are the Opinions of them, who take Bacchus for nothing else
but the use and strength found out to lie in Wine.

But those Fabulous Authors that say this God was a Man, unanimously attribute
to him the finding out and first planting of the Vine, and every thing that
belongs to the use of Wine. But whether there were more than one of that Name,
they differ among themselves. Some affirm there was but One, and this very
Bacchus who taught the use of Wine, and gathering of Grapes, and with an Army
overran the whole World, and first instituted the Rites and Festivals of the
Bacchanalia. Some (as I have before declared) have affirmed, that there were
Three that lived at several times, and have given an Account of the Actions of
each of them.

Of whom (they say) the most ancient was born in India, and therefore in regard
1 Bacchus.
that Country (through the Temper of the Climate, and richness of the Soil)
naturally produced Vines, they affirm he was the first that taught the way of
pressing of Grapes, and found out the use of Wine; and employed himself
likewise in pruning of Fig Trees, and other Fruit Trees of a larger size, and
taught others the same Art: And in Conclusion, that he found out whatever
appertained to the Vine. And hence he was called the Leneus:
Presser, and the Bearded, because it P. 138:
is the Custom among the Indians to let their Beards grow all their Days
without cutting them.

This they say, is the Bacchus which overran the whole World with his Arms, and
found out the manner of Planting of Vines, and the pressing of Grapes with
Wine-Presses (and thence was surnamed Leneus, as before) and imparted what he
had discovered to others; by which Advantages he so gained the Hearts and
Respects of all Men, that when he was dead, they adored him with Divine
Honors. At this day they show the Place of his Birth in India, and many Cities
there in their own proper Language, called after his Name. Many other things
they relate of this Indian Bacchus, which is too tedious here to rehearse.

Another Bacchus (they say) there was who was the Son of Jupiter and
Proserpina, 2d Bacchus.
or as some think, of Ceres. This they say, was the first that taught how to
plow with Oxen, when Men before tilled the Ground with their own Handy Labors,
and invented many other things useful for the Art of Husbandry, that the
Countryman might not be overlaid with his Labors. By these Advantages and
Benefits to Mankind, he gained such Reputation and Esteem, that he was by all
adored as a God, and Divine Worship and Solemn Sacrifices were offered in
honor of him. In all his Images and Statues he was painted and engraven with
Horns, as well to signify the nature of this Second Bacchus, as to denote how
great a benefit and advantage accrew'd to the Husbandmen by the invention of
the Plow.

A Third Bacchus they say, was born at Thebes in Beotia, of Jupiter and Semele,
3d Bacchus.
the Daughter of Cadmus; for Jupiter being in love with her, by reason of her
extraordinary Beauty, is said frequently to lie with her; at which Juno was so
inflamed with Jealousy, that she resolved to be revenged upon the Girl; and to
this end (minding to deceive her (she appeared in the shape of one of her
Servants, and persuaded Semele (who never suspected any finister design) that
it was very fitting that Jupiter should lie with her in the same splendor, and
glorious appearance as he did with Juno: Whereupon Semele over persuaded
Jupiter, that he would honor her in his Addresses in the same manner as he did
Juno; upon which he visited her in Thunder and Lightning, which killed the
young Lady, causing her to miscarry; and Jupiter forthwith clapped up the Infant
within his Thigh, and when he was come to the full time of his Birth, he
conveyed him to Nysa in Arabia, where being nursed by Nymphs, he was called
from his Father and the Place In Greek Dis, is Jupiter, and Nysa, the Place so
called.
Dionysus. Being a very Beautiful Young Man, he spent the time of his Youth in
Dancing, Plays, and all manner of Sports and Pleasures with Young Women.

Afterward he got together an Army of Women armed with (...), Thersis.
Lances, and adorned with Garlands of Flowers, and marched with 'em through all
Parts of the World, teaching Men his Mysterious Rites and Ceremonies, yet
imparting them only to those that lived virtuously and piously. He every where
likewise instituted Festival Days, and General Meetings for Sports and
Dancings, and composed Differences both in Cities and Countries; and instead of
Wars and Seditions, established Peace and Concord amongst them. And when the
noise of his coming to any Place was spread Abroad, and how kind he was to all,
and how great a Benefactor he was in improving and civilizing the Manners of
Men, they ran out flocking from all Parts to receive him. But some few Proud
and Impious Persons despised him, and gave forth that he carried * Women along
with him The Bachldes.
to gratify his Lusts, and that he taught his Rites and Ceremonies, merely to
commit Whoredom with strange Women; but of these he took a speedy Revenge; for
whenever he exerted his divine power in punishing the Wicked, sometimes he
struck them with Madness, and at other times caused them to be torn in pieces
by the Hands of the Women; and sometimes by his Sovereign Skill in Martial
Affairs, P. 139.
caused his Enemies suddenly to be Slain. For instead of the Lances, he
ordered his Bacchides to carry Darts wrapped round with Ivy at the Points, with
which (on a sudden and unexpectedly) they assaulted and wounded to Death the
Kings that were ignorant of the Stratagem, and therefore despised and contemned
them, because they were Women.

Amongst them that were punished by him, the most considerable and eminent were
Pentheus the Grecian, and Myrrhanus the Indian King, and Lycurgus of Thrace.
For Bacchus intending to transport his Forces out of Asia into Europe made a
League with Lycurgus King of Thrace, whose Country was washed by the
Hellespont. As soon as Bacchus had transported his Bacchides into the Country,
one of his Allies (as he thought Lycurgus) commanded his Soldiers to set upon
Bacchus and all his mad Crew in the Night, and to cut them all off. Of which
Bacchus being informed by one of the Inhabitants, called Tharops, he was no
little amazed, because he had but a few with him, the Strength of his Army
being on the other side of the Hellespont; upon which he himself secretly
passed over to his Army: But Lycurgus in the mean time cut the throats of all
his Bacchides that were left behind, in a Place called Nisius. As soon
therefore as Bacchus had transported his Forces, he fought the Thracians, and
overcame them; and having taken Lycurgus Prisoner, first plucked out his Eyes,
and after he had put him to all sorts of Torments he could devise, and used him
with all the Contempt and Disgrace imaginable, he nailed him to the Cross.
Afterward in Recompense to Tharops Crucified.
for the Kindness showed him, he advanced him to the Kingdom of Thrace, and
taught him the manner of Celebrating the Mysteries of his Solemnities called
Orgyae. Orgyae.


Oeagrus the Son of Tharops, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, being
instructed by him, in the same mysterious Rites and Ceremonies. Oeagrus
afterward taught them Orpheus his Son, who (being eminent for his Learning and
Ingenuity) changed many things in the Orgyae. Hence those Rites and Mysteries
first instituted by Called liber Pater.
Bacchus were afterward called Orphea.

But some of the Poets, among whom is Antimachus, say, Lycurgus was not King of
Thrace, but of Arabia; and that he treacherously set upon Bacchus and his
Bacchides in Nysa in Arabia: And further relate that Bacchus having every where
punished the wicked and rewarded the good, returned out of India, mounted upon
an Elephant, into Thebes; and because he spent three Years in his Expedition,
the Grecians celebrate the Festivals called Trieteriades. And report that being
Trieteriades.
laden with the Spoils of so great an Expedition, he was the first that was
brought in Triumph into the Country. These are the Genealogies of Bacchus,
according to the unanimous Consent of all the Ancients.

But many of the Cities in Greece contend for the Place of his Birth; for the
Eleans, Naxians and the Inhabitants of Eleutherae, the Teians and many other,
appropriate his Birth each particularly to themselves. And the Teians for
Confirmation The Place of Bacchus his Nativity.
of what they say, bring this Argument, that there is a Spring in their City,
which at some certain times streams forth most rich and fragrant Wine: And as
to the rest, some of them show Parcels of Land dedicated to him; and others
(from ancient Tradition) sacred Groves and consecrated Temples. But in Truth
since this God has left behind him many Tokens of his Beneficence, and likewise
of his personal Presence in most Parts of the World, it is no wonder that every
one affirms that his own Country and City, was the Place that was especially
dear to Bacchus.

The Poet in his Hymns confirms what we have before declared, where speaking P.
140.
of those that doubt the Place of his Birth, brings him in as born at Nysa in
Arabia in this manner --

(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Some Dracanum, Icarus some, some Naxus name,
Places from which the divine Bacchus came.
From Thebes some, and from thy curling Streams
Alphaeus others say: All silly Dreams.
Thee Father JOVE in secret brought to Light
Fearful of Men's, and his fair Juno's Sight,
On Nysas Mount adorned with pleasant Woods
Far from Phoenician Coasts near Egypt's Floods.
Yet I am not ignorant that the Africans inhabiting the Seacoasts, do
themselves challenge the Birth Place of this God, and say that what things are
reported to be done by him were done among them, and show many Marks and Signs
to prove what they say, which remain among them to this very day: And in
further Confirmation hereof many of the ancient Historians and Poets, and
likewise a great Part of the Modern Writers do agree in this thing concerning
him.

And that we may not omit any thing that is said of Bacchus, we shall range
under distinct Heads what the Africans have related concerning him, and wherein
the Grecian Historians have agreed with them, and lastly what Account is given
of him by Dionysices, who composed a History of the ancient Stories and Fables.
For he has written a History of Bacchus, of the Amazons, of the Expedition of
the Argonauts, and the War of Troy, and many other things, annexing thereunto
several Poems of the ancient Mythologists and Poets. He says that Linus was the
first that invented Rhimes and Music in Greece: And that Cadmus brought
Letters out of Phoenicia, and was the first that taught the Grecians to
pronounce them, and gave them their several Names, and formed their distinct
Characters: Hence these Letters are all generally called Phoenician Letters,
because they were brought over out of Phoenicia into Greece: but they were
afterward called Pelasgian Characters, because the Pelasgians were the first
that understood them after they were brought over. He says, that this Linus
being an excellent Poet and Musician, had many Scholars, amongst whom there
were three that were the most famous, Hercules, Themyris and Orpheus. Hercules
learnt to play upon the Harp, but was very dull and unapt to learn, insomuch as
he was sometimes box'd and beaten, at which he was at length so enraged that he
killed his Master by a Blow with his Harp. Themyris was very ingenions, and
gave himself wholly to Music; and grew so eminent therein, that he would boast
he could sing more sweetly and melodiously than the Muses themselves; at which
the Goddesses were so enraged, that they both deprived him of his Art, and
struck him blind besides, as Homer affirms in these Verses,

(...)
(...).
Themyris then by the Muses was envied
And of his Art the Thracian they deprived.
And then again,

(...)
(...).
The enraged Goddesses then struck him blind
That the way to Sing or Play he could not find.
Of Orpheus, the last of his Scholars, we shall speak particularly when we come
to what concerns him.

This Linus (they say) writ in Phenician.
Pelasgian Letters, the Acts of the first Bacchus, and left other Stories in
his Writings behind him. Orpheus, likewise it is said, used the same Characters,
and Pronapides, Homer's Master, an ingenious Musician. Thymaetes also the Son
of Thymaetus, the Son of Leomedon, who lived in the time of Orpheus, and
traveled through many Parts of the World, as far as to the Western Parts of
Lybia to the very Ocean: This Thymaetes visited likewise (they say) Nysa the
Place where Bacchus was brought up, as is reported by the Ancient Inhabitants;
where being instructed by the Nysians, he wrote a Poesy called Phrygia, of the
particular Actions of this God, in very old Language and Character. P. 141.
Amongst other things, he says, that Ammon a King, reigning in some Part of
Lybia, married Rhea the Daughter of Coelus, Sister of Saturn and the other
Titans; and that when he came first to the Kingdom, he met with a beautiful
Virgin called Amalthea, upon the In Asia near the Caspian sea.
Ceraunean Mountains, and falling in Love with her, begat a Son of her, who was
afterward famous and admirable both for Strength and Comeliness of Person;
afterward he made Amalthea Queen of the neighboring Nations, which in its
Situation being in shape of an Ox's Horn, was therefore called the Western
Horn, and that the Soil is so very rich, that it abounds with Vines and all
other sorts of Fruit Trees. Being possessed of this Country, she called it
after her own Name, Amalthea's Horn. And therefore Posterity call every rich
Piece of Land that abounds with Fruit Trees, Amalthea's Horn.

But Ammon fearing the rageful Jealousy of Rhea, concealed his Adultery, and
privately sent away the Child afar off to the City Nysa, which lies in an
Island almost inaccessible, surrounded with the River Triton, into which there
is but one The Description of Nysa and the Gr^ta.
strait and narrow Entrance, called the Nysian Gates.

The Land there is very rich, abounding with pleasant Meadows, Gardens and
Orchards, watered on every side with refreshing Streams; wherein grow all sorts
of Fruit Trees and Vines, which grow of themselves, for the most part running
up upon the sides of Trees. A gentle, cooling and refreshing Wind pierces
through the whole Island, which makes the Place exceeding healthful, so that
the Inhabitants live much longer here, than any others in the neighboring
Countries. The first Entrance into the Island runs up in a long Vale, shaded
all along with high and lofty Trees, so thick, that only a dim and glimmering
light passes through; but the Fiery Beams of the Sun enter not in the least to
offend the Passenger. In passing along, drill many Sweet and Crystal Springs,
so that the Place is most pleasant and delightful to them that have a desire
there to divert themselves. When you are out of this Vale, a pleasant and very
large Grota, of a round Form, presents it self, arched over with an exceeding
high Craggy Rock, bespangled with Stones of diverse resplendent Colors; for
being exchequer'd, some sparkl'd with Purple Rays, some with Azure, and others
darted forth their refulgent Beauty in diverse other Colors, no Color being
ever known, but it might be seen there. At the Entrance grew Trees of a strange
and wonderful Nature, some bearing Fruit, others always green and flourishing,
as if they had been created only by Nature to delight the sight: In these
nested all sorts of Birds, whose Color and pleasant Notes, even ravished the
Senses with sweet delight: So that all the Place round, imparted a sort of
Divine Pleasure, not only to the Eye, but the Ear; the sweetness of Natural
Notes far excelling the Artificial Harmony of all other Music whatsoever.
Passing through this, appears a large and spacious Grota, in every part
enlightened by the bright Rays of the Sun: Here grow various sorts of Flowers
and Plants, especially Cassia, and others that perpetually preserve their sweet
Odours in their natural Strength. Here are to be seen the many pleasant
Apartments of the Nymphs, (composed of various Flowers, planted in that order
by wise Nature's Hands, and not by Man's Art) fit to receive even the Gods
themselves. Within all this pleasant Round, is not a Flower or Leaf to be seen
withered, or in the least decayed; so that the Spectators are not only
delighted with the sight, but even transported with the Pleasures P. 142.
of the fragrant Smells, and sweet Odours of the Place.

To this Cave the Child was brought by Ammon, and committed to the care of
Nysa, one of the Sisters of Aristeus, to be brought up; but ordered Aristeus
himself to be his Tutor, who was a Prudent, Honest, and very Learned Man: And
that the Child might be the beteer secured against the mischievous Contrivances
of his Stepmother Rhea, to these was joined Minerva to be his Guardian, whom
the River Triton they say, brought forth a little before these Times; and
therefore from thence she was called Or Tritoangenes, because she first
appeared in a Virgins Habit at the River Triton.
Tritonides. They report that this Goddess lived a Virgin all her Days, and
that being likewise endu'd with extraordinary Wisdom, she found out many Arts
and Sciences; and that her strength of Body, and Manly Courage was such, that
she employed her self in feats of Arms, and went out to the Wars. Amongst her
other Actions, this was one remarkable, that she killed Aegides a terrible
Monster, before esteemed invincible. It was the Birth of The Earth.
Terra, and (in an horrible manner) naturally breathed forth Flames of Fire at
her Mouth. This Monster first appeared in Phrygia, and burnt up the whole
Country, which is therefore called Burnt Phrygia at this Day. Afterward she
bent her Course to the Places about Mount Taurus, and burnt and destroyed all
the Woods and Forests all along, as far as to India: Thence she moved toward
the Seacoasts, and burnt down the Cedars upon Mount Libanus in Phaenicia:
Thence passing through Egypt, she burnt up Lybia, as far as to the Western
Shore, till at length she set on Fire all the Woods upon the Ceraunian
Mountains. The Earth being thus all in a Flame, and the Inhabitants partly
consumed, and partly through Fear, having forsaken their Country, Minerva (they
say) eminently furnished both with Wisdom and Courage, killed this Monster; and
wore its Skin upon her Breast, to be both as a Breast Plate and Coat of Mail
against future Encounters, and likewise as a Memorial of her Valor and
glorious Victory.

Terra, the Mother of this Monster, being hereat enraged, in revenge brought
forth the Giants, those implacable Enemies of the Gods, which were afterward
destroyed by Jupiter, with the assistance of Minerva, Bacchus and other Deities.

But as for Dionysus bred up in Nysa, and instructed in the most learned Arts
Bacchus.
and Sciences, he grew not only eminent for the Strength and Beauty of his
Body, and Endowments of his Mind, but for his Inventions of things useful for
Man's Life. For while he was but as yet a mere Boy, he found out the nature and
use of Wine, discovering the pressing of the Clusters of the Vine, and drying
of the Grapes, to the end to store them up for future use. He found out
likewise what Ground was most proper for the planting of every thing, and in
hopes of attaining unto Immortal Honor for the great Benefits and Advantages
of those things by him discovered, he communicated his Inventions to Mankind.

When his Fame and Glory was noised abroad in every Place, Rhea (it is said)
enraged at Ammon, endeavored to seize Dionysus: But being disappointed in her
Design, she forsook Ammon, and returning to her Brother the Titans, Married her
Brother Saturn, who at the instigation of Rhea, with the other Brothers, made
War upon Ammon, and in a Battle routed him. That Ammon by reason of Famine was
forced to fly into Crete, and married Geta, one of the Daughters of the Curati,
then reigning there, and with her gained the Sovereignty of the Island, and
called it after his Wife's Name Get, which was before called Idea.

Saturn they say, having gained the Kingdom of Ammon, governed cruelly, and P.
143.
marched with an Army to Nysa against Dionysus, who hearing of the routing of
his Father, and the Confederacy of the Titans against him, raised Soldiers in
Nysa, Two Hundred of which were bred up with him, who as they were eminent for
Valor, so they were great Lovers of Dionysus. He confederated likewise with
the Neighboring Lybians, Africans and the Amazons, of whom we have before
related, that they were both valiant, and used to send great Forces abroad in
other Countries, and had brought many Parts of the World under their Dominion.
They were brought (they say) into this Confederacy chiefly for the sake of
Minerva, who minded the same way and course of Life as they did: For the
Amazons were both Warriers and Virgins. The Army with Dionysus was divided into
Two Bodies, the Men commanded by him, and the Women by Minerva; and in this
Order they made a violent Charge upon the Titans: The Engagement was very hot,
and great numbers fell on both sides: At length upon a Wound given to Saturn,
Dionysus gained the Day, who signalized his Valor in this Battle above all
others. The Titans then fled to the Places formerly belonging to Ammon, and
Dionysus with a great number of Prisoners returned to Nysa, where he surrounded
them with his Soldiers, and then in an Harangue, accused the Titans; so that
all thought they must every Man be put to the Sword: But forthwith pardoning
them all, he gave them liberty either to go Home, or to take up Arms with him:
Upon which they all chose to serve him, and upon the account of their sudden
and surprising Deliverance, all adored him as a God. Then giving to each of
them a Cup of Wine, as a Sacred Pledge of their Fidelity, he caused them Man by
Man to swear that they would serve him faithfully, and fight for him to the end
of the War.

This Rite and Ceremony of pledging their Faith on both sides, by pouring out
and drinking of Wine, being then first begun, was afterward imitated by
Posterity, and Truces and Leagues in times of War were called Drink Offerings.
Libations.

Dionysus afterward undertaking a War against Saturn, and marching out of Nysa
with all his Forces for that purpose, they report that Aristaeus his Tutor, was
the First that with great Solemnity offered Sacrifices to him as to a God. It Is
said the noblest of the Nysaeans, called Silenians, were his Companions. For
Selenus was the First that reigned in this Island, who is so very ancient, that
none knows his Original: And forasmuch as he had a Tail growing out at his
Rump, his Posterity partaking of his nature, had the same Badge. Dionysus
therefore marched away with his Army (and after much toil and hazard for lack of
Water passing through many Deserts, infested with wild Beasts) he came at
length to Zacira.
Zabima a City of Lybia, and there encamped; near to this place he killed the
Monster (the Spawn of The Earth Monster, Camps.
Terra, called Camps, which had destroyed many of the Inhabitants, for which
he was in high Reputation among the People for his Valor. He raised a Mount of
Earth over this Monstrous Beast he had killed, to the end to leave an
everlasting Monument of his Valor to Posterity, which remains to this very
day. Thence he marched against the Titans, causing his Army to pass quietly and
orderly through all Places, carrying himself courteously and civilly toward
all; assuring every Body that he undertook this Expedition for no other Reason
but to punish the Impious, and benefit all Mankind: So that the Lybians
admiring his good Order and Discipline, and the Greatnese of his Mind, largely
supplied his Army with Provision, and freely joined with him as Confederates.

And now approaching near to the City of Ammon, he routed Saturn again before
the Walls, who afterward set the City on Fire in the Night, with a purpose to
destroy the ancient Palace of Ammon, and he himself, with his Wife P. 144.
Rhea, and others of his distressed Friends, secretly fled out of the City. But
Dionysus was nothing like to him in his Temper; for he not only pardoned Saturn
and Rhea, whom he had taken Prisoners, upon the account of being his Kindred,
but entreated them that for the future they would as his Parents love him, and
live with him as his choicest and most beloved Friends; so that Rhea loved him
all her Life long as dearly as her own Son, but the love of Saturn was
deceitful. About this time Saturn and Rhea had a Son born, called Jupiter, who
was advanced to many Places of Honor by Dionysus, and afterward became King
upon the account of his Virtuous Qualifications.

The Africans had informed Dionysus before the Fight, that Ammon at the time he
was driven out of his Kingdom, foretold, that after a certain time his Son
Dionysus would recover his Father's Kingdom, and that he should enlarge his
Dominion over the whole World, and should be adored as a God. Dionysus hereupon
concluding that the Prophecy would certainly take effect, he built a Temple
and a City to his Father, and having ordered him to be worshipped as a God,
constituted Priests for the Oracle.

It Is reported that Ammon was portray'd with a Ram's Head, because he always
wore an Helmet in the Wars of that shape.

There are some that (...), fabulously report.
report he had Horns naturally growing out at his Temples; and hence it is,
that his Son Dionysus is represented in the same manner; and modern Authors do
deliver it as a most certain Truth, That this God was Horned.

When he had built the City, and settled the Oracle, they say, he first
consulted with this new God, concerning his intended Expeditions, and that his
Father answered him, that by doing good to all Mankind, he should attain to an
Estate of Immortality. Being thus encouraged, he first invaded Egypt, and made
Jupiter the Son of Saturn and Rhea, King of the Country, though he was but then
a Boy: But appointed Olympus his Assistant and Tutor, by whose Instructions he
attained to a high degree of Virtue and noble Endowments, and thence was called
Jupiter Olympus.

Dionysus was said to have taught the Egyptians the manner of planting, and use
of the Vine, and to keep and store up Wine, Acorns or Crabbs.
Apples and other Fruits. His Fame was now so noised abroad in every Place,
that none durst oppose him, but all submitted of their own accord, and with
Praises and Sacrifices adored him as a God. Passing thus (they say) through the
whole World, he planted and improved the Countries all along as he went, and by
his good Acts obliged all Mankind to a grateful remembrance, by rendering him
immortal Honor: And whereas all Men have diverse Sentiments of the rest of the
Gods, yet they all agree in the Immortality of Bacchus: For there is neither
Greek nor Barbarian, but have tasted of his Grace and Bounty; yea, even those
that inhabit the most barren Countries altogether unfit for the Planting of
Vines, learnt of him how to make Drink of Barley, little inferior for
deliciousness of Taste to Wine. Beer.


They say moreover, that Dionysus with a swift March hasted out of India to the
The Mediterranean.
Sea, and there found the Titanes passing over with great Forces into Crete,
against Ammon. And whereas Jupiter in the mean time had brought over Forces out
of Egypt to the assistance of Ammon, and a great War was broke out in that
Island, Dionysus forthwith, together with Minerva and others (reputed to be
Gods) transported Aids to them in Crete. Hereupon was fought a great Battle,
wherein the Dionysans were Victors, and the Titanes were every Man cut P. 145.
off.

After Ammon and Bacchus were translated to a state of Immortality, (and all
the Titanes now utterly extinct,) Jupiter became Lord of the Universe, none
daring to be so impious as to oppose him.

These are the things which the Libyans say were done by the first Bacchus the
Son of Ammon and Amalthea.

The Second Bacchus (they say) was Son of Jupiter, by Io, the Daughter of
Inachus, and reigned in Egypt, and there taught the manner of divine Worship
and Sacrifices.

The Third was the Issue of Jupiter and Semele, and was among the Grecians a
Rival of the other Two before mentioned. For making it his business to imitate
them, he likewise with a great Army marched through the whole World, and set up
many Pillars at the utmost, Bounds of his several Expeditions, and planted and
improved likewise the Countries as he went. And as the ancient Bacchus listed
the Amazons into his Army, so did this other Women. He took likewise much care
and pains about the Orgia and Sacred Rites and Ceremonies, some of which he
reformed, and added others. But because of the length of time, the first
Invention and finding out of things is unknown to many; this last Bacchus only
inherits the Glory and Reputation belonging to the former, which Misfortune not
only befell him, but Hercules after him.

For whereas there was anciently Two of the same Name; one of them (and the
more ancient) is said to have flourished in Egpyt, who having overcome a great
part of the World, erected a Pillar in Africa. The other was born in Crete, and
was one of the Idaei Dactyli; he was a Jugler, but likewise a good Soldier, and
instituted the Olympic Games.

The last was the Son of Jupiter, by Alcmena, born a little before the Trojan
War: He traveled through many Parts of the World, to execute the Commands of
Euristheus; and succeeded in all his Enterprises; he erected a Pillar in Europe.

His Name being the same, and his Actions much like to those of the former, was
the occasion that what things were done by the ancient Hercules's after their
Deaths, were by Posterity solely ascribed to him, as if there had been never
any but one Hercules in the World.

Amongst other evident Proofs that there were more than one Dionysus or
Bacchus, this very Fight of the Titanes does make it clear: For it is generally
acknowledged, that Dionysus was with Jupiter in the War against the Titanes,
and they say that it is an absurd and undecent thing to account Semele
Contemporary with the Titanes, and to affirm that Cadmus, the Son of Agenor was
more ancient than the The Gods of Olympus.
Celestial Gods. And these are the things which the Lybians relate of Bacchus.
Thus having now performed our Promise made at the beginning, we shall here put
an end to this Third Book.

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK IV.
The PREFACE.
I Am not ignorant that the Writers of Antiquities in many things fall short of
the truth in their Relations. For being that ancient things are (as it were)
scraped out of the Rubbish with very great difficulty, they greatly perplex the
Historian. And because the Supputation of Times, wherein things were done,
cannot now be so exact as to infer an Infallible Argument for the truth of the
Actions related; therefore it is that the Reader despises the Authors of the
History. And the multitude and variety of the Gods, Demy-Gods, and other Famous
Men, whose Genealogies are to be treated of, add much more to the difficulty.
And the greatest vexation of all is, that the Writers of Antiquities and
Mythologies differ exceedingly in their Relations one from another: And
therefore the most famed and noted Historians of later Times, have altogether
waved Treatises of Ancient Things, and applied themselves to Composing
Histories only of such as have happened in Times a little before their own. For
Ephorus the Cumean, the Scholar of Isocrates, designing to write a General
History, passing over matter of former Ages, began his Writings with the Time
of Samuel the Prophet, Eighty Years after the Destruction of Troy.
Return of the Heraclides: Callisthenes and Theopompus, who were Contemporary,
followed the same Method, and waved all matters of Antiquity. But I am of a
contrary Opinion from them in this matter, and therefore the more fully to
discharge what I have undertaken, have resolved with the greatest care and
diligence I can, to treat of the Antiquities of Ancient Times: For there are
many things, and such as are very remarkable, that have been done by the Gods
and Demy-Gods, and other Famous Men, to some of whom Posterity for their good
Actions to the general benefit of Mankind, have attributed Divine Honors, as
to Gods, and have adored others, by instituting Sacrifices to them as
Demy-Gods. But the due praises of all these Worthies are published to the World
by History, to the Succession of perpetual Generations.

In the Three former Books, we have treated of the Affairs of other Nations,
and of their Gods; of the Description of Places in the several Countries; of
the wild Beasts, and other living Creatures bred amongst them, and whatever we
judged worthy of remark, or strange and wonderful.

In this Book we shall set forth the Antiquities of the Grecians from the P.
147.
most ancient Times, and therein treat of the Gods, and Demy-Gods, and of all
others that have been famous and remarkable in feats of Arms, in times of War,
or have found out what has been beneficial to Mankind in times of Peace, or
such as have been Lawmakers.

We shall begin therefore with Dionysus or Bacchus, because he is the most
ancient, and did most benefit to Mankind.

In the former Books we have showed how that some of the Barbarians have
challenged the Birth of this God to be amongst them. For the Egyptians say,
that their God Osiris is the same whom the Grecians call Dionysus; and that he
went through the whole World, and first found out the use of Wine, and taught
Men how to plant the Vine, and that for this great Benefit to Mankind, all
generally agree that he attained to a state of Immortality.

The Indians likewise with no less Confidence say, that he was born among them,
and that he showed the way and manner of Planting the Vine, and discovered the
use of Wine; which having before declared, we shall now deliver what the
Grecians report concerning this God.

CHAP. I.
What the Grecians say further of Bacchus. The Story of Priapus. Of
Hermophroditus. Of the Muses. The Birth of Hercules; and his Twelve Labors
enjoined him by Euristheus. His wandering Expeditions through Africa, Spain,
France, Italy, Sicily: His setting up Two Pillars at Gades, and his other Acts
by the way. The Story of Orpheus.

CAdmus (they say) the Son of Agenor, being sent out of Phenicia by the King
his Father to seek Europa, was commanded to bring her back, or he himself never
to return into Phenicia. After many This of Gadmus, was An. Mund. 2660, in the
time of Geidon; before Christ, 1688.
long and tedious Travels through many Countries, not being able to find the
lost Lady in any place, despairing of ever returning into his own Country, he
came at length into Beotia, and by Command of the Oracle, built Thebes, where
he resided, and married Harmonia, the Daughter of Venus, by whom he had Semele,
Ino, Autonoes, Agaves and Polydores. Semele was so beautiful, that Jupiter fell
in love with her, and lay with her: But making his Addresses Silently,
in a mean and ordinary manner, she looked upon it as if he did it in contempt
of her, and therefore earnestly entreated him to come to his Embraces with her
in the same manner as he did when he lay with Juno. Whereupon decking himself
in his Divine Majesty, he approacht to her in Thunder and Lightning, and so lay
with her in Light and Splendor: But Semele being great with Child, and not
able to bear the Flashes of Lightning that shot round about her, miscarried,
and she herself was consumed by the Flame; and then Jupiter took away the
Infant, and delivered it to Mercury, with Orders to convey him to the Cave in
Nysa (which lies between Phenicia, and the River Nile) and there to recommend
him to the care of the Nymphs, to be carefully bred up. Hence from Jupiter,
whom the Greeks call Dia and Nysa, he was called Dionysus, as Homer in his
Hymns witnesses in this Distick.

(...)
(...)
Far off from Phenice stands the Sacred Nyse,
Where Streams of Egypt's Nile begin to rise,
On Mountain high with pleasant Woods adorned
Being brought up by the Nymphs in Nysa, they say, he found out the use of
Wine, and taught the way and manner of planting the Vine; and going almost into
all Parts of the World, he civilized many Nations and Countries, so that he was
highly honored of all. He found out likewise the manner of making Drink of
Barley; some call it Zythus, for Taste and fragrant Smell not much Zythus, Beer.
inferior to Wine, which Art he especially taught them, whose Country was not
fit for Planting, or producing of Vines. He led along with him an Army, not
only of Men, but of Women, to execute Punishments upon impious and wicked Men.

In Beotia (in gratitude to his own Country,) he set free all the Cities, and
upon the account of this Freedom, built a City, and called it In Greek, Freedom.
Eleuthera.

After he had spent Three whole Years in an Expedition into India, he returned
with many rich Spoils into Beotia, and was the first in triumph mounted upon an
Indian Elephant. Therefore the Beotians and the rest of the Grecians and P. 148.
Thracians, to keep up the Memory of the Indian Expedition, instituted solemn
Sacrifices every Third Year to Bacchus, called Trieterica, at which time they
are of opinion this God appears among Men; and therefore every third Year in
many Towns of Greece, the Festivals of Bacchus, called Bacchanalia, are
celebrated by a Company of Women and Virgins, who (according to the solemn
Rites) carry * Javelins decked with Flowers, and run about like Furies,
hollowing and Called Thyrses.
setting forth the Praises of the God. The Married Women likewise run to these
Sacrifices, and fill the Air with loud and solemn Hymns to Bacchus, as if he
were then present amongst them, in imitation of the Maenadae, Women that acted
like fuous Mad Women.
Menades, which heretofore (as is said) went along with Bacchus. Amongst many
others who were impious and wicked, he especially inflicted Punishment upon
Pentheus and Lycurgus. But because the invention and use of Wine is very
grateful to Manboth for its pleasant relish, and its strengthening and
inlivening of the Body, it is the Custom at Supper-time, when pure and unmixt
Wine is freely offered to all, to call upon the Good Genius; but after Supper,
when the Wine is mixed with Water, to call upon Jupiter the Savior.
Jupiter Soter: For from pure and unmixt Wine, many times proceeds Madness; but
tempered and allayed with Water called the Liquor of Jove, (...).
the Liquor that descends from Jove, it truly chears and refreshes the Spirits,
and cures Men of their Madness and Intoxication. Amongst all the Gods (they
say) Bacchus and Ceres deserve most to be honored by Mankind, because they
were by their good Inventions most benefited: For he found out the most
pleasant Drink, and she the most strengthening Food.

They report that there was another Bacchus or Dionysus, much ancienter than
this, the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina, called by some Sabazius, at whose
Birth Dionysus, Sabazius.
Sacreds and Sacrifices were celebrated in secret, and in the Night, by reason
of the filthy Commixtures that were then among them. It Is said, he was of a
very sharp Wit, and was the first that taught how to yoke Oxen, and by them how
to Plow and Sow the Ground; whence they feign him to have Horns. They say
likewise, that the Dionysus of Thebes.
Son of Semele was of later times; of a slender and delicate shape of Body, and
most comely Feature, exceeding Amorous, and addicted to the Sports of Venus:
That he carried about with him, multitudes of Women in his Army, furnished with
Lances wrapped about with all sorts of Flowers: And that the Muses attended him
in his Expedition, Virgins excellently learned, who by their melodious Singing,
Dancing and other pleasant Diversions, exceedingly delighted the God.

Selenus, its said was his Master, his Fauster Father, and Associate in his
Wars; (...).
and was an excellent Instructor and Teacher, and contributed much to the
improvement of Bacchus in Virtue, and the advancement of his Reputation and
Honor.

In the time of Battle, he was furnished with warlike Weapons, and a Coat of
Mail covered with a Panther's Skin; in time of Peace, when he celebrated Solemn
Festivals, and came into the General Assemblies, he was clothed with splendid
and delicate Apparel; and to prevent the Headache by drinking of too much Wine,
he wore a Mitre upon his Head, and was called The Miter Wearer.
Mitrophorus. This gave occasion to Kings afterward to wear Diadems.

They say, he was called Bimater, one of Two Mothers.
Bimater, because both Dionysus's had one Father, but several Mothers; but the
Younger succeeded the Elder in the like remarkable Actions, and therefore
Posterity through ignorance of the Truth, and being both had one and the same
Name, concluded that there was but one Dionysus.

They attribute to him the carrying of a Rod, for the Reasons following: When
Wine was first found out, it was drunk pure, not mixed with Water, so that in
many Meetings and solemn Festivals, many times Men drunk to that P. 149.
Excess, that they grew Mad and Furious, and beat one another with Clubs and
Staves, insomuch as some were grievously wounded, and others were killed; at
which Dionysus was much offended; and though he did not altogether forbid the
drinking of unmixt Wine, because it was so pleasant and delicious, yet instead
of Clubs, he ordered the use of Wanns and small Rods.

Men have given him many Sirnames, according to the several Acts or
Circumstances of his Life. For he is called Bacchaeus, from the (...) bowling or
Mourning Women.
Bacchae, that accompanied him. Leneus, from pressing of the Grapes at the
Lonos, a Wine Press. Iyrigene.
Winepress. Bromeus or Thunderer, because of the Crash of Thunder that was at
the time of his Birth; and for the same Reason he was called * Fireborn: He was
sirnam'd likewise Thriambus, because he was the first (of whom ever any mention
was made) that Triumphed, when he returned laden with many Spoils into his
Country from his Indian Expedition. Many other Names were assigned him, which
would be both too tedious particularly to recite, and likewise foreign from the
Design of this History.

They held that he had two Biformis.
Faces, because there were two Dionysus's, the ancient Dionysus, who always
wore a long Beard, because all in ancient time let their Beards grow; and this
later Bacchus who was a spruce young Man, as we have before declared. But some
say, that a double Countenance was assigned him, because of the two special
Qualities wherewith Drunkards are affected, being either raging mad, or
transported with Mirth.

They say likewise that he carried Satyrs along with him, who by their dancing
and skipping in his Sports and Plays made the God exceeding merry. To conclude,
as the Muses pleased and delighted him with the Knowledge of the liberal
Sciences, so the Satyrs with their Tricks and antic and ridiculous Gestures
and Actions completed the Happiness and Comfort of his Life.

It Is reported likewise he invented Plays, and set up Theaters, and instituted
Music Schools, and freed all Musicians that went along with him in his
Expeditions from public Taxes; and hence it is, that Posterity (after the
Example of Dionysus) have created Societies of Musicians, and decreed that all
of that Profession should be free.

But that we may keep within due Bounds, we shall here put an end to our
Discourse concerning Bacchus, and his Actions in Ancient times.

And now since what is anciently reported of Priapus is (as we conceive)
pertinent to this History of Bacchus, we shall here proceed to give an Account
of him.

The Ancients feign that Priapus was the Son of Bacchus and Venus, induced
thereunto by a probable Argument, which is this, That when Men are drunk they
are naturally prone to Venery; and some say, that when the ancient Mythologists
would name a Man's Yard, they called it Priapus; and therefore that the privy
Parts (because they are the Instruments of Generation, and support the constant
and continual Succession of Mankind) have received divine Honor.

The Egyptians tell this Story concerning Priapus; They say that the Titanes in
ancient times treacherously assassinated Osiris, and divided his Members into
equal Parts, and that every one privately carried away a Part out of the
Palace, only his privy Members they threw into the River, because none would
meddle with them: But Isis (they say) after a diligent Inquiry made concerning
the Murder of her Husband, and having revenged his Death upon the Titanes; by
conjoyning his dismembered Parts, reduced them to a humane Shape, and delivered
the Body to the Priests to be buried, and commanded that Osiris should be
adored as a God, P. 150.
and appointed the Shape of his privy Member (which only was wanting and could
not be found) to be set up as a sacred Relict in the Temple, and to be honored
likewise as a Deity: And these are the Things which the ancient Egyptians feign
concerning the Original and divine Worship of Priapus. Some call this God
Ithyphallus, others Typhon. He Is not only worshipped in the Temples in the
Cities, but in the Fields and Villages, where he is reputed the Guardian and
Keeper of their Vineyards and Orchards, and say that if any steal their Goods
he inflicts Punishment upon them for it. This God is not only honored in the
Festivals of Bacchus, but in all other sacred Solemnities, where with Sport and
Ridicule his Image is presented to the View of all.

They feign likewise that Hermaphroditus had the like Original, who being
sprung Hermaphroditus.
from Mercury.
Hermes and Venus.
Aphrodita, was from their two Names joined together so called. Some say that
this Hermaphroditus is a God, who at some certain times appears to Men, and is
naturally both Man and Woman; in Beauty and Slenderness of his Body he
represents a Woman, but in Strength and manly Countenance, a Man. Others
account these Births for Monsters, which being but rare, portend sometimes both
Good and Bad by turns; but enough of these.

Here it is fit to say something of the Muses (of whom some mention is made in
Muses.
the History of Bacchus.) Most of the Writers of Antiquities, and those of
greatest Authority, say they were the Daughters of Jupiter and Memory.
Mnemosyne. Some few of the Poets (among whom is Alcman) say they were the
Issue of Coelum and
Coelus and Terra, Heaven and Earth.
Terra. They differ likewise about their Number, for some reckon three, others
nine; but the Number Nine by the Authority of the most famous Authors (such as
Homer, Hesiod, and some others of the like Esteem) has prevailed before all
others. For thus says Homer --

(...).
The Muses Nine with Voices sweet do cant.
Hesiod likewise sums up their Names in these Verses --

(...)
(...)
(...)
Clio, Thalia and Melpomene,
Likewise Erato and Terpsichore,
Polymnia, Urania, Euterpe,
And one beyond them all, Calliope.
To each of these they attribute their peculiar Art in particular sorts of
Sciences, as poetical Harmony, Dancing, Singing, Astrology and the rest of the
liberal Arts. They are said by most to be Virgins, because liberal Sciences
seem to be incorrupt, and virtuous Qualifications.

They are called Muses from the Greek Word Myein, which signifies the teaching
of things commendable and profitable, and such as are unknown to them that are
instructed. They apply likewise to each a particular Reason of their several
Names. Clio, they say, is so called, because she advances Men's Names to the
Skies in assisting the Poets to resound their Praise. Euterpe, because she
delights her Auditors with wholesome and commendable Instructions. Thalia, from
the constant Glory and Honor that attends upon Learning. Melpomene, is so
called from Melody, by which means she insinuates her self with Delight into
the Minds of Men. Terpsichore, because she delights her Scholars with those
Pleasures that result from Learning. Erato, because she procures Love and
Respect to Learned Men from all. Polymnia, from the many Hymns whereby she
advances the Renown of her Poets, and crowns their Names with immortal Praise
and Glory. Urania, because those that are taught and improved by her are even
lifted up to Heaven. Lastly, Calliope, from the Sweetness of her Voice, that
is, her elegant P. 151.
Language and exact Composures of her Verse, whereby she gains the general
Applause of her Learned Auditors.

Having treated sufficiently of these Matters, we shall now bend our Discourse
to the things done by Hercules. Hercules.


I am not ignorant that those that write of the Actions of the Ancients,
especially of the Acts of Hercules, meet with many Difficulties; for of all the
great Actions that ever were done in the World, those of Hercules far exceed
all that ever have been recorded. A most difficult Task therefore it is to give
such an Account of what this Hero did, as may be agreeable to the Worth and
Dignity of his Actions, or to frame such a Discourse as may equalize the
Greatness of them, for which he attained to a State of Immortality. For in as
much as things that are ancient and unusual are judged incredible by most, its
absolutely necessary, though with the Diminution of this God's Glory, to omit
some of his Acts, lest by relating all, the whole History be rejected as
fabulous. For some unreasonably expect as clear Evidence for things that are
ancient, as for those done in our own Age, and judge of the Greatness of
Actions (which makes them seem incredible) according to the Rule of things done
in the present time; and judge of the Strength of Hercules according to the
weak Measure of Men's Strength now.

And so by reason of the Greatness and Strangeness of things related, History
suffers in its Credit and Reputation. But in In Mythologies.
old Stories the Truth ought not to be searched into too critically and
punctually: For in the Plays and Theaters, though we do not believe for certain
that there ever were such Creatures as Centaurs, or Creatures of a double
Nature of several Species's, nor such a one as Geryon, that had three Bodies,
yet we favorably receive and entertain those Fables, and with a general
Applause advance the Honor of the That is, Hercules, who carried away Geryon's
Oxen.
God. How unjust is it then that Men should forget the Labors of Hercules
while he was here upon Earth? Whereby he did Good to all the World, and instead
of rendering him his due Praises, to calumniate him, whom our Ancestors with
unanimous Consent for his eminent Virtue honored with divine Honors.

And what can be more impious, than not to preserve and defend that Religious
Respect to this God, which they by their Example have recommended to us? But
letting these things pass; we shall relate the things done by him from the
beginning, according as the Poets and the most ancient Mythologists have handed
them down to us.

Perseus (they say) was the Son of Jupiter by Danae, the Daughter of Acrisius,
and that Perseus begat Electryo of Andromeda, the Daughter of Cepheus, and that
Electryo begat Alcmenes of Eurydice the Daughter of Pelops, and that Jupiter
(deceiving Alcmenes) lay with her and begat Hercules: So that by this Genealogy
Hercules descended from the chiefest of the Gods, both immediately by his
Mother, and more remotely by his Great-Grand-Father Perseus. His Virtue and
Valor were not only evident from his Acts, but might be concluded and foreseen
by what happened before he was born: For when Jupiter lay with Alcmenes, he
lengthened the Night threefold, so that spending so much time in procreating
this Child, was a Sign how extraordinary strong he was like to be. They say
that Jupiter lay not with her out of any amorous Pang of Love, as with other
Women, but merely for Procreation sake: And therefore willing that his Embraces
at this time should be lawful, he forbore all Violence; and knowing that the
Woman's Chastity was such, that no Arguments would prevail with her, he
deceived her by taking upon him the Shape of Amphitryo.

And now the Time of her Delivery drew nigh, when Jupiter full of thoughts
concerning the Birth of Hercules, in the presence of all the Gods declared,
that he would make him King of the Persians, who was to be born that P. 152.
that day. Whereupon Juno enraged with Jealousy, with the assistance of
Ilithyia, a Goddess assistant to them in Travel.
Ilithyia her Daughter, gave a Check to the delivery of Alcmenes, and brought
forth Eurystheus before his full time. But though Jupiter was thus outwitted by
Juno, yet that he might perform his Promise, he took care to preserve the
Honor and Reputation of Hercules. And therefore its reported that he prevailed
with Juno to consent, that Eurystheus being made King according to his Promise,
Hercules (who should be subject to him) performing Twelve Labors (such as
Euristheus should impose upon him) should be taken into the Society of the
Immortal Gods.

Alcmenes being delivered (out of fear of Juno's Jealousy) exposed the Child
in a place which is now from him called Hercules's his Field. About which time
Minerva, together with Juno, walking Abroad, found the Infant, and much
admiring his Beauty, Minerva persuaded Juno to give it suck: The Child drawing
the Breast with more violence than at his Age was usual, Juno not able to
endure the pain, cast away the Infant; whom Minerva took up, and brought Home
to his Mother to be nursed by her. The Accident here seems very strange and
remarkable. For the Mother, who owed a natural Affection to her own Child,
exposed him to Destruction; but she who hated him, as a Stepmother
(unknowingly) preserved her natural Enemy.

Afterward Juno sent two (...), Two Dragons.
Serpents to devour the Child: But he took them with both his Hands by their
Throats and strangled them. Upon which account the Argives (coming to
understand what was done) called him Hercules, Hercules signifies the Glory of
Juno, who is called in Greek Hera.
because Juno was the Occasion of his Glory and Fame; for he was before called
Alcaeus. Others are named by their Parents, but he gained his Name by his
Valor.

In Aftertimes it happened that Amphitrio, being banished from Tyrinthe,
settled himself in Thebes; here Hercules was educated, here he was instructed
and greatly improved in all laudable Exercises, in so much as he excelled all
others in Strength of Body, and also in the excellent Endowments of his Mind.

Being now grown up to Man's Estate, he first freed Thebes from tyrannical
Slavery, and thereby made a grateful Return to the Country where he was bred.
The Thebans at that time were under the Tyranny of Erginus, King of the A
People of Thessaly.
Menyans, who every year exacted Tribute from them, not without Scorn and
Contempt. Hercules therefore not at all discouraged with the Greatness of the
Bondage they labored under, attempted a glorious Piece of Service. For when
those who were sent from the Menyae to collect the Tribute, carried it *
insolently (...).
toward the People, he cut off their Ears, and cast them out of the City,
whereupon Erginus demanded the Delivery up of the Malefactor, and Creon the
Prince of Thebes (dreading the Potency of Erginus) resolved to deliver him up;
But Hercules stirred up the young Men of the City to arm themselves, in order
to recover the Liberty of their Country, and to that end took away all the Arms
that were in the Temples, formerly dedicated to the Gods by their Ancestors, of
the Spoils of their Enemies. For none of the Citizens had any Arms of their
own, by Reason the Menyans had disarmed the City; so that the Thebans had not
the least Thought of a Revolt.

Intelligence being brought that Erginus with an Army approached the City,
Hercules set upon him in a strait Passage (where a Multitude was of little Use)
and killed Erginus, and cut off almost his whole Army. He fell likewise
suddenly upon the City of the Orchomenians, entering unexpectedly, and burnt
the Palace of the Menyae, and razed the City to the Ground.

The Fame of this notable Exploit was presently noised over all Greece, while
such a sudden and unexpected Achievement was the Subject of every Man's
Admiration, and Creon the King (wonderfully taken with the Valor of the young
Man) gave him his Daughter Megaera to Wife, and committed to him the Care and
Charge of the City as if he had been his own Son.

But Euristheus King of Argos (jealous of Hercules his growing Greatness) sent
P. 15^.
for him to perform the Labors he was to impose upon him, which he refusing,
Jupiter commanded him to obey King Euristheus; whereupon Hercules went to
Delphos, and inquired of the Oracle concerning this Matter, who answered him,
That it was the Pleasure of the Gods, that he should perform twelve Labors at
the Command of Euristheus, and that when he had finished them, he should
receive the Reward of Immortality. Hereupon Hercules became exceeding sad and
melancholy; for he judged it very much below him to be at the Beck of his
inferior; and to disobey his Father Jupiter a second time he concluded was both
unprofitable and impossible. While he was in this Perplexity Juno struck him
with Madness; being therefore through the Discomposure of his Mind become
distracted, and by the Growth of his Distemper altogether a mad Man, he
designed to murder Iolaus, who saving himself by Flight he fell upon his own
Children by Megara, who were next in his Way, and struck them through with his
Darts, as if they had been his Enemies.

As soon as he came again to himself, and understood his Error, he almost sunk
under the Weight of his Misery (being pitied by every Body) and shut up himself
in his own House a long time from the Converse and Society of Men.

At length Time moderating his Grief, resolving to undergo all the Difficulties
that were enjoined him, he went to Euristheus; who in the first place commanded
Hercules his 12 Labors. 1. The Nemean Lion.
him to kill the Lion in the Forest of This Forest was in Achaia.
Nemea, which was of a monstrous Bigness, not to be pierced or wounded by
Sword, Spear or Stones, and therefore not to be dealt with but by mere Force
and Strength of Hand. His Walks were commonly between Mycenas and Nemea, near
the Mountain (from what happened to it) called Tretos bored through.
Tretos. For at the Foot of this Hill there was a Den, in which this Monster
used to lurk. Hercules here meeting with him laid hold on him, whereupon the
Beast beginning to fly to his Den, he resolutely pursued him (having before
stopped up one of the Mouths of the Den) and so both closed, where he got the
Lion by the Throat, and strangled him with his Arms. Then he clothed himself
with his Skin (which was big enough to cover his whole Body) and ever after
wore it as a Defense in all Conflicts.

His second Task was to kill the Hydra of Lerna. This Monster had a hundred 2.
Hydra.
Necks rising out of one Body, and upon every Neck a serpentine Head, and when
one of these was cut off, two others grew up in its stead, and therefore this
Monster was accounted invincible; and not without good reason; for from the
Part that was lost, arose a double Assistance in its Room. Against this
Difficulty he invented this Stratagem; he commanded Iolaus to sear the Part
that was cut off with a Firebrand, that thereby the Blood might be stopped, by
which Means the Beast was killed; and he dipped the Points of his Darts in the
Monster's Gall, that wherever they struck, the Wound might be incurable.

The third Command was, that he should bring the Erymanthean Boar (which 3. The
Ery(...)than Boar.
roved about in the Plains of Arcadia) to him alive. This seemed to be a most
difficult Task. For he that fought with this Beast ought to be so subtle as
diligently to watch the exact Time and fittest Opportunity in the Management of
the Conflict; for if he should let him go while he was in his full strength,
the Champion was in danger to be rent in pieces with his Tushes; and if he
wounded him too sore, and so killed him, his Labor was lost, and his Victory
imperfect. However he so prudently managed the Combat, that he brought the Boar
alive to Euristheus, who was so terrified to see him come hurrying with the
Boar upon his Shoulders, that he hid himself in a Brazen Hogshead.

In the mean time Hercules subdued the Centaurs upon this occasion: There was
one Pholus among the Centaurs, from whom the Neighboring Mountain was P. 154.
called Pholoes; this same having entertained Hercules as his Guest, took up an
Hogshead of Wine that had for a long time been buried in the Earth. For it is
reported that this Wine was anciently deposited in the Hands of a certain
Centaur by Bacchus, who commanded that it should be broacht at that very time
when Hercules came thither; who now happening to be there the Fourth Age after,
Pholus remembering Bacchus his Command, opened the Hogshead; whereupon the Wine
being old, and exceeding strong, the Flavor of it reached to the Neighboring
Centaurs, and struck them all with a fit of Fury and Madness; whereupon they
all came in Troops, and in a terrible Tumult assaulted Pholus his House, to
carry away the Prey, in so much as Pholus in a great Fright hid himself.

But Hercules unexpectedly set upon the Aggressors; for he was to fight with
those who from the Mother partook of the Nature of the Gods, were as swift as
Horses, as strong as double Bodied Beasts, and were indu'd with the
understanding and prudence of Men.

Some of these Centaurs assailed him with Fir-Trees plucked up by the Roots;
others with huge and massy Stones, some with lighted Firebrands, and others
with Axes, with whom he undauntedly entered the List, and fought with that
bravery, as was agreeable to the glory of his former Actions.

Their Mother A Cloud.
Nephele assisted them by a violent Storm of Rain, which was no prejudice to
them that were Four-footed; but he that had but Two, had by this means a
troublesome and slippery Standing: However Hercules with wonderful Valor
overcame them, that had so many and great Advantages above him, Killing most of
them, and putting the rest to flight: Of those that were slain, the most
remarkable were Daphnis, Argeus, Amphion, Hippotion, Oreus, Isoples,
Melanchetes, Thereus, Dupo and Phrixus. And every one of those that fled, came
afterward to condign Punishment; For Homadus, (because he ravished in Arcadia,
Atalcyona, the Sister of Euristheus) was slain by Hercules, for which his
Generosity was greatly admired: For though he hated his Enemy upon his own
private Account, yet he judged it a commendable piece of Humanity, to have
Compassion of a Woman in her afflicted Condition, upon the account of her
Dishonor and Disgrace.

Somewhat likewise remarkable happened to Pholus, Hercules his Friend: For
burying the Centaurs that were killed (upon the account of his Kindred and
Relation to them) plucking a Dart out of one of them, he chanced with the Point
mortally to wound himself, of which he died; whom Hercules with great Pomp and
State buried at the Foot of the Mount; which fell out to be far more glorious
than the most stately Monument; for the Mountain being called Philoe, preserves
the memory of him buried there, not by Characters and Inscriptions, but by
similittude of Name. In the same manner he killed Another Centaur.
Chiron (eminent for his Art in Physic) by chance with the throwing of a Dart.
But this that has been said of the Centaurs shall suffice.

Afterward Hercules received a further Command, That he should take the 4th
Labor.
swift Heart that had golden Horns, and bring him to the King. This he performed
more by Art and Subtilty than strength of Body: For some say he took her in a
Net, others by tracing her to the place where she rested, and there laying hold
on her when she was asleep; but others say, that he ran her down, and so gained
her by swiftness of Foot. However it were, it is certain he performed this
Labor not by force or any hazard, but by Art and Skill.

Being next commanded to drive away the Birds that were about the Stymphalian
5th Labor.
Lake, by Art and Contrivance he easily performed this: For there were an
innumerable number of Birds in those Places, which destroyed and eat up all the
Fruits in the Neighborhood; and they were so numerous, that no Force could
prevail to be rid of them. Being therefore there was need of Art and
Contrivance in this matter, he invented a Brazen Or Table, or other thing that
(...)ld sound and make a noise.
Pan, and by the mighty sound it made, by striking upon it, frighted the Birds,
and by the continual noise, drove them at length quite away; so that the Lake
was never infested with them afterward.

This Labor being now at an end, Eurystheus in Contempt of him, commanded 6.
Augaeus his Stable.
him without any Assistant to cleanse Augeus his Stable, in which were vast
heaps of Muck and Dirt which had been gathering together for many Years.
Hercules P. 155.
therefore to avoid the ignominy of this Contempt cast upon him, scorned to
carry out the Muck and Dung upon his Shoulders, but in one Days time, without
any disgrace to himself, cleans'd the Stable, by turning the Course of the
River Peneus through it; in which thing the ingenuity of Hercules is admirable,
who so executed the proud Command of his domineering Master, as to avoid every
thing that was base and unbecoming the glory of his immortal Honor.

Next was imposed upon him the bringing the Bull out of Crete, with which 7.
Bull out of Crete.
(they say) Pasiphae fell in love. To this end therefore he sailed into the
Island, and by the assistance of King Minos, transported the Beast (for which
he had made so long a Voyage) into Peloponesus.

Having performed this Task, he instituted the Olympic Games, and for that
purpose chose out a place he judged most convenient for the reception of such a
Pompous Assembly, which were the Fields all along the Banks of the River
Alpheus. Here he ordered Olympic Games by Hercules, An. Mund. 2730. An. Mund.
2747. Secund. Helv. tempore Servitutis Jud. sub Ammonit. ante Jephtha, Cir. 12.
the Solemnity of these Games to the honor of his Father Jupiter; and
appointed to the Victors a Crown for a Reward, minding the general good and
benefit of Mankind, without taking any advantage to himself. In every Exercise
he was Victor, without any opposition; for by reason of his remakable strength
and valor, none durst contend with him, although the Contests were of a
contrary and different nature one from another: For it is a hard matter even for
a mighty Champion in Combat, always to win the Prize in a Course, and as
difficult for those that are usually Victors in small Contentions, to prevail
against them that are eminent in greater Contests. Hercules therefore prevailed
in all these Games, carrying away the Prize from the chiefest among them.

And here we are not to omit giving an account of the Rewards given to him by
the Gods for his Virtue; for when he retired himself from Wars, and betook
himself to his ease and quietness, and to follow Sports, Panegyricks and
Festivals, every one of the Gods presented him with their several Gifts.

Minerva gave him an imbroidered Hood, Vulcan a Club and a Breast Plate; and
between these Two, was a Contest who should excel in their several Arts, whilst
the one wrought and bestowed what was for pleasure and ornament in time of
Peace, and the other what was for defense in time of War. Neptune presented him
with Horses, Mercury with a Sword, Apollo a Bow, and taught him the art of
Archery. And Ceres to expiate the Slaughter of the Centaurs, instituted in
honor of Hercules some small Mysteries. But concerning the Birth of this God,
this is remarkable, for the first Woman upon Earth that Jupiter lay with, was
Niobe, the Daughter of Pharoneus; and the last was Alcmena, who was in the
Sixteenth Age after Niobe as the Mythologists say. From the time of her
Ancestors, Al^men^'s Ancestors.
he began to beget Men, and at length ended in this Alcmena, and would never
after have any thing to do with any Mortal, or beget any Issue, never expecting
to beget a more excellent Offspring.

Afterward when the Giants fought with the immortal Gods at Pallene, Hercules
aided the Gods, and after a great Slaughter made by him of those Sons of the
Earth, he became greatly renowned. For Jupiter called those only Gods of
Olympus, who assisted him in the War, by this Title of Honor, to distinguish
the Courageous from the Coward; which Surname he gave to Bacchus and Hercules,
though their Mothers were Mortals; not only because they were the Offspring of
Jove, but likewise for that they were like him in virtuous Qualifications,
doing good generally to all Mankind.

But Prometheus is judged to be Noah by some, and Magog the Son of Japhet by
others. See Gale's Court of the Gentiles, p. 1. c. 6. Sect. 4.
Prometheus because he stole Fire from Heaven, and handed it to Men, was clapped
in Chains by Jupiter, who caused an Eagle to seize and feed continually upon
his Liver: But Hercules seeing that he suffered so much for his Kindness to
Mankind, shot the Bird with an Arrow, and then having pacified Jove, freed this
common Benefactor from all farther trouble.

Afterward he was enjoined to bring away Diomedes King of Thrace's Mares, P.
156. Diomedes' s Mares.
which were kept in Stalls of Brass, and (by reason of their Strength and
Fierceness) tied up in Iron Chains. Their Provender was not from the Product of
the Earth, but they were fed with the Flesh of miserable Strangers that came
thither, cut in small Pieces for that purpose. Hercules to gain Possession of
them, laid their own Master Diomedes before them, who satiating their Hunger by
his Flesh, who had wickedly taught them to feed upon Flesh, thereby became tame
and manageable. Euristheus when they were brought to him, dedicated them to
Juno, and their Breed continued to the time of Alexander the Great. When he had
performed this Labor, he saild with Jason to Colchos, to bring away the Golden
Fleece by force of Arms. But of this we shall speak, when we come to the
Expedition of the Argonauts.

Then he was commanded to strip Hyppolyta the Amazon of her Belt. Hereupon 9
The Amazons Belt.
resolving upon a War against the Amazons, he sailed into Pontus, from him
called The Euxine Sea.
Euxinus, and arriving at the Mouth of the River Thermodon, he incampt near the
City Themiscyra, the Seat Royal of the Amazons: And first he demanded the Belt
to be delivered to him; which being refused, he joined Battle with them.

The choice and most noble of the Amazons were drawn up against Hercules, the
rest of the Army opposed the other ordinary Troops, so that there was a very
sharp Engagement. The first that fought Hand to Hand with him, was Aella, so
called from her swiftness; but she found her Enemy swifter than her self: The
Second was Philippis, who upon the first Onset, received a Mortal Wound, and
fell down Dead. Then Prothoe entered the List, who, they say, Seven times
baffled her Enemy in single Combat; but she being at length slain, he killed
the Fourth called Eribea. She was so confident in her strength and feats of
Arms, that she used to boast she needed none to second her; but meeting with
one stronger than her self, she presently experienced the vanity of her
boasting.

After these Celaenus, Euryaea and Phobe, Companions with Diana in Hunting,
(who never used to miss their Mark, yet now could none of them hit one,) in
defending one another, were all killed together upon the Spot. Then he overcame
Deianita, Asteria, Marpes, Tecmessa and Alcippe. The last mentioned had vowed
perpetual Virginity, and kept their Oaths, but could not preserve their Lives.
Menalippe, she was rather Sister to Antiope, who was Queen. See Not. Comes,
lib. 7. c. 9.
Melanippe also the Queen of the Amazons, (who was famous and highly admired
every where for her Valor) then lost her Kingdom. The chief of the Amazons
being thus cut off, he forced the rest to fly, and killing most of them in the
pursuit, wholly destroyed and rooted up that Nation. Of the Prisoners he gave
Antiope to Theseus, but Melanippe he discharged, having first taken from her
her Belt.

After this, a Tenth Labor was imposed upon him by Eurystheus, and that 10
G^ryon's Oxen.
was to drive away the Oxen of Geryon that pastur'd in Iberia near to the
Ocean. Hercules perceiving he could not perform this Task without much trouble
and great preparation, set forth a brave Fleet, and manned it with such a
number of Seamen and Soldiers, as such an Expedition justly required: For it
was noised Abroad through the whole World, that Chrysaores (so called from his
Riches) King of Spain.
Iberia, had Of whom this Geryon was one, whom the Poets feign to have Three
Bodies.
Three Sons, strong Bodied Men, and famous for Martial Affairs, and that each
of them had great Armies of Valiant Men, constantly at hand attending upon
them; which was the reason Euristheus imposed this Task upon him, conceiving
this Expedition was greater than he was ever able to perform: But Hercules
undertook this with as much considence as he had done those before, and
commanded Forces to be raised in Crete, whence he resolved to set forth; this
Island being P. 157.
the most convenient Port from whence to make any Expedition into any part of
the World. Before he set Sail, mighty Honors were conferred upon him by the
Inhabitants; in grateful return of which Favors, he freed the Island from wild
Beasts, so that no hurtful Creatures, such as Bears, Wolves, Serpents, and such
like remained there ever after. He did these things in reverence to the Island,
because it was reported that Jupiter was bred and born there. Loosing thence,
he arrived at Libya. Here in the first place he challenged and slew Antaeus
(famous for his great strength and skill in Wrestling,) who was used to kill
the Strangers he wrestled with, after he had mastered them. Then he destroyed
the wild Beasts in the Deserts, and made Africa so quiet and improvable (which
was before full of hurtful Creatures,) that every part was fit for Tillage, and
planting of Fruit Trees; the whole Country productive of Wine and Oil. In
short, he so improved Libya (which by reason of the multitude of wild Beasts
was before uninhabitable,) that no Country in the World afterward exceeded it
for fertility and richness of Soil. In like manner he so purged the Nation from
wicked Men, and insolent Tyrants, that he put all the Cities into a flourishing
state and condition. It Is therefore reported that he was prosecuted with the
hatred and opposition of all sorts of dreadful wild Beasts, and of wicked Men;
for when he was an Infant in his Cradle, he was assaulted by Serpents, and when
he was a Man, he was vexed and perplexed with the Commands of a proud and unjust
Tyrant.

After the Killing of Antaeus, he went into Egypt, where he slew the Tyrant
Busiris, who murdered all Strangers that landed there. After he had passed over
the Sandy Deserts of Libya, he found a fertile and well watered Country, in
which he built an extraordinary great City, from the number of its Gates called
Hecatompylon, a Hundred Gates.
Hecatompylon, which continued in a flourishing Condition till of latter Times
that the Carthaginians with a great Army, (commanded by Eminent Captains) took
it.

Hercules having passed through a great part of Africa, arrived Or in the
straits near Cadiz.
in the Ocean, near Gades, where he erected Two Pillars, one on each side the
straight upon the Continent.

Thence (with his Fleet sailing along with him) he passed over into Spain.
Iberia, where he found the Sons of Chrysaores, with Three mighty Armies. These
at a distance, he challenged to a single Combat, and having at length slain the
Three Generals, he gained Iberia, and drove away those remarkable Herds of
Cattle.

In the mean time as he traveled through Spain, he was magnificently
entertained by a petit Prince in the Country (who was a Pious and Just Man) in
return of which, he bestowed upon him some of the Cattle; and he again
consecrated them all to Hercules, and every Year sacrificed to him one of the
fairest Bulls that were bred of them; some of which Sacred Breed remain in
Iberia to this Day.

And now because we have before made mention of Hercules Pillars, we conceive
Hercules's Pillars.
it fit in this Place to say something further concerning them.

Hercules, when he arrived at the utmost Coasts of both Continents adjoining to
the Ocean, resolved to set up these Pillars as lasting Monuments of his
Expedition. That his Work therefore might be famous to all Posterity, it is
said, that he much enlarged both the Mountains on each side, by making great
Moulds for a long way into the Sea; so that whereas before they lay in the Sea
at a great distance one from another, he made the Passage so narrow, that the
great Whales from that time could not pass out of the Ocean through those
Streights into the Mediterranean; and by the greatness of the Work, the Glory
of the Workman is P. 158.
preserved in everlasting remembrance.

But there are some of a contrary Opinion, and affirm that the Continents once
joined together, and that he cut a Trench through them, whereby he opened a
Passage, and so brought the Ocean into our Sea. But every Man may judge of this
matter as he thinks fit. The like he did before in Greece: For when the large
Champain Country about Tempe, was all over a standing Lake, he cut Sluices
through the lower Grounds, and through those Trenches drained all the Water out
of the Lake, by which means were gained all those pleasant Fields of Thessaly
as far as to the River Penaeus. But in Beotia he did quite contrary, for he
caused the River which ran through the Country of the Minyae to overflow the
whole Region, and turn all into a standing Pool: What he did in Thessaly, was
to gain the favor of the Grecians, but that in Beotia he did to punish the
Minyae, because they oppressed the Thebans.

Hercules having committed the Government of the Kingdom of Iberia to the
chiefest of the Inhabitants, marched away with his Army into France.
Celtica; and over(...)n the whole Country, and put an end to their usual
Impieties and Murdering of Strangers.

And whereas a vast multitude from all Nations came and listed themselves of
their own accord in his Army; having such a number, he built a Famous large
City, which he called from his wandering Expedition Or Alexia, Arras.
Alesia. But because many of the Barbarians from the neigbouring Places were
mixed among the Citizens, it happened that the rest of the Inhabitants (being
much inferior in number) learnt the Barbarians Manners of the other. The Celtae
at this Day have a great esteem and honor for this City, as being the chief
and Metropolis of all Gaul; and ever since the time of Hercules it has remained
Free never taken by any to our very days; till at length Caius Caesar, who (by
reason of the greatness of his actions) was called Divus, took it by storm, and
so it came into the hands of the Romans. With the rest of the Gauls Hercules
marching out of Gaul into Italy, as he passed over the Alps levelled and opened
those rough and difficult Ways (that were scarce passable) to make way for his
Army and Carriages. The Barbarians who Inhabited those Mountainous Parts, were
used to Kill and Rob, in the straight and craggy Places, Armies as they happned
to pass this way; but he subdued them and put to Death the Ringleaders of those
wicked practices, and so made the Passage safe this way to all Posterity.
Having passed the Alps, he continued his March through Gaul, as it is now
called, and came into Liguria. The Ligurians inhabit a rough and barren Soil,
but being forced by continual Labor Hercules comes into Liguria.
and Toil, it produces some little Corn and other Fruits: The People here are
short and low, but by reason of their constant Labors well set and strong; for
they are far from idle and luxurious livers, and therefore are very active, and
Valiant in time of War. To conclude, because all these neighboring Regions are
plied with continual Labors and Pains (for that the Land requires it) it is the
Custom for the Women to work and labor in that kind, as well as the Men; and
whereas the Women as well as the Men work for Hire, there fell out a remarkable
Accident concerning one of these Women, strange and unusual to any of our
Female Sex. Being great with Child, and falling in Labor in the midst of her
work amongst the Men, without any noise or complaint she withdrew herself into
a certain Grove there near at hand, and there being Delivered, she covered the
Infant with Leaves, and hid it among the Shrubs, and then returned to her Work
again, without the least sign of having born a Child, and continued with her
Fellow Laborers in her Work as she did before. But the Infant crying and
bawling, discovered the whole matter; yet the Overseer of the P. 159.
Workmen would by no means be persuaded to suffer her to leave her miserable
Labor, till he that hired her, pitying her condition, paid her her Wages, and
discharged her.

Hercules after he had gone through Liguria, and Thuscany, incampt at Tiber,
where Rome now stands, built many Ages after by Romulus the Son of Mars. The
Natural Inhabitants at that time inhabited a little Town upon a Hill, now
called Mount Palla(...)e. Here Cacius in the Greek.
Politius and Pinarius, the most eminent Persons of Quality among them,
entertained Hercules with all the demonstrations of Kindness imaginable, and
presented him with many noble Presents: There are now at Rome ancient Monuments
of these Men; for the most noble Family, called the Pinarii, remains still
among the Romans, and is accounted the most ancient at this day. And there are
Politius his Stone Stairs to go down from Mount Pallatine (called after his
Name) adjoining to that which was anciently his House.

Hercules being much pleased with the civil Entertainment of the Pallatines,
foretold them, that whosoever should dedicate the Tenth of their Goods to him,
after he was translated to the Gods, should be ever after more prosperous: And
this Dedication has been over since constantly used to this day. For many of
the Romans, not only such as are of mean Estates, but the great and rich Men
(having experienced how Riches have flowed in upon them, after the Decimation
of their Goods to Hercules,) have dedicated the Tenth part of their Substances,
which have been of the value of Four Thousand Talents. For Lucullus (the
richest almost of all the Romans in his time, valued his Estate, and
consecrated the Tenths to this God, and feasted continually with prodigious
Charge and Expense. The Romans afterward built a Magnificent Temple near to
the River Tiber, in honor of this God, and instituted Sacrifices to him out of
the Tenths.

Hercules marching from Mount Pallatine, passed through the Maritime Coasts of
Italy, as they are now called, and came into the Champain Country of Cumaea,
where (it is said) there were men infamous for their Outrages and Cruelties,
called Giants. This Place is also called the Phlegraean Plain, from a Hill
which anciently vomited out Fire, like unto Etna in Sicily, now called
Vesuvius, which retains many (...)
Signs and marks of its ancient Irruptions.

These Giants hearing of Hercules his Approach, met him in Battle Array; and
fighting with the force and cruelty of Giants, Hercules (with the Assistance of
the Gods) overcame them; and cutting off most of them, quieted that Country.
These Giants were called Sons of the Earth, by reason of the vast Bulk of their
Bodies. These are the things that some report (whom Timaeus follows) concerning
the destruction of the Giants of Phlegraea.

Leaving the Plains of Phlegraea, he came to the Sea, where he performed some
remarkable Works about the Lake Avernus (as it is called) which is consecrated
to Proserpine. It Is situated between Micenus and Diciarcheos, near the hot
Baths, Five Furlongs in Circuit, and of an incredible Depth. The Water of this
Lake is exceeding clear, and the mighty depth of this Gulf casts a blew Color
upon the Surface.

It Is reported, that anciently there was here an Oracle, where they conjured
the Infernal Spirits, which the latter Ages abolished. Whereas this Lake
extended P. 160.
as far as to the Sea, it is said Hercules by casting up of Earth, so stopped up
its Current, that he made the way near the Sea, now called the Herculean way.
And these are the things he did there.

Marching thence, he came to a certain Rock in the Country of the Posidonia^s,
where they report a kind of a Miracle happened. A certain Huntsman (famous all
over the Country for his brave Exploits) was used formerly to fix the Heads and
Feet of all the Game he took, to Trees, as an Offering to Diana: But having
then taken a great wild Boar (in Contempt of the Goddess) he boasted, and
declared he would only consecrate the Head to her; and forthwith according to
what he said, hung it upon a Tree. It being then Summertime, about Noon, he
laid him down to Sleep, during which time, the Band which fastened the Head,
broke, and so it fell down upon him that slept, and killed him. And there is no
reason to wonder at this, when many of the like kind are reported to have
happened, by which the Goddess has revenged her self of the Impious. But the
contrary happened to Hercules, for the sake of his Piety; for when he came to
the Borders of Rhegium and Locris, being wearied with his March, and laid down
to rest, they say he was disturbed with the noise and creaking of the
Grasshoppers, whereupon he entreated the Gods to free him from that disturbance,
who heard his Prayers: For the Grasshoppers flew away, not only for that time,
but none were ever seen there at any time after.

When he came to the narrowest Passage over the Sea, he caused the Cattle to
swim over before him into Sicily, and he himself caught hold of one of the
Horns of the Oxen, and in that manner swam along for the space of Thirteen
Furlongs, as Timaeus reports the matter. Afterward, desiring to go round the
Island, he went on his Journey from Peloriadis to Eryx, and passing along the
Shore, the Nymphs opened the hot Baths for him, where he refreshed himself
after his tedious Journey. These Baths were Two in number, the Hemerian and
Egestean, so called from the Places. After Hercules came into the Country of
Eryx, Eryx the Son of Venus and Bula, the King of the Country, challenged
Hercules to wrestle with him. Both sides proposed the Wager to be won and lost;
Eryx laid to stake his Kingdom, but Hercules his Oxen; Erix at first disdained
such an unequal Wager, not fit to be compared with his Country; but when
Hercules on the other side answered, that if he lost them, he should lose
together with them Immortality, Eryx was contented with the Condition, and
engaged in the Contest: But he was overcome, and so was stripped out of the
Possession of his Country, which Hercules gave to the Inhabitants, allowing
them to take the Fruits to their own use, till some one of his Posterity came
to demand it, which afterward happened: For many Ages after, Doriaeus the
Lacedemonian (sailing into Sicily) recovered his Ancestors Dominion, and there
built Heraclea, which growing great on a sudden, became the Object of the
Carthaginians Envy and Fear, lest growing stronger than Carthage it self, it
should deprive them of their Sovereignty; and for that Reason they besieged it
with a mighty Army, and took it by force, and razed it to the Ground; of which
we shall speak particularly in its proper time.

Hercules having viewed Sicily round, came to the City now called Syracuse,
where P. 161.
when he came to be informed of the Rape of Proserpina; he offered magnificent
Sacrifices to the Goddesses, and at Cyane sacrificed the goodliest of his
Bulls, and ordered the Inhabitants to sacrifice Yearly to Proserpina, and
observe an Anniversary Festival at Cyane. Then traveling through the heart of
the Country with his Oxen, he was set upon by the Sicani, with a strong Body of
Men; whom after a cruel Battle he routed, and cut off most of them; amongst
whom (it is reported) there were Captains of extraordinary Valor, who are
honored as Demy-Gods to this Day; to wit, Leucaspis, Pedicrates, Buphonas,
Caugates, Cygaus and Crytidas: Thence he passed through the Country of
Leontines, and much admired the pleasantness of the Territory, and by reason of
the singular respect he found from the Inhabitants, he left there eternal
Monuments of his Presence.

Among the Agyrineans something remarkable happened concerning him; for they
kept magnificent Festivals, and offered Sacrifices to him as to the Gods
themselves; which was the first time he approved of such Worship, never before
allowing any Sacrifice to himself: But now the Deity it self ratified his
Divinity; for not far from the City in a Rocky Way, the Oxen made Impressions
with their Feet, as if it had been in Wax; and the same thing likewise
happening to Hercules himself, caused him to conclude that (his Tenth Labor
being now perfected) his Immortality was in part sealed to him; and therefore
he refused not the Yearly Solemnity of Sacrifices instituted in honor of him
by the Inhabitants. That he might therefore manifest his gratitude to them for
the Honors conferred upon him, he caused a Pond to be sunk near the City, Four
Furlongs in Compass, which he called after his own Name. The Impressions
likewise made by the Hoofs of his Oxen, he named after himself; and Or built a
Temple.
consecrated a Grove to Geryon, as to a Demy-God, whom the Inhabitants
religiously worship at this Day. He built likewise there a famous Temple in
honor of Iolaus, his Associate in his Expedition, and appointed he should be
honored with Yearly Sacrifices, which are observed at this day: For all the
Inhabitants of this City let their Hair grow, without Cutting, from their very
Births, in honor of Iolaus; till they make an Offering of them to him, and
gain the favor of the God by costly and magnificent Sacrifices. Such is the
Holiness and Majesty of this Temple, that whosoever do not observe these holy
Rites, they are stricken Dumb, and are like Dead Men: But as soon as any
recollects himself, and vows to offer his Sacrifices, and gives a Pledge to the
God for that purpose, they are presently restored to their former Health. The
Inhabitants therefore very fitly call the Gate where these Sacred Solemnities
are performed Heraclea. They every Year likewise with great earnestness
celebrate the Wrestlings, Quoitings, etc.
Gymnick Sports, and Horse-Races; whither all the People both Bond and Free
flocking, they privately taught their Servants how to worship this God, how to
celebrate the Solemn Sacrifices, and to perform when they met together the
Sacred Rites and Festivals.

After this, Hercules passed over his Oxen again into Italy, and in his
marching along by the Seacoasts, he killed one Lacinius that was stealing some
of his Oxen. There he buried Croton, and erected a stately Monument over him,
whom he had unfortunately slain; and foretold that in time to come there should
be built a famous City, called after the Name of him that was there buried.
Having at length marched round about Adria, and all the Coasts of that Gulf on
Foot, he passed through Epirus into Peloponesus.

Having finished his Tenth Labor, Euristheus imposed another Task upon him,
11th Labor, Cerberus out of Hell.
and that was that he should bring Cerberus out of Hell. Preparing himself
therefore to perform this, to be better enabled thereunto, he went to Athens to
be initiated into the Mysterious Rites of Elusina, where Musaeus the Son of
Orpheus was P. 162.
then High Priest.

And because we have now occasion to mention Orpheus, we conceive it will A
Digression to Orpheus.
not be amiss here to give a short Account of him. He was the Son of Oeagrus,
and by Birth a Thracian, for the Art of Music and Poetry far excelling all
that ever were recorded. For he composed a Poem for sweetness and smoothness,
the Subject of all Men's admiration: And he grew so eminent in this Art, that by
the Melody of his Music, he was said to draw even wild Beasts and Trees after
him: And being naturally very studious, he attained to an extraordinary degree
of Knowledge in the ancient Theology. He improved himself likewise very much by
traveling into Egypt, so that he was accounted to excel the most accomplished
Person among all the Grecians for his Knowledge, both in Divinity and Sacred
Mysteries, in Music and Poetry. He was one likewise in the Expedition of the
Argonauts, and for the exceeding Love he had to his Wife (with an admirable
Courage) descended into Hell, and there so enchanted Proserpina with the
sweetness of his Music, that she gratified him so far as to suffer him to
carry back his Wife along with him, that died a little before.

In like manner they say Bacchus hereupon raised his Mother Semele from the
Shades below, and enduing her with Immortality, surnamed her Thyone.

Having now done with this Digression relating to Orpheus, we return to
Hercules: When he entered the Infernal Regious (the Mythologists say)
Proserpina kindly received him as her Brother, and gave him liberty to loose
Theseus and Perithous from their Chains; and at length contrary to the
Expectations of all Men, brought up the Cerberus.
Dog tied in his Chain, and presented him to open view.

The last Labor enjoined him was to fetch away the Golden Apples of the 12th
Labor, The Hesperian Apples.
Hesperides, to which purpose he passed over a Second time into Africa. The
Mythologists vary in their Writings concerning this; for some affirm that there
were really golden Apples in some of the Gardens of the Hesperides, guarded
continually by a terrible Dragon. Others say, that there are Sheep of exquisite
beauty in the Hesperides, and that from thence they are Poetically called
Golden Apples, as Venus from her Beauty is called Golden Venus. Others will
have it, that the Fleeces upon the Sheep's Backs are of that admirable Color,
that they glitter like Gold, and thence have been so called. And by the Dragon
they understand the Shepherd of the Flocks, who being a Man of a strong Body
and stout Heart, preserved the Flocks, and killed the Thieves that attempted to
steal them.

But let every one judge of this matter as he thinks best himself: For Hercules
killed the Keeper, and brought away the Apples or Sheep (which soever they
were) to Eurystheus, trusting now, that since all his Tasks were performed
(according to the Oracle of Apollo) he should be rewarded with Immortality.

CHAP. II.
An Account of Atlas and his Daughters, called Atlantides and Hesperides. The
Amazons routed by Theseus in Attica. The further Acts of Hercules; he goes
against Leomedon King of Troy, and other Acts. The Story of Meleager Son of
King Oeneus. Amalthea's Horn. Hercules his further Acts. His Death by a
poisoned Shirt.

BUT we are not to omit what is said of Atlas, and the Original of the
Hesperides. In the Country called Hesperis, lived Two famous Brothers, Hesperus
Atlas.
and Atlas; They were possessed of most lovely Sheep, of a Ruddy and Golden
Color, for which cause the Poets in their Phrase called them Melon, in Greek,
signify, both a Sheep and an Apple.
Golden Apples.

Hesperis the Daughter of Hesperus was married to his Brother Atlas, whence the
Country was called Hesperis; by her Atlas had Seven Daughters, which from their
Father were called Atlantides, and from their Mother Hesperides. Busiris King
of Egypt having a great desire to enjoy these Virgins by reason of their
extraordinary Beauty, sent out some Pirates, with Orders to seize these Ladies,
and bring them away to him. P. 163.


About this time Hercules being employed in his Second.
last Labor, killed Anteus in Lybia, who compelled those Strangers that came
into his Country, to wrestle with him; and inflicted condign Punishment upon
Busiris in Egypt, who sacrificed all Strangers that (arrived there) to Jupiter.
Afterward passing over the River Nile, he came into Ethiopia, and killed
Ematheon the Ethiopian King, who had challenged him to a Battle: And then he
again set upon the Task enjoined him. In the mean time the Thieves hurried away
the Girls out of a Garden where they were Playing, and in great haste got to
their Ships; whom Hercules met with upon a certain Shore, where they were
refreshing themselves; and being informed by the Virgins of the Rape, he killed
all the Thieves, but delivered the Girls to Atlas their Father; for which
Kindness he was so grateful, that he not only readily assisted him with what
things were needful for the accomplishment of what he had then in hand, but
willingly taught him the Art of Astrology: For he bestowed much of his Care and
Pains in the Study of this Art; and because he had a curiously wrought Sphere
of the Stars, he was said to carry the whole World upon his Shoulders. In the
like manner Hercules tranferring the Doctrine of the Spheres to the Greeks,
gained a Name, as he that from Atlas took upon himself the burden of the whole
World: The Greeks darkly signifying thereby what then happened betwixt him and
Atlas.

While Hercules was thus employed, they say, those Amazons that were left,
gathered Amazons routed by Theseus.
all in a Body from all Parts of the Nation, to the River Thermodon, with a
Design to revenge themselves upon the Grecians, for the Losses they sustained
by Hercules; and they bore a particular grudge and hatred to the Athenians,
because that Theseus carried away Captive Antiope, (or as others write)
Hippolytes, Queen of the Amazons.

Being therefore joined with the Scythians, as their Confederates, they raised
a great Army, with which the Amazonian Leaders passing over the Cimerian
Bosphorus, marched through Thrace, and pierced through a great part of Europe,
and encamped at length in Attica, at a Place which from them is now called the
Amazonian Field. Theseus having intelligence of their Approach, marched out
against them with an Army raised from among the Citizens, taking along with him
Antiope, by whom he had now his Son Hippolytus. Battle being joined, those with
Theseus through the Valor of the Athenians won the day, and slew part of the
Amazons upon the spot, and drove all the rest out of Attica. There Antiope in
the defense of her Husband, fought bravely, and died in Battle like a Hero.
Those Amazons that remained, despairing ever to recover their Country, went
away with the Seythians their Confederates into Seythia, and there seated
themselves.

^at having spoke sussiciently of these, we return to Hercules; who having now
finished all his Labors, was told by the Oracle that it was a thing very
necessary, that before he was translated to the Gods, he should plant a Colony
in Sard^nia, and make his Sons of the Stock of the Thespiadae, Governors of the
Island. He therefore with his Nephew Iolaus, passed over thither with the Boys,
because they were yet very Young. Here we think it convenient to premise
something concerning the Birth of these young Boys, that we may more clearly
give an account of the Colony. Thespis was of the most noble Family among the
Athenians, the Son of ^r^^theus, and Prince of a Territory so called from him.
He had of many Wives, Fifty Daughters. This Thespis being desirous that his
Daughters should have Issue by Hercules, who was as yet but very Young, but of
strength of Body beyond the usual course of Nature at that Age, invited him to
a sacred Festival, and there nobly entertained him, and sent for his Daughters
severally, one after another; Hercules lay with them all, and got them with
Child, and so became both a Husband of Fifty Wives, and a Father of Fifty Sons;
all which (being called by the general Name of Thespiadae in obedience to the
Oracle, when they were grown up, he ordered them to be sent away, to plant a
Colony in P. ^04.
Sardinia; and because Iolaus was Admiral of his whole Fleet, and his Companion
in all his Expeditions, he committed the care of the Colony of these Thespians
to him. But Two of the Fifty remained in Thebes, whose Posterity (they say)
continue there in great Honor and Esteem at this Day; and Seven more, whom
they call De(...)i, (...) of the People.
Pe^uchi, resided in the City Thespis, whose Posterity (they say) were the
principal Men of the City within the time of Man's Memory. All the rest, and
whosoever else would go along with them, Iolaus transported into Sardinia; and
having overcome the Inhabitants in Battle, the pleasantest part of the Island,
and that which was most Champain, he divided by Lot, which at this day is
called Iolacion. And he so improved the Island, and planted it with
Fruit Trees, that it became afterward a Bone of Contention: For from that time
it grew so Famous for the Riches and Fruitfulness of the Soil, that the
Carthaginiaus growing Rich and Powerful, so coveted this Island, that they
fought many Battles to gain it; of which we shall speak hereafter in its proper
Place.

After Iolaus had settled his Colony, he sent for Daedalus out of Sicily, and
employed him in building many stately Structures, which remain to this Day, and
from the name of the Architect, are called Daedal^a.
Daedalus his Works. He built likewise stately and sumptuous Public Schools
for all manner of Exercises, and Courts of Justice, with many other such Works
conducing to the happiness and well-being of Man's Life: He called also the
Inhabitants Iolacians, after his own Name, the Thespiade allowing him that
honor as their Father. For upon the Account of his faithful Service to them,
they so loved him, that they called him Father. Whence it came to pass in
Aftertimes, that they who sacrifi'd to this God, call Iolaus Father, as the
Persians did Cyrus.

Afterward Iolaus returned into Greece, and arrived at Sieily, were he staid a
considerable time.

About that time some of his Fellow-Travellers (taken with the pleasantness of
the Island) th(...)e seated themselves; and being mixed among the Si^ani, they
continued there, and are in great esteem with the Inhabitants. But Iolaus is
especially honored, to whom for the general good, he did in many Cities,
Temples and Groves are built, and Divine Worship instituted as to a Demy-God.
This Colony is (...) upon the account of a remarkable Circumstance; for the
Oracle commanded that all Persons of this Colony should be Freemen, and that
their Posterity for ever should so continue; which Freedom is effectually
enjoyed at this very day: For many Barbarians being mixed with this Colony, in
process of time the whole Colony became Barbarous; and removing themselves to
the Mountains, inhabited in Places inaccessible; where being used to Flesh and
Milk (having many Herds and Hocks of Cattle,) they never made use of
Bread-Co(...); and being that they live in Caves under Ground, they have easily
avoided the Miseries of War; and therefore though both the Carthaginians and
Romans have often attempted to subdue them by force of Arms, yet all has been
in vain: But let this now suffice that has been said concerning Iolaus and the
Thespiadae, and their Colony in Sardinia.

Hercules having now finished all his Labors, gave his Wife Megara to Iolaus,
P. 165.
suspecting that to have Issue by her, would be unfortunate, by reason of the
miserable Disaster that befell his former Children; and for this Reason, he
sought after another Wife (less to be suspected) by whom he might have more
Children. In order whereunto, he desired Iole the Daughter of Eurytus Prince of
Oechaliae, in Marriage. But Eurytus Iole the Daughter of Eurytus, refused to be
given to Hercules in Marriage.
(fearing the Misfortune of Megara) told him he would consider of it. Hercules
looking upon this as a Denial, to revenge himself for the Dishonor put upon
him, drove away Eurytus his Horses: But Iphitus the Son of Eurythus suspecting
how the matter was, came to Tirynthus to seek them; where Hercules brought him
up to the Top of an high Turret, and bid him look round about, to see whether
he could spy the Horses pasturing in any Place: Iphitus not discerning any of
them, Hercules complained he had falsely accused him of Theft, and thereupon
threw him down headlong from the Top of the Tower. For which wicked Fact being
punished with a grievous Disease, he went to Neleus, at Pylus, and entreated
him to expiate his Offense. Whereupon Neleus consulted concerning this matter
with his Sons; who all declared (except Nestor the Youngest,) that no expiation
ought to be allowed. Then he went to Deiophobus the Son of Hippolytus, and
desired him to expiate him. But sinding still no Remedy for his Disease, he
consulted at the Oracle of Apollo what he should do to be cured; who answered
him, that he should be easily freed from his Distemper, if he were sold for a
valuable Price, and the Money given to Iphitus his Children. In obedience
therefore to the Oracle, (forced through the violence of the Distemper) with
some Friends he passed over into Asia, and there suffered one of his Servants
to sell him: And sold he was as a Slave to Omphala the Daughter of Jardanus,
and Queen of the Maeones, (for so the Lydians were formerly called) and the
Seller gave the Price to the Children of Iphitus according to the command of
the Oracle.

Hercules hereupon being recovered of his Distemper diligently served Omphala,
and cleared the Land of Robbers that infested it; for some of the Thieves
called Cercopes (who had done abundance of mischief) he Killed, others he
brought bound before the Queen. He Killed also Sileus with a Spade, who forced
all Strangers that came thither to work in the Vineyards. He recovered likewise
the Spoils by force of Arms from the Itones, that wasted a great part of the
Kingdom with their Depredations, and took and razed their City to the Ground,
from whence they made all their Excursions. Omphales admiring the Valor and
noble Exploits of the Man, after she came to understand who he was, and from
whence descended, not only Manumitted him, but Married him, by whom she had
Lamon. He had a Son likewise before called Cleolaus, begotten in the time of
his servitude, of one of his Fellow Servants.

Returning afterward into Peloponesus, he led an Army against Laomedon, King
of Troy, for some Injuries received from him. For he had denied to deliver the
Horses he had promised him for the Killing of the Whale at the time that he
accompanied Jason by force of Arms to bring away the Golden Fleece, of which we
shall presently treat particularly in the History of the Argonauts. But being
at that time prevented from revenging himself by reason of the Expedition
wherein he was engaged with Jason, he picked out a fit opportunity afterward,
and sailed (as some say) with Eightheen Ships against Troy, but as Homer says
with Six only in the whole, who introduces Tlepolimus in these Words.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
But Hercules my Father, as is said,
The Lions strong in Valor did exceed,
That only with Six Ships and Slender Force,
For Laomedon's Horses took his Course;
And then Besieged and took the City Troy,
And many of her People did destroy.
Hercules therefore, when he arrived in the Country of Troas, marched straight
with a Valiant Number of Men to Troy, but left Oiclcus the Admiral, the Son of
Amphiaraus with the Fleet to be ready to assist him as occasion served. In the
mean time Laomedon being surpised by the sudden advance of the Enemy, in a
great hurry raised as many Forces as the shortness of the time would admit him
to do, and led them against the Fleet, hoping by burning of it, to put a speedy
end to the War. Oicleus the Admiral met the Enemy, and was killed at the first
Onset; P. 166.
the rest being forced to their Ships, stood off to Sea.

Laomedon then returned and Fought with Hercules, and he and most of his Men
were cut off. Hereupon Hercules presently took the City by Storm, and put many
of the Inhabitants that opposed him, to the Sword, but advanced Priam (for his
Justice) to his Father's Throne. He was the only Son of Laomedon, that
disapproved what his Father did, and advised that the Horses should be
delivered to Hercules according to the Contract. Hercules to crown Telamon's
Valor with an honorable Reward, gave him Hesione the Daughter of Laomedon to
Wife. For he was the first that in this Storm made his Way into the City at the
very strongest part of the Castle Wall, where Hercules himself made the Assault.

After his Return into Peloponesus, he made War upon Augeas for defranding him
of his promised Reward; but after a Battle fought with the Eleans, without
effecting any thing further at that time, he returned to Olenus, who had before
entertained him as his Guest, whose Daughter Hippolyte was at that time just
Married to Axanus. Hercules being then there, killed Eurytion the Centaur, for
offering Violence to Hippolyte at the time of her Marriage.

Being returned to Tirynthe, Eurystheus (moved upon some Suspicion of Treason
or other) Banished him with his Mother Alcmena; and likewise Ephicle and Iolaus
out of the Kingdom. Being thus forced away, he resided at Pheneus in Arcadia.
Where he heard that the Sacreds of Neptune in a Solemn Procession were sent to
the Istmos under the Conduct of Eurytus the Son of Augeas: Whereupon he hasted
away, and set upon Eurytus on the sudden near to Cleone where Hercules's
Temple now stands, and killed him. Afterward entering the Country of Elis, with
a Potent Army, he killed also King Augeas, and took the City by Storm, and
recalled Phyleus into his Country, and gave up the City, together with the
Kingdom into his Hands. For he was banished by his Father, for ordering the
Reward to be given to Hercules, being chosen an Arbitrator between them.

Afterward it happened that Tyndarus was banished from Sparta by Hippocoon,
whose Sons likewise being Twenty in number, had killed Hyionus the Son of
Lycimnius, Hercules his Special Friend. Hercules understanding what they had
done, made War upon them, and in a great Battle routing them, slew Multitudes
of them; and took Sparta by Storm, and restored Tyndarus the Father of the
Castor and Pollux.
Dioscuri to the Kingdom, upon this Condition, that (in as much as he had
gained it by Conquest) he should keep it, and hereafter deliver it up entire to
his Posterity. In this Battle there were very few killed on Hercules his side,
amongst whom were those Famous Men Iphiclus, and Seventeen Sons of Cepheus; for
of Twenty, Three only escaped. On the other side, there fell Hippocoon himself
with Ten of his Sons, and a great number of the Spartans. After this Battle, he
returned into Arcadia, and resorted to King Aleos, whose Daughter Augeas by
stealth lay with, and got with Child, and then went to Stymphalus. Aleos being
ignorant of what was done, afterward discovered the matter, by the swelling of
his Daughter's Belly, and thereupon asked her who was the Father; who answered
she was forced by Hercules. Her Father not giving any credit to what she said,
delivered her to a Nauphan whom he consided in, and ordered him to drown her.

Auge being carried away for Nauphalia, a City in Argos.
Nauphalia, in her Voyage fell in labor near the Mountain Parthenius, and
turned aside into a Wood near adjoining, under color of discharging the
necessities of nature, and there was delivered of a Son, which she left hid
among the Shrubs: Then she went away with the Nauplian, and came at length to
Nauplia, a Port in the Territory of Argos, and so was unexpectedly P. 167.
preserved: For the Nauplian was not willing to drown her as the King had
commanded, but gave her to certain Strangers of Caria, who were then setting
Sail for Asia, who took her away, and sold her to Teathras King of Mysia. In
the mean time the Child that was left in Mount Parthenius was found sucking of
an Hind, by some Shepherds belonging to King Corythus, who brought it to their
Master: Corythus willingly received it, and educated and brought it up as his
own Son, and named him Telephus from the (...) Elaphos is a Hind in Greek.
Hind that suckl'd him. When he was grown up to Man's Estate, he went to the
Oracle at Delphos to inquire who was his Mother, where he was answered that he
must repair to Teuthras, King of Mysia: Having found out his Mother, and it
being now known who was his Father, he was in high Esteem and Reputation, so
that Teuthras, who had no Heir Male, married him to his Daughter Argiope, and
adopted him his Heir and Successor to the Kingdom.

In the mean time Hercules the Fifth Year after his Banishment into Pheneus,
being exceedingly grieved for the Deaths of Hyionus the Son of Lycimnius, and
of his Brother Iphiclus, wholly abandoned Arcadia and Peloponesus; and being
accompanied with Multitudes of the Arcadians went to Calydon, a City of
Aetolia. And having now neither Wife nor lawful Issue, he married Deianira the
Daughter of Oen^us, Meleeager being then dead.

And here it will not be amiss to make a small Digression, and declare what
happened to Meleager.

Oencus upon a great Plenty of Corn, in Gratitude, sacrificed to all the Gods,
but Meleager.
only Diana: At which the Goddess being enraged, sent among them that so famed
and mighty Calydonian Boar, which wasted and spoiled all the Neighboring
Region, and killed and destroyed most of their Cattle. Meleager the Son of
Oeneus being then in the Flower of his Age and full Strength, and not inferior
to any for Valor, associated himself with many other Gallants to hunt this
Boar. He being the first that wounded the Beast with his Dart, by the general
Consent of all carried away the Spoil and Honor of the day, which was the
Boar's Skin. Atalanta the Daughter of Echeneus, was one of his Associates in
this Hunting; and therefore Meleager (being much in Love with her) presented
her with the Skin, attributing to her the Glory of the Action. But the Sons of
Thestius his Fellow-hunters took it most hainously, that a Stranger should be
preferred before them, and no regard be had to the Nearness of Kindred that was
between them and Meleager. To defeat her therefore of Meleager's Gift they lay
in wait for her, and fell upon her in her return to Arcadia and took away the
Skin by Force. But Meleager (for the Love he bore to Atalanta) being much
troubled at the Affront and Disgrace offered her, took upon him the Defense of
her Cause, and at first advised the Aggressors to restore what they had
violently taken away. But when he could not prevail, he slew them. They were
the Brothers of Althea, his Mother, who so immoderately grieved for their
Deaths, that she poured out most heavy Curses against her Son, and wished the
Gods would cut him off, who heard her Prayer, and killed him. Some there be
that feign that when Meleager was Ovid. 8. Meta.
born the Destinies appeared to Althea in her Dream, and foretold that Meleager
her Son should dye when a Brand that was then in the Fire should be consumed.
His Mother therereupon conceiving the Life of her Son depended upon the
Preservation of the Firebrand, laid it up very carefully: But being incensed at
the Death of her Brothers, she threw it into the Fire, and so hastened her Sons
Death. But afterward repenting and grievously afflicted for what she had done,
Ovid says she stabbed her self.
she hanged her self. In the mean time Hipponous in Clenum, a City in Achaia.
Olenum being incensed at his Daughter Peribaea, because she said she was with
Child by Mars, sent her to Oeneus in P. 168.
Aetolia, and desired him that he would forthwith put her to Death: But he
having lately lost both his Son and his Wife, would not kill the Lady, but
married her, and begat of her Tydeus. But let this suffice concerning Meleager,
Althea and Oeneus.

Hercules to gain the Favor of the Calydonians diverted the River Vid. Ovid.
Vid. Strabo. It had two Mouths representing two Horns, one of which was damned
up by Hercules; the Stream roars like a wild Bull.
Achelous into another Channel which he cut for it, and by that means watered a
great Part of the Country, and made it exceeding fruitful, which gave Occasion
to the Poetical Fables, that Hercules fought with The Son of Oceanus and Terra,
fought with Hercules for Deianira the Daughter of Oeneus: and finding himself
too weak transformed himself into a Bull. Vid. Ovid and Strabo.
Achelous transformed into the Shape of a Bull, and in the Conflict cut off one
of his Horns, and gave it to the Aetolians: This they call Amalthea's Horn, in
which (the Poets feign) grow all manner of Summer-fruit, as Grapes, Apples, and
such like. By the Horn they darkly signify the new Course of the River
Achelous, bending like a Horn through the other Channel: By the Apples,
Pomegranates and Grapes they denote the Fruitfulness of the Soil watered by the
River and the Plenty of fruitful Plants. By terming it * Amalt(...) Horn they
signified the Strength of him that cut the Ditch. ^


Afterward Hercules assisted the Calydonians in the War against the Thes^rot.,
and took the City Ephyra by Storm, and slew their King Phileus; and lying with
his Daughter, who was his Prisoner, on her he begat Tlepolemus. The Third Year
after his Marriage to Deianira, Eurynomus the Son of Architelus (then a young
Boy) serving Oeneus at Table, Hercules for some small Mistake in his Attendance
gave him such a Box on the Ear (that much against his Will) he killed the poor
Boy; for which Misfortune he was so grieved, that with his Wife Deianira and
Hyllus his Son by her who was then a young Child, he voluntarily banished
himself out of Calydonia: In his Journey, when he came to the Banks of the
River Euenus he found Nessus the Centaur, who carried People over the Ford for
Hire. Deianira being the first that he carried over, the Centaur fell in Love
with her for her Beauty, and attempted to ravish her, whereupon she cried out
for Help to her Husband, who presently shot him through the Body with an Arrow.
The Centaur through the Grievousness of his Wound died in the very Act of his
Rape, only had time to teil her that for the great Love he bore her he would
teach her a (...).
Receipt for the procuring of Love by Force, whereof Hercules should never
after be familiar with any other Woman besides her self, and that was, that she
should anoint Hercules his under Garment with the Blood that issued from his
Wound mixed together with Oil and some of his Seed that fell from him; and
having thus said he immediately breathed out his last.

Deianira observed what Directions he had given her, and mixing the Seed of
Nessus with his Blood which dropped from the Arrow, kept it privately in a little
Box for Hercules. Hercules having passed the River went to Ceyces, King of
Trachinia, and dwelt with him as a Stranger, ever accompanied with the
Arcadians as his Fellow Soldiers and Associates.

After these things, Philas King of the Dryopi being accused for some Act of
Impiety against the Temple of Delphos, Hercules with the Assistance of the
Melienses took up Arms against him, and both killed him and cast the Dryopi out
of their ancient Habitations, and gave their Country to the Melienses. On his
Captive the Daughter of Philas he begat Antiochus. Besides Hyllus he had
afterward other Children by Deianira, Gryneus or Gleneus and Hodites. Some of
the Dryopi that were driven out of their Country passed over to Eubaea, and
there built the City Carystus: Others of them sailed into the Island Cyprus,
and gained new Seats, and became one People with the Inhabitants; the rest fled
to Eurystheus, who (in P. 169.
Hatred of Hercules) received them into his Protection, and they with his
Assistance built three Cities in Peloponesus, Asine, Hermione and Eione.

After the Expulsion of the Dryopi, a War broke forth between the Doreans
(which inhabited Hestiaetes in the Reign of Aegimius) and the Lapithae, the
Inhabitants of Mount Olympus, whose King was Coronus the Son of Phoroneus.

But the Lapithae being much stronger than the other, the Doreans craved the
Assistance of Hercules, and promised him the third Part of the Kingdom; upon
which Terms they prevailed with him to join with them as their Confederate.
With their joint Forces therefore they set upon the Enemy, and Hercules by the
Valor of the Arcadians (whom he ever had with him as his Assistants) routed
them, and slew the King himself, and cutting off Multitudes of the Enemy,
forced the Lapithae out of the Territory which they contested for.

This being thus effected, he gave up the third Part of the Country promised
him to Aeginius, to be kept by him in Trust in Order to be restored to Hercules
his Posterity. In his return to Trachinia, he killed Cygnus the Son of Mars,
who challenged him to a Duel. And as he passed through the Country of the
Pelasgi, from Itonus, he met with King Hormenius, and demanded his Daughter
Astydamia in Marriage; but because Deianira was his lawful Wife before, he
refused to give his Consent. Upon which he made War upon him, and both took the
City and killed the King; and so possessing himself of Astydamia by Force of
Arms, begat of her C^esippus. Afterward he made a second Expedition against
the Sons of Eurytus, for denying to give him Iole in Marriage* And by the Help
of the Arcadians took the City, and slew Toxeus, Molion and Pytius, the Sons of
Eurytus; and carrying away Iole, made to the Promontory Cenaeus in Now N(...)
po^t.
Eubaea, where he appointed a solemn Sacrifice, and sent Lichas his Servant to
Trachine to his Wife Deianira with Orders to wish her to send him his Coat and
Shirt he used to wear when he sacrificed to the Gods. Deianira (being inform by
Lichas of her Husband's Love to Iole, and how he had a greater Love and
Kindness for her than her self) anointed the Coat and Shirt with the
destructive Receipt given her by the Centaur, which Lichas (ignorant of the
Matter) carried to the Sacrifice. But as soon as Hercules put on the Garment,
the Infection and Venom of the Receipt began by little and little to work,
which put him at last upon the Rack in most miserable Torment. For the Poison
of the Arrow like a stinging Viper overspread the Garment, and by its scorching
Heat even eat up the Flesh of his whole Body. Hercules being thus intolerably
tormented forthwith killed his Servant Lichas; and then dismissed his Army, and
returned to Trachinia. But his Torment more and more increasing he sent
Lioymnion and Iolus to Delphos to inquire of Apollo how he might be ^^'d.
Deianira amazed at the Extremity of her Husband's Misery, and conscious of what
she had done, hanged her self. The Answer of the Oracle was, That with a
warlike Train they should carry Hercules away to O^^a, and there raise up for
him a great Pile of Wood, and Jupiter would take great Care of the rest. Iolus
hereupon and those with him performed what was commanded, suspecting what the
Issue was like to be. Hereupon Hercules (despairing of his Recovery) mounted
the Pile, and earnestly desired those present to set it on Fire. When none
would do it, at length Philocletes observed his Order, and put Fire under the
Pile; and for P. 1^^.
a Reward Hercules gave him his Bow and Arrows; hereupon the Pile was presently
on a Flame, not only by the Fire but with Thunder and Lightning from Heaven,
and all was in an instant reduced to Ashes. Iolus afterward seeking for his
Bones, could find none at all; whence arose an Opinion that Hercules (as the
Oracle had foretold) was translated from Men to the Gods. Iolus and the rest
having therefore sacrificed to him as a Demy-God, and raised up a great
Monument in Remembrance of him, returned to Trachinia. Afterward Men^alus, the
Son of Actor, Hercules his special Friend, instituted that in Opuntus there
should be offered up to him every Year as to a Demy-God, a Bull, a Boar and a
Goat. The Thebans did the same; and the Athenians were the first that offered
Sacrifices to him as a God, and their pious Example first induced all the
Grecians, and afterward all other Nations as such to worship him.

To what we have said, we must further add this, that after his Translation to
the Gods, Jupiter persuaded Juno to adopt Hercules for her Son; and ever after
she bore toward him a Motherly Affection. And they report, that this Adoption
was brought about in this manner; Juno being gone to Bed, and Hercules laid
close to her Body, she dropped down from under her Clothes to the Ground; which
Rite and Ceremony the Barbarians use in adopting of a Son to this day. They
feign that afterward Juno married him to The Goddess of Youth, Daughter of
Juno, and Cupbearer to Jupiter. At a Feast her Foot slipped, and she showed
all, and was displaced, and Ganymed put in her room. Servius. She re^or'd
Iolaus to his Youth: See ^vid. 9. Met.
Hebe; and in the Story of the Dead the Poet introduces his Ghost in these
Words, --

-- (...)
(...)
Among the Gods he feasts with Hymns
And in fair Hebe joys and sings.
But they report that when Jupiter would have him to be one of the Amongst the
Heathen there were Twelve Chief Gods. Ovid calls them Deos Nobiles: They
enjoyed Heaven by natural Right; Juno, Vesta, Minerva, ^eres, Diana, Venus,
Mars, Mercury, Jove, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apolio. Goodw. Antiq. 36. Lib. 2.
Sect. 1.
Twelve Gods; Hercules refused that Honor; for that it was impossible for him
to be taken into the Number, unless one of the Twelve were rejected, and it was
an unseemly thing to accept such an Honor with the Disgrace of another God.

Although we have been long in our Relation concerning HERCULES, yet to make
amends we have not omitted any thing material that is reported of him. And now
it is time that we treat of the Argonauts, for Hercules went with them in that
Expedition.

CHAP. III.
Of the Argonauts, Medea and the Daughter of Pileus. How the Argonauts gained
the Golden Fleece. The Pranks of Medea, The Acts of Jason. The Cruelty of
Pelias toward Jason's Kindred; how he was killed by his own Daughters through
Medea's Charms. Medea burns the King of Corinth's Palace, and him in it. The
miserable End of Jason. Of the Heraclidae, and their Return to Peloponesus.

JASON (they say) was Son of Aeson, and Nephew to Pelius King of Thessaly. And
being a Man of strong Body and of an high Spirit, far above any of his Age, was
ambitious to perform some memorable and remarkable Action; for knowing that
Perseus his Ancestor and some This Expedition of the Argonauts was An. Mun.
2094. about the time of the Death of Abimelech, Judge. 9. 23. before Christ 254.
Helv. Chron. But Sr. Walter Rawleigh says, it was the 9 Year of Gideon, 34
Years before. Lib. 2. I. Part C. 13. Sect. 6.
others (by their expeditious and admirable Atchievments in foreign Countries)
had purchased eternal Honor and Renown, he resolved to imitate them in the
like heroic Undertakings: Acquainting therefore the King his Uncle with his
Purpose, he easily obtained his Consent, not that Pelius thereby aimed at the
Honor and Glory of the young Man, but that he hoped (among so many Hazards and
Difficulties) he would be cut off; for having no Issue Male, he was afraid lest
his Brother with the Assistance of his Son would some time or other invade his
Kingdom. But he concealed his Suspicion in the mean time, and promised to
furnish him with Provisions for his Voyage, encouraging him to undertake the
Adventure in Sailing to Colchis to bring away the Ram's Golden Fleece, so much
famed and spoken of all the World over.

Pontus at that time was inhabited by fierce and barbarous People, that were
infamous for murdering of all Strangers that came amongst them, and therefore
it was called Inhospitable.
Axenos: However Jason (being ambitious of Glory) though he was something
concerned at the Difficulty of the Undertaking, yet when he considered it was
not altogether impossible to be accomplished, and that the more hazardous it
was, the greater his Honor and Glory would be, he furnished himself with all
things necessary for his Expedition.

And in the first Place built a Ship at the Mountain Pelius, much larger in P.
171.
every respect than was usual in those Times; for then they used to sail only
in Boats and little Skiffs. Every one therefore at the sight of the Vessel was
amazed, and the intended Design and the Building of this Ship was noised over
all Greece, so that many of the noble and brisk Youths were eager to join and
go away with Jason in Order to partake of the Honor in this Expedition.

Jason now lanching forth his Ship, completely furnished with all things
necessary, made choice of four and fifty of the greatest Persons of Quality out
of the Number of those that were desirous to go along with him. Amongst whom
the most remarkable were Castor and Pollux, Hercules and Telamon, Orpheus and
Atalanta, the Daughter of Schaeneus, the Sons of Thespius, and JASON himself
the Head and Captain of the Expedition to Colchos; he called the Ship Argo,
from the Builder, whose Name was Argus (as some fabulous Writers report) who
(they say) embarked with them to repair the Ship, as Occasion might serve: But
others say it was so called from its swift Sailing, for that Argon among the
ancient Greeks signified swift. Being all on Board, they unanimously chose
Hercules for his extraordinary Valor to be their General. After they had set
Sail from Iolcus, and passed by Athos and Samothrace, they were by a Tempest
cast upon Sigeum, a Promontory of Troas: Where landing, they found a Young
Virgin tied near to the Sea-shoar, for this Reason as is said.

The Report was, that Neptune being displeased with Laomedon the King
concerning the fabulously famed building of the Walls of Troy, sent a vast
Monster out of the Sea upon the Land, which devoured all that came upon the
Shore, and the Husbandmen that tilled the Ground upon the Seacoast; and that
this Sea-God destroyed the People by a Plague, and blasted all the Fruits of
the Field. The whole Country being in this miserable Condition, the People met
in a general Assembly, and consulted together what Course was to be taken for
the redress of their deplorable Condition. Hereupon it is said that the King
sent to inquire of the Oracle of Apollo what was to be done in this matter: Who
received this Answer, That Neptune was angry, and would be then appeased, when
one of the Trojan's Children upon whom the Lot should fall, should be offered
up to be devoured by the Sea Monster. Hereupon they say, that a General Lot was
cast, and that it fell upon the King's Daughter, called Hesione; whereupon
Laomedon was forced to deliver up his Daughter, and left her bound in Chains
upon the Shore: And it fortunately happened at that very time, that Hercules
landed with the rest of the Argonauts, and being informed by the Lady of her
Misfortune, he broke off her Fetters, and brought her into the City, promising
he would kill the Monster. Laomedon hereupon rejoiced exceedingly, and promised
to bestow upon him as a Reward, some Horses he had that were unconquerable.
They say this Monster was killed accordingly by Hercules, and that free Liberty
was given the Lady either to go along with her Deliverer, or stay at Home with
her Parents; the Lady it is said, chose to go along with the Stranger, not only
as being more affected with the deliverance, than the Society of her Parents
and Kindred, but fearing lest (if another Monster should appear) she should be
again exposed by the People to the same Calamity.

Hercules therefore receiving honorable Rewards suitable to so welcome a Guest,
left Hesione and the Horses in trust with Laomedon, to be restored to him after
P. 172.
his return from Colchis. Then he proceeded on his Voyage with the Argonauts;
and presently after they were overtaken with another violent Storm, insomuch as
they despaired of their Lives; Orpheus only, they say, of all his Companions in
the Expedition (being a Religious Man) sacrificed and prayed to the Gods of
Samothracia for their Preservation: Whereupon on a sudden there was a Calm,
and Two Stars fell down upon the Heads of Castor and Pollux, to the great
amazement of the Beholders; and so all concluded, that by the Providence of the
Gods, they were now out of danger. Hence it has been a Custom ever since, that
when any are in a Storm at Sea, they call upon the Gods of Samothracia, and
when any Stars appear, they are looked upon then to be Castor and Pollux, that
appear for their Deliverance.

When the Storm was over, the noble Adventurers landed in a Province of Thrace,
of which Phineus was King; where met them Two Young Men, who for the Punishment
of their Offenses, were driven out of the Territories, and grievously whipped all
along as they came. They proved to be the Sons of Phineus, by Cleopatra the
Daughter of Boreas, and Orithya the Daughter of Erechtheus. But through the
malice of their Stepmother (by false Accusations) their Father was wrought upon
to deal thus severely and unjustly with them; for Phineus having Married
(besides his former Wife) Idaea the Daughter of Dardanus King of Seythia, was
so enslaved by an inordinate Affection to her, that he humored her in every
thing she required; and therefore at that time he gave credit to her
Accusation, that those Two Young Men (to please their own Mother, and in
contempt of her) attempted to lay violent Hands on her.

Hercules with the rest, fortunately landing at that very time, they say the
Young Men called out to those noble Hero's, and implored them as if they had
been so many Gods, to rescue them out of those miserable Circumstances,
declaring the cause why their Father was so enraged against them. But Phineus
meeting the Strangers, in a rage charged them not to meddle in other Peoples
Concerns; for they might be assured, that no Father would willingly so punish
his own Sons, unless the greatness of their Faults had overcome all Natural
Affection.

But it happened, that at that time, the Boreadae, the Brothers of Cleopatra,
were Companions with Hercules in this Expedition. These therefore were the
First that (by reason of their near Relation) by force of Arms relieved the
Young Men, and breaking in Pieces their Chains, killed as many of the
Barbarians as opposed them. But when Phineus himself with a multitude of
Thracians that came flocking in, marched up to decide the matter by a Battle,
it is said, that then Hercules stoutly laid about him, and slew both Phineus,
and a great number of the other Thraclans. Then seizing upon the King's City
and Palace, he set Cleopatra at liberty, and restored to her Sons their
Father's Kingdom; who resolving to be revenged upon their Stepmother, he
persuaded them to forbear doing any such thing, but rather to send Messengers
into Scythia to her Father, to let him know that they left her wholly to his
Discretion, to be punished for her Offenses. Which being done accordingly, the
Scythian put his Daughter to Death; and the Sons of Cleopatra were highly
commended by the Thracians for their Mildness and Equity. But I am not ignorant
how some of the Fabulous Authors relate, that Phineus put out his Two Sons
Eyes, and that in retaliation when he was old, Boreas served him the same
Sauce: And they report likewise, that Hercules going out of the Ship to get a
little fresh Water, was left behind by the Argonauts in Asia. For in ancient
Stories no Historians unanimously agree one with another; and therefore it is
not to be admired, that in giving account of things in ancient Times, we do not
in every thing agree with the Poets and other Writers.

But it is said, that the Two Sons gave up the Kingdom to their Mother
Cleopatra, and went along with the Argonauts in their Expedition; who sailing
away from Thrace, and arriving at Pontus, landed in Taurica Chersonesus, being
altogether ignorant of the cruelty of the Inhabitants: For it was a Custom
amongst those P. 173.
Barbarians, to sacrifice all Strangers that arrived there, to Diana Taurica.
Amongst whom it is said, that in aftertimes, Ephigenia, the Priests of the
Goddess, practiced the same Cruelty upon all she could lay hold on.

And here in regard the Course of the History requires it, it is requisite we
should give an Account of the Causes of this horrid Cruelty executed upon
Strangers, especially this Digression seeming pertinent to the Acts of the
Argonauts.

They say, that Sol begat Two Sons, Aeetes and Perses, and that Aeetes was King
of Colchis, and the other of Taurica, and that both were exceeding cruel. That
Hecate was the Daughter of Perses, far more fierce and cruel than her Father;
for being given to Hunting (if she could find no Game) she would sport her self
with casting her Darts at Men instead of Beasts: She made it her business
likewise to compound Deadly Poisons, and was the first that found out
Wolf-Bane, a most poisonous Herb.
Aconitum; and made trial of the nature and efficacy of every Composition, by
mixing them with the Food given to Strangers. Being thus grown extraordinary
skilful in this devilish Art, she first poisoned her own Father, and so usurpt
the Crown.

Then she built Diana's Temple, and ordered all Strangers that arrived there,
to be sacrificed to that Goddess; so that her Cruelty was noised abroad in
every Place. She afterward Married Aeetes, and by him had Two Daughters,
Cerces and Medea, and one Son called Aegialeus. Cerces likewise being much
addicted to the Compounding of all sorts of Medicines, found out the wonderful
Natures and efficacy of diverse sorts of Roots and Herbs, many she learnt of her
Mother Hecate, but many more she discovered by her own industry; so that she
left nothing new (for any that came after her) which might any ways advance
that Art. This Cerces was Married to the King of the Sarmathians, whom some
call Scythians; but she likewise poisoned her Husband, and so usurping the
Kingdom, executed many Butcheries and Cruelties upon the Subjects; for which
(as some Writers relate) she was driven out of the Kingdom, and fled to the
Ocean, and possessing herself of a certain Desert Island, settled there,
together with the Women her Companions. But as other Historians say, leaving
Pontus, she settled in the Promontory of Italy, now called from her Cerceum.

They report likewise, that Medea learnt the same Art from her Mother and
Sister; but she plainly made use of it for contrary ends and purposes; for she
constantly laid out her self to save the Lives of Strangers that were driven
thither, sometimes begging the Lives of such as were condemned of her Father,
and at other times by her subtle Contrivance procuring their Escapes out of
Prison.

For Aectes prompted thereunto both by the cruelty of his own Nature, and
likewise incited by the Counsels and Persuasions of Hecate his Wife, observed
the Custom of Murdering of Strangers. But Medea every day more and more opposed
her Parents in this thing; Aectes (upon suspicion of Treason) committed his
Daughter Medea to Prison, whence notwithstanding the escaped, and fled to a
Temple of Apollo, seated on the Sea-Shoar; about which same time, the Argonauts
sailed by Taurica, and arrived in the Night at Colchis, at the very Place where
the Temple stood; where meeting with Medea, wandering upon the Shore, were
informed by her of the cruel Custom of Murdering of Strangers in those Parts;
whereupon giving the Virgin thanks for her Humanity and Kindness, they told her
of their Designs, and of the end of their adventure; and she on the other Hand
informed them what Dangers she was surrounded with from her Father, by reason
of her Kindness and Compassion to Strangers: It being therefore evident to both
Parties what was then fit to be done, Medea on her part promised she would
assist 'em to the uttermost of her power, till they had accomplished P. 17^
their Design; and Jason promised and confirmed by a Solemn Oath, that Medea
should from that time forward be his Wife. Hereupon the Argonauts leaving a
Party to guard their Ships, went with Medea in the Night to the Golden Fleece:
Of which we must here write more largely, that nothing may be omitted which is
pertinent to the History.

They say that Phryxus the Son of Athamantes, to avoid the malice of his
Stepmother, fled out of Greece, together with Helles his Sister, and being by
the advice and direction of the Gods, transported out of Europe into Asia, upon
the Back of a Golden-fleec'd Ram, it happened that the Young Maid fell off into
Pontus, which was therefore from thence called Hellespont: But Phryxus landing
safe in Colchis, by the Command of the Oracle sacrificed the Ram, and hung up
its Skin in the Temple of Mars.

Afterward the King was told by the Oracle, that he should dye when some
Seafaring Men came thither, and carried away the Golden-Fleece. And this was
the Cause (besides the cruelty of his Nature) that moved this Vile Man to
sacrifice Strangers, that (this horrid Cruelty being noised Abroad in all
Parts) no Stranger might dare to set footing in his Country. He built a Wall
likewise round the Temple, and placed a strong Guard of Taurican Soldiers to
keep it, which has afforded matter for prodigious Stories among the Grecians;
as how that Bulls that breathed out Fire at their Nostrils guarded the Temple,
and that a Dragon kept the Fleece. For by reason of the ambiguity of the Word
Which signifies in Latin a Bull, and is like in sound to Taurica.
Taurus, it was strained to signify the fierceness and violence of Bulls, and
the cruel Murdering of Strangers, gave rise to the fiction of the Bulls
breathing out Fire. Upon the same Account the Poets have given the Name of a
most terrible and monstrous Beast, placed as a Guard for Security of the Temple.

And much like to this Story, is what they say concerning Phryxus: For they say
that he sailed in a Ship, upon whose Foredeck was carved the Head of a Ram, and
that Helles by leaning too much forward over the sides of the Ship to vomit,
fell overboard into the Sea.

Others say, that about the time that Phryxus with his Schoolmaster was taken
by Aeetes; the Scythian King, the Father in Law of Aeetes, came to Colchis, and
fell in love with the Boy, and upon that account he was bestowed by Aeetes upon
the Scythian, who loved him as his own Child, and adopted him his Heir and
Successor to the Kingdom. But that the Schoolmaster whose Name was Crius,
signifies a Ram in Greek.
Crius, was sacrificed to the Gods, and his Skin according to the Custom, was
fastened to the Walls of the Temple.

Afterward Aeetes being foretold by the Oracle that he should dye when
Strangers carried away the Ram's-Skin, it is said that he gilt it with Gold,
that the Splendor thereof should cause the Soldiers who were set to guard it,
to be more careful and diligent in their watch. But we leave every one to judge
of these things as he thinks fit.

However it was, Medea conducted the Argonauts to the Temple of Mars, which was
not above Seventy Furlongs distant from the City Sybaris, dignified with the
Palace Royal of the Kings of Colehis. Medea therefore coming in the Night to
the Temple Gates, which were fast shut up, spoke to the Guards in the Language
of Taurica: Whereupon knowing her to be the King's Daughter, they forthwith
opened the Gates; upon which, the Argonants rushed in with their drawn Swords,
and killed many of the Barbarians, and drove the rest (terrified with the
sudden Surprise) out of the Temple; and then plucking down the Fleece, they
hasted back to their Ship with all speed.

While these things were in acting, Medea was as diligent on her part, and
poisoned the ever wakeful Dragon, which wound himself about the Fleece in the
P. 175.
Temple; and then she went on Shipboard with Jason. The Tauricans that fled,
informed the King of what was done, who forthwith pursuing the Greeks with his
Soldiers which were ready at hand, overtook them at the Seaside, and falling
upon them on the sudden, slew Iphitus, one of the Argonauts, Brother of
Euristheus, who imposed upon Hercules so many Labors. But when the rest of the
Greeks (who were before dispersed) fell on in a great Body upon them, the
Barbarians were most of them killed by Meleager, amongst whom was the King
himself. The Grecians hereupon being fired with this Success, pressed more
resolutely upon the Colchians, and at length put them to flight, and slew the
greatest part of them in the pursuit. Of the Argonauts were wounded in this
Encounter, Jason, Lacrtes, Atalanta, and the Thespiadae, but they were cured
within a few Days, by Applications, as is said, made up of Herbs and Roots by
Medea. Then furnishing themselves with Provision, they set Sail, in order to
return. But being got into the midst of the Pontick Sea, they were overtaken
with a sudden Tempest, to the great hazard of their Lives. But Orpheus
addressing himself to the Gods of Samothracia as before, the Winds presently
ceased, and Glaucus the Sea-God presently appeared near to the Ship, and swam
along by the Ship-side for Two Days and Nights together, and foretold to
Hercules his Labors and future Immortality. He told likewise the Castor and
Pollux.
Tyndarides, that they should be called The Sons of Jupiter.
Dioscuri, and should be adored and reverenced by all Men as Gods. Then he
called the Argonauts every one by their Names, and told them, that for the sake
of Orpheus's Prayers, by the provident care of the Gods, he now appeared to
them, and had foretold them of things to come. Therefore he advised them, that
as soon as they landed, they should pay their Vows, and give Thanks to the
Gods, by whose Kindness they had been now twice delivered. Having said this,
Glaucus dived again into the Sea.

The Argonauts being now arrived at the Mouth of Pontus, made to Land, where
Byzas then reigned, from whom the City is now called Byzantium. Here they
erected Altars, and offered up their Prayers and Thanks to the Gods, and
consecrated the Place, which is now at this Day accounted Sacred, and
reverenced by all that sail by that way. Loosing from thence, they passed
through Propontis, and the Hellespont, and made to the Coasts of Troy. When
they arrived there, Hercules sent his Brother Iphiclus and Telemon into the
City, to demand Hesione and the Horses: But Laomedon laid the Messengers by the
Heels, and plotted the Destruction of all the Argonauts. To which foul Act, all
his Sons (except Priam) contributed their helping Hands. For Priam alleged,
that Compacts with Strangers ought to be kept inviolable, and pressed that his
Sister, with the Horses that were promised should be restored; whose Advice
being disregarded, he privately conveyed Two Swords into the Goal to Iphiclus
and Telamon, declaring to them his Father's Design, and by this means procured
their Deliverance. For forthwith killing the Keepers that resisted them, they
escaped to the Sea, and discovered all particularly to the Argonauts. The
Heroes hereupon readily prepared themselves for Battle, and marched on to meet
the Trojans, who with their King were issued out of the City against them.

A sharp Dispute and Conflict there was, but at length the Valor of the Heroes
P. 176.
prevailed, where they say, Hercules exceeded them all; for he killed Laomedon,
and took the City by a sudden Assault, and punished them who were Parties and
Contrivers in the Design with the King; but gave the Kingdom to Priam for his
Justice and Equity; and after entering into a League of Friendship with him,
loosed from thence with the Argonauts. But some out of the ancient Poets say,
that being furnished only with Six Ships, upon the Account of being denied the
Horses, he took Troy himself, without the help of the Argonauts, and to confirm
this, they allege these Verses of H(...)

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
But Hercules my Father, as is said,
The Lions strong in Valor did exceed,
That only with Six Ships and Slender Force,
For Laomedon's Horses took his Course;
And then Besieged and took the City Troy,
And many of her People did destroy.
From Troy the Argonauts arrived at Samothracia, and then again gave Thanks to
the Gods, where they dedicated their Drink Offering Bowls, and left them in the
Temple, which remain there at this Day.

The return of the Heroes was not yet known; but the common Report was
throughout all Thessaly, that Jason and all his Companions were destroyed some
where or other about Pontus.

Pelias therefore now thinking it a fit opportunity to cut off all that might
in any probability seem to affect the Kingdom, compelled Jason's Father to
drink (...)ls Blood, and Murdered his Brother Promachus, who was then but a
mere Child.

But when Amphinome his Mother was sought for to be butchered, she acted the
part of a manlike and noble Spirit, worthy of remark; for running to the King's
Palace, she poured out most heavy Curses upon his Head, wishing that due
Vengeance might overtake him for his Impiety; and then immediately stabbed her
self, and so like an Hero ended her Days.

Pelias having thus extinguished Jason's whole Family, in a short time after
paid for it, and received the due Reward of his Wickedness: For Jason in the
Night entering a Port of Thessaly not far from the City Iolcos (yet out of view
of the Inhabitants) was by one informed of the sad state and condition of his
Family, and thereupon all the Heroes were in a readiness to assist Jason, and
to undergo all hazards for that purpose; but there arose some difference of
Opinions amongst them; for some were for surprising the King with a sudden
Assault, others were for the Raising of Forces out of every Country, and so to
join against him in a common War: For it was impossible for Three and Forty
Men, to think to overcome so Potent a Prince, both as to his Riches and the
number of his Cities. In these different Councils its said, that Medea promised
to kill the King by a Stratagem, and deliver up the Palace into their Hands,
without any hazard to any of them. The Heroes wondering at what she said, asked
how she would accomplish it? Who answered, that she had great variety of
Poisons of admirable strength and efficacy, some of them found out by her
Mother Hecate, and others by her Sister Cerces; that she had not as yet made
use of them for the killing of any Man; but now by the help of them, she would
execute due and deserved Punishment upon the wicked Wretches; and told the
Argonauts her whole Design, after what manner she would get to the King; and
promised that from some Turret in the Palace that looked toward the Sea, she
would give a Sign to their Watch by Fire in the Night, and by Smoke in the Day.

Hereupon she provided a Hollow Image of the Goddess Diana, in which she hid
several sorts of Poisons, and anointed her Hair with a sort of Ointment, which
turned it all gray and hoary, and with the same Ointment wrinkl'd up her Face
and her whole Body, so that she looked like an old withered Hagg. Then taking
the Goddess with her, ordered in all respects so as to excite the common People
to a superstitious Adoration, she entered the City when it was light; whereupon
the People came running in to her from all Quarters, as if she had been an
inspired Priestess: And she her self commanded every Body to bear a reverend
regard to the Goddess, who was now by the special Providence of the P. 177.
Gods, come to them from the Hyperboreans, for the Preservation of the King and
the whole City. All being now employed up and down in adoring the Goddess, and
preparing of Sacrifices in honor of her, the whole City was possessed with
such a Fanatical Fury of Superstition, that Medea ^^ily procured her self to be
brought into the Palace; where with her Delusions she infatuated both (...) his
Daughters with such a Pang of Superstition, that they all believed the Goddess
was come to load the King's House with all manner of Blessings, for (...)
declared that Diana in a Chariot, drawn through the Air by Dragons, had (...)
over many Parts of the World, and had now at length made choice of the K(...)
as the most Pious Prince to settle her Image, and establish her worship (...)
ever; adding, that she was commanded by the application of (...) to give a
Check to his Old Age, and restore him to his former Youth and (...) and bestow
many other Blessings upon him that might make hi^ Life comfort(...) to himself,
and pleasing unto the Goddess.

The King being amazed at this strange and unusual Discourse, she promised him
forthwith to give an assurance of the truth of what she said, by (...) in her
own Body. To this end therefore she ordered one of (...) his (...)ters to bring
her some Spring Water; which being done, she shut up her self in a little Room,
and bathing her Body all over in the Water, she cleans'd her self of the
Ointment, and so being restored to her former Vigor, as soon as she came into
the King's Presence, all the Beholders were amazed; for they conceited that an
Old Woman was transforw'd into a Youthful and Beautiful Virgin by the power and
providence of the Gods. She forthwith likewise by her Witchcraft caused the
appearance of the shape of the Dragons to appear, by which the (...)dess was
drawn through the Air from the Hyperborcans to continue as a Guest with Pelias.

These things done by her, being looked upon to be above the Course of Nature,
the King highly honored her, and believed all she said to be true; and it is
said that he took his Daughter's aside, and ordered them to assist her, and do
whatever she commanded; and that it was fitter his own Children should apply
Medicines to his Body than Servants, in order to reap the Benefits designed him
by the Favor of the Gods. Pelias therefore having expressly commanded that his
Daughters should observe whatever Medea ordered to be done, in reference to the
care of their Father's Body, were ready in all things to obey her. About
Midnight therefore when Pelias was fast asleep, she said it was absolutely
necessary that his Body should be boiled in a Cauldron: And though the young
Ladies easily and readily of their own accord, prepared themselves to obey her,
yet she applied her self to another Experiment for the gaining of further
Credit to what she said: There was an old Ram bred up in the Stall, which she
told the young Ladies, she would first Boil, and then it should come forth a
Lamb. Whereupon they agreed, and then it is said, she cut the Ram into small
Pieces, and boiled them, till to their seeming, by the use of her enchanted
Drugs, she brought forth a young Lamb out of the Kettle, to the admiration and
astonishment of the young Women, who now thinking they might with great
assurance depend upon what she promised, resolved to observe her in all her
Commands; and all of them, but Alcetis (who out of a pious and natural
Affection to her, Father, would not lay Hands upon him) cudgelled him to Death.
Whereupon Medea pretended that Vows and Prayers were first to be made to the
Moon, before his Body was dissected, and cast into the Cauldron: To which end,
she carried the Young Ladies with Torches and Firebrarnds to the top of the
highest part of the Palace; where Medea to spin out time, mumbled out a long
Prayer P. 178.
in the language of Colchis, that the Argonauts might make the Assault in the
mean time; who now seeing the Fire from the Turret, concluded the King was
dispatched; and therefore in a Body they made hastily to the City; where
presently mounting over the Walls, they entered the Palace with their drawn
Swords, and killed the Watch that opposed them. As soon as Pelias his Daughters
were come down to boil their Father, unexpectedly seeing Jason with the rest of
the Noble Youths his Companions, entered into the midst of the Palace, they
grievously cried out with exceeding sorrow and lamentation: Having now neither
power to revenge themselves upon Medea, nor time to purge themselves from the
horrid fact that by her Delusions they had committed, they had forthwith
murdered themselves, if Jason (pitying their miserable Condition) had not
prevented them, and comforted them with this Consideration, that their present
Misery was not occasioned by their own malicious Contrivance, but that they
were without any Fault of theirs led aside by the deceit of another: He
promised them likewise, that their whole family should be civilly and
honorably used. Having therefore called together a General Assembly, he
excused what was done, and declared that he had dealt far more gently with the
Authors of those Injuries than they deserved, and what he had done, was far
short of what he and his had suffered. Then he placed Acastus the Eldest Son of
Pelias upon his Father's Throne, and carried himself with all due respect to
the King's Daughters; and in performance of what he had promised, it is said, he
at length married them to the greatest Persons of Quality.

Alcestis the Eldest he married to Admetus the Thessalian the Son of Pheretes;
Amphinome to Andraemon the Brother of Leonteus; and Eradne to Canas the Prince
of Phocis, the Son of Cephalus. And these were the things afterward done by
Jason.

Then arriving with the rest of the Heroes in the Isthmos of Peloponesus, he
there sacrificed to Neptune, and dedicated the Ship Argo to that God. Having
gained the special favor of Creon King of Corinth, he was made Free of the
City, and ever after dwelt among the Corinthians.

When the Argonauts were preparing every one to return into his own Country,
they say Hercules made this Proposal, Olympic Games instituted by Hercules.
This was the first Institution: But the Olympicks were not an Era, till 460
Years after, An. Mund. 3174, in the 37th Year of Vzziah King of Judah, before
Christ, 774.
that to obviate the unexpected Blasts and Frowns of Fortune, they should enter
into an Oath mutually to assist each other, whenever any of them stood in need
of help; and that they should pick out the most remarkable place in Greece for
the celebrating of Sports, and a General and Solemn Meeting of all the
Grecians, and that the Games should be celebrated in honor of Jupiter Olympus,
the greatest of the Gods.

Upon which the Heroes entered into the Association proposed, and left it to
Hercules to institute the Games; who made choice of the Ground in the
Territories of Elis, near to the River Alpheus, for the General and Solemn
Meeting, and dedicated the Place to the chiefest of the Gods, from whom it was
called Olympic. Having therefore appointed Horse-coursing, Wrestling, and
other Oymnick Sports, and ordered their several Prizes and Rewards, he sent
Messengers to all the Cities, to acquaint them with the institution of these
Games. He was in no small Honor and Repute before, upon the account of his
Expedition with the Argonauts: But this Institution of the Olympic Games much
more advanced his praise; for he was so cried up amongst all the Grecians, and
was so eminently famous in the esteem of most of the Cities, that many desired
to enter into a League of Friendship with him, and to stand and fall with him
in all Dangers whatsoever.

His Valor and Military Art was so admired by every Body, that he presently
got together a vast Army, with which he went through the whole World, desiring
to benefit all Mankind: Upon which account all unanimously agree that he has
attained to a state of Immortality. But the Poets according to their prodigous
P. 179.
way of relating matters, say, that Hercules himself alone, and without any
Arms, performed all those famous Actions reported of him. But we have before
given an Account of all those things that are fabulously related concerning
this God: And now it remains that we should proceed with the History of Jason.

It Is said that he and Medea, as Man and Wife, lived together Ten Years in
Corinth, and of her begat first Two Twins, Thessalus and Alcimena, and a Third
called Tisandrus, much younger than the other Two. During all this time, they
say Medea was greatly beloved of her Husband, being eminent not only for the
excellency of her Beauty, but for her Prudence and other Virtuous
Qualifications: But it is said, that when she grew old, and her Beauty began to
decay, Jason fell in love with Glauces, the Daughter of Creon, and courted the
young Lady to marry her. The Father agreed to the Match, and appointed a Day,
but Jason they say, first applied himself to Medea, in order to persuade her to
a voluntary Divorce; telling her, that he did not marry this other Lady out of
any aversion or disgust to her, but that he might have Children to be Heirs to
the Royal Family. Hereat the Woman stormed, and appealed to the Gods for
Revenge, the Witnesses of his Oath and Vows. However it is said, Jason without
any further regard to her, married the King's Daughter.

Medea therefore being commanded to leave the City, having only one Day allowed
her by Creon to prepare for her Departure, by the Art of Witchcraft she changed
the Form of her Countenance, and entered the Palace in the Night, and by a Root
found out by Cerces her Sister (which being kindled, was of such a nature, as
it could not be extinguished) she set the Palace on Fire. And now all being in
a Flame, Jason sprang out from the Burning, and escaped, but Glance and her
Father Creon hemmed in on every side by the Fire, were both consumed. Some
Historians say, that Medea's Sons presented the new Bride with poisoned
Plasters, which she applying to her self, miserably perished, and her Father
together with her, by only touching her Body in endeavoring to help her. Medea
thus succeeding in her first Attempt, proceeded still to be further revenged
upon (...) (...). 7.
Jason; for she was so far transported with Rage and Jealousy, yea, with
implacable Cruelty, that notwithstanding Jason's narrow Escape, and the
Destruction of the Bride, she further inhanc'd his Misery, by murdering his
Sons he had by her; for she cut all their Throats (except one who made his
Escape by Flight) and buried them in the Temple of Juno; and when she had done,
at Midnight fled with some of her Faithful Maidservants from Corinth to
Hercules at Thebes, who undertaking as a Surety for Jason, that he should
perform his Vows made to her in Colchis, promised to assist her in taking
Revenge. In the mean time, every one judged Jason was justly punished in this
loss, both of his Wife and Children: Not being therefore able to bear the
insupportable weight of his Calamities he killed himself. The Corinthians were
even astonished at the extremity of his Misery, and were especially perplexed
concerning the Burying of the Children. Therefore they sent to Delphos to
inquire of the Oracle how their Bodies were to be disposed of: And it is said,
the Oracle ordered them to be buried in Juno's Temple, and that they should for
ever after be worshipped as Demi Gods. The Corinthians accordingly observed what
was commanded; and Thessalus, who escaped the cruel Hands of his Mother, was
brought up by them.

Afterward he returned to Iolcus, his Father's Country, and found Acastus the
Son of Pelius, then lately dead; and thereupon (as next Heir to the Crown) took
upon him the Sovereign Authority, and called the People within his Dominion P.
180.
after his own Name, Thessalians. But I am not ignorant that there are other
Accounts given concerning the naming of them Thessalians, of which we shall
speak in their proper Place.

In the mean time they say, Medea finding Hercules at Thebes distracted, and
his Children a little before by him murdered, she cured him with her Medicinal
Applications. But because there was no hope of Assistance for her from Hercules
at the present, by reason of the Labors imposed upon him by Eurystheus, she
fled to Aegeus the Son of Paedion at Athens, who married her, and begat of her
Medus, afterward King of the Medes. Others say, she was brought to her Trial
by Hippotus the Son of Creon, and fairly acquitted.

Some small time after, when Theseus returned from Traezene to Athens, she was
expelled the City for Witchcraft; and Aegeus sent her away by Messengers, with
Orders to conduct her to what Place soever she had a mind to go; and it is said,
she went into Phaenicia; and that from thence she past into the upper Parts of
Asia, and being Married there to a certain famous King, she had a Son by him
called Medus, who after the Death of his Father, succeeded in the Kingdom, and
became renowned for his Valor, and after his own Name, called the People Medes.

But by reason of the Monstrous Stories feigned by the Tragedians, there is
great variety and difference in the History concerning Medea. Others in favor
to the Athenians say, that she returned safe to Colchis, and took along with
her Medus the Son of Aegeus: And that about that time, Aeetes was by force of
Arms deprived of his Kingdom by Perses his Brother, and was restored by his
Nephew Medus, who killed Perses.

Afterward Medeus having raised a great Army, overran many Parts of Asia above
Pontus, and subdued that Part now called from him Media: But it would be here
unnecessary and too tedious to relate all the Stories that they have written
concerning Medea; therefore we shall now proceed with what remains of the
History of the Argonauts.

Many both of the Ancient and Modern Writers (amongst whom is Timaeus) report
that the Argonauts (after the carrying away of the Golden Fleece) coming to
understand that Aeetes had blockt up the Mouth of Pontus with his Fleet, to
prevent their return, performed that which was wonderfully remarkable: For it is
said, they sailed up to the Head of the River Tanais, and there drew the Ship a
considerable way over Land into another River that ran into the Ocean, and so
fell down that way into the Sea; and then bending their Course from the North
to the West, leaving the Continent on their Left Hand, they at length entered
our Sea near Now Cadiz.
Gades: And to confirm this, they use these Arguments.

First, that the The Galls, now French.
Celts, the Inhabitants near the Ocean, do adore Castor and Pollux above all
the rest of the Gods; for amongst these Celts, there is an ancient Tradition,
that these Gods appeared, and came to them out of the Ocean: And they affirm,
that there are several Places near the Sea, that had their Names from the
Argonauts and the Castor and Pollux.
Dioscuri, which remain still to this Day; and that within the Continent beyond
Gades, there are apparent Marks and Signs of the return of the Argonauts: For
sailing by Now Tuscany.
Tyrrhenia, and arriving at a certain Island called Ilua near Tuscany.
Aethalia, there is a Spacious Haven, was called by them Argo, from the Name of
their Ship, which Name the Port retains to this Day: And that there is P. 181.
another Harbor in Hetruria, About an Hundred and Twenty Miles.
Eight Hundred Furlongs from Rome, which they named Telamon, and that the Port
at the City Formia into Italy they called Aeetes, which is now named Caieta.

They further say, that being driven upon the Quicksands in Lybia, by a
Violent Tempest, they were informed by Triton the King, of the nature of the
Sea in those Parts, and how to avoid the Danger; for which Kindness they
presented him with a Brass Tripode, on which were inscribed very ancient
Characters, which not long since it is said was amongst the Hesperians.

We are not here to omit refuting those Historians, that affirm the Argonauts
sailing through the River Ister to the Spring-heads below, passed through the
Channel there straight before them into the Adriatic Gulf. But Time has now
clearly manifested the mistakes of those Authors, who thought that that Ister
which disimbogues itself by several Mouths into the Pontick-Sea, and that other
which falls into Adria, rise from one and the same Springhead. For since the
Conquest of Istria by the Romans, it is known by experience, that the
Fountainheads of this River, are not above Forty Furlongs from the Sea: But the
Identity of Rivers Names has been the occasion of Historians Mistakes.

Having now insisted long enough upon the Acts of Hercules, and the Argonauts,
Hercules his Sons and Nephews.
it is requisite according to my Promise, to relate the Actions of his Sons.

After the Translation of Hercules to the Gods, his Children dwelt in
Trachinia, with Ceyces the King. When Hyllus and some of the rest were grown up
to Men's Estates, Eurystheus began to fear, lest when they were all grown up, he
should be ejected out of the Kingdom of Micaena: Therefore he resolved to expel
the Heraclides out of all parts of Greece. To this end he required Ceyces, to
banish the Heraclides and the Posterity of Licymnius, together with Iolaus and
the Arcadian Regiments (that assisted Hercules in his Expeditions) out of his
Dominions, and threatened him that if he did not he would proclaim War against
him.

Hereupon the Heraclides and their Friends, considering they were not able to
contend with him, resolved to fly from Trachine of their own accord: Making
therefore away to other Cities more wealthy and considerable, they desired
Residence amongst them: But none durst receive them but the Athenians, who out
of their natural Generosity, entertained them, and gave them and their Friends
Habitations in Tricorynthus, which is one of the The other Three Cities are
Oenon, Probatintum and Marathon.
Four Cities of that part of Attica called Tetrapolis.

After some time when all the Heraclides were attained to Men's Estates, and
their Spirits were raised up upon the account of the glory of their Father,
Euristheus jealous of their growing Interest, led a strong Army against them.
But the Heraclides assisted by the Athenians, having committed themselves to
the care of Iolaus (Hercules his Brother's Son) who together with Theseus and
Hyllus, commanded the Forces, fought Eurystheus, and routed his Army, and cut
off a great part of them; and Euristheus himself (his Chariot breaking in
pieces in his Flight) was killed by Hyllus the Son of Hercules; and all the
Sons of Eurystheus fell in this Battle.

The Heraclides having obtained so remarkable a Victory over Eurystheus, and
their prosperous Success now advancing the number of their Forces, they invaded
Peloponesus under their General Hyllus.

One Atreus at that time, after the Death of Eurystheus, had obtained the
Kingdom of Mycaena; and being joined with the Tegeans, and some other
Confederates, marched out against the Heraclidae. Both Armies met in the
Isthmos, and there Hyllus challenged any one This Atreus was Uncle to
Eurystheus, that is, Brother of Assidamia, the Mother of Euristheus. He was the
Son of Pelops, and Father of Agamemnon. Vid. Thy. lib. 1. P. 182.
of the Enemy to fight him singly, upon condition that if he overcame the
other, the Kingdom of Euristheus should be given up to the Heraclidae; but if
he himself were killed, that then the Heraclidae should not return into
Peloponesus, within the space of Fifty Years. Whereupon Echemus King of the
Tegeans entered the List, and fought with Hyllus, who was slain in the Combat.
The Heraclidae thereupon in performance of the Agreement, made no further
Attempt to enter Peloponesus, but returned to Trycorinthus. Afterward
Licymnius with his Children, and Tlepolemus the Son of Hercules, by the consent
of the Citizens took up their Residence, and dwelt in Argos; the rest continued
in Tricorynthus, till the Fifty Years were expired, and then they returned into
Peloponesus, whose Acts we shall set forth, when we come to those Times.
Alchmena in the mean time came to Thebes, and a little time after vanished
away, so that she was worshipped by the Thebans as a Goddess. The rest of the
Heraclidae, they say, applied themselves to Aeginius the Son of Dorus, who
restored them to their Father's Kingdom, with which he was entrusted by
Hercules, and so settled themselves among the Doreans.

But they say, that Tlepolemus the Son of Hercules, who resided in Argos, was
forced to fly thence to Rhodes, for the Killing of Licymnius the Son of
Electryo, upon some falling out that was between them. The Island was then
inhabited by the Hellenes, a Colony brought thither by Triopas the Son of
Phorbas.

Tlepolemus divided Rhodes, together with its Inhabitants, into Three equal
Parts, and built there Three Cities, Lyndus, Jalysus and Camirus; becoming King
of the Rhodians upon the account of the renow'd Actions of his Father, he
afterward assisted Agamemnon at the Siege of Troy.

CHAP. IV.
The Acts of Theseus. The Minotaur in Crete. Androgeus the Son of Minos
murdered by Egeus. Ariadna Daughter of Minos, in love with Theseus. Ariadna's
Crown. Aegeus King of Athens kills himself. Theseus's Death. The War of Thebes
by the Seven Captains. The Epigoni renew the War. The Pedigrees of the Heroes
at Troy. Of the Centaurs, and Lapithae. The Pedigrees of Aesculapius, Aeacus,
Ajax, Pelops, Tantalus, Oenomeus. Dardanus's Posterity to Priam King of Troy.

SInce we have spoken of Hercules and his Posterity, it remains that we say
something of Theseus, because he seemed to imitate Hercules in his brave and
noble Actions. Theseus was Cotemporary with Hercules, An. Mun. 2720, to 2745.


He was the Son of Aethra, the Daughter of Pittheus, by Aegeus Plut. judged by
Neptune, till his Father was known, Plut.
Neptune, and brought up in Traezena, with Pittheus his Mothers Father. Having
afterward found (as is reported) the A Sword and a Pair of Shoes. See Plut.
Thesius.
Tokens hid under a Stone by Aegeus, he resolved to go to Athens: As he
traveled along the Seacoasts in the Isthmos, his Mind was full of Thoughts
how to imitate the Valor of Hercules, and to perform some glorious and
honorable Enterprises.

1. First therefore he killed Corynetes, who used to carry a Club called
Coryne, which he used as defensive Arms, and with the same Weapon knocked all
Passengers and Travelers on the Head.

2. Then next he slew Sinnis, who haunted the Isthmos, and used to bend down
Two Pine-Trees, one to meet another, and He was called (...), a Bender of
Pines, Plut. Thesers.
bind one Arm to one of the Trees, and another to the other, of such as he took
passing that way; and when he had done, then to let them spring up on a
sudden, which by their force and violence so rent in Pieces the Bodies of the
poor Miserable Creatures, that they died in most horrid pain and torment.

3. The Third thing remarkable that he did, was the Killing of the Crommyonion
Sow, a most vast and fierce Creature which destroyed many.

4. The Fourth was the Killing of Sciron, who lay lurking amongst the Rocks,
called from him the Scyronian Rocks: His manner was, that he would force
Passengers to wash his Feet upon the top of a steep Rock, and then kick them
down headlong into the Sea, near Chelone.

5. Next he slew Cercyon at Eleusina, who killed all that he overcame in
Wrestling.

6. Afterward he killed one Procrustes, who resided in Corydallus in Attica:
His Custom was to force all that past that way, to lie down upon a Bed, and if
they were longer than it, to cut off so much of their Legs, as reached beyond
the Bed; if they were shorter, then he wrackt and stretched out their Limbs,
till they reached the full length; thence he was named * Procrustes. A Tormentor.


Having performed these notable Exploits, he came to Athens, and by the Tokens
which he brought along with him, he was known and owned by Aegeus.

7. Afterward he mastered the Marathonian Bull (which Hercules in performance
of one of his Labors, brought from Crete into Peloponesus) and led the Monster
in Triumph into Athens, which Aegeus sacrificed to Apollo. P. 183.


And now it remains that we speak of the Minotaur which was killed by Theseus:
Minotaur.
But for the clearer understanding of the History, it is necessary that we first
ascend to things done some time before, that have a Reference to the Narration.

Teutamus.
Tectamus the Son of Dorus, the Son of Hellen, the Son of Deucalion, arriving
in Crete, with the Aeolians and Pelasgians, reigned there as King, and marrying
the Daughter of Cretheus, had by her Asterius; in the time of whose Reign, they
say Jupiter having carried away Europa out of Phaenicia, transported her upon a
Bull's Back into Crete, and upon her begot Three Sons, Minos, Rhadomanthus, and
Sarpedon.

Asterius King of Crete afterward married Europa, but having no Children of
his own, he adopted the Sons of Jupiter, and left the Kingdom to them.
Rhadamanthus prescribed Laws for the Cretians: Minos taking the Kingdom upon
him, married Itone, the Daughter of Lyctius, and of her begat Lycastes, who
coming to reign, Married Ida the Daughter of Corybantus, and of her begat
another Minos, whom some say was the Son of Jupiter. He was the first of the
Grecians that rigged out a gallant Navy, and gained the Dominion of the Sea. He
married Pasiphoe, the Daughter of Sol and Cretes, and by her had Deucalion,
Astrea, Androgeus, Ariadne, and many other Children.

Androgeus in the Reign of Aegeus, went to Athens, to the The Panathenean
Festivals were kept in honor of Minerva, wherein were exhibited Wrestling,
Horse-Races, Dancing in Armor, etc. They were celebrated the 27th of July
Yearly. Rous. Archaeal. Attic. lib. 2. c. 10. p. 67. Vid. Steph. Dict. They
were instituted by Theseus; upon what ground: See Pausan. in Arcad. c. 2.
Panathenean Solemnities, where he was Victor in all the Sports and Contests;
upon which Account, he became very familiar with the Sons of Pallas; and
thereupon Aegeus grew jealous, lest the House of Pallas, with the assistance of
Minos, should out him of his Kingdom, and therefore contrived to cut off
Androgeus. To which end, as he was traveling to Thebes to see a Sacred
Procession by order of Aegeus, he was waylaid by some of the Country People,
and assassinated near Oenon in Attica.

Minos afterward hearing of the sad Misfortune of his Son, went to Athens, and
required Justice for the Murder committed: But seeing that he could not
prevail, he proclaimed War against the Athenians, and prayed Jupiter to send a
Drought and Famine upon the City of Athens; whose Prayer was speedily heard,
for forthwith there was a great Drought throughout Attica, and even through all
Greece it self, together with a miserable Scarcity and dreadful Famine.

The chief Men therefore of the several Cities, assembling themselves together,
sent to consult the Oracle at Delphos, what they must do in order to avert the
present Calamity; who answered, that they were to go to Aeacus the Son of
Jupiter, and Aegina the Daughter of Asopus, and entreat him to offer Sacrifices
for them: Which they did accordingly, and Aeacus performed what they desired:
Upon which the Drought and Famine ceased in all Parts of Greece, but only in
Attica, and there it still continued; so that the Athenians were forced to
resort again to the Oracle, to implore Relief from the pressing Calamity. Upon
which, the God returned Answer, that to expiate the Murder of Androgeus, they
should give to Minos such satisfaction as he required. The Athenians obeyed the
Oracle; and Minos demanded, that for Seven Years together, they should send
Seven Boys, and as many Girls to be devoured by the Minotaur, and that this
they should do as long as the Monster lived. The Athenians sent them
accordingly, and so the Famine ceased, and Minos desisted from further
prosecuting of the War. When the Seven Years were expired, Minos came again
with a great Navy into the Coasts of Attica, and demanded Fourteen Boys, which
were delivered him.

Theseus with the rest of the Children his Fellows, being now ready to set
Sail, Aegeus sent a Pilot along with them, with Orders, that if Theseus
overcame the Minotaur, that they should enter the Here seems something to be
wanting, as how Theseus came to be one of them. Vid. Plut. These.
Port of Athens with white Sails; but if he perished with black, as In token of
Mourning, when they carried away the Children to Crete, Plut. These.
they used formerly to do.

When the Athenians arrived in Crete, Ariadna, Minos his Daughter, fell in love
with Theseus for his gallant mean and deportment: Having therefore opportunity
of Converse with her, by her Advice and Assistance, he both killed the
Minotaur, and learned the P. 184.
Passage out of the Labyrinth, and so came out safe. Then privately preparing
for his return into his own Country, he stole away Ariadna, and sailed out of
the Port in the Night, and arrived at the Island then called Dia, but now Naxos.

They report, that at that time Bacchus being taken with the Beauty of the
Young Lady, took her by force from Theseus, and through the ardent Affection he
had for her, married her; and that his love for her was such, as that after her
Death, he dignified her with Immortality, and transformed her crown into a
Constellation of Stars, called Ariadna's Crown. Theseus they say, was so
grieved Ariadna's Crown.
to be thus bereaved of the Young Lady, that through Sorrow and Vexation, he
forgot the Commands of Aegeus, and made into the Port of Athens with black
Sails. At which sight, Aegeus concluding that his Son was destroyed, resolved
upon an Heroic, but a sad and lamentable Action; for he went up to the top of
the Citadel (and through the excessiveness of his Grief, counting his Life a
Burden to him) he threw himself down Headlong. After his Death Theseus
succeeded him in the Kingdom, and governed according to the Laws, and ordered
and performed many things, which conduced to the welfare and increase of the
City. The most famous and remarkable among all the rest was this, That he
gathered all the People together that were scattered Abroad in the Country (and
so were more considerable for their Number than their Power) and brought them
into Athens. From this time the largeness of the City did so puff up the
Athenians, and swell them with that confidence, that they questioned not but to
be Lords of all Greece. But having said enough of these things, we shall go on
with those that remain concerning Theseus, and which afterward happened to him.

Deucalion, the Eldest of Minos's Sons, reigning in Crete, entered into a
League with the Athenians, and Married his own Sister Phoedra to Theseus.

After his Marriage he sent away his Son Hippolytus, whom he had by the Amazon,
to Troezena, to be bred and brought up by his Sister Aethra: Of Phoedra he
begat Acamantes and Demophon.

Hippolytus a while after coming to Athens to the Celebration of a great
Festival, Phoedra was so taken with his Beauty, that she fell passionately in
love with him: But he going back again for that time, she built near to the
Citadel the Temple of Venus, whence she might have a prospect of Traezene.

Afterward going with Theseus to Traezene to visit Pittheus, she solicited
Hippolytus to lie with her; who refusing the Motion, her Love was turned into
Hatred and Rage, and therefore she accused him to her Husband, that he
attempted to Ravish her. Theseus suspecting the truth of what she said,
summoned Hippolytus to appear and answer the Accusation; but Phoedra fearing
she should be discovered upon the Trial of the Cause, hanged herself.

When Hippolytus first heard of the Accusation, he was driving a Chariot; upon
the News whereof, he was in such a Consternation and Disturbance, that he let
the Reins fall; which so startled the Horses, that they hurried him away, and
broke the Chariot in Pieces; and he himself being fastn'd in the Harness, was
dragged along upon the Ground, and so perished. Hippolytus thus losing his Life
upon the account of his commendable Chastity, was adored by the Troezenians as
a God. Theseus afterward by a Sedition being driven out of the City, died in
Banishment. But the Athenians being sorry for what they had done, brought back
his Bones, and honored him as a God, and the Place where they buried him in
the midst of Athens, they made a Sanctuary, which from him was called Theseion.

Since we have proceeded so far in the Story of Theseus, we shall give a
distinct account also of the Rape of Helen, and of the intention of Perithous
to court Proserpina; for these things have a Relation to the History of Theseus.

Perithous the Son of Ixion, after the Death of his Wife Hippodamia, by whom he
had a Son called Polypodes, went to Athens to Theseus; whom finding a Widower
(having then lately buried his Wife Phoedra) he advised to steal away Helen,
the Daughter of Jupiter and Laeda, who was then about Ten Years of Age, and of
surpassing Beauty: To this end they went (with some other of their Associates)
P. 185.
to Lacedemon, and catching a fit opportunity for the purpose, seized upon
Helen, as their common Prize, and carried her away to Athens; where it was
agreed between them, to cast Lots for her, and that he who should have the good
Fortune to gain her, should faithfully assist the other (through all Hazards
whatsoever) in procuring him another Wife. This Compact being confirmed by a
Solemn Oath, she fell by Lot to Theseus. The Athenians were much incensed at
what was done in this Business: Theseus therefore fearing the bad effect of it,
privately kept Helen at Aphidna, one of the Cities of Attica, and committed her
to the care of his Mother Aethra, and some other Persons of Quality that were
his Faithful Friends.

Afterward Perithous had a desire to court Proserpina, and for this purpose
required Theseus to go along with him: At first Theseus endeavored to dissuade
him, and to take him off from such a wicked and impious Design. But Perithous
urging him the more vehemently (and by virtue of his Oath being bound
thereunto) he at length agreed to join with him in the Attempt. To this end
both of them descended into the Hell. See this explained in Plut. These. This
Pluto was the King of the Molossians, and his Wives and Daughters Name was
Proserpina, who clapped both Theseus and the other up in Prison.
Shades below, and for their Impudence and Impiety, were clapped up, and bound
fast in Chains; but Theseus was afterward released for the sake of Hercules.
But Perithous suffers Eternal Pains with the Infernal Spirits for his
Wickedness; though some Writers report, that neither of 'em ever returned.
About the same time they say, Castor and Pollux (the Brother of Helen)
assaulted Aphidna, and taking it by Storm, razed it to the Ground, and carried
away Helen (still a Virgin) to Lacedemon, and with her among the Captives,
A^thra the Mother of Theseus.

Having spoke sufficiently of these things, we shall now proceed to give an
Account of the Seven Captains that made War against Thebes, and show the first
Causes of that War. Laius The Seven Captains against Thebes. This is the first
War related by any Heathen Historian, either in Prose or Verse. An. Mund. 2727,
the 10th Year of Jair, Judge. 10. 3. Before Christ, 1221, about 30 Years before
the Trojan War.
the King of Thebes having married Jocasta the Daughter of Creon, and for a
long time being without Children; at length consulted the Oracle whether he
ever should have any Issue. Pithia the Priestess gave answer from the Oracle,
that it would be unfortunate to him to have any Issue; for the Son that he
should afterward beget, should kill him, and involve his whole Family in most
dreadful Calamities. But somewhat forgetful of what the Oracle had declared, he
afterward begat a Son, but bored his Feet through with an Iron, and ordered
him to be exposed in the open Fields; and for that reason he was afterward
called Oedipus. The Servants that took him Oedipus.
into their Custody for that purpose, were unwilling to leave him so to the
wide World, but gave him to King of Scicion, or Corinth.
Polybus his Wife, who was barren.

Being attained at length to Man's Estate, Laius resolved to inquire of the
Oracle, to know what was become of the exposed Infant; and Oedipus at the same
time being by some one informed of the Design against him when he was so very
Young, took a Journey to Delphos, to inquire of the Oracle who were his true
Parents: It so fell out, that both of them meeting one another upon the Road in
Phocis, Laius in a proud and haughty manner commanded Oedipus to get out of the
way; who thereupon was so enraged, that he fell upon Laius and killed him, not
knowing him to be his Father.

About that time they report that Sphinx, a double shaped Monster, came to
Sphinx.
Thebes, and put forth a Riddle to be resolved by any that could: Which none
being able to do (by reason of the difficulty of the thing) she destroyed many:
At length she became more moderate, and offered a Reward to such as should
unfold it, that he should marry Jocasta, and with her enjoy the Kingdom of
Thebes. When none else could expound the Riddle, Oedipus was the only Man that
did it. The Riddle propounded by Sphinx was this; What Creature is that that is
Two-Footed, Three-Footed, and Four-Footed? When all others were puzzled, Oedipus
interpreted it to be a Man; who when he is an Infant, creeps upon all His Hands
and Feet.
Four; when he grows elder, goes upright upon his Two Feet; but when he is old,
he is Three-Footed, using a Staff to support him by reason of his weakness.
Whereupon Sphinx (as it is reported) threw herself down Headlong from the top
of the Rock: And Oedipus married his Mother unknown to him, and begat of her
Two Sons, Eteocles and Polynices, and Two Daughters, Antigone and Ismene. The
Sons being grown up to Man's Estate, came to the knowledge of the P. 186.
Wickedness committed in their Family, and therefore for the foulness of the
Fact, confined Oedipus so as that he should not stir Abroad; and his Sons took
upon them the Government, first agreeing together to rule Yearly one after
another by turns. Eocles the Elder Brother reigned first, but when his Year was
out, he refused to give way to his Brother: Polynices demanded the Government
according to the Covenant between them, but his Brother turned to him the Deaf
Ear; upon which he repaired to Ardrastus King of Argos.

At which time Tydeus the Son of Oeneus King of Calydonia, was fled out of
Aetolia to Argos, for Killing of his Nephews Alcathous and Lycotheus. Adrastus
kindly entertained them both, and by command of the Oracle, gave his Daughter
Argia in marriage to Polynices, and Deipyle to Tydeus. The young Men being both
in great Honor and Esteem, and highly approved of by the King for their
virtuous Qualifications, Adrastus promised to restore them both to their own
Countries. Resolving therefore first to bring back Polynices, he sent Tydeus on
an Embassage to Etocles to debate the matter with him: In his Return, it is
said, he was set upon by Fifty Men, employed by Eteocles to way-lay him; all
whom notwithstanding he slew, and came safe, beyond all seeming Probability to
Argos. Adrastus being informed of this piece of Treachery, prepared all things
necessary for the War, and Procured Capaneus, Hippomedon and Parthenopaeus the
Son of Atalanta, the Daughter of Sheneus to join with him: Polynices also
endeavored to persuade Amphiraus the Sooth-sayer, to go along with them to the
War against Thebes; but he foreknowing he should fall in that War if he went,
refused to stir. Polynices therefore presented Amphiraus his Wife with a Or
Necklace.
Golden-Chain (which as is reported, was bestowed upon Harmonia by Minerva) to
persuade her Husband to join with them as one of their Confederates. There
being some Controversy about that time between Adrastus and Amphiaraus
concerning the Kingdom, they agreed together to refer the whole matter in
difference, both as to the Kingdom and the War, to the decisive Judgment of
Euriphile the Sister of Adrastus, and Wife to Amphiaraus. Hereupon she gave
Judgment for Adrastus, and that her Husband should join with the rest in the
War against Thebes. Amphiaraus (though he looked upon himself to be betrayed by
his Wife,) yet prepared to go along with the other Captains: But before he
went, commanded his Son Alchmeon, that after he was dead, he should kill
Eriphyle; who afterward executed his Father's Commands, by murdering his
Mother; but was some time after so terrified in Conscience with the horridness
of the Fact, that he went stark mad.

But to proceed; Adrastus, Polynices and Tydeus, together with Four other
Captains, Amphiraus, Capaneus, Hippomedon, and Parthenopeus, with a great Army,
marched against Thebes; where Eteocles and Polynices killed each other. Capeneus
in attempting to scale the Walls, was likewise slain. The Earth opened her
Mouth and swallowed up Amphiaraus and his Chariot together, and so he was never
more seen. All the rest of the Generals likewise perished in this War except
Adrastus, and a great Slaughter there was among the common Soldiers, whom the
Thebans would not suffer to be carried off the Ground; so that Adrastus was
forced to leave them unbury'd, and return to Argos.

The Bodies of the Slain thus lying unbury'd at Cadmea, none daring to interr
them, the Athenians (always commendable above others for their Humanity) took
care of this matter, and buried them all. And these were the Misfortunes that
befell the Seven Captains in the War at Thebes.

But the Children of them that were Slain (called Epigoni) to revenge their
Born after.
Father's Deaths, all joined together, and resolved to make War upon that City.
The Oracle of Apollo (upon Enquiry) answered them, that they should overcome P.
187.
Thebes, if they made Alchmaeon the Son of Amphiaraus their General. Whereupon
Alchmaeon being accordingly (with unanimous consent) created Commander in
chief, consulted the Oracle, both concerning the present intended Expedition,
and the Revenge that he was enjoined by his Father to execute upon Eripyle his
Mother. The Oracle commanded him to perform both, because she not only received
a Chain of Gold for what she did, which was the occasion of his Father's Death,
but a rich Or Garment called Peplus.
Vale likewise as a Bribe, in order to the ruin of himself. Venus (they say)
heretofore bestowed this Chain and Garment upon Harmonia the Wife of Cadmus;
but both were given to Eripyle; the Chain by Polynices, and the Vale by
Thersandrus, Polynices his Son, that she might persuade Alchmaeon, to go to the
Theban War.

Alchmaeon therefore raised Soldiers out of Argos, but great Numbers out of
the Neighboring Towns, and with these he marched against Thebes: The Thebans
issued out of the City against them, upon which there was a sharp Engagement;
but the Alchmeons at length got the Day. The Thebans being thus overcome with a
great Slaughter of their Citizens, seeing themselves too weak for the other,
utterly despaired of all future Success, and therefore consulted Teiresias the
Soothsayer what they should do. Who advised them to abandon the City, as the
only means left for their Safety and Preservation. The Cadmeans followed his
Advice, and in the Night forsook the City, and fled to a Province in Beotia,
called Tilphotium. The Epigonians afterward entered and razed the City, and
being now Lords of all (among others) possessed themselves of Daphne, the
Daughter of Teiresias, whom (according to their Vow) they devoted (as the chief
of their Spoils) to the Oracle at Delphos. The Daughter nothing inferior to her
Father for the Art of Divination, mightily improved it while she continued at
Delphos; for she was endued with those Parts and Qualifications that were to be
admired: She writ diverse sorts of Prophetical Verses in a most artificial dress
and composure, out of which (they say) the Poet Homer borrowed many Verses for
the adorning of his Poems. Being often in an Enthusiastical inspiration from
the God, she uttered things that were Prophetical, and therefore (they say) she
was called a Sibyl. For to be so inspired, is in the Greek Language to act the
(...).
Sibyl.

The Epigonians thus prosperously succeeding in their Expedition, returned at
length (laden with Spoil) into their own Country. Among those Thebans that
fled to Tilphosium, Tiresias died, and was buried by the Cadmeans with great
Funeral Pomp, and adored afterward as a God.

Some time after leaving the City Tilphosium, they invaded the Doreans, and
overcoming them in a Battle expelled them out of their Country, and settled
themselves for a while in their Rooms; but afterward part of them returned to
Thebes in the Reign of Creon, the Son of Menaeceus, and the rest continued in
Doris: But the expuls'd Doreans at length returned into their Country, and
inhabited Erineus, Citinius, and part of Beotia. About this time Beotus the Son
of Neptune and Arne, * In the Greek Euboea for Beotia.
came into the Country, then called Aeolis, (now Thessaly) and named those that
accompanied him Beotians.

Here it is necessary to give a distinct and particular Account of those things
which Aeolians.
we have gathered out of the Rubbish of Antiquity, concerning these Aeolians.

In former times, some of the Children of Aeolus (the Nephew of Deucalion and
Helen) inhabited the Places before mentioned, but Mimas another Son reigned in
Aeolis, and Hippotes the Son of Mimas begat Aeolus of Menalippe: And Arne the
Daughter of this later Aeolus had a Son by Neptune called Beotus. Aeolus not
believing she was got with Child by Neptune, judged her guilty of Whoredom, and
therefore delivered her to a Metapontinian Stranger (that was there by chance
at that time) to be transported to A Town in Italy near Tarentum.
Metapontum; which he did accordingly, and there she was delivered of Aeolus
and Beotus, whom the Metapontinian (being Childless) by direction of the
Oracle, adopted for his own Sons. When they grew to Men's Estate, a Sedition
being raised in Metapontum, they possessed themselves P. 188.
of the Kingdom by force of Arms. Afterward Arne and Autolyte, the Wife of the
Metapontinian falling together by the Ears, the Sons of Arne, in assisting
their Mother, killed Autolyte; which cruel Fact the Metapontinian took most
heinously, and therefore they got on Shipboard, and put to Sea with their
Mother Arne and many other of their Friends. Aeolus possessed himself of the
Islands in the Tyrrhenian Seas, called the Aeolides, after his Name, and built
a City there which he called Lipara. But Beotus went to his Grandfather Aeolus,
who received him as his Son, and he came afterward to the Kingdom, and called
the Country after his Mother Arne, but named the People Beotians, after his own
Name.

Itonus the Son of Beotus begat Four Sons, Hippalcimus, Electrion, Archilicus
and Alegenor: Hippalcimus had Peneleos, Electryon, Leitus, Algenor, Cloncus,
Archilycus, Prothaenor and Ariesilaus, who were all Commanders in chief of the
Beotians in the Trojan War.

Having now set forth these Affairs, we shall endeavor to give an account of
Of the Progeny of Salmoneus and Tyro.
Salmoneus and Tyro, and of their Progeny down to Nestor, who was one of the
Grecian Commanders at the Siege of Troy.

Salmoneus was the Son of Helen, Nephew of Aeolus, and Nephew's Son to
Deucalion: He made an Expedition out of Aeolis, and possessed himself of a
Territory in Elis, upon the Banks of the River Alpheus, and there he built a
City, which he called after his own Name Salomnia: He married Alcidice the
Daughter of Aleus, and by her had a Daughter named Tyro, who was an
extraordinary Beauty. His Wife Alcidice dying, he married another called Aderas.
Siderone, who (after the manner of Step-mothers) hated Tyro.

Afterward Simoneus (being both cruel and unrighteous toward Men, and impious
toward the Gods) was hated by his Subjects, and at length for his Contempt of
the Gods, was by Jupiter struck dead with a Thunderbolt.

About this time Neptune begat Two Sons of Tyro, Pelias and Neleus. Tyro being
afterward married to Cretheus, she had by him Amythaon, Pheretes and Aesones.
After the Death of Cretheus, Pelias and Neleus were at strife one with another
for the Kingdom. Pelias reigned as King of Iolcus and the Neighboring
Countries, and being joined with Melampus and Bias, the Sons of Amythaon and
Aglaia, together with some Achaeans, Phthiots and Eolians, made an inroad with
his Army into Peloponesus. At which time, in Argos, Melampus (being a
Sooth-sayer) restored some Women to soundness of Mind, that through the Anger
of Bacchus were struck with a raging Madness. And for this good Act he was
rewarded by Anaxagoras, King of the Argives, Son of Megapentheus, with Two
parts of the Kingdom. Hereupon Melampus took his Brother Bias as his Associate
with him in the Government, and resided at Argos. Then marrying Iphianira the
Daughter of Megapantheus, he had by her Antiphates, Manto, Bias and Pronoes.
Antiphates had by Zeuxippe the Daughter of Hippocoon, Oicles and Amphales. From
Oicles and Hypermnestra, the Daughter of Thespius, descended Iphianira,
Polybaea, and Amphiaraus: And thus Melampus and Bias, and their Posterity
enjoyed the Kingdom of Argos.

Neleus likewise with those whom he conducted, entered. Messina, and built the
City Pylus, which was given to him by the bordering Inhabitants; who reigning
here, married Chloris the Daughter of Amphion the Theban, and by her had Twelve
Sons, of whom Periclimenus was the Eldest, and Nestor the Youngest, who went
along with the rest to the Trojan War. But to the end we may keep within
Bounds, this that has been said shall susfice concerning the Ancestors of
Nestor.

And now something is to be further added concerning the Lapithites and the
Lapithites, Centaurs.
Centaurs; most of whom were the Sons of Oceanus and Thetys (as the
Mythologists do report,) remarkable for their giving Names to Rivers; amongst
whom was Peneus, from whom the River in Thessaly was so called. He was familiar
with P. 189.
the Nymph Creuta, and of her begat Hypseus and Stibes, of whom Apollo begat
Lapithes and Centaurus. Lapithes resided near the River Peneus, and reigned
over the Neighboring Territories. He married Orsinome the Daughter of
Eurynomus, and by her had Two Sons, Phorbas and Periphas, who afterward
reigned in those Parts; and the whole Nation of the Lapithae, are so called
from Lapithes. Phorbas one of the Sons of Lapithes, resided at Olenus: Whence
Alector the King of Elis (fearing the power of Pelops) sent for him to his
Assistance, and made him his Associate in the Kingdom. Phorbas had Two Sons,
Egeus and Actor, who were afterward Kings of Elis.

Periphas the other Son of Lapitha, married Astyagea, the Daughter of Hypseus,
and by her had Eight Children; the Eldest of whom Antion, had Issue Ixion of
Perimela, the Daughter of Amythaon. Ixion (they say) upon Promise to Hesioneus
of a great Dowry and rich Gifts, married his Daughter Dia, of whom he begat
Perithous: But Ixion not performing his Promise made on the behalf of his Wife
Hesioneus seized his Horses in lieu of a Pawn. Ixion under color of giving
full satisfaction, desired his Father in Law to come to him; who coming
accordingly, Ixion threw him into a Fiery Furnace.

But because none could expiate him from the guilt of so heinous a Parricide,
it is said that Jupiter did it. But growing afterward in love with Juno (they
say) he was so impudent, as to court her to play the Adulteress: Whereupon
Jupiter turned a Cloud into the shape of Juno, with which Ixion gratified his
Lust, and begat those Half Men, called Centaurs. At length, for his enormous
Impiety, he was fastened by Jupiter to a Wheel, and after his Death suffered
Eternal Torments.

Others say, that the Centaurs were bred up by the Nymphs in Pelion, and that
when they grew up to Men's Estates, they ingender'd with Mares, and so begat a
double shaped Brood, called Both Horse and Man in their Natures
Hippocentaurs. Others say, that the Centaurs were the Issue of Nephele and
Ixion, and because they were the first that attempted to ride upon Horses,
therefore they were called Hippocentaurs, and feigned to be of a double Nature,
both Man and Horse. It Is said that these Centaurs being of the same Stock and
Original, demanded of Perithous a share of their Father's Kingdom; which being
denied, they made War upon the Lapithites; and that when the War was ended,
Perithous married Hippodamia the Daughter of Bystus, and invited Theseus and
the Centaurs to the Marriage; and that the Centaurs (being Drunk, and inflamed
with Wine) attempted to ravish the Women that were then at the Marriage Feast:
At which bold and wicked Prank, Theseus and the Lapathites were so incensed,
that they killed many of them, and drove the rest as Fugitives out of the City.
And for this Reason, the whole Body of the Centaurs afterward made War upon
the Lapithites, and killed most of them, and forced the rest that had escaped
the Sword, to fly into Pholoe in Arcadia: But some got into Malea, and there
continued. The Centaurs lifted up with this Success, often issued out of
Pholoe, and robbed all the Grecians that traveled that way, and killed many of
the Neighboring Inhabitants.

Having now done with these occurrences, we shall next speak of Aesculapius
Aesculapius's Posterity.
and his Posterity: They say he was the Son of Apollo and Coronis, and being of
an acute and sharp Wit, earnestly bent his Mind to the study of Physic, and
found out many Preservatives for the Health of Men's Bodies; and grew at length
so famous, that curing many in a wonderful manner, whose Distempers were looked
upon to be desperate, he was judged to raise up many from the Dead: And
therefore it is reported by the Mythologists, that Pluto complained to Jupiter
of Aesculapius, that through his Cures the number of the Dead decreased; and
accused P. 190.
him for the weakening of his Empire in the Shades below: At which Jupiter was
so incensed, that he killed Aesculapius with a Thunderbolt. At whose Death
Apollo was enraged to that degree, that he killed the Cyclops that made the
Thunderbolt for Jupiter. Whereat Jupiter was again in wrath, and for a
Punishment of his Offenses, forced * Apollo to serve Mankind in a piece of
constant 4 The Sun.
Drudgery. Aesculapius (it is said) had Two Sons, Machaon and Podalirius, who
were skilful in their Father's Art, and went along with Agamemnon to the Trojan
War; in which War they were very useful and serviceable to the Grecians, for
they cured them that were wounded in Fights with singular industry, and were in
such esteem and favor among the Grecians, that by reason of their
extraordinary usefulness in their Art, they were exempted from hazarding their
Persons, and freed from all other public Services.

But here we shall conclude the History of Aesculapius, and his Sons; and shall
now proceed to give an account of the Daughters of Asopus, and the Sons of
Aeacus.

Oceanus and Tethys (as some Stories have it) had many other Sons, which gave
The Daughters of Asopus and Sons of Aeacus.
Names to famous Rivers, besides Peneus and Asopus. The Residence of Peneus,
was that Country which is now called Thessaly, who gave Name to that Famous
River there called Peneus. Asopus dwelt at Phlias, and married Medon the
Daughter of Ladon, by whom he had Two Sons, Pelasgus and Ismenus, and twelve
Daughters, whose Names were Cercyra, Salamis, Aegina, Pirene, Cleone, Thebe,
Tanagra, Thespira, Asopis, Sinope, Oenia and Chalcis. Ismenus one of his Sons,
came into Beotia, and seated himself near the River called after his own Name.
Sinope one of the Daughters was forced away by Apollo to that Place where the
City Sinope now stands; so called from her: From her and Apollo sprang Syrus,
who reigned over those People, from him called Syrians. Neptune transported
Cercyra into that Island, now called from her Or Cercyra.
Corcyra. He had by her a Son called Pheax, from whom the Phia, or Phea, a City
in Elis.
Pheans are so named.

This Pheax was the Father of Alcinous, who guided Ulysses into Ithaca: Salamis
also was forced by Neptune, and carried away into the Island called after her
own Name; by him she had Cenchreus, who was King of this Island, and a brave
spirited Man; he killed a Serpent of a vast bigness, which had destroyed many
of the Inhabitants. Aegina was carried away by Jupiter from Phlias, into the
Island Aegina, so called from her; and by her had Aeacus, afterward King of
that Island, whose Sons were Peleus and Telamon. Peleus by the throwing of an
Hand-Stone, unfortunately killed his Half-Brother Phocus, being both of the
same Father, but not of the same Mother; for this Fact he was banished by his
Father, and fled into Phthia, a Province of that Country, now called Thessaly,
where he was acquitted and purged of the Slaughter by King Actor, and succeeded
him in the Kingdom, Actor dying without Issue. Achilles was the Son of Peleus
and Thetis, and went along with Agamemnon to the War of Troy. Telamon likewise
fled out of Egina, and arrived in Salamis, where he married Glance the King's
Daughter, and by that means afterward came to be King of that Island. After
^he Death of Glauce, he married Eribaea of Athens, the Daughter of Alcathous,
and by her had Ajax, another Associate in the Trojan War.

Having given account of these things, we shall now speak of Pelops, Tantalus
P. 191.
and Oenomaus. And here it will be necessary to go higher, and treat distinctly
of some things in time long before.

In Pisa a City of Peloponesus, Mars begat Oenomaus of Harpina, the Daughter of
Pelops, Tantalus and ^^nomaus.
Asopus: Oenomaus had one only Daughter, called Hippodamia, and consulting the
Oracle how long he should live, the God answered that he should dye when his
Daughter was Married: Dreading therefore her Marriage, he resolved she should
ever remain in a Virgin State, conceiving by this means only, he should avoid
the danger foretold.

But whereas many earnestly su'd to have her to Wife, he made a Proposal of a
Horse-Race to the Suitors, with this Condition, that he who won the Race,
should have his Daughter, and that he that lost, should be put to Death.

The Course to be run was from Pisa to the Altar of Neptune, in the Isthmus of
Corinth, and the manner of starting was thus: Oenomaus first sacrificed a Ram
to Jupiter; and in the mean time the Suitor makes speedily away in a Chariot
drawn with Four Horses; and Oenomaus having at length finished his Sacrifice,
mounts his Chariot driven by one Myrtilus, and with a Lance in his Hand,
pursues the Suitor, and overtaking him, runs him through. And in this manner,
by the swiftness of his Horses, always coming up to the Suitors (though they
set out so long before him) he killed very many.

But Pelops the Son of Tantalus coming to Pisa, and desiring to have Hippodamia
for his Wife; as soon as he saw her, bribed Myrtilus (Oenomaus's
Chariot-driver) to suffer him to be Victor; by which means he got to Neptune's
Altar in the Isthmus, before Oenamaus; who concluding that what the Oracle had
foretold, was now near to be fulfilled, through grief of Heart was so dejected,
that he murdered himself. Pelops thus gaining Hippodamia, with her likewise
gained the Kingdom of Pisa; and being a Valiant and Prudent Man, and growing
rich besides, subdued most of the Countries of Peloponesus signifies the Island
of Pelops.
Peloponesus, and so called the whole Peninsula after his own Name.

Since we have made mention of Pelops, it is fit to say something of Tantalus's
Father, that we may not omit any thing worthy Remark. Tantalus the Son of
Jupiter was a rich and renowned Prince, and had his Royal Seat in that part of
Asia, which is now called Paphlagonia, and for the nobleness of his Birth,
being the Offspring of Jove (they say) he was the very Darling of the Gods
themselves. However he used not his Prosperity with that Moderation and
Humility as became a Mortal; but being admitted to Familiarity and Feasting
with the Gods, discovered their Secrets to Men; for which he was not only
punished while he was Living, but was thrust down among the Wicked and Impious
(as the Histories relate) to suffer Eternal Torments after Death. This Tantalus
had Pelops, and a Daughter named Niobe, By Amphion, King of Thebes.
who had Seven Sons, and as many Daughters, who were extraordinary Beauties:
Being proud of the great number of her Children, she often boasted, that for
her fruitfulness, she excelled The Mother of Diana and Apollo.
Latona her self: At which the Goddess they say, was so enraged, that she
commanded Apollo with his Arrows, to kill the Sons, and Diana with hers, the
Daughters; who executing their Mothers Commands, slew all the Children at once.
So that Niobe who abounded with Children, was childless at one and the same
moment.

But because Tantalus being hated by the Gods, was expelled out of Paphlagonia
by Ilus the Son of Tros, something is fit to be said concerning Ilus and his
Ancestors.

The first that reigned in the Country of Troas, was Teucer the Son of the
River D(...)danu^'s P^sterity to Priam.
Scamander, and the Nymph Idaea; he was a brave Man, and gave the Name of
Teucri to the Inhabitants. He had a Daughter called Batea, whom Dardanus
married, and succeeded Teucer in the Kingdom; and ordered the People to be
called P. 192.
from him Dardanians; and built a City near the Sea Shore, and called it
Dardanum. He had a Son named Erichthonius, a Prosperous and Wealthy Prince; of
whom the Poet Homer writes thus --

(...),
(...).
None richer was of all Men under th'Sun,
Whose brave Three Thousand Mares in the Meads did run.
Tros was the Son of Erichthonius, and of him the People were named Trojans; he
had Three Sons, Ilus, Assaracus and Ganimede; Ilus built a noble City in the
Champain Country of Troas, which he called Ilium; the Son of Ilus was
Lao(...)don, whose Sons were Tithonus and Priam: Tithonus led an Army into the
Eastern Parts of Asia, and pierced as far as to Aethiopia, whence rose the
Story of Memnon, being the Son of Aurora; which Memnon brought aid to the
Trojans, and was killed by Achilles.

Priam married Hecuba, and by her (besides many other Sons) had Hector, who was
especially remarkable for his Valor in the Trojan War. Asaracus King of the
Dardanians, had Capys his Son, the Father of Anchises, who of Venus begat
Aeneas, a Famous Man among the Trojans. Ganymede lastly was extraordinary
beautiful, and is reported to be caught up to Heaven by the Gods to be
Jupiter's Cupbearer.

And now from these, we shall proceed to Daedalus and the Minotaur, and the
Expedition of Minos into Sicily against King Cocalus.

CHAP. V.
Of Daedalus, and his Works in Crete, Sicily, and elsewhere. His Flight into
Sicily: Minos invades Sicily; the manner of his Death there. The Famous Temple
of the Curetes or Corybantes in Sicily, built by the Posterity of the Cretians
that came there with Minos. The Pedigree of Aristeus; his Acts; his Son Acteon.
of Eryx. Venus her Temple in Eryx in Sicily; the Fame of it. Of Daphnis the
Shepherd. A Description of the Herean Mountains. Of Orion. Of the Straight of
Messina.

DAedalus was an Athenian, of the Family of the Ericthidae; for he was the An.
Mund. 2732.
Son of Metionon.
Hymetion, the Son of Eupalamus, the Son of Erechtheus. He was extraordinary
Ingenious, and very studious in the Art of Architecture, and was an excellent
Statuary, and Engraver upon Stone, and improved those Arts with many notable
Inventions. He made many wonderful Pieces of Work in several Parts of the
World, and so far excelled in the framing and cutting of Statues, that those
that were long after him, report that the Statues he made, did resemble living
Men even to the Life. For their Symmetry was so exact and perfect, that their
Eyes, and frame of Motion, and the whole Composure of the Body, was a lively
Representation of Living Creatures. For he was the first that in Statues
expressed the direct and lively aspect of the Eyes, and the progressive Motion of
the Legs and Thighs, and stretching forth of the Hands and Arms, and therefore
was justly admired by all: For those Artists that were before him, framed their
Images with blinking Eyes, Heads hanging down, as if they were glu'd to their
sides. But though Daedalus was thus admired for his exquisite Skill in this
Art, yet he was forced to fly his Country for a Murder committed upon the
occasion following. Talus Daedalus his Sister's Son, being but a Young Boy, was
at that time bred * Called Calus, by Fausan, lib. 1. (...). 21.
up with his Uncle, to learn his Trade. This Talus for Ingenuity excelled his
Master, and invented the Potter's Wheel: He got likewise a Serpent's Jaw Bone,
and with it sawed a little piece of Wood asunder; then in imitation of the
Tooth in the Jaw, he made the like in Iron, and so he found out an Instrument
for the sawing of the greatest Pieces of Timber, exceeding useful, and tending
much to the furtherance and ease of all Architects. He invented likewise the
Turner's Lath, and many other Tools for the use of Architects; upon which
account he was in great Esteem and Reputation. Daedalus hereat burnt with Rage
and Envy against the poor Boy, and fearing he would grow far more famous than
himself, secretly murdered him. Being seized upon just as he was laying the
Carcass in the Ground, he was asked what he was burying? He answered, that he
was covering a Serpent with Earth. Here it is very worthy of Remark, that the
same Creature that was the occasion of making of the Saw, should be also the
means of discovery of the Murder. Being therefore brought to his Trial at the
Court of the Areopagites, and there condemned to dye for the Murder; he first
fled to a sort of Of the Family, or Tribe of Cecrops.
People in Attica, who from him were called Daedalians: Thence he got into
Crete, where he was much admired for his Art, and in great favor with King
Minos.

Afterward (as it is commonly reported) Pasiphae the Queen, Minos his Wife, P.
193.
burning in her Lust after a Bull, he framed an Engine like to a Cow, and helped
her by that means to satisfy her Lust. They say, that before that time, Minos
Yearly sacrificed the best and largest Bull in the Herd to Neptune; and once
there being a most lovely Beast in the Herd, a worse was picked out to be
sacrificed; at which Neptune was so incensed at Minos, that he caused his Wife
Pasiphae to go Mad for Love after the Bull; and by the Art of Daedalus, she
prostituted her self to the Beast, and brought forth the Minotaur so famous in
ancient Stories.

They ascribe a double nature to this Creature, that from the Head to the
Minotaur.
Shoulders, he resembled a Bull, and in all his lower Parts was like to a Man.
It Is said, that for the keeping and feeding of this Monster, Daedalus built the
Labyrinth full of windings and turnings, this way and that way, impossible to
be found out by any Stranger before unacquainted. Here it was that the Minotaur
devoured the Seven Boys, and the like number of Girls Yearly sent thither from
Athens, as we have before declared.

Daedalus being informed of Minos his Threats for making of the Cow, fearing
the Rage of the King, by the help of the Queen got on Shipboard, and secretly
escaped out of the Island. Icarus his Son fled away with him, and both arrived
at a certain Island, situated in the Ocean far off from any Land, where the
Young Man being too rash, and hasty to Land, dropped into the Sea, and there
perished; from whom it is called the Icarian Sea, and the Island Icaria.

From hence Daedalus sailed into Sicily, and landed there where Cocalus
reigned, who received him very courteously, and upon the account of his great
skill, and the Fame that went of him, made him his Bosom Friend.

Some report this Story concerning him, That Daedalus continuing still in
Crete, was hid by Pasiphae; Minos in the mean time making diligent search after
him, in order to punish him, but not able to find him out, he promised great
Rewards to such as should discover him.

Daedalus utterly despairing to get away by Shipping, made for himself and Son,
artificial Wings, joynted and compacted in a wonderful manner with Wax, and
fastn'd them to his own and his Son's Body, and with them Daedalus suddenly
flew away, and got over the Cretian Sea: But Icarus soaring too high (such is
the folly of Young Men) fell down into the Sea, the Sun melting the Wax
wherewith the Feathers of the Wings were joined together. But his Father flying
low near the Surface of the Sea, and sprinkling his Wings in the Water, passed
over safe into Sicily. Though this may seem an absurd Fable, yet we judged it
not sit to be past by.

Daedalus staid with Cocalus and the Sicilians a long time, and was highly
honored and esteemed by all for his excellent Art and Skill in his Profession:
There are some Works of his there that remain to this day; for in the Territory
of Megaris, he made a Fish Pond with wonderful Art, through which the great
River 1. Colymbethra.
Alabone emptied it self into the Sea. He built likewise a City (now called
Agrigentina in Camacus) upon a Rock so strong, that it was inexpugnable. The 2.
A City.
Passage to it was so straight and winding, that the Place might be easily
defended by Three or Four Men. Therefore Cocalus here built a Palace, and
treasured up all his Wealth, as a Place (through this Architect's ingenious
Contrivance) wonderfully secure. In the Third Place, he made a Cave in the
Territory of Selementa, 3. A S^o^e, or Sweating-House; a Bannion. P. 194.
in which by Fire there under Ground, a warm Steam was so artificially raised,
that by it is moderate heat, it caused a gentle Sweat, and gradually cured many
that resorted thither of their Distempers, with a great deal of Pleasure,
without any uneasiness from the Heat. And whereas there was a high and craggy
Rock in the Country of Eryx, and no room to build but upon the highest and
craggiest part of it, by reason of the strait and narrow Passages about the
Temple of Venus, he drew a Wall round the very Top, and plained and enlarged it
in 4. Plaining a Rock.
a wonderful manner. They say, he likewise made a Golden Honeycomb (dedicated
to Venus Erycina) with such exquisite Art, and so like to a true and 5.
Honeycomb of Gold.
real one, that none could ever be comparable to it. He wrought many other
excellent Pieces in Sicily, which length of Time has worn out, and consumed.

But Minos King of Crete, who had the Dominion at Sea, hearing that Daedalus
was fled into Sicily, proclaimed War against that Island. Having therefore
rigged out a mighty Fleet, he set Sail, and arrived upon the Coasts of
Agrigentum, which was from him called Minoa, where he landed his Men, and sent
Messengers to Cocalus, to demand the delivery up of Daedalus to Justice.
Hereupon Minos and Cocalus came to an interview, and Cocalus promised to do all
that Minos required, and entertained him with all honorable Respect: But when
he was in a Bath, Cocalus kept him there so long, that he was stiffl'd with the
steam and heat. Afterward he delivered his Body to the Cretians that came
along with him, pretending he came to his Death, by slipping accidentally into
the Hot and Scalding Baths. His Soldiers buried him with great Pomp, and built
him a double Sepulcher, in the lower part whereof, in a Vault, they deposited
his Bones, and near to the higher Part that was open to the view, they erected
a Temple to Venus, which for many Ages after was so adored by the Inhabitants,
that they offered Sacrifices there, as in a Temple peculiarly consecrated to
her.

In later Times, when Agrigentum was built, it being then discovered that the
Bones were there buried, the Sepulcher was wholly ruined, and the Bones sent to
the Cretians, at the time when Thero was Sovereign Lord of Agrigentum. The
Cretians that were thus brought over into Sicily, after the Death of Minos,
having then no King, fell at odds one with another, and raised a great Tumult.
But their Ships being all burnt by the Sicilians, Cocalus his Subjects, they
were out of all hope ever to return into their own Country; and therefore
resolved to settle themselves in Sicily. To that end, some of them built a
City, which from the Name of their King they called Minoa. Another part of them
went up into the heart of the Country, and possessing themselves of a Place
naturally very strong, there built Engium, a City so called from a Fountain
there.

After the Destruction of Troy, they received Merion, with other Cretians that
were cast upon Sicily; and because they were of the same Nation, they made them
The Curetes or Corybantes.
Members of their City. Afterward making frequent Inroads into the
Neighboring Country, from so strong a Fort, they subdued many of the
Borderers, and got some small Territory; afterward being grown wealthy, they
built a Temple to the Called the Mother Goddesses in Crete.
Curetes or Corybantes, and most religiously adored those Goddesses and adorned
their Temple with many rich Gifts. They say, these Goddesses came into Cicily
out of Crete, where they were most especially adored and honored. It Is
reported that they privately bred up and concealed Jupiter from his Father
Saturn. In reward of which Kindness, they were taken up into the Heavens and
placed among the Stars, where they make the Constellation called The Bear.
Arctos. Of whom Aratus (agreeable hereunto) in his Poem of the Stars, speaks
thus --

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Upon their Shoulders him they bore away,
If that we may believe what Stories say:
From Crete great Jove advanced to the Heavens clear,
And placed the Curetes in the Northern Bear.
For that from's Father Saturn him they hid,
When young; and the Youth out of all danger rid.
It Is not fit therefore that we should pass by in silence the piety of these
Goddesses, P. 195.
and their Fame and Reputation amongst all Men. For they are not only adored by
the Inhabitants of this City, but several of the Neighboring Countries worship
them with pompous Sacrifices, and other Religious Services. And the Oracle at
Delphos enjoined many Cities to give divine Honor to these Goddesses;
promising that by this means they should be blessed both in their private and
public Concerns. And at length these Goddesses grew so Famous, that rich Gifts
both of Gold and Silver were dedicated to them by the Inhabitants, and such
Offerings are continued to the very time of writing this History. For they
built to them a most sumptuous Temple, both for greatness of Structure, and
Costlyness of Ornament. For in regard there was not Stone in that part of the
Country fit for the raising such a Structure, they took care to have it brought
from the Agyrinaeans, which was a About Fifteen Miles.
Hundred Furlongs distance, and the way very rough and craggy, and hard to
pass: And therefore to convey the Stones, they provided Gr. Carts with Four
Wheels.
Wagons, and a Hundred Yoke of Oxen; being the better enabled to bear the
Charge, for that the Sacred Treasures were very large. For a little before our
time, there were Three Thousand Oxen dedicated to those Goddesses, and so much
Land as raised a vast Revenue: But having said enough of this, we shall proceed
to the History of Aristaeus.

Aristaeus was the Son of Apollo and Cyrene, the Daughter of Gypsaeus, who was
Aristaeus his Original.
the Son of Peneus. Of his Birth some tell this Story: They say that Cyrene was
very beautiful, and brought up at Mount Pelion, and that Apollo fell in love
with her, and transported her into Lybia, where in later time was built a City,
called after her Name Cyrene. There Apollo committed his Son Aristaeus,
begotten of Cyrene (then a young Infant) to the care of the Nymphs, to be
brought up by them; who gave him Three several Names, Norricus, Aristaeus and
Agreus. These Nymphs taught him how to To make Cheese.
curdle Milk, to order and make Bee-Hives, and plant Olive-Yards; and by this
means he became the first that directed all other Men in this Art: For which he
was so honored, that all adored him as a God, as much as they did Bacchus.

Afterward they say, he went to Thebes, where he married Autonoe, one of
Cadmus's Daughters, by whom he had Actaeon, torn in Pieces (as the Mythologists
Actaeon.
say) by his own Dogs. Some give this Reason of his Misfortune, Because that he
designed Nuptial Embraces with Diana in her Within the Consecrated Ground
belonging to the Temple.
Temple, dedicating to her what he got in hunting, for that Solemnity. Others
say, because he boasted that in hunting, he excelled Others say, because he
looked at her when she was Bathing. See Paus. Boetic. c. 2.
Diana her self. And it is not improbable, but that the Goddess might be
incensed at either of these. For whether for the gratifying of his Lust by his
Prey, he abused the Goddess, who was ever averse from Marriage, or that he
dared to prefer himself in the Art of Hunting before her, who by all the Gods
themselves was granted to excel all others in that respect, the Goddess was
certainly most justly angry: It Is therefore very probable, that being
transformed into the likeness of those Beasts he used to take, the Dogs when
they were in pursuit of other Game, might tear him himself in Pieces.

After the Death of Actaeon, Aristaeus went to Apollo, the Oracle being called
the Oracle of Apollo.
his Father the Oracle at Delphos, and there it is said, he was commanded by the
Oracle to remove into the Island Coos, who told him that he should be there
highly honored, and in great esteem with the Coons.

Thither therefore he sailed; a Plague afterward raging over all Greece, he
sacrificed to the Gods for the deliverance of the Grecians: When he had
perfected his Sacrifice about the rising of the In August.
Dog Star, at which time the Etesian Winds began to rise, the Plague staid.
This remarkable change (if it be seriously P. 196.
considered) may justly be wondered at; for he who had his Son torn in Pieces
with Dogs, allayed the evil Influences of the Dog Star (which commonly are
pernicious) and at that time restored Health to many Thousands.

Afterward leaving his Children behind him, he went to Lybia, and from thence
being furnished with Shipping by the Nymph his Mother, he sailed into Sardinia,
where being taken with the pleasantness of the Island, he feated himself, and
improved the Ground with Planting and Tillage, and civilized the Inhabitants
who were before Rude and Barbarous. Here he begat Two Sons, Carmus and
Calaecarpus. Afterward he sailed to other Islands, and staid for some time in
Sicily, upon the account of its Fruitfulness both in Corn and Cattle, where he
imparted several things to the Inhabitants that were of great Benefit and
Advantage. Therefore it is said all the Sicilians, and especially those that had
Olive-Yards, adored Aristaeus as a God.

At last, they say, he went into Thrace to Bacchus, where he learnt the Rites
The Feasts of Bacchus.
of the Orgia, and through his familiar Converse with that God, was instructed
in many other things, both useful and profitable.

After he had lived for some time near Mount Between Thrace and Thessaly.
Haemus, he vanished away, and never was seen more; and was afterward honored
as a God, not only by the Barbarians in those Parts, but by all the Gracians:
But concerning Aristaeus, this shall suffice.

Now to say something concerning Daphne and Eryx; it is reported that Eryx
Daphnis, Eryx.
was the Son of Venus and Butes King of Bithynia, called formerly Bebrycia in
Asia.
Butes, a Native, a most Famous Prince. This Eryx for the Nobleness of his
Birth on the Mothers side, was of great Esteem among the Inhabitants, and
became King of part of the Sicily.
Island, and built a City called after his own Name, upon a high and lofty
Hill, upon the top of which within the City, he built a Temple to Venus,
adorned Venus's Temple in Eryx.
with rich Oblations, and all other stately Furniture. The Goddess in reward of
the Piety of the Inhabitants, and the devotion of her Son the Founder, expressed
a special Love and Kindness for this City, and upon that named her self Venus
Erycina.

When any seriously considers the Majesty of this Temple, he cannot but greatly
admire it; for all other Sacred Structures, after they have been famous for
some time, have often by the adverse Blasts of Fortune, been at length ruined
and destroyed; but this has been so far (from the very first Dedication of it)
from decreasing in its Glory, that it has grown still more and more in
Reputation and Esteem. For after the Consecration of it by Eyrx, Aeneas another
Son of Venus, when he arrived in Sicily in his Voyage to Italy, beautified it
with many rich Oblations, because it was Consecrated to his Mother; and after
him the Sicilians for many Ages together (at great Cost and Expense) adored
this Goddess with magnificent Sacrifices, and further adorned her Temple with
many great Oblations. The Carthaginians also in later times, when they
conquered part of the Island, still continued the splendid Worship of this
Goddess. And lastly, the Romans, when they became Masters of the whole Island,
surpassed all that were before 'em in the Worship of this Deity; and this they
did upon good ground, for they derived their Original from her, and by her
means were prosperous in all their Affairs, and therefore in gratitude for so
many Benefits, they returned her the greater Honor and Esteem. For the Consuls
and Praetors, and all that came as Governors into this Island, as soon as they
came to Eryx, offered most magnificent Sacrifices, and dedicated rich Gifts for
the beautifying of this Temple; and by little and little laid aside their
Austerity, and pleasantly conversed both with the Women and Children in their
Jollity, looking upon this to be the only way to ingratiate themselves into the
favor of the Goddess. The Roman Senate likewise out of their singular respect
to this Goddess, decreed that Seventeen of the most considing Cities they had
in Sicily, should make an Offering in Gold to Venus, and that the Temple should
be continually guarded by Two Hundred Soldiers.

And thus though we have treated something largely of Eryx, yet the Account is
not impertinent to the History of Venus.

We shall now endeavor to relate what the Mythologists report concerning
Daphnis, Herean Mountains.
Daphnis: In Sicily they say, are Mountains called Herei, so pleasant for
Situation, and of so sweet an Air, that no Place can be better pitched upon than
they, for Pleasure and Diversion in the Summer time: For there are many Springs
of admirable sweet Water, and decked with Trees of all sorts. There are whole
Woods of tall and stately Oaks, which bear Acorns of a vast bigness, twice as
many, and twice as big as in any other part of the World.

There likewise grows abundance of Roots and Herbs, natural Vines, and
unspeakable number of Apples.
Melons, so that a Carthaginian Army once ready to starve for want of
Provision, was there relieved and preserved; and though so many Thousands were
there fed, yet plenty remained in the Mountains still. In this Region there is a
pleasant Valley, graced with Rows of Trees, affording a most (...), Divine
Comeliness.
ravishing prospect to the Eye, and likewise a Grove dedicated to the Nymphs:
Here they say Daphnis was begotten by Mercury upon one of the Nymphs, and
gained that Name from the multitude of L. Daphne, (...), a Laurel, in Greek.
Laurels that grow there. Being bred up by the Nymphs, and having many Herds of
Cattle, he diligently followed the Shepherds Life; upon which account he was
also called The Cowherd.
Bubulcus; and being very skilful and ingenious in composing Songs and Tunes,
he found out the Bucolick Poems, and Harmonious Notes which are much used, and
highly esteemed amongst the Sicilians at this Day. They say likewise, that he
often hunted with Diana, and by his dutiful observance and attendance upon the
Goddess, mightily gained her Favor, and with his Piping and Singing,
wonderfully delighted her. It Is likewise said, that a Nymph falling in love
with him, told him, that if he lay with any other Woman but her, he should be
struck blind; which afterward proved true, for lying with a King's Daughter
who had made him drunk, he forthwith lost his Sight.

But this concerning Daphnis shall suffice. Now we proceed in short to the
Story Orion.
of Orion. It Is said, that he was the biggest and strongest Man of all the
Heroes, and was much given to Hunting; and being so very strong, for the sake
of Vainglory, performed many great Actions.

Amongst other things, by casting up a Mold, he made the Harbor called Act,
for Zanclus the Sicilian King, from whom the City was anciently called Zancle,
but now Messina.

But since we make mention of Messina, we conceive it no digression if we here
subjoyn what is related concerning the narrow Sea, whereon it is seated.

Some ancient Writers say, that Sicily was once a Peninsula, and afterward The
Straight at Messina.
became an Island, in the manner following.

The Sea beating violently upon each side of the narrowest part of the Isthmus,
at length cut through and disjoined one part from the other, and the place from
thence was called Rhegium, where many Years after, was built the City now so
called. Others say, that that narrow Neck of the Continent, was rent asunder by
an Earthquake, and by that means the Sea burst into that part where the
Convulsion was made. But the Poet Hesiod affirms the contrary; for he says,
that the Sea being formerly broader, Orion raised up in the open Sea, the
Promontary Pelorus, and built upon it a Temple to Neptune, religiously adored
by the Inhabitants. After the performing of these things, they report that he
sailed into Eubaea, and there resided. Afterward for the glory of his Actions,
being fixed as a Constellation amongst the Stars, his Name became Famous to
Eternity, of whom the Poet Homer makes mention in his Poem of the Dead, in
these Words:

(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
Next vast Orion his appearance made,
Hunting Wild Beasts within a Fruitful Mead,
Which on the wast Mountains he had killed before,
When once a brazen Knotted Club he bore.
Where likewise he takes notice of his great Bulk; and a little after making
mention of Aloiades, he adds, that at Nine Years of Age, he was Nine Cubits
make Four Yards and a half. Nine Orgia make Eighteen Yards.
Four Yards and an half in thickness, and Eighteen Yards in height.

(...),
(...).
His Mother Earth his Body did so rear,
That none for Height and Beauty might compare
With him; except Orion who excelled
In both; and so him more than paralleled.
Having now treated sufficiently of the Heroes and Demy-Gods, according as we
at first designed, we shall here put an end to this Book.

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK V.
The PREFACE.
IT ought to be the special care of all Historians, not only in their Writings
to observe whatever may be useful and profitable, but also to keep to a due
Order and Method in the several parts of their History. This not only conduces
much to direct and caution private Persons how to get and keep Estates, but is
an extraordinary help to Writers, in composing of their Historical Treatises.
For some there are, that though they are justly in high Esteem for their
Eloquent Style, and Variety of Learning discovered in their Writings, yet have
been too careless in distributing their Matter under proper Heads; so that
though the Readers may easily discern their great Pains and Industry, yet their
manner of Writing deserves justly to be censured. Timaeus indeed was very exact
in his Chronology, and extraordinarily industrious to abound in variety of
Relations; but for his unseasonable and immoderate Censures P. 199.
of others, may be justly taxed and reprehended himself; who for his unbounded
Liberty that he takes in this bitter Censuring, is called by some, the Epitiment
Detracter.

But Ephorus, on the contrary, in his Universal History, acts the part of an
excellent Historian, both as to the Elegancy of his Style, and his accurate
Method: For he divides his Books according to their several Subjects, keeping
close in every Book to things of one and the same nature. Which way and order
of Writing, I approve above all others, and therefore shall endeavor to
imitate him as well as I can.

CHAP. I.
A Description of Sicily. The Aeolides or Lipari (...)nds. Of Malta, Gaulus,
Cercina, Corsica, Sardinia, Pityusa and the Baleares.

HAving Styled it the Book of the Islands.
designed this Book for a Description of the Islands, we shall first begin with
Sicily, being the chiefest and most remarkable for Ancient and Memorable
Actions.

It was anciently called Three cornered like a Wedge.
Trinacria, from its Shape. Afterward by the Sicanians, the first Inhabitants,
it was called Sicania; and at last it was called Sicily, from the Sicilians,
who with all their People entirely transported themselves thither out of Italy.

In Circuit, it is About Five Hundred Forty Five Mile.
Four Thousand, Three Hundred and Sixty Furlongs: For one of the Three Sides,
from the Promontory Pelorus to Lilibeum, is a Thousand and Seven Hundred
Furlongs; the other from Lilibeum to Pachinum, a Promontory of Syracuse, runs
out in length a Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs. The rest contains a
Thousand, One Hundred and Forty Furlongs.

The Sicilians, the Inhabitants, from old Tradition, continued down to them
from their Forefathers, say, that this Island is dedicated to Ceres and
Proserpine. Some of the Poets feign, that at the Marriage of Pluto and
Proserpine, this Island was given to the new Bride, by Jupiter for a Present. *
For an Anacalypterium. These were Gifts bestowed upon the Bride by the Husband
and his Friends, when she plucked off her Vail at her first being brought to her
Husband. They were called (...). See Archaeolog. At. lib. 4. c. 7.
The most approved Authors say, that the Sicanians who were the ancient
Possessors, were the first natural Inhabitants of this Isle; and that the
Goddesses which we have beforementioned, appeared first in this Island; and
that the fatness of the Soil was such, that Corn first grew here of it self,
which the most Eminent of all the Poets confirms in these Words --

(...),
(...),
(...).
Within this Island all things grow,
Without the help of Seed or Plow,
As Wheat and Barley; with the Vine,
From whence proceeds both Grapes and Wine,
Which with sweet Showers from above
Are brought to ripeness by great Jove.
For in the Territory of Leontium, and in many other Parts of Sicily, there
grows up wild Wheat at this very Day. If it be asked in what part of the World
these Grains were first known, before the use of Corn was found out; it is most
probable that they were first brought to the best and richest Country, and
therefore upon that Account, we see that the Sicilians most especially worship
those Goddesses who were the first Discoverers of these Fruits. That the Rape
of Proserpine was in this Country (they say) is most clear and evident from
hence, that neither of these Ceres and Proserpine. This Rape the Ground of this
Fable, was Ann. Mund. 2673, before Christ, 1275.
Goddesses ever resided in any other Place, but in this Island, wherein they
delighted above all others. The Rape, they say, was in the Meadows of Enna, not
far from the City, a Place decked with Violets, and all sorts of other Flowers,
affording a most beautiful and pleasant Prospect. It Is said, that the fragrancy
of the Flowers is such, that the Dogs sent out to hunt the Game, thereby lose
the benefit of their Sense, and are made incapable by their Scent to find out
the Prey. This Meadow-ground in the middle and highest part of it is Champain,
and well watered, but all the Borders round are craggy, guarded with high and
steep Precipices, and is supposed to lie in the very Heart of Sicily: Whence
it is called by some the Navel of Sicily: Near at hand are Groves, Meadows and
Gardens, surrounded with Morasses, and a deep P. 200.
Cave, with a Passage under Ground opening toward the North, through which
they say, Pluto passed in his Chariot, when he forced away Proserpine. In this
Place the Violets and other sweet Flowers flourish continually all the Year
long, and present a pleasant and delightsom Prospect to the Beholders all over
the flourishing Plain.

The say, that Minerva and Diana, who had both vowed Virginity as well as
Proserpine, were bred up together with her, and all Three wrought a Gown for
Jupiter their Father, of the Flowers they had gathered in Company one with
another. And that they were exceedingly delighted in the Island upon the
account of the familiar Converse they enjoyed one with another; so that each of
them chose out a particular Place for their several Residences. Minerva made
choice of those Parts near Himaera, where the Nymphs for the sake of Minerva
opened the Hot Baths about the time of Hercules his coming thither. The
Inhabitants likewise dedicated the City to her (to this Day called Athenaeum)
with the Country round about. To Diana was allotted by the Goddesses the Island
at Syracuse, which from her was called both by the Oracles of the Gods and by
Men, Virg. 3 Aen.
Ortygia. The Nymphs likewise to ingratiate themselves the more with Diana,
made a mighty great Fountain in this Island, called Arethusa, wherein were bred
many great Fishes, not only in Ancient Times, but there they remain to this
very Day as Sacred and never touched by any. But when some in time of War have
made bold to feed upon 'em, they have suddenly by the apparent anger of the
Goddess been afflicted with some remarkable Calamity, of which we shall write
more fully in its proper Time and Place.

Proserpine enjoyed the pleasant Meadows about Enna in Common, with the other
two Goddesses, and had a great Fountain called Cyane, in the Territories of
Syracuse, consecrated to her. For they say, that Pluto after the Rape, carried
away Core, the Girl.
Proserpine in a Chariot to Syracuse, and there the Earth opening, both of them
descended into (...).
Hell together, from which time in that Place arose the Spring and Lake called
Cyane, where the Syracusians every Year celebrate a solemn Festival; at which
they privately Sacrificed the lesser Victims, but publicly and openly they
threw Bulls into the Cyane.
Lake; which manner of Sacrifice Hercules introduced, when he went over all
Sicily with the Herds of Geryon. After the Rape of Proserpine, they say, Ceres
(not being able to find out her Daughter) lighted Firebrands at the Irruptions
of Aetna, and wandered through diverse Parts of the World to seek her, and did
much good where she came, especially where she was courteously received,
bestowing Wheat upon the Inhabitants in a grateful return of their Civility.
And because the Athenians entertained this Goddess with the greatest civility;
therefore next to Sicily, they were the First upon whom she bestowed this
Grain; for which the People of Athens honored this Goddess above all others
with splendid Sacrifices, and sacred Mysteries at Eleusis, which for their
antiquity and sanctity are greatly esteemed every where.

The Athenians generously communicated this Blessing of Corn to many others,
and they imparted of the Seed to their Neighbors, so that by degrees the whole
World was full of it.

The Sicilians therefore being the First that had the use of Corn, by reason of
their Familiar Converse with Ceres and Proserpine who dwelt among them,
instituted Sacrifices and Solemn Festivals to both these Goddesses, whose Names
gave Reputation to the things; which Festivals were solemnized at such a time,
as was most proper to point at the great benefit they had received: For they
celebrated the Rape of Proserpine, in the time of Wheat Harvest, and performed
these Sacrifices and Solemnities with that sanctity and application of Mind, as
became them, who were obliged to be thankful for being preferred before all
other People in the World with the First reception of so great a Blessing.

They had another Festival which they celebrated to Ceres at the time of Wheat
Seedings; it continued for the space of Ten Days, and was remarkable for the
Name of the Goddess; and during this time every thing was celebrated with great
Pomp and Splendor; but the rest of the Worship was after the old way and
Fashion. But it is a Custom among them during all these Ten Days, to use P. 201.
Obscene and Fifthy Language in their Converse one with another, because the
Goddess being put into dumps of Melancholy for the loss of her Daughter, is put
to the Smile they say, by smutty Discourse. That the Rape of Proserpine was in
this manner, as we have before declared, many of the Ancients both Poets and
Historians do generally affirm. For Carcinus the Tragaedian, who came often to
Syracuse, observing how Zealous the Citizens were in celebrating the Sacreds
and Festivals of Ceres, has these Verses in his Poems.

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
Ceres most lovely Proserpine.
Daughter, as they say,
By Pluto's Crafty Snares was snatched away,
Who under Ground through darksom Caves conveyed
To the gloomy Shades below, the harmless Maid.
Her mournful Mother wept and wrung her Hands,
Seeking her Ravished Daughter in all Lands.
Then Aetna's Flames through all the Land did roar,
And Flakes of Fire spread the Island over;
And while the noble Maid was thus bemoaned,
For want of Corn the fainting Country groaned:
And hence it is, that to this very Day,
Devoutly to these Goddesses they pray.
It Is not fit we should here omit giving an Account of the Kindness and Bounty
of this Goddess to Mankind: For besides that she found out Corn, she taught the
Art of Husbandry, and instituted Laws, whereby Men governed their actions
according to the Rules of Justice and Honesty: For which reason they say, she
was called the (...).
Lawmakers And certainly none can bestow greater Benefits than these imparted
by her, which include both Being and Well-being. But this concerning the
Antiquities of Sicily shall suffice.

But its necessary to say in brief something of the Sicanians, the first
Inhabitants Sicanians.
of Sicily, because several Historians differ in their Relations concerning
them. For Philistus says they were a Colony transplanted from Spain.
Iberia into this Island, and came thither from the River Sicanus from whence
they were called Sicani. But Timaeus (condemning the Ignorance of this Writer)
proves clearly and evidently that they were the Original Inhabitants; whose
Reasons to prove their Antiquity being many we conceive it needless to recite.
The Sicanians anciently dwelt in Villages, and built little Towns upon Hills
that were naturally strong, for their better Security against Thieves and
Robbers. For they were not under one General Monarch, but every Town had each a
several Prince. And at first they enjoyed the whole Island, and lived by
Tillage and improvement of the Ground: But after that Aetna burst out in Flames
in many Parts of it, and streams of Fire even overflowed the neighboring
Territory, the Country lay wast and ruined for a great space and Tract of
Ground together. And in regard the Fire continued thus to spoil the Country for
many years together, the Inhabitants in a Consternation forsook the Eastern
Parts of Sicily, and went down into the West. At length after many Ages the
Sicilians with all their Families transported themselves out of Italy, and
settled in that part of the Island before forsaken by the Sicanians. Where out
of a covetous desire to gain more, they incroacht still further, and made
incursions into the neighboring Countries, so that there were frequent Wars
between them and the Sicanians, till by a mutual Compact and agreement they
settled the Boundaries of each others Territories; of which we shall give a
particular account in their Proper place and time. The last that sent Colonies
into Sicily were the Grecians, and those very considerable, who built Cities
upon the Sea Coasts. By the multitude of Grecians that resorted thither and the
frequent and ordinary Commerce with them, they learnt both the Language, and
the Grecians way of living, and lost (together with their own barbarous
Dialect) their very Name likewise, and were called Sicilians. Having said
enough of these, we shall now pass to the Islands called the Eolides, which are
seven in number The Eolide Islands.
called Strongyle, Euonymus, Didyme, Phoenicusa, Hiera, Vulcania, and Lipara;
in which last there is a City of the same name: These lie between Sicily and
Italy P. 202.
in a direct line from East to West, and are distant from Sicily about an
hundred and fifty Furlongs: They are much of an equal bigness; the greatest of
them is in Circuit an hundred and fifty Furlongs. They have been all subject to
great eruptions of Fire, the Passages of which by the openings of the Earth are
apparent and visible at this day. But in Strongyle and Hiera to this very time
violent Vapors burst out of the Earth, with a roaring dreadful noise;
abundance likewise of Sand and Fiery stones are Vomited out of the Ground; the
like to which may be seen about Mount Aetna: For some affirm that from these
Islands there are Caverns within the Earth that run out as far Aetna, and so
there is a Communication one with another, and therefore both these, and those
Breaches and Casmas of the Earth at Aetna, cast forth their Flames at certain
seasons by turns. They say that these Islands anciently were desert and
uninhabited; and that afterward Liparus Son of King Auson upon a sedition
raised against him by his Brothers with a Long Ships, or Men of War.
Fleet well manned, Fled out of Italy into the Island, from him called Lipara,
where he built a City of the same name, and tilled and cultivated the rest of
the Islands. When he was old, Aeolus the Son of Hippotas, with some other of
his Associats arrived in the Island, and married Cyane the Daughter of Liparus;
and investing the rest that he brought along with him, with the same Rights and
Privileges that the natural Inhabitants enjoyed, he became supreme Lord of the
Island. Liparus afterward having a desire to return into Italy, Aeolus
assisted him in possessing the Country about Syrrentum, where (after he had
reigned with a general applause) he died, and was buried in great state and
funeral Pomp, and honored by the Inhabitants as a Demi God. This is that
Aeolus (which they say) entertaind Ulysses in his Wanderings; and was reported
to be pious toward the Gods, righteous toward Men, and kind and courteous to
Strangers.

It Is likewise reported that he taught Mariners the use of Sails; and by the
diligent observance of Fire foretold the rising of Winds; whence he was feigned
to have a Sovereign power over the Winds; and for his Piety was called the
Friend of the Gods. He had Six Sons, Astyochus, Xuthus, Androcles, Pheroemon,
Jocastes and Agathurnus, who were all in great Reputation and esteem upon the
account of the Fame of their Father's Virtues.

Amongst these Sons Jocastes reigned as King over those Parts, lying upon the
Seacoasts of Italy, as far as Rhegium. Pheroemon and Androcles enjoyed that
Part of Sicily from the narrow cut of the Sea to Lilibaeum. That part of the
Country that lies Eastward was inhabited by the Sicilians; the other toward
the West by the Sicanians, which several People were continually Quarrelling
one with another: But they freely submitted to the Sons of Aeolus, for the sake
of their Father's Eminent Piety, and their own gentle and sweet Dispositions.
Xuthus reigned in the Territory of Leontium, called from him Xuthia to this
Day. Agathurnus possessed the Region now called Agathynites, and built the City
called Agathurnum, after his own Name.

Astyochus was Sovereign Lord of Lipara; and all of them imitating their
Father's Piety and Justice, were in great Honor and Esteem. After the
Posterity of Aeolus had reigned successively for many Ages together, at last
the Royal Line in Sicily was extinct. After which, the Sicilians were under an
Aristocratical Government: But the Sicanians fell to odds one with another
about the Sovereignty, P. 203.
and for a long time together were imbroil'd in a Civil War.

Many Years afterward, when the other Islands (through the Severity of the
Kings of Asia) were more and more emptied of their Inhabitants, some of Cnydus
and Rhodes determined to transplant themselves; to which end they created
Pentathlus a Cnidian, their Captain (who derived his Pedigree from Hippotes the
Son of Hercules) and under his Conduct they transported themselves into Sicily,
and arrived at Lilibaeum.

This fell out in the About Seven Years after the taking and destruction of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadonozer. Ant. Chr. 585 Years.
Fiftieth Olympiad, in which Epitilidas the Laconian was Victor. At which time
likewise it happened, that Aegestanes and Selinuntes were at War one with
another; in which War (joining with the Selinuntines) in one Battle, they lost
many of their Men, and among the rest, their General Pentathlus. The
Selinuntines being thus routed, those of these Strangers that survived,
determined to return Home; to which purpose they chose Gorgus Thestores and
Epitherides, of the Household of Pentathlus, to be their Captains, who sailed
through the Tyrrhene Sea, to Lipara, where they were kindly received, and
easily persuaded to enter into a League with the Inhabitants, and dwell among
them, who were then scarce Five Hundred that remained of those that came over
with Aeolus.

Afterward when the Tyrrhenians infested the Seas with their Pyracies, (being
vexed with their Incursions) they prepared a Fleet for their Defense; and
divided themselves into several Parts, some to till the Ground, and others to
guard the Seas against the Pirates.

Then enjoying their Estates in Common, and feeding together in Societies, they
continued for some time in this Community of Life. Afterward they divided
Lipara (wherein was situated the Metropolitan City) amongst themselves; the
rest of the Islands they Tilled and improved for the use of them all in Common.

At last they divided all the Islands for the space of Twenty Years; and when
that time was expired, they again made a Division by Lot. Afterward they
overcame the Tyrrhenians in many Sea Fights, and devoted the Tenths of the best
of their Spoils to the Oracle at Delphos.

It remains we should show by what means the City of Lipara in succeeding Ages
grew to that height of Wealth, that they were not only happy in themselves, but
renowned and glorious Abroad.

This City is beautified by Nature with very large and fair Harbors, and
furnished with famous Baths; for they are not only Medicinal, but by reason of
their singular Properties and Qualities, afford much Pleasure and Delight; and
therefore many in Sicily that are taken with strange and unusual Diseases, pass
over into this Island, and by washing themselves in the hot Baths, are restored
presently to perfect Health, even to Admiration.

And the Island it self to this Day, abounds in that famous Mineral of Allom,
which brings in a great Revenue both to the Liparians and the Romans; For being
in no other part of the World, and so very useful, the Inhabitants (upon good
Reason) have the sole vending of this Commodity, and by setting what rate they
please upon it, they grow prodigiously rich. Only indeed in the Isle of Melos,
there grows a sort of small Allom, but not sufficient to supply any
considerable number of Cities. This Island of Lipara is not large, but
reasonably well stored with Fruit, and abounds with every thing necessary for
the Sustenance of Man's Life; for it plentifully supplies the Inhabitants with
all sorts of Fish, and bears Fruit most delicious to the Taste. But this may
suffice to be said of Lipara, and the rest of the Aeolid Islands.

Next to Lipara Westward, lies a small Island uninhabited, called (upon a
remarkable Accident) Ostales. For at the time when the Carthaginians were
engaged in great Wars with the Syracusians, they were furnished with
considerable Forces both at Sea and Land; amongst whom were many Mercenaries
out of several Countries, which were always a turbulent sort of Men, and
commonly P. 204.
accustomed to raise many horrid Mutinies in the Army, especially when they
received not their Pay at the Day when it was due. Some therefore there were at
that time (about the number of Six Thousand) according to their usual Insolency
and rude Behavior (not receiving their Pay) first got into a Body together,
and then with rude Shouts and Clamours, assaulted their Commanders. And when
for want of Money, they still delayed to pay them, they threatened they would
prosecute their Right against the Carthaginians with Force of Arms, and
thereupon laid hold upon their Officers; and though they received a Check from
the Senate for their unruliness, yet they were the more furious and outrageous.
Whereupon the Senate privately ordered the Colonels and Officers to put all the
Mutineers to Death; upon which Orders, they forthwith got them all on
Shipboard, and (under color of some Military Service to be performed)
transported them to the Island beforementioned, and there landed them and left
them: And though they stormed and raged at this Misfortune, yet they were in no
capacity to revenge themselves upon the Carthaginians, but at length were all
famished to Death: And being that so great a Number (as if they had been
Captives of War) perished in so small an Island, this strait place was filled
with the multitude of dead Men's Bones; and for this reason the Island was
called as aforesaid.

And in this manner these Mercenaries (by the fraud of their own Officers) were
brought into these Extremities, and miserably perished for want of Food.

Having now gone through the Aeolides, we shall next view those Islands that
lie on both Sides of them.

Southward over against Sicily, lie Three Islands, which have all safe and
commodious Harbors, and each of them a City.

The first is Malta, about Eight Hundred Furlongs from Syracuse, furnished
Malta, distant from Sicily about Sixty Miles.
with very good Harbors; and the Inhabitants are very Rich; for it is full of
all sorts of Artificers, amongst whom there are excellent Weavers of fine
Linen. Their Houses are very Stately and Beautiful, adorned with graceful
Eaves, and pargeted with white Plaster. The Inhabitants are a Colony of
Phaenicians, who trading as Merchants as far as the Western Ocean, resorted to
this Island upon the account of its commodious Ports, and convenient situation
for a Sea-Trade; and by the advantage of this Place, the Inhabitants presently
became famous both for their Wealth and Merchandise.

The next is Gaulus, furnished with several safe Harbors, Gaulus, now called
Gaudus, about Five Miles from Malta.
and first inhabited by the Phaenicians.

Then follows Circina, lying to the Coasts of Africa, in Cercina, now called
Carcana.
which is a handsome City, and most commodious Ports, wherein may ride not only
Merchant Men, but Men of War.

Having spoken of the Southern Islands, we shall return to the rest near to the
Lipari, which lie in the Tyrrhenian Sea; for near to Populonium (as it is
called) a City of Hetruria, lies Aethalia, now called Zerbe, formerly
Lotophagitis.
Aethalia, distant from Lipara, near a Hundred Furlongs, so called from the
great Aethalos in Greek, is a Mist, Smoke or Fog. P. 205.
Mists and Fogs that rise there. This Island abounds with Iron Stone, which
they dig and cut out of the Ground to melt, in order for the making of Iron;
much of which Metal is in this sort of Stone. The Workmen employed first, cut
the Stone in Pieces, and then melt them in Furnaces, built and prepared for the
purpose. In these Furnaces, the Stones by the violent heat of the Fire, are
melted into several Pieces, in form like to great Spunges, which the Merchants
buy by Truck and Exchange of other Wares, and transport them to Dicearchia; and
other Mart-Towns.

Some of these Merchants that buy of these Wares, cause 'em to be wrought by
the Copper Smiths, who beat and fashion 'em into all sorts of Tools,
Instruments and other shapes and Fancies; as some they neatly beat into the
shape of Birds, others into Spades, Hooks, and other sorts of Utensils. All
which are transported and carried about into several parts of the World by the
Merchants.

There Is another Island, by the Greeks called Cyrnon, and by the Romans and
Corsica.
Natural Inhabitants Corsica, Three Hundred Furlongs distant from Aethalia.
It Is an Island of an easy Access, and has a beautiful large Harbor, called
Syra^usium. There are in it two Cities Calaris and Nicaea. Cities.


The Phoceans built Calaris, at the time they were possessors of the Island,
but were afterward ejected by the Tyrrhenians. Nicaea was built by the Or
Tyrrhenians.
Hetrurians, when they Lorded it as Masters at Sea, and subdued all the Islands
that lie near adjoining to Hetruria.

During the time the Cities of Corsica were subject to them, they exacted a
Tribute from the Inhabitants, of Rozen, Wax and Honey, of which great plenty is
produced in this Island. Corsican Bondslaves are naturally of such a Temper
Servants.
and Qualification, that for usefulness they are to be preferred before all
others whatsoever. The Island is large, a great part of it Mountainous and
Woody, and watered with several small (...), for (...).
Rivers.

The Inhabitants feed upon Milk, Honey and Flesh, which this Country affords
plentifully, and exceed all other Barbarians in Justice and Humanity one
toward another: For where any find Honey in hollow Trees in the Mountains,
it is certainly his that finds it, without any further Dispute. The Sheep have
all their Owners Mark set upon them, and that certainly secures the Property of
their Masters, though there be no Shepherd to look after them. And in all other
respects in their Converse and way of Living, every one of them in their
several Stations observe the Rules of common Right and Justice. A very strange
thing there is among 'em concerning the Birth of their Children; for when the
Woman is in Labor, there is no care taken of her in the time of her Travel; Men
in Travel for their Wives.
but the Husband goes to Bed as if he were sick, and there continues for
certain Days, as if he were under the Pains of a Woman in Travel.

Here grows in this Island abundance of extraordinary Box-Trees, which is the
Reason that the Honey produced here, is many times very bitter. It Is possessed
by Barbarians, whose Language is very strange and difficult to be understood;
they are above the number of Thirty Thousand.

Next to this lies Sardinia, an Island as big as Sicily; it is inhabited by
Barbarians, whom they call Iolaeians, sprung (as they they themselves suppose)
from those few that inhabited the Country with Sardinia belongs to the King of
Spain, Six Miles from Corsica; about an Hundred and Seventy Miles in length,
and Eighty Miles broad.
Iolaus and the Thespidae. For at that time that Hercules instituted those so
much Olympic Games.
Celebrated Games, having many Children by the Daughters of Thespius, by the
Command of the Oracle, he sent them with a numerous Train, both of Barbarians
and Grecians into Sardinia, to settle themselves in new Habitations.

Their Captain Iolaus (Hercules his Nephew on his Brother's side) possessed
himself of the Island, and built in it several famous Cities; and dividing the
Country by Lot, called the People from himself, Iolaeians. He built likewise
public Schools and Temples, and left other Monuments for public use, and
general advantage, which remain to this Day.

For the most pleasant Fields of the Country are called after him, The Fields
of P. 206.
Iolaus, or The Iolaeian Fields; and the People are still called Iolaeians from
him. It was foretold likewise by the Oracle concerning his Colony, that if they
were called after his Name, their Freedoms and Liberties should be secured to
them for ever; and accordingly their Laws and Government have been preserved
firm and unshaken to this Day. For though the Carthaginians, when they were in
the height of their Power, took this Island, yet they could not inslave the
People: for the Iolaeians fled to the Mountains, and made them Habitations
under Ground, and kept and maintained many Herds and flocks of Cattle, which
afforded them Food sufficient, both as to Milk, Cheese and Flesh. And thus
leaving the Champain Parts of the Country, they were both freed from the Toil
of Plowing and Tilling the Ground; and besides, lived at ease in the Mountains,
contented with a mean and moderate Provision, as we before said.

And although the Carthaginians often assaulted them with great Armies, yet the
difficulties of the Places were such, and the windings and turnings within
these Subterraneous Caves were so inexplicable, that they were ever the
security of these Inhabitants from Bondage and Slavery. And lastly, the Romans,
since they became Masters of the Place, have often attempted to reduce them by
force of Arms, but were never able to prevail, for the Reasons before alleged.
But to return to the ancient Times; Iolaus after he had settled all the
Concerns relating to the Colony, returned into Greece. The Thespiades after
they had been Lords of the Island for many Ages, were at length expuls'd, and
driven into Italy, and seated themselves in the Parts and Places about Cuma:
The rest of the People returned to their former Barbarism, and making choice of
the best Captains from among their own Countrymen, have defended their
Liberties to this Day.

Having said enough of Sardinia, we shall now go on with the other Islands.

Next to the beforementioned Island, is Pityusa, so called from the multitude
Pityusa.
of Pine-Trees growing there, lying in the midst of the Sea, Three Days, and as
many Nights Sail from Hercules's Pillars, one Day and Nights Sail from the
Coast of Africa, and only a Days Sail from Spain; as large as Corcyra, and
reasonably Fruitful. It bears some few Vines and wild Olive Trees. Amongst
other things it produces, it is most esteemed for fine Wool. It Is checkered with
pleasant Champain Fields, and lovely Hills. There Is a City in it called Ercsum,
inhabited by a Colony of Carthaginians: The Island is graced with famous Ports,
and high Walls, and a great number of stately Houses. Barbarians of several
Nations inhabit there, but most are Carthaginians, a Colony of whom settled
there about a Hundred and Sixty Years after the building of Carthage.

There are other Islands over against Spain, which the Grecians call Signifies
naked.
Gymnesiae, because in Summertime the Inhabitants go naked. By the Natives and
the Romans they are called Baleares, now called Majorca, and Minorca, (...).
Baleares, from casting of huge massy Stones out of Slings, wherein the
Inhabitants excel all other People.

The Greater of these Islands is larger than all the rest of the In the
Mediterranean.
Islands, except these Seven, Sicily, Sardinia, Cyprus, Crete, Eubaea, Corsica,
and Lesbos. It Is one Days Sail distant from Spain.

The Lesser lies more Eastward, and breeds and feeds all sorts of brave and
large Cattle, especially (...), Half Asses.
Mules, which for the largeness of their Bodies, and the exceeding noise they
make in their Braying, are remarkable above all others. Both these Islands are
of a good and fertile Soil, and are Peopled with above Thirty Thousand
Inhabitants.

As to the Fruits of the Earth; they are altogether destitute of Wine; the want
therefore of it makes 'em the more eager after it. Neither have they any Oil
amongst them; to supply which, they press out the Oily part of Mastick, P. 207.
and mix it and Swines-Grease together, and with this Composition anoint their
Bodies.

They love Women exceedingly, whom they value at such a Rate, that when the
Pirates bring any Women they have taken, thither, they will give as a Ransom Three
or Four Men for one Woman. They live in Caves hewed in the Rocks, Habitations.
and spend all their Days in these Holes, dug up and down in the steepest part
of the Rocky Mountains, by which means they provide for themselves both shelter
and security.

They make no use either of Silver or Gold Coin, but prohibit the importation
Coin.
of it into the Island; for which they give this Reason: For that Hercules in
former times made War upon Geryon the Son of Chrysaores, for no other reason
but because he was rich in Silver and Gold; and therefore that they may live
more securely, and quietly enjoy what they have, they have made it a standing
Law to have nothing to do with that Wealth which consists in those Metals.

According therefore to this Decree, when once heretofore in a War they
assisted the Carthaginians, they brought nothing of their Pay into their own
Country, but laid it all out in Wine and Women.

They have a filthy Custom likewise amongst 'em concerning their Marriages;
Marriages.
for in their Marriage Feasts, all their Friends and Household Servants, as they
are in Seniority of Age, one after another, carnally know the Bride, till at
length it come to the Bridegrooms turn, who has the honor to be last.

They have another strange Custom likewise about the burying of their Dead;
Burials.
they cut the Carcass in Pieces with Wooden Knives or Axes, and so put up all
the Parts into an Urn, and then raise up a great heap of Stones over it.

Their Arms are Three Slings, one they wind about their Heads, another they tie
about their Loins, and the Third they carry in their Hands. In time of War,
they throw much greater Stones than any other People, and with that Violence,
as if a thing were shot out of an A Catapult.
Engine; and therefore in the time of Assaults made upon Towns, they grievously
gall those that stand upon the Bulwarks, and in Field-Fights break in pieces
their Enemies Shields, Helmets, and all other defensive Armor whatsoever; and
are such exact Marksmen, that (for the most part) they never miss what they aim
at: They attain to this Skill by contiual Exercise from their very Childhood,
for while they are very Young, they are forced under the tutorage of their
Mothers, to cast Stones out of Slings. For they fasten a Piece of Bread for a
Mark to a Pole, and till the Child hit the Bread, he must fast, and then at
length the Mother gives him the Bread to eat.

CHAP. II.
Of Medera, Britain, Gallia, Celtiberia, Iberia and Tyrrhenia, and of the
Inhabitants, and their Laws and Customs.

SInce we have gone through the Islands lying Eastward, on this side within the
Pillars of Hercules, we shall now lanch into the main Ocean to those that lie
beyond them; for over against Africa, lies a very great This seems to be Madera.
Island in the vast Ocean, of many Days Sail from Lybia, Westward. The Soil
here is very fruitful, a great part whereof is Mountainous, but much likewise
Champain, which is the most sweet and pleasant part of all the rest; for it is
watered with several navigable Rivers, beautified with many Paradises.
Gardens of Pleasure, planted with diverse sorts of Trees, and abundance of
Orchards, interlac'd with Currents of sweet Water. The Towns are adorned with
stately Buildings, and Banqueting Houses up and down, pleasantly situated in
their Gardens and Orchards. And here they recreate themselves in Summer Time,
as in Places accomodated for Pleasure and Delight.

The Mountainous part of the Country is clothed with many large Of Oak.
Woods, and all manner of Fruit Trees; and for the greater Delight and
Diversion of People in these Mountains, they ever and anon open themselves into
pleasant Vales, watered with Fountains and refreshing Springs: And indeed the
whole P. 208.
Island abounds with Springs of sweet Water: Whence the Inhabitants not only
reap pleasure and delight, but improve in Health and Strength of Body.

There you may have Game enough in Hunting all sorts of Wild Beasts, of which
there is such plenty, that in their Feasts there is nothing wanting either as to
Pomp or Delight. The adjoining Sea furnishes them plentifully with Fish, for
the Ocean there naturally abounds with all sorts.

The Air and Climate in this Island is very Mild and Healthful, so that the
Trees bear Fruit (and other things that are produced there, are fresh and
beautiful) most part of the Year; so that this Island (for the excellency of it
in all respects) seems rather to be the Residence of some of the Gods, than of
Men.

Anciently by reason of its remote situation, it was altogether unknown, but
afterward discovered upon this occasion.

The Phaenicians in ancient Times undertook frequent Voyages by Sea, in way of
Traffic as Merchants, so that they planted many Colonies both in Africa and in
these Western Parts of Europe. These Merchants succeeding in their undertaking,
and thereupon growing very rich, passed at length beyond the Pillars of
Hercules, into the Sea called the Ocean: And first they built a City called
Gades, near to Hercules his Pillars, at the Seaside, in an Isthmus in Europe;
in which, among other things proper for the Place, they built a stately Temple
to Hercules, and instituted splendid Sacrifices to be offered to him after the
Rites and Customs of the Phaenicians. This Temple is in great Veneration at
this Day, as well as in former Ages; so that many of the Romans, famous and
renowned both for their Births and glorious Actions, have made their Vows to
this God, and after Success in their Affairs, have faithfully performed 'em.
The Phaenicians therefore upon the account before related, having found out the
Coasts beyond the Pillars, and sailing along by the Shore of Africa, were on a
sudden driven by a furious Storm afar off into the main Ocean; and after they
had lain under this violent Tempest for many Days, they at length arrived at
this Island; and so coming to the Knowledge of the nature and pleasantness of
this Isle, they were the first that discovered it others: And therefore the
Hetrurians (when they were Masters at Sea) designed to send a Colony thither;
but the Carthaginians opposed them, both fearing lest most of their own
Citizens should be allured (through the goodness of the Island) to settle
there, and likewise intending to keep it as a Place of Refuge for themselves,
in case of any sudden and unexpected blasts of Fortune, which might tend to
the utter ruin of their Government. For being then Potent at Sea, they doubted
not but they could easily (unknown to the Conquerors) transport themselves and
their Families into that Island. Having now spoken sufficiently of the African
Ocean, and the Islands belonging to it, we shall pass over to Europe.

For over against the French Shore, opposite to the Hircinian Mountains (which
are the greatest of any in Europe) there lie in the Ocean many Islands; the
greatest of which is that which they call Britain, which anciently remained
untoucht, free Britain.
from all Foreign Force; for it was never known that either Bacchus, Hercules,
or any of the ancient Heroes or Princes, ever made any attempt upon it by force
of Arms: But Julius Caesar in our time (who by his great Atchievments gained
the Title of Divus.
Divine) was the first (that any other makes mention of) that conquered the
Island, and compelled the Britains to pay Tribute. But these things shall be
more particularly treated of in their proper time: We shall now only say
something concerning the Island, and the Tin that is found there.

In Form it is Triangular, like Sicily; but the Sides are unequal. It lies in an
P. 209.
Oblique Line, over against the Continent of Europe; so that the Promontory
called Kent. Camb. Brit. 186.
Cantium, next to the Continent (they say) is about a Hundred Furlongs from the
Land: Here the Sea ebbs and flows; but the other Point called Cornwall Point, or
the Land's End.
Belerium, is Four Days Sail from the Continent.

The last called Orcas, the furthest Point of Scotland Northwest, now called
Howburn. Camb. Brit. 949.
Horcas or Orcas, runs out far into the Sea. The least of the Sides facing the
whole Continent, is Seven Thousand and Five Hundred Furlongs in length; the
Second stretching out itself all along from the Sea to the highest Point, is
Fifteen Thousand Furlongs, and the last is Twenty Thousand. So that the whole
Compass of the Island is Forty Two Thousand, Five Hundred Furlongs. The
Inhabitants are the Original People thereof, and live to this time after their
own ancient manner and custom: For in Fights they use Chariots, as it is said
the old Grecian Heroes did in the Trojan War. They dwell in mean Cottages,
covered for the most part with Reeds or Sticks. In reaping of their Corn, they
cut off the Ears from the Stalk, and so house them up in Repositories under
Ground; thence they take and pluck out the Grains of as many of the oldest of
them as may serve them for the day, and after they have bruised the Corn, make
it into Bread. They are of much Sincerity and Integrity, far from the Craft and
Knavery of Men among us; contented with plain and homely Fare, Strangers to the
Excess and Luxury of Rich Men. The Island is very Populous, but of a cold
Climate, subject to Frosts, being under the The Bear.
Artick Pole. They are governed by several Kings and Princes, who for the most
part are at Peace and Amity one with another. But of their Laws and other
things peculiar to this Island, we shall treat more particularly, when we come
to Caesar's Expedition into Britain.

Now we shall speak something of the Tin that is dug and gotten there. They that
inhabit the British Promontary of Cornwall.
Balerium, by reason of their Converse with Merchants, are more civilized and
courteous to Strangers than the rest are. These are the People that make the
Tin, which with a great deal of Care and Labor they dig out of the Ground; and
that being Rocky, the Meetle is mixed with some Veins of Earth, out of which
they melt the Mettle, and then refine it: Then they beat it into Apiece
Pieces like to a Dye, and carry it to a British Isle near at Hand, called Isle
of Wight.
Ictis. For at low Tide, all being dry between them and the Island, they convey
over in Carts abundance of Tin in the mean time. But there is one thing peculiar
to these Islands which lie between Britain and Europe: For at Full Sea, they
appear to be Islands, but at low Water for a long Way, they look like so many
Peninsula's. Hence the Merchants transport the Tin they buy of the Inhabitants,
to France; and for Thirty Days Journey, they carry it in Packs upon Horses
Backs through France, to the Mouth of the River In France, and falls into the
Mediterranean.
Rhosne. But thus much concerning Tin. Now something remains to be said of
Amber.

Over against Scythia above Gall in the Ocean, lies an Island called Basilia
called Baltia, Three Days Sail from Scythia.
Basilea, upon which there is cast by the working of the Sea, abundance of
Amber, not to be found in any other part of the World.

Many of the ancient Historians have written incredible Stories of this Amber,
which since have been experienced to be false: For many Poets and other Writers
report, that Phaeton the Son of The Sun.
Sol, while he was but as yet a young Boy, prevailed with his Father to give
him liberty to drive his Chariot for one Day: P. 210.
Which Request obtained, the Youth not being able to manage the Reins, the
Horses scorned the Charioteer, and forsook their ancient Course, and ran wildly
and disorderly through the Heavens, and first set them on Fire, and by that
means caused that Tract called the (...)
Milky Way; then burning up a great part of the Earth, many Countries were laid
waste; at which Jupiter was so enraged, that he threw a Thunder-blot at
Phaeton, and commanded Sol to guide his Steeds into their wonted Course: And
that Phaeton himself fell down into the River Po, anciently called Eridanus;
and that his Sisters greatly bewailing his Death, (through excessive grief)
changed their Nature, and were transformed into Poplar Trees, which Yearly to
this Day distill their Tears, and by Concretion (they say) becomes this Electrum
or Amber, which for Beauty and Brightness, excels all others of its Kind, and
is distilled most in that Country, when the Deaths of Young Men are solemnly
bewailed. But forasmuch as they that have invented this Story, have turned
their Backs upon Truth, and that later Ages have disproved it by Experience of
the Contrary, regard is rather to be had to true and Faithful Historians. For
Amber is gathered in this Island beforementioned, and transported by the
Inhabitants into the opposite Continent, from whence it is brought over to us in
these Parts as is before declared.

After this Account given of the Western Islands, we conceive it not
impertinent, if we briefly relate some things which were omitted in the former
Books concerning the Neighboring Nations in Europe.

In Gall, now France.
Celtica (they say) once ruled a famous Man, who had a Daughter of a more Tall
and Majestic Stature than ordinary, and for Beauty far beyond all others of
her Sex. This Lady glorying much both in her Strength and Beauty, despised all
that courted her, as judging none worthy of her Bed. It happened that Hercules
at the time he was engaged in the War against Gallia, marched into Celtica, and
there built Now Arras.
Alesia. When this young Virgin saw him, admiring both his Valor and stately
Proportion, she readily admitted him to her Bed; yet not without the consent of
her Parents. Of this Lady he begat Galetes, who for Virtues of Mind, and
strength of Body, far excelled the rest of his Nation. When he came to Man's
Estate, and was possessed of his Grandfather's Kingdom, he subdued many of the
Neighboring Countries, and performed many notable Atchievments by his Sword.
His Valor being every where noised Abroad, he called his Subjects after his
own Name, Gauls.
Galatians, and the Country Or Gallia, Gall.
Gallatia, Gall.

Having shown the Original of the Name, something is to be said of the Country
it self. Gall is inhabited by several Nations, but not all alike Populous: The
greatest of them have in 'em Two Hundred Thousand Men, the least but Fifty
Thousand. Of these there is one that has been an Ancient Ally of the Romans, and
continues so to this Day.

In regard it lies for the greatest part under the Artick Pole, it is very cold,
and subject to Frosts; for in Winter in Cloudy Days, instead of Rain, the Earth
is covered with Snow; in clear Weather, every Place is so full of Ice and
Frost, that the Rivers are frozen up to that degree, that they are naturally
covered over with Bridges of Ice. For not only a small Company of Travelers,
but vast Armies, with their Chariots and laden Carriages, may pass over
without any P. 211.
danger or hazard.

There are many great Rivers run through Gaul, which by their various Windings
and turnings cut through and parcel the Champain Grounds, some of which have
their Spring-heads from deep Lakes, others issue out from the Mountains, and
empty themselves either into the Ocean or into our The Mediterranean.
Seas.

The greatest that falls into our Sea, is the Rhosne, which rises out of the
Alps, and at Five Mouths, disgorges itself into the Sea. Of those that empty
themselves into the Ocean, the greatest are the Danube and the Rhine; over the
last of which Caesar, called The God, or Divine.
Divus, (in our time) to admiration, cast a Bridge, and past over his Forces,
and subdued the Gauls on the other side.

There are many other Navigable Rivers in Celtica, to write of which
particularly would be tedious: Almost all of them are some times Frozen up, as
if Bridges were cast over their Channels. But the Ice being naturally smooth,
and therefore Slippery to the Passengers, they throw Chaff upon it that they
may go the more firmly.

In many Places of Gaul, there is something strange and very remarkable, which
is not fit to pass over in silence. For the West and North Winds in Summer are
so fierce and violent, that they fling into the Air great Stones as big as a
Man can grasp in his Hands, together with a Cloud of Gravel and Dust. Nay, the
violence of this Whirlwind is such, that it forces Men's Arms out of their
Hands, rents their Clothes off their Backs, and dismounts the Rider from his
Horse.

This excessive Cold and immoderate Temper of the Air, is the cause why the
Earth in these Parts produces neither Wine nor Oil; and therefore the Gauls to
supply the want of these Fruits, make a Drink of Barley, which they call
Xythus: They mix likewise their Hony-Combs with Water, and make use of that for
the same purpose. They are so exceedingly given to Wine, that they guzle it
down as soon as it is imported by the Merchant, and are so eager and
inordinate, that making themselves drunk, they either fall dead asleep, or
become stark mad. So that many Italian Merchants (to gratify their own
Covetousness) make use of the Drunkenness of the Gauls to advance their own
profit and gain. For they convey the Wine to 'em both by Navigable Rivers, and
by Land in Carts, and bring back an incredible price: For in lieu of a Hogshead
of Wine, they receive a Boy, giving Drink in truck for a Servant.

In Gaul there are no Silver Mines, but much Gold, with which the nature of the
Place supplies the Inhabitants, without the labor or toil of digging in the
Mines. For the winding Course of the River washing with its Streams, the Feet
of the Mountains, carries away great pieces of Golden Ore, which those employed
in this business gather, and then grind and bruise these Clods of Golden Earth;
and when they have so done, cleanse them from the gross Earthy part, by washing
them in Water, and then melt them in a Furnace; and thus get together a vast
heap of Gold, with which not only the Women, but the Men deck and adorn
themselves. For they wear Bracelets of this Metal about their Wrists and Arms,
and massy Chains of pure and beaten Gold about their Necks, and weighty Rings
upon their Fingers, and Croslets of Gold upon their Breasts. The Custom
observed by the higher Gauls in the Temples of their Gods, is admirably
remarkable; for in their Oratories and sacred Temples of this Country, in
honor of P. 212.
their Gods they scatter Pieces of Gold up and down, which none of the
Inhabitants (their superstitious Devotion is such) will in the least touch or
meddle with, tho the Gauls are of themselves most exceeding Covetous.

For Stature they are tall, but of a Weak.
sweaty and pale Complexion, Red-Hair'd, not only Naturally, but they endeavor
all they can to make it redder by Art. They often wash their Hair in a Water
boiled with Lime, and turn it backward from the Forehead to the Crown of the
Head, and thence to their very Necks, that their Faces may be more fully seen,
so that they look like Satyrs and Hobgoblins. By this sort of management of
themselves, their Hair is as hard a Horse's Mane. Some of them shave their
Beards; others let them grow a little. The Persons of Quality shave their Chins
close, but their Mustaches they let fall so low, that they even cover their
Mouths; so that when they eat, their Meat hangs tangling in their Hair; and
when they drink, the Liquor runs through their Mustaches as through a Sieve. At
Meal-time they all sit, not upon Seats, but upon the Ground, and instead of
Carpets, spread Wolves or Dogs Skins under them. Young Boys and Girls attend
them, such as are yet but mere Children. Near at Hand they have their Chimneys,
with their Fires well furnished with Pots and Spits full of whole Joints of
Flesh Meat; and the best and fairest Joints (in a way of due honor and regard)
they set before the Persons of best Quality: As Homer introduces the Grecian
Captains entertaining of Ajax, when he returned Hom. Iliad. lib. 7. ver. 321.
Victor from his single Combat with Hector, in this Verse --

(...)
But Agamemnon as a favoring Sign,
Before great Ajax set the lusty Chine.
They invite likewise Strangers to their Feasts, and after all is over, they ask
who they are, and what is their Business. In the very midst of Feasting, upon
any small occasion, it is ordinary for them in a heat to rise, and without any
regard of their Lives, to fall to it with their Swords. For the opinion of
Pythagoras prevails much amongst them, that Men's Souls are Immortal, and that
there is a Transmigration of them into other Bodies, and after a certain time
they live again; and therefore in their Funerals they write Letters to their
Friends, and throw them into the Funeral Pile, as if they were to be read by
the Deceased. In their Journeys and Fights they use Chariots drawn with Two
Horses, which carry a Charioteer and a Soldier, and when they meet Horsemen in
the Battle, they fall upon their Enemies with their A kind of Dart.
Saunians; then quitting their Chariots, they to it with their Swords. There
are some of them that so despise Death, that they will Fight naked, with something
only about their Loins. They carry along with them to the Wars for their
Servants Freemen.
Libertines, chosen out of the poorer sort of People, whom they make use of for
Wagoners, and Pedees. When the Army is drawn up in Battalia, it is usual for
some of 'em to step out before the Army, and to challenge the stoutest of their
Enemy to a single Combat, brandishing their Arms to terrify their Adversary. If
any comes forth to fight with them, then they sing some Song in commendation of
the valiant Acts of their Ancestors, and blazon out their own Praises: On the
contrary they vilify their Adversary, and give forth slighting and contemptuous
Words, as if he had not the least Courage. When at any time they cut off their
Enemies Heads, they hang 'em about their Horses Necks.

They deliver their Spoils to their Servants, all besinear'd with Blood, to be
carried before them in Triumph, they themselves in the mean time singing the
triumphant A Triumphant Song.
Paean. And as the chief of their Spoils, they fasten those that they have
killed, over the Doors of their Houses, as if they were so many Wild Beasts
taken in Hunting. The Heads of their Enemies that were the chiefest Persons of
Quality, they carefully deposite in Chests, emblaming them with the Oil of
Cedars, P. 213.
and showing them to Strangers, glory and boast how that some of their
Ancestors, their Fathers or themselves (though great Sums of Money have been
offered for them) yet have refused to accept 'em.

Some glory so much upon this account, that they refuse to take for one of
these heads its weight in Gold; in this manner exposing their barbarous
Magnanimity. For it is brave and generous indeed not to sell the Ensigns of true
Valor; but to fight with the dead Bodies of those that were Men like our
selves, resembles the cruelty of wild Beasts.

Their Garments are very strange; for they wear party colored Coats,
interwoven here and there with diverse sorts of Flowers; and Hose which they
call Brac^. They make likewise their Cassocks of Basket-work joined together
with Laces on the (...), Laced under, or framed above the Lace.
inside, and checkered with many pieces of work like Flowers; those they wear
in * (...), Cassocks of Rods.
Winter are thicker, those in Summer more slender.

Their defensive Arms are a Shield, proportionable to the height of a Man,
garnished with their own Ensigns.

Some carry the shapes of Beasts in Brass, artifically wrought, as well for
Defense as Ornament. Upon their Heads they wear Helmets of Brass, with large
Pieces of Work raised upon 'em for ostentation sake, to be admired by the
Beholders; for they have either Horns of the same Metal joined to them, or the
shapes of Birds and Beasts carved upon them. They have Trumpets after the
Barbarian manner, which in sounding make a horrid noise, to strike a terror fit
and proper for the occasion. Some of them wear Iron Breast-plates, and hookt;
but others, content with what Arms Nature affords them, fight naked. For
Swords, they use a long and broad Weapon called Spatha, which they hang cross
their right Thigh by Iron or Brazen Chains. Some gird themselves over their
Coats, with Belts gilt with Gold or Silver. For Darts they cast those they call
Lances, whose Iron Shafts are a Cubit or more in length, and almost Two Hands
in breadth.

For their Swords are as big as the A sort of Dart.
Saunians of other People; but the Points of their Saunians are larger than
those of their Swords; some of them are straight, others bowed and bending
backwards, so that they not only cut, but break the Flesh; and when the Dart is
drawn out, it tears and rents the Wound most miserably.

These People are of a most terrible Aspect, and have a most dreadful and loud
Voice. In their Converse they are sparing of their Words, and speak many things
darkly and * figuratively. They are High and Hyperbolical in trumpeting (...),
Synecdochically.
out their own Praises, but speak slightly and contemptibly of others. They are
apt to menace others, self-opinionated, grievously provoking; of sharp Wits,
and apt to learn.

Among them they have Poets, that sing melodious Songs, whom they call Bards.
Bards, who to their Musical Instruments like unto Harps, chant forth the
praises of some, and the dispraises of others.

There are likewise among them Philosophers and Divines, whom they call Druids;
for Saronidae or Saronids, are of the same signification with Druids, the one
of an Oak, the other of an hollow Oak.
Saronidae, and are held in great Veneration and Esteem. Prophets likewise they
have, whom they highly honor, who foretell future Events, by viewing the
Intrals of the Sacrifices; and to these Soothsayers all the People generally
are very observant.

When they are to consult of some great and weighty matter, they observe a most
strange and incredible Custom; for they sacrifice a Man, striking him with a
Sword near the Diaphragma cross over his Breast, who being thus slain, and
falling down, they judge of the Event from the manner of his Fall, the
Convulsion of his Members, and the Flux of Blood; and this has gained among
them (by long and ancient usage) a firm credit and belief.

It Is not lawful to offer any Sacrifice without a Philosopher; for they hold
that by these, as Men acquainted with the nature of the Deity, and familiar in
their Converse with the Gods, they ought to present their Thank-Offerings, and
by these Ambassadors to desire such things as are good for them. These Druids
and Bards are observed and obeyed, not only in times of Peace but War also,
both by Friends and Enemies. P. 214.


Many times these Philosophers and Poets stepping in between Two Armies, when
they are just ready to engage near at Hand, with their Swords drawn, and Spears
presented one against another, have pacified them, as if some wild Beasts had
been tamed by Enchantments. Thus Rage is mastered by Wisdom, even amongst the
most Savage Barbarians; and Mars himself reverences the Muses.

And now it will be worth while to declare, that which Multitudes are
altogether ignorant of. Those who inhabit the Inland Parts beyond Marseilles.
Massylia, and about the Alps, and on this side the Pyrenean Mountains, are
called Celts: But those that inhabit below this part called Celtica, Southward
to the Ocean and the Mountain Hyrcinus, and all as far to Scythia, are called
Gauls. But the Romans call all these People generally by one and the same Name,
Gauls.

The Women here are both as Tall and as Courageous as the Men. The Children for
the most part from their very Birth are gray headed; but when they grow up to
Men's Estate, their Hair changes in Color like to their Parents. Those toward
the North, and bordering upon Scythia, are so exceeding Fierce and Cruel, that
(as Report goes) they eat Men, like the Britians that inhabit Some part of
Britain, then so called, Steph.
Iris.

They are so noted for a fierce and warlike People, that some have thought them
to be those that anciently overran all Asia, and were then called Cimmerians,
and who are now (through length of time) with a little alteration called
Cimbrians.

Anciently they gave themselves to Rapine and Spoil, wasting and destroying
other Countries, and slighted and despised all other People. These are they
that took Rome, and robbed the Temple at Delphos. These brought a great part of
Europe and Asia under Tribute, and possessed themselves of some of the
Countries of those they subdued. Because of their mixture with the Grecians,
they were at last called Gallo-Grecians. They often routed and destroyed many
great Armies of the Romans.

According to their natural Cruelty, they are as impious in the Worship of
their Gods; for Malefactors after that they have been kept close Prisoners Five
Years together, they impale upon Stakes, in honor to the Gods, and then with
many other Victims upon a vast Pile of Wood, they offer them up as a burnt
Sacrifice to their Deities. In like manner they use their Captives also, as
Sacrifices to the Gods. Some of them cut the Throats, burn or otherwise destroy
both Men and Beasts that they have taken in time of War: Though they have very
beautiful Women among them, yet they little value their private Society, but
are transported with raging Lust to the filthy act of Sodomy; and lying upon
the Ground on Beasts Skins spread under them, they there tumble together, with
their (...)
Catamites lying on both sides of them. And that which is the most abominable
is, that without all sense of Shame, or regard to their Reputation, they will
readily prostitute their Bodies to others upon every occasion. And they are so
far from looking upon it to be any fault, that they judge it a mean and
dishonorable thing, for any thus caressed, to refuse the favor offered them.

Having spoken of the Celts, we shall now give an account of their Neighbors
Celtiberians, Spaniards.
the Celtiberians. The Two Nations Celts and Iberians, heretofore breaking
forth into a War about the Boundaries of their Countries, at length agreed to
inhabit together promiscuously, and so marrying one with another, their Issue
and Posterity (they say) afterward were called Celtiberians. Two Potent
Nations being thus united, and possessed likewise of a rich and fertile Country,
these Celtiberians became very famous and renowned; so that the Romans had much
ado to subdue them after long and tedious Wars with them. These Celtiberians
bring into the Field not only stout and valiant Horsemen, but brave Foot, both
for strength and hardiness able to undergo all manner of Labor and Toil. They
wear black rough Cassocks made of Wool, like to Goats Hair. Some of them are
armed with the P. 215.
Gauls light Shields, others with Bucklers as big as Shields, and wear Greaves
about their Legs made of rough Hair, and brazen Helmets upon their Heads,
adorned with Red Plumes. They carry Two-edged Swords exactly tempered with
Steel, and have Daggers beside, of a Span long, which they make use of in close
Fights. They make Weapons and Darts in an admirable manner, for they bury
Plates of Iron so long under Ground, till the Rust has consumed the weaker
part, and so the rest becomes more strong and firm: Of this they make their
Swords and other Warlike Weapons; and with these Arms thus tempered, they so
cut through every thing in their way, that neither Shield, Helmet, nor Bone can
withstand them. And because they are furnished with Two Swords, the Horse when
they have routed the Enemy, light and join with the Foot, and fight to
admiration.

There Is another strange and wonderful Custom they have amongst 'em; for though
they are very nice and curious in their Diet, yet they have a very fordid and
filthy Practice, to wash their whole Bodies over with Urin, and rub their very
Teeth with it, which is counted a certain means of Health to their Bodies. As
to their Manners, they are very cruel toward their Enemies and other
Malefactors, but very Courteous and Civil to Strangers: For to all such from
what Place soever they come, they readily and freely entertain them, and strive
who shall perform the greatest Office of Kindness and Respect. Those who are
attended upon by Strangers, they commend and esteem them as Friends of the
Gods. They live upon all sorts of Flesh in great Plenty, and their Drink is
Their Diet.
made of Honey, their Country abounding therewith: But they buy Wine also of
the Merchants that Traffic thither.

Of those that border upon them, the most civilized Nations are the People of
the higher Province of Spain.
Vaccaei, who every Year divide the Lands among them, and then Till and Plow
it, and after Harvest, distribute the Fruits, allotting to every one their
Share; and therefore it is Death to Steal, or underhand to convey away any thing
from the Husbandman. Those they call Lusitanians. Lusitania, now called
Portugal.
Lusitanians, are most valiant of all the Cimbri in the Greek, not Celtiberii,
as in the Latin.
Cimbri. These in Times of War carry little Targets made of Bowel Strings, so
strong and firm, as completely to guard and defend their Bodies. In Fights they
manage these, so nimbly whirling them about here and there, that with a great
deal of Art they avoid and repel every Dart that is cast at them.

They use hookt Saunians made all of Iron, and wear Swords and Helmets like to
those of the Celtiberians. They throw their Darts at a great distance, and yet
are sure to hit their Mark, and wound deeply: Being of active and nimble
Bodies, they can easily fly from, or pursue their Enemy, as there is occasion:
But when they are under Hardships, they cannot bear near so much as the
Celtiberians. In time of Peace, they have a kind of a light and airy way of
Dancing, which requires great agility and nimbleness of the Legs and Thighs: In
time of War they (...).
march observing time and measure; and sing the Paeans when they are just ready
to charge the Enemy.

The Iberians, especially the Lusitanians, are singular in one thing that they
do; for those that are young and pressed with ^ant, but yet are strong and
courageous, get together upon the Tops of the Mountains, and furnish themselves
with Arms; and having made up a considerable Body, make Incursions into Iberia,
and heap up Riches by Thieving and Robbery; and this is their constant Practice
in despite of all hazard whatsoever; for being lightly armed, and nimble of
Foot, they are not easily surpised. And indeed steep and craggy Mountains are
to P. 216.
them as their natural Country, and to these they fly for shelter, because
there is no way in those Places for great Armies to pass. And therefore though
the Romans often set upon them, and in some measure have curbed them, yet they
were never able wholly to put an end to their Thieving and Robbing.

Having related what concerns the Iberians, we conceive it not impertinent to
say something of their Silver Mines. For almost all this Country is full of
such Mines, whence is dug very good and pure Silver; from whence those that
deal in that Metal, gain exceeding great Profit. And in the former Book we
have spoken of the Pyrenean Mountains in Iberia, when we treated of the Acts
and Achievements of Hercules: These are the highest and greatest of all
others; for from the South Sea, almost as far as to the Northern Ocean, they
divide Gall from Iberia and Celtiberia, running out for the space of About 400
Miles.
Three Thousand Furlongs. These Places being full of Woods, and thick of Trees,
it is reported that in ancient time this Mountainous Tract was set on Fire by
some Shepherds, which continuing burning for many Days together, (whence the
Mountains were called Pyrenean) the parched Superficies of the Earth swet,
abundance of Silver and Signifying Fiery in Greek.
the Ore being melted, the Metal flowed down in Streams of pure Silver, like a
River; the use whereof being unknown to the Inhabitants, the Phaenician
Merchants bought it for Trifles given for it in Exchange, and by transporting
it into Greece, Asia and all other Nations, greatly inricht themselves; and
such was their Covetousness, that when they had fully loaded their Ships, and
had much more Silver to bring Aboard, they cut off the Lead from their Anchors,
and made use of Silver instead of the other.

The Phaenicians for a long time using this Trade, and so growing more and more
wealthy, sent many Colonies into Sicily and the Neighboring Islands, and at
length into Africa and Sardinia: But a long time after the Iberians coming to
understand the nature of the Metal, sunk many large Mines, whence they dug an
infinite quantity of pure Silver (as never was the like almost in any other
place of the World) whereby they gained exceeding great Wealth and Revenues.

The manner of working in these Mines, and ordering the Metal among the
Iberians is thus; there being extraordinary rich Mines in this Country, of Gold
as well as Silver and Brass, the Laborers in the Brass take a Fourth part of
the pure Brass dug up, to their own use, and the common Laborers in Silver
have an Euboick Talent for their Labor in Three Days time; for the whole Soil
is full of solid and shining Oar, so that both the nature of the Ground, and
the industry of the Workmen is admirable. At the first every common Person
might dig for this Metal; and in regard the Silver Ore was easily got, ordinary
Men grew very rich: But after that Iberia came into the Hands of the Romans,
the Mines were managed by a throng of Italians, whose Covetousness loaded them
with abundance of Riches; for they bought a great number of Slaves, and
delivered them to the Taskmasters and Overseers of the Mines. These Slaves
open the P. 217.
Mouths of the Mines in many Places, where digging deep into the Ground, are
found Massy Clods of Earth, full of Gold and Silver; and in sinking both in
length and depth, they carry on their Works in undermining the Earth many
Furlongs distance, the Workmen every way here and there making Galleries under
Ground, and bringing up all the Massy Pieces of Ore (whence the Profit and Gain
is to be had) even out of the lowest Bowels of the Earth.

There Is a great difference between these Mines and those in At^ica; for
besides the Labor, they that search there are at great Cost and Charge; and
besides are often frustrated of their hopes, and sometimes lose what they had
found, so that they seem to be unfortunate to a Proverb: But those in Iberia
that deal in Mines, according to their Expectations, are greatly inricht by
their Labors; for they succeed at their very first sinking, and afterward by
reason of the extraordinary richness of the Soil, they find more and more
resplendent Veins of Ore, full of Gold and Silver; for the whole Soil round
about is interlac'd on every hand with these Metals. Sometimes at a great depth
they meet with Rivers underground, but by Art give a check to the violence of
their Current; for by cutting of Trenches under ground, they divert the Stream;
and being sure to gain what they aim at, when they have begun, they never leave
till they have sinished it; and to admiration they pump out those Floods of
Water with those Instruments called Egyptian Pumps, invented by Archimedes the
Syracusian, when Egyptian Cochleans.
he was in Egypt. By these with constant pumping by turns, they throw up the
Water to the Mouth of the Pit, and by this means drain the Mine dry, and make
the Place fit for their Work. For this Engine is so ingeniously contrived, that
a vast Quantity of Water is strangely with little Labor cast out, and the
whole Flux is thrown up from the very bottom, to the Surface of the Earth.

The Ingenuity of this Artist is justly to be admired, not only in these Pumps,
Archimedes.
but in many other far greater things, for which he is famous all the World
over, of which we shall distinctly give an exact narration, when we come to the
time wherein he lived.

Now though these Slaves that continue as so many Prisoners in these Mines,
incredibly enrich their Masters by their Labors, yet toyling Night and Day in
these Golden Prisons, many of them by being over-wrought, dye under Ground. For
they have no rest nor intermission from their Labors; but the Taskmasters by
Stripes force them to intolerable hardships, so that at length they dye most
miserably. Some that through the Strength of their Bodies, and vigor of their
Spirits are able to endure it, continue a long time in those Miseries, whose
Calamities are such, that Death to them is far more eligible than Life.

Since these Mines afforded such wonderful Riches, it may be greatly admired
that none appear to have been sunk of later Times: But in answer hereunto, the
Covetousness of the Carthaginians, when they were Masters of Iberia.
Spain, opened all: And hence it was they grew so Rich and Potent, and hired so
many Valiant Soldiers, by whose assistance they carried on so many great Wars,
that they neither trusted to the Soldiers raised from among their own Citizens,
nor to those of their Confederates, but involved the Romans, Sicilians and
Africans in extreme Hazards, almost to their utter Ruins, by conquering all
with their Moneys dug out of the Mines. For the Carthaginians were ever of old
excessively thirsting after Gain, and the Italians came not one jot behind any
of them, but were as eager to ingross all.

In many Places of Spain there is found also Tin; but not upon the Surface of P.
218. Portugal.
the Ground, as some Historians report, but they dig it up, and melt it down as
they do Gold and Silver. Above Lusitania there is much of this Tin Metal that is
in the Islands, lying in the Ocean over against Iberia, which are therefore
called Cassiterides; and much of it likewise is transported out of Britain into
Gaul, the opposite Continent, which the Merchants carry on Horse-backs through
the heart of Celtica to Marselles, and the City called Narbo, which City is a
Roman Colony, and the greatest Mart Town for Wealth and Trade in those Parts.

But now having done with the Gauls and Celtiberians, we shall pass to the The
Genoans.
Ligurians. Ligurians.
They inhabit a rough and barren Country, and live a toylsom and troublesome
Life in their daily Labor for their common Sustinence; for the Country being
Mountainous and full of Woods, some are employed all Day long in cutting down
Trees, being furnished with strong and great Hatchets for that purpose. The
Husbandman's business for the most part lies in hewing and breaking Rocks, the
Soil is so very rough and craggy; for there is not a Clod of Earth they can dig
up without a Stone; and though they continually thus conflict so many
Hardships, yet Custom has turned it to a Second Nature; and after all their
Labor and Toil, they reap but very little Fruit, scarce sufficient to supply
their Necessities. Daily Toil therefore, and scarcity of Food, is the reason
they are so Lean, and nothing but Sinews. The Women share in these Laborious
Tasks as much as the Men: These People hunt often, and take many wild Beasts,
by which they supply the want of Bread. Being therefore accustomed to range the
Snowy Mountains, and climb the rough and craggy Hills, their Bodies are very
strong and brawny. Some of them for want of Corn and other Fruits, drink Water;
and feed upon Locusts and wild Beasts, and cram their Bellies with such Herbs
as the Land there produces; their Country being altogether a Stranger to those
desirable Deities, Ceres and Bacchus.

In the Night they lie in the Fields, and very seldom so much as in the meanest
Huts or Cottages; but most commonly in hollow Rocks, and natural Caves,
wheresoever they judge there may be a convenient shelter for them; and much
after this manner they do in all other things, living after the old fordid and
barbarous manner.

In short, the Women here are as strong as Men, and the Men as Beasts; and
therefore it is reported, that in their Wars, sometimes the biggest Men among
the Gauls, have been foiled and slain in a single Combat upon a Challenge, by a
little slender Ligurian.

They are lighter armed than the Romans, for they defend themselves with a long
Shield, made after the fashion of the Gauls, and their Cassocks are girt about
them with a Belt: They wear wild Beasts Skins, and carry a Sword of an ordinary
length: But some of them conversing much with the Romans, have changed their
ancient manner of arming themselves, and have imitated their Lords and Masters.
They are bold and daring, not only in times of War, but upon all other
occasions. For in their Traffic they sail through the Adriatic, from Sardona,
a City of Liburnia, now Croatia.
Sardonian and African Seas, exposing themselves to great Hazards in little
Skiffs, less than the ordinary Ships, without the help of any other Vessels; in
which notwithstanding they will boldly (to admiration) venture to weather out the
greatest Storms and Tempests.

Now it remains we should speak of the Hetrurians or Tuscans in Italy, now
under the great Duke of Tuscany.
Tyrrhenians: They were anciently very valiant, and enjoyed a large Country,
and built many Famous Cities; and having a great Navy, were long Masters at
Sea, and called the Sea lying under Italy the P. 219.
Between Sicily and Sardinia, formerly the lower Sea on the South-West side of
Italy, the Adriatic or Gulf of Venice, being called the Higher Sea, on the
North-East of Italy.
Tyrrhenian Sea, after their own Name. Amongst other things wherewith they
furnished their Land Army, they found out the most useful Instrument for War,
the Trumpet, which from them is called Tyrrhena. To the Generals of their Army
they gave these Badges of Honor; they allowed them an Ivory Throne, and a
Purple Robe. They were the first that invented Portico's or Galleries to their
Houses, to avoid the trouble and noise of a crowd of Servants, and other
Hangers-on; most of which being imitated by the Romans, and brought into their
Commonwealth, were afterward improved to a great degree of Curiosity. They
gave themselves much to Learning, especially to the study of natural
Philosophy; and amongst natural Events, mightily intent (above all others) to
find out the nature of Thunder and Lightning: And therefore to this Day, they
are admired by all Princes all the World over, who make use of them to
interpret all the Prodigious effects of Thunder.

They enjoy a very rich Country, and well Tilled and Improved; and so reap
abundance of all sorts of Fruits, not only for their necessary Food, but for
Pleasure and Delight.

They had their Tables spread twice a Day, furnished with all sorts of
Varieties, even to Luxury and Excess.

Their Foot-Carpets are interwoven with Flower-works, and abundance of Silver
Cups, and great variety of them they make use of. Of Household Servants they
have great numbers, some of whom are very beautiful, and others exceeding rich
in Apparel, above the Condition of Servants.

Both Servants and Freemen have several Apartments allowed them, completely
furnished with all manner of Adornments. At last they threw off their former
Sobriety, and now live an idle and debaucht Life, in Riot and Drunkenness; so
that it is no wonder that they have lost the Honor and Reputation their
Forefathers gained by Warlike Atchievments. The goodness of the Soil does not
a little add Fuel to their Luxury, for they enjoy a most Fertile Country, rich
Land, whence they reap abundance of all sorts of Fruits: For Hetruria is second
to none for Fertility of Soil, being a large Champain Country, yet
distinguished with rising Hills here and there, fit and commodious likewise for
Tillage: It Is watered also with moderate Showers, not only in the Winter, but
in the Summer Season.

CHAP. III.
Of Gredosia. Of the Isles of the Arabian Sea. Of the Holy Island. Of Panchaea.
Of Samothracia. Of Naxus, Syme, Nausus, Calydna, Nisyrus, Carpathus. Of Rhodes,
and of Chersonesus.

HAving gone through the Western and Northern Countries, and the Islands of the
Ocean, we shall now describe the Southern Islands lying in the Arabian Ocean,
on the East part of Arabia next to A Country of Asia now called Tarse, a
Province of Persia.
Gredosia. This part of Arabia is a Country full of Villages, and considerable
Towns, some of which are situated upon high Hills, others upon rising Grounds,
or something higher than Champain Fields. Their greatest Cities have stately
Royal Palaces, and are very wealthy and Populous: The Country abounds with all
sorts of Cattle, and is of a very fruitful Soil, affording plenty of rich
Pasture for the Flocks and Herds: Many Rivers run through it, watering the
Fields, to the great increase of the Fruits of the Earth. And therefore this
part of Arabia which excels the rest in richness of Soil is justly called
Arabia the Happy.

Over against the utmost point of this Country near the Ocean, lie many Islands
but there are but Three that are worth remark: The First is called the Holy
Island, The Holy or Sacred Island.
wherein it is unlawful to bury the Dead: But not far from this, about Seven
Furlongs distant, there is another wherein they bury: The Sacred Isle chiefly
produces Frankincense, and in that abundance, as suffices for the Service and
Worship of the Gods all the World over; it has likewise Plenty of Myrrh, with
other P. 220.
odoriferous Spices of several sorts, which breath out a most fragrant Smell.
The nature of Frankincense, and the manner of getting it is thus: The Tree is
very small, like to the white Egyptian Thorn, and bears a Leaf like to the
(...).
Willow: It puts forth a Flower of a Golden Color; from the Bark of this Tree
by incision made, distills the Frankincense in Drops like Tears.

The Myrrhe-Tree is like to the Mastick-Tree, but bears a more slender Leaf,
and grows thicker upon the Branches. The Myrrh flows forth, by digging up the
Earth round about the Roots. Those that grow in a rich Soil, bear twice a Year,
that is, in the Spring and Summer: That in the Springtime, is of a red color,
caused by the Dew; the other nearer Winter, is white.

There they got likewise the Fruit of the It grows in Africa, bears a red
Fruit. Vlid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 13. c. 19.
Paliurus Tree, very wholesome both in Meat and Drink, and good against a
Dissentery. The Land is divided amongst the Inhabitants, of which the best part
is allotted to the King, who has likewise the Tenths of the Fruits.

They say the breadth of the Island is about Two Hundred Furlongs, inhabited by
them they call Panchaeans, who transport the Myrrh and Frankincense into
Foreign Parts, and sell it to the Arabian Merchants, from whom others buy these
and other such like-Merchandise, and convey them to Phaenicia, Coelo-Syria and
Egypt; and from those Places they are carried by the Merchants over all parts
of the World.

Besides these, there is another large Island about Thirty Furlongs distance
from this last mentioned, lying to the East many Furlongs in length. For they
say, from a Promontory thereof running out toward the East, may be seen India
like a Cloud in the Air, the distance is so great.

There are many things observable in Panchaea, that deserve to be taken notice
of. Panchaea.
The natural Inhabitants are those they call Panchaei; the Strangers that dwell
among them are * People of the Western Parts, together with Indians, Cretians,
(...)
and Scythians. In this Island there is a Famous City, called Panara, not
inferior to any for Wealth and Grandeur. The Citizens are called the Suppliants
of Jupiter Triphylius, and are the only People of Panchaea, that are governed
by a Democracy, without a Monarch. They choose every Year the Presidents or
Governors, that have all Matters under their Cognizance, but what concerns Life
and Death; and the most weighty Matters they refer to the College of their
Priests. The Temple of Jupiter Triphylius is about Sixty Furlongs distant from
the City, in a Champain Plain. It Is in great veneration because of it is
Antiquity and the Stateliness of the Structure, and the Fertility of the Soil.

The Fields round about the Temple are Planted with all sorts of Trees, not
only for Fruit, but for Pleasure and Delight; for they abound with tall
Cypresses Plane-Trees, Laurels and Myrtles, the Place abounding with Fountains
of running Water: For near the Temple there is such a mighty Spring of sweet
Water rushes out of the Earth, as that it becomes a Navigable River: Thence it
divides it self into several Currents and Streams, and Waters all the Fields
thereabouts, and produces thick Groves of tall and shady Trees; amongst which
in Summer abundance of People spend their time, and a multitude of Birds of all
sorts build their Nests, which create great delight both by affecting the Eye
with the variety of their Colors, and taking the Ear with the sweetness of
their Notes. Here are many Gardens, sweet and pleasant Meadows decked with all
sorts of Herbs and Flowers, and so glorious is the Prospect, that it seems to
be a Paradise worthy the Habitation of the Gods themselves.

There are here likewise large and Fruitful Palms, and abundance of
Walnut-Trees, P. 221.
which plentifully Furnish the Inhabitants with pleasant Nuts.

Besides all these, there are a multitude of Vines of all sorts, spiring up on
high, and so curiously interwoven one amongst another, that they are exceeding
pleasant to the view, and greatly advance the delights of the Place.

The Temple was built of White Marble, most artificially joynted and cemented,
two Hundred Yards in length, and as many in breadth, supported with great and
thick Pillars, curiously adorned with with Carved Work. In this Temple are
placed huge Statues of the Gods, of admirable Workmanship, and amazing
largeness. Round the Temple are built Apartments for the Priests that attend
the Service of the Gods, by whom every thing in that Sacred Place is performed.
All along from the Temple, is an even course of Ground, Four Furlongs in
length, and a Hundred Yards in breadth; on either side of which, are erected
vast Brazen Statues, with Apiece Pedestals; at the end of the Course,
breaks forth the River from the Fountains beforementioned, from whence flows
most clear and sweet Water, the drinking of which, conduces much to the Health
of the Body. This River is called the (...). Aqua Solis.
Water of the Sun.

The whole Fountain is lined on both sides, and flag'd at the bottom with Stone
at vast Expense, and runs out on both sides for the space of Four Furlongs.
It Is not lawful for any but the Priests to approach to the brink of the
Fountain. All the Land about for Two Hundred Furlongs round, is consecrated to
the Gods, and the Revenues bestowed in maintaining the public Sacrifices, and
Service of the Gods: Beyond these consecrated Lands, is an high Mountain,
dedicated likewise to the Gods, which they call the Throne of Celus and
Triphylius Olympus; for they report that Called Caelum in Latin.
Vranus, when he governed the whole World, pleasantly diverted himself in this
Place; and from the top of the Mount observed the motion of the Heavens and
Stars, and that he was called Triphylius Olympus, because the Inhabitants were
composed of Three several Nations, Panchaeans, Oceanites and Doians, who were
afterward expelled by Ammon; for it is said that he not only rooted out this
Nation, but utterly destroyed all their Cities, and laid Doia and Asterusia
even with the Ground. The Priests every Year solemnize a Sacred Festival in
this Mountain, with great Devotion.

Behind this Mount, in other Parts of Panchaea, they say there are abundance of
wild Beasts of all kinds, as Elephants, Lions, Leopards, Deer, and many other
wonderful Creatures both for Strength and Proportion. In this Island there are
Three chief Cities, Hyracia, Dalis and Oceanis. The whole Country is very
Fertile, and especially in the production of all sorts of Wine in great Plenty.

The Men are Warlike, and use Chariots in Battles, after the ancient manner.
The whole Nation is divided into Three Parts: The First Class is of the
Priests, with whom are joined the Artificers. The other Tribe consists of the
Husbandmen; and the Third are the Militia and the Shepherds.

The Priests govern all, and are the sole Arbitrators in every matter; for they
give Judgment in all Controversies, and have the Power and Authority in all
public Transactions of State. The Husbandmen Till the Land, but the Fruit is
brought into the Common Treasury, and who is judged the most skilful in
Husbandry, receives the largest share of the Fruits for a Reward in the First
Place; and so the Second, and the rest in order to the Tenth, as every one
merits less or more, receives his Reward by the Judgment of the Priests. In the
same manner the Shepherds and Herdsmen carefully bring into the public Stock,
the Victims and other things both by number and weight, as the nature of the
things are; for it is not lawful for any to appropriate any thing to themselves
particularly, except a House and a Garden. For all the young Breed of Cattle,
and other things, and all the Revenues, are received by the Priests, and they
justly distribute to every one as their necessity does require; only the
Priests have a double Proportion. P. 222.


They wear soft and fine Garments; for their Sheeps Wool is much finer here
than any where else; both Men and Women likewise deck themselves with Golden
Ornaments; for they wear Necklaces of Gold, and Bracelets about their Arms, and
like the Persians have Rings hanging in their Ears. Their Shoes are such as
others wear, but richly beautified with diverse sorts of Colors.

Their Soldiers for ordinary Pay, defend the Country, fortifying themselves
within Camps and Bulwarks; for there is a part of the Island infested with most
daring Thieves and Robbers, who often lurch and surprise the Husbandmen.

To conclude, these Priests for Delicacy, State and Purity of Life, far exceed
all the rest of the Inhabitants: Their Robes are of white Linen, and sometimes
of pure soft Wool. They wear likewise Miters, imbroider'd with Gold. Their
Shoes are Sandals curiously wrought with exquisite Workmanship, and in their
Ears hang Golden Earrings like to the Women's.

They attend chiefly upon the Service of the Gods, singing melodious Songs in
their Praises, setting forth their glorious Acts and Benefits bestowed upon
Men. The Priests say they came originally from Crete, and were brought over
into Panchaea by Jupiter, when he was upon Earth, and governed all the World;
and allege their Language for a Confirmation of this Assertion, in as much as
they retain many Words of the Cretian Speech among them. And further say, that
they derived from their Ancestors that Civility and kindness wherewith they
entertain the Cretians, the Fame and report of their ancient Consanguinity
descending continually in a perpetual Succession to their Posterity: They show
likewise a Record written, as they say, by Jupiter's own Hand, at the time when
he was on Earth, and laid the Foundation of the Temple.

There are in this Island likewise Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass and Iron, but
not lawful for any to export them. Nay, it is not lawful for any of the Priests
to go out of the Verge of the Consecrated Ground; and if any do, it is lawful
for any Man that finds 'em to kill 'em. They have under their Charge,
innumerable vast Vessels, and other Consecrated things, both of Gold and
Silver, which have been laid up there in honor of the Gods for many Ages. The
Gates of the Temple are of admirable Workmanship, beautified with Gold, Silver,
Ivory and Thine Wood.

The Whereon he lay at Meals.
Bed of the God is Six Cubits long, and Four broad, of massy Gold, most
curiously wrought in every part; and near adjoining, stands the Table, as
large, and of the like Materials and Workmanship with the other in every
respect.

In the middle of the Bed, is placed a great Golden Pillar, whereon are Letters
inscribed, called by the Egyptians, Sacred Writing, expressing the famous
Actions of Vranus, Jupiter, Diana and Apollo, written they say, by Mercury
himself. Celus.
But this may suffice concerning the Islands lying in the Ocean over against
Arabia.

We shall now speak of those in the Aegaean Sea, near to Greece, beginning
Samothracia.
with Samothracia. It Is said this Island was anciently called Samos, and
afterward Samothracia, to distinguish from one near to it, called Samos, built
by Samus.

The Inhabitants are those that have ever been originally there, so that
there is nothing certain handed down to Posterity, concerning the first
Inhabitants and Governors of this Place. Some there are notwithstanding, that
report, that it was anciently called Samos, and afterward Samothracia, from
Colonies that settled there out of Samos and Thrace.

The natural Inhabitants had anciently a peculiar kind of Speech, some Marks P.
223.
whereof remain in the Worship of their Gods at this Day. The Samothracians
themselves report, that before there was any Flood in any other Nations, there
was a great one amongst them.

The first Irruption was at the Mouth of the Two Rocks in the Thracian
Bosphorus.
Cyneae, and the other made through the Hellespont: For they say, that the
Pontick Sea being once a standing Pool, was so swelled by the falling in of
Rivers, that being overcharged with Water, it emptied it self into the
Hellespont, and overflowed a great part of the Coasts of Asia, and laid a
considerable part of the Champain Country of Samo-thracia under Water. And as a
manifestation of this, some Fishermen of later time have brought up with their
Nets, the Heads of Stony Pillars, certain Signs of the Cities being overflowed
and ruined by the Waters. The Inhabitants that escaped (they say) fled to the
higher parts of the Island, but the Sea rising still higher, they made their
Addresses to their Gods, and thereupon being delivered from the imminent Danger
they were in, they compassed in the Bounds of those Places wherein they were
preserved throughout the whole Island, and there erected Altars, where they
sacrifice to their Gods at this Day: Whence it is apparent, that they inhabited
Samothracia before the last Deluge.

Afterward one Saon an Islander, the Son (as some say) of Jupiter and Nympha,
but (as others, of Mercury and Rhena,) gathered the Inhabitants (before living
scattered and dispersed) into a Body; and made Laws for their better
Government, and divided them into Five Tribes, calling them after the Names of
his Sons, but named himself Saon, after the Name of the Island. The Government
being thus settled, it is said, that Dardanus, Jasion and Harmonia, the Children
of Jupiter and Electra, one of the Daughters of Atlas, were born among them. Of
these, Dardanus (being a bold and brave Spirited Man) passed over in a Pinnace
into Asia, and first built the City Dardanus, and erected the Kingdom of Troy
(so called, from Troy built afterward,) and called the People Dardanians. He
Reigned (they say) over many other Nations besides in Asia, and that the
Dardanians above Thrace, were a Colony settled there by him.

It Is further said, that Jupiter desiring likewise to advance his other Son to
a high degree of Honor and Reputation, discovered to him the Rites of the
Sacred Mysteries anciently observed in that Island, but then newly revived,
which it was not lawful for any to hear, but those that are initiated.

But he seems to be the first that initiated Strangers; whence these Rites and
Ceremonies became more noted and famous.

About this time, Cadmus the Son of Agenor came thither to seek after Europa,
Cadmus.
and being initiated into these Sacred Mysteries, married Harmonia the Sister
of Jasion, not the Daughter of Mars, as the Greeks report: They say, that this
was the first Marriage that was celebrated in the presence of the Gods, where
Ceres in love with Jasion, presented him with Corn, Mercury with a Harp;
Minerva bestowed that famous Necklace, Vail and Pipe. Electra taught him to
celebrate the Sacred Mysteries of the great Mother of the Gods with Cymbals,
Timbrels and Dancing. Apollo played upon his Harp, and the Muses upon wind
Instruments, and the rest of the Gods celebrated the Nuptials with joyful
Acclamations.

Cadmus afterward (as he was commanded by the Oracle) built Thebes in Beotia;
and Jasion married Cybele, of whom they say he begat Coxybas; after Jasion was
received into the Number of the Gods, Dardanus, Cybele and Coripas traveling
into Phrygia brought over the sacred Mysteries of the Mother of the Gods into
Asia; then Cybele Married Olympus, the first, and bore Alces, and called this
Godess Cybele after her own Name. Corybas called those that celebrated the
sacred Mysteries of his Mother (in a furious Rage like Madmen) after his own
Name, Corybantes, and married Thebe the Daughter of Cilix the Son of Phelix
whence Celicid.
Cilix; and thus Pipes were brought over into Phrygia, and Mercury's Harp into
Lyrnesus; which when the City was taken, was carried, away by Achilles. It Is
reported likewise that Pluto was the Son of Jasion and Ceres, which rose from
this real Truth, that Ceres at the Marriage of Haermonia bestowed upon Jasion
upon the account of her Familiarity with him, Plutos is rich in Greek
rich Presents P. 224.
of Corn: But what are particularly acted in the Celebration of these sacred
Mysteries, it is granted are only known by those that are initiated.

It Is commonly said, that these Gods are always present, and afford their help
and assistance to those that are Initiated, and call upon them, when they fall
into any sudden and unexpected Distress; and that these Worshipers grow more
and more Pious and Righteous, and still exceed themselves in Goodness; and
therefore the most famous of the Ancient Heroes and Demygods greatly coveted to
be initiated into these sacred Rites and Ceremonies: For it is believed, that
Jasion, Dioscurus, Hercules and Orpheus (who were Members of this Society)
through the favor of these Gods prosper'd in all their Wars.

Having now finished what concerns Samothracia, the Course of the History leads
us to Naxus.

This Island was formerly called Strongyle. The Thracians were the first that
Naxus.
settled here, upon the occasion following. It Is said, that Boreas had two Sons,
Butes and Lycurgus, of several Mothers. Butes the younger Plotted to Murder
his Brother, which being plainly discovered, the Father appointed no greater a
Punishment to be Executed upon his Son, but only commanded him, with his
Accomplices to take Shipping and be gone, and seek out for themselves some
other Habitations: Upon which, Butes with a Number of Thrasians (his fellow
Criminals) went aboard, and in a direct Course made their way through the
Cyclade Islands, and arrived at Strongyle, and thus possessed of the Island,
robbed all by their Piracies that passed that way. But being in want of Women,
they roved about here and there, and forcibly carried them away where ever they
could find them. Some of the Ciclade Islands at that time were wholly desolate,
and others of them but very thinly inhabited. Running out therefore a long way
off, and being repulsed at Eubaea, they arrived at Thessaly; and there landing,
they met with the Nurses of Bacchus at the Mountain called Diros, Celebrating
the Mysteries of the Gods in Achaia Phthiotis; being then ready to seize upon
the Women, some of them cast away their Offerings and fled to the Sea, and
others to the Mountain before mentioned: But Butes seized upon Coronides, and
Ravished her, which dishonor she bore so hainously, that she called upon
Bacchus to revenge her Disgrace, and thereupon he struck Butes with Madness,
who in his Mad mood cast himself into a Pit and so perished. The rest of the
Thracians seized upon other Women, amongst whom were two Noble Ladies,
Iphimedia the Wife of Aloeas, and his Daughter Pancratis; with these they
returned to Strongyle. In the room of Butes they Created Agassamenus King of
the Island, and Married him to Pancratis the Daughter of Aloeas, a Lady of an
admirable Beauty: For (before whom he took her to be his Wife) Siculus and
Hecaterus, two of the most eminent Commanders, fought a Duel, and Wounded one
another. Agassamenus bestowed Iphimedia upon one of his intimate Friends, whom
he had made General of his Army. In the mean time Aloeas sent his two Sons,
Otus and Ephialtes, to seek after his Wife and Daughter, who invading
Strongyle, fought with the Thracians, routed 'em, and took the City by Storm.
Not long after Pancratis died, Otus and Ephialtes possessed themselves of the
Island, and ousted the Thracians, and called it Dia. Shortly after they fell
out and fought a set Battle, wherein many were killed on both sides, and the
two Brothers killed one another, whom the Inhabitants afterward adored as
Demygods. After the Thracians had held the Island for above two hundred Years,
at length a Drought and Famine forced 'em to leave the Place. After them the
Carians (being expuls'd Lamia) possessed themselves of it, whose King Naxus,
the Son of Polemon, afterward ordered the Island should be called Naxus, after
his own Name. This Naxus was a very famous and good Man, and left behind him a
Son, called P. 225.
Leucippus, whose Son Smardius afterward reigned in the Island; in whose Reign
Theseus coming out of Crete with Ariadne, landed here; and in his Sleep saw
Bacchus threatening him with Ruin, if he did not forsake Ariadne; with which
Vision being terrified, he left her, and withdrew himself out of the Island.
Then Bacchus in the Night led away Ariadne to the Mountain Arius, and then
immediately disappeared, and not long after Ariadne was no more seen.

The Naxians have many Stories amongst them concerning this God; for they say
he was bred up with 'em, and therefore that this Island was loved by Bacchus
more than any other, and by some called Dionysiades. For Jupiter (as the Story
goes) (Semele before the Birth of Bacchus, being struck with a Thunderbolt)
took the Infant Bacchus out of his Mother's Womb, and clapped him within his
Thigh: But when the full time of his Birth was at Hand, to conceal him from
Juno, he was brought forth in Naxus, and there committed to the care of the
Nymphs, Philias, Coronidis and Cleidis, to be educated by them; and that Semele
was therefore before his Birth killed by Lightning, to the end that Bacchus not
being born of a Mortal, but of Two immortal Deities, might from his Birth be of
an Immortal Nature. Upon the account therefore of the kindness showed him in
his Education, he expressed his gratitude to the Inhabitants so far, as that he
advanced them to a high degree of Wealth and Power, and furnished them with a
brave Fleet of Ships; and that they being the first that made a defection from
Xerxes, (they say) he assisted 'em to vanquish the Barbarians in a Sea Fight,
and that he gave a clear Evidence and Token of his Concern with them in the
Battle at Platea; and that the excellency of their Wine, was an apparent
demonstration of the Kindness of this God to their Island.

The First that inhabited Syme (which before lay waste and desolate) were Syme.
those that came thither with Triops, under the Conduct of Chthonius, the Son
of Neptune and Symes, from whom the Island was so called.

Nireus, the Son of Charopus and Aglaies, was in aftertimes King of this
Island; he was a very comely and beautiful Man, and went along with Agamemnon
to the War against Troy; and together with this Island, was Lord of Cnidus.

After the end of the Trojan War, the Carians possessed themselves of this
Place at such time as they were Masters at Sea; afterward forced thence by an
excessive Drought, they settled themselves in Vranopolis, in Mount Athos.
Vranium. From that time it lay desolate, till the Fleet of the Lacedaemonians
and Argives arrived there, and then it was Planted with new Colonies in this
manner.

Ausos, or Auson, the Son of Ulysses and Calypso.
Nausus, one of the Companions of Hippotas, taking along with him those that
came too late, at the time when the Of Argos.
Country was divided by lot, possessed himself of Syme, which then lay
desolate, and afterward received others (that came there under the Conduct of
Xuthus) to share with him both in the Privileges of the City, and Commodities
of the Country, and possessed the Island equally among them. They say, that
both Cnidians and Rhodians made up part of this Colony.

The Cares anciently possessed Calydna and Nisyrus; and afterward Thessalus,
the Calydna, Nisyrus.
Son of Hercules, was Lord of both the Islands; and therefore Antiphus and
Philippus Kings of Coos (when they were engaged in the War of Troy) were
Generals of those Forces that were sent out of these Islands. In their return
from the Trojan War, Four of Agamemnon's Ships were by a Storm cast upon
Calydna, and the Men that were on Board, continued there intermixed with the
other Inhabitants. But the ancient Inhabitants of Nisyrus, were swallowed up by
an Earthquake. After which, the Coons added it to their Dominion, as they had
done Calydna before. After them, the Rhodians sent a Colony thither; all the
former Inhabitants being wholly swept away with a Plague.

As for Carpathus, that was first seized upon by some of Minos his Soldiers, at
Carpathus. P. 226.
such time as he was Master at Sea, and lorded it over the Grecians. Many Ages
after, Ioclus, the Son of Thymoleon of Argos, by the Command of the Oracle,
brought over a Colony thither.

The Island of Rhodes was anciently inhabited by those called Telchines; who
(as Rhodes.
an old Story goes) were the Offspring of Thalassa, and with Caphira the
Daughter * The Sea.
of Oceanus brought up Neptune, who was committed to their care by Rhea. It Is
said, they invented several Arts, and found out many other things useful and
conducing to the well-being of Man's Life. It Is reported, they were the first
that made Statues of the Gods, and that some of the ancient Images were
denominated from them; for amongst the Lindians, Apollo is called Apollo
Telchinius: Amongst the Ialysians, Juno and the Nymphs were called Telchiniae;
and amongst the Camiraeans, Juno was called Juno Telchinia. But these Telchines
were likewise reported to be Conjurers, for they could raise Storms and
Tempests, with Rain, Hail and Snow, when ever they pleased; which the Magi.
Magicians (as is related in History, were used to do. They could likewise
transform themselves into other Shapes, and were envious at all that learnt
their Art.

Neptune they say, fell in love with Halia, the Sister of the Telchines, and of
her begat several Children, Six Sons, and one Daughter called Rhoda, from whom
the Island was called Rhodes.

In those Days there were Giants in the Western Parts of the Island. Then
likewise Jupiter having conquered the Titans, fell in love with a Nymph named
Hamalia, and of her begat Three Sons, Spartaeus, Cronius and Cytus. About the
time they were grown up to Men's Estate, Venus in her Passage from Cythera to
Cyprus, arrived at this Island; but being hindered from landing by the Sons of
Neptune, together with proud and impious Language, the Goddess was so provoked,
as that she struck 'em mad, and caused 'em in their raging mood to ravish their
own Mother, and commit many other outrages upon the Inhabitants. Neptune coming
to the Knowledge of this vile Fact, sunk his Sons under Ground for their
Wickedness. Whence they were called the Oriental.
Eastern Demons. Halia threw her self into the Sea, and after was adored by
the Inhabitants as a Goddess by the Name of Leucothea. Afterward the Telchines
foreseeing an Inundation coming upon Rhodes, forsook the Island, and were
dispersed and scattered Abroad. Of whom Lycus went into Lycia, and built the
Temple of Apollo Lycius, near to the Banks of the River Xanthus.

When the Flood came, it rose so high, that besides destroying those that
remained in the Island, all the flat and Champain part of the Country (with
Showers that poured down continually) was like a standing Pool of Water: Some
few that fled to the higher Grounds were preserved, amongst whom were the Sons
of Jupiter. But Sol (as the Story is) falling in love with Rhoda, called the
Island after her Name Rhodes, and cleared the Island of the Inundation. But the
truth coucht in the Fable is this: In the first Generation of all things, when
the Island lay in Mud and Dirt, the Sun dried up the Moisture, and made the
Land productive of Living Creatures; whence sprang the Seven Heliades, so
called from In Greek, Helios.
the Sun, and other Men, the Original Inhabitants. And hence it is, that they
account the Island to be consecrated to the Sun, and the Rhodians in
aftertimes constantly worshipped the Sun above all other Gods, as the Parent
from whence they first sprang. The Names of his The Heliades.
Seven Sons are Ochimus, Ceraphus, Macir, Astis, Tenages, Triopas and Candalus;
Sol, the Sun.
he had only one Daughter called Electryo, who dying a Virgin, became ever
after adored by the Rhodians as a Demy-Goddess. When the Heliades attained to
Men's Estate, Sol told 'em, that which soever of them first sacrificed to
Minerva, should ever enjoy the presence of the Goddess. The same thing it is
said, was promised and foretold at the same time to the Athenians. Hereupon it
fell out that the Heliades, through P. 227.
too much have, forgot to put Fire under the Altars, before they laid the
Sacrifices upon them: Cecrops they say, then reigned in Athens, and was later
than the other in slaying the Burnt-Offering, but was before them in burning
the Victim; for which Reason there is a peculiar That is, laying the Victim upon
the Altar before the Fire.
Ceremony used in Rhodes in their Sacred Mysteries to this Day, and the Image
of the Goddess is set up there.

These things some have related concerning the Antiquities of the Rhodians,
among whom is Zenon, who wrote their History.

The Heliades, as they were in station above other Men, so they excelled others
in Learning, and especially in Astrology. They were the Persons that first
found out the Art of Navigation, and the dividing of the Day into Hours.
Tenages was the most ingenious of any of them, and therefore through Envy was
Murdered by his Brothers; Upon discovery of the Fact, both the principal.
Authors and their Accomplices fled for it.

Macer got to Lesbos, and Candalus to Coos. Actis fled into Egypt, and there
built Heliopolis, calling it after the Name of his Father; and from him the
Egyptians learnt the Science of Astrology.

Afterward, when most of the Inhabitants of Greece were destroyed by the
Flood, and all Records and ancient Monuments perished with them; the Egyptians
took this occasion to appropriate the study of Astrology solely to themselves;
and whereas the Grecians (through Ignorance) as yet valued not Learning, it
became a general Opinion, that the Egyptians were the first that found out the
Knowledge of the Stars.

And so even the Athenians themselves, though they built the City Sais in
Egypt, yet by reason of the Flood, were led into the same Error of forgetting
what was before. And therefore it is believed, that many Ages after, Cadmus the
Son Cadmus.
of Agenor, brought the Knowledge of Letters out of Phaenicia first into
Greece; and after him, it is supposed the Grecians themselves added some Letters
to those they learned before; but a general Ignorance however still prevailed
amongst them.

Triopas, another Son, past over into Caria, and possessed himself of the
Promontory there, called from him Triopium. The rest of Sol's Sons, having had
no hand in the Murder, staid behind in Rhodes; and afterward built the City
Achaia, and dwelt in Ialysia. But the Regal Power was in Ochymus the Eldest
Son, who married Hegetoria, one of the Nymphs, and of her begat a Daughter
called Gydippe, who afterward went by the Name of Cyrbias, by marrying of whom
Cercaphis his Brother came to the Kingdom; after whose Death, Three of the
Sons, Lindus, Ialysus and Camirus reigned together; in whose time a great
Inundation laid Cyrbe waste and desolate. These Three Brothers divided the
Country amongst themselves, and each built a City, and called them after their
own Names.

At this time Danaus fled out of Egypt with his great number of Daughters,
Danaus.
and landed at Lindus in Rhodes; where being received by the Inhabitants, he
built a Temple to Minerva, and consecrated to her an Altar. During this Travel
of Danaus, Three of his Daughters died in Lindus, and the rest passed over with
their Father to Argos.

Not long after, Cadmus, the Son of Agenor, being commanded by the King to
Cadmus.
seek after Europa, made for Rhodes; and in the Voyage being overtaken with a
violent Storm, made a Vow to build a Temple to Neptune. Having therefore
escaped the danger (according to his Vow) he dedicated a Temple to this God in
the Island, and left some of the Phaenicians to be Overseers of the Sacred
Mysteries, who were made Members of the City with the Ialysians, and out of
their Families (they say) from time to time were chosen the Priests. Cadmus at
that time devoted many rich Gifts to Minerva Lindia, amongst which, was a Brass
Cauldron, a most excellent piece of curious ancient Workmanship; it had an
Inscription upon it in Phaenician Letters; which were therefore called
Phaenician, P. 228.
because (they say) they were first brought out of Phaenicia into Greece.

In aftertimes, vast Serpents bred in Rhodes, which destroyed many of the
Inhabitants; those therefore that remained, sent to Delos, to consult the
Oracle what was to be done for the removal of the present Calamity they
suffered under, who returned answer, That they should admit Phorbas and his
Followers to share with them in the Island. He was the Son of Lapithas, and was
then with many of his Friends in Thessaly, seeking for a convenient Place
wherein to settle themselves. The Rhodians hereupon (according to the direction
of the Oracle) sent for Phorbas, and received him as a Proprietor with them in
the Island, who destroyed all the Serpents, and freed the Country from their
former fears; and from thenceforth continued in Rhodes, and was after his Death
adored as a Demy-God, having approved himself a Good Man in several other
respects.

Afterward Althaemenes the Son of Catreus King of Crete, consulting the Oracle
Althaemenes.
concerning some Affairs, was answered, that it would be his Fate to kill his
own Father; to avoid which Misfortune, he voluntarily forsook Crete, with many
others who of their own accord went along with him, and passed over to Camirus,
the Metropolis of Rhodes, and there built a Temple upon Mount Atamirus, to
Jupiter Atamirus, which is in great Veneration and Esteem at this Day. It Is
situated upon the very Top of the Mountain, whence may be had a clear Prospect
of Crete. Althamenes with his Followers, thus settled in Camirus, lived in great
Honor and Esteem among the Citizens. But his Father Catreus having no issue
Male, and exceedingly loving his Son, undertook a Voyage to Rhodes, longing to
find out his Son, and bring him back to Crete.

And now his unalterable Destiny was near at Hand, for landing at Rhodes in the
Night, with some others of his Attendants, forthwith there was a Conflict
between them and the Islanders; whereupon Althamenes run in hastily to their
Assistance, and (unknown to him) killed his Father with a Dart; which when he
came to understand, he was so overwhelmed with Sorrow, he ever after avoided
all manner of Society, and wandered up and down in the Deserts, and at last
died of Grief: But by the Command of the Oracle he was afterward honored by
the Rhodians as a Demy-God.

After this, a little before the Trojan War, Tlepolimus the Son of Hercules,
fled voluntarily from Argos, by reason of his Killing of Licymnius, whom he
slew unawares; and upon inquiry having received an Answer from the Oracle
concerning the planting of a Colony, he passed over with a few People into
Rhodes, where being received, he settled: And being afterward created King of
the Island, he divided the Country into equal Shares by Lot; and during his
Reign, ordered all other Matters according to the Rules of Justice and Equity.
At length preparing to go along with Agamemnon, in the Expedition against Troy,
he committed the Government into the Hands of Butas, who fled with him from
Argos. And after he had gained much Glory and Renown in that War, he died in
the Country of Troas.

Now because some things of Chersonesus, are intermixed with the Affairs of
Chersonesus.
Rhodes, over against which it lies, we conceive it not amiss here to give an
account of it. Some are of Opinion it is called Chersonesus, from the nature of
the Place, being like to an Istmus, or as others write, from one Chersonesus,
once a Petty Prince there. Not long after whose time (it is said) Five of the
Curetes came there; which Curetes were the Posterity of those that brought up
Jupiter (born of the Mother Goddess Rhea) in the Mountains of Ida in Crete.
After their arrival in Crete (with a considerable Navy) they expelled the
Cares, the ancient Inhabitants, and divided the Country into Five Parts, and
each of them built a City, and called them after their own Names. P. 229.


Not long after, Inachus King of Argos, sent Cyrnus, one of his Noblemen and
Commanders, with a considerable Fleet, to find out his Daughter Io, and not to
return till he found her. After he had roved about into several Parts of the
World, and could not find her, he at length arrived at Caria in Chersonesus,
and there settled himself, despairing ever to return to his own Country; and
afterward partly by Force, and partly by Persuasions, he reigned as King over
part of the Country, and built a City, and called it Cyrnus, after his own
Name; and governed so well, to the advancement of the public Good, that he was
greatly beloved and honored by the Citizens.

Afterward Triopas, one of the Sons of Sol and Rhoda, fled into Chersonesus,
for the Killing of his Brother: But being cleared and acquitted by King
Melisseus, he sailed into Thessaly, to the assistance of Deucalion's Sons, and
helped to expel the Pelasgians thence, and they divided the Country called
Dotion among them. He there cut down the Grove of Ceres, and made use of it for
the Building of himself a Palace; for which he was hated of the People, and
forced to fly out of Thessaly, and sailed away with some of his Followers to
Cnidia; where he built a City called after his own Name Triopium. Leaving this
Place, he gained Chersonesus, and a great part of Caria adjoining to it.

Many Writers, and especially the Poets, much differ about the Descent of
Priopas. Some derive his Descent from Canace (the Daughter of Aeolus) and
Neptune, others say, his Parents were Lapitha, the Son of Apollo, and Stibes
the Daughter of Pineus. In Castabus in Chersonesus, there is a Temple dedicated
to Hemithea; what is remarkable concerning her, is not fit to be omitted.
Although there are many various Stories related of her, yet we shall only give
an Account of what is generally granted and agreed upon by the Inhabitants to
be true.

Staphylus and Chrysothemides had Three Daughters, Molpadia, Rhoeo and
Parthenos. Rhoeo was got with Child by Apollo, at which her Father was so
incensed, thinking she had played the Whore with some Mortal Man, that he locked
her up in a Chest, and threw her into the Sea, and the Chest was afterward
cast up upon the Island Delos, where she was delivered of a Son, whom she named
Arrius. Being thus wonderfully preserved, she laid the Child upon the Altar of
Apollo, and prayed to him, that if he was the Child's Father, he would save and
defend the Infant: Upon which the Story goes, that Apollo hid the Child; but
afterward took care to have him carefully brought up, and endued him with a
Prophetic Spirit, and advanced him to great Honor and Reputation.

Molpadia and Parthenos, the other Sisters, having the Charge of their Father's
Wine (the use of which was then but newly found out) with Drinking too much,
fell fast asleep; in the mean time, a Sow which they fed, coming into the
Place, threw down the Hogshead and spilt all the Wine. When the poor Ladies
perceived what was done, they so dreaded the Severity of their Father, that
they fled to the Sea Shore, and threw themselves headlong from the Top of a
high Rock into the Sea: But Apollo for the sake of their Sister, took them up
safe, and brought them to some Cities in Chersonesus. Where Parthenos at
Bubastus was adored as a Goddess, and had a Temple erected in honor to her.

Molpadia was brought to Castabus, and for the special Revelations she had from
the God, she was called Half a Goddess.
Hemithea, and was in great honor and esteem among all the Chersonesians. In
the Celebration of her Mysteries, (in remembrance of the Misfortune concerning
the Wine) they offer Drink Offerings of Water and Honey mixed together; and he
that has touched a Swine, or eaten of Swines-Flesh, is not permitted to enter
into her Temple.

This Temple of Hemithea, in following times grew so Famous, that not only P.
230.
the Inhabitants adored it, but Strangers far and near resorted to it with
great Devotion, and with many rich Presents and magnificent Sacrifices; and
that which is most observable is, that the very Persians themselves when they
destroyed all other Temples throughout all Greece, only spared the Temple of
Hemithea. Thieves and Robbers likewise that spoil and waste all before them,
have still from time to time spared this Temple, though it stand open and
naked, without the defense of a Wall to secure it. They say, that the Cause of
the flourishing Condition of this Place is, the great Kindness of this Goddess
to all Men whatsoever; for she appears to those that are sick, in their Sleep,
and directs them to proper Remedies for the recovery of their Health; sach as
are in desperate Distempers, and resort thither, she perfectly cures and
restores. Women likewise that are in hard Labor, she safely delivers, and
frees from the pains and hazards of Childbearing, and therefore that Temple is
full of ancient Relicts and Donations safely kept and preserved to this Day,
not by Guards or Walls, but only by the Religious Devotion observed in this
Place.

But let this suffice concerning Rhodes and Chersonesus; it remains we should
now treat of Crete.

CHAP. IV.
Of Crete: The First Inhabitants. Of the Idaei Dactyli: Of Jupiter, Saturn,
Hyperion, Prometheus, Mnemosyne, Themis, Ceres, Neptune, Pallas. Jupiter' s
Race; as the Muses, Vulcan, Mars, etc. Of the ancient Hercules, Britomartis,
Pluto. Rhadamanthus' s Justice. Of Lesbos. Deucalion' s Flood. Of the Blessed
Islands. Of Tenedos, and the Cyclades.

THE Inhabitants of Crete affirm, that the most ancient People of Crete are the
Eteocretes, whose King, whom they call Creta, found out many very useful
things, conducing much to the support and comfort of Man's Life. They say,
likewise, that many of the Gods were born amongst them, who for their Benefits
conferred upon Mankind, were eternally honored as Deities. Of which things we
shall here distinctly treat, as they are delivered to us by the most approved
Authors that have writ the History of Crete.

The first Inhabitants of Crete (of whom there is any remembrance) were the
Idaei Dactyli, in Mount Ida: Some say there were a Hundred others, but Ten in
number, called Dactyli, from the Ten Fingers on Men's Hands.

Some affirm, and amongst those Ephorus, that the Idaei Dactyli had their
Original from Mount Ida in Phrygia, and passed over with Minos into Europe; and
that they were Conjurers, and gave themselves to Enchantments, and Sacred Rites
and Mysteries; and abiding in Samothracia, greatly amused and astonished the
People of the Island. At which time it is said, Orpheus (who was naturally of a
prompt Wit to Music and Poetry) was their Scholar, and the first that brought
over the Rites and Ceremonies of their Mysteries into Greece. The Dactyli
moreover (as is said) found out the use of Fire; and discovered the nature of
Iron and Brass, to the Inhabitants of the Antisapterians, near to the Mountain
Berecynthus, and taught the manner of working of it: And because they were the
first discoverers of many things of great use and advantage to Mankind, they
were adored and worshipped as Gods: One of them, they say, was called Hercules;
a Person he was of great Renown, and he that instituted the Olympic Games,
which were thought by Posterity to have been appointed by Hercules the Son of
Alcmena, led into that Error by the Identity of Names.

An Evidence of these things, they say, remains to this Day, in that the Women
chant the Songs formerly sung by this God, and wear about them certain Amulets,
in imitation of him who was a Magician, and taught sacred Rites and Ceremonies:
All which were different from the Manners of Hercules the Son of Alemena.

After the Idaei Dactyli (they say) there were Nine Curetes, some of which are
feigned to be the Offspring of the Earth, and the rest to descend from the
Idaei Dactyli. They dwelt in the Mountains, under the shade of thick Trees, and
in P. 231.
Caves, and other Places that naturally afforded them a shelter and covering,
the building of Houses not being then found out. They were very Ingenious, and
therefore invented many things very useful and profitable: For they were the
first that taught how to manage Flocks of Sheep, and to tame and bring up other
Cattle, and how to gather Honey; and that they were the first that showed how
to cast Darts, and to Hunt; and that ordered Men into Societies and
Communities, and sociably eating one with another, and brought Men into a
peaceable and orderly Course of Life: They invented likewise Swords and
Helmets, and dancing in Arms, and by the great noise they made, deceived
Saturn. For it is said, that by them Jupiter (whom his Mother Rhea, to hide him
from her Father Saturn committed to their Care) was secured and brought up: But
being willing to treat of this more particularly, we must go a little higher
with ou^ Relation.

The Cretians say, that the Titans were contemporary with the Curetes: They
dwelt in the Country of the Gnosians, where now may be seen the ancient
Foundations and Courts of the House where Rhaea inhabited, and an old Sacred
Grove of Cyprus Trees. They were in number, Six Men and Five Women, the Issue
of Heavens and Earth.
Vranus and Terra, as some affirm; but as others say, the Offspring of one of
the Curetes and Titaea, and called Titans after the Name of their Mother. The
Sons were called Saturn.
Cronus, Hyperion, Coeus, Japetus, Crius and Oceanus; the Sisters were Rhea,
Themis, Mnemosyne, Phaebe and Thetis; every one of whom were the Inventers of
something useful and profitable to Man's well-being, and as a Reward of their
Deserts, are by all Men honored with an everlasting Remembrance.

Saturn the Eldest, obtained the Kingdom, and reduced his Subjects from a wild
and barbarous, to a more civil Course Saturn, held for good Reasons to be Noah.
See before.
of Life, both as to Food and Manners. Having therefore upon that account
gained much Honor and Reputation, he went into many Parts of the World, and
persuaded all wherever he came, to Justice and Integrity of Heart; and
therefore it is brought down as a certain Truth to Posterity, that in the times
of Saturn, Men were plain and honest, free from all sorts of wicked Designs or
Practices; yea, that they were then happy and blessed. He chiefly reigned over
the Western Parts of the World, and was advanced to the highest Pinnacle of
Honor and Renown; and therefore of later Times, both the Romans and
Carthaginians (while their City stood) and other Neighboring Nations, adored
this God with magnificent and splendid Festivals and Sacrifices; and many
Places up and down are called after his Name: And because at that time the Laws
were strictly observed, no act of Injustice was committed, but all submitting
to his Authority, lived happily, and enjoyed Pleasure and Content without any
Molestation; which is attested by the Poet Hesiod, in these Verses.

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...):
(...),
(...).
Whilst Saturn reigned, those then his Subjects were,
Who lived the lives of Gods without all care;
Who Sorrow, Labor, nor Old Age oppressed,
But soundness both in Hands and Feet them blessed;
With joyful Vigor to their Feasts they went,
Free from all Ills, their Deaths did represent
Sound Sleep; to them flowed down what e're was good,
And without Toil, the Earth did yield them Food,
And from her Fruitful Womb did them afford
Her Fruits most freely of her own accord.
Rich in their Flocks, and to the Gods most dear,
During this Reign, these happy People were.
And these are the things they reported of Saturn.

As to Hyperion, they say, that he was the first that by his own Industry found
Hyperion.
out the Motions of the Sun and Moon, and other Stars, and the Seasons and
Distinctions of Time measured out by them, and afterward imparted his
Knowledge to others. And therefore he was called the Father of those Planets,
as he that first taught the Knowledge and nature of them.

Latona, they say, was the Daughter of Coeus and Phebe; and that Prometheus was
the Son of Japetus, who (as some feign) stole Fire from the Gods, and bestowed
P. 232.
it upon Men.

But the truth of the Story is, he found out the way how to strike Fire out of
Flint or Stone. Mnemosyne they say, found out the Art of Logic, and gave
Mnemosyne.
proper Names to every thing, by which, whatever is discoursed of, might be
distinctly known and understood: But some attribute this to Mercury. They
ascribe likewise to this Goddess every thing conducing to the help of Man's
Memory, from whence she has her Mnemosyne. Memory in Greek. Themis.
Name.

Themis taught the Art of Divination, and instructed Men in Holy Rites, and
prescribed Laws for the Service and Worship of the Gods, and for preservation
of Peace and good Government amongst Men; and therefore we call those that keep
and take care of the Sacred Laws both of Gods and Men, Thesmophylacae, and
Thesmothetae. And when Apollo himself is to give his Answer at the Oracle, we
say, To act the part of Themis.
Themisteum, because he was the first that practiced Divination. These Gods
therefore having thus greatly benefited Mankind, were not only adored with
Divine Honors, but were accounted to be the first that after their Deaths were
translated to Olympus.
Heaven. Vesta, Ceres, Juno, Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto, are said to be the
Children of Saturn and Rhea.

Vesta invented the Building of Houses, and upon this account almost every
Vesta.
Body sets up her Statue in their Houses, and adore her with Divine Honors.

Ceres was the first that discovered the use of Bread-Corn, finding it by
chance Ceres.
growing of it self amongst other Plants and Herbs; and taught the way of
Housing and Baking it, and how to sow it. For she found out Corn before
Proserpina was born; after whose Birth and Rape by Pluto, she was so incensed
at Jupiter, and in such grief for the loss of her Daughter, that she set all
the Corn on Fire. But when she had found out Proserpina, she was reconciled to
Jupiter, and gave Seed-Corn to Triptolemus, with order to impart it to all
People, and teach them how to order it, and make use of it.

Some say, she made Laws, to direct Men to deal justly and truly one with
another; and from hence she was called Thesmophoron: For these great Advantages
to Mankind, she was likewise highly honored; and not only Grecians, but the
Barbarians almost every where, that partook of these Fruits, adored and
worshipped her with Solemn and Magnificent Festivals and Sacrifices.

There are many Controversies and Differences concerning the first finding out
of this Fruit, for some say, this Goddess first saw it, and taught the nature
and use of it before any other. For the Egyptians say, that Isis and Ceres were
one and the same Person, who first brought Seed-Corn into Egypt, the River Nile
watering the Fields, and washing the Country at proper Seasons, much advancing
thereby the growth and increase thereof.

But the Athenians say, that although Corn was first found out amongst them,
yet it was transported from other Places into Attica. The Place where it was
first seen, they call Eleusina, because that Seed-Corn was first brought
thither.

The Sicilians likewise who inhabit the Sicily.
Island, specially dedicated to Ceres and Proserpina, say, it is most reasonable
to conclude, that this great Gift was first bestowed upon them who tilled and
improved that Country which was most beloved of this Goddess. For it is a most
unreasonable thing this Place should be reported the richest Island of the
World, and yet to judge it the last in sharing of this great Blessing, as if it
had been no part of their Fertility, especially when Ceres resided there her
self; and all agree that Proserpina was ravished in this Place; and that this
Island is a Country most proper for Corn of any other in the World, as the Poet
testifies. P. 233.


(...) Hom. Odys. lib. 9. ver. 109.

(...)
(...).
Within this Island all things grow, See before c. 1.

Without the help of Seed or Plow,
As Wheat and Barley --
Of Ceres therefore thus they say
In Stories of her --
As to the other Deities, they say, that Neptune was the first that used
Navigation, and rigged out a Navy, and was appointed Admiral by Saturn; and
therefore it was a common Tradition afterward, that all Sea-Affairs were under
his Rule and Government, and upon that account Mariners worship him with Solemn
Sacrifices. They say moreover, that Neptune was the first that managed Horses,
and taught the Art of Horsemanship, whence he was called A Horseman.
Hippius.

Pluto (they say) first showed the way of Sepulchers and Pompous Funerals,
Pluto.
whereas before no regard was had to any of these; which was the reason he was
accounted Lord of the Dead, and Prince of the Infernal Of Hell. Jupiter.
Shades.

There are many differing Opinions concerning the Genealogy and Kingdom of
Jupiter. There are some of Opinion, that after the Death of Saturn, he
succeeded in the Kingdom, not advanced to that dignity by a forceable Expulsion
of his Father, but by a just and lawful Succession. Others report, that Saturn
being forewarned by the Oracle concerning Jupiter, that a Son of his to be
afterward born, would oust him of his Kingdom by force, killed his Children
one after another, as soon as they were born; at which Rhea was so grieved (not
being able to work upon her Husband's obstinate Humor) that she forthwith upon
his Birth hid Jupiter in Ida, recommending his Education to the Care of the
Curetes, who inhabited that Mountain: And that they again lodged him in a Cave,
and entrusted him with the Nymphs, entreating them to be very careful of him;
who fed him with Milk and Honey mixed together, and for his better nourishment
suckled him at the Paps of a Goat, called Amalthaea: For there are many Tokens
of his Birth and Education in this Crete.
Island to this Day.

For when he was a young Infant, and carried away by the Curetes, they say,
that the Navel String fell from him at the River Triton, whence that part of
the Country, sacred to this God, is called Omphalus, A Navel in Greek.
Omphalium, and the Region adjoining, Omphaleus. In Ida likewise, where this
Goddess was educated, the Cave wherein he was hid, is not only consecrated to
him, but the Ports near to that Promontory are under his Guard and Protection.

But here is not to be omitted a wonderful Story that is related concerning the
Bees: For they say, the God to preserve an eternal Memory of his familiarity
with the Bees, changed their color into that of Brass or Copper, washed over
with Gold: And whereas the Place is exceeding high, and subject to stormy
Winds, and used to be covered over with depths of Snow, he fortified the Bees
with an Impassibility, so that they were able to feed and gather Honey in the
most stormy and coldest Places.

Amongst other Honors attributed to the Goat that gave him suck, he bestowed
this, that he himself from her, assumed the Name of The Goatholder.
Aegiochus. When he was grown up to Man's Estate, he first built a City at
Dicta, where he was born, the Ruins whereof are to be seen at this Day.

This God excelled all the other in Valor, Prudence, Justice, and all other
Virtues: And therefore after the death of his Father, when he came to reign, he
conferred many and great Benefits upon Mankind. For he was the first that
instructed Men how to punish Injuries, and to deal justly and honestly one with
another, to forbear Force and Violence, and bring their Differences and
Controversies orderly before Tribunals and Courts of Justice, there to be ended
and decided. In sum, he did whatsoever was necessary for the making of good
Laws, and Preservation of Peace among Men; stirring up the Good by wholesome
Advice to their Duty, and restraining the Bad through fear of severe and due
Punishment P. 234.
for their Offenses.

It Is reported, he traveled through the whole World, putting to Death Thieves,
Robbers, and other Impious Persons, establishing Commonwealths and Democracies
in every Place wherever he came.

About that time he slew several Giants with their Adherents, as Mytinus in
Crete, and Typhon in Phrygia.

Before the Battle with the Giants in Crete, upon Jupiter's sacrificing of Oxen
to Sol, Coelus, Terra, i. e. To the Sun, Heaven and Barth.
Sol, Coelus and Terra, in all the Intrals appeared evident Signs of what was
decreed by the Gods: Their Victory especially was portended; and a defection of
some from the Enemy, as it proved in the issue of the War; for Musaeus fled and
revolted from them, for which he was highly honored.

At length, all that fought with the Gods were every one cut off, and
destroyed: But he was afterward engaged in a new War against the Giants at
Pallene in Macedonia, and anciently in the Plains of Italy, called Phlegraei,
from Plin. Not. His. lib. 3. l. 5.
the Conflagration the Country once suffered, but now called In Campania near
Cumas.
Cumaei.

The reason why Jupiter destroyed the Giants, was their Violence and
Oppression, making use of their strength and massy Bodies to inflave their
Neighbors; and for that they were lawless, and not to be kept within any
bounds of Justice, made War upon them; who for their doing good, and being
beneficial to Mankind, were reputed for Gods by all People whatsoever. And he
not only rooted up the Wicked and Impious, but rewarded the best of the Gods,
Heroes and Men, with due Honors according to their several Deserts. The great
Authority therefore and good Deeds of Jupiter were such, that to him was
attributed an eternal Habitation and Kingdom in In Heaven.
Olympus. And more splendid Sacrifices by his Command are offered to him than
to any of the other Gods; and since his passing from Earth to Heaven, a strong
Persuasion is sixth in the Hearts of all those he was kind unto, that he has the
Command and Government of all that is done in Heaven; and is supreme Lord of
Storms, Thunder and Lightning; and therefore they call him In Greek, Zein, is
to live.
Zena, because he seemed to be the Preserver of Men's lives, by affording
fruitful Seasons to ripen the Fruits of the Earth. They call him likewise
Father, not only upon the account of his (...)e and Kindness to all Mankind,
but likewise for that it is generally believed all Men were originally his
Offspring.

He Is called likewise the Supreme King, by reason of the Majesty and Excellency
of his Kingdom; and moreover The good and wise Counselor.
Eubuleus and Metietes, by reason of his Wisdom and Prudence in Counsel.

It Is said also, that Minerva was the Daughter of Jupiter, born in Crete, at
the Spring-heads of the River Triton, and therefore she was called Or Tritona.
Tritogenea; and now at this Day there stands a little Chapel dedicated to
this Goddess at the Place where she is said to have been born. They say
likewise, that the Marriage of Juno and Jupiter was solemnized in the Country
of the In Crete, the Territory of the City Gnosus.
Gnosians, near the River Therone, where there is now a Temple, in which the
Priests offer an anniversary Sacrifice and Festival with great Devotion,
imitating the Nuptial Rites according as by Tradition they have received them.

The Daughters of Jupiter, it is said, were the Goddesses, Venus, the Graces,
Lucina and her Servant Diana, together with those called Horae, that is to say,
Eunomia, Dica, Irene, i. e. Good Laws, Justice and Peace.
Eunomia, Dica, and Irene.

The Gods he begot; were Vulcan, Mars, Apollo and Mercury: To every one of
these (they say) Jupiter imparted the knowledge of things invented and
perfected by himself, and attributed the honor of the Invention to them,
desirous to perpetuate their Memories, and advance their Reputation and eternal
Praise amongst all Men.

To Venus he committed the care of the mature Age of Virgins; at which time
Venus.
they ought to Marry, and the oversight of other things used at Nuptials,
together with Sacrifices and Drink Offerings, which are solemnly offered to
this Goddess; but all first Sacrifice to Jupiter the Perfector, and to Juno the
Perfectris, because they are the Authors and Inventors of all, as a little
before we have P. 235.
declared.

To the Graces was given power to beautify the Face, and to give a Comely The
Graces.
Shape and Proportion to all the Members of the Body, and to do good wherever
they pleased, and to cause the Persons to be grateful and thankful for what
they received.

To Lucina he committed the care of them that were in Travel and Childbearing,
Lucina.
and easing of them in their Pains; and therefore Women in these hazards
chiefly at that time, called upon her for help and assistance.

Diana showed the way how to nurse up little Infants, and to provide Food for
Diana.
them suitable to their tender Age; upon which account she was called the
Childrens Nurse.

To every one of the Horae, is allotted an Office agreeable to their several
Horae.
Names, to the great advantage of Mankind, for the Government of themselves in
the Course of their Lives. For there is no greater blessedness in this Life,
than Eunomia, Good Laws.
Good Laws, Dica, (...)tice.
Peace and Irene, Peace.
Justice.

To Minerva he committed the Care of Olive-Yards, and planting of Olive Trees,
Minerva.
and extracting of Oil. For before the Birth of this Goddess, this Tree grew
wild, disregarded among other Trees of the Wood. But the use and culture of
them (as is now practiced) was not then known.

The making of Garments likewise and Architecture, and many other Arts was
discovered to Men by this Goddess: She invented Pipes, and the manner of Wind
Music, and many ingenious Tools and Instruments for Handicrafts; whence she
was called The Work(...) woman, or Goddess of Crafts. Muses.
Ergana.

To the Muses, their Father allotted the Invention of Letters, and the
Composing of Verses, called Poetry.

But there are some who attribute the Invention of Letters to the Syrians, from
whom the Phaenicians learnt them, and communicated them to the Grecians when
they came along with Cadmus into Europe; whence the Grecians called them
Phaenician Letters. To these that hold this Opinion, it is answered, that the
Phaenicians were not the first that found out Letters, but only changed the
Form and Shape of them into other Characters, which many afterward using, the
Name of Phaenician grew to be common.

Vulcan they say, found out the working of Iron, Brass, Silver and Gold, and
Vulcan.
all other Metals that require forging by Fire; and that the general use of
Fire in all other cases, was found out by him, and discovered not only to
Artificers, but to all other Men; and therefore all the Masters of these Arts,
pay their Devotions, and offer their Sacrifices chiefly to this God; and both
they and all others, call Fire Vulcan, to the end that this great Good bestowed
upon all Mankind, might be for ever remembered, to his eternal Honor and Praise.

Mars they say, first taught the making of all sorts of Weapons, and how to
Mars.
furnish Soldiers both with offensive and defensive Arms, and to fight with
Courage and Resolution, destroying all them that were Enemies to the Gods.

To Apollo is attributed the invention of the Harp, and that sort of Music;
Apollo.
and it is said, he discovered the Art of Physic, which is practiced by
Revelation from him, by which the Sick heretofore were commonly restored to
Health: He found out likewise the use of the Bow, and taught the Inhabitants to
shoot; and therefore the Cretians delight much in Shooting, and call the Bow
Scythicus.

Aesculapius was the Son of Apollo and Coronides; he was instructed by his
Father Aesculapius.
in the Art of Physic, and found out Surgery, and the making up of
Medicines, the Virtues of Roots and Plants, and improved to that degree in his
Art, that he was reputed the first Founder and Author of it, and likewise the
Prince of Physicians.

To Mercury they attribute the Invention of Messages in Times of War, by
Mercury. P. 236.
Trumpets and Heralds, of Truces and Leagues; and as a Sign, they were sent to
treat with the Enemy, they carried a Mercury's Rod.
Rod before them; and therefore were suffered safely to come and go. Hence they
were called the Common Mercury, because both sides enjoyed the equal benefit of
a Peace after a War.

They say, he was the first that invented Weights and Measures, and getting of
Wealth by Merchandise, and the way of Cheating and Cozening of others. He was
accounted the Herald of the Gods, and the best Messenger, because he was quick
and ingenious in declaring particularly every thing he had in Command. Whence
he was called Hermes the Interpreter.
Hermes.

He was not the Inventer of Names and Words, as some say, but excelled in clear
and eloquent Expression, and delivery of his Message. He was likewise the
Author of the Games of Wrestling, and invented the Harp made of a Tortois
Shell, after the Contest between Apollo and Marsyas; in which (they say) Apollo
was Victor, and revenged himself of his Adversary, to a greater degree than was
fit; for which he was afterward so grieved, that they say, he broke the
Strings of his Harp, and for some time forbore to play upon that Instrument.

The Cretians say, that Bacchus found out the use of the Vine, and the manner
Bacchus.
of planting and pruning of it, and the making of Wine, and the way of laying
up the Summer Fruits; by which means they were preserved for Men's use and
sustenance for a long time.

It Is further reported, that this God was the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina,
and born in Crete; and Orpheus in his Sacred Rites and Mysteries, says, he was
torn in pieces by the Titans: But there were many of this Name Bacchus, of
which we have more largely and particularly given an account already; but of
this Dionysius or Bacchus his being born in Crete, they endeavor to show
evident Signs, as Arguments to prove it; for they say, there are Two Islands
formed by him, near Crete, in a part of the Sea called the Double Gulfs; to
which Islands he gave the denomination of Dionysiadae, which he never did in
any other part of the World.

As to Hercules, it is said, that there was one of that Name, the Son of
Jupiter, The Ancient Hercules.
born many Years before him, that was begotten of Alcmena in Argos; but who was
the Mother of this Hercules is uncertain: Only this is certain, that there was
no Man comparable to him for Strength; that he traveled through the whole
World, inflicting just and deserved Punishment upon the Wicked, and destroyed
wild Beasts that infested the Countries, and made them desolate: That he
delivered Men every where out of Bondage and Slavery, and that yet he himself
(notwithstanding so many hazards and difficulties) was never worsted, remaining
still unconquerable and invulnerable; for which renowned Actions, he is by all
Men adored with eternal Honors. But that Hercules, who was the Son of Alcmena
was much later; but because he was like unto this ancient Hercules in his noble
Acts, he likewise attained immortal Glory, and in after Ages (being of the same
Name) * This Hercules is held to be Joshua. Gale's Court of the Gentiles, Part
1. Book 2. c. 5.
was accounted to be the same Person, and (through the ignorance of the Vulgar)
the Deeds of the former were ascribed to the later. They say, that the Praise
and Renown of this elder God, for his famous Actions, continues in Egypt to
this Day, where he built a City.

Britomartis, otherwise called Dictynna (they say) was born in Caenon in Crete,
Britomartis, Dictynna.
and was the Daughter of Jupiter, begotten on Carmes, the Daughter of Eubulus,
the Son of Ceres. It Is said; she invented the Hunters Toyls and Nets, and
thence was called Dictyon in Greek, signifying a Net.
Dictynna: She was very familiar with Diana, and therefore it was thought by
some, that Dictynna and Diana were one and the same Person, which Goddess is
adored and honored in Crete both with Temples and Sacrifices. Those are very
much mistaken, who say that Dictynna was so called, from her flying and hiding
her self in the Fishers Nets to avoid Minos, who would have forced and ravished
her. For it is not reasonable to imagine, that a Goddess (the Daughter of the
most Supreme God) should be reduced to so low a Condition, as to stand in need
of Humane help; nor is it just to imagine, that Minos, who (by the general
Consent of all) was reputed a righteous and upright Man, and P. 237.
lived a good Life, should be guilty of such an horrid Impiety, and grand piece
of Wickedness.

Pluto (they say) was the Son of Jasion and Ceres, and born in Tripolus in
Crete; Pluto.
and of his Descent there is a double Relation in History.

For some say, that Jasion so improved and cultivated the Land, that it brought
forth Fruit in that abundance, that they that saw it, imposed upon it a Name
proper to the abundance of the Fruits, and called it (...), Riches.
Pluto; and therefore Posterity afterward used to say, That he who had more
than enough had Pluto.

Others say, that Jasion and Ceres had a Son named Pluto, who first taught Men
a more orderly and careful way of Living, and how to gain and treasure up
Wealth. Whereas a provident Care of getting and keeping of Estates, was
altogether neglected. And these are the things which the Cretians say of those
Gods which they pretend were born among them. Moreover they say, the manner of
Worshipping and Sacrificing to the Gods, and other Rites and sacred Mysteries
came from them to other Nations, and they bring in this as a most certain and
undeniable Argument, as they suppose. For they say, the Rites and Initiations
practiced by the Athenians in Elusina, which are almost the most famous of any
other, and those in Samothracia, and in Thracia among the Cidonians (of all
which Orpheus was the Institutor) are celebrated darkly and Mystically; but in
Crete at Gnosus (by an ancient Law) the very same sacred Mysteries are
celebrated plainly and openly, and whatever is done in secret by others, none
amongst them conceals from any that have a desire to know them; for many of the
Gods (they say) went out from Crete, and traveled through many parts of the
World, and were Benefactors to all sorts of Men, and communicated to them the
Benefit and Advantage of such things as they themselves had found out and
invented. For Ceres sailed into Attica, and from thence into Sicily, and at
length into Egypt; in which Places, after she had delivered them Corn, and
taught them how to sow it, she was highly honored amongst them: So Venus dwelt
near Eryx in Sicily, in the Island Cythera, at Paphus in Cyprus, and in Syria
in Asia; and because she was often seen, and continued long among the
Inhabitants of these Places, she was called Venus Erycina, Cytherea, Paphya and
Syria. Apollo likewise continued long in Delos, Lycia and Delphos; and Diana in
Ephesus, Pontus, Persia and Crete; and therefore from the Places and things
done there by them, Apollo was called Apollo Delius, Lycius and Pythius; and
she was styled Diana Ephesia of Cresia, Tauropolia and Persia; although both of
them were born in Crete.

This Goddess Diana is highly honored by the Persians, and the same Mysteries
and Sacrifices that are celebrated and offered to her by others, the Barbarians
themselves at this very day, celebrate in honor of Diana Persia. To this
purpose they give an Account of the rest of the Gods, which as they are easy
for the Reader to understand, so they are too tedious for us to recite.

Moreover they say, that many Ages after the Birth of the Gods, there were many
Heroes among them, of whom the most Eminent were Minos and Rhadamanthus, who
were the Progeny of Jupiter and Europa (the Daughter of Agenor) whom they
report by the Providence of the Gods, to be carried over into Crete upon the
Back of a Bull. Minos they say, who was the Elder, obtained the Kingdom, and
built in the Island many Cities; amongst which, Three were most Famous;
Gnosius, situated in that part of the Island that looked toward Asia; Phaetus,
lying Southward upon the Shore; and Cidonia situated in the Western Part over
against Peloponesus. Many Laws they say, were made by him for P. 238.
the Government of the Cretians, receiving them from Jupiter his Father, who
used to converse with him privately in a Cave. He had a great Fleet, and
conquered many of the Islands, and was the first of the Greeks that gained the
Dominion of the Seas; and after he had arrived to a high pitch of Glory and
Honor by reason of his Justice and Valor, he died in Sicily, in undertaking a
War against Cocalus, of which we have before given a particular Narrative, when
we treated of the Affairs of Daedalus, who was the occasion of this War.

Rhadamanthus they say, was the most Just Man in the World, for in executing
Rhadamanthus.
of Justice upon Thieves, Robbers and other Impious and Wicked Persons, he was
inexorable.

They report likewise, that he gained several Islands, and many of the Maritime
Coasts of Asia, all voluntarily submitting to him upon the account of his
eminent Justice. He gave the Kingdom to Erythro, one of his Sons, who called
themselves Erythri, from him. To Oenopion the Son of Minos and Ariadna, they
say he allotted Chius: Others say, he was the Son of Bacchus, and was taught
how to make Wine by his Father.

He rewarded likewise each of his Captains, either with some Island or City:
Upon Thoantes he bestowed Lemnos; on Engyeus, Cyrnus; to Pamphilus he gave
Peparathus; to Euambeus, Maronea; to Alcaeus, Parus; to Arrion, Delus; to
Andreus the Island Andros, so called after his Name.

And because he was so remarkably Just, he is feigned to be the Judge of Hell;
and to distinguish between the Pious and Impious, the Good and the Bad: They
say likewise that Minos is Copartner with him in that dignity, upon the account
of his Uprightness, and his just and righteous Reign.

Sarpadon, the Third Brother, they say, past over with an Army into Asia, and
Sarpadon.
possessed himself of Lycia and the Neighboring Territories. His Son Evander
succeeded him in the Kingdom of Lycia, who marrying Deidamia, the Daughter of
Bellerophon, of her begat Sarpedon, who went to the Trojan War with Agamemnon,
and is called by some the Son of Jupiter. Deucalion and Molus (they say) were
the Sons of Minos: Deucalion had a Son called Idomeneus, and Molus another
named Merion, who (as is said) assisted Agamemnon against Troy with a Fleet of
(...) in the Margent, confirmed by Hom. Iliad. 11. verse. 652.
Fourscore Sail, and afterward returned and died in their own Country, and
were honorably buried and adored as Gods: They show their Sepulcher in Crnosus
in Crete.
Gnosus, whereon is this Inscription.

(...)
(...)
Idomeneus in this Tomb does lie,
Who born in Gnosus was; and him hard by,
I Son of Molus rest, Merion called.
These Two are adored as Demy-Gods by the Cretians, for they offer Sacrifice to
them, and in their Wars call upon them for aid and assistance.

Having given an Account of these things, it remains we should now speak of the
Nations that are intermixed with the Cretians. That the Aeteocretians were the
first Inhabitants of this Island, and reputed to have been there from the
beginning, we have before declared. Many Ages after, the Pelasgi planted among
them a Nation inured continually to Arms, and wandering up and down from their
ancient Habitations, seized upon that part of the Island where they landed.

The Third Nation that came thither (they say) were the Dorienses, under the
Conduct of Teutamus, one of the Posterity of Dorus. It Is said the greatest part
of his Colony he brought from the Neighboring Parts of Olympus, and some part
from the Achaians in Laconia; for that Dorus gathered his Colony out of the
Parts and Territories near to Malea.

A Fourth sort of People that poured into Crete, were a promiscuous Company of
Barbarians from several Parts round about, who notwithstanding in process of
time, spoke the same Language with the ancient Cretians, the natural
Inhabitants. But after the power of Minos and Rhadamanthus became prevalent and
considerable, all these Nations were reduced into one Body, as one People
throughout the whole Island. And at length after the return of the Heraclidae,
the Argives and Spartans sent Colonies, and possessed themselves likewise of
other Islands, and both in this and those other built several Cities, of which
we shall P. 239.
treat more fully in due and proper time.

But since that almost all the Historians of the Cretian Affairs, differ among
themselves, it is not to be wondered at if we do not agree with them all in
every thing we relate; for we follow them who give the most probable Account,
and are esteemed to be of most credit. For sometimes we follow Epimenides the
Theologist, and sometimes Dosiadas, Sosicrates and Leosthenidas.

Having therefore treated thus largely of Crete, we shall now apply our selves
to speak of Lesbos.

This Island was anciently inhabited by many several Nations one after another,
Lesbos.
by reason it was so often left and forsaken: The first that seized upon it,
were the Pelasgi when it lay desert and uninhabited. For Xanthus the Son of
Triopas Prince of the Pelasgians that came from Argos, seated himself in a part
of Lycia, which he had possessed himself of, and there reigned over the
Pelasgians that came thither with him; whence he sailed over to Lesbos, which
at that time lay desolate, and divided the Country amongst the People, and
called the Island Pelasgia, which before was called Isa.

In process of time, after the Seventh Generation, many People were destroyed
by Deucalion's Flood, and Lesbos likewise at that time was by Deucation's Flood.
Chataracts of Showers laid waste and desolate. But afterward Macarius
happening to touch there, and considering Deucalion's Flood, An. Mun. 2436,
Eighteen Years before the Israelites departure out of Egypt. Orige's Flood, 248
Years before this, while Jacob was with Laban, An. Mund. 2189.
the pleasantness of the Island, there seated himself.

This Macarius was the Son of Crinacus, the Son of Jupiter (as Hesiod and some
other of the Poets say) and dwelt in the City Olanus, then called Jados, and
now Achaia.

He got together a great Company of Ionians, and multitudes from several other
Nations flockt in to him; in the first place he possessed himself of Lesbos;
afterward growing more powerful, through the richness of the Island, and his
own Justice and Humanity, he gained many Neighboring Islands, and divided the
Lands amongst his Countrymen and Followers.

About that time Lesbos, the Son of Lapithas, the Son of Eolus, the Son of
Hippotas (by the Direction of the Oracle at Delphos) arrived in this Island
with new Colonies, and marrying Methymna the Daughter of Macareus, seated
himself and his Followers there, and enjoyed an equal Interest with them that
were there before him; and afterward becoming a Man of great Renown, he called
the Island Lesbos, after his own Name, and the People Lesbians: For Macareus
had Two Daughters, Mytylene and Methymna, from whom two of the chiefest Cities
of the Island were so called.

Macareus having a design to possess himself of some of the neighboring
Islands, ordered one of his Sons to carry over a Colony first into Chius;
afterward he sent another into Samos, named Cycholaus, who seated himself
there, and divided the Lands by Lot amongst those of his Colony, and ruled over
them as King. The Third Island Peopled by Macareus, was Coos, over which he
appointed Neander King.

After this, he sent a large Colony with Leucippus into Rhodes, whom the
Rhodians (by reason of the small number of Inhabitants that were left among
them) willingly received, and suffered them to have and enjoy the Lands equally
with them.

But about that time, the Continent over against these Islands, lay under most
The Macarian Islands.
pressing and grievous Calamities by reason of the late Deucalion's Flood.
Flood; for in regard all the Fruits of the Earth by the Inundation and Excess
of Rain were rotted and spoiled for a long time together, Famine exceedingly
prevailed, and through Corruption of the Air, Plague and Pestilence depopulated
and laid the Towns and Cities waste. But in the mean time, the Islands lying
more open to the Winds, and so partaking of their healthful Gales, were loaded
with the Fruits of the Earth, and the Inhabitants had fullness of all things,
and in a short time were in a happy and prosperous State and Condition; and by
reason of the great Plenty that was amongst them, they were called the Islands
of the Blessed, or (...)
The Blessed Islands. But some say, that they were called the Macarean Islands,
from Macareas and Ion, two Sons of one of the Princes that formerly ruled
there. And indeed these Islands for richness of Soil and plenty of all things,
did not only excel all the neighboring Countries in ancient Time, but do so
even to this Day. For the fertility of the Soil, the pleasantness of the
Situation, and P. 240.
the healthfulness of the Climate is such, that they are not without cause
called, but are really and in truth, Blessed and Happy Islands.

Lastly, Macareus King of Lesbos, made the first Law among them, which was so
beneficial and advantageous to the Public, that he gave it the Name of the
Lion, because of the strength and force of that Beast.

A considerable time after this Colony planted in Lesbos, another was brought
into the Island Tenedos in this manner.

Tennes was the Son of Cyrnus, King of Colone in Troas, and was a Man renowned
Tenedos.
for his Valor; he brought over a Colony out of the opposite Continent, and
possessed himself of the Island Leucophrys, at that time desolate.

After he had divided the Country by Lot amongst his Subjects, and had built a
City, he called it Tennus, after his own Name. By his good and upright
Government he gained upon the Hearts of his People, and was highly honored
while he lived, and after his Death was adored as a Demy-God: For they built a
Temple in honor of him, and offered Sacrifices to him as a God: Which
Religious Veneration was continued to Times not long since. But we are not here
to omit what the Islanders report concerning Tennes, the Founder of the City Or
Tennus.
Tenedos. They say that Cygnus, the Father of Tennes, giving Ear to the false
Suggestions and Calumniations of his Wife, locked his Son in a Chest, and caused
him to be thrown into the Sea, and that the Chest was cast up by the Waves upon
Tencdos; and being thus strangely preserved by the special Providence of God,
became King of the Island, and afterward growing renowned for his Justice and
other eminent Virtues, he was at length honored and adored as a God. And
because his Stepmother hired a A Minstrel.
Piper by a false Oath to support her own Calumny, it is a Law amongst them of
Tenedos, That no Piper shall come into the Temple.

Afterward when Tennes, was killed by Achilles in the time of the Trojan War,
and Tenedos then laid wast by the Grecians, the Tenedeans, made another Law,
that it should not be lawful so much as once to name Achilles in Tennes his
Temple. These are the things related of Tenedos and it is ancient Inhabitanas.

Having now given an Account of the most considerable Islands, we shall proceed
in the next place to the lesser.

The Cyclade Islands were Formerly desolate and uninhabited: But Minos the The
Cycladae Islands.
Son of Jupiter and Europa, King of Crete, having a strong Army at Land, and
with a powerful Navy, Master at Sea, sent many Colonies out of Crete, and
Peopled many of the Islands of the Cyclades, and divided the Lands to the
People by Lot, and subdued a great part of the Seacoasts of Asia; and
therefore the Seaports and Havens of Asia, and of the Islands, have the same
Names with those in Crete, and are called Minoi. Minos being now grown great
and powerful, began to envy his Brother Rhadamanthus his Copartner in the
Kingdom, for the honor and reputation he had gained by his Justice. Willing
therefore to remove him as far from him as possibly he could, he sent him into
the furthest parts of his Dominions. Whereupon Rhadamanthus abiding in the
Islands over against Ionia and Caria, caused Erythrus to build a City in Asia
after his own Name, and made Oenopion, the Son of Ariadna the Daughter of
Minos, Lord of Chius.

These things were all done before the Trojan War: But after the destruction of
Troy, the Cares grown rich and wealthy, gained the Dominion at Sea, and subdued
the Cyclades, some of which they took into their own hands, and rooted out the
Cretians; others they enjoyed in Common with the ancient Cretian Inhabitants.
But in process of time the Grecians growing strong and powerful, the barbarous
Carians were ejected out of most of the Cyclades, and the Islands fell into the
hands of the Greeks. Of which we shall give a more particular Account hereafter
in proper Time and Place.

D. G.
The following Books, that is to say, the VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, are lost.
THE Last Ten Books OF THE HISTORICAL LIBRARY OF Diodorus the Sicilian,
CONTAINING, The Affairs of the WORLD for the space of 179 Years, from the
Expedition of Xerxes into Greece, to Seleucus his coming into Cappadocia with
his Army, and the other Confederate Princes into other Parts against Antigonus,
in the 3d Year of the 119th Olympiad.

Together with The Fragments of PHOTIUS his BIBLIOTHECA, and others, Published
by L. Rhodomannus.

AND The Fragments Published by H. Valesius, and by F. Vrsinus.

WITH A SUPPLEMENT.

Made English, By GEORGE BOOTH, of Chester, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for A. and J. Churchill at the Black-Swan in
Paternoster Row: 1700.

ANCIENT SICELE ACCORDING TO THE Description of Philip Cluuerius


THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK XI.
The PREFACE.
THE Book next before this, being the Tenth in the whole Composure of our
History, ends with things done in the Tear immediately before the Descent of
Xerxes into Europe, and with those Debates in the General Assemblies of the
Grecians at Corinth, concerning the admission of Gelo into the Grecian
Confederacy.

In this to proceed (as things were done) in a continued Series of the History,
we shall begin with Xerxes' s Expedition into Greece, and end the Year
immediately before the Army of the Athenians, under Cymon their General,
invaded Cyprus.

CHAP. I.
Of Xerxes his Expedition into Greece, and the Battle of Thermopyle, and the
Sea Fight at Salamis.

CAllias being Archon or chief Magistrate of Athens, Spurius Cassius, and
Proclus Virginius Tricostus, Consuls at Rome, in the Seventy Fifth Olympiad,
celebrated at Elis, (in which Asyehus.
Asylus the Syracusian Olymp. 75. Ant. Chr. 478.
was Victor) Xerxes (for the reason after mentioned) raised an Army against the
Grecians. He married Artozostra the Daughter of Darius; and was himself the Son
of Gobrias, whose Daughter Darius married. Herod. lib. 6. c. 43. and lib. 7. c.
5.
Mardonius the Persian was Cousin German, and by Marriage likewise nearly
related to Xerxes, of great esteem among the Persians for his Valor and
Prudence. This Man prompted forward by the greatness of his Spirit, and the
heat of his Youth, burned with Ambition, to be General of so great an Army as
that Expedition required; and therefore persuaded Xerxes that he would bend all
his power to subdue the Grecians, those implacable Enemies of the Persians.

Being brought over to close with this Advice, he determined utterly to destroy
and root them up: And to that end sent Ambassadors to Carthage, to treat with
them concerning the joining of their Forces together: Whereupon it was thus
agreed between them, That Xerxes should Land his Forces in Greece, and that the
Carthaginians at the same time should with a great Army invade the Greeks in
Italy and Sicily.

According to which Compact the Carthaginians raised a great sum of Money, and
hired many Soldiers out of the Provinces of Liguria in Italy France.
Gallia and Spain.
Iberia; and raised Men of their own throughout all Lybia, and out of Carthage
itself. In which preparations were spent Three Years, and an Army of Three
Hundred Thousand Men were mustered, and Two Hundred Ships fitted out.

On the other part Xerxes stirred up by the Industry of the Carthaginians, (by
way of Emulation) as far exceeded them in Warlike Preparations, as he did in
Dominion and Empire. He commanded Ships to be built every where upon the
Seacoasts within his Dominions, as Egypt, Phaenicia, and Cyprus, and likewise
through Cilicia, Pamphilia, Pisidia, Licia, Caria, Misia, Troas, the Cities of
the Hellespont, Pontus and Bithynia, and in Three Years time (as the
Carthaginians had done) set forth above Twelve Hundred Long Ships: Ships of
Burden were called Olcades, and were built in a round form; the first were
Galleys, using Oars chiefly, the other Sails.
Galleys. And this was the better accomplished by means of the Preparations of
those great Forces raised by Darius his Father in his Life time. For Datis,
Darius his General, being not long before overcome by the Athenians in the
Battle of Marathon, Darius ever afterward bore an implacable hatred against
them: But just as he was ready to pass over into Greece, he was prevented by
Death.

Xerxes, therefore encouraged both by his Father's Assistance, and the Advice
of Mardonius (as is before related) resolved to invade the Grecians.

When all things were prepared, he commanded the Officers of his Navy to
randezvouze his Fleet as * Cyme, and Phocea. Cuma in Eolia.
And he himself with the whole Army, both of Horse and Foot, raised out of
every Province of his Dominion, marched from Susa; and advancing to Sardis,
forthwith sent Heralds, P. 243.
into Greece, commanding them to go to all the Cities and demand in the Name of
the King Earth and Water were Badges and Tokens of Subjection and Slavery;
(...).
Earth and Water.

There dividing his Army, part he sent (sufficient as was conceived) to make Of
Ships from Abidos to the other Side, Seven Furlongs, about a Mile, Herod. lib.
7. c. 34.
a Bridge over the Hell^spant, and another part to cut a Way through the
Mountain Through a Neck of Mount Athos, Twelve Furlongs over, for his Ships to
pass, Herod. lib. 7. c. 22, 23, 24.
Athos, both judging it safe for his Soldiers to have so short a Cut for their
March, and hoping likewise by such an extraordinary Work upon the first
Attempt, to strike a Terror into the Grecians. They therefore that were sent,
having so great a multitude of Hands at work, speedily dispatched the Business.

But the Grecians being now alarmed with the vast Army of the Persians, sent
Ten Thousand (...), Men in Armor Others were called (...), naked or light
armed, that wore no Armor, such as Archers, Darters.
Men at Arms into Thessaly, to possess themselves of the Passages or Posts of
Tempe. The General of the Lacedaemonians was Synetus, and of the Athenians
Themistocles: These sent Messengers to all the Cities, to require them to raise
Soldiers for the defense of the Passages at the common Charge; for they made it
their Business with all Expedition to interest all the Cities of Greece in the
War, that so the Persians might be opposed by the combined Force of all Greece
together.

But when they heard that the greatest part of the Thessalians, and those that
inhabited the Straits, had submitted unto the Kings Delegates or Commissioners,
they returned home, despairing to make any effectual Defense at Tempe.

And here it will not be from the purpose to declare what part of Greece
assisted the Barbarians, that (deservingly branding them with disgrace)
Traitors to the Common Liberty of their Country may out of a sense of shame and
Dishonor be deterred from the like practice. We say therefore, that the
Dolopians, Aenians, Milesians, Perrhaebians, and * Magnesians, sided with the
Barbarians; and even Bordering upon Thessaly.
while the Guards were in Tempe, the Achaeans, Phthiotians, Locreans, and
Thessalians joined with them; and after they were withdrawn, most of the
Beotians, went over to the Persians. Hereupon the Grecians, in a common
Assembly at the Istmos, decreed, that if they should be victorious, those
Grecians that sided with the Persians, should be sacrificed to the Gods every
Tenth Man. And they ordered Ambassadors to be sent to such as at present stood
neuter, to stir them up forthwith to take up Arms for the Common Liberty.

Of these, some without delay, heartily joined themselves to the common
Interest; others promised to do it in due time, though in truth by delay they
were willing to have some prospect of the Issue of the War before they hazarded
themselves. They of Argos by their Ambassadors in the Common Council, declared
that they were ready to join in Arms with the rest of Greece, if they might
have some share of the supreme Command in the Army: To whom Answer was given by
the Council, that if they thought it a greater Grievance to Fight under a
Grecian General for the Common Liberty, than to be Slaves to a Barbarian, they
do wisely to forbear to take up Arms: But if through their Ambition they aspire
to the Command of Greece, it were just that they should first signalize
themselves by such noble Actions, as might justly deserve so great an Honor.
After this the Grecian Cities, generally gave Answer to the King's Ambassadors
(that went through Greece) in such a manner as plainly demonstrated at how high
a Rate they prized the common Liberty of the Country.

When Xerxes understood that the Bridge over the Hellespont was finished, and a
Passage made through the Mountain Athos, he forthwith marched from Sardis,
determining to make his Way to the Hellespont. And when he came to Abidos, he
passed his Army over the Bridge into Europe; then marching through Thrace, he
increased his Army by the Thracians and other Borderers. When he came to
Doriscus, he commanded his Fleet should sail thither, that his Forces both by
Sea and Land might join.

There he numbered his Army, in which it is reported there Cornelius Nepos says
Seven Hundred Thousand Foot, and Four Hundred Thousand Horse.
were enrolled above Eight Hundred Thousand Foot, more than Twelve Hundred
Galleys, Three Hundred and Twenty of which were Greek Ships. The Ships
themselves were provided at the Charge of the King, but furnished with Soldiers
and Mariners by the P. 244.
Grecians within his Dominions. All the rest were Ships fitted out by the
Barbarians. Of these, Two Hundred were built and manned by the Egyptians; Three
Hundred by the Phaenicians; the Cilicians, Fourscore; the Pamphilians Forty;
and the Licians as many: Besides, the Carians Fourscore; and from Cyprus an
Hundred and Fifty. As to those from the Grecians, the Doreans inhabiting about
Caria, together with them of Rhodes and Coos, sent Forty; the Ionians with them
of Samos and Chius, an Hundred; the Eolians with Lesbos and Tenedos, Forty:
They of the Hellespont, with them that inhabited about Pontus, Fourscore: The
Islanders Fifty. For the King had secured to himself all the Islands between
Cyaneas, Triopion and Sunium.

Such was the number of the Men of War in the Navy besides Eight Hundred and
Fifty prepared for transporting of Horses, and Three Thousand Ships of Burden
of Thirty Oars a-piece. Thus Xerxes was employed at Doriscus in numbering his
Army; but the General Council of Greece, being informed that the Forces of the
Persians did approach; it was ordered that the Grecian Fleet, should forthwith
sail to Artemesium in Now called Negropont.
Eubaea, judging that to be the most convenient place to oppose the Enemy: And
a Guard of Men at Arms are sent to Thermopile, sufficient (as was conceived) to
secure the Straits and Passages, and repel the Barbarians: For it was
determined with all haste and speed to defend on every side all those that took
part with the Grecians, and with their Forces every way to preserve their
Confederates. Euribiades a Lacedemonian, was Admiral of the whole Fleet;
Leonidas Or King.
General of Sparta, commanded the Forces sent to Thermopile, a brave Man and an
excellent Soldier.

Leonidas taking upon him the Command, chose only a Thousand Men out of the
Army to follow him in this Expedition. But the The Council, or Parliament of
Sparta.
Ephori or Common Council advising him to take a greater number against so
powerful an Enemy, yea, commanding him so to do, he in an intricate and
perplexed Speech made Answer, That in truth that number was too few to keep the
Pass against the Barbarians, but that he needed no more to accomplish that
Design which they were going about to effect. Receiving this dark Answer, they
asked him whether he led out the Army upon any slight and inconsiderable
Attempt? He returned in Answer, that in Words and Talk he was to lead them to
defend the Passages: But in truth and in the Event to dye for the Common
Liberty. Therefore if these Thousand which he had chosen might go along with
him, the Fame of Sparta would be advanced even by their Destruction: But if all
the Lacedaemonians should go thither, the very Lacedemonian Name would be
utterly extinct, they being Men never used to fly to save themselves.

Upon this there were allotted to him a Thousand Lacedaemonians, Three Hundred
Spartans, and Three Thousand out of the rest of the Army: So that he marched
away with Four Thousand Soldiers to Thermopile. But the Locrians who inhabited
near the Passages, had given Earth and Water, signs of Subjection. Vid. Antea.
Earth and Water to the Persians, and had promised to seize the Passes.

But when they perceived Leonidas to advance to Thermopile, they revolted and
joined themselves to the Greciau Army; and so a Thousand Locrians, as many
Milesians, and near a Thousand Phocians marched with him to Thermopile; besides
Four Hundred Thebans, of a different Faction sided now with Greece: For the
Thebans that were in Confederacy with the Persians were divided amongst
themselves.

This then is the utmost number of the Army which under Leonidas their General
came to Thermopile, and there prepared themselves to bear the brunt of the
whole strength of the Persians.

Xerxes having now numbered his Forces, marched From Doriscus in Thrace, upon
the Banks of Hebrus. P. 245.
away with his whole Army to the City Acanthus, his Fleet sailing near at hand
over against him; thence his Navy passed through the Ditch or Sluice cut through
the Isthmus of Mount Athos.
Istmos, and by that means he passed his Fleet into the other That lies before
the Town.
Sea by a short and safe Cut.

When he came to the Bay of Not of Elis, as the Greek is, (...), mistaken for
(...), near Thermopyle.
Melus, he was informed that all the Passages were possessed by the Enemy: Upon
which he again increased his Forces, and joined to them little less than Two
Hundred Thousand Men more, which he had raised as his Confederates out of
Europe. So that besides his Naval Forces, his Land Army consisted of no less
than a A Hundred Myriads is a Million.
Hundred Myriads. And the rest that were in his Fleet (what in his Men of War,
and what in his Transport Ships and Shipping for other Necessaries) were judged
to be no way inferior for number to his Land Forces. Therefore what we find
reported concerning the Number he brought with him is not to be wondered at.

For it is said, that (...), never failing Rivers.
great Rivers were drunk up by that multitude, and that the Sea it self was
even covered over by the spreading forth of the Sails of the Ships: So that the
Forces of Xerxes have been by all reputed the greatest that ever any History
made mention of.

The Persian Army now incamping at the River Sperchius, Xerxes sent Messengers
to Thermopyle, both to find out with what Resolution he was likely to be
opposed, and likewise to declare that the King commanded them to lay down their
Arms, and return in safety to their own Countries, and become Friends and
Confederates to the Persians; which if they yielded to, then he faithfully
promised that he would bestow upon them both larger and richer Countries than
those they did then inhabit.

This Message being heard, those with Leonidas returned this Answer; that they
were in a better Posture to be the Kings Confederates being armed, than if they
were disarmed; and if it happened that they must fight, then they could more
gallantly and courageously venture their Lives for their Liberties. As for the
Countries which the King promised them, they bid them tell him, that it was not
the manner of the Grecians, by any base and dishonorable means to plant
themselves in any Country, or to gain Lands and Estates but by Virtue and
Valor, and being so gained by the same Valor to defend them.

Xerxes having received this Answer, presently sent for Demaratus the Spartan
(who was banished from his Country, and fled to him) and in a scoffing manner
asked the Laconian, whether the Grecians could run faster than his Horses? or
whether they durst engage with so great an Army? Demaratus is reported to have
answered the King thus: You are not O King, unacquainted with the Valor of the
Grecians, forasmuch as your Majesty ever made use of them to reduce your
Rebellious Subjects upon all occasions: And do not think that these, who have
done more than the Persians in the Defense of your Majesty's Sovereignty, will
approve themselves with less Valor, for the preservation of their own
Liberties against the Persians.

At which words, Xerxes laughing him to scorn, commanded him to follow him,
that he might presently see the Lacedaemonians taking to their Heels.

And now Xerxes dislodging his Army, marched to the Straights of Thermopyle,
placing the Medes in the Front of the Battle, either because they were esteemed
Men of greatest Courage, or that he desired to have them all cut off, for they
were still proud and haughty in regard the Sovereign Power not long before was
wrested from their Ancestors, and many there were likewise in the Army whose
Kindred perished in the Battle of Marathon. Xerxes therefore orders the
Brothers and Children of those that were slain in that Battle, to be placed in
a Body in view of the Medes, conceiving this would be a means to exasperate 'em
to a fiercer Revenge upon the Grecians.

The Medes therefore being put in the Front (as before said) made a fierce
Charge upon the Thermopylean Guards. But Leonidas (being well prepared) had
placed his Men in a close Body, in the straightest part of the Passages: Now
both sides are hotly engaged, for the Barbarians having their King both the
Spectator and Witness of their Valor on the one hand, and the thoughts of
danger of losing of Liberty, together with the Commands of the General firing
the Grecians on the other, the Fight was amazing. And now setting Foot to Foot,
fighting P. 246.
close at hand, and being locked together, Wounds were given on both sides,
insomuch as the Battle was doubtful a long time, till at length the Grecians
through their Resolution, and the greatness of their Shields getting ground,
the Medes with much ado fell off, and began to flag, a great part of them being
killed, and many others wounded. The Medes thus baffled, the Caesii and Sachae
(counted excellent Soldiers) continued the Fight; and although they were fresh
Men and untouched, against Men almost tired out, yet they were hewed down and
quickly put to flight, and many killed by Leonidas his Soldiers: For the
Barbarians being guarded with short Shields and Bucklers, were fitter for Fight
in the open Field, (where they could by reason of the lightness of their Arms
move as they pleased,) than in narrow Passages, where they could not well touch
the Bodies of their Enemies standing so close together, and being likewise
defended with large Shields. On the other hand, the Barbarians being but
lightly armed, lay the more open to all the Darts and Blows of the Assailants.

Xerxes now seeing the Passages strowed with the Carcases of his Soldiers, and
that the Barbarians were not able to withstand the Grecian Valor, sent against
them the chiefest of the Persians, such as were called Immortal and
Invulnerable, Men of far stronger Bodies than any of the rest of the Army. Of
these the Grecians made a quick dispatch, for they fled presently, and Night
now coming on, gave a present Cessation of Arms, with a great Slaughter of the
Barbarians, few being lost on the Grecians side.

Xerxes fretting at the late Misfortune of his Arms, so cross to his hopes and
expectations, the next day chose out of all his Regiments, such as were most
approved for Strength and Valor; and after many earnest Entreaties, he told
them that if they broke in upon the Grecians, and drove them out of the
Passages, he would remunerate them with large Rewards; but that Death should be
the Wages of them that fled. Upon which, they made a fierce and violent Charge
in one Body upon the Army of the Grecians. The Soldiers of Leonidas on the
other hand closing together in a Body like a strong Wall, with great resolution
resisted the furious shock of their Adversaries, and were so earnest in Fight,
that they would not suffer the usual fresh Aids to succeed to their Assistance;
but overcoming all difficulties by Resolution, they beat down and destroyed
most of the choicest of the Barbarians; every one striving who should spend
most of the day in signalizing his own Valor: For the Courage of the Young
Men, put on the Old and Experienced Soldiers to a higher strain of Valor than
ordinary; and the Glory formerly gained by the Old, stirred up the Young Men to
Emulation of Honor.

At length this brave and choice Army of the Barbarians was routed and put to
flight: In their flight they were stopped by a strong Body of Men appointed for
that purpose, who drove them back upon the Enemy, and so forced them to renew
the Fight. But the King being astonished and in great fear, conceiving none
durst make any further Attempt upon the Grecians, one Or rather a Trachinian
called Ephialtes. Pausan. lib. 1. c. 4.
Trachinius an Inhabitant of the Country (to whom all the secret and by-ways in
the Mountains were by use very well known) came to Xerxes, and promised him to
lead the Persians through a certain straight and difficult This was over Mount
Oeta. Pausan. ibid.
Pass, that the Troops sent along with him might come upon the Backs of
Leonidas his Soldiers, and by this means the Grecians being fought both behind
and before, might easily be cut off.

At the hearing of this, the King greatly rejoiced, and amply rewarded the
Trachinian, and forthwith sent along with him in the Night Twenty Thousand Men.
But one Tyrastiades of Cuma in the Persian Army, (...), a lover of truth and
honesty.
an upright Man of honest Principles, in the Night privately conveyed himself
from the Watch or Sentinels of the Persians, and came to Leonidas, and
discovered what the Trachinian had contrived; which being known, a Council of
War was called at Midnight, where they advised together what was to be done in
the present imminent danger and state of Affairs. There were some that were of
Opinion, That it was best forthwith to leave the Passages, and to return to the
rest of their Associates while it was yet well with them, for that there was no
hopes of safety if they continued there.

But Leonidas the Lacedemonian General minding to appropriate Immortal Honor
P. 247.
to himself and his Spartans, commanded all the rest to depart, and reserve
themselves for better Times, and for further help to the Greeks hereafter;
enjoining only the Lacedaemonians to stay, and not to desert the defense of the
Straights, for that it became the Generals and Commanders of Greece resolvedly
to be victorious, or to dye valiantly upon the Spot.

The Council then breaking up, all the rest presently marched away: And
Leonidas being now left upon the Place only with his Citizens, was resolved
with them to perform wonderful and Heroical Actions: For the Lacedaemonians
being but very few (for he kept the Thespians only with him, so that all of
them together did not exceed Five Hundred Men) he prepared himself bravely to
dye for the Liberty and Glory of Greece.

In the mean time, they that were sent with Or the Trachinian.
Trachinius, led about through the steep Passes, had beset those with Leonidas
on every side: But the Grecians who had before cast off all Thoughts of
Deliverance, and had preferred Honor before Life, with one Voice desired their
General that he would lead them out against the Enemy before it were known to
the Persians that they were surrounded.

Leonidas hereupon commending the Courage of his Soldiers, commanded them that
they would with all speed go to their Dinners with that cheerfulness as those
that must be with the (...), Sup with them below, or with the Infernal Spirits.
Gods at Supper: And he himself presently commanded Meat to be brought to him,
and fell to eating: For by this means he said they would be more able to
endure, and longer to abide the Dangers and Toyls of such an Engagement.

After they had all refreshed themselves, and were ready attending upon their
General, he commanded them to follow him, and break into the Enemies Camp to
kill all that they met, and make to the King's Pavilion: At which word of
Command, in one Body in the Night under their General Leonidas, they should
rush into the Camp of the Persians.

The Barbarians being amazed at so sudden and unexpected an Alarm, every
where run out of their Tents in great disorder and confusion. And supposing
that all those that were sent with the Trachinian were cut off, and that all
the Grecian Forces were amongst them, they were every where seized with fear
and astonishment: A great Slaughter therefore was made amongst them by the
Soldiers of Leonidas, but much more by the Persians among themselves, they not
knowing who was Friend or Foe: The Mistake likewise being advanced by the
Darkness of the Night, in which none could be distinguished, dread and horror
prevailed all over the Camp, so that it was no wonder that a terrible Slaughter
was made among them: For they killed one another, since now there was neither
Time nor Place to be at any certainty, for that none knew whose Commands, or
what Captain to follow, or what Colors or Ensigns to hasten to: But their
Minds were in a continual Distraction. And if the King had then been in his
Pavilion, he had been easily destroyed amongst the rest by the Grecians, and in
that moment had an end been put to so great a War: But Xerxes presently at the
beginning of the Tumult, hastened, and speedily got out of harms way. The
Grecians breaking into his Pavilion, cut off the Heads almost of all they found
there, and diligently sought for Xerxes (while the Night favored them) in all
parts of the Camp.

But when the Day brake, and Light began to make a Discovery, the Persians then
perceiving the Grecians to be very few, began to despise them, but durst not
make strait upon them, being terrified by their amazing Courage.

Therefore they compassed them round, and gauling them every way, both in the
Flank and Rear, they were all destroyed with Darts and Arrows. And this was the
end of those sent with Leonidas to guard the Passes in Thermopyle, whose Valor
who can sufficiently admire? who were also unanimous not to desert their Post
assigned them, but undauntedly sacrificed their Lives for the common safety of
Greece, and chose rather to dye valiantly and in Honor, than to live as Slaves
and in Disgrace.

On the other hand, this Terror and Amazement of the Persians, cannot but be
very probable; for which of the Barbarians could ever suspect so incredible an
P. 248.
Attempt? Who could have imagined, that Five Hundred should have that
Confidence, as without Fear to set upon A Hundred Myriads a Million. Just. lib.
2. says Five Hundred Thousand. Orosius Six Hundred Thousand.
a Hundred Myriads? So that we may conclude that Posterity cannot but fix upon
these Men as a Pattern and Example of Valor for ever; who though compassed
about with inextricable Dangers, and wearied out in their Bodies with
overcoming, yet in their Minds were unconquerable. These therefore are the only
Men (we read of) that became more famous by their being overcome, than others
by their most glorious Victories; for we ought not to make a Judgment of Men's
Virtues by the Event, but by their solid and well-grounded Resolutions: For
Fortune is the Mistress of the First, but every Man's Reason is the Advocate
for the other.

For who can judge there were ever braver Men than these? who though they were
not the Thousandth part of their Enemies, yet were acted with such brave
Spirits, as to dare to try their Courage with an incredible Multitude; not that
they had the least hope or expectation of overcoming upon so unequal Terms, but
resolving with undaunted Resolutions and noble Souls to surpass all that ever
was done in former Ages. They knew indeed they were then to fight with
Barbarians: But yet they concluded, that thereby they should be sharers in Fame
and Glory with all that ever were before them. For they were the only Men
(since the Memory of Man) that chose rather to defend the Laws of their
Country, than to preserve their own Lives, even with a Contempt of Dangers that
were insuperable; judging it more desirable for Men of Valor so to signalize
themselves.

To these the common Liberty of Greece ows more than to those that afterward
overcame Xerxes in following Battles; for the Barbarians being astonished with
such an extraordinary and unheard of Attempt, were afterward much discouraged,
and had little heart to Fight. The Spirits of the Grecians on the other side,
were inflamed with the desire of gaining the like honor with their Countrymen.
To conclude, these alone seemed to have born away with them the immortal Memory
of an unparalleled Valor, above all before them: And therefore their Praises
have been set forth not only by Historians, but by many Poets, amongst whom,
that famous Of Melus in Thessaly.
Milean Poet Simonides Ceus, a Lyrick Poet, in the time of Xerxes.
Simonides has described this noble Action, with high Strains of Commendation
worthy of their Valor, thus --

At famed Thermopyle these brave Souls got,
An honorable Death, and Noble Lot;
Their Tomb an Altar bears, which does record
Their Ancestors; and Death does Life afford
Unto their Fame, nor Rust, nor Times Teeth shall
Devour the Trophies of their Funeral,
The Praise of Grecian Heroes to maintain,
Their Countries Freedom that were Slain,
This Chapel does contain.
Leonidas above the rest,
The Spartan King will this attest;
Who gave proof to Posterity,
That real Valor cannot dye.
Having now said enough of these Gallant Men, we shall return where we broke
off. Xerxes thus possessed of the Passes, obtained (according to the Proverb)
only in a A Cadmean Victory. The Proverb and Reason, Erasm. Adag. 375. Paus. in
Boetic. 729. c. 9.
Cadmean Victory, lost a great number of his Soldiers, with the Destruction of
a very few of his Enemies in comparison. And having now gained the Straights,
and made his way open, he determined to try his Fortune in a Sea Fight: To that
purpose he forthwith sent for Megabates the Admiral of his Navy, and commanded
him to make up to the Grecian Fleet, and with the whole strength of his Navy to
join Battle with them; who without delay obeys the King's Command, and looses
from Pydna in Macedonia with the whole Fleet, and sails to the utmost Coasts or
Promontory of Magnesia called Sepias, where meeting with a violent Storm and
Tempest, he lost Three Hundred of his Ships of War, and a great number of his
Transport Ships. When the Storm was over, he made away, and arrived at Aphetas,
a City of Magnesia. From thence he sent forth Three Hundred Sail, and commanded
the Officers that they should sail about, and make to the Right Hand of the
Island Vid. Antea.
Eubea, and so surround the Enemy. The Grecians in the mean time lay at Anchor
at Artemesia in Eubea, whose Navy was at the most not above Two Hundred and
Fourscore Sail, whereof an Hundred and Forty were fitted out by the Athenians,
and the rest by the other Grecians. Euribiades, a Spartan, was Admiral of the
Fleet; and Themistocles the Athenian took care of all other things relating to
it. P. 249.
This Man by reason of his singular Prudence and Military Experience, was not
only in great Reputation and Authority with the Grecians in the Fleet, but even
with Euribiades himself; and all were ready at his Command. When the
Sea-Officers were in Consultation where was the most commodious Place to join
Battle; whilst all the rest were for abiding where they were, and to receive
the Enemy as they then lay; only Themistocles was of a contrary Opinion, and
declared, that that Party ever had the advantage, who in good order made the
first Onset upon the Enemy: For if they then in a Body fell upon the Enemy, who
was at that time in Disorder and Confusion, by coming out of several Ports, and
at a great distance one from another, the Attack would probably be successful
and prosperous.

The Counsel and Advice of Themistocles prevailing, the whole Grecian Fleet in
order of Battle, set sail against the Persians, who coming out of their several
Ports, as they were dispersed and out of order, were met by the Navy of
Themistocles, who sunk many of 'em, and forced as many more upon the Shore.

In the mean time, the Fleets of both Parties now come together, and Battle
joined, some parts of the Fleets prevailed here and there on both sides,
without absolute Victory on either, till Night put an end to the Contest.
Presently followed a most dreadful Tempest, whereby many Ships of the Persian
Fleet were forced out of their Harbors, and lost. So as God dimself seemed to
fight for the Grecians, by reducing the Barbarians to a less number, that the
Grecians might be an equal Match for them, and better able to bear the brunt of
a Sea Fight. Hence it was, that the Grecians grew more and more confident and
courageous: And on the other Hand, the Barbarians ever more fearful in all
Attempts.

But after the Storm was over, having again brought together their Navy, they
Another Sea Fight.
made down upon the Enemy with their whole Fleet: The Grecians enforced with
Fifty Athenian Ships, made ready, and undauntedly received the Barbarians. And
here the manner of the Fight was almost like that at Thermopyle, for the
Persians endeavored to charge through the midst of the Grecians, and so to
pass into The Straight between Eubea and Beotia.
Euripus: But the Grecians, with the help of their Confederates in Eubea,
defended the Straights; upon which, there was again a fierce Engagement, and
both sides lost many of their Men of War: But Night drawing on again, both
Parties were forced into their Harbors. It Is reported that the Athenians on
the Grecian side, and the Zidonians on the other, bravely behaved themselves in
both Battles.

The Grecians afterward hearing of the Defeat and Slaughter made at
Thermopyle, The Grecians transport themselves at Salamis.
and being certainly informed, that the Persians were marching toward Athens,
were in great consternation, and therefore sailing back to Salamis, they there
lay. And now the Athenians seeing the extreme Hazard all were in, who remained
in Athens, put on Board their Wives and Children, and all Necessaries, and
whatever else they could, and transported 'em into Salamis. Then the Admiral of
the Persian Fleet, understanding that the Enemy was withdrawn from their former
station, presently with his whole Fleet made for Eubaea, and there first takes
the City Istiea by Storm, and razed it, and then wastes and destroys the whole
Country before him.

In the mean time Xerxes marches from Thermopyle through the Consines of
Phocia, Xerxes harras^eth Greece.
razes all the Towns far and near, and wastes and spoils all before him.

That part of the Phocians who sided with the Grecians, not being able to
Contest with so great a Multitude, forsook their Towns, and with all their
Inhabitants betook themselves to the difficult Passages and Defenses of the
Mountain Parnassus.

Afterward the King entering the Country of the Doreans, forbore from Pillage
and Spoil, and commanded that no Injury should be done there, because they were
his Friends and Associates. But part of his Forces left there, he commanded to
invade Delphos, and to burn the Temple of Apollo, and to rob and carry away all
that they found there; and he himself in the mean time, led the rest of his
Army into Beotia, and there encamped.

When those that were sent to spoil the Delphian God, were advanced as far
Xerxes his Army punished at Delphos, P. 250.
as the Temple of Pallas, there arose a sudden and incredible Tempest, and
Storm of Hail and Wind, with dreadful Thunder and Lightning, wherewith great
Rocks were rent asunder, and fell upon the Heads of the Persians, and destroyed
them by Heaps. The rest that survived, being terrified with this Portent of the
Immortal Gods, ran away with all haste and speed. And thus by Divine
Providence, the Oracle of Delphos was preserved from Ruin and Robbery. They of
Delphos, that they might continue the Memory of this wonderful Appearance of
the Gods to Posterity for ever, erected a great Trophy or Monument near the
Temple of Pallas, on which they engraved this Elogy --

A grateful Gift to Jove, the Delphians Me
Have raised, proud Monument of Victory.
By Phoebus help, who Medean Bands confound,
Peserv'd the The Roof covered with Brass. See Pausan. lib. 10. (...). 5. he
says the Temple was made of Brass.
Temple that with Brass was Crowned.
Xerxes passing through Beotia, wasted the Country of the Thespians, and burnt
Platea, forsaken before of its Inhabitants. For the People of these Parts, with
their Families and all their Concerns, had withdrawn themselves into
Peloponesus: From thence he passed into Attica, continuing still his
Devastation and Ruin of all things: And Athens it self he razes Athens razed.
to the Ground, and burns the Temples.

Whilst Xerxes was thus employed, his Fleet (having first spoiled Eubaea and
the Coasts of Attica) loosed from Eubaea, and came to Attica. About the same
time the Corcyreans lay about Peloponesus, with Threescore Galleys, because
they could not (as they pretended) recover the Cape or Promontory of Malea. But
other Writers say, that this was rather done out of Policy, that they might
observe how the issue of the War was like to succeed, and submit to the
Persians if they were Victors; and that the Grecians, if they were Conquerors,
might believe they came so far in order to assist them.

But when News was brought to the Athenians that were at Salamis, that their
Country was burnt up, and the Temple of Pallas laid in Rubbish, they were
extremely grieved and dejected. An exceeding fear likewise seized the other
Grecians, seeing themselves besieged (as it were) by the Enemy on every side,
coopt up together within Peloponesus. And therefore it was determined that the
Leaders Consultations among the Grecians concerning Fighting at Sea,
and Officers should consult and give their Opinion what place was fittest and
most convenient wherein to try their Fortune in a Sea Fight. Many and various
Opinions were proposed and bandied to and fro in this matter: The
Peloponesians, as those who only minded their own security, advised that the
Fight might be near the Isthmus: For Fortifying the Isthmus with a strong Wall,
if things did not succeed, they might presently withdraw themselves into
Peloponesus, as into a Place of greatest Safety and Defense: But if they should
be penned up in the little Island Salamis, they should run into Mischiefs
inextricable.

But Themistocles advised to fight at Salamis, for that within the Straights
they were sure to have the Advantage, where they might fight with a few Ships
against many. On the other hand, he made it out, that to fight near the
Isthmus, would be great disadvantage to them, for they must fight in the open
Sea, where the Enemy would have room to make use of the whole Fleet, by which a
few Vessels (as they were) would soon be destroyed by such a Multitude.

These Reasons, and many others to the same purpose in reference to the
Business in Hand, being seasonably and wisely offered by Themistocles, brought
over all the rest to his Opinion.

It being now therefore determined in this General Council, to Fight within the
Straights of Salamis, the Grecian Captains with all speed prepared themselves
for Battle against the Persians: Euribiades therefore, together with
Themistocles, began to encourage the People against the Danger approaching: But
they were P. 251.
struck with such Terror and Fear of the great Power of the Persians, that they
regarded not the Advice or Commands of their Leaders and Officers; but every
one to save himself, hasted with all speed to pass over from Salamis to
Peloponesus.

Neither were the Grecian Forces by Land, seized with less Fear and Terror, by
reason of the great Power of the Enemy, being likewise much dejected by the
Slaughter of those valiant Men at Thermopile: And then the misery of the
Atheniaus, was ever before their Eyes, which amazed them, and put a damp upon
all their Hopes.

Upon which the In Peloponesus.
General Council discerning the Tumult and distracting Fears among the People,
made an Order for the Enclosing of the Isthmus with a Wall; and thereupon many
Hearts and Hands joining together, the Work was completed: And so the
Peloponesians, defended themselves by a Wall drawn out along from A Port of
Corinth.
Lecheum to Cenchrea Five Miles.
Forty Furlongs.

But now the Fleet at Salamis, was in a Mutiny, and in that degree of Fear,
that none would obey their Officers. Themistocles therefore perceiving that
Euribiades, the Admiral of the Fleet, was not regarded, and that the Violence
of the Furious Popularity could not be restrained; and considering likewise
that the Straits and Difficulties of the Places at Salamis were of great
Advantage in order to obtain the Victory, resolved upon this Project: He
commanded one chosen A Stratagem of Themistocles.
out for that purpose, to go privately as a Deserter to the King, to let him
know that the Grecians had resolved to pass over with all their Fleet from
Salamis into the Isthmus. Xerxes gives credit to what was related, as a thing
very probable, and therefore resolved with all haste and diligence, to prevent
the Land and Sea-Forces of the Grecians from joining; and to that purpose
commanded the Ships he had from Egypt, forthwith to possess themselves of the
Straits and narrow Seas between Salamis and Megaris, and orders the rest of his
Navy to make for Salamis, and there without delay to Fight the Enemy. The
King's Galleys were drawn up distinctly, according to their several Nations,
that being all of one and the same Language, they might more readily aid and
assist one another.

The Fleet setting forth in this Order, the Phaenicians were in the Right Wing,
and the Grecians joined with the Persians were placed in the Left. In the mean
time, the Officers of the Ionians sent with great Secrecy a certain Samian unto
the Grecians, to acquaint them what the King determined, and in what Method and
order all things were hastening forward, and that they themselves (as soon as
the Battle was joined) were resolved to desert the Barbarians.

All which, when the Samian had thus privily discovered to Euribiades,
Themistocles The Sea Fight at Salamis.
(his Matters succeeding according to his Hearts desire, and as he had
contrived,) with great Joy encouraged the Navy to Fight. The Grecians
recovering their Spirits at the Message sent by the Ionians, and (stirred up
with fresh hope by the present Circumstances of Affairs to Fight) against their
former Determinations, loosed from Salamis with great Resolution. And now the
Fleet being disposed in order of Battle by Euribiades and Themistocles, the
Left Wing was committed to the Lacedaemonians and Athenians against the
Phenicians, the Enemy's Right Wing.

The Phenicians were at that time in great Reputation for Maritime Affairs, as
well by reason of the multitude of their Shipping, as for their singular and
ancient Skill in Navigation. The Of the Island Aegina.
Aegineans, and those of Megara, were placed in the Left Wing, for these were
conceived (next to the Athenians) to be the best Seamen; and it was concluded
that they would fight with the greatest Obstinacy and Resolution, in regard
they had no where to fly with the rest of the Grecians for Security, if they
were put to the worst. The middle Battle was supplied by the rest of the
Grecians.

Things being thus ordered and prepared, they forthwith set sail and possessed
themselves of the Straits and Passages between Salamis and Heraclea.

As for the King, he commanded the Admiral of his Fleet, that without any stop
or delay, he should set upon the Enemy: And he placed himself upon an Eminence
over against the Island of Salamis, from whence he might see all the Passages
of the Battle.

The Persians, indeed at the First, while they could sail in the open Seas,
every P. 252.
one kept his station: But when they began to enter the Straits, many of the
Ships were Forced out of their Order, which occasioned a great Tumult, and
Confusion amongst the rest. Then the Admiral, who led the Van, fell in First
with great Valor upon the Enemy, and was sunk at the First Charge, upon which,
a great Terror seized the whole Fleet; for upon the Death of the Admiral many
took upon them to command, and gave out several and different Orders; so that
they durst not proceed further but tackt about and made to Sea.

The Athenians perceiving the Terror and Confusion of the Barbarians, fiercely
pursued them; some of their Ships they struck through with the Beaks of their
Vessels, and brusht off the Oars of others: And many of the Barbarians Galleys
in the Flight, lying open with their Broad-sides to the Beaks of the Grecian
Ships, by multitude of strokes were pierced through and through; So that now,
not having time to turn the Heads of their Galleys, they fled as well as they
could with their Fled backward.
Oars reversed.

The Phenicians, and Cyprian Ships being now dispersed by the Athenians, and
forced to Fly, the Cilicians, Pamphylians, and Lycians, who were next to them,
fought indeed at the First very obstinately; but when they saw the best and
stoutest of the Ships routed, and making away, they hasted also out of the
Danger.

In the other Wing, the Fight was for some small time doubtful, the Contest
being vigorous on both sides; but the Phenicians and Cyprians being driven
a-shoar, and the Athenians making Head upon the other, the Barbarians not able
to bear the Shock, fled, and lost many of their Ships in the Flight. And thus
the noble Grecians got a glorious Victory at Sea over the Barbarians.

In this Battle, Forty Ships of the Grecian Fleet were lost; but above Two
Hundred Galleys of the other were sunk, besides those that were taken with
their Ships and Men.

The King being thus unexpectedly overcome, in a Rage slew the Phenicians, as
the first that fled; threatening the rest, that in due time he would measure out
Punishments for them proportionable to their Demerits; who terrified with the
King's Threats, forthwith made for Attica, but the Night following they sailed
into Asia.

And now Themistocles, justly esteemed the Author of this Victory at Sea,
contrives Another Stratagem of Themistocles.
another Stratagem not inferior to the former; for the Grecians being
terrified, and not daring to fight at Land against so many Thousands of Men, he
thus diminishes the Forces of the Enemy.

He sends his Childrens Schoolmaster to the King, with Instructions to
acquaint him, that the Grecians were hasting with their Fleet to the Bridge, in
order to pull One Sicinus a Persian, Plut. in Themist.
it down.

This Message the King believed, as very probable, and thereupon was in a
terrible Fright, lest the Grecians, who had then the whole Command of the Seas,
should block up his Passage into Asia, so that he could not return; he resolved
therefore to be gone with all speed, and to leave Mardonius behind him, with an
Army both of Horse and Foot, consisting of no less than Four Hundred Thousand
Men. These Two pieces of Military Policy contrived by Themistocles, crowned the
Grecians with the renown of Two glorious Victories: And thus stood the Affairs
of Greece. But now having declared sufficient for the present, the things that
were transacted in Europe, we shall go on to those done elsewhere in Foreign
Parts.

CHAP. II.
How the Carthaginians invaded Sicily, and were routed by Gelon.

THE Carthaginians (as it was before agreed between them and the Persians, that
they should at the same time set upon the Greeks in Sicily) had made great
preparation for War: And now all things being in readiness, they chose Amil^^r
General of their Army, a Man of great Authority amongst the Citizens; who being
furnished both with Sea and Land Forces, looses from Carthage. The Land Army
was no less than Three Hundred Thousand, and his Fleet above Two Thousand Sail,
besides Transport Ships for the carrying of Provision, which were above Three
Thousand.

But Sailing through the Libian Sea, by the violence of a Storm, he lost his
Ships, wherein the Horses and Chariots were on Board: And when he came P. 253.
to Pannormus, the Port of Sicily, he was heard to say, that there was now an
end of the War; for he was much afraid, that the Sicilians by the favor of the
Sea, had escaped the Danger. There he lay for the space of Three Days,
refreshing his Army, and repairing his Ships; and then marched by Land against
Himera, his Fleet sailing over against him near the Shore.

When he came to the City, he placed his Army in Two Camps, in the one his
Land, and in the other his Naval Forces. Under all his Long Ships or Galleys,
he caused deep Trenches to be drawn, and to be barracado'd round with Timber.
His Land Forces he encamped in Front, over against the City, Extending the
Fortifications from the Barracado of his other Camp to the Hills that overtopt
the City. When he had thus blockt up the Place on the West side, he unladed all
the Ships of Burden, of the Meat and Provision, and sent away what Ships he had
left, for Corn, and what other Provision and Victuals they could buy, to be
brought to him from Africa and Sardinia: But he himself marched toward the
City with a choice part of the Army, and routed the Himerians that came sorth
to oppose him, by which the struck a great Terror into the Besieged.

Hereupon Thereon Prince of the Agrigentines, though he had aid sufficient with
him for the Defense of Himera; yet being now in a great Fright, sent with all
speed to Syracuse to Gelon for Succors; who being prepared with his Forces
beforehand, and understanding the fear the Himerians were in, without delay,
marched out of Syracuse, with no less than Fifty Thousand Foot, and Five
Thousand Horse, and with a swift March came to Himera. Upon which, he revived
the Spirits of the Himerians, and freed them from all Fear of the Carthaginian
Army; for he encamped near the City, and fortified himself both with a Wall and
deep Trench, and then sent forth all his Horse to seek out the Enemy, who were
at that time dispersed, forraging all over the Country. These Horse setting
upon the Carthaginians roving and disorderly dispersed, took as many Prisoners
as each of them could carry back; for above Ten Thousand were brought into the
City. By which Exploit, the Authority and Glory of Gelon was much advanced; and
now the Himertans began to contemn their Adversaries.

Afterward (with no less courage) he performed other things; for all the Gates
that Thero before (for fear of the Enemy) had built, he on the other Hand (in
contempt of the Carthaginians) caused to be pulled down, and furnished the
Place with others that were of absolute necessity. To sum up all, Gelon being
an expert ^
Soldier, and prudent in Management, set his Head at work how he might by some
Stratagem deceive the Barbarians, and destroy their Forces without any Danger
to himself or his Army: Which Device of his was much forwarded by an Accident
that then happened, for as things then stood, resolving upon burning the
Enemy's Fleet, it fortuned Amilcar being then in the Camp with his Navy,
preparing for a great Festival Day to Neptune, some of the Horsemen brought to
Gelon a C^^rier taken in the Fields, who brought Letters from the Selim^^t^ans,
in which was written, that they would send the Horsemen to him at the Day that
he had appointed; which was the Day whereon he had determined the Sacrifice
Upon the same Day therefore Gelon sends Horsemen of his own, commanding them,
that conveying themselves privately in the Night to Places nearest and most
convenient, as soon as it was Day, they should go to the Enemy's Naval Camp, as
if they were the Selinutian Confederates; and being received within the Wall
and Fortification, should first kill Amilcar, and then set Fire to the Ships.

He gave moreover in Charge to those that were as Spies upon the next Hills, P.
254.
that as soon as the Horsemen were admitted into the Fortification, they should
give notice of it by lifting up the Sign. And he himself at Break of Day (with
his Army drawn up) waited when the Sign would be given.

The Horse being come to the Carthaginians Camp about Sunrising, they were
admitted by the Watch for Confederates; being entered, without delay they make
up with a fierce Charge to Amilcar, who was then Sacrificing, and both killed
him, and fired the Ships. And presently the Sign being given by the Spies, Gelo
with all his Forces in Battalia, fell into the Camp of the Carthaginians.
Whereupon the Officers presently drew forth all their Forces out of the Camp to
encounter the Sicilians, and with Ensigns advanced, fought with great
obstinacy. And now the Trumpets in both Armies sounded a Charge, and in
Emulation each endeavored to exceed the other in Noise and Clamor. In
conclusion, great was the Slaughter on both sides, with little or no advantage
to either; when presently the Flame mounting up from the Ships, and News
brought of the Death of the General, the Grecians (now encouraged) doubled
their Shouts, in certain hope, and confidence of Victory; but the Carthaginians
altogether discouraged Gelo routs the Carthaginians.
and in Despair, betook themselves to Flight. And because Gelo had commanded
that no Prisoners should be taken, the Slaughter in the Pursuit was very
grievous; at last no less than an Hundred and Fifty Thousand were Slain. The
rest gained a Place by Nature Fortified, and this gave the first stop to the
Fury of the Pursuers: But because they wanted Water (through Extremity of
Thirst) they were forced to deliver up themselves to the Conqueror's Mercy.

Gelo's Name was now renowned upon the account of so great a Victory obtained
merely by his own prudent Contrivance; and his Praise was advanced to the very
Heavens, not only by the Sicilians, but by all others. For I may truly say,
that we have no History of any General, that ever before him put in Execution,
so prudent and remarkable a Stratagem; or ever slew more of the Barbarians in
one Battle, or took so many Prisoners. And therefore some Writers account this
Battle nothing inferior to the A Comparison of the Battle at Himera, with the
Battle at Platea.
Fight by the Grecians at Patea, and equal this Project of Gelo to the
Contrivances and Intreagues of Themistocles. But the highest Commendations
(because they were both so remarkable and eminent) are by some attributed to
this, and by others to that. For whereas both the Greeks and Sicilians before
Fighting, were terrified with the multitude of the Barbarians, the News of
Gelo's Victory, (the Sicilians first prevailing) inspired the Grecians with
greater Courage. But the Fortune of the Generals on either side was much
different; for it is most certain, that the Persian King with many Thousands
more escaped; but not only the Generals of the Carthaginians, but even all the
whole Army were so slaughtered and destroyed, that (as it is reported) not one
escaped to Carthage to carry the News of the Defeat. Add moreover, that the
most Noble of the Grecian Commanders, Pausanius and Themistocles, were most
unworthily dealt with, even by their own Countrymen; the one for his
Covetousness and Treason, was killed by his Fellow Citizens, and the other
(Banished Greece) was forced to fly to his greatest Enemy Xerxes, and there
live in Exile. Gelo, on the contrary (after his Success, advanced to more P.
255.
Honor by the Love and Favor of the Syracusians,) reigned till he was old,
and died admired and honored of all. And such was the Esteem and grateful
Remembrance the Citizens had of him, that the entire Government was continued
in his Family Three Descents. Those therefore who have thus highly merited,
challenge from us likewise their due Honor and Praise. But to return where we
left. The same Day that Gelo routed the Carthaginians, Leonidas at Thermopyle
with his Grecians, broke into the Camp of Xerxes with more than ordinary
Valor; as if the Gods on purpose had contrived and effected at one and the
same moment of time, a glorious Victory in one Place, and an honorable Death
of the Grecians in another.

After the Fight at Himera, Twenty Long Ships, which Amilcar had (...), kept
out of the B^racad^.
drawn out, occasionally for necessary Services, made their Escape, and only
they of the whole Army, made an Attempt to return to their own Country, the
rest being either Killed or Taken. But being overloaded with the Multitude of
them that fled, and meeting with cross Winds and Tempests, they were all
Shipwrackt and lost, save only a few that escaped in a small Boat, and arrived
at Carthage; and there with a doleful Cry, declared how all the Army that was
carried over into Sicily, was destroyed.

The Carthaginians were so terrified with the unexpected Slaughter of their
Men, that they all watched Night and Day, for the Guard of the City, as if Gelo
had been just then ready to enter into Carthage with his whole Army. The number
of those that were Slain, affected the whole City with Lamentations; and
private Houses and Families were full of Tears and Complaints; while some
enquired after their Children, others after their Brothers: A great number of
Orphans now bereft of their Parents, with miserable Cries, bewailed both their
Deaths, and their own Misery, who were now left naked and destitute of those
that should take care of them.

The Carthaginians therefore fearing lest Gelo should hasten into Africa, sent
unto him Plenipotentiaries, Men both of great Eloquence and Discretion.

In the mean time, he honorably rewarded the Horsemen that destroyed Amilcar,
and upon all others that had done any remarkable Service, he bestowed the Marks
of his Favor. The chiefest of the Spoils, he kept himself, with an intent to
Dedicate them as Ornaments to the Temples at Syracuse: Many of the rest he gave
to be set up in the Temples of the Himereans: What remained, together with the
Captives, he distributed amongst his Soldiers, proportionably to every one's
Merit. And those Captives that fell to the share of the Cities, were in all
those Places (with their Legs shackl'd) employed in public Works for the
Common Good. They of Agrigentum having gotten many Captives for their share,
enriched both their City and Country round about with their Labors; for they
had so many Prisoners, that many of the private Citizens had Five Hundred
a-piece.

And the Multitude of their Captives and Slaves was advanced, not only because
The Works at Agrigentum by the Captives.
they sent great Assistance to the War, but likewise by reason many of the
Barbarians, when their Army was routed, fled up into the Mid-land and Borders
of Agrigentum, who being all taken alive, filled the City with Prisoners. The
greatest part were set apart for the Public Service, and appointed to cut and
hew Stone; of which, they not only built the greatest of their Temples, but
made Watercourse or Sinks underground, to convey Water from the City, so
great and wide, that though the Work it self was contemptible, yet when done
and seen, was worthy of Admiration. The Overseer and Master of the Work, was
one Pheax, an excellent Artificer, from whom these Conduits were called
Pheaces. The Agrigentines likewise sunk a Fish Pond, with great Costs and
Expenses, Seven Furlongs in Compass, and Twenty Cubits in Depth.

Into this, Water was brought both from Fountains and Rivers, and by that means
sufficiently supplied with Fish of all sorts, both for Food and Pleasure. P.
256.
And upon this Pond, fell and rested great Multitudes of Swans, which gave a
most pleasant and delightful prospect to the Eye; but by neglect of succeeding
Ages, it grew up with Mud, and at last through length of Time, turned wholly
into dry Ground. But the Soil there being very fat and rich, they have planted
it with Vines, and replenished it with all sorts of Trees, which yields to them
of Agrigentum, a very great Revenue.

When Gelo had dismissed his Confederates, he marched back with his Army to
Syracuse.

And for his notable Victory he was not only had in great Honor and Esteem by
his own Citizens, but even by all the Sicilians. For he got so many Prisoners
and Slaves, that the Island seemed to have all Africa under her Dominion.

Ambassadors came continually from all the Cities and Princes of the Adverse
Party, begging Pardon for their Error, and promising Observance to all his
Commands for the future. But as for Gelo, he carried himself with great
Complacency The praise of Gelo.
toward all, and entered into a League with them; and in the time of his
Prosperity, behaved himself with great Modesty and (...)
Humanity; not only toward the Sicilians, but even toward his most implacable
Enemies, the Carthaginians.

For when Ambassadors came from Carthage, with many Tears begging his Favor,
he received them very (...).
Courteously, and made Peace with them, upon Condition that they should pay Two
Thousand Talents of Silver for the Expenses of the War: And that they should
build (...). Sir Walter Rawleigh says, Two Armed Ships, as Pledges of the
Peace; which I rather incline unto.
Two Temples, where the Articles of the League might be kept as Sacred. The
Carthaginians being thus safe beyond their hopes, freely consented to the
Demands, and promised a Crown of Gold to Damareta, the Wife of Gelo: For by
making their Addresses unto her, she was chiefly instrumental for the procuring
of the Peace. And after she received the Crown from the Carthaginians, which
was of the value of an Hundred Talents of Gold, Gelo coined it into Money, and
called it from her, Damaret^^um, every Piece worth Ten Three Pounds Fifteen
Shillings.
Attick Drachmas, called likewise of the Sicilians, Pentecontralitrons, from
their being Fifty Pounds in weight.

Gelo carried himself thus graciously to all, chiefly prompted thereunto by his
own generous Disposition, yet not without some Design to engage all by
Kindness. For he had a purpose to pass with his Army over into Greece, and to
join with them against the Persians: But when he was ready to transport his
Fleet, Messengers from Corinth brought him the News of the Victory by the
Grecians at Salamis, and that Xerxes with a great part of his Army had left
Europe. Upon which News he altered his Resolution, and commending the
forwardness of his Soldiers, called a General Assembly, with a Command that
all should meet Armed: He himself when the Assembly was met, came in amongst
them, not only without any Arms, but without a Tunick, a Soldier's Coat.
Tunick, covered only with a Cloak or Mantle, and in a Speech set forth the
whole Course of his Life and Actions to the Syracusians; the People giving
evident Testimony of their Approbation to every Word that he said, and admiring
that he should so expose himself amongst Armed Men, to the Will of every Person
that might have a Design against his Life; every one was so far from offering
him any Violence, as a Tyrant, that had oppressed them,. that all with one
Voice proclaimed him their Benefactor, their King, and the Deliverer of their
Country.

After these things, he built Two Magnificent Temples, one to Ceres, and
another to Proserpina out of the Spoils: And caused a A Three-footed Stool or
Chair.
Tripode to be made of Sixteen Talents of Gold, which he dedicated as a Token
of his Gratitude to Apollo at Delphos. He afterward determined to build a
Temple to Ceres in Mount Etna, which so far proceeded, as that the Image of the
Deity was placed in her Shrine; but by Death he was interrupted in his Design,
and the Work left imperfect. The Death of Gelo. Pindar the Poet.
About this time, Pindar the Lyrick Poet flourished. And these are all the
things that were done this Year worthy of any Remark.

CHAP. III.
The Victory of the Greeks over Mardonius at Platea.

XAnthippus being Archon of Athens, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, and Serrius
Cornelius Cossus, Roman Consuls, the Persian Fleet (all but the Phaenicians)
after P. 257.
the Battle at Salamis, lay about Cuma: And there continuing all Winter, at the
Spring passed over to Samos to guard the Coasts of Ionia: The Fleet consisted
of Four Hundred Sail; and because they were jealous of the Ionians, they kept a
strict Eye upon the Cities there.

In Greece, upon the great Success of Salamis, which was chiefly owing to the
Valor and Conduct of the Athenians, all were of Opinion that the Athenians
(bering lifted up) would now contend with the Lacedaemonians for the Dominion of
the Seas: And this the Lacedaemonians foresaw, and therefore used all their Arts
and Endeavors to keep them under. And for that reason when they were to take
notice of the Noble Actions in that Fight, and to distribute Rewards
accordingly, the Lacedaemonians prevailed by their Interest, that the Honor of
the Day should be given to them of Aegina, and among the Athenians to Amynias,
the Brother of Aesculus the Poet; because that he being General of the Galleys,
first charged the Admiral of the Persians, and sunk both him and his Ship
together.

But when the Athenians showed their Resentment that they were so undeservedly
Jealousies between the Athenians and the other Grecians.
slighted, the Lacedaemonians were afraid, lest Themistocles (being provoked
with the Indignity) should contrive some considerable Mischief against them and
the rest of the Grecians: Therefore to stop his Mouth, they rewarded him doubly
above all the rest. But when the People of Athens understood that he had
accepted what was given him, they were much incensed, and removed him from his
Place as General, and put Xanthippus, of the Family of Ariphron, into his stead.

And now the Distaste given by the Grecians to the Athenians being spread
Abroad, Ambassadors came to Athens, both from the Persians and the Grecians.
The Persian Ambassadors spoke to this effect: That if the Athenians would side
with the Persians; they should have what part of Greece they would choose; that
Mardonius the Persian General would rebuild their Walls and their Temples; and
that the City should have and enjoy its former Laws and Liberties. On the other
Hand, the Lacedemonian Ambassadors earnestly entreated them, that they would
not make any League with the Barbarians, but preserve their ancient Amity with
the Grecians, being so near one with them, both in Nation and Language.

To the Barbarians the Athenians gave this Return, That the Persian had no
Country so rich, nor Gold so heavy, which could tempt them to forsake their
Confederates the Grecians in their necessity. And to the Lacedaemonians they
commanded Answer to be given, That as heretofore their care had been to
preserve Greece, so for the future to their utmost Endeavor they would defend
it. And in the mean time, desired that they would forthwith with all their
Forces pass into Attica, in regard it was very apparent, that Mardonius when he
came to understand the Athenians to be so Resolved against him, would invade
Athens with all his Force: And so it came to pass; for Mardonius Encamping in
Beotia, first endeavored to draw the Cities of Peleponesus to a Defection, by
sending Moneys here and there to the Governors and Chief Men. And after when he
received the Answer returned him by the Athenians, he raged like a Mad Man, and
forthwith marched with all his Army into Attica: For besides those which Xerxes
left with him, he raised many out of Thrace and Macedonia, and other
Confederate Cities, to the number of Two Hundred Thousand Men and upwards.

And now Attica being invaded by so great a Multitude, the Athenians sent
Mardonius invades Attica.
Messengers to the Spartans, and desired their Aid, who were so slow that the
Enemy violently broke in upon the Country, so that the Athenians were reduced
to great Streights, and now a Second time, with their Wives and Children, and
all other things that they could in that Distraction and Hurry carry away, left
their Country, and fled to Salamis.

Mardonius greatly enraged, destroyed and wasted all the Country, levelling the
City to the Ground, and utterly demolished all the Temples that were left
untouched in the former Desolation.

Upon his returning thus to Athens with his Forces, it was determined in the P.
258.
general At the Isthmus.
Assembly of the Grecians, that they would all join with the Athenians, and
march to Platea, and there join Battle with the Persians for the Liberty of
their Country. And made Solemn Vows to the Gods, that if they became Victors,
they would celebrate and set apart a Festival Day, and institute Sports to the
Goddess Libertas at Platea.

At the General Rendezvous in Peleponesus, they took an Oath to oblige one
another to the Prosecution of the War, to the end their League might be
inviolably observed, and that all Difficulties might be undergone with
undaunted Courage. The Form of the Oath was thus, -- I will not prefer Life
before Liberty. The Oath of the Consederacy.
I will not desert my Officers, whether they live or dye, but that I will bury
my Fellow Soldiers that shall fall in the War, how many soever they may be. If
I be victorious in this War, I will not destroy or spoil any City of my
Confederates. I will not rebuild any of the Temples that are burnt or ruined,
but leave them as Monuments of the Impiety of the Barbarians to Posterity.

When they had thus sworn, they marched over the Mountain Citharon into Beotia,
and encamped at the Foot of the Hill, near the City Erythra. Aristides was the
Commander of the Athenians, and Pausanias the Tutor of Leonidas (who was under
Age) was General of the whole Army.

When Mardonius understood that the Enemy was entered Beotia, he marched from
Thebes, and pitched his Tents at the Ante Chr. 478.
River Near Platea, and Thebes. The Fight with the Persians at Erybra.
Aesopus, and fortified himself with a deep Trench, enclosing his Camp round
with a Wall of Timber. The Grecians were an Hundred Thousand, but the Persians
were Five Hundred Thousand. The Barbarians began the Fight, who all the Night
long, roving up and down with all their Cavalry, set upon the Grecians in their
Camp: The first that felt the Brunt were the Athenians, who forthwith in good
order valiantly opposed them; so that the Fight was very hot. At length the
rest of the Grecians put all to Flight that made the Onset on them; only the
Magareans, who had to deal with the General and best of the Persian Horse, were
over-press'd, yet gave no ground, but sent with all speed to the Athenians and
the Lacedaemonians for Succors. When Aristides understood their Distress, he
forthwith sent the chief of such Athenians as were then about him, to their
aid; who joining with the other, made such a Charge upon the Barbarians, that
they soon freed the Magareans from their Dangers, killing the General of the
Persian Horse, with many others, and put the rest to flight.

This happy success at the beginning of the War, filled the Grecians with hope
of absolute Victory in the Conclusion. Afterward The great Battle with the
Persians at the River Asopus near Platea.
they removed their Camp out of the Plain, next under the Foot of the Mountain,
into another Place more convenient for obtaining a perfect Victory. For on
their Right Hand was an high Hill, and on their Left the River Asopus for their
Defense: Between these Two they encamped, thus guarded by a natural
Fortification. The straitness of the Place thus chosen by the Grecians, was of
great advantage, and did much conduce to the Victory: For the Persians could
not enlarge their Front as otherways they might, by reason whereof so many
Thousands of the Barbarians became useless and unprofitable. The Generals,
Pausanias and Aristides having now so fair an Opportunity, drew out their
Forces, and advanced in Battalia as the Ground would give them leave.

Mardonius on the other Hand, being forced to march up in a close Body, drew up
his Men to the best advantage he could devise, and with a great Shout meets the
Grecians, and with the choicest of his Men, who were his Lifeguard, makes the
first Charge upon the Lacedaemonians, who were placed in Front to receive him.
He fought with an high Resolution, and made great Slaughter amongst the Greeks;
but the Lacedaemonians stoutly stood their Ground, contemning all Danger, and
destroyed likewise Multitudes of the Barbarians, who (as long as P. 259.
Mardonius was in the Head of the Army) bore the Brunt with great Courage; but
as soon as he fell (valiantly behaving himself) and that they discerned the
choice of the Army with him, were all either killed or wounded, their Hearts
The Persians routed.
failed, and they betook themselves to Flight, and were as hotly pursued by the
Grecians; however the most of them got within the Timber Wall. The rest (being
Grecians that sided with Mardonius) fled to, and sheltered themselves within
the Walls of Thebes. The Remainder of the Army, to the number of Forty Thousand
and upwards, fled another way, with Artabazus (a Man of great account amongst
the Persians) who came with them back by a shorter Cut into Phocis.

This Dispersion of the Persians caused the Forces of the Grecians likewise to
be scattered, and divided into several Parties; for the Athenians, Plateans and
Thespians fiercely pursued those that fled to Thebes. The Corinthians,
Sicyonians and Philasians, and some few others, followed close upon the back of
those that fled with Artabazus. The Lacedaemonians with the rest of the Army,
besieged and assaulted those that were forced within the Wall. The Thebans
receiving those that fled, issued forth, and joined with them against the
Athenians their Pursuers; upon which there was a fierce and bloody Fight before
the City Walls, the Thebans bravely standing to it, so that many were killed on
both sides. But at length the Athenian Courage drove the Thebans back into the
City.

Then the Athenians marched back to the Lacedemonian Camp, and joined with The
Persians Camp forced.
them in assaulting the Persians within the Wall; where the Fight was
maintained with great Obstinacy on both sides; the Barbarians on the one Hand,
within a place of Strength defending themselves with great Courage, and the
Grecians on the other, with all their Might, endeavoring to force the Wall,
the Fight was pursued without regard or fear of Death; so that many were
wounded, and great numbers, with Showers of Darts were there Slain. But neither
the Wall, though strongly Fortified, nor the number of the Barbarians could
withstand the fierce Assault of the Grecians, but whatever was in their way,
they bore down all before them. The Grecian Generals, the Lacedaemonians and
Athenians out of Emulation and desire of Glory, strove to exceed each other,
encouraged both by their former Victories, and pricked forward by their own
natural Valor. At length the Persians Camp was entered and taken by Storm; and
though the Barbarians cried for Quarter, yet they found no Mercy. For Pausanias
considered the great number of the Enemy, insomuch as he was afraid lest
through their Number (which far exceeded the Grecians) some unexpected and
sudden Mischief should happen, and therefore commanded that they should take
no Prisoners. Whereupon an incredible Slaughter was made in a short time, and
was Above 100000 Persians put to the Sword in the Camp.
scarce ended, when more than an Hundred Thousand were already put to the Sword.

When the Battle was ended, the Grecians applied themselves to the Burying of
their Dead, which were above Ten Thousand. Then they divided the Spoil amongst
the Soldiers, and appointed Judgment to be given concerning every thing that
was done with more than ordinary Valor and Courage in that War. By the Decree
of Charitides, amongst the Cities, the greatest Honor was attributed to
Sparta; and amongst the Men to Pausanias.

In the mean time Artabazus with swift Marches passed through Phocis into
Macedonia, with those Forty Thousand Persians that fled with him, and brought
them all over safe into Asia. The Grecians dedicated a Tenth of the Spoils, and
made thereof a Tripode of Gold, and placed it in the Temple of Delphos, and
engraved upon it this Elogy;

The stout Defenders of Great Greece this gave,
From Bondage when its Cities they did save.
And another was Engraven by the common Consent of all, to the Honor of those
Lacedaemonians who died at Thermopyle, in these Words --

Of Pelops Country one Four Thousand brave
Men, to (...), Two Hundred Thousand Myriads. Mistaken it seems. P. 260.
Two Millions base repulse once gave.
And another by a Private Hand thus, --

Good Stranger tell the Spartans here we lie,
Stoutly their Laws while we maintaining dye.
After the same manner did the People of Athens adorn the Sepulchers of those
that fell in the Persian War; and then were first instituted the Funeral Games,
and a Law was then made, that the Valorous Exploits of those that were buried
at the Public Charge of the City, should be thenceforth set out by the best of
their Orators.

Afterward Pausanias the General, causing all his Army to return to their
several Colors, marched against the Thebans, and required the first Authors of
the Defection to the Persians, to be delivered up to Justice. The Thebans being
discouraged both with the Multitude and Valor of their Enemies, the chief
Authors of the Confederacy with the Persians, yielded themselves up to Mercy,
and were all put to the Sword by Pausanias.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Fight with the Persians by the Grecians in Ionia at Mycale.

THE same day that the Battle was fought at Platea, there was another great
Fight with the Persians in Ionia, which I shall relate from the beginning.

Leotychidas the Lacedemonian, and Xanthippus the Athenian Admirals of the
Navy, after the Battle at Salamis, came with their Fleet to Aegina, where
staying some few Days, they failed thence to Delos with Two Hundred and Fifty
Galleys. While they staid there, Ambassadors came to them from Samos,
entreating that they would be assistant to the Inhabitants of Asia, to regain
their Liberty.

Leotychidas hereupon calling a Council of War, it was there determined to
assist them; and to that end, with all speed they loosed from Delos. The
Officers of the Persian Fleet being then in Samos, hearing of the Expedition
the Grecians intended against them, departed from Samos with their whole Fleet,
and came to Mycale in Ionia, and judging themselves not strong enough to
encounter the Grecians, they haled all their Ships ashore, and compassed 'em in
both with a Wall and a deep Trench. And in the mean time, they sent with all
speed for Landforces from Sardis, and other Neighboring Places, so that an
Hundred Thousand Men were presently Mustered together, and they procured all
other things necessary for the War, as far as was possible, being jealous that
the Ionians were ready to revolt.

Leotychidas with his whole Fleet well provided, sailed with a straight Course
against the Barbarians at Mycale, and sent before him a Ship, with an Herald or
Crier in it, one of greater Voice than any of the rest of his Army, and gave
him in charge, that when he approached the Enemy, he should proclaim with a
loud Voice, That the Grecians that had routed the Persians at Platea, were now
at Hand, resolved to restore the Greek Cities in Asia to their Liberty; which
was done by those with Leotychidas, because they conceived that upon the News,
the Grecians in the Army of the Persians would revolt, and great Tumult, and
Disorder would be made amongst them; which happened accordingly.

As soon as the Crier came up to the Persian Fleet, and had executed his
Commands, the Persians grew jealous of the Grecians, and the Grecians began to
consult together of a Revolt. The Officers of the Grecian Fleet having well
debated and considered all things relating to the present Affair, landed their
Forces. The next Day, when all things were ready for the Onset, a Rumor was on
a sudden spread in the Army, that the Grecians had overcome the Persians at
Platea. Upon which, Leotychidas and his Colleagues drew up the Army in a Body,
encouraging them to fight, making use of several Arguments to that purpose, and
withal singing among them Songs of the Victory at Platea, thereby the more to
stir up and inflame their Spirits to the present Encounter. But the
Circumstances of Affairs were then very remarkable; for it is certain both
Armies fought on one and the same Day; the one at Mycale, and the other at
Platea. Therefore since Leotychidas could not then know any thing of the
Victory at Platea, we may conclude that this Report was a Stratagem invented by
him on purpose; especially considering the great distance of Places, the News
could not possibly arrive in P. 261.
so short a time. But the Persians, now no longer confiding in the Grecians,
took away their Arms, and delivered them to their Confederates, and encouraged
their Soldiers, telling them, that Xerxes was at hand with a great Army for
their Assistance, whereby they raised up their Spirits.

Both Armies being now drawn up in Batalia, and advancing one toward the
other, when the Persians saw the inconsiderable Number of the Grecians, they
despised them, and forthwith charged upon them with a great shout. In the mean
time the Samians and Milesians, determined to assist the Grecians, with all the
strength they could make, and to that end with a swift March made toward the
Enemy. And the Ionians conceived that when they came in sight of the Grecians,
they would be thereby more encouraged, which fell out otherwise; for those with
Leotychidas being seized with a pannick Fear, upon the apprehension and
suspicion that Xerxes, was at hand with all his Forces from Sardis, there was
nothing but Confusion and Distraction, through various Surmises and Opinions
amongst them. Some were for retiring forthwith to their Ships, others were for
standing their Ground, and fighting valiantly to the last Man. Whilst they were
in this Terror Disorder and Confusion, the Persian Army advanced in order of
Battle, and in a terrible manner with great shouts fell in upon the Grecians,
who were forced to receive the Charge, having now no time left for further
Consultations. The Battle being now joined, great Courage, and Resolution was
shown on all hands, and a long time the Fortune of the Day was doubtful, and
many fell on both sides. But as soon as the Samian and Milesian Armies
appeared, the Courage of the Grecians was revived, and the Persians so flag'd
and failed that they forthwith fled, and were pursued with a very great
Slaughter; for the Soldiers of Leotychidas and Xanthippus followed them close
at their Heels, to their very Tents. In the mean time the Aeolians and many
other of the Inhabitants of Asia, came in to the assistance of the Grecians
though then almost Conquerours: For a general and ardent desire of Liberty
possessed all the Asian Cities, and therefore many neither regarded Leagues
made, or Hostages given, but together with the other Grecians with the same
Rage hewed down and slew the flying Persians. And thus the Persians, were
routed and dispersed with the slaughter of Forty Thousand Men; of the rest some
of them escaped to their Camp, and others fled to Sardis.

Xerxes being informed both of the Slaughter of his Men at Platea, and of the
routing of his Army at Mycale, leaving part of his Forces to carry on the War,
in a great Fright fled with the rest to Ecbatana.

When all was over, Leotychidas and Xanthippus sailed back to Samos, and then
received the Ionians and Aeolians as their Confederates in the War. And some
time after used many persuasive Arguments to them, to leave Asia, and come over
into Europe, promising them to bestow upon them the Estates of all those that
Ant. Chr. 477.
had confederated themselves with the Persians. For if they continued in Asia,
they would be in continual Alarms by Enemies that far excelled them in
strength, and that were near to them; and that their Friends by reason of the
distance by Sea, could not be assistant to them so opportunely, and at such
Seasons as their Necessity might require. Upon which Promises the Ionians, and
Aeolians were persuaded, and in observance of the Grecians Desires, prepared
themselves to take Shipping for Europe. But the Athenians afterward changing
their Minds, now persuaded them to remain where they were, and faithfully
promised that though now if the rest of Greece should assist them, yet that
they would from time to time, send them aid, as being they who were only
obliged so to do, by reason of their Kindred and Relation to them. For the
Athenians were jealous that if the Ionians settled in new Habitations, by the
common concurrence of the Grecians, they would not for the future own Athens as
their Metropolitan City and place of their Original. Whereupon the Ionians upon
second thoughts determined not to remove out of Asia.

Things thus accomplished, the Grecian Army divided: The Lacedaemonians Olymp.
75. 2. Ant. Chr. 477. Ann. Mund. 3471. P. 262.
sailed back into Laconia; the Athenians with the Ionians and Islanders, made
for Sestos; which Xanthippus the General took at the first Assault; and after
he had put a Garrison into it, and discharged his Confederates, he returned
with his Citizens to Athens. And this was the event and issue of the Medean War
(as it was called) after it had continued for the space of Two Years.

Herodotus the Historian began his History with some things before the War of
Troy, and relates in Nine Books, whatever happened of Moment almost in all
parts of the World; and concludes his History with the Fight at Micale, and the
Herodotus ends his History.
Siege, and taking of Sestos. During these Transactions, the Romans had great
Wars, and shed much Blood amongst the Volsians. Spurius Cassius the Year before
Consul, being convicted of Treason, for aspiring to the Supreme Government, was
put to Death. And these were the things done this Year.

CHAP. V.
The Death and Commendation of Gelo King of Syracuse; and the Rebuilding of
Athens by the Policy of Themistocles.

TImosthenes being Archon or Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Cesus Fabius, and
Lucius Aemilius Mamerchus Roman Consuls, there was a settled Peace throughout
all Sicily; for the strength of Anno Mundi, 3472. Olymp. 75. 3. Ant. Chr. 476.
the Carthaginians was utterly broken, and Gelo governed the Sicilians with
that Justice and Equity, that the Laws flourished in every City, and Plenty
every where abounded. The Syracusians making a Law against extravagant Pomps of
Funerals, Law in Syracuse, against Funeral Pomp.
and not only taking away those usual vast Expenses upon the Dead, but
forbidding all manner of Curiosity upon that account; Gelo willing in all
things to confirm what the People agreed upon, confirmed this new Law by his
own Example; for falling sick, and lying upon his Deathbed, he gave up the
Kingdom to Hiere his eldest Brother, and commanded that the Law should be
strictly kept in reference to his Funeral. After his Death, his Successor in
burying of him, observed his Commands. His Body was laid in his Wife's
Inheritance, within the Nine Towers (as they were called) Places of great and
sumptuous Workmanship.

The whole City accompanied the Body to the Place, which was about (...), Five
and Twenty Miles.
Two Gelo's Funeral
Hundred Stages distant: And the Citizens erected a stately Monument over him,
and commanded he should for ever after be honored with the Honors due to the
Ancient Heroes.

This Monument was in aftertimes destroyed by the Carthagians in their War
against the Syracusians: And the Places called the Nine Towers (through Envy)
were demolished by Agathocles. But yet neither Ante Chr. 476.
the Hatred of the Carthaginians, nor the Envy of Agathocles, The Commendation
of Gelo and them that rule well.
nor the Force nor Fraud of any other Person, was able to eclipse the Glory of
Gelo. For History has justly preserved his Fame, and will for ever hand it down
to Posterity. For as it is just, and tending much to correct the Irregularities
of Humane Conversation, to fix a Brand and Mark of Disgrace upon those that
have used their Power wickedly and mischievously, so on the other hand, it is
as just to perpetuate the Memory of those who have ruled justly and honorably
to the good of others. For this will be an Inducement to Men to behave
themselves so, as to merit Commendation from those that come after them. Gelo
reigned only Six Years: Hiero his Brother and Heir, Eleven Years and Eight
Months.

After the Victory at Platea, the Athenians brought back their Wives and
Children The Athenians repair their Walls.
from Troezen and Salamis to Athens, and forthwith set upon the Repairing of
their Walls, and spared neither Cost nor Pains in that, nor in any other thing
necessary for their Defense.

But the Lacedaemonians considering that the Athenians had much advanced their
Reputation by their Strength at Sea, fearing lest they should grow too strong,
determined to forbid the building of their The Lacedaemonians endeavor to
hinder the building of the Walls of Athens.
Walls; and therefore sent Ambassadors with all speed to Athens, to let them
know, that it was not for the common good and interest of Greece, that Athens
should be walled; for if Xerxes should make upon them a Second Invasion with
fresh and greater Forces, if he should gain Cities out of Peloponesus ready
walled, he might from thence, as out of Forts and Castles, make sudden
Incursions upon them, and thereby with ease subdue the Grecians. But when the
Ambassadors were not much regarded, they imperiously commanded the Carpenters
and Smiths to P. 263.
cease from the Work. Whereupon the Athenians not knowing what to resolve
Themistocles his Stratagem to build the Walls of Athens.
upon, Themistocles (who was then in great Favor and Authority) advised them,
that they should not at present make any Noise or Stir about the matter. For if
they should contend, the Lacedaemonians would easily hinder them in the Work, by
making an Inrode upon them with the Forces of Peloponesus. But he intimated to
the Senate privately, that he (with such others, as they should appoint) would
go as Ambassadors to the Lacedaemonians, and there argue the Case with them
concerning the Fortification of the City. And he gave in charge to the
Magistrates, that if any Ambassadors came from Lacedemon, they should detain
them till his return from thence; and in the mean time they should with the
assistance of the whole City go on with the Work, and that was the very way (he
told them) to effect their Design.

The Athenians all approved of his Advice, and Themistocles with those joined
in Embassy with him, set forth for Sparta. In the mean time the People of
Athens set upon the Work with might and main, sparing neither House nor
Sepulcher for Materials: Women and Children, Strangers and Servants were all
employed, and none permitted to be idle. The Work went on beyond expectation,
and through the multitude of Hands, and diligence of those employed, advanced
to Admiration; which being noised abroad, the Lacedaemonians were very hot with
Themistocles concerning the Fortifying of the City. But he denied all, and
wished them not rashly to believe every little Story spread Abroad, but rather
to send some faithful Messengers, who might bring them a certain account of the
truth, how Matters went; and for further Assurance, he delivered up himself and
his Associats as Hostages to the Spartans.

The Lacedaemonians at present pacified and persuaded by what Themistocles Ante
Chr. 476.
had said, took him and his Associates into Custody, and forthwith sent some of
the chief of the Citizens to Athens, to make strict inquiry and observation how
Affairs were. In the mean time, the Athenians in a short space, advanced their
Walls to their just height. The Spartan Ambassadors as soon as they entered into
Athens, being very turbulent, and sharply threatening the Athenians for what
they had done, they committed them all to Prison, declaring they should not be
set at Liberty, till Themistocles and the rest of their Ambassadors were sent
Home. By this Trick the Laconians being deluded, were forced to redeem their
own Ambassadors by the discharge of the Athenians. And this Policy of
Themistocles in procuring the walling of the City, both with effectual speed
and safety, purchased the great Love and Honor of the Citizens.

Whilst these things were acting in Greece, the Romans made War upon the
Tuscans, and got a great Victory, with the Slaughter of many of their Enemies,
and afterward took Tusculum by Storm, and reduced the City of the Esculaneans.

CHAP. VI.
The enlarging of the Haven at Athens by Themistocles. The Treason of
Pausanias, and the Justice of Aristides.

AT the end of the Year, Adimantus was chosen Archon of Athens, and Fabius
Vibulanus, and L. Valerius were Consuls of Rome. At this time Themistocles for
his excellent Government and ingenuity in state Policy, was in great esteem,
not only at Athens, but over all Olymp. 75. 4. Ante Chr. 475.
Greece. Being hereby encouraged, he made it his Business (by further and
greater Services) to enlarge the Bounds and Ann. Mund. 3473.
Sovereignty of his Country: For confidering that there was no Haven at the
Pyreum, and the Athenians were forced to Themistocles his Project to enlarge
the Haven Pyreum at Athens.
make use of Phaleron for their Port, which was strait and incommodious, he
contrived to turn that into an Harbor, which would require the least Charge,
and yet would be the most beautiful and spacious Haven in all Greece, which
being accomplished, he hoped would conduce to the making the Athenians Masters
of the Seas; who then had a great Fleet, and were famous for their many
Victories at Sea.

By this means he hoped the Ionians (being defcended from the same Ancestors)
P. 264.
would be brought over to them, and so by their Assistance he should be able to
restore all the Grecians in Asia to their Liberty, and thereby for ever oblige
them to be Friends to the Athenians.

Moreover he concluded that the Islanders moved with the Athenians strength at
Sea, would presently join with them, who were judged Persons that might be of
great advantage or prejudice to them. And he very well understood that the
Lacedaemonians were very considerable at Land, but understood little of
Sea-Affairs; but yet he kept all private to himself, being assured that the
Lacedaemonians would never suffer it to be done.

Therefore in a Public Assembly, he told the Citizens that he had found out
Ant. Chr. 475.
something of very great moment and advantage to the Commonwealth; but that it
was not at present expedient to make it public; being of that nature, that the
fewer that were acquainted, the better; and therefore wished the People to
choose Two whom they could best trust, to whom he would discover the whole
Design.

The People hereupon chose Two, Aristides and Xanthippus, not only because they
were Men of Integrity and honest Principles, but that they emulated
Themistocles, and secretly envied him for the Glory and Reputation he had
amongst the People. When they had privately heard what he had designed, and his
Reasons, they made report unto the Assembly, that what Themistocles had
contrived, was not only great, but of extraordinary advantage to the
Commonwealth, and with ease to be effected. The People were presently taken
with great admiration of the Man; and yet as soon struck with a suspicion, lest
by these Inventions and great Designs, he aimed at the Sovereignty. Therefore
they commanded he should forthwith discover his Purposes. But he told them
again and again, that it was not for the public good openly to reveal them.

The People now more admiring the Courage and Constancy of the Man, commanded
him to reveal the business to the Senate privately; and if the Senate did judge
that it was a matter feasible, and of certain advantage to the Public, then
whatever was necessary for the Execution of his Design should be granted to
him. Upon which, when he had informed the Senate of the particulars, and when
upon the Relation, all was judged both easy, and of highest Concern and
Advantage to the Commonwealth, every thing at length was granted to him which
he desired (in order to the effecting of his Design) with the approbation and
consent of the People.

The Assembly then broke up with great admiration of Themistocles, every Ant.
Chr. 475.
one expecting what would be the issue of their Counsels. And now being
furnished with all things necessary, both as to Men and Money, he contrived how
to delude the Lacedaemonians a Second time; for he was assured, that as they had
opposed the repairing of the Walls, so they would with all their power and
might obstruct the making of the Port.

He sent therefore Ambassadors to Sparta, who should let them know how much it
tended to the advantage of Greece, in case of future Invasions by the Grecians,
to have in some Place or other a commodions Haven. By this Contrivance giving a
check and stop to any hasty opposition by the Lacedaemonians, he forthwith sets
upon the Work. And all Hands being employed in the business, the Port was
finished upon a sudden, and beyond all expectation. Then he advised the People
that they would add Twenty Galleys more every Year to the Fleet they had, and
that they would privilege with freedom from all Impositions all Strangers and
Artificers, that by that means both the City might become Populous, and store
of Workmen and Tradesmen might be had with little pains; for he conceived both
necessary, not only for the increase, but the support of their power at Sea:
And thus the Athenians were employed.

The Lacedaemonians now commanded Pausanias who was their General at Platea, to
free the Greek Cities from the Persian Garrisons which still remained amongst
them; whereupon he sailed from Peloponesus Pausanias ordered to free the
Grecian Cities from the Persians. Ante Chr. 475. P. 265.
(with Fifty Galleys, and from Athens with Thirty, of which Aristides was
Admiral) to Cyprus, and there delivered the Cities from the Garrisons that were
fixed amongst them. Thence sailing back to the Hellespont, he took Byzantium,
then under the Persian Yoke, and freed the City; some of the Barbarians being
put to the Sword, and others taken Prisoners; amongst whom, some of the
Persians of great Quality were taken and delivered to the care and custody of
Gongylus of Eretria, under pretense to reserve them for Punishment, but in
truth to return them safe to Xerxes: For he had contracted a private
Confederacy with the King, and was to marry the King's Daughter for his Reward,
in undertaking to betray Greece. All these Matters were transacted by
Messengers and Interpreters between him and Artabazus the Persian General, who
secretly fed Pansanias with Money, with which he corrupted such Grecians as
were for his Purpose.

But the Treason was discovered, and the Author fell under just Punishment in
Pausanias his Treason.
this manner: Giving himself up to Persian Luxury and Excess, and carrying it
with great Insolency and Tyranny toward those that were committed to his
Charge, all highly resented his Pride and Haughtiness, especially those that
had born any Office and place of Magistracy in the Commonwealth. The Soldiers
therefore every where murmuring, and in all their Meetings, complaining one
Ant. Chr. 475.
to another of these things, and of the Pride and Tyranny of Pausanias, the
Peloponesians at length deserted him, and returned into their own Country, and
sent Messengers to Sparta, to accuse him.

But Aristides the Athenian making use of the present occasion in all public
Meetings and Assemblies, stirred up the Cities, and by fair and smooth Words so
far wrought, as to prevail with them to put themselves under the Protection of
the Athenians. And that which helped forward the matter to the advantage of the
Athenians was this that follows. Pausanias had agreed with Artabazus, that he
should not suffer any to return that brought him Letters from himself, lest
their Intreagues should be discovered: Whereupon all such Messengers were
killed to prevent their Return; which being taken notice of, and suspected by
One Argilius his Catamite. Cornel. Nep.
one employed in that Affair, he opened the Letters delivered to him, and by
the Contents being now confirmed in his former Opinion of the Destruction of
the other Letter-Carriers, he delivered the Letters to the Ephori; who not
being fully satisfied of the truth by those Letters which were very dark; but
insisting upon further and clearer Evidence, the Messenger told them he would
find out a way how they might convict him of his Treason, by Testimony out of
his own Mouth.

Whereupon the Messenger forthwith went to Tenarus, to pay his Devotion in the
Temple of Neptune, where he wrought a double A Room with a Partition built in
some part of the Ground belonging to the Temple; for the Greek Word is Hiero,
which is the Temple or any of the Consecrated Ground. The Word Temenos, is
properly the Temple it self.
Tent, one within another, within one of which were concealed The manner of the
Discovery of Pausanias his Treason.
some of the Ephori and other Spartans. Pausanias hastens thither, and inquires
of him, what was the ground and cause of his Earnestness in his Addresses; who
complained, that he by his Letters had determined his Death notwithstanding his
Innocence. Upon which, Pausanias declared he was very sorry for what he had
done, and begged his Pardon, and entreated him to conceal the matter, and
promised he would bountifully reward him: And so they parted.

But the Ephori and those with them took little notice at that time of the
business; but a while after, the Lacedaemonians with the authority of the
Ephori, consulted together to seize him, and bring him to his Trial; which he
foreseeing, fled to the Temple of Minerva Chalcidica.

The Lacedaemonians being at a stand, whether it were lawful for them to force
him out of the Temple, it is said his Mother went thither, and placed a Tile she
brought with her before the Gate of the Temple, and without doing or saying any
other thing, returned to her own House; which when the Lacedaemonians understood
(according to the Mother's Sentence) they made up the Gate of the Temple, and
by this means he was famished to Death. His Body indeed was delivered to his
Friends to be buried; but the Deity was highly incensed for the Violation of
the Sanctuary: For when the Spartans went to enquire P. 266.
at the Oracle of Delphos, concerning some other matters, they were commanded
to restore the Suppliant to the Goddess: Which Command being impossible for
them to observe, there were many and great Consultations among 'em what was
best to be done. At length they came to this Resolve, to set up and dedicate
Two Brazen Statues of Pausanias in the Temple of Minerva, which was done
accordingly.

And now according to our usual manner, through the whole Course of our
History, as we have used to advance the just Praises of them that were virtuous
The Censure of Pausanias.
and deserving, and on the other hand, to perpetuate the dishonorable Actions
(after their Deaths) of such as acted wickedly, so we shall not let pass the
detestable Malice and Treason of Pausanias, without Censure. For who could not
but admire the madness of this Man? who after his Victory obtained at Platea,
and by other noble Actions, being grown so deservedly famous and popular among
Ante Chr. 475.
the the Grecians, did not only neglect to preserve what honor and authority
he had gained, but in a sordid manner (thirsting after the Riches and
effeminate Delights of the Persians,) wickedly stained all his former Glory by
Treason. Grown proud by success, he grew weary of the plain Laconian way of
Living, and gave himself up to the Luxury, Voluptuousness, and softness of the
Persians, whom it less became of all other Men to imitate. For he knew (not by
relation from others) but by his own Experience, how much the severe Discipline
of his own Country did exceed the soft Manners of the other, as to the
advancement of Virtue and Courage: And therefore his Treason not only brought
upon himself just punishment, but likewise was the occasion that all his fellow
Citizens were deprived of the Admiralty at Sea.

For the great care and integrity of Aristides in the management of Martial
Affairs being taken notice of, as likewise his Courtesy and Moderation toward
all All submit to Aristides.
that were under his Command (and that managed with an apparent demonstration
of all manner of Virtuons Qualities) all with one consent chose to subject
themselves to the Athenians. The Captains and Officers therefore sent from
Sparta, no longer regarding Pausanias, but all admiring Aristides, submitted in
every thing to him, by which means he got the Sovereignty of the Sea without
Blows.

Aristides therefore forthwith propounds to his Confederates, That it might be
decreed by the general Consent of the People in their Public Assemblies, that
from thenceforth a common Fond or Treasury should be appointed at Delos, where
all the Money collected for public Service should be kept. In pursuance of
which Counsel, for the better managing of the War against the Persians
(wherewith they were then threatened) all the Cities were commanded to
contribute Aristides his Justice.
according to their several Abilities; which was so liberally done, as the Sum
amounted to no less than Five Hundred and Sixty Talents; which he so equally
and justly disposed of (being made Lord Treasurer) that he gained the entire
consent and approbation of all the Cities to whatsoever he thought fit to be
done.

And now having accomplished that, which above all other things seemed to be
most difficult; for his Justice and Integrity, he got the Name of Aristides the
Just. And so the very same time that Pausanias by his Wickedness deprived his
Citizens of the chief Command at Sea, Aristides by his Virtue gained for the
Athenians that Sovereignty which they never had before. And these were the
Actions of this Year.

CHAP. VII.
Hiero King of Sicily prepares to besiege Agrigentum; discovers the Treason of
them of Himera to Thero their Prince. Expells the Cateneans and Naxians.

WHen Phedon was Archon of Athens, the Seventy Sixth Olympiad was performed,
Olymp. 76. Ant. Chr. 474.
in which Scamander of Mitylene was Victor; the Consuls of Rome were Cesus
Fabius and Spur. Furius Medullinus. About this time died Leotichidas King of
Sparta, in the Two and Twentieth Year of his Reign, to whom succeeded
Archilaus, who reigned Two and Forty Years. At the same time died Anaxilaus
King of Rhegium, and Zancles after he had governed Eighteen Years, and Micychus
(a faithful Trustee) was admitted into the Government, upon Condition that he
should restore all to the Children of the deceased King when they P. 267.
came of Age.

Hiero King of Syracuse, after the Death of Gelo, had a jealous Eye toward
Hiero King of Syracuse.
his Brother Polyzelus, because of his great Interest and Esteem among the
People; and therefore contrived how to take him out of the way; to which end,
he imploys all Mercenaries and Strangers about him for his Guard, judging that
to be the surest way for the keeping Possession of the Kingdom.

And when the A People of Sybaris in Greece.
Sybarites were besieged by the A People of Croton in Italy.
Crotonites, and desired assistance from him, he raised a great Army, and
committed the charge of the War to Polyzelus, with a purpose that he might fall
in the Battle. But Polyzelus suspecting the Design, refused the Command; at
which the King fell into a great Rage against his Brother, who fled to Thero
King of Agrigentum; whereupon Hiero makes all preparation Ante Chr. 474.
and speed to besiege them both.

In the mean time, Thrasideus the Son of Thero being Governor of Himera, by
Thrasideus his Oppression.
his harsh and severe Government, quite lost the Hearts of the People. But they
not daring to complain to his Father, (not looking upon him as an impartial
Judge) sent Ambassadors to Hiero, with great Accusations against Thrasideus,
and offer both to deliver up their City, and to assist him against Thero. But
Hiero (judging it better for his purpose to deal with Thero in a calm and
peaceable manner) secretly betrays the Himerians and their Plots against him.
All things being made apparent and plain, Thero is not only reconciled to
Hiero, but likewise The Treason of the Himerians discovered by Hiero. Hiero
expels the Cataneans.
restores Polyzelus to his Brother's former Love and Favor, and puts to death
many of the Traitors of Himera.

About the same time Hiero expelled the Cataneans and Naxians from their own
Country, and planted the Cities with new Colonies of Five Thousand Men out of
Peloponesus, and as many from Syracuse, and called Catana Aetna; and
distributed not only the Country of Catana, but many large Tracts adjoining, by
Lot amongst the Citizens, which were Ten Thousand. And this he did, both to
have Succors at hand upon any Pressing occasion, and likewise that he might be
honored after his Death, as the Founder of so great a City, (wherein were
contained Ten Thousand Inhabitants. The Cataneans and Naxians he transplanted
into the City of the Leontines, commanding them to abide there in common
freedom with the rest of the Inhabitants.

Thero in like manner considering how Himera was in a great measure
depopulated, planted the Doreans there, and ordered that whosoever would,
should be enrolled Citizens of that Place. These governed the Commonwealth with
great Commendation for the space of Fifty Eight Years: Not long after which
time, the Carthaginians razed the City to the Ground, which has continued
ruined and in its Rubbish to this Day.

CHAP. VIII.
The Lacedaemonians quarrel with the Athenians for the Dominion of the Sea.

WHen Dromoclides was Archon of Athens, and Marcus Fabius, and Caius Manlius
Olymp. 76. 2. Anno Mund. 3497. Ant. Chr. 473.
Consuls of Rome, the Lacedaemonians were highly concerned for their loss of the
Sovereignty of the Sea, and therefore being greatly exasperated against the
Grecians, who had deserted them, they breathed out Revenge, with just
Indignation against them. A General Council therefore being called, they
advised together concerning War to be proclaimed against the Athenians, in
order to the Recovery of their Dominion at Sea: And in several other Assemblies
of the People, most of them (especially the Young Men) were very hot and eager
for the War, vaunting every where how rich they should be if they succeeded in
their Design, and how all would be encouraged in the Service of their Country,
when every private Family has had such advantages and occasions to enrich and
advance themselves.

And they called to mind an old Prophecy from the Oracle, which bid them P.
268.
beware of having but an half Empire, which could signify nothing else (as
they alleged) but the present Circumstances they were in. For being there were
Two Sovereignties, the one at Land, and the other at Sea, if they lost the one,
they must needs be Masters but of a Lame Government.

The whole City almost being of the Opinion for a War, the matter was again
referred to the Senate, supposing none would dare to contradict the general
Sense of the Citizens. But one of the Senators, of the Family of Hercules, Ant.
Chr. 473.
called Hetaemaridas, (a Man of great Esteem among the Citizens for his Virtue)
advised quite otherwise, and declared his Opinion that they should suffer the
Athenians quietly to enjoy the Dominion of the Sea, for that it was not the
Custom of the Commonwealth of Sparta, to contend about that Sovereignty. And
urging many Reasons for the confirmation of his Opinion (which was not at first
very grateful) he at length prevailed both with the Senate and People to wave
the War. And so it was concluded, according to his Advice, as most advantageous
to desist.

The Athenians at the first were in great fear of a bloody War with the
Spartans about this Command at Sea, and therefore they built many Galleys for
that purpose, and provided a great Mass of Treasure, and sought to gain all
their Neighbors and Confederates with the greatest Demonstrations of kindness
and courtesy imaginable. But hearing of what was resolved and determined by
the Lacedaemonians, all fear of War being now vanished, they wholly bent their
Minds to advance the power and greatness of their City.

CHAP. IX.
Hiero breaks the power of the Hetruscans by Sea.

WHen Acestoridas was Archon of Athens, and Cesus Fabius, and T. Virginius
Olymp. 76. 3. An. Mu. 3498. Ante Chr. 472.
Consuls of Rome, at that time Hiero King of Syracuse (at the Request of the
Citizens of Cuma in Italy by their Ambassadors who were greatly annoyed by the
Hetruscans) sent a considerable Fleet to their Assistance, who joining Battle
with the Hetruscans of Tyrenia, in a Sea Fight sunk several of their Ships, and
obtained a complete Victory, and so the power of the Hetruscans being broken,
they returned to Syracuse.

CHAP. X.
The War between the Tarentines and the Japigians.

MEnon being Archon of Athens, L. Aemilius Mamercus, and C. Cornelius L^ntulus,
Consuls of Rome, broke out a War between the Tarentines and the Olymp. 76. 4.
Ant. Chapter 471.
Japiges, concerning the Limits of their Lands. At the first there were but
little Skirmishes, and taking Booties one from another: But the Enmity
increasing by degrees, and in the mean time Slaughters being committed far and
near on both sides, at length it broke out into open War. The Japiges, of their
Citizens and Confederates, bring into the Field above Twenty Thousand Men. The
Tarentines understanding the great Preparation made against them, both with
their own Citizens and Confederates of Rhegium, likewise take the Field. A
bloody Battle was fought, and after many killed on both sides, at length the
Japiges became absolute Victors; and in the Pursuit, the Tarentines were
scattered, and broken into Two Parties, whereof one fled back toward Tarentum,
the other were furiously driven toward Rhegium. The Japiges likewise divided
themselves into Two Parties, of which, the one pursued close upon the back of
the Tarentines; and in regard the distance of Place was but very small, there
was a very great Slaughter made. The other Party so hotly pursued them of
Rhegium, that they fell in pell-mell with them into the City, and so took and
possessed it.

CHAP. XI.
The Death of Thero Prince of Agrigentum, and the Tyranny of his Son
Thrasydeus, who Abdicated the Government, and killed himself. Three Hundred of
the Family of the Fabii slain at one time.

THE next Year, Chares was Archon at Athens, and at Rome, Titus Memius, and P.
296.
Caius Horatius were Consuls. Then were celebrated the Olympian Games at Elis,
being the Seventy. Seventh Olympiad, An. Mund. 3500. Olymp. 77. 1.
in which Dancles of Argos was Victor. About this Ant. Chr. 470.
time, Thero King of Agrigentum died, in the Sixteenth Year Thero King of
Agrigentum died.
of his Reign, and Thrasydeus his Son succeeded.

Thero governed with great Moderation and Justice, and The Commendation of
Thero.
therefore was greatly loved and honored by his Subjects: And at his Death was
reverenced as a Divine Hero; but his Son even in his Father's Lifetime,
appeared to be of a violent and bloody Disposition.

And after his Father's Death, throwing aside all restraint of the Laws, he
ruled arbitrarily and tyrannically: For which Thrasideus King of Agrigentum his
Cruelty.
reason his Subjects combined against him, as one not fit to be entrusted with
the Government, and perfectly hated by all. Ant. Chr. 470.
And therefore within a little time after he came to an end suitable to his
Deserts.

For after the Death of his Father, he raised a great Army of Mercenaries, and
of his own Subjects of Agrigentum and Himera, to the number of above Twenty
Thousand Horse and Foot, and with these went against the Syracusians. But Hiero
furnished with a considerable Army, The Fight of the Agregentines and
Syracusians.
wasted the Borders of Agrigentum, and after joined Battle with the Enemy, in
which most of the Grecians on both sides being drawn up one against another,
were slain. But the Syracusians got the Day, with the loss of Two Thousand Men;
of the other side were killed above Four Thousand.

Thrasideus by this ill Success, perplexed in his Mind, Abdicated his
Government, and fled to the Megarians called Miseans, and being there condemned
to Dye, slew himself. The Agrigentines after Thrasideus abdicates the
Government, and kills himself.
they had restored and settled their Democratical Government, sent an Ambassador
to Hiero, to strike up a Peace. At the same time in Italy, the Romans had War
with the Veians, and in a great Battle at Cremera were routed; and amongst
others, Three Hundred of the Fabii, all of one Family, were slain every Man.
And these were the Affairs and Events of this Year.

CHAP. XII.
The Malice of the Lacedaemonians against Themistocles, and his Banishment. His
Praise.

THE next Year Praxiergus being Archon of Athens, Aulus Virgilius Tricostus,
An. Mu. 3500. Olymp. 77. 2. Ante Chr. ^^9.
and C. Servilius, Roman Consuls; the Eleans who before lived dispersed in
several little Villages, now imbody'd themselves into one City, called Elis.
The Lacedaemonians observing how Sparta was contemned and evil spoken of by
reason of the Treachery of Pausanias, and how the Name of Athens grew famous
for their Loyalty and Faithfulness one to another, endeavored all they could
to stain the Athenians with the same Blot of Ignominy. And therefore for as
much as Themistocles was a Man of great Repute and Esteem amongst the
Athenians, they accuse him of Treason, as if he consulted with Pausanias how
Themistocles accused.
to betray Greece to Xerxes. And the more to provoke the Enemies of
Themistocles, and to stir them up to accuse him, they made use both of Bribes
and false Insinuations, affirming that Pausanias discovered his Treasonable
Design of betraying Greece unto Themistocles, and solicited him to join with
him both in Counsel and aid other ways: But though Themistocles would not then
agree to do that, yet he did not look upon himself obliged to discover his
Friend. However (notwithstanding the Potency of his Adversaries) Themistocles
was clearly acquitted, Themistocles acquitted.
and his Name grew more famous amongst the Athenians, for he was greatly
beloved by the Citizens for the former eminent Services he had done the
Commonwealth. But afterward (when by reason of his Popularity, he became
suspected by some, and envied by others) unmindful of his former Deserts) they
determined both to weaken his Authority, and to bring down the height of his
Spirit. In the first place therefore, they Banished him the City, by the
Judgment of Ostracism. This Themistocles Banished. P. 270.
Law was instituted at Athens, after the Tyrants were expelled out of the City
by Pisistratus: And the Law was thus; Every Citizen writ the Name of him in a
Shell, whom they The Law of Ostracism.
most suspected to be in a capacity. (by reason of his Power and Interest) to
overturn the Popular Government; and he whose Name was writ in most of the
Shells, was forthwith Banished for the space of Five Years. And this Law was
used at Athens, not so much as a punishment for any particular Ant. Chr. 469.
Offense, as to humble the Spirits of proud and aspiring Men, and by their
Banishment to reduce them to more Moderation and Submission.

Themistocles thus banished from his Country, went to Argos; which when known
by the Lacedaemonians (supposing now they had a fair opportunity to ruin him,)
they sent again Ambassadors to Athens, to accuse him as being in Conspiracy
with Pausanias in his Treason; alleging that those Injuries which did concern
all Greece in general, should not be determined by the Athenians only, but by a
Common Council of Greece, which was wont upon such occasions to be assembled at
Sparta. Themistocles considering that the Lacedaemonians were resolved to expose
the Athenians to Shame and Contempt, and that they of Athens were as ready to
oppose them, in defending their Country against the Crime objected, he
concluded that the matter concerning him, would be agreed to be heard in a
Common and General Assembly of the Grecians at Sparta: And he had had
experience, that the Lacedaemonians were guided more by Interest and Favor,
than by the Rules of Justice, as by a late Experiment was apparent in a
Judgment they lately gave, in a Cause between them of Argos and Athens: For
they that were Judges in that Assembly, were so envious against the Athenians,
that though the Athenians provided more Ships for the late War, than all the
Grecians beside; Ant. Chr. 469.
yet they judged them worthy of no more Honor than any of the rest of the
Greeks: For these Reasons he judged it not advisable to trust to that Assembly
at Sparta; for from his late defense made at Athens, they took occasion to
renew their Accusation; for in his Justification he had confessed he had
received Letters from Pausanias, to persuade him to join with him in his
Treason, conceiving this would be a strong Argument for the support of his
Innocence; in as much as it might be concluded, that Pausanias would never have
used such earnest entreaty, unless he had before disallowed of Pausanias his
Treasonable Designs.

For these Reasons, Themistocles fled to Admeius King of the Of Epirus.
Themistocles flies to the Molossians.
Molossians, and at his Court humbly prayed for Protection. The King at the
first received him courteously, and promised that he would take care of his
safety: But when the Lacedaemonians sent some of the Nobility to him to demand
Themistocles, calling him Traitor, and the ruin of Greece, and denouncing War
against the King by all the Grecians, unless he did deliver him: The King at
length moved with their Threats, and yet pitying his late Suppliant on the one
hand, and desiring to avoid the imputation of ignominy, of harboring a Traitor
on the other hand, advised Themistocles with all speed to be gone as privately
as he could, and furnished him with a great Sum of Money for his support in his
Flight. Having received the Money, and all other Supplies necessary, provided
by the King for Ant. Chr. 469.
him, he fled in the Night from the Molossians, and finding Two Young Merchants
of Liguria, who were well acquainted with the Voyage, he fled with them, and by
the advantage of the Night, and the unwearied care and industry of the Two
Young Men, he deceived the Lacedaemonians, and came safe into Asia, Themistocles
flies into Asia.
where he had a special Friend called Lysithedas, a Man of great wealth and
interest, and with him he abode. This Man was in great favor with Xerxes the
Persian P. 271.
King, and had nobly entertained his whole Army as they passed that way: By
which means he became very familiar and endeared to the King. The Man pitying
the present condition of Themistocles, endeavored all he could to prefer him,
and promised to do him all the service that was in his power.

But when Themistocles desired him to bring him to the King; he at first
refused, alleging if he did, the King would take off his Head, because he had
done so much Mischief to the Persians. Yet when he found that Themistocles was
in earnest and pressing, he yielded to him, and in a short time, procured him a
safe Conduct into Persia. It was a Custom there, that when any of the King's
Concubines Themistocles conveyed into Persia.
were brought to him, they were carried in a Chariot close covered, and it was
not lawful for any, either to spy or inquire who was so carried. Lysitheidas
made use of this to effect what he designed, for he procured a Chariot
sumptuously adorned with Flags and Streamers, and put Themistocles into it, and
with all secrecy brought him safe to the King; who had first promised
Lysitheidas Ante Chr. 469.
in private, that none should do him any Injury. After he came into the King's
presence, and in an elegant and fluent Discourse, had satisfied him, that he
had not been any ways injurious to the Persians, he was fairly discharged and
acquitted. And being thus safe by the favor of an Enemy, he fell presently
into a new and far greater danger, which was thus --

Mandona, the Daughter of Darius that destroyed the Magi, and Sister of Xerxes,
The further danger Themistocles fell into.
was of high esteem among the Persians; she lost all her Children in the
Sea Fight, where the Persians were routed; which she could not bear without
great trouble, which moved all to pity her: She hearing that Themistocles was
come to Court, in a Mourning Habit, and with many Tears, petitioned the King
her Brother, that he would kill Themistocles; but not being able to prevail,
she solicited the Nobility to the same purpose, and at length raised a
tumultuous Multitude, to demand Justice against him; who rushed with great
Clamours and Noise into the Palace, crying out for Justice against
Themistocles. The King told the Nobility, that he would call a Senate, and
whatever they ordered should be effected. Themistocles had time sufficient
given him to prepare for his Trial; within which time he perfectly learnt the
Persian Language, and did so manage and plead his own Cause before the Senate,
that he was acquitted both of Guilt and Themistocles delivered.
Punishment.

The King rejoiced at his Discharge, and honored him with many rich Gifts: For
he gave to him in Marriage a Virtuous Persian Lady, of Noble Birth, and
excellent Beauty: And ordered him many Servants to wait upon him, and gave him
all sorts of drinking Vessels, and Ant. Chr. 469. The King of Persia's Bounty
to Themistocles.
things for daily use, not only for necessity, but for delight and pleasure. He
bestowed likewise upon him, Three Cities for his Support and Maintenance:
Magnesia near the River Meander (the richest City of Asia for Corn) to provide
him Bread. Mynutes for Meat and Victuals, being near the Sea, where much Fish
was caught; and Lampsacus full of Vines for his Drink.

Themistocles now free from all fear of the Grecians (by whom he was
undeservedly banished after all the good Services he had done for them, and
richly provided for by them, whom he had afflicted with grievous Slaughters,)
lived in these Cities with great plenty of all things. At length he died at
Magnesia, Themistocles his Death.
where he was Buried, and a Sumptuous Monument there set up for him, which
remains to this day.

Xerxes longed to renew the War against Greece, and required Themistocles to P.
272.
be General of the Army: Who assented, upon Condition that Xerxes would swear
that he would not undertake the War without him. Upon which a Bull was
sacrifi'd, and at the Solemnity the King swore accordingly. Then Themistocles
drunk off a Cup of the Bull's Blood, and immediately fell down Dead.

Thus was Xerxes diverted, and Themistocles (by the manner of his Death) left
behind him a remarkable Evidence of his Sincerity in the Management of the
Affairs of his Country.

And now we are come to the Death of the bravest Man amongst the Grecians, of
whom it may be justly doubted whether he fled to the Persians, with Ant. Chapter
469. The Praise of Themistocles.
the stain of any Guilt or Treachery against his Country, but rather believed
that the Athenians and the rest of the Grecians, ungrateful for all the good
Services he had done, forced him most unjustly into extreme Hardships and
Dangers. For if we impartially and without Envy, examine the Temper and Actions
of the Man, we cannot but judge him in every respect, to be the bravest and
most accomplished Person of any we have before mentioned. Therefore it may be
justly admired, that the Athenians should wilfully deprive themselves of so
excellent a Person: For when Sparta was in greatest power above all the other
Cities, and Eurybiades the Spartan was High Admiral of the Fleet, who but he by
his Counsels and Management, robbed all the Spartans of their Glory? Whom have
we ever heard of that by one Action did accomplish that which advanced his
Honor above all Generals, and his City above all Greece, and Greece it self
above all the Barbarians? What General ever had less Advantages, and yet
subject to greater and more eminent Dangers? Who ever obtained so glorious a
Victory, opposing the combined strength of all Asia, with the Citizens of a
poor ruined City? Who ever advanced his Country to such a height and extent of
Power by his honorable Actions in time of Peace? Who ever so preserved his
Ant. Chapter 469.
Country in the greatest heat of a devouring War? By one well laid Stratagem of
pulling down a Bridge, he ruined the Enemies Landforces, causing them to
divide one half from the other, and by that means making it more easy for the
Grecians to destroy the rest. Therefore if we seriously consider the things
done by him, and exactly and particularly examine them, it will evidently
appear, that he was most unworthily dealt with by a City that he had by his
Virtue and Valor advanced to the highest pitch of Glory; and that that City
which was esteemed and reputed the Justest and Wisest, was to him most Cruel
and Unjust.

Though this may seem a long digression in the praise of Themistocles, yet we
conceived it an inexcusable neglect, slightly to pass over his excellent and
incomparable Virtues. During these Times, Micythus Prince of Rhegium, and
Zancles built Teuxuntum in Italy.

CHAP. XIII.
Cymon the Athenian General, gains many Places for the Athenians; routs the
Persians by a Stratagem at Eurymedentum.

DEmotion or Dromodides being Archon at Athens, the Romans chose P. Valerius
Olym. 77. 3. Ant. Chapter 468.
Publicola, and Naulius Rufus Consuls.

During the Government of Demotion, the Athenians chose Cymon, the Son of
Miltiades, to be their General, and with a great Army commanded him to pass
Cymon General of the Athenians.
over into Asia, to aid the Confederate Cities, and to free them that were as
yet garrisoned by the Persians. He came with a Fleet to Bizantium, and took the
City Eion from the Persians; and forced Scyrus, where the Pelasgi and Delopes
inhabited; and appointing one amongst the Athenians to see the Repair of it, he
divided the Country by Lot.

From hence (with his Mind and Thoughts full of great Projects) he sailed back
Ant. Chapter 468.
to the Pyreum, and being furnished with more Ships and sufficient Provision,
he puts forth again with a Navy of two hundred Sail.

At length with the Ionians, and other Confederates, he got together a Fleet
Cymon's Victory both by Sea and Land.
of three hundred Sail, and made for Caria. And when he came there, all the
Grecian Cities upon the Seacoast, immediately revolted from the Persians. The
rest (which were filled with the natural Inhabitants, and with Persian
Garrisons) P. 273.
Cymon took by Storm. All being thus brought under his Power in Caria, Lycia
wholly submitted and came under his Protection. By those that came in to the
Athenians the Fleet was greatly increased. Hereupon the Persians prepared
Landforces of their own Country, but their Seamen were of Phenicia and
Cilicia: Tithraustes, Xerexs his Bastard Son, was General of the Persian Army.

Cymon having Intelligence, that the Persian Fleet lay at Cyprus, makes
straight The Sea Fight at Cyprus.
thither, and joins Battle with his Two hundred and fifty Ships, against Three
hundred and forty of the Persians. It was fought stoutly and bravely on both
sides; at length the Victory fell to the Athenians, who (besides many that were
sunk and destroyed) took above a Hundred Ships with their Men. The rest flying
to Cyprus, the Soldiers left their Ships and ran ashore, and the empty Vessels
afterward came into the Hands of the Enemy.

Cymon being not yet satisfied with this Victory, forthwith sailed away with
his whole Fleet, with a Design to fall upon the Land-Army of the Persians, who
were then encamped at Eurymedon, contriving to delude them by a Stratagem; Ant.
Chapter 468.
he filled the Ships he had taken with the stoutest of his Men, with Turbans
and Cymon routs the Persians at Land by a Stratagem.
other Ornaments attired like the Persians, who deceived by the Make and
Furniture of the Persian Ships, took them for a fresh Supply, and received the
Athenians as Friends.

Cymon when Night came, landed his Men, and being taken as a Friend, he rushed
into the Camp of the Barbarians, now filled with Confusion and Terror, (his
Soldiers killing all before 'em, and amongst the rest, Pheredates in his Tent,
the King's Nephew on his Brother's side, another General of the Persians Army.)
At length the whole Army through the sudden and unexpected Assault, were
totally routed and put to flight; and such a Fear and Consternation surprised
the Persians, that many of 'em knew not by whom they were broken; for they
could not in the least imagine, that they were assaulted by the Grecians, who
had no Land-Army as they were verily persuaded; but thought that the Pisideans
their Neighbors, who had been a little before provoked, had risen in Arms
against them. Supposing therefore this Impression upon them, to be made from
the Land, they fled to their Ships as to their Friends; and because the Night
was very dark, the Mistake was the greater, and more mischievous, none knowing
certainly what to do. When the Persians in this Confusion were slaughtered on
every side, Cymon having before directed his Soldiers, Ant. Chapter 468.
that as soon as he should lift up a burning Torch, they should all repair
thither, gave the Sign near to the Fleet, fearing some Disaster might happen by
his Men being scattered and dispersed in seeking after the Pillage of the
Field; at the Sight of the Torch they left off pillaging, and all returned to
their Ships.

The next day they set up a Trophy near the place, and sailed back to Cyprus,
P. 274.
fraught with two glorious Victories, the one at Sea, and the other at Land.
For it was never before known, that such great Things both by Sea and Land were
ever done by one and the same Army. From this time Cymon for the great
Atchievments he had bravely and wisely performed, both by his Valor and
Policy, was highly advanced in Reputation, not only amongst his
Fellow-Citizens, but all the rest of the Grecians: For he took Three hundred
and forty Ships, Twenty thousand Prisoners, and a vast Sum of Money. The
Persians greatly perplexed with this dreadful Blow, fell a Building a greater
Number of Ships than they had before; for the great Successes of the Athenians
after this struck them with Fear and Terror; and from this time, the City
increased both in Wealth and Power, and became famous abroad for the Glory of
their Arms. The Athenians dedicated the Tenths of the Spoil to their Gods, with
this Epigram;

Since Seas from Europe, Asia did divide,
And Mars first raged with bloody Hand,
Among Mankind the Sun has not espied
So sad a Fight from Sea or Land.
From the Phenician Fleet when strongly manned,
An Hundred Ships were took, these slew
Thousands of Medes, made Asia sighing stand
Sad, and oppressed with the Armed Crew.
These were the things done this Year.

CHAP. XIV.
A great Earthquake in Sparta; the War upon them by the Helots and Missenians.

PHedon was now Archon of Athens, and Lucius Furius Medullinus and Marcus
Manlius Vulso Consuls of Rome, when a most sad and unexpected Calamity Olym.
77. 4. Ant. Chapter 467.
happened to the Spartans; for by an Earthquake there, not only the Houses were
wholly overturned, but above Twenty thousand Souls buried in the Rubbish. A
great Earthquake in Sparta.
The City shak'd for a long time together, and many by the violent Fall of the
Walls of the Houses miserably perished; and the Houshold-goods and Riches of
all sorts were by this dreadful Shake swallowed up.

Thus were they punished as by some angry Deity taking Vengeance upon their
Crimes. And were afterward brought under many other Calamities, by the Hands
of Men upon the Accounts following.

The Helots and Missenians (enraged not long before against the Lacedaemonians)
The Helots conspire against Sparta.
bridled their Anger for a time, whilst they feared the Power and Grandeur of
the City of Sparta. But when they observed that the greatest part of the City
and Inhabitants were destroyed by the late Earthquake (setting light by them
that were left) they entered into a League, and with joint Force made War upon
the Spartans. But Archidamus King of Sparta by his Prudence had preserved many
of the Citizens from the late Ruin, and with these resolutely goes forth
against the Enemy. For while the City was in the height of this terrible
Convulsion, Archidamus suddenly headed his Army, and hastened into the open
Field, and commanded the rest to follow him; by which means this remnant Ant.
Chapter 467.
was preserved. Having then marshaled his Men, he prepared for Battle.

The Helots with the Missenians in their first Heat, with great Confidence
marched against Sparta, supposing there was none to make any Defense. But when
they understood that Archidamus was ready with the Citizens that were left, to
defend the City and Country, they desisted from their Design. Afterward P. 275.
from a Fort they had in Missenia they made daily inrodes into Laconia.

The Spartans send to the Athenians for Aid, who furnished them with Supplies:
The War between the Messenians and Lacedaemonians.
And at length, by their Diligence in procuring Assistance from the rest of
their Confederates, they got together an Army equal to their Enemies: Nay, at
the beginning of the War, they were far superior; but afterward they dismis'd
the Athenians, in truth, suspecting that they favored the Messenians, but
pretending that the Forces of the other Confederates were sufficient for the
present Service. The Athenians looking upon it as a Slight and an Affront,
departed grumbling, full of Indignation, with their Hearts boiling with Revenge
against the Lacedaemonians; which Hatred increased every day more and more; and
this was the first Cause of the Enmity between the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians, which afterward broke out into open Hostility, and filled the
Cities with Cruelty and Bloodshed, and all Greece with Misery and Calamity: But
we shall write of these things distinctly in their due place.

After this the Lacedaemonians, with the Forces of their Confederates, besieged
Ithome. In the mean time all the Helots revolted from the Lacedaemonians, and
joined with the Messenians. And now though the War had continued ten Years
complete, wasting one another with various Successes, yet they could not decide
the Controversy.

CHAP. XV.
The War between the Argives and the Mycenians.

WHen Theaginidas was Archon of Athens, and Lucius Emilius Mamercus and An. Mu.
3504. Olymp. 78. 1. Ant. Chapter 466.
Lucius Vopiscus Julius, Consuls of Rome, began the Seventy Eighth Olympiad,
wherein Parmenidas Possidoniates was Victor. At that time the War broke out
between the Argives and the Mycenians upon the following Occasion. The
Mycenians by reason of the ancient Renown and Glory of their Country, would
never submit to the Government of the Argives, as all the rest of the Cities in
the Territory of Argos did, but were still governed by their own Laws distinct
from them of Argos. They contended likewise with the Argives, concerning the
Holy Rights of the Temple of Juno, and to have the sole Management of the
Nemean Games. Besides, when the Argives made a Law, that none should aid the
Lacedaemonians at Thermophyle, unless the Spartans would relinquish and give up
part of their Country to them of Argos, they of Mycena only of all the other
Cities in the Territories of Argos joined with the Lacedaemonians. And lastly,
they of Argos were jealous, lest by the Growth of their Power, their ancient
Courage should so revive as to contend with them for the Sovereignty. For these
Reasons they had an evil Eye to the Mycenians, and some time not long before
had a longing Desire to ruin their City. And now they thought a fit Occasion
and Opportunity was offered them, to accomplish what they before designed, in
regard the Spartans seemed not to be in a Condition, by reason of their late
Calamity, to aid and assist them. To this end they marched against 'em Ante
Chr. 466.
with a great Army both from Argos and their Confederates; and having routed
'em, drove 'em within the Walls, and besieged their City. The Mycenians made a
stout Defense for a time, but wearied out and wasted by Famine, (the
Laccdemonians partly through Wars of their own, and partly through the late Ruins
by the Earthquake unable to assist 'em, and the help of the other Confederates
failing) they became a Prey to the Conquerors. The Argives made all the
Citizens Captives, and consecrated a Tenth of the Spoil to God, and laid the
City even with P. 276.
the Ground. Such was the End of Mycena, a City in former times flourishing
Mycena in Greece ruined.
in all Prosperity, that had bred and brought up Men famous in their
Generations, that had been glorious in the World by brave and noble Actions,
and now lies wast and forsaken unto this day. These were the Affairs of this
Year.

CHAP. XVI.
The Death of Hiero.

LYsiatus being Governor or Archon of Athens, the Romans chose Lucius Pinarius
Mamercinus, and Lucius Furius Fusus their Consuls. At this time Hiero King of
Syracuse invited to him with many rich Presents the Sons of Anaxalius, Prince
of Zancles, now Messina in Sicily, and put them in mind how kind Gelon had been
to their Father, and advised 'em now they were come to Men's Estate, to call
Micythus their Tutor to account, and to take the Sovereign Power and Government
into their own Hands. Being returned to Rhegium, they forthwith demanded an
Account of Micythus of his Administration; who, being a just and honest Man,
called together all the Friends of the two young Men, and gave so full and
clear Account of his Trust, that The Justice and Honesty of Micythus, Tutor and
Governor of the Prince of Zancles.
all then present admired his Justice and Faithfulness. The Youths now sorry
for what they had done, desired him to take upon him again the Government, and
as their Father, to order and dispose of all Affairs as he thought fit. But
Micythus utterly refused to be any longer concerned; but giving up all, shipped
his Goods, and sailed forth from Rhegium, with the general Love and Favor of
the People, and made Rhegium in Italy.
for Greece, where he lived the rest of his Time in great Repute at Tegea in
Arcadia. Hiero dyed at Catena, a City repeopled by him, and was there buried
with great Pomp and Solemnity after he had reigned Eleven Years. He left his
Kingdom to Thrasybulus his Brother, who reigned only one Year.

CHAP. XVII.
Thrasybulus King of Syracuse deposed by Force of Arms for his Tyranny.

NOw was Lysanias Archon of Athens, and Appius Claudius, and Titus Quintus
Olymp. 78. 3 Ant. Chr. 464.
Capitolinus, Roman Consuls, during whose Governments, Thrasybulus lost the
Kingdom of Syracuse: Concerning whom, inasmuch as it is our purpose
particularly and distinctly to write, it is necessary to look a little back,
that so things may be more clearly understood from the beginning. Gelo, the Son
of Dinome, a Man for Valor and Military Discipline excelling all the rest, by
a notable Stratagem (as you have heard) routed the Carthaginians. And using his
Victory with all Moderation toward them he had subdued, and dealing kindly and
courteously with all his Neighbors, was greatly honored among the Sicilians;
and for the Sweetness of his Disposition, lived beloved of all in Peace and
Quietness to the end of his days.

Hiero the eldest of his Brothers succeeded him in the Kingdom, but far unlike
him in his Government. For he was covetous, cruel and altogether a Stranger to
the Candor and Sincerity of his Brother, by reason whereof many were inclined
to a Defection and Revolt; but the Memory of Gelo's Generosity and general
Kindness to all the Sicilians, restrained them from outward Force and Violence.
But when Hiero was dead, Thrasybulus his Brother advancing to the P. 277.
Crown, exceeded his Predecessor in all Vice and Wickedness: For being more
cruel and bloody in his Nature, he slaughtered the Citizens against all Law and
Ant. Chapter 264.
Justice; and by false Accusations banished many others, and consiscated their
Estates. At last hating his People, and the People on the other hand, hating
him for the Injuries they had suffered, he raised a Standing Army, to defend
himself against the feared Revolt of his Subjects. And now growing every day
more and more into the Hatred of his People, abusing some, taking away the
Lives of many others; the People not able longer to endure his Cruelties, made
a general Defection, and rose up in Arms, to procure their Liberty by the
Sword, and shake off that Yoke of Slavery and Tyranny they were under.
Thrasibulus seeing the whole City of Syracuse in Arms against him, first
endeavored to cool them by fair words; but when he saw they were so incensed,
that there was no opposing them, he raised Forces from Catana, a Colony not
long before placed there by Hiero, and by other Confederates and Mercenaries,
he got together an Army of Fifteen Thousand Men, and possessed himself of that
part of the City called Acridina, and the Island which was strongly Fortified,
from whence he made many Sallies and Incursions upon the Enemy.

The Syracusians at first kept that part of the City called Ithica, and from
thence annoyed Thrasibulus: And sent Ambassadors to Gela, Agrigentum, Selenunte
and Himera, and to the rest of the Cities in the Heart of Sicily, desiring aid
and assistance for the recovering of their Liberty. These readily answered
their Request, and sent them seasonable Supplies, some Regiments of Foot,
others Troops of Horse, others Ships furnished with all necessaries for War:
Thus in a short time having a considerable Force both of a Fleet at Sea, and an
Army by Land, the Siracusians offered Battle to the Enemy, both by Sea and
Land. But Thrasibulus being forsaken of his Confederates, and having now none
to trust unto Ant. Chapter 464.
but his Mercenaries, betook himself only to Acridina, and the Island, and left
the rest of the City wholly to the power of the Syracusians. Afterward he
fought with them at Sea, and was beaten, losing many of his Ships, and fled
with those that escaped into the Island. Presently after he drew out his Men
from Acridina, and joined Battle with them in the Suburbs of the City, where he
was again routed, with the loss of many of his Men, and retreated a Second time
within his Post in Acridina.

At length being out of all hope to regain his Sovereignty, Thrasibulus
abdicates the Government.
he sent to the Syracusians, and came to terms of Agreement with them, and so
departed into A City in Magna Grecia in Italy.
Locros. The Syracusians thus freed from Slavery, suffered the Mercenaries to
march away peaceably. They freed likewise the rest of the Cities from such
Garrisons as were put upon them, and restored to every place the Democracy.
From thenceforth the Syracusians lived in great Peace and Prosperity, and
enjoyed a popular Government for the space of Threescore Years, till the Reign
of Dionysius. This Thrasibulus received a well ordered and constituted Kingdom,
but basely lost it by his wickedness; and spent the rest of his Days at Locris
as a private Man. While these things were done in Sicily, Rome first created
Four to be Tribunes P. 278.
of the People, Caius Sicinius, Lucius Numitorius, Marcus Duillius, and Spurius
Aquilius.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Murder of Xerxes by Artabanus.

AT the end of this Year, Lysitheus was made Chief Governor of Athens, and
Olymp. 78. 4. Ant. Chr. 463.
Lucius Valerius Publicola, and Titus Aemilius Mamercus, Consuls of Rome. In
their times Artabanus of Hircania, in great esteem with Xerxes, and Captain of
his Guard, contrived to gain the Kingdom by the Murder of the King. He reveals
his Design to Mithridates the Eunuch, one of the King's Chamberlains (whom he
most consided in, as being his near Kinsman, and whom he had obliged by many
instances of his Favor.) Mithridates presently complies with him, and brings
Artabanus privately in the Night into the Bedchamber, and being entered,
without delay murders the King: And in the heat of the Fact runs to the King's
Sons, Two of whom, Darius the Eldest, and Artaxerxes, were then at Court:
Hytaspes the Third at that time, was Governor of Bactria. Artabanus in the dead
of the Night, hastens to Artaxerxes, and tells him that Darius had murdered
his Father to come to the Crown: And therefore persuades Artaxerxes that he
should not slothfully suffer his Brother to settle himself on the Throne, but
revenge his Father's Death, and take upon himself the Sovereignty. For the
effecting whereof, he promised him to bring in the King's Guards for his
Assistance. Artaxerxes was easily persuaded, and with the Assistance of the
Guards kills his Brother. Artabanus seeing his Treachery to succeed according
to his hearts Desire, now boasts before all his Sons that the time was come for
his advancement to the Kingdom, and forthwith came to Artaxerxes with his Sword
drawn, and Ant. Chr. 463.
Wounds him. The King not being much hurt, bravely Defends himself, and kills
Artabanus upon the place. Having thus not only preserved himself, but revenged
Artaxerxes kills Artabanus.
the Murder of his Father, he was established in the Throne of Persia. This
was the end of Xerxes after he had reigned Twenty Years. But his Successor
continued Forty Four.

CHAP. XIX.
The War between the Athenians and the Aegineans.

THE following Year wherein Archimedes was Archon of Athens, Aulus Virgilius,
Olymp. 79. Ant. Chapter 462.
and Titus Numitius, Roman Consuls; was the first Year of the Seventy Ninth
Olympiad, at which Xenophon the Corinthian won the Prize: At this time the
Thrasians revolted from the Athenians, through the Differences arising
concerning the Mines, but were reduced by force to their Obedience. The
Aegineans likewise rebelled, and being subdued, the Athenians besieged their
City, which was grown proud, not only through their great Successes and
Victories at Sea, but their Riches at Land, and having a brave and well
furnished Navy, were ever Enemies to the Athenians; who therefore entered the
Aegina, near Peloponesus in the Aegean Sea.
Island with an Army, laid waste the Country, and resolved to raze the City
Aegina to the Ground: Hereupon now grown great in power, they carried not
themselves with that Humanity and Courtesy toward their Confederates as they
were used to do, but domineered every where with a proud and high Hand. This
imperious way of theirs, caused many of their Confederates to enter into
Consultations for a general Defection, and some particular Places determined it
of their Ante Chr. 462.
own accord, without flagging for, or expecting the results of a General
Assembly. While these things were acting, the Athenians (being now every where
P. 279.
Masters at Sea) sent a Colony of Ten Thousand Men to Amphipolis (chosen partly
out of the Citizens, partly from among the Confederates) and divided the
Country by Lot: For sometime they kept under the Thrasians that bordered upon
them; but when they attempted to proceed further into the heart of the Country,
those that entered Thrace were wholly cut off by the A People of Thrace, near
the Mountain Edon.
Edones.

CHAP. XX.
The Egyptians revolt from the Persians. New Troubles in Sicily:

TLepolemus being Governor of Athens, the Roman Consuls were Titus Quintius,
Olymp. 79. 2. Ante Chr. 461.
and Quintus Arbilius Structus. Artaxerxes now newly come to the Throne of
Persia, first put to Death all those that had an Hand in the Murder of his
Father, and then settled Affairs so as he This is Artaxerxes Longimanus, who
forbad the Building of Jerusalem. From his Seventh Year, began Daniel's Seventy
Weeks, which is 490 Years to the Death of Christ.
thought most conducing to the interest of the Government: For he removed those
Governors of the Provinces whom he most suspected, and placed others whom he
most confided in, in their room. He took care to store up all manner of
Provisions, and to furnish his Army with all things necessary; and ruling with
all Justice and Equity, he grew into high Esteem among the Persians. In the
mean time the Egyptians hearing of the Death of Xerxes, and the Troubles in
Persia occasioned thereby, fell a plotting how to recover their Liberty; and to
that The Egyptians revolt from the Persians.
end on a sudden rose against the Persians, and drove the Questors or Persian
Treasurers out of Egypt.

Then they set up one Inarus to be their King; who first had an Army of the
Inarus set up in Egypt.
natural Inhabitants, and afterward increased his Forces by Mercenary
Foreigners. He sent likewise Ambassadors to Athens, desiring their aid, with
Promises that if they regained their Liberty, the whole Kingdom should be for
their Service and Advantage as well as his; and he should be ever and in every
thing grateful to them. The Athenians conceiving it to be much to their
advantage, if by what force they could make, they might drain the Persians of
their Money, and gain likewise the Egyptians to their interest, to be ready to
serve them upon all occasions, determined to send to their Assistance a Navy of
Three Hundred Sail; and Ant. Chapter 461
to that end, all Hands were at work to make ready a Fleet. Artaxerxes
receiving the News of the Revolt of the Egyptians, resolved to exceed them both
in number of Men, and Provisions of War; and for that purpose forthwith raised
Soldiers out of all the Provinces of the Kingdom, rigged out his Fleet, and
omitted nothing necessary in the present Juncture. And thus stood the Affairs
of Asia and Egypt at this time.

In Sicily after they had cast off the Kingly Government, and restored all the
The flourishing state of Sicily after the deposition of Tyrants.
Cities to liberty, the whole Island greatly flourished; for having a rich and
fertile Soil, and Peace on every side, they grew very rich in a short time, the
Land abounding in Laborers, Cattle, and all other Conveniences, for the
comfort and happiness of Man's Life, much being now laid up, and nothing
expended in Wars. But they continued not long thus, but again broke forth into
Wars and Seditions upon the account following. Thrasibulus being deposed, they
called a General Assembly, to consult about the manner of a Popular Government,
and there it was unanimously decreed, that a Statue should be erected to Jovi
Liberatori.
Jove the Deliverer, as high as a Colossus, and that there should be Yearly
upon the Day that they were rid of the Tyrant, and regained their Liberty,
Sacrifices offered, and Solemn Games celebrated: At which Solemnities they
likewise vowed to sacrifice Four Hundred and Fifty Oxen, and therewith to feast
all the People, and that all the P. 280.
Magistrates (according to the ancient Custom) should be chosen out of the
chiefest Citizens; and that none of the Strangers who were made Denizens by
Gelon, should be admitted to these Honors, looking upon them either as
unworthy, or Ant. Chr. 461.
fearing lest they (being always inured to Monarchy) should endeavor a change
of Government, which was no vain conception, as the Event after made evident.
For Gelon had infranchis'd above Ten Thousand Mercenaries, of whom, above Seven
Thousand remained at that time.

These being enraged thus to be excluded, and made incapable of being chosen
New Stirs in Sicily at Syraeuse.
Magistrates, began to plot, and at length joining together, seized upon
Acridina, a part of the City, and the forementioned Island, both of which
Places were strongly walled and fortified.

On the other side in this Confusion, the Syracusians possessed themselves of
another part of the City, especially toward the Epipole, defending themselves
with a Wall and strong Guards. The Seditious were so penned up, that they grew
scant in their Provisions. And though they were far less in number than the
Citizens, yet they were much better Soldiers; and therefore when ever they
made any Sallies, in every Skirmish they went off with Success. But being so
close shut up, they were nigh famished. And this was the state of Sicily at
this time.

This Year Conon was Archon of Athens, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, and
Tiberius Olymp. 79(...). Ant. Chr. 46.
Aemilius Mamercus were Roman Consuls. At this time Artaxerxes King of Persia,
made Archemenes the Son of Darius his great Uncle, General of his Army intended
against Egypt, which consisted of above Three Hundred Thousand Horse and Foot:
With these he marched into Egypt, and encamped near the River Nile, and as soon
as he had refreshed his Army, prepared for Battle. The Egyptian Forces were
made up of Africans and Egyptians, and waited in expectation of further Aid
from the Athenians; who at length arrived with a Fleet of Two Hundred Sail, and
joining with the Egyptians, the Battle began with great Resolution on both
sides. The Persians indeed were far more in number; The Persians routed in
Egypt.
but the Athenians with great Valor and Courage breaking in upon that Wing of
the Persians that was placed against them, and killing and destroying many of
them, the rest of the Barbarians fled, and in the pursuit, most of the Army was
cut off, and the rest fled to a place called the The Third part of Memphis, the
other Two Parts being taken by the Athenians, Usher's Annals, 136. Thucidides,
lib. 1. 37. Memphis now called Grand Cairo.
White Wall. The Athenians by whose Valor the Victory was obtained, followed
close after them to the place, and Besieged it. But Artaxerxes having
intelligence of the Overthrow of his Army, sent some he could most confide in,
to the Lacedaemonians, with a great Sum of Money, to induce the Spartans to make
War upon the Athenians, thinking by that means to force them back, for the
necessary defense of their own Country. But the Lacedaemonians would neither
accept of the Money, nor hearken to any other Proposals of the Persians. Being
thus without hopes of Aid from the Lacedaemonians, Artaxerxes prepared a new
Army, and made Artabazus and Megabysus, both very Valiant Men, Generals, and
sent them against the Egyptians.

CHAP. XXI.
The Persians Expedition into Egypt. Wars in Sicily.

AT Athens, Euippas was Archon, and Quintus Servilius and Spurius Posthumus P.
281. Olymp. 79. 4. Ant. Chr. 459. Artabazus and Megabyzus sent Generals into
Egypt.
Albus, Consuls at Rome. At which time Artabasus and Megabyzus appointed
Generals for the Egyptian War, marched away for Egypt with above Three
hundred thousand Horse and Foot. When they came to Cilicia and Phenicia, they
refreshed the Army, and commanded the Cyprians, Phenicians and Cilicians to set
forth a Fleet, who furnished out Three hundred Sail fitted both with Men,
Provisions and all other things convenient and necessary for a Sea Fight. In
Preparations for the War, training of the Soldiers, and employing themselves
in other Acts of Military Discipline, they spent almost a whole Year. The
Athenians in the mean time closely besieged the Persians at the White Wall,
which was valiantly defended and not likely to be taken after a Years Siege. In
Sicily the Syracusians at War with the before-named Revolters daily assaulted A
Fight between the Syracusians and the Seditious.
Acridina with the adjoining Island; and though they overcame the Rebels at Sea,
yet they could not drive them out of the City, they were so fortified. But
afterward when both Armies were drawn out into the open Field, the Fight being
obstinate, many were killed on both sides, but the Victory was at length gained
by the Syracusians. After the Battle the Syracusians crowned Six hundred Men
who were most active in the Fight, and gave to every one a * Mina in Money, as
a Reward of his Valor. During these Combustions, Deucetius General About 3 l.
2 s. 6 d.
of the Sicilians, began a War against the Inhabitants of Catana, for
withholding the Lands of the Sicilians, in which the Syracusians likewise
engaged against A War against them of Catana.
Catana.

The Cataneans had these Lands divided to them by Lot, when they were first
placed a Colony there by Hiero the late King. And therefore defended their
Right with all the Force and Power they could. But being overcome in several
Battles, they were forced at length to leave Catana, and possessed themselves
The Cities of Sicily freed from Foreigners.
of the City Etna, formerly called Eunetia; and the ancient Inhabitants of
Catana after a long time of Banishment, returned to their own Country, and
former Habitations. After this, all others that were driven out of their own
proper Cities in the times of Hiero, with the Assistance of their Neighbors,
were forthwith Ant. Chr. 459.
restored, and the Usurpers were every where ejected, as the Gelones,
Acragentines and Himereans. The Rhegians and Zancleans likewise threw off the
regal Power of the Sons of Anaxilas, and asserted the Liberty of their Country.
After this the Gelones seating themselves at Camerina, again divided the Land
by Lots. At length almost all the Cities determining to root up all those they
took for their Enemies, confederated together (by virtue of a public Edict)
against all the Foreigners, and restored those that had been banished, to their
ancient Cities; transplanting all the Strangers (that had before usurped) to
Messena. In this manner all the Seditions and Tumults through the Cities of
Sicily were appeased, and almost all were forced from the Power of Foreigners,
and reduced to the ancient Form of a Commonwealth, and all the public Lands
divided by Lot to the Citizens. P. 282.


Now Phasiclides was Governor of Athens, and the Eightieth Olympiad was
celebrated, Olymp. 80. 1. Ant. Chr. 458.
in which Tharillus the Thessalian was Victor. And at Rome were chosen Quintus
Fabius, and Titus Quintius Capitolinus, Consuls. In Asia, the Persian
Commanders now in Cilicia had got together a Fleet of Three hundred Sail, well
An Expedition into Egypt by the Persian Generals.
manned and furnished in every respect for the War, and marched with the
Land-Army through Syria and Phenicia, and came at length to Memphis, (the Fleet
sailing all along by the sides of them, near the Shore) where they forthwith
raised the Siege at the White Wall; both the Egyptians and Athenians being
amazed at the Approach of such an Enemy: Hereupon the Persians presently call a
Council of War, and prudently resolved to decline fighting, but rather to
endeavor to make an end of the War by some politic Stratagem. And to that end
knowing that the Athenian Fleet lay at Anchor at an Island called Or Prosopis
in Egypt, in that Part called Delta.
Prosopitis, they diverted the Course of the River (which encompassed the
Island) by deep Trenches made in the adjoining Continent, and by that means
joined the Island to Main-land. The Egyptians as soon as they discerned all
the Ships, stood upon dry Land, struck with Amazement, forsook the Athenians,
and submitted themselves to the Persians. The Athenians thus The Athenian Fleet
ruined by a Stratagem in Egypt by the Persians.
forsaken, and seeing the Fleet made useless, set Fire to all the Ships, that
they might not come into the Power of the Enemy. And nothing terrified with
their present Circumstances, they encouraged and advised one another, that they
should not do any thing that should be a blemish and disgrace to the Courage
and Valor they had before shown in former Encounters.

Soaring therefore above the Valor of those that lost their Lives at
Thermopole, for the safety of Greece they resolved to fight. But the Commanders
of the Persians, Artabazus and Megabizus seeing the Courage of the Athenians,
and considering their former Losses of so many thousand Men, they made Peace
with the Peace made with the Athenian Army.
Athenians upon this Condition, That they should depart out of Egypt without
Hurt or Prejudice. The Athenians thus preserved (through their own Valor) leave
Egypt, and marching through Africa to Cyrene, from thence they all came safe
(beyond their hopes) unto their own Country. During these things, Ephialtes Son
of Simonidas, Tribune of the People at Athens, stirred up the Rabble against
Ante Chr. 458. A Tumult against the Magistrates in Athenis.
the Areopagites to take away the Power from the Senate in Mars Hill, and to
overturn the ancient and laudable Laws of the Country. But such wicked Designs
went not unpunished, for he was killed in the Night, not known by whom, and so
ended his days in Dishonor.

CHAP. XXII.
The War between the Epidaurians and the Athenians.

THE former Year ended, Philocles governed Athens the next, and at Rome, Aulus
Posthumous were Consuls: In their times was begun the War by Olymp. 80. 2. Ant.
Chr. 457.
the Corinthians and Epidaurians against the Athenians, who in a sharp Battle,
overcame the other, and with a great Fleet made out against the Halienses, and
invaded Peloponesus, where they slaughtered and destroyed many of their
Enemies. The Peloponesians make Head again, and with a great Army sight them at
Cerryphalia, where the Athenians again rout them. Grown now consident with
these Successes, and observing the Aegineans (puffed up with the Victories that
they had obtained) to carry it as Enemies toward them, they determined to make
War upon them; and in Execution thereof, sent forth against them a great Fleet:
They of Aegina on the other hand, trusting to their Skill War between the
Athenians and them of Aegina. Ant. Chr. 457.
and former Successes at Sea, despised the great Forces of the Athenians, and
with a small Navy, and some few other Ships lately built, venture a Sea Fight,
but were beaten, with the loss of Seventy of their Vessels; so that now they
were wholly discouraged and dejected, and therefore were forced to submit P.
283.
themselves to the Athenians. These things were done by Leocrates, the Athenian
Admiral, in the space of Nine Months War with the Aeginetes. In the mean time,
Deucetius King of Sicily (very Rich, and of a Noble Family) built Menenum, and
divided by Lot the adjacent Lands, amongst them of the Colony brought thither.
Then he Besieged the Famous City Morgantina, and was highly honored by all his
Countrymen.

CHAP. XXIII.
The War between the Corinthians and Megareans.

THE next year Bion was Archon at Athens, and Publius Servilius Structus, and
Olym. 80. 3. Ant. Chapter 456.
Lutius Aebutius Eliuas, Roman Consuls. During their Government, broke out the
War between the Corinthians and Megareans about the Limits of their Country. At
the first they made inroads into one another Country, and then proceeded with
little Skirmishes. At length the difference growing higher and hotter, the
Megarians (suspecting their own weakness) made a League with the Athenians, by
which means they balanced their Enemies in Strength and Power. And when the
Corinthians sent a considerable Army from Peloponesus against Magera, the
Athenians sent Aids to the Magerians under Myromides their General, a very
Valiant Man. The Armies presently engaged, and great Valor and Obstinacy was
showed on both sides, insomuch as the Success was very doubtful a long time;
till at length the Athenians got the day, with the Slaughter of Multitudes of
the Enemy. And a few Days after, the Athenians were Victors in another Battle
fought at Cimolia, where they likewise killed many. Within a few Days after, a
Third Battle was fought. -- Here something seems to be wanting Ant. Chr. 456.
in the Greek Copy.

The Phoceans made War against the Doreans, who were originally Lacedaemonians,
and inhabited Three Cities lying under Mount Parnassus, Erybium.
Cytinium, Boium and Erineus. At the first, the Doreans, (being overcome) lost
their Cities to the Boion. War between the Phoceans and Doreans.
other. But the Lacedaemonians being of the same Blood, afterward sent them aid
under Nicomedes, formerly General of Cleomedes, who led forth an Army of
Fifteen Hundred Lacedaemonians, and raised as many more out of Peloponesus as
made up Ten Thousand; with these he marched to the Defense of the Doors, he
being Tutor and Governor of Pleistonactis their King, who was then a Child.
Having conquered the Phoceans, and recovered the Cities, he put an end to the
War, upon Articles of Peace between the Two Nations.

When the Athenians understood that the Lacedaemonians had made an end of the
Phocean War, and were ready to return home, they consulted how to cut them off
in their Passage by the way. To this end, having resolved upon the attempt,
they took to their aid and assistance the Argives and Thessalians, and so
making out against them with a Fleet of Fifty Sail, manned with above Fourteen
Thousand Soldiers, they stopped the Passages through Grarenea, a Ridge of a Hill
lying before the Entrance into the Isthmos. The Athenians contrive to cut off
the Lacedaemonians in their return Home. Ant. Chr. 456.
Geranea. The Lacedaemonians hearing of the Contrivances of the Athenians,
turned out of the way toward Tanagra in Beotia: But the Athenians marched
swiftly after them, and at length the Two Armies joined Battle; and although
the Thessalians (in the very heat of the Fight) deserted the Athenians, and
joined with the Spartans, yet they and the Argives stood manfully to it, and
after many were killed on both sides, the Night put an end to the Dispute.
After this, there being sent much Provision out of Attica to the Athenians,
which was understood by the Thessalians, they conceiving this to be now a fit
opportunity to do some notable Service, (having refreshed themselves) in the
Night marched out to meet the Carriages: And being that the Guard that attended
them, never suspected any Design, but admitted the Thessalians as Friends, the
Contest grew hot whether should get or lose all. For the Thessalians (being at
first thus admitted) killed all they met, and P. 284.
being well prepared, and the other taken at unawares, made a great Slaughter.
The Athenians that were encamped, hearing of what mischief the Thessalians had
done, hastened to the Relief of their Countrymen, and fell with great Rage upon
the Thessalians, and routed them at the first Charge with a great Slaughter. In
the mean time, the Lacedaemonians came in to the and of the Thessalians, and
both Armies being now drawn up in Battalia, it came to a general Battle, which
was fought with great Resolution, and many killed on both sides. The issue and
event being doubtful, both the one side and the other suspected the loss of the
Day; but Night growing on, and the Victory still remaining doubtful, Messengers
were dispatched one to another, and a Truce at length agreed upon for Four
Months.

CHAP. XXIV.
The War between the Athenians and the Beotians.

THIS Year ended, Mnesitheides was chosen Archon of Athens, and Lucius Olym.
80. 4. Ant. Chapter 455.
Lucretius, and Titus Viturius Cicurinus were Roman Consuls. In the time of
their Governments, the Thebans being brought low by reason of their League with
Xerxes, endeavored by all the Artifices they could, to regain their former
Power and Sovereignty; for being greatly despised by all the Beotians who had
shaken off their Authority, they applied themselves to the Lacedaemonians, to
assist them in recovering the Government of Beotia: And for this Kindness they
The War between the Athenians and the Thebans.
promised that they would be at all the Charge of the War then begun against
them by the Athenians, and that the Spartans should not need to bring any
Landforces out of Peloponesus.

The Lacedaemonians judging it to be much to their advantage, to gratify the
Thebans in their Request, conceiving that if they were thus strengthened and
supported, they would become a Bulwark against the Athenians, especially the
Thebans having at that time a great and well disciplined Army at Tanagra, they
enlarged the Bounds and Circuit of the City of Thebes, and compelled all the
Beotians to the subjection of the Thebans.

The Athenians to obviate the Designs of the Lacedaemonians, raised a
considerable Army, and made Myronides the Son of Callias, General. Having
chosen a competent number of the Citizens, he told them the Day wherein he
intended to march out of the City. When the Day came, many of the Soldiers
(notwithstanding the Command given) did not appear; yet with those he had, he
made for Beotia. Some of his Friends and Officers of the Army, persuaded him to
stay, till the rest of the Soldiers came up to them. But Myronides being both
a Prudent and Valiant Commander, answered, That it did not become a General to
Loyter, for it was a shrewd Sign, that they who were slow and dilatory in
their March toward their Enemy, would be Cowards in the Fight, and would
prefer their own safety before the good of their Country. For they (said he)
that readily appeared at the Day appointed, gave an evident Testimony of their
Valor, that they were resolved not to shrink in the Day of Battle. Which by
the Sequel did appear; Ant. Chapter 455. The Thebans routed by Myronides.
for he marched against the Thebans with an Army far less in number of Men, but
much excelling in Prowess and Valor, and by the brave Resolution of his
Soldiers, utterly routed the Enemy; which Victory was not inferior to any
that were ever obtained by the Athenians in former Times. For neither that at
Marathon, nor at Platea against the Persians, nor any other Exploit of the
Athenians, did exceed this of Myronides against the Thebans. For the former,
some of them were obtained against Barbarians, others by the help of their
Confederates. But this was gained by the Athenians themselves alone, against
the P. 285.
most Valiant of the Greeks. For the Beotians were ever accounted for stoutness
and hardyness, not inferior to any in Greece; which in aftertimes was
confirmed; for at Leuctra and Mantinea, the Thebans alone fought both with the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, and purchased to themselves great Renown,
and became reputed (and that not unworthily) the best Commanders of all Greece.

Although this Battle was one of the most Famous, yet no Author has writ any
thing of the manner or order of it. However by this glorious Victory over the
Beotians, Myronides has equaliz'd his Memory with those illustrious Generals,
Themistocles, Miltiades and Cimon. Immediately after the Fight, he took Tanagra
by Storm, and demolisht it. And running over all Beotia, wasted all before him,
and divided the Spoil and Riches of the Country amongst his Soldiers.

The Beotians enraged with the wasting and destroying of their Country, came
together from all Parts, and with a great Army marched against their Enemies.
Another Battle with the Thebans. Ant. Chr. 455.
The Fight began amongst the Vineyards of Beotia, and both sides being fully
resolved, the heat of the Battle continued a whole Day, but at length with
great difficulty the Valor of the Athenians prevailed.

Myronides shortly wan all the Cities of Beotia, except Thebes. Then he raised
The Acts of Myronides.
his Camp, and marched with his Army against the Locrians (called Opuntians)
routed them at the first Onset, and upon their submission took Hostages, and
then broke into Pharsalia, and with as much ease overcame the Phoceans, as he
did the Locrians, and receiving Hostages, marched for Thessaly, and charging
them with Treason, commanded them to recall those they had Banished.

But the Pharsalians refusing to obey, he besieged the Pharsalos.
City, which (after a long and stout Defense) he was not able to take by Force,
and therefore raised his Siege, and returned to Athens; where he was received
with great Acclamations of Praise, for the noble Acts he had in so short a time
accomplished. These were the Remarks of this Year.

CHAP. XXV.
The Athenians invade the Spartans by Tolmides.

THE Eighty First Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, wherein Polymnastus Olymp.
81. An. Mu. 3516. Ant. Chr. 454.
Cyreneus was Victor, at the time when Callias was Archon of Athens, and
Servius Sulpitius and Publius Voluminous Amintinus were Roman Consuls. Then
Tolmides the Admiral of the Athenian Fleet out of Emulation to the glory of
Myronides, Tolmides's Design to invade Laconia.
made it his Business to do something more than ordinary remarkable. And
therefore for as much as none before had ever attempted to invade Laconia, he
advised the People of Athens to make an Inroad into the Country of the
Spartans, undertaking that if he might have but a Thousand Armed Men Aboard his
Ships, he would waste Laconia, and bring an Eclipse upon the Spartans Glory.
Having got the Consent of the People, and designing privately to get more His
Stratagem to raise Soldiers.
Men than he at first required, he conceived this Project: All were of opinion
that a choice should be made of the strongest, young and most spriteful Men in
the Army. But Tolmides designing far more than the Thousand yielded to him for
his intended Enterprise: He goes to every one of the ablest Men, and tells 'em
each singly, that he intended to choose him for the War, and that it was far
more for their Credit and Reputation, to offer themselves of their own accord,
than being chosen to be compelled to the Service. When by this means he had
persuaded above Three Thousand to give in their Names of their own accord, and
discerned the rest to be backward, he then proceeded to the choice of the
Thousand granted to him by the Consent of the People. And when all things P.
286. The acts of Tolmides.
were ready for the Expedition, he set Sail with Fifty Ships, and Four Thousand
Soldiers, and arriving at Methon in Laconia, took it; but by reason of the
speedy Succor sent by the Spartans, he was forced to quit the Place, and made
for Gythium, a Port Town of the Lacedaemonians, which he likewise took, and
there burnt and destroyed all the Shipping and Naval Provisions, wasting the
Ant. Chr. 454.
Country round about. Thence he bent his Course for Zacynthus in Cephalania,
and possessed himself of that City, and after he had brought all the Towns in
Cephalania to a submission, he sailed with the whole Fleet to Naupactus, on the
opposite Shore, which he gained at the first Assault, and there placed a Colony
of the Noblest Families of the Messenians, who had been before (upon Agreement)
dismis'd by the Lacedaemonians. For about this time in a War against the
Messenians and the Helots, the Lacedaemonians had reduced most of them to their
former Subjection. And them of Ithomea they discharged upon Articles of
Submission, as is before said: And as for the Helots, those of them that were
the Authors and Ringleaders of the Defection, they had put to Death, and made
the rest Slaves.

Sosistratus now Praetor of Athens, the Romans chose for Consuls, Publius
Valelerius Olymp. 81. 2. An. M. 3517. Ant. Chr. 453.
Publicola, and Caius Clodius Rhegillanus. During their Government, Tolmides
continued in Beotia. But the Athenians made Pericles the Son of Xanthes General
of a select number of Men, and committed to him Fifty Ships, and a Thousand
Soldiers, with a Command to invade Peloponesus. Hereupon he wasted Pericles
made General.
a great part of it, and passed into Acarnania, near the Island Oeniades, and
there brought all the Cities to a Submission. So that during this Year, the
Athenians gained many Cities, and became famous for their Military Discipline,
and many glorious Successes in their Wars.

CHAP. XXVI.
The War in Sicily between the Aegestines and the Lilybeans. The Custom of
writing upon an Olive-Leaf the Names of such as were to be banished in Sicily,
called Petalism.

IN this Year Ariston was Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Quintus Fabius
Vibulanus Olymp. 81. 3. An. M. 3518. Ant. Chapter 452.
and Lucius Cornelius Curetinus, Consuls of Rome. In the time of their
Government, a Peace was made between the Athenians and the Peloponesians for
Five Years, by the mediation of Cimon the Athenian.

In Sicily a War broke out between the Aegestines and the Lilybeans concerning
A War between the Aegestines and Lilybeans in Sicily.
some Lands near to the River Mazarus: After a sharp Battle fought, and many
killed on both sides, they began to cool for some time; but after an account of
the Citizens was taken in every City, and a new division of the Lands was made
by Lot, and that every one was to take his share as it fell, the shares fell so
confused, that the Cities broke out again into Civil Discords and Dissentions,
by which Mischiefs the Syracusians greatly smarted. For one called Tyndarides,
a rash conceited Fellow, who protecting and feeding many poor People,
Tyndarides's Treason in Syracuse.
by that means sought to make a Party to further his Design in obtaining of the
Principality: But when it was evident, that he aimed at the Sovereign power, he
was brought to his Trial and condemned to dye. And when they were bringing him
back to the Goal, he was by the Party he had before prepared, as aforesaid, by
Force rescued out of the Hands of the Officers. This raised a Tumult through
the whole City, and caused the chief and soberest part of the Citizens to join
together against them; who presently apprehended the Innovators, and put them,
together with Tyndarides to death. When several Attempts were made of this
kind, and many were infected with this itch of Dominion, the Syracusians were
at length forced after the Example of the Athenians, to make The Law of
Petalism made in Syracuse.
a Law not much differing from that of Ostracism at Athens: For there every
Citizen was to write in (...).
a Shell the Name of him whom they conceived to be most powerful to possess
himself of Sovereignty. So the Syracusians were to write the Name of him who
was thought to be most potent upon an (...)
Olive-Leaf; and when the Leaves were counted, he whose Name was upon most of
the Leaves, was Banished for Five Years.

By this means they conceived they should bring down the aspiring Minds of P.
287. Ant. Chapter 452.
the great ones to some moderation; for they did not hereby intend the
punishment of any Crime that was committed, but the prevention of Mischief, by
impairing the Estates, and weakening the interest of them that might be
ambitious. That therefore which the Athenians called Ostracism, from the nature
of the thing, the Syracusians called Petalism.

This continued long amongst the Athenians, but was abolished within a short
Petalism abolished.
time after by the Syracusians, for these Reasons: For when several of the
chief and best deserving Men were by this Law banished the City, the rest who
were beloved by the Citizens, and were Men of great use in the Service of their
Country, withdrew themselves from all public business, and out of fear of the
Law, betook themselves to private Lives: But minding thus their own private
Concerns, at length they fell into all manner of Profuseness and Luxury. In the
mean time, the basest of the Citizens taking upon them the Government, stirred
up the Common People to Innovations and Disturbances in the Commonwealth; and
so all things ran a Second time into Sedition and Confusion, and a continual
and mighty Storm of Trouble and Disorder shook the City. For there arose many
Ringleaders and Seducers of the People, especially Young Conceited Men, who
thought none spoke like themselves, nor no Wisdom like theirs. In Sum, many
instead of the Principles of the ancient Justice and Honesty, instilled Ant.
Chr. 452.
nothing into the People, but wicked Notions, both in Manners and Practice. In
time of Peace, it was their only business to heap together Riches, but had no
regard at all to Amity and Justice amongst Men. The Decree therefore of
Petalism, upon more mature Consideration, was repealed within a short time
after it was put in execution. And thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at this
time.

CHAP. XXVII.
Pericles makes an Inrode into Peloponesus. Besieged Scycion. Phaylus in Sicily
made Admiral against the Tyrrhenian Pirates; is corrupted and banished. The
Original of the Palici: And the Stories of the Temple, and Wonders of the
Craters in Sicily.

WHen Lysicrates was Governor of Athens, Caius Nausius Rutillius, and Lucius
Olymp. 81. 4. Ante Chr. 451.
Minutius Augurinus, were celebrated Consuls at Rome. During their times,
Pericles the Athenian General made an Inrode into Peloponesus, and wasted the
Pericles makes an inrode into Peloponesus.
Country of the Scycions. The Scycions marched out with a great Army against
him, and Battle being joined, Pericles routed them, and killed many in the
Pursuit, and having driven the rest within the Walls of the City, laid Siege to
the Place. But after he had made a valiant Assault, and saw he could not
Scycion Besieged.
win the Place, in regard the Lacedaemonians had sent Aid to the Besieged, he
withdrew his Army from Scycion, and marched into Acarnania, there wasting the
Country of the Oeniades; and having loaded himself with Booties and Plunder,
left Acarnania. After this, he marched into Chersonesus, and divided the
Country by Lot amongst a Thousand Citizens. And in the mean time Tolmides the
other General made a Descent into Eubea, and divided the Country of the Naxians
amongst another Thousand of the Citizens.

As for Sicily, the The Hetrurians in Italy.
Tyrrhenians infesting the Sea with Pyracies, the Syracusians chose one Phaylus
to be Admiral of the Fleet, and commanded him to make a Descent upon Hetruria.
The Affairs of Sicily.
Tyrhenia. Being furnished with a Fleet well provided, upon the first attempt,
he wastes the Island of Aethalia; but being corrupted by the Hetruscans with
Money, he returned into Sicily, without doing any thing memorable. But the
Syracusians banished him Ante Chr. 451.
for his Treason, and chose another called Apelles, and sent him with
Threescore Ships against the Hetrurians.
Tyrrhenians. Upon which he wastes the Seacoasts of Tyrhenia, and sails to
Corsica, then subject to the Hetruscians, and harrased and destroyed a great
part of the Island; and having wholly subdued Aethalia, returned to Syracuse,
with a multitude of Prisoners and much spoil.

After this, Ducetius Prince of the Siculi, reduced all the Cities of the same
Nation (except Hybla) into one Society and Community. This Man being both Wise
and Valiant, bent his Mind Ducetius Prince of the Sicilians, or Siculi.
for the accomplishing of something great and unusual; for having a rich
Treasury, he removed the City Neas, the Place P. 288.
of his Birth, into a plain Champain Ground, and built a famous City near the
Temple of the Gemini Fatres Jovis Filii, ex Nympha Thalia. Palicon built in
Sicily.
Palici (as they are called) from whom he called the City Palicon. And because
those Deities now fall in our way, it is not fit we should altogether pass by
the strange and indeed incredible Stories that are related concerning this
Temple, and especially that great wonder there called the i. e. Pots or
Caldrons.
Craters. For they say, that this Temple is to be preferred before all others,
both for Antiquity and Religious Worship, especially for the strange and
wonderful things done there.

And first in this Temple, there are hollows in the Earth, called Craters, not
The Wonders of the Craters in Sicily.
very large in compass, but of incredible depth, from whence break out great
sparks of Fire and Water, like as from boiling Pots or Caldrons. The Water cast
forth, resembles so many Streams of Fire; but there is no certainty what it is,
for none hitherto ever durst approach it: For the violent irruption of the
Fiery Matter is so wonderful, that it seems to be the immediate effect of some
divine Power. It smells like Brimstone, as most predominant, and the bottomless
Gulf roars and makes a most dreadful and horrible noise. And that which is far
more to be admired is this, That this River of Fire neither flows nor makes any
stay upon the Land, but in a continual motion, with an amazing force, hurls it
self up into the Air. This Place therefore by these wonderful Ant. Chapter 451.
instances of some Divine Presence, being accounted Sacred, the most Solemn and
Sacred Oaths were used here to be taken, and due Punishments were without delay
executed by the Deity, upon the Perjured Person; For it has been observed,
that many such have been struck blind as they have gone out of the Temple. And
the great Veneration that Persons have had for the Place, has often been the
occasion that matters of great Controversy (where Might was likely to overcome
Right) have been decided by an Oath in this Place. This Temple likewise at some
times, is a Place of Refuge, and a special help for injured Servants to protect
them against the cruelty of their Severe Masters. For they who fly thither,
cannot be drawn thence, but continue safe there, till by the Mediation of
Friends they are reconciled to their Masters, and mutual Oaths taken for the
faithful Performance of what is promised on both sides. And it was never known,
that ever any broke his Faith with his Servant in such a case, such an (...).
awe (through the fear of the Gods) was upon them. This Temple is situated in a
most pleasant Plain, adorned with beautiful Porches, Galleries and other
stately Buildings, becoming the dignity of the Gods. But of this sufficient is
said. And now we return to what we were before relating.

Deucetius after he had walled in his new City Palicon, divided the Country
adjacent among the Inhabitants. They grew wonderfully rich in a short time,
Ant. Chr. 451. Palicon destroyed.
both by reason of the fruitfulness of the Soil, and the multitude of the
People. But this Sunshine lasted not long, for destroyed it was, and lies
waste and desolate to this Day. The reason of which shall be declared in its
proper Place.

In Italy, after the Sacking of Sibaris by the Crotonians, one Thessalus, about
Eight and Fifty Years after getting together the remnant of the Sibarites,
rebuilt Sibaris, situated between two Rivers, Sybaris and Crathis. But the
Sibarites growing rich suddenly by reason of the fruitfulness of the Soil,
possessed the City only Six Years, and were again ejected; which we intend to
relate more fully in the following Book.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Contests between Deucetius and the Agrigentines. His strange Submission to
the Syracusians, who sent him to Corinth, with promise to supply him with
Necessaries.

WHen Antidotus was Governor of Athens, the Romans chose Lucius Publius
Posthumus, Olymp. 82. 2. An. M. 3521. Ant. Chr. 450. P. 289. Agrigentines
routed by Deucetius.
and Marcus Horatius Consuls. In their time, Deucetius the General of the
Siculi took Aetna, whose Prince was killed by Treachery. Afterward he led his
Army into the Country of the Agrigentines, and besieged Motyum, a Garrison of
the Agrigentines. They of Agrigentum sent aid to them of Motyum, but his Army
fought and routed them, and took the Place. The Winter approaching, all
returned to their several Cities. The Syracusians put to Death Bilco, the
General of the Army, the Author (as was supposed) of that ruin that was brought
upon them in this Battle, and who was judged to have had secret Correspondence
with Deucetius. At the Return of the Year, they made another General,
committing to him an Army well appointed Fight between the Siculi and
Deucetius, against the Syracusians.
in all respects, with strict Orders to ruin and destroy Deucetius. To which
end he led forth the Army, and found Deucetius encamped near (...).
Nomae, where a Battle was fought, and after many killed on both sides, the
Siculi after a valiant Resistance at last fled, but a great slaughter was made
of 'em, in the Pursuit. Many of those that escaped, fled to the Forts and
Strong Holds, for few had Hearts and Courage enough to run the same Fortune
with Deucetius.

Whilst these things were thus acting, the Agrigentines retook the Castle of
Motyum taken by the Agrigentines.
Motyum by force, wherein at that time was a Garrison of Deucetius; then they
marched to the Victorious Syracusians, and both encamped together: But
Deucetius having lost all his Treasure in the last Battle, was brought near to
the utmost extremity, partly through the Treachery of some, and partly through
the Cowardice of others of his Soldiers who deserted him.

At length seeing matters brought to so desperate a Condition, that his Friends
A remarkable Passage of Deucetius.
who were yet about him were ready to lay violent Hands upon him, to prevent
the execution of their Treacheries, he fled with all speed in the Night to
Syracuse, and whilst it was yet dark, came into the Marketplace, and fell down
before the Altars, and as an humble Suppliant, gave up both himself and his
Country into the Hands of the Syracusians. The strangeness of the thing brought
a great Concourse of People together into the Marketplace. Upon which, a
General Assembly of the Magistrates was called, and there it was debated what
was to be done in this matter. Some who were used and loved to speak much to
the People, persuaded them to take him as an Enemy, and for his many Acts of
Hostility against them, to punish him accordingly. But the Wiser sort of the
Senators who were then present, declared that the Suppliant was to be
preserved, and that a reverend regard was to be had to the Providence of God;
The generosity of the Syracusians in sparing Deucetius. Ant. Chr. 450.
and that they should not have respect so much to what Deucetius deserved, as
seriously to consider what was fit and just for them to do in such a case. To
kill one whom Providence had laid as a Suppliant at their Feet, was unjust, but
to preserve and keep to the Rules of Piety toward God, and Humanity toward
Men that submit to Mercy, greatly became the Generosity of the Syracusians.
Hereupon the People unanimously cried out, Let the Suppliant be safe. Deucetius
thus delivered, the Syracusians sent him back to Corinth, and commanded him
there to continue the rest of his Days, with a Promise to supply him with all
things necessary for his comfortable support. And now having performed our
Promise in setting forth those things that happened the Year next before the
Athenian Expedition into Cyprus under Cymon their General, we conclude this
Book.

THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK XII.
The PREFACE.
HE who seriously considers the incertainty and instability of Humane Affairs,
must needs be struck with great admiration; for he will find that nothing which
amongst Men is accounted Good, is purely such; nor any thing that is esteemed
Bad, is perfectly or absolutely evil, without some ingredient of Profit and
Advantage: Which Lesson we may learn from what is before Related, if we ponder
and digest things well. For the Expedition of Xerxes the King of Persia into
Greece by reason of his vast Army, terrified the Grecians to the highest
degree, who were by that War in great danger to be brought into absolute
Slavery, and might justly fear that Greece was likely to fall into the same
condition with the Greek Cities in Asia, who were not long before brought under
the power of the Persians. But beyond all expectation, the event of this War,
was wonderful, for the Grecians were not only delivered from this threatening
Storm, but by that occasion gained an everlasting Renown, and every City in
Greece thereby abounded with so much Wealth, that their sudden Turn of Fortune
into such a height of Prosperity was admired by all: For Fifty Years together
from that time, Greece flourished in all Felicity; in which time, by the Wealth
that abounded amongst them, all good Arts were highly improved, and excellent
Artists are recorded to have flourished in this Age; amongst whom was Phidias
that famous Statuary; and several other Arts and Sciences Phidias the Statuary.
then advanced to an extraordinary degree. But the great honor of Greece was
Philosophy and Oratory, and chiefly among the Athenians, Those that were
eminent for Philosophy, were Socrates, Plato and Aristotle: For Oratory,
Pericles, Isocrates and his Scholars. There were others no less famous for
Military Discipline and excellent Commanders, as Miltiades, Themistocles,
Aristides, Cimon, Mironides, and many others, of whom it would be too tedious
to give a particular account. For the Athenian Name was highly honored almost
through all parts of the World; for they so enlarged their Dominion that by
their own strength without the help of the Lacedaemonians, P. 292.
and them of Peloponesus, they routed the mighty Armies of the Persians, both
by Sea and Land; and did so weaken that great Empire, that they compelled it
upon Treaties to set free all the Grecian Cities in Asia: The particulars
whereof are distinctly and at large related in the former Book, and in this we
have at present in hand. And now we are come to the Matters designed to be
treated of, endeavoring (as near as we can) to fix the time when things were
done. We began the Book next before this with the Passage of Xerxes into
Greece, and continued it with an account of affairs every where happening from
that time to the Year next before the Expedition of the Athenians against
Cyprus under Cymon their General. In this we shall begin with that Expedition,
and proceed to the War decreed by the Athenians against the Syracusians.

CHAP. I.
Cymon the Athenian Admiral. his Expedition into Cyprus. Peace concluded
between the Persians and Athenians. Cymon dies in Cyprus.

EVthydemus being chief Governor of Athens, Lucius Quintus Cinnatius and Marcus
Fabius Vibulanus Roman Consuls, Fortune frowned upon the Athenians; Olymp. 82.
3 An. Mu. 3520. Ant. Chapter 448.
for in assisting the Egyptians against the Persians, they lost all their Ships
in the Island An Island in Egypt in that part called Delta.
Prosopis; but not long after a new War was Determined against the Persians for
the Liberties of the Grecian Cities in Asia.

For this purpose the Athenians rigged out a Navy of Two Hundred Galleys, and
made Cymon the Son of Miltiades Admiral, and ordered him to make straight for
Cyprus, and there invade the Persians. Accordingly he forthwith Sailed thither
Cymon invades Cyprus.
with a brave Fleet, well'd Manned and Victual'd, and in all other things in
every respect sufficiently provided. Artabasus was then Admiral of the Persian
Fleet, and lay with Three Hundred Ships at Cyprus: And Megabyzus was General of
the Ant. Chapter 448.
Persian Land Forces, and encamped with an Army of Three Hundred Thousand Men
in Cilicia.

Cymon being Master at Sea, landed his Men at Cyprus, and forced Citium and
Malus, but used his Victory with great Moderation and Humanity; having received
A Sea Fight at Cyprus.
Intelligence that Fleets were come from Phenicia and Celicia to the assistance
of the Islanders, he hois'd up Sail, Fought with them, sunk many of their
Vessels, and took an Hundred, together with their Men, and pursued the rest
even to Phenicia. The Persians with the remnant of the Fleet that was left fled
to Megabyzus, where he lay encamped. But the Athenians without delay pursued
them, and landed Ante Chr. 448. A Battle at land in Cilicia with the Persians.
their Men and set upon the Enemy, but lost in this Fight Anaxicrates, Vice
Admiral of the Athenian Fleet, who Fought with much Gallantry, and there fell
with Honor. However the Athenians got the Day, and after they had made a great
Slaughter of their Enemies, returned to their Ships, and Sailed back to Cyprus.
These were the things done in the first Year of the Cyprian War.

After this, when Pedieus was Archon of Athens, the Romans bestowed the
Consular Dignity upon Marcus Valerius Lactuca and Sporius Virginius Tricostus.
In the Olymp. 82. 4. Ant. Chapter 447. An. Mu. 3521.
time of their Government Cymon continuing Master at Sea, brought most of the
Cities of Cyprus under the power of the Athenians: But Salamis the Metropolis
was a very strong Persian Garrison, well stored with Arms, Ammunition and
Provision of all sorts; therefore he judged it of mighty consequence and
Advantage if he could gain this Place; for he conceived if this were done that
the whole Island would easily fall into his Hands, and the Persians would be
altogether discouraged, and not being able to relieve Salamis (the Athenians
being Masters Salamis in Cyprus besieged by Cymon.
at Sea) would be deserted and despised by all their Confederats. Lastly, he
concluded, that if the whole Island of Cyprus were by force of Arms subdued,
the chief ends of the War were obtained; and so it happend: For the Athenians
P. 293. Ant. Chapter 447.
laying close Siege to the City, Assaulted and Battered it every day. But the
Garrison being well furnished with Arms and all other necessaries, easily
defended themselves from the Walls against all the strength of their Enemies.

In the mean time Artaxerxes the King of Persia, hearing of the defeating of
his Armies in Cyprus, called together a Council of War, where it was determined
that it was most for the Public Good to make Peace with the Grecians: Whereupon
Expresses were sent to the Generals and Officers of the Persians to make Peace
with them upon any Terms. Artabasus and Megabyzus forthwith dispatched
Ambassadors to Athens, to treat of Peace, whose Conditions being accepted by
the Athenians, they sent likewise Plenipotentiaries, the chief of whom was
Callias the Son of Hipponicus.

And these were the Articles of Peace between the Persians and the Athenians
Peace concluded between the Persians and Athenlans.
and their Confederats, to wit, that all the Greek Cities in Asia should be
free and governed by their own Laws. That none of the Persian Commanders with
any Force should come within three Days Journey of the Sea. That they should
not Sail in any Man of War between A City in Pamphilia.
Phaselis and A City in Lycia.
Cyane. When these were confirmed by the King and the Officers of his Army, the
Athenians on the other side agreed and engaged not to invade any of the
Provinces of Artaxes. Peace thus concluded, the Athenians withdrew their Forces
from Cyprus Triumphing in the glory of their Victories, and in the advantages
of the Peace. But whilst the Army stayed in Cyprus, Cymon fell Sick and there
Dyed. Cymon dies. Olymp. 83. Ant. Chapter 446.
Afterward, Philiscus being chief Ruler at Athens, the Romans choosing Titus
Romilius Vaticanus and Caius Veturius Cicurinus Consuls, was Celebrated the
Eighty Third Olympiad, in which Crison of Himera carried the Victory. At this
time the Megarians revolted from the Athenians, and by their Ambassadors sent
to Sparta, The Megarians revolt from Athenia(...)ns
made a League with them; with which Treachery the Athenians enraged sent their
Forces into their Country, who robbed and spoiled every where, and so laden
with Plunder returned home. The Citizens indeed issued out of the Town for the
Defense of the Country, and engaged, but were beaten and driven within their
Walls.

CHAP. II.
The Megarians revolt from the Athenians, and are beaten. The Athenians routed
at Cheronea by the Beotians. Many Cities revolt. A Peace is Concluded.

AFter these things, when Tymarchides was chief Governor of Athens, Sporius
Tarpeius and Aulus Asterius Fontinus being created Roman Consuls, the Olymp.
83. 2 An. M. 3525. Ant. Chapter 445.
Lacedaemonians made an Irruption into Attica, and wasted and destroyed the
Country far and near; and after they had taken several Forts and Castles
returned into Peloponesus. However Tolmedes the Athenian General took Cheronea;
but the Beotians joining together supriz'd him, upon which a Bloody Battle was
Fought at Cheronea, in which Tolmedes was killed, though Fighting with great
Resolution, and the rest of the Athenians were all killed or taken. By this
remarkable Slaughter the Athenians were compelled for the redeeming of the
Captives, to restore all the Cities of Beotia under their dominion unto their
ancient Liberties. Afterward, at the time when Calimachus was Archon of Athens
and Sextus Olymp. 83. 3
Quintilius Tergeminus Roman Consuls; In Greece many Cities revolted from the
Athenians, who were grown very low by reason of the late defeat at Cheronea,
Ant. Chapter 445.
especially the Inhabitants of Eubea were plotting and contriving some
dangerous Designs. Pericles, therefore being made General, makes for Eubea with
a great Army, and assaulted and took the City of the Called Hestiea.
Hestieans, and all the Citizens Captives, and transplanted them, and by this
so terrified the rest that they all submitted unto the Athenian Government. And
a Peace was concluded for Peace Concluded by the Cities with Athens for 30
Years.
Thirty Years, and the Articles were Signed and Sealed by Callias and Chares.

CHAP. III.
The War between the Agrigentines and Syracusians in Sicily. The War between
them of Crotona and the Siberites. Sibaris razed. The Building of Thurium.
Charondas his good Laws in Thurium. His remarkable Death. The Laws of Zaleucus
of Locris.

IN Sicily Wars arose between them of Syracuse and of Agrigentum for these P.
294.
Reasons. After the Syracusians had broken the Power of Ducetius Prince of the
Siculi, upon his submission to the People for Mercy, they pardoned him, but
commanded him to lead a private Life at Corinth: But he continued not long
there before he broke all his Engagements and Agreements, and pretending that
he was commanded by the Oracle to People the (...).
pleasant Sea Coast in Sicily, he arrived in the Island with a great Number of
Men, as Colonies to Plant there. Some of the Siculi joined him, and amongst
them one Archonides, Prince of Now St. Nicholas.
Erbita: While he was intent upon his Colony, the Agrigentines partly out of
envy to the Syracusians, and likewise because they had spared Deucetius their
common Enemy, without their Consent, make War upon the Syracusians. Upon this
the Cities of the Siculi then divided; some joined with the Agrigentines,
others with the Syracusians, and great Armies are raised on both sides, and the
Cities are pressed to the War with great Importunity. At length emcamping one
over against the other, at the River Himera, they came to a Battle, and the
Syracusians got the day, and killed a Thousand of the Agrigentines upon the
Place. But presently after the Fight, the Agrigentines sent Ambassadors to
Syracuse to make Peace, which was agreed unto upon Conditions. Whilst things
were thus acting in Sicily the City Thurium was Built in Italy: And this was
the Thurium Built in Italy.
occasion;

The Grecians sometime before having Built Sybaris, in a short time the City
grew very Rich by reason of the fruitfulness of the Soil. For being Situated
between two Rivers, Crathis and Sybaris (from whence it took it is Name) and the
Inhabitants having a large and rich Country to Till, they grew Rich on a The
City Sybaris very rich.
sudden, and taking in many into the Freedom of the City, flourished to such a
degree as that they seemed to exceed all the Inhabitants of Italy. For they
were so populous that this one City had in it three hundred thousand
Inhabitants. There was at that time in the City one called Telys, who had great
Influence over the People. This Man by raising Scandals amongst the the
Citizens against those who were the Richest, so far at length prevailed with
the Sybarites, that they Banished Five Hundred of the most wealthy Citizens,
and confiscated The Wealthy Citizens Banished by the instigation of Telys.
their Estates to the public Use.

These Banished Men went to Crotona, and there (after the manner of suppliants)
fled to the Altars erected in the Forum. Hereupon Telys sent Ambassadors to the
Crotonians, either to deliver up the banished Men, or expect War. A Council was
called, and put to the question, whether they should deliver up the (...).
Italiotes, so strangers were called that lived in Italy. Pythagoras. Ant. Chapter
445. The War between the Sybarites and them of Crotona.
Suppliants to the Sybarites or engage in a War with an Enemy more powerful
than themselves. The Senate and People made some doubt, and the People first
inclined to deliver them up rather than endure the War. But afterward
Pythagoras advising them to protect the Suppliants they changed their Opinion,
and determined to Fight in their Defense.

Hereupon the Sybarites took the Field with an Army of three hundred Thousand
Men. The Crotonians had but an hundred Thousand, which were commanded by Milo
the Wrestler, who at the first Onset put to flight that Wing of the Army which
was opposite to him; for he was of invincible Strength, and had Courage
answerable to his Strength, and had been six times Victor at the Olympic
Games; when he began his Fight he was Crowned with Olmpick Wealths, wearing
(like Hercules) a Lion's Skin and a Club; at last he gained an absolute
Victory, and thereupon was much admired by his Countrymen. Upon the rout the
Crotonians gave no Quarter, but Killed all they took, so that most of the Army
was destroyed, the City was sacked and miserably laid wast and desolate. But
within fifty eight Years Sybaris rased.
after the Thessalians arrived in order to Plant there, and P. 295. Rebuilt 58
Years after.
within less than five Years after they had rebuilt the City, they were
likewise ejected by the Crotonians. For when Calimachus was Archon of Athens,
this City began to be Inhabited: But shortly after it had changed both it is
Name and Sybaris removed changed it is Name and called Thurium.
Place, being Built elsewhere by Lampo and Xenocrates, which was upon this
occasion. The Sybarites driven out of their Country a second time, sent
Ambassadors into Greece, and desired aid from the Lacedaemonians and Athenians
to assist them in restoring them to their Country, and likewise desiring that
they would send a Colony to partake with them. The Lacedaemonians rejected their
Address; but the Athenians resolved to assist them, and sent ten Ships with
Soldiers to the Sybarites, of which Lampo and Xenocrates Ant. Chapter 445.
were Generals: And Proclamation was made through all the Cities of Peloponesus
by the Athenian Heralds, that it should be lawful for any that would, to Plant
with them in their intended new Colony. Many complied, especially being moved
thereunto by the Oracle of Apollo, who advised them to Build a City there where
there was little Water, and yet Bread without Measure.

Setting Sail therefore for Italy, they at length arrived at Sybaris; and there
made diligent search for the Place commended to them by the Deity. And finding
a Fountain or Spring (not far from Sybaris) which was called Thuria, issuing
it is Waters through a brazen Pipe, called Medymnum, which signifies a Bushel
(judging this to be the Place foretold by the Oracle) they compassed it in with
a Wall, and there Built the City, calling it from the Name of the Spring
Thurium.

The City in length contained four Streets: The first they called Heraclea, the
second Aphrodisiade, the third Olympiad, the fourth Dionysiad. The breadth was
divided into three Streets; the first called Heroa, the other Thuria, and the
last Thurina. When all these Streets were filled with Houses, the City appeared
very compact and beautiful. But the Thurians continued not long at Peace
amongst Sedition at Thurium.
themselves, for a grievous Sedition (and not without some cause) began to
disturb their Commonwealth. For the Sybarites, the ancient Inhabitants, shared
all the chief Places of the Magistracy amongst themselves, and left only the
inferior Ant. Chapter 445.
Offices to the new Colonies. And the Wives of the ancient Citizens were first
admitted to Sacrifice before those that were lately brought into the Freedom of
the City. And besides, they engrossed all the Land next to the City, and
divided it among themselves, and left that which was far off to the new Comers.
This Fire of Dissension broke out into a devouring Flame, insomuch that the new
Colony (then more powerful than the other) destroyed almost all the ancient
Inhabitants, and brought the whole City into their own Power. But the Country
being very Rich, and more than was sufficient for them that remained, they sent
for many out of Greece to till and improve the Land, amongst whom they divided
both the Houses in the City that were destitute of Inhabitants, and the Land in
the Country. The Inhabitants grew very Rich in a short time, and entering into
League with the Crotonians, governed their Commonwealth from thenceforth with
great Commendation; and having settled a Democracy, divided the Citizens into
ten Tribes, and gave them Names according to their several Countries: Three
that came out of Peloponesus they called the Arcadian, Achaian and Elean. The
same Number of them that came from other more remote Parts of Greece, they
named the Beotian, Amphyctonidae, and Doridae, according to their several
Tribes. The four residue from other Countries of Greece they called the Jadans,
Athenaidae, Enboedae and Islanders. Out of the most learned and best
accomplished Citizens they chose for their Legislator Charonidas, who examined
the Laws of every Country, and picked out of every one what he judged to be the
best, and digested them all into one Body or Systeme: But Charonidas his Laws.
Ant. Chapter 445.
he added many himself of his own Contrivance: To rehearse some of which it
will not be unprofitable to the Reader. And first he institued, That whoever
Married a second Wife, and brought a Stepmother amongst his Children, should 1
Concerning second Marage. P. 296.
be removed from the Senate and Common Assemblies, for he judged that Man could
never advise his Country well who was so imprudent in his own Family: For they
that were once well Married ought to rest satisfied with such a Happiness; and
such as are unfortunate in their first Match, and yet against their own
experience commit a second Fault in the same kind, justly deserve to be noted
for Fools. To False Accusers he appointed this Punishment, That they should be
led through the City Crowned with the Shrub-Tamarisk, that it might 2 False
accusers.
appear to all, that the Offender was guilty of the highest Wickedness. And it
is reported that some Convicted of this Offense, to avoid the disgrace have
killed themselves. By the severity of this Law false Informers (the Plague of
the Commonwealth) were driven out of the City, and the Citizens lived in great
prosperity. Charonidas made likewise a new Law (never before instituted by any
former Legislator) concerning keeping bad Company. For he found by Experience,
That both the Manners and Judgments of good and honest 3 Bad Company.
Men were often depraved by the society and familiarity of wicked Men, and
drawn aside from the Paths of Virtue to the filthiness of Vice; and that such
Company like an infectious Disease seized the Minds of the very best with it is
Contagion and Corruption: For the way to Vice is down the Hill with a very easy
descent; by reason whereof many of more than ordinary Integrity, (ensnared with
the enticing Charms of Pleasure) have fallen into the highest degree of
Wickedness; desiring therefore to prevent this mischief he severly forbad the
keeping company and familiarity with lewd Men: And framed a Process against ill
Society, and imposed a severe Fine upon such as should be found Guilty. And he
made moreover another Law more excellent than this, past Ant. Chr. 445.
by, by all the ancient Lawmakers: That is, That all the Children of the
Citizens should learn to (...). 4 Teaching to Write.
Write, and the City should pay the Master Wages. For he knew that they who
were poor were not able to be at the Charge, and by consequence must lose the
advantage of Instruction for their Children: For he preferred (and not without
Cause) the (...). The praise of the Art of Writing.
knowledge of Writing to be learnt in the first place before all other Arts;
For by the help of this many things conducing to the public Good are preserved
to Posterity; as Suffrages, Decrees, Epistles, Wills Laws and other things
necessary for Instruction. Who can sufficiently set forth the praises this Art?
By this the Memory of the Dead is preserved amongst the living; by these
Messengers, they that are at the greatest distance, far absent, may be
Conversed with as present. These preserve the Opinions of the wisest Men, the
Answers of the Gods, the Learning of Philosophers, all the Sciences of the
World, and hand them down to Posterity for ever. Life is due to Nature, but how
to live well we ow to the Books of the Learned, so that by this good Law (at
the public Care and Charge) those who were illiterate before (wholly deprived
of those great Blessings) were now improved by more happy Education; so that
(we may say) he far exceeded those former Lawmakers who appointed Phisicians
for the curing of private Men's Distempers at the charge of the Public; for they
provided cures for Men's Bodies; but he for Ignorance and disease of Men's Souls.
And we never desire to have need of a P. 297.
Phisician, but are always unwilling to part with a learned Man: Many Poets
have Celebrated these Laws concerning evil Company; among others are these. --

If one Herd with bad Company
I ask not what he is, but, see,
Such as his Friends are such is he. Ant. Chr. 457.

Of his Law concerning Stepmothers mention is made thus, The lawgiver (say
they) Charonidas, amongst others made this Law. --

Let him have no repute but of a Fool
That sets a Stepdame over his House to Rule:
Nor let him for a civil Office sue,
Who to an old Plague dares to add a new:
If good luck in a Wife thou have had, then
Stick at a good hand; if bad, as most Men,
Thou Art Mad if thou seekst to be cursed again.
In truth he who miscarries twice in one and the same thing may justly be
accounted a Fool. For what Philemon the Comic Poet says of them that have
often escaped Shipwreck, some have applied to this Case.

I wonder not that one the Sea should enter
And Sail, but that he made the second venture.
It Is no wonder to see a Man Marry; but to see him twice Marry. For it is safer
and more advisable for a Man to expose himself twice to the dangers of the Sea,
than to the hazards of a second Wife. For most sad and cruel discords often
arise in Families between Parents and Children by the tricks and devices of
Stepmothers. Hence we have the frequent and horrid pieces of Villainy of this
kind represented upon the Stage by the Tragedians.

Charonidas framed another very good Law concerning the Guardianship of
Orphans. 5 About Orphans.
Upon the first view there seems to be little in it worthy taking notice of;
but Examining it more closely, we may discern much in it Wisdom and excellent
Contrivance. Their Estates he committed to the care and Guardianship of next of
Kin on their Fathers side, but their Education and the custody of their Persons
Ante Chr. 445.
to them of the Mothers. At first here seems nothing of any great weight in
this Law, but upon more serious Consideration, it will evidently appear to be a
most excellent Constitution: For if the Cause be seriously pried into why he
ordered the care of the Estate to one, and the Education of the Person to
another, the Wisdom and Prudence of the Lawmaker will be very evident: For they
on the Mother's side would never contrive any thing of prejudice to the Person
whose Estate could never come and descend to them; and the mischief was
prevented as to the Kindred of the Father's side, because the Person was not
committed to their Custody. On the other hand, in regard the Estate of the
Orphan was to fall to the Father's Kindred in case of his Death, it was to be
presumed they would take care to preserve and improve it, upon the prospect of
the possibility of it is coming unto themselves. Another Law he made against
those that ran 6 Against such as ran from their Colors.
away from their Colors or refused to take up Arms for the Defense of their
Country: For whereas former Lawgivers made it Death, his Edict was, That such
Men should sit three days in the Forum clothed in Woman's Apparel; which
Constitution as it was more moderate than those in other places, so the
greatness of the disgrace did work more upon ingenious Spirits to deterr them
from softness and effeminatness; judging it far better to dye than to undergo
so much disgrace in their own Country. By this way he destroyed not those that
were Guilty, but reserved them for the future Service of the City as occasion
should be; who in all likelihood after such disgrace would carry themselves
better, and endeavor to wipe off the stain of their former reproach by doing
something more than ordinary for the time to come. The Severity and Strictness
likewise The severity of his Laws as to the repeating of them.
of his Laws gave a perpetual vigor to them; For it was absolutely forbidden to
depart in the least from the Letter of the Law though it were never so severe or
inconvenient. But if any were fit to be repealed or amended, he gave power for
that purpose. For he judged it fit and just for every Man to Stoop to the Ant.
Chr. 445.
Authority of the Lawgiver, but to suffer the Cavils and Exceptions of every
private Man to prevail (nay though they seemed to tend to the Public good) was
most absurd. And by this means he restrained those that would in giving of of
Judgment for criminal Matters bring in their own Glosses and Expositions
against the express Words of the Law, lest by their Cavils the Authority of the
Laws should come to nothing. And hereupon it is reported that some Prosecutors
P. 298.
against Criminals said to the Judges, that either the Law or the Malefactor
must of necessity be preserved, Charonidas therefore appointed something more
than usual concerning the amendment of the Laws. For whereas he saw that there
were many in diverse Cities who rashly, and hand over head going about to
correct and amend the Laws, did nothing else but (by corrupting them) involve
the common People in Seditions; he published this most excellent Law (differing
from all that were before) That any Person who would have any Law to be altered
or amended, a Council should be called, and he who would have an alteration, 8.
Concerning amendment of the Laws.
should have a Rope put about his Neck, and so continue while the Votes of the
People-concerning the change of the Law were in taking; and if the Assembly did
approve of the new Law, then the Author should be discharged; A notable Law to
prevent Innovation.
but if it were rejected, then he should be forthwith hanged. By this so severe
a Caution to prevent Innovation, new Lawmakers disappeared, and none durst so
much as whisper any thing concerning the amendment or alteration of the Laws.

From that time forward, there were at Thurium only Three (forced by urgent
Provocations) that appeared and stood up to persuade the People to Abrogation
of some Laws. For there was a Law, that he who struck out the Eye Ant. Chr. 445.
of another, should have his own Eye plucked out. It happened that one who had
only one Eye (by the injury of another) lost that also, so that he was
altogether Eye for Eye. The Story of him that had but one Eye.
blind. In this case although the Offender was to lose his Eye for the injury
done to the other, yet the punishment was not thought equivalent to the nature
of the Offense; for he who made his Fellow Citizen wholly blind, although by
losing one of his Eyes, he satisfied the letter of the Law, yet the loss and
prejudice was not equal; and therefore it was conceived to be most equitable
and just, that he who deprived another of his sight wholly, should lose both
his Eyes, if the punishment were proportioned to the Offense. This blind Man
therefore (moved and heated with the pain and indignity of the thing)
complained to the People of his sad Condition, and made his Address to them One
moved to have some Laws amended.
for amendment of the Law. At length having the Rope about his Neck, he
prevailed, and the Law was abolished, and another made more effectual in its
place, and so he escaped hanging. Another Law likewise was moderated, whereby
power was given to the Wife in some cases, to leave her Husband, and marry whom
else she thought fit. For one grown old (being forsaken by his young Wife)
proposed to the People for an amendment of the Law to have this further
Addition, That it might be lawful for any Wife that had a desire to leave Law
about Marriage.
her Husband, to marry any other Man, provided he were no younger than her
former Husband; and that he who cast off his Wife, should marry none younger
than the Wife he rejected. And he succeeded so well in his Proposal, that by
having the Law amended, he not only escaped the Rope, but by this means, his
Wife that had a Mind to a young Fellow, was forced to return to him again. Ant.
Chr. 445.


The Third Law (which Solon likewise had made) which was amended, was that
concerning Virgins and Orphans. The Law was, that where there was an Heiress
left, the next of Kin might demand her in Marriage; and so on the other hand, a
young Woman an Orphan, might demand him that was of her next Kindred in
Marriage, and he should be forced to marry her; or if she were poor, give her
Five Hundred Dram was of the Value of 7 d. in our Money.
Drams for her Portion. There was an Orphan of this kind left of a good
Family, but yet extreme Poor; she by reason of her Poverty in no likelihood to
get a Husband, made her application to the People, and with many Tears bemoaned
her desolate condition, and despicable state of Life, and desired an amendment
of the Law to this purpose, That in lieu of the Five Hundred Drams, the
next of Kin whom by the Law the Orphan might demand in Marriage, should be
forced to marry her. The People commiserating her Condition, changed the Law,
and so she was delivered from P. 299.
the Rope, and the rich Kinsman was forced to marry the poor Maid without any
Dowry.

Now it remains we should speak of the Death of Charonidas, concerning which,
The remarkable Death of Charonidas.
there happened something remarkable and wonderful; for when he was gone forth
against some Robbers that made inroads into the Country, before he returned,
there happened a Tumult to be raised by the People in one of their Common
Assemblies. Determining therefore to make diligent Enquiry into the Cause and
Authors of the Sedition, he came hastily in amongst them, with his Sword girt
at his side; and a Law he had made, that none should come armed into the
Senate House; but had forgotten his Sword then at his Side, and so rushed into
the Assembly, and thereby gave an occasion to them that maligned him, to accuse
him: Upon which, one cries out, You break the Law which you your self made. No,
says he, but I will confirm it; and forthwith ran himself through. Vid. lib.
13. f. 53.
Some Writers ascribe this Fact to Diocles the Lawmakers of Syracuse.

But having spoken enough of Charonidas, we shall now relate something in short
of Zaleuchus the Lawmakers, because they were much alike in their
Consultations, The Lawmakers Zaleuchus.
and bent their Minds and Thoughts to the same things, and flourished in Cities
near adjoining one to another. Zaleuchus was an Italian born at Locris, of a
noble Family, of great Learning, and Scholar to Pythagoras. He was of great
esteem and account in his Country, and chosen by the People to be their
Lawmakers. He began his Laws first with the Worship of the Gods. In the Preface
he requires the Inhabitants, That in the First place, and above all, they
should be fully persuaded, and Law about Religion. Excellent Notions and Rules
of Natural Religion relating to Divine Worship, and this by a Heathen.
undoubtedly believe that there were Gods; and that devoutly looking up to
Heaven, and viewing the Beauty and admirable Harmony and Order thereof, they
should judge and certainly conclude, that that great Work was not of Men, or
came there by chance: And therefore he ordained, they should adore and worship
the Gods, from whom all that is good descends upon Men. And to that end, that
they ought to have their Minds pure and unspotted, inasmuch as the Gods are
better pleased with the just and honest Actions of Righteous Men, than with all
their costly Sacrifices. Having made this Preface or Introduction, he then
subjoyns his Precepts. First, That none should be implacable Ant. Chr. 445. 1.
Against Implacableness.
one against another, but that all should so manage their Animosities; as to
keep a reserve in a short time to be reconciled, and in full Friendship with
their Adversaries; and if any did otherwise, such a Man should be reputed of a
fierce and inhumane Disposition. Secondly, He commanded the Magistrates 2.
About Magistrates.
that they should not be Proud and Domineering; that they should not give
Judgment in any matter, either for Love or Hatred. And in other particulars, he
devised many things with great Wisdom, Prudence and Ingenuity. 3. Whereas in
all other Countries, by the excess and extravagance of Women 3. Against the
Expense of Women.
much Silver was spent and wasted, by a witty and ingenious kind of Punishment,
he restrained their Excess, for he ordered, That no Woman that was Free of the
City should be attended Abroad with any more than one Servant, unless she were
Drunk. That none should walk abroad in the Night, except it were with an intent
to play the Who^e, nor wear golden Ornaments or Garments embroidered with Gold,
unless with the same intent: Nor that any 4. Expenses of Men.
Man should wear a Gold Ring, of a Milesian Garment, unless he were guilty of
Fornication or Adultery. By these dishonorable Exceptions and Conditions of
Indemnity (which were Punishments in themselves) he easily restrained the
Citizens from Luxury and Excess, for none were willing to expose themselves as
laughing-stocks to their Fellow Citizens, by owning themselves guilty of such
foul Offenses. Many other Laws concerning Contracts and other Differences which
might arise, were with great Judgment made by him, which would be too tedious
particularly to relate, and beside the scope and intent of our History: We
shall therefore return whence we made a digression. P. 300. Olymp. 83. 4. Ant.
Chapter 443.


Lysimachides was chief Ruler of Athens, when the Romans conferred the Consular
dignity upon Titus Menenius, and Poplius Sestius Capitolinus. In their time the
Sybarites that had escaped in the late Sedition, seated themselves at the River
Tarentum, where they continued for some time, but at length were rooted out,
and utterly destroyed by the Brutii. In Greece in the mean time, the Athenians
having recovered Eubea, drove the Hestians out of the City; and sending thither
a Colony of a Thousand Citizens of their own, they divided the City and Land
adjacent amongst them by Lot.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Decemviri in Rome, chosen to make Laws. The War between the Thurians
and Tarentines. The sad Story of the Daughter of one Lucius Virginius in Rome,
which caused a disturbance and great Sedition. The Law of the Twelve Tables.
Peace all over the World.

WHen Praxitiles was Governor of Athens, the Eighty Fourth Olympiad was Olymp.
84. 1. Ant. Chapter 442.
celebrated (in which Crison of Himera was Victor) and at Rome, Ten Persons
(called the Decem-viri) were chosen to compose new Laws. Appius.
Publius Claudius Regillanus, Titus Crenucius.
Minutius, Sporius Viturius, Caius Julius, Servius.
Caius Sulpitius, Publius Sestius, T. Romilius.
Romilius, Sporius Posthumous, A. Manlius.
Culbinius and Publius Horatius. By these Persons were Laws made. In their time
a War broke out between the Thurians and them of Tarentum; in which War the
Countries were wasted on both sides by Inroads by Land, and Invasions from Sea;
many small Battles and Skirmishes were fought, but nothing done of any moment.

Lysanias being chief Ruler at Athens, the Romans again chose Ten Men for
Olymp. 84. 2. Ante Chr. 441. The Story of the Daughter of Virginius.
making of Laws. Appius Claudius, Marcus Cornelius, Lucius Minutius, Caius
Sergius, Quintus Pitilius, Marcus Rabuleius, T. Antonius Meranda, Q. Fabius
Vibulanus, C. Duilius, and Sp. Oppius. But these could not perfect the Business
wherein they were employed; for Appius.
one of them fell in Love with a beautiful Virgin, but of small Fortune, whom
he endeavored to debauch by Money. But when he saw he could not gain his
Design by those means, he subborn'd a One Marcus Claudius.
Fellow fit for his purpose to claim her for his Bondslave, and to bring her
before the Decem-viri, and demand Judgment against her as his Slave; which was
easily obtained from a corrupt Judge, the Author of the Villainy. She being
delivered to him, the Sycophant Knave carried her away as his Bond-maid. In the
mean time, the One Lucius Virginius.
Father of the Young Woman, moved with Grief and Rage at the indignity offered,
hastened to the Court, where seeing no hopes of redress, he followed his
Daughter close behind her, and spying a Knife in a Butcher's Shop, as he passed
by, he snatched it up, and forthwith stabbed his Daughter to Death, to avoid the
indignity and disgrace of such a condition, and forthwith without delay,
hastening out of the City, made to the Army that was then encamped at Algidum,
and with many Tears declared his miserable Condition, and implored their
Assistance; which on the sudden affected them all with Commiseration, and
great sorrow at his Calamity; upon which (being all stirred up with a
resolution to relieve the distressed Father) in the Night they rush into Rome,
and possess themselves of the Aventine Mount. As soon as the Day brake, the
Decem-viri, being informed of the Rage of the Soldiers against the wickedness
of the Fact (by force of Arms resolving to defend their Colleague) got together
a multitude of Young Men to dispute the matter with their Adversaries by the
Sword. And now a great and bloody Fight seemed to be at hand, when some of the
Citizens of the best Quality, foreseeing the danger, interposed by Messengers
to both Parties, in order to compose the Difference; entreating and earnestly
beseeching them, that they would forbear, and not involve their Country in
Blood and Destruction. At length the matter was agreed upon these Conditions,
That there Tribunes of the People chosen at Rome.
should be Ten called (...), Tribunes of the People.
Tribunes of the People chosen, who should have Sovereign Power and Authority
over all the rest of the Magistrates of the City, and who might protect the
common Liberty of the People: And that one of the Consuls every Year should be
chosen out of the Senators, and the other out of the Common People. Yea,
further, that they should have Power to choose both Consuls out from among
themselves if they thought fit. And this Law was then made to be a Check to the
exorbitant power of the Patricians; for they Ant. Chr. 441. P. 301.
under color of their great and high Birth, and the glory of their Families,
with insufferable Pride engrossed to themselves all the power and authority of
the City. Amongst the Conditions it was further added, That the Tribunes of the
People, at the end of every Year, should appoint as many new ones in their room
to succeed, and if they did neglect it, they should be burnt alive. And though
the Tribunes could not agree in their Choice, yet they should continue still in
their Offices in the mean time. And this was the end of the great Commotion at
Rome.

Diphilus being Archon of Athens, the Romans created Marcus Horatius, and
Olymp. 84. 3. Ant. Chapter 440. The Twelve Tables at Rome.
Lucius Valerius Potitus Consuls, who perfected the Laws which suffered an
irruption by the Sedition. For there were then Ten of the Twelve Tables (as
they were called) only finished, the other Two were added by these Consuls. The
Roman Laws thus perfected, the Consuls ordered them to be engraven upon Twelve
Tables of Brass, and fixed them to the Pleaders Desk in the face of the Court.
And these Laws thus written briefly and plainly without any flourish of Words
remain unto this Day.

About the time these things were done, most Nations through the World were at
Peace; for the Persians made a double League with the Grecians, and with the
Athenians and their Confederates, Most Nations of the World at Peace.
whereby Liberty was restored to all the Greek Cities of Asia. The other
afterward was with the Lacedaemonians, by which This may be the time mentioned
in Zachary, Zach. 1. 11. which continued to the time of Darius Nothus, Ant.
Chr. 440.
it was agreed quite contrary, that the Greek Cities in Asia, should remain
under the power of the Persians. In like manner, the Grecians were at Peace
among themselves, the Athenians and Spartans having entered into a League for
Thirty Years. And all was likewise quiet in Sicily, the Carthaginians having
made Peace with Gelon, and all the Grecian Cities submitted to them of
Syracuse. And the Agrigentines after the Slaughter at Himera, accepted of Terms
of Peace. And all the People of Italy, France, Spain, and most Parts of the
World, were at perfect Concord one with another. Therefore we have no account
in History of any thing memorable done in War during this time; but all were
every where at rest, solacing themselves with Sports and Sacred Festivals, and
other Jollities, the common Attendants of a prosperous State and Condition.

CHAP. V.
The War between the Samians and the Melesians. A Sedition in Samos, which
revolts from the Athenians. The War in Sicily by the Syracusians against the
Trinacrians.

TImocles was now chief Governor of Athens, and Larius Herminius, and Titus
Virginius Tricostus, Roman Consuls. In their time the Samians break forth into
War against the Milesians concerning Olymp. 84. 4. Ant. Chr. 439.
(...) pro Priene, Thucyd. Priene, a Town in Ionia, under the Mountain Micale.
Pericles sent against the Samians.
Priene; and discerning the Athenians more to favor the Milesians, they
revolted from them. Hereupon the Athenians sent Pericles (made Admiral some
time before) with Forty Sail against the Samians, who approached their City,
easily reduced it, and there established a Democracy. And having imposed a
Mulct of Eighty Talents upon them, and received as many Youths for Hostages, he
committed them to the care and custody of the Lemnians; and so having in a
short time finished with good success all for which he was sent, he returned to
Athens.

After this, a grievous Sedition happened in Samos, some being for the
Democracy, Seditions in Samos.
others endeavoring to set up an Aristocracy, whereby the City was in a mighty
popular Tumult. They who were against the Democracy went over to Sardis in Asia
to Pissuthines the Persian Governor to desire aid, who lends them Seven Hundred
Soldiers, hoping by this means to bring Samos under his power. P. 302.
The Samians with this aid, loosing from Asia in the Night, stole secretly upon
the City, and by the help of their Accomplices, entered and surpised it; and
being thus easily possessed, forthwith eject all of the contrary Faction. Then
having stolen and carried away the Hostages out of Lemnos, and strengthened
Samos with Garrisons, they declare themselves open Enemies against the
Athenians; who again send against them Pericles with Sixty Sail; who overcame
them in a Sea Fight though they had Seventy Sail. Upon this (with the help of
Twenty Five Ships, which joined him from Chios and Mitylene) he besieged Samos;
and some few Days after, leaving part of his Forces to maintain the Siege, with
the rest he made against the Phenician Fleet, which the Persians sent to the
aid of the Samians. The Samians taking advantage of the opportunity of his
departure, suddenly set upon the rest of his Fleet and routed them; with which
success they grew very proud and haughty. But Pericles hearing of the ruin of
his Fleet left behind, returned without delay, and got together a strong and
numerous Navy, fully resolving utterly to ruin the Enemy's Fleet; And being
speedily supplied by the Athenians with Threescore Ships, and with Thirty from
Chios and Mitylene, he renewed the Siege both by Sea and Land, wearying the
City with continual Assaults. He was the first that made use of those warlike
Engines called Battering Rams, and Scorpions, by the assistance and ingenuity
Battering-Rams and Scorpions. Ant. Chr. 439.
of Artemon the Lacedemonian. And by his fierce and violent Assaults, battering
down the Walls with his Engines, the City fell into his Hands. And after he had
put to Death the Authors of the defection, he caused the Samians to pay Two
Hundred Talents in Compensation for the charge of the War. He carried away
likewise all their Ships, and demolished the Walls; and when he had restored
the Democracy, returned into his own Country. To this time the Thirty Years
Truce between the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians continued unviolated. And
with these things was this Year remarkable.

When Myrichides governed the state of Athens, Lucius Julius, and Marcus
Geganius Olym. 85. 1. An. Mu. 3531. Ant. Chr. 438.
were Roman Consuls. The Eleans then celebrated the Eighty Fifth Olympiad, in
which Crisus of Himera was the Second Victor. In these times in Sicily,
Ducetius formerly Prince of the Siculi, planted the Country of the Callatines,
and having settled there many Colonies, began at length to take upon him the
Sovereign power over the Siculi: But falling sick, both his Life and his
Designs Ducetius dies.
vanished together.

The Syracusians now being Lords of all the Cities of Sicily (except Trinacria)
War between the Syracusians and Trinacrians.
resolved to gain that likewise by force of Arms; for they were exceedingly
jealous of the Trinacrians, because they were very rich, lest they should at
any time after gain the Sovereignty of the Sicilians.
Siculi, to whom they were related as Kindred. This City both then and ever,
had many valiant Men amongst them, and upon that account was ever esteemed the
principal City of the Siculi, for it was full of good Commanders, Men of brave
and daring Spirits. The Syracusians therefore gathered together all their
Forces both from Syracuse, and from among their Confederates, and marched
against the Trinacrians; who being destitute of all assistance, by reason the
rest of the Cities were subject to Syracuse, were in a bloody Battle hard put
to it; and after a resolute and valiant opposition, all gallantly died upon the
spot. For those that were wounded, rather than to undergo the disgrace of being
Captives, dispatched themselves. They of Syracuse having obtained this Victory
over a People never before subdued, P. 303.
made all the Inhabitants Captives, and razed the City to the Ground. The
richest of the Spoils they sent to Delphos as a grateful Offering to the Gods.

CHAP. VI.
The Corinthian War against Corcyra. Potidea revolts from the Athenians.
Quarrels in Thurium. Meton's Year. Heraclea in Italy built. Potidea besieged by
Phormio.

GLaucides the Chief Magistrate of Athens, Titus Quintus, and Agrippa Furius,
Olym. 85. 2. An. M. 3533. Ant. Chapter 437.
Consuls of Rome: The Syracusians (being Victorious as is before related) fell
a building of Ships of Three Oars upon a Bank, and doubling the number of their
Horse, busi'd themselves in raising a Land-Army. And that they might. raise,
and get together a great Treasure and Fond of Money, they exacted larger
Contributions from their Subjects; and this they did with a Design to subject
all Sicily by degrees to their Dominion.

Whilst these things were in doing, the Corinthian War (as it is called) broke
The Corinthian War.
forth upon the following occasion. The Epidamnians, the Inhabitants of the
Coasts of the Adriatic Sea, being Colonies brought from Corcyra and Corinth,
were greatly distressed with Tumults and Seditions amongst themselves, where
the stronger Party cast many of the contrary Faction out of the City; whereupon
the Exiles joined together, and calling the Illyrians to their Assistance and
Confederacy, they made against Epidamnum with a great Fleet: And being the
Barbarians were very strong, they easily possessed themselves of the Country,
and besieged the City. They of Epidamnum not able to resist so great a Force,
Ant. Chr. 437.
sent to Corcyra for aid, who were of the same Stock and Kindred; but being
disregarded by them, they made their Application to the Corinthians, owning
that City to be their only Metropolis, and desired a Supply of more Citizens in
the room of those that were ejected. The Corinthians partly out of pity to them
of Epidamnum, and partly out of an old grudge they bore them of Corcyra (for
that they only of all the Colonies, brought from them thither, neglected to
send to them as their Metropolis, the usual Offerings) decreed Aid to be sent
to them of Epidamnum. And accordingly they sent both a new Supply of Citizens,
and a Guard of Soldiers sufficient for the defense of the City. The Corcyreans
much enraged at this, fitted out a Fleet of Fifty Sail against them. The
Admiral of which Fleet after his arrival commanded them of Epidamnum, to
receive the Exiles: And then by Ambassadors proposed to the Corinthian
Garrison, That the matter relating to the Colony, might rather be ended in an
orderly Course of Justice, than by force of Arms. But the Corinthians refusing,
it came at length to a War; and Fleets were prepared, and Associations and
Confederacies made on both sides: And these were the Causes of that Corinthian
War. In the mean time, the Romans made War against the Volsci. At first they
began with light and small Skirmishes; but at length in a formal Battle the
Romans became Victorious, and slew most of their Enemies upon the Field.

When Theodorus governed Athens, and the Romans constituted Marcus Genusius,
Olymp. 85. 3. Ant. Chapter 436.
and Agrippa Curtius Chelon, Consuls; in Italy the Nation of the Campanians
began to flourish; so called from the Fruitfulness of the Country round about
them. In Asia the Archaeanactidae had now held the Kingdom of the Cimmerian
Bosphorus for the space of Two and Forty Years; to whom then succeeded
Spartacus, who reigned Seven Years. In Greece the Corinthians and Corcyreans
were preparing on both sides Navies for Fights at Sea: And presently the
Corinthians Sea Fight between the Corinthians and Corcyreans.
made toward the Enemy with Seventy Galleys bravely sitted out; and the
Corcyreans met them with Fourscore, routed them, and took Epidamnum by Storm,
and made all the Corinthians their Prisoners, but put all the rest to the
Sword. The Corinthians by this overthrow, wholly discouraged, returned into
Peloponesus. P. 304.
The Corcyreans now become Masters of this part of the Sea, invaded the
Confederates of the Corinthians, and wasted their Country.

This Year ended, Euthymenis entered upon the Government of Athens, and at
Olymp. 85. 4. An. Mu. 3535.
Rome Three Military Tribunes were appointed Magistrates with Consular dignity,
Aulus Sempronius, Lucius Atilius, and Titus Celius. At that time the
Corinthians, not long before overcome at Sea, determined to put forth another
Navy more glorious than the former. And to that end getting together Materials
from all Parts, and hiring Ship-Carpenters out of the Cities, they built Ships
with all care and earnestness, and prepared all manner of Arms and Weapons, and
every thing necessary for War; some Ships they built new, others they repaired,
and some they borrowed of their Confederates. Nor were they of Corcyra idle,
for they were nothing inferior to their Enemies in care and diligence; whence
it was apparent how dreadful a War was like to ensue. In the mean time, the
Athenians sent a Colony to Amphipolis, chosen partly out of their own City, and
partly out of the neighboring Forts and Castles.

Nausimachus being chief Ruler of Athens, Titus Quintus, and Marcus Geganius
Macerinus were chosen Roman Consuls. At that time, the Eleans celebrated the
Olymp. 86. 1. An. Mu. 3536. Ant. Chr. 435.
Eighty Sixth Olympiad, in which Theopompus of Thessaly carried away the Prize.
The Corcyreans hearing of the great Preparations that were making against them,
sent Ambassadors to Athens, to desire their Assistance, which was done likewise
by the Corinthians. The Assemblies being called, and audience given to the
Ambassadors on both sides, it was determined to join with them of Corcyra. The
Athenians join with the Corcyreans.
And without delay, they sent them Ten Ships of Three Oars in a Seat, well
Manned and provided, promising to send them more, as there should be occasion.

The Corinthians (now abandoned by the Athenians) having Ninety Ships of their
own, borrowed Sixty more of their Confederates, and so made up a Fleet of an
Hundred and Fifty Sail, and furnished it with choice Commanders, and forthwith
made out against the Corcyreans, to fight them upon the first opportunity. As
soon as the Corcyreans heard that their Enemies Fleet was near at Hand, they
made forth against them with a Navy of an Hundred and Twenty Sail, accounting
those of Athens.

The Fleets engaged, and fought with great Resolution; the Corinthians at the
Another Fight at Sea. Ant. Chr. 435.
first had the Advantage, but a Fleet of Twenty Sail from Athens just then
appearing (sent in pursuance of a second Address made to them) the Corcyreans
got the Day. The next Day the Corcyreans appeared with their whole Strength in
a Line of Battle, daring the Corinthians to Fight; but they kept within their
Harbors, and so avoided further Fighting.

Antilochides now Archon of Athens, at Rome Marcus Fabius, and Posthumous
Aebutius Olymp. 86. 2. An. Mu. 3537.
Elbas. Ant. Chr. 434.
Aulicus were made Consuls: In their times the Corinthians greatly resented the
Confederacy of the Athenians with them of Corcyra, especially for that the
Victory obtained, was chiefly by their means. And therefore being enraged, and
seeking by all the means they could to be revenged, they stirred up their
Colony at Potidea to revolt. In like manner Perdicas the King of Macedonia, not
long Potidea revolts from the Athenians.
before incensed against the Athenians, prevailed with them of Chalcidica a
Region in Macedonia.
Chalcidica to revolt, and leave the Cities upon the Sea Coast, and withdraw
only into one called Olynthus.

The Athenians hearing of the defection of Potidea, sent forth a Fleet of
Thirty Sail, with Command both to destroy the Country of the Rebels, and storm
the City. They according to order, bent their Course for Macedonia, and
likewise besieged the City. The Corinthians sent Two Thousand Men to assist the
Besieged, and the Athenians sent as many to strengthen it. Hereupon a great P.
305. Potidea Besieged. Ant. Chr. 435.
Battle was fought in the Isthmus near Pallene, where the Athenians were
Victors, and killed above Three Hundred of the Enemy. And then straiter Siege
was laid to Potidea. In the mean time, the Athenians built a new City in
Propontis, which they called Letoanum.

In Italy the Romans sent new Colonies into Ardea, and divided the Country
amongst them by Lot.

Now Charetes executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans made
Olymp. 86. 3. An. Mu. 3538. Ant. Chr. 434.
Quintus Furius Fusus, and Manius Papyrius Crassus Consuls. In Italy the
Inhabitants of Thurium (being composed of People gathered from several Places)
began to quarrel and disagree concerning what City chiefly Thurium, should be
reputed Quarrels at Thurium.
a Colony of, and who should be acknowledged the Founder. For first they of
Athens challenged it, affirming most of the Inhabitants came from thence. Next
they of Peloponesus (because many Cities sent Colonies from thence) claimed the
right of being accounted Founders of the City. In this manner (there being many
Persons of Quality Members of the Colony, who had done much toward its
Advancement,) there arose great Dissentions, every one challenging the dignity
and honor as due to himself. At length they of Thurium sent to Delphos to
consult there who should be esteemed and taken to be their Founder. The Oracle
answered, That he himself should be so taken. And thus the great doubt being
resolved, the Thurians declared Apollo their Founder: And so this Difference
being removed, the People lived in Peace as formerly. In Greece, Archidamus
King of Lacedemon died, having reigned Forty Two Years, and Agis Archidamus
dies.
succeeded, who reigned Seven and Forty Years.

At the time when Apseudes was chief Governor of Athens, and Titus Minenius,
Olymp. 86. 4. An. Mu. 3539. Ant. Chr. 453.
and Proculus Geganius Macerinus, Roman Consuls, Spartacus King of Bosphorus
died, after he had Reigned Seventeen Years; whom Seleucus succeeding, Reigned
only Four Years. At Athens flourished that famous Astrologer Meton the Son of
Pausanias, who then published his Table of the Cycle of the Moon called
Enneadeceterides, beginning from the Thirteenth of the Attick Month Answering
to the Roman Months June and July. See Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 10. c. 7.
Scirrophorion: For in the space of Nineteen Years the Stars return to the same
State and Place, and complete as it were a great Year. And therefore by some it
is called Meton's Year. Meton's Year.
This Man in this Discovery, seems to be exactly true to a wonder, for the
Motions and Aspects of the Stars, fully agree with this Description. And
therefore most of the Grecians following the Rule of this Table, have never
erred to this Day. In Italy they of Tarentum, drove out the Inhabitants of
Siris, and bringing a new Colony thither, built a City called Heraclea.

When Pythodorus governed Athens, and Titus Quintius, and Titus Menenius
Agrippa, were Roman Consuls, the Eleans celebrated the Eighty Seventh Olympiad,
in which was Victor Sophron of Olymp. 87. 1. An. Mund. 3540. Ant. Chr. 432.
of Amphracion. At this time Spurius Milius killed by Servilius Hala, Master of
the Horse.
Manius affecting Sovereignty at Rome, was killed. In the mean time, the
Athenians in a Signal Battle at Potidea (wherein they were Conquerors) lost
their General Callias. Phormio was advanced to his Place, who as soon as he
came to the Army, renewed the Siege, and pressed hard upon it with continual
Assaults: But by reason of the Valor and P. 306.
Obstinacy of the Defendants, the Siege continued long.

Here Thucydides the Athenian begins his History, and then proceeds to relate
Thucydides begins his History.
the War between the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians, called the Peloponesian
War. It continued Seven and Twenty Years, but Thucydides writes only of the
first Two and Twenty Years, in Eight Books, others say Nine.

CHAP. VII.
The Peloponesian War. Potidea Revolts; Besieged by the Athenians, and is
surrendered upon Articles. Nicias made the Athenian Admiral. Gorgias an
excellent Orator sent from Leontine in Sicily to Athens. A Peace concluded
after the War had continued Ten Years.

WHen Euthydemus governed at Athens, the Romans created Three Military Olymp.
87. 2. An. M. 3541. Ant. Chapter 431.
Tribunes, invested with Consular Power; Manius Emilius Mamercus, Caius Julius,
and Lucius Quintius. At this time broke forth that War between the Athenians
and the Lacedaemonians, called the Peloponesian War, of longest continuance of
any we read of in History.

According to the Design of our History, it is convenient in the first Place,
to The Peloponesian War.
declare the Causes of this War. The Athenians now endeavoring to have the
Dominion of the Sea, brought over to Athens all the Money they had laid-up at
Delos, which they had gathered together from the Cities of Greece, almost to
the value of Eight Thousand Every Talent is 187 l. 10 s.
Talents, and made Pericles Treasurer. He was of a very noble Family, and in
Eloquence far exceeded others of his Fellow Citizens: But not long after,
having spent a great part of the Money (entrusted with him) upon his private
occasions, and being called by the People to give an account, through grief of
his incapacity to discharge himself, he fell Sick: And being thus disturbed in
his Mind, in regard he was not able to make satisfaction, Alcibiades his Nephew
(who was then under Age, and under his Care and Guardianship) directed him into
a way how to extricate himself out of the present trouble^. For seeing his
Uncle so disturbed, he asked the Reason; who answered, I am studying how I
shall give an Account to the People for the Moneys committed to my Care and
Custody. He replied, That it were better for him to consider and advise how he
might give no account at all. Pericles hereupon following the Advice of the
Young Man, contrived by all the ways imaginable how he might involve the
Athenians in some great War. For by this means he foresaw Ant. Chapter 431.
he should avoid the Account, inasmuch as the City would be so distracted with
Cares and Fears in such a conjuncture. To forward this Design, an Accident fell
out very opportunely upon the following occasion. Phidias had made the Statue
of Minerva, and Pericles the Son of Xantippe, was employed to see the Work
done: But some of Phidias's Workmen and Servants fell out, and stirred up by the
Enemies of Pericles, they fled to the Altars of the Gods. And being commanded
to declare the Reason of a thing so unusual, they said, that they could make it
out, that Phidias, with the connivance and help of Pericles, had imbezilled a
great Sum of Money belonging to the Goddess. Whereupon an Assembly was called,
at which the Enemies of Pericles moved the People to apprehend Phidias, and
charge Pericles with the Sacrilege. They accused likewise A Famous Philosopher,
who held the Sun was a burning Plate or Stone. He was tried in Athens, for this
and his Impieties: He held God was an Infinite Moving of himself. See Laertius.
Lact. lib. 1. c. 5.
Anaxagoras the Sophist, the Master of Pericles, for his impious Opinions
concerning the Gods; with the same Calumnies they loaded likewise Pericles,
chiefly designing to stain the glory, and weaken the interest of so brave a
Man. But Pericles being well acquainted with the Disposition of the People, as
knowing that they highly valued Men of worth, in times when they were threatened
with War, (the present Circumstances of Affairs making it at such times of
absolute necessity:) And on the contrary, that in times of Peace (when they had
nothing to do but giving the Reins to Envy and Malice) blackned the same Men
with all manner of Calumny; therefore judged it advantageous for his Affairs,
if he could engage the City in some considerable War, that thereby having
occasion to make use of them, they should be deaf to all Acccusations against
him, and should have no time or leisure to call him to an Account. To help on
this his Design, Ant. Chapter 431.
it was lately decreed at Athens, that they of Megara, should have no Traffic
with the Athenians either by Sea or Land: The Megareans therefore made their
Address for Relief to the Spartans, who agreed to their Requests, and by the
unanimous Assent of all the Assembly, they sent Ambassadors to the Athenians,
with order to require them to rescind the Decree against them of Megara; And
that if they refused, then that their Ambassadors should denounce War against
P. 307.
them in the name both of them and their Confederates. Upon hearing of the
Ambassadors, an Assembly was called to debate this matter; where Pericles,
(that far surpassed all the rest in Eloquence and strength of Reason) gave his
Reasons against the abrogating of the Decree. He alleged it was a step to
Bondage and Slavery, and against the common good to yield to the Demands of the
Lacedaemonians; but advised them rather that they should draw all their Goods
and Concerns out of the Country into the City; and being now Masters at Sea, to
enter into a War with the Lacedaemonians. And hereupon making an accurate
Discourse of the War, he told them what a Multitude of Confederats they had,
what a brave and well manned Fleet they were Masters of, what a vast Treasure
they were possessed of, brought from Delos, gathered from the common
Contribution of the Cities, amounting to Ten Thousand A Common Talent was about
an Hundred Eighty Seven Pounds, Ten Shillings of our Money.
Talents; and though Four Thousand of it were spent in the building of the The
Propyle was a stately Gate or Porch belonging to the Acropolis or Citadel.
Propyle, or Citadel, and in the Siege at Potidea, yet every Year Four Hundred
and Sixty Talents were raised by Tribute from their Confederates. And besides
all this, that the Adornments belonging to the Shows, and the Persian Spoils
amouned to Five Hundred Talents more. And that in the Temples and other public
Works of the City, there were great Riches, so that the very Image of Minerva
it self alone was worth Fifty Talents of Gold; whose Ornaments were so placed,
that they might be taken off; and all of them when necessity required might be
borrowed from the Ant. Chapter 431.
Goddess, so that they be faithfully restored in time of Peace. And as to the
Estate of the Citizens, he told them, through the Enjoyment of a long Peace the
City was grown exceeding Rich; he added moreover, that they had Twelve Thousand
Armed Men, besides their Confederates, and what were in their Garrisons. And
those in their Garrisons, together with their Colonies, were more than
Seventeen Thousand; and that they had ready a Fleet of Three Hundred Sail. On
the contrary, the Spartans were Poor, and far inferior to the Athenians in
Naval Forces. Having fired the Citizens with these Discourses, he vehemently
pressed the People not to give ear to the imperious Demands of the
Lacedaemonians: And by the earnestness of his Speech, he easily prevailed; for
which reason he was called Olympius. Aristophanes the Comic Poet, who
flourished in the time of Pericles, mentions these things in the Verses
following --

Ye Poor and Country Swains, consider well,
The Words I speak; if you would know, they will tell
Your Country how destroyed; a Spark but small,
Brought from Megara's Law, blown up with all
By him, has raised such Smoke of War, Blood, Fears,
As draws from Eyes of Greece continual Tears.
And likewise the Comic Poet Eupolis, in other Verses, says of Pericles, whom
Ant. Chapter 431.
they call Olympius.

Thunder and Lightening he raised in Greece,
Of Eloquence who was the Masterpiece;
Only among the Orators, his Darts
Were left fast fixed in the Hearers Hearts.
And these were the causes of the Peloponesian War, as they are related by
Ephorus.

The principal Grecian Cities thus provoked to War, the Lacedaemonians (in a
general Convention with them of Peloponesus) declared War against the
Athenians, and forthwith sent their Ambassadors to the King of Persia, to enter
into a League offensive with them. Ambassadors were likewise sent, to desire
Two Hundred Ships of their Confederates in Sicily and Italy.

And now being joined with the Peloponesians, and having raised a Land-Army
from several Parts, and prepared with all things necessary for War, they first
begin. At that time in Beotia the City Platea was a free City, in league with
the Athenians: P. 308.
But some of the Citizens designing to enslave the Place, in contrivance with
the Beotians promised to bring the City under their Power if they would but
send them a Guard of Soldiers. The Beotians therefore sent Three Hundred
Soldiers in the Night to Platea, who being let into the Gates, the Traitors
delivered up the City into their Hands. But the Plateans willing to approve
their Platea entr'd in the Night by the Thebans.
Faithfulness to the Athenians (at first thinking that the whole Army of the
Thebans were entr'd) sent Ambassadors to them to treat and make Terms: But when
Day appeared, and they of Platea understood how small a Number the Enemy was,
they all as one Man came upon them, and Fought with great resolution for their
Common Liberty. But because the Fight was in the Streets, the Thebans being
better Soldiers at the first destroyed many of the Plateans: But afterward
they in the Houses, even the very Boys and Children by throwing down Tyles from
the Roofs so sorely galled the Thebans that they were forced to fly; that part
of them who got out of the City clearly escaped, but another part that fled for
shelter to a little House, at length were compelled to give The Thebans driven
out of Platea.
up themselves to the will of the Enemy.

The Thebans being informed by them that had escaped, of this misfortune, with
all their force hastened to the City: By reason of which sudden incursion many
of them who lived in the Country, and those abroad being taken at unawares,
were killed and many Prisoners taken; the whole Country being filled with Fears
Devastations and Robberies. In the mean time the Plateans sent to the Thebans
to entreat them to depart out of their Coasts, promising they would release the
Prisoners. Upon which conditions the Matter was Composed; and the Thebans
received the Captives and restored the Plunder to them of Platea, and so
returned home. The Plateans had sometime before sent to Athens for Aid, and had
brought much of their Goods out of the Country into the City: The Athenians
hearing of their Distress hastened away to them a competent Number of Soldiers,
who though they Marched with all expedition, yet they Ant. Chapter 431.
could not prevent the Thebans: But what was left in the Country they brought
into the Town: The Women and Children and those that were infirm, they got
together in a Body, and conveyed them to Athens.

Hereupon the Lacedaemonians judging the Athenians had broke the League,
gathered Forces together from all parts both from Sparta and from the rest of
the Peloponesians. The Confederats of the Lacedaemonians were the Peloponesians
wholly, except the Argives, for they then stood Neuters. Those out of
Peloponesus were the Megareans, Ambraciots, Leucadians, Phocians, Beotians,
many of the Locrians over against Eubea, and the rest those of Amphissa. Those
that sided with the Athenians were the Inhabitants of the Seacoasts of Asia,
the Carians, Dorians, Ionians, them of the Hellespont, and all the Islanders,
except the Inhabitants of Melus and Thera. The Thracians likewise were their
Confederats, except those of Calcidica and Potidea. Besides these there joined
with the Athenians the Messenians in Naupactus, and the Corcyreans. Here seems
to be something wanting and lost, i. e. who they were that sent Shipping.
All the rest sent Landforces. These Confederats stood firm on both sides.

The Lacedaemonians having at length raised a great Army, made Archidamus their
King, General, who made an Irruption into Attica, besieged their Castles, The
Spartans wast Attica.
and wasted a great part of the Country. The Athenians inflamed with desire of
Revenge for this Destruction of their Country, were eager to be out to Fight
their Enemies; but Pericles the General advised the hot Youths to forbear a
while, telling them that he would drive the Spartans out without Fighting. To
this Ant. Chapter 431. P. 309.
end he fitted out an hundred Galleys well Manned, and gave the command of the
Fleet to Carcinus and some other Officers, with order to make a descent into
Peloponesus. Accordingly they laid wast a great part of the Seacoasts, took
several Castles, and struck the Lacedaemonians with great Consternation. So that
without delay they withdrew their Forces out of Attica, and made it their chief
care now to defend Peloponesus. The Athenians now freed by this ingenious
Contrivance from their Enemies, highly Honored Pericles as a wise Commander
and one able to carry on the War against the Lacedaemonians.

Apolodorus now Archon at Athens, the Romans chose Marcus Geganius.
Genarius and Olymp. 87. 3: An. Mu. 3542. Ante Chr. 430.
Lucius Sergius Consuls. In the mean time the Athenian General ceased not to
wast and plunder the Seacoast of Peloponesus, and destroy their Castles. And
being joined with Fifty Galleys of Three Tire of Oars from Corsyra, he made a
more dreadful incursion into Peloponesus, and especially on the Act. Pericles
harrases Peloponesus. Ant. Chapter 430. Brasidas his Valor.
Seacoast, and up further into the Land, burning all the Towns before him.
Then he made for Methone, a City of Laconia, wasting and plundering the Country
in his way, and attempted the taking of the City it self. There Brasidas a
Spartan (a young Man, but of great Strength and Valor) seeing Methone likely
to be lost, with some other Spartans joining with him, made his way through the
midst of the Enemy, who were dispersed here and there in their several Posts,
and with the slaughter of many of them got safe into the Castle. After the
Athenians had made several Assaults (in which Brasidas behaved himself with
great bravery in the midst of dangers) and saw no hopes of gaining the Place,
they returned to their Ships. But Brasidas who had preserved Methone by his
valor and resolute Defense, was highly honored amongst the Spartans. And
being encouraged by this Success in several Encounters, afterward he behaved
himself with that Valor that he gained a great Name and Reputation.

The Athenians roul'd about to Elis, wasted the Country, and besieged Pheras,
Pheras taken by Storm by the Athenians.
a Castle of the Eleans; to which they sent relief, but were beaten by the
Athenians, who took Pheras by Storm. Yet within a while after the Eleans coming
upon them with all their Strength, they were forced to their Ships, and Sailed
back to Cephalenia; where they made a league with the Inhabitants, and then
returned to Athens.

Afterward Cleopompus, made by the Athenians Admiral of a Fleet of thirty The
Acts of Cleopompus.
Sail, was commanded into Eubea, both to defend the Island, and to make War
upon the Locrians. He invaded and spoiled all the Sea-tract of Locris, and took
the City Thronium, and afterward routed the Locrians in a Land-Fight at
Aelopes. He then Fortisied the Island Atalante, near Locris, that it might be
both a Defense against the Locrians, and that from thence he might with more
ease make incursions upon them.

About the same time the Athenians cast all the Inhabitants out of Aegina, for
favoring the Lacedaemonians (as they were accused) and brought new Colonies
Ant. Chr. 430.
thither, and divided the City and Country amongst them by Lot. The
Lacedaemonians appointed A Town belonging to the Messenians.
Thyre to the ejected Aeginites for their habitation; and on the other side,
the Athenians forthwith alloted Naupactus for a receptacle for the Messenians,
formerly ejected by the Lacedaemonians. At the same time the Athenians sent
Pericles with an Army against them of Megara, who after he had harras'd the
Country and taken much Spoil and Plunder, returned to Athens.

Shortly after the Lacedaemonians with their Confederats broke a second time
into Attica, and cut down the Trees, burnt the Towns and most miserably
destroyed P. 310.
almost the whole Country, except Tetrapolis, which they spared by reason of
their former kindness in receiving of their Ancestors and subduing (by Arms
from thence) Euristheus. For they conceived it just and equal to show kindness
to them who had deserved so well from their Predecessors. The Athenians during
this incursion durst not come into the Field, but kept close withim A Plague in
Athens.
the Walls of their City, by reason whereof a great Plague raged amongst them.
For a Multitude of all sorts of People being thronged together, it may be
reasonably concluded that through the straitness of the Place the Air was
corrupted, and caused the Infection. By this means they were so weakn'd that
they were not able to drive the Enemy out of the Country, but sent out Pericles
again with a Fleet into Peloponesus; who wasting the Seacoasts, and taking
some Cities, caused the Lacedaemonians at length to leave Attica.

The Athenians by reason of the wast and spoil made in the Country, and the
great destruction of the People by the Plague in the City, fell into great
discontent and vexation, and were enraged, at Pericles, whom they looked upon
as the great Incendiary and occasion of the War, and therefore deprived him of
the Magistracy, and upon slight and frivolous Surmizes laid a Mulct upon him of
Thirty Talents. Then they sent Ambassadors A Talent was Two Hundred and Fifty
Pounds, the greater; but the lesser an Hundred Eighty Seven Pounds Ten
Shillings.
to Sparta to treat of Peace; but being slighted by the Lacedaemonians (who
would admit of no reasonable Terms,) they were reduced to a necessity to choose
Pericles General again. And these were the Actions of this Year.

Epaminondas this Year was chief Ruler of Athens, and Lucius Papyrius Crassus
and Olymp. 87. 4. Ant. Chr. 429.
Marcus Comelius Maluginensis. Pericles dies.
Macerinus Roman Consuls: At which time Pericles the General Died at Athens. A
Man in Nobility of Birth, greatness of Estate, in Eloquence, Arts and
Stratagems of War far beyond all the rest of the Citizens. About the same time
the Athenians were very hot and earnest to recover Potidea by force, and to
that end sent Hagno thither with the Army formerly commanded by Pericles. Hagno
thereupon Sailed thither with the whole Fleet, and made all the preparation for
the Siege imaginable, viz. Engines of all Sorts for an Assault, Potidea
Besieged.
Arms and Darts, and sufficient Provision for the whole Army. However though he
continually battered the Walls of the City in many places, yet he spent much
time to no purpose. For the fear of being taken by Storm added courage to the
Defendants, and the hight of the Walls commanding the Port, made them very
resolute: Besides, a Disease hapn'd among the Besiegers which destroyed many of
them, so that they were greatly discouraged. Notwithstanding Hagno knowing that
the Athenians had been at the charge of a Thousand Talents to carry on the
Siege, and that they were highly incensed against them of Potidea (because they
Ant. Chr. 429.
were the first that made a Defection) durst not leave the Siege: But with all
his might persisted, and stirred up the Soldiers even above their Strength to
force the City. But at length considering that many of the Citizens were lost
both in the Assaults and by the infection of the Disease, leaving a part of the
Army to maintain the Siege, he returned with the rest to Athens, having lost
above a Thousand Men. After he was gone, they of Potidea (being brought to the
utmost extremity for want of Provision) sent to the Besiegers to treat with
them upon Terms of Peace; which was readily accepted and embraced with both
Arms (as they say) by the Athenians, and Peace was made upon the Terms
following, to wit, That Potidea surrendered.
all the Inhabitants should draw out of the City, and take nothing away with
them but every Man one Suit of Apparel, and every Woman two.

Matters being thus composed, the Potideans with their Wives and Children
(according to the Articles) left the City and settled themselves among the
Calcideans in Thrace; after which the Athenians sent a Colony of a Thousand
Persons, P. 311.
and divided both the City and Country adjacent amongst them by Lot.

Phormio being now made Admiral at Athens, with Twenty Ships sailed round
Peloponesus and arrived at Naupactum, where possessing himself of the Greek
Criseus, he stopped the Passages against the Lacedaemonians so as that their Ships
could not come forth. But their King Archidamus with a great Army began a new
expedition, Ant. Chr. 429.
and marched into Beotia, and when he came to Platea (ready and prepared to
wast and destroy the Country) he first solicited that City to revolt: Platea
besieged by the Lacedaemonians.
But not being able to prevail, he fell a robbing and spoiling the Country all
along as he went. Afterward he Besieged the City, in hopes to weary them out
for want of Provision: He incessantly likewise Battered the Walls with his
Engines, and made frequent Assaults. But with all his Attempts not being able
to gain the Place, he left a part of the Army to carry on the Siege, and with
the rest marched back into Peloponesus.

About this time the Athenians made Xenophon and Phanomachus Generals, and
commanded them with a Thousand Men to go into Thrace. When they came as far as
Pactolus in Beotia, they burnt spoiled and robbed the Country all before them,
and destroyed the very standing Corn. But they of Olynthus joined with the
Beotians, fell upon the Athenians and slew most of them, together with their
Generals. The Athenian Generalskill'd in Beotia.


In the mean time the Lacedaemonians by the advice of the Ambraciots with a
Thousand Men and a few Ships under Cnemus their Captain, made for Acarnania and
being enforced by a considerable Number of their Confederates, Cnemus arrived
there and encamped near the City Stratos. But the Acarnanians in a Body came
suddenly upon him, surpised him with the loss of many of his Men and drove
him into the Country of Oeniades. About the same time Phormio the Athenian
Commander with his twenty Ships met with the Lacedemonian Fleet of Forty Seven
Ante Chr. 429. The Lacedaemonians routed at Sea, at Rhium.
Sail, and Fought them, sunk the Admiral and disabl'd many others, took Twelve
with the Men in them, and pursued the rest to the Continent. The Lacedaemonians
thus unexpectedly beaten, with the remaining part of their Fleet got into
Patrae in Achaia. This Battle was at a Place called Rhium. Hereupon the
Athenians erected a Trophy, and Dedicated a Ship in the Isthmos to Neptune, and
so returned to their Confederat City Naupactus. But the Lacedaemonians sent
other Ships to join the remainder of their Fleet that were at Patra. And all of
them rendezvouz'd at A Promontory near the Isthmos of Corinth.
Rhium, whither likewise the Lacedaemonians Land-Army Marched, and there
encamped near to their Fleet.

Phormio encouraged by the late Victory, set upon the Enemy though they far
exceeded him Number, and destroyed many of their Ships; but not without some
loss of his own, so that he went off but half Conqueror; but being enforced
with Twenty more Ships from Athens, tlie Lacedaemonians made off for Corinth,
and durst never attempt any more to Fight at Sea. And these are the things
reported to be done this Year.

Diotinus executing the place of chief Magistrate at Athens, the Romans created
Olymp. 88. 1. Ante Chr. 428.
Caius Julius.
Junius and Proculus Virginius Tricostus Consuls: And they of Elis celebrated
the eighty eighth Olympiad, in which Simmachus of Messina in Sicily carried
away the Prize. About this time Cnemus the Lacedemonian Admiral while he lay at
Corinth contrived how to surprise the Pyreum. For he understood by his P. 312.
Spies that no Shipping lay there, nor any Guard was appointed to defend the
Place; and that the Athenians were secure, and therefore Negligent, conceiving
none durst be so bold as to come up thither to attempt any thing of that Nature.

To this end having brought Forty Ships a little before to Megaris, with these
well Manned he set Sail from thence in the Night, and past over to Salamis,
where he surpised and took the Castle Budorium, and seized their Ships and
harras'd the rest of the Country. They of Salamis firing their Beacons, the
Salamis invaded by the Lacedaemonians.
Athenians suspected that the Pyreum was taken, and ran all with great fear and
confusion to their Arms for the defense of the Place: But being better informed
made away for Salamis. The Lacedaemonians thus frustrated in their Design, left
Salamis and returned home. After their departure the Athenians had a more
watchful Eye upon Salamis, and placed there a strong Garrison; and fortified
the Pyreum with Walls, and sufficient Guards for it is Defense.

About this time Sitalces King of Thrace, though he had but a Small Kingdom,
yet by his Valor and Prudence greatly enlarged his Dominions; being a Man The
Commendation of Sitalces King of Thrace.
both Just and Kind to his Subjects, and Valiant and Diligent in time of War.
He made his chief care to preserve and increase his Stores, by which means he
grew so very Rich that he gained larger Territories than ever any King of
Thrace had done before him. For that part which lay by the Sea Coast ran along
from the Borders of the Abderites to the River Ister. And that from the Sea, up
into the main Land, was of as great extent as a swift Footman could Travel over
in Thirteen Days.

This Prince was possessed of so large a Country, that his yearly Revenue
amounted to above a Thousand Talents. During his Reign a War broke forth, upon
which occasion he raised out of Thrace more than an Hundred and Twenty Thousand
Foot, and Fifty Thousand Horse. But it is necessary that we Ant. Chr. 428.
declare the Causes of this War, that so the following account may be better
understood.

Sitacles had entr'd into a League with the Athenians, and one of the Articles
Sitalces his War with the Macedonians.
was, That he should faithfully Assist them in the War wherein they were
engaged in Thrace. To this end he raised a powerful Army, with a design to join
with the Athenians to take Calcidea by Force: And likewise for the hatred he
had to Perdiccas, King of Macedonia, he resolved to restore Amyntas the Son of
Philip, to his Father's Kingdom. For these Causes he was necessitated to raise
a very great Army. When all things were in readyness he Marc'hd all his Forces
out of Thrace, and entr d Macedonia: But the Macedonians struck with terror at
the multitude of their Enemies dared not to oppose them, but getting in all
their Fruits and Goods they could within their Garrisons, they kept close
within their Forts and Walls. The Thracians brought Amyntas along with them as
King, and first treated the Cities by Messengers and fair Speeches; but when
none would hearken to them, he Assaulted the first Castle in his way, and took
it by Storm. Upon which many of the Cities and Garrisons (through fear) Ant.
Chapter 428.
surrendered of their own accord. After they had run through all Macedonia,
loaded with Rich Booty, they made against the Greek Cities of the Calcideans.

Whilst Sitalces was thus employed, the Thessalians, Achaians, Magnesians, and
all the other Grecians inhabiting within Macedon and Thermopyle, confederated
and raised a mighty Army; for they were afraid lest the Thracians who were so
P. 313.
powerful, should make an inroad into their Country, and bring them under the
Thracian Yoke: And the Calcideans did the like. Sitalces hereupon being
informed of the great Armies raised against him by the Grecians, and knowing
his Army was not able to endure the sharpness of the approaching Winter, struck
up a Peace with Perdiccas, and in confirmation thereof, contracted a Marriage
with him, and so marched his Army back into Thrace.

In the mean time, whilst these things were on foot, the Lacedaemonians with
Another inroad into Attica.
their Confederates made another irruption out of Peloponesus into Attica,
under their King Archidamus, who had the Sovereign Command of the Army; and
after they had destroyed all the standing Corn when it was near ripe, and made
havoc and spoil all over the Country, they returned to their respective
Habitations. The Athenians on the other hand, were not in heart to oppose them,
but were under sore Calamities by Plague and Famine, and therefore altogether
despaired of any good issue and event of the War. And these were the things
observable this Year.

Euclides was Ruler of Athens, when the Romans chose Three Military Tribunes
Olymp. 88. 2. Ant. Chr. 427. War between the Syracusians and the Leontines.
in the room of Consuls, Marcus Manlius.
Mannius, Quintus Su'pitius Pretextatus, and Servitius Cornelius Cossus. At
this time in Sicily, the Syracusians made War upon them of Leontum, a Colony
brought thither from the Calcideans, originally Athenians, who being
overpress'd by the power of the Syracusians, and in great danger to lose their
City, sent Ambassadors to Athens for speedy and seasonable aid, to deliver them
from their present Exigency. The chief among them that were sent, was Gorgias
the Orator, the most Eloquent Man of his time. He Gorgias the Orator.
was the first that taught the Rules of Rhetoric, and was so famous for his
wise and learned Orations, that all his Scholars as a Gratuity, gave him an
Hundred A Mina in Silver, is about 3 l. 9 s.
Mina's apiece.

When he came to Athens, and had Audience, he made an Oration to the People
concerning the League desired; and by his new and ingenious way of speaking,
the Athenians were so taken (who were otherwise Men of great Wisdom and
Eloquence) that they were struck with admiration. For he adorned his Speech
with most excellent Figures, Paranomacisms, (...). Figures called Synoeceiosms,
Oxymorons, Paranomacisms, and the like.
and artificial composures of Words and Sentences, as by Opposites,
Paranomacisms, equal Periods like Terminations, and the like gingling strains
of Rhetorical Wit, to allure and entice his Auditors, which at that time for
its novelty, was much admired. But now it is looked upon to savor too much of
affectation, and to be ridiculous, especially when by frequency and often
repetition it becomes fulsome and tedious. Gorgias having persuaded the
Athenians to enter into a League with the Leontines, returned to Leontinum with
great Reputation for his Eloquence. Ant. Chr. 427.


The Athenians for some time before, had an hankering Mind after Sicily, by
reason of the richness of the Soil, and therefore were now more willingly
persuaded by Gorgias, and decreed to send Aid as was desired. The pretense was
to assist them who were their own Countrymen, and were brought into great
straits, but in truth their chief Design was to gain the Island; for not many
Years before, when the War broke forth between the Corinthians and them of
Corcyra, and both addressed themselves to the Athenians for Aid, to make them
their Confederates, the People of Athens resolved to side with the Corcyreans,
because Corcyra was so situated, that it was a very ready and convenient Pass
over from thence into Sicily. In short, the Athenians being now Masters at Sea,
and every where successful, had many Confederates, and were richly furnished,
both with Men and Money, had many Cities under their power, were possessed of a
mighty Treasure in ready Money brought from Delos, gathered from the
Inhabitants of Greece to the value of above Ten Thousand Ten Thousand Talents
amounts to 1875000 l. Sterling, the lesser Talent. The greater Talent is 250 l.
The lesser is 187 l. 10 s.
Talents.

Moreover, they had likewise many excellent Officers, and expert Commanders; by
these Advantages, the Athenians were grown very confident that they should both
overcome the Spartans, (and having subdued all Greece) win also the P. 314.
whole Island of Sicily. These were the Reasons induced them to resolve to
assist the Leontines, and to that end sent them Ant. Chr. 427.
an Hundred Sail of Ships, under the command of Lachetes and Chabrias. With
these they arrived at Rhegium, and from The Athenians assist the Leontines in
Sicily by Chabrias.
their Colonies there and at Calcidea, they had an Hundred Ships more, which
joined with the former; from thence they loosed, and came first to the Lipare
Islands, where they ravaged the Country, because they were Confederates of the
Syracusians. Then they made to In Italy upon the Seacoasts.
Locris, and took Five Ships belonging to the Locrians, and besieged one of
their Castles. The Siculi bordering upon the Mylae, a City in Sicily.
Myleans coming to their aid, the Armies engaged, and the Athenians were
Conquerors, and killed above a Thousand of their Enemies, and took no fewer
than Six Hundred Prisoners: And presently after they took the Castle by Storm.
In the mean time, Forty Ships more were sent to the Fleet by the Athenians, to
carry on the War with more Vigor, under the command of Eurymedon and
Sophocles. And when they were all joined, they made up a Fleet of Two Hundred
and Fifty Sail. But while the War was carrying on, the Leontines by their
Ambassadors, struck up a Peace with them of Syracuse: Upon which, the Athenian
Fleet, returned Home. But the Syracusians received all the Leontines into the
City, and made them all free of Syracuse, and from that time appointed the City
Leontium to be a Fort or Garrison of the Syracusians. And this was the
Condition of Sicily at this time.

In Greece, they of the Island Lesbos revolted from the Athenians: And the
Lesbos revolts from Athens.
Reason was, because all the Inhabitants of the Cities throughout Lesbos, were
by order and decree of the Athenians, removed and brought into The greatest
City of Lesbos.
Mitylene. For this Reason also they entered into a League with the
Lacedaemonians, and advised them how they might become Masters at Sea. To
accomplish which Design, they promised them a great number of Ships: The
Spartans gave a very quick ear to this, and whilst they were preparing a Navy,
the Athenians were before them, and commanded Clinippides with Forty Sail,
forthwith to waft over an Army into Lesbos; who being joined with other
Confederates, made for Mitylene; Ant. Chr. 427. Mitylene besieged by the
Athenians.
and in a Sea Fight routed the Mityleans, and then besieged them.

Hereupon the Lacedaemonians resolved to assist them of Mitylene, and to that
end prepared a brave Navy; but the Athenians enforced their Army with a
Thousand Men more sent into Lesbos, before the Lacedaemonians arrived. Paches,
the Son of Epiderus, was General of this Expedition, who when he arrived at
Mitylene (joining with the former Army) laid a more strait Siege to the Place;
and contiually assaulted the City both by Sea and Land. The Lacedaemonians in
the mean time, sent Five and Forty Ships, under the Command of Alcidas, to
assist the Mitylenes; and again invaded Attica, with the assistance of their
Confederates; who fell upon those Places that were before untouched, and after
they had most shamefully pillaged and wasted the Country, they returned Home.
But the Mitylenes, oppressed with Famine, the Sword, and seditious Tumults,
upon Conditions surrender the City. After which a Council was held at Athens
what Mitylene surrendered.
they should do with them of Mitylene: There was one Cleon an Orator, a cruel
and violent spirited Man, stirred up the People to kill all the Mitylenes, that
were Men grown up, and to sell all the Women and Children for Slaves. The
Athenians P. 315.
voted it to be so as Cleon had persuaded them, and sent Messengers to
Mitylene, to acquaint the Governor with the Decree. When Paches had read it,
another to the contrary presently came to his Hand; upon which, Paches
understanding the Athenians had changed their Minds, with great joy called the
Mitylenes together, and both remitted their faults, and likewise freed them
from their fears. But the Athenians demolished the Walls of Mitylene, and
divided the whole Island of Lesbos by Lot, except the Lands belonging to
Methymna. And this was the issue of the Lesbean defection from Athens.

About the same time, the Lacedaemonians (still carrying on the Siege at Platea)
drew a Wall round the City, and fortified it with several Forts and strong
Guards for its Defense. The Siege continuing long, and no Relief coming from
Ant. Chr. 427.
Athens, the Besieged were greatly pressed both with want of Provision, and the
loss of many of the Citizens who were cut off in the frequent Assaults. All
therefore being doubtful what the issue might be, a Council was called to
advise what was fit to be done in order to their Preservation. Many thought it
most advisable to capitulate; but there were others, to the number of Two
Hundred, that were for breaking through the Guards in the Night, and so fly to
Athens. In pursuance whereof, observing the darkness of the Night, those that
were for Capitulating, were prevailed with to assault a remote part of the
Enemy's Wall; by which means, they who intended to break through the Guards
(whilst their Enemies were busied in assisting their Fellows that were
assaulted) scaled another part of the Wall (having got Ladders for that
purpose) and killed the Guards, and so escaped to Athens.

The next Day, the Lacedaemonians were in great vexation at the escape of them
out of the City, and brought their Forces close to the Walls, and bent all
their Minds and Strength with all expedition to force the Place: Upon which,
the Plateans being terrified, gave up both themselves and their City to the
mercy of their Enemies. Platea surrendered.


But the Lacedemonian Commanders put this Question to every one that they sent
for from among the Plateans, What good Offices or Services they had ever done
to the Lacedaemonians? And when one by one confessed they knew of none; they
asked them again, Whether they had ever done the Spartans any harm? And when
none denied that, they ordered them all to be slain; so that all that remained
in the City, were put to the Sword, and the Town it self was razed to the
Ground, and the Lands belonging to it let to farm. And thus the Inhabitants
Platea razed.
of Platea for their faithfulness to the Athenians, became involved in great
Misery, and undeservedly perished.

Whilst these things were in doing, a great Sedition and A Sedition at Corcyra.
civil Discord arose in Corcyra upon the following occasion: In the Battle at
Epidamnum, many of the Corcyreans were taken Prisoners; and while they were in
custody, they promised the Corinthians, that if they might be released, they
would undertake to deliver up Corcyra into their Hands. This was a very welcome
and grateful Offer to the Corinthians. A considerable Number of Talents
therefore being colourably procured from their Friends for their Redemption,
they were all discharged.

As soon as they returned into their Country, minding the performance of their
Contract, they First seized upon the chief of the Citizens, (and especially
those who could most influence the People,) and afterward cut their Throats,
and so quite dissolved the Democracy. But the Corcyreans were presently
assisted by the Athenians, and recoverd their Liberty, and were resolved to
execute Justice upon Ant. Chapter 427.
the Ringleaders of the Defection. But they (through fear of punishment) fled
for refuge to the Altars of the Gods, and as Suppliants begged Pardon both of
the Gods and the People.

Euthydemus was Governor of Athens, when Three Military Tribunes invested P.
316. Olymp. 88. 3. Ant. Chr. 426. Plague breaks forth again at Athens.
with Consular Power were again chosen at Rome, Marcus Fabius, Phalinius, and
Lucius Sereulius. In their time the Plague broke out afresh, when they were
freed from this Contagion but very lately before: It raged so exceedingly, that
they lost Four Thousand Foot Soldiers, and Four Hundred Horse; and of others,
Freemen and Servants, above Ten Thousand. And now because the Course of the
History may require a Declaration of the Causes of this violent Distemper, it
is necessary for us in this place to set them forth.

Abundance of Rain had fallen in the Winter, by reason whereof, the Earth being
over-wet in many Places (especially in low and hollow Grounds) the Water lay
like standing Pools; and those being corrupted and putrified by the heat of the
Summer, thence proceeded a Mist of gross and stinking Vapors, which corrupted
the Air, as it often happens about filthy Marshes. And besides, the want of
good Food, much advanced the progress of the Disease, for the Year before, the
Fruits by too much Rain were crude and unwholsom.

There was likewise a Third cause of this Distemper, which was this; the That
is, Winds which come at stated and certain times every Year. Plin. lib. 2. c.
47.
Etesian Winds this Summer blew not, by whose gentle Breezes, the violent heat
of the Air was constantly allayed before at other times; so that the Heat being
now excessive, and the Air as it were inflamed, Men's Bodies now wanting the
usual Refreshment, contracted an evil Habit; from whence arose (through the
vehement and immoderate heat) all sorts of burning Distempers. And hence it
was, that many seized with this Disease, to free themselves from the burning
heat that was in their Bodies, cast themselves into Pits and Wells. But the
Athenians judged that Ant. Chr. 426.
so grievous a Distemper was from God, and therefore according to the charge
given them by the Oracle, they purged the Island Delos (which was formerly
dedicated to Apollo) now polluted (as they conceived) by burying many dead
Bodies there. Therefore all the Graves of the Dead were dug up, and the Urns
were transported into the next Island to Delos, called Rhene; and a Law was
made, that it should not be lawful for any for the time to come, either to
bury, or to bear any Child in Delos. They then likewise revived the Panegyric
Festival in Delos, now for a long time disused. While the Athenians were thus
religiously employed, the Lacedaemonians with their Confederates in Peloponesus,
encamped in the Isthmos, and there consulted together concerning the invading
of Attica again. But there then happening such terrible (...) An Earthquake.
Earthquakes in several parts of Greece, that it so terrified and possessed
them with fear and awe of the Gods, that they all returned to their respective
Countries. For the horrible Concussions of the Earth were so great, that many
Cities near the Sea were sunk and drowned. And whereas that Tract of Land near
Locris was before a Peninsula, by the violence of the Earthquake, a Channel was
made through the Isthmos, and the Place turned into an Island now called Near
Eubea, now called Negropont.
Atalante.

While these things were doing, the Lacedaemonians sent new Colonies into
Trachin, and changed its Name into There are many of this Name, but this is
near the Mountain Oeta, and the Straits of Thermopyle. Ant. Chr. 426.
Heraclea. The Reason was, for that the Trachinians having had Wars with the
Oeteans many Years, had lost most of their Citizens. And therefore being almost
depopulated, they addressed themselves to the Lacedaemonians (whose Colonies
they were) to repeople their City. The Lacedaemonians in regard they were their
Countrymen, and Hercules their Ancestor in times long past, had resided at
Trachin, resolved to make it a large and beautiful City: And to this end, they
sent a Colony thither, out of their own City, and out of others in Peloponesus,
to the number of Four Thousand; and out of the rest of Greece, as many as
pleased, were received as Members of the Cololony. The whole number was little
less than Six Thousand. To conclude, Trachin was at length so far enlarged,
that it contained Ten Thousand Men; and when they had divided the Land
adjoining by Lot, they called the City Heraclea.

Stratocles being Archon of Athens, the Consular dignity was conferred upon the
Three Military Tribunes at Rome, Lucius Furius Medullus.
Metellus, Mamercus. P. 317. The Acts of Demosthenes the Athenian General.
Lucius Pinarius, and S. Posthumous Albus. In the time Olymp. 88. 4. An. Mu.
3547.
of their Government, Demosthenes made Admiral of the Fleet by the Athenians,
with Thirty Ships well manned, joined with Fifteen more from Corcyra, and other
Aids from the Cephaleans, Acarnanians and Messenians inhabiting A City of
Achaia, now called Lepantum by the Venetians. Ant. Chr. 426.
Naupactus, and so set sail for Leucas, and when he had harrased and wasted the
Country of Leucadia, he bent his Course for Aetolia, and there burnt and
destroyed many of their Villages; but the Aetolians making head against them,
routed the Athenians, who fled to Naupactus. The Aetolians encouraged with this
Victory, with the aid of Three Thousand Lacedaemonians, marched against
Naupactus (which the Messeneans then inhabited) but were repulsed. From thence
they made an Expedition against A City of Aetolia.
Molycria, and took the City.

The Athenian General Demosthenes, fearing lest they should attack Naupactus,
sent a Thousand Men out of Arcarnania to strengthen the Garrison. He himself
continued in Acarnania, and fell upon a Thousand Ambraciots in their March, and
cut them almost all off. Upon this the whole Strength of the Ambracia.
City came out against him, and he destroyed most of them likewise, so that the
City was almost made desolate. Hereupon he entered into a Consultation of
assaulting Ambracia, hoping it might be easily won by reason there were few
left to defend it: But the Acarnanians fearing that if the Athenians were
Masters of the Town, they should have more troublesome Neighbors than the
Ambraciots were, refused to follow Demosthenes: Upon this Mutiny the
Acarnanians became Friends with the Ambraciots, and entered into a League of
Peace and Amity for an Hundred Years. Demosthenes thus deserted by the
Acarnanians, returns with Twenty Sail to Athens. Presently after the Ambraciots
(having lately smarted so much, and in great fear of the Athenians) desired a
Garrison from the Lacedaemonians.

Demosthenes afterward marching with an Army to A Town in the Western part of
Peloponesus.
Pylus in Peloponesus, determined to draw a Wall round the Place; which was
naturally Fortified, and Four Hundred Stadia's from Messena: And being well
furnished with Multitudes Eight Stadia's make a Mile; every Stadium is 625
Foot. 400 Sladia is 50 Miles.
of Men, in Twenty Days space he finished the Work. But the Lacedaemonians
hearing of the Fortifying of Pylus, prepared great Forces, both by Land and
Sea, and with a Ante Chr. 462.
Fleet of Forty Five Sail well manned and provided, and with Twelve Thousand
Land Soldiers, made against Pylus. For it seemed to them a thing dishonorable,
to suffer them who durst not come into the Field to defend Attica from
Devastations, now to nestle themselves, and to make Fortifications in
Peloponesus. They encamped therefore with their Army, under the command of
Thrasymedes near to Pylus, and were resolved to undergo all hardships Pylus
besieged.
and hazards, in order to subdue the Place. To this end they stood with their
Fleet in the very Mouth of the Port, to block up all the Passage and Entrance
from the Enemy. And by their Forces at Land, they assaulted the Walls with one
Body after another by turns, pressing on with wonderful Obstinacy and
Resolution.

They put likewise some of the choice of their Soldiers, both of the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, into the Island Sphacteria, which was
near at hand, and ran out at length over against the Port, by which the Harbor
was the safer and securer from Storms. And this they did to prevent the
Athenians, it being a Place very commodious, and useful for the carrying on of
the Siege. They likewise continued the Assaults every Day, without
intermission, and received Wounds upon Wounds, from the Towers and Bulwarks
upon the Walls, and yet remitted nothing of their Heat and Resolution; so that
Multitudes were killed, and many wounded, in striving to storm a Place most
strongly Fortified. Ant. Chr. 426. P. 318.
For the Athenians being possessed of a Town of natural Strength, and
abundantly furnished with Arms and all things necessary for a Defense, most
vigorously repelled their Enemies. For they hoped, that if they frustrated this
Design, Peloponesus would be the Seat of the whole War; and that they should by
degrees wast and destroy their Country.

In the mean time, whilst these things were managed at the Siege with the
greatest heat imaginable on both sides, and the Spartans exercised all their
Force and Power, (amongst many others that purchased Honor by their Gallantry)
Brasidas mounted to the highest step of Glory; for when the other Captains and
Commanders in the Fleet durst not make up to the Shore with the Ships, by
reason of sharp Rocks, and the difficulty of the Place, he acting the part of
an Admiral, with a loud Voice commanded, and incessantly urged the Pilot of his
own Vessel, without any regard to the Ship, to force it ashore: For he said it
was a base thing for the Spartans, if they resolving (as they pretended to be
victorious) should be more sparing of their Ships than their Lives; and in the
mean time suffer the Athenians to Lord it in Laconia. Hereupon the Pilot was
forced to run the Ship ashore, and forthwith Brasidas (resolvedly fixing
himself upon the Hatches or Ladder to get out of the Ship. (...)
Hatches) encountered with a whole Troop of Athenians that made up in a Body
upon him, and killed many of them that first assaulted him; but Darts flying
thick about him, and receiving many Wounds, at length (through the loss of much
Blood) he fell down as dead; and his Arm slipping off Board, and hanging out of
the Ship, his Buckler caught by the Waves, dropped out of his Left Hand into the
Sea, and was seized presently by the Enemy; and he himself lying half Dead
amongst the Heaps of those he had killed, was taken Ant. Chr. 426.
up and carried out of the Ship by his own Men; Thus far excelling others in
Valor, that when others have been put to death because they basely threw away
their Shields, he by the loss of his, gained the highest Honor and Reputation.
However the Lacedaemonians obstinately persisted in the Siege at Pylus, with
great loss of their Men.

Here any one may justly admire at the wonderful and various turns and changes
of Fortune at Pylus: For the Athenians drove the Spartans out of Laconia; and
they who were usually Victors at Land (now forced from Land) overpower the
Athenians at Sea; and they who were before Masters at Sea, now repel their
Enemies at Land. But the Siege continuing very long, they who were in the
Island were in great hazard to be famished, because the Athenian Fleet now
commanding at Sea, stopped all Provision that way. The Lacedaemonians therefore
now fearing what would become of them that were blocked up in the Island, The
Lacedaemonians blockt up in Sphacteria.
sent to Athens to treat upon Terms of Peace: But when nothing of Peace would
be hearkened unto, they desired that they would accept of an Exchange, and
receive as many Prisoners of their own Men, as they were that were in the
Island. But when this was refused, the Lacedemonian Ambassadors very freely and
sharply even in Athens it self, told them, that by their refusing to exchange
one equal number for another, they owned that the Lacedaemonians were of more
worth and value than the Athenians. Being reduced to these straits and
necessities, they in the Island Sphacteria, were forced to submit, and the
Athenians took them all Prisoners. The number of those that were Spartans (who
then delivered up themselves) were an Hundred and Twenty; of those that were
their Confederates, an Hundred and Fourscore. Cleon the Admiral of the Fleet,
brought Ant. Chr. 426.
them all bound to Athens, where it was decreed by the People, that if the
Lacedaemonians would make an end of the War, they should all be preserved; but
if they persisted, they should all be put to Death. After this, the Athenians
sent for the best Soldiers of the Messenians that inhabited Naupactus, and
joined some of their Confederates with them for the defense of Pylus, judging
the Messenians, for the P. 319.
inveterate hatred they had toward the Spartans, would be very eager to spoil
Laconia by Sallies from so strong a Fortification: And in this condition were
things at Pylus.

In the mean time Artaxerxes, King of Persia died, having reigned Forty Years:
Artaxerxes dies.
Xerxes succeeded him, and reigned only one Year. In Italy the Aequi rebelled
against the Roman; to suppress whom, the Romans created Aulus Posthumous
Dictator, and Lucius Julius, Master of the Horse; who made an inrode with a
brave Army into their Country: Upon which the Aequi presently Fought them, and
were routed. A great Slaughter was made, and many taken Prisoners, and the
Romans carried away great Spoil. After this Slaughter, the Aequi submitted to
the mercy of the Romans. Posthumous having thus bravely managed the War
(according to Custom) triumphed. A thing something incredible is reported to be
done by this Posthumous; to wit, that he put his own Son to Posthumous put his
own Son to death.
Death, for that in the Battle, out of a spritely heat of Youth, pressing on
upon the Enemy, he left his Post assigned him by his Father.

This Year ended, Or rather Iparchus. Olymp. 89. 1. An. Mu. 3548. Ant. Chr.
425. Nicias invades Melus.
Isarchus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and at Rome, Titus Quintius, and
Caius Julius were Consuls; at which time, the Eighty Ninth Olympiad was
celebrated at Elis; in which Symmachus was again Victor. At this time the
Athenians made Nicias Admiral of their Fleet, who with Threescore Sail, and
Three Thousand Men at Arms, under his Command, was ordered to invade the
Lacedemonian Confederates. Whereupon he forthwith made up to the Island Melus,
spoiled the Country, and besieged the City many days. For this only of all the
Islands of the Cyclades stood firm and constant to the Lacedaemonians, because
they were a Colony from Sparta. Nicias knowing he was not in a condition able
to storm the Place (which made a resolute Defense) passed to Oropus in Beotia,
and leaving his Fleet there, marched with his Forces into Tanagria, where he
was joined with new Supplies from Athens, under the Command Spoils Tanagria.
of Hipponicus the Son of Callias: Both these together proceeded in wasting and
spoiling the Country. Hereupon the Thebans came out against them, and fought
them; but the Athenians routed them with a great Slaughter. When all was over,
Hipponicus with his Forces returned to Athens, and Nicias to the Fleet; who
sailing along the Coasts of Locris, wastes and destroys many Places upon the
Sea-shoar. Here Forty Ships came up to him from the Confederates, which (with
those he had before) made up a Navy of an Hundred Sail; he had likewise a brave
Army of Land Soldiers, with which he made for Corinth, and landing his Men,
engaged with the Army of the Corinthians, beat them twice, and after Nicias
routs the Corinthians, and invades Cythera.
the Slaughter of many of his Enemies, erected a Trophy. In this Fight there
were killed only Eight of the Athenians, but Three Hundred of the Corinthians.
Thence he sailed toward A Town near Corinth.
Cremmion, spoiled the Country, and took the Castle by Assault. Presently
after, he marches back, Fortifying the Castle in In Laconia. Ant. Chr. 425.
Methone by the way, and having put in a strong Garrison, wasted the Country
adjoining, and at length (spoiling and harrasing all along upon the Seacoast)
returned to Athens. Not long after, the Athenians sent forth Threescore Sail,
and Two Thousand Men at Arms against An Island on the South-East side of
Laconia.
Cythera, under the command of Nicias and some others. When he had landed his
Men in the Island, the City after a short Siege surrendered, and leaving there a
good Garrison for the defense P. 320.
of the Island, he passed over to Pelo^ponesus, and spoiled the Country upon
the Seacoasts, and took In Peloponesus, now called Cerigo, belonging to the
Venetians.
Thyre (situated between the Consines of Laconia and Argos) by Assault, and
demolished the Walls, and made all the Inhabitants Captives. But the Aeginetes
who inhabited there, and Tantalus the Governor of the Castle, he sent Prisoners
to Athens, where they were detained with other Prisoners.

Whilst these things were acting, the Megareans now tired out with the War they
had both with the Athenians and their Exiles (after many Messages backwards and
forwards between the two Cities,) some of the Citizens of Megara (incensed
against the Exiles) promised the Athenian Commanders to betray the City. To
that end, Hippocrates and Demosthenes the Athenian Generals (by Compact with
them of Megara) sent in the Night Six Hundred Soldiers to the City, whom the
Traitors let in within the Walls: But the Treachery being discovered, the Ant.
Chr. 425. Magara betrayed to the Athenians.
People were divided into Two Factions, one sided with the Athenians, and the
other with the Lacedaemonians. In the mean time, one of his own accord made
Proclamation, that whosoever would, might join with the Megareans and
Athethenians. The Lacedaemonians thus deserted by them of Megara, the Watch
which was all along upon the Walls, left their station, and fled into the
Arsinal called Nicea, where the Megareans kept all their Naval Stores and
Provisions. But the Athenians entrenched round and besieged the Castle; and a
little time after, sending for Workmen from Athens, compassed in Nicea with a
Wall. Upon this, the Peloponesians fearing they should all be put to the Sword,
if the Place were taken by Storm, delivered up Nicea upon Conditions to the
Athenians. Thus stood the Affairs of Megara at this time.

But Brasidas with a great Army raised in Sparta and other Parts of
Peloponesus, marched to Megara, and drove the Athenians (surprised with this
sudden and unexpected approach) out of Nicea, and reduced the City to its
former obedience Recovered by Brasidas. The Acts of Brasidas.
to the Lacedaemonians. Then he marched through Thessaly, and came to Dion in
Macedonia. Thence going on to Acanthus, he assisted the Chalcedeans, and partly
by Threats, and partly by fair and plausible Arguments, wrought upon the chief
City of the Acanthians to desert the Athenians. Afterward he brought over many
other of the Thracians to join as Confederates with the Lacedaemonians; and
henceforward desiring to carry on the War with more Vigor, sent for Soldiers
out of Lacedemon to strengthen his Army.

The Spartans hereupon sent to him a Thousand of the best Soldiers amongst the
The Descendents of Slaves. Ant. Chr. 425.
Helots, whom they had long before designed to root out, hoping most of them
would be cut off in the War: And there was another vile act of cruelty
committed by them, by which they determined utterly to destroy all the Helots.
For they made a Proclamation that whosoever of the Helots had done any service
for Sparta, should be made Free, and to that end they should send in their
Names: When Two Thousand had writ their Names, they ordered the most powerful
and chief of the Citizens to cut all the Helots Throats in their several
Houses: For they were in great dread of them, lest when they saw an opportunity
they should join with their Enemies and so be instrumental to the ruin of
Sparta. However, when these Helots, with some other supplies from their
Confederates joined with Brasidas, his Army was very Strong. And thus
strengthened he Marched P. 321.
his Forces to Amphipolis. Aristogoras the Milesian, was the first that brought
Colonies into the City; when he fled from Darius the King of Persia. But after
Aristogoras his Death, the Inhabitants were ejected by the Thracians called
Edones. Two and Thirty Years after the Athenians sent thither a Colony of Ten
Thousand Men. But these being destroyed by the Thracians at Drabiscum two Years
after, the Thracians recovered the City under Apion, their General. This City
subject to so frequent changes of War, Brasidas made it his business to subdue.
To this end marching thither with a great Army, he encamped at the Bridge near
to the City, and presently possessed himself of the Suburbs. The next day they
of Ant. Chr. 425.
Amphipolis being greatly terrified, surrendered the Place, upon conditions that
all that would, might leave the City, and take their effects with them. And
soon after he took in many other neighboring Cities, amongst which, the chief
were Sime and Galepsus, both Colonies of the Thracians, and Myrcinus a Town of
the Edones.

He likewise fell a building new Ships at the River Strymon, and sent for fresh
Supplies from Lacedemonia and other Confederates. He also caused great store of
Arms to be made, by which he armed the new raised Men, and furnished himself
with Darts, Weapons and all other Provisions. And being thus completely
provided, he marched from Amphipolis, and encamped at a Place called The Sea
Shore.
Act. Here were Five of the Towns partly inhabited by Grecians of Andros, and
partly by a mixed multitude of Barbarians, descended from the Iberians, a People
of Macedonia, near the River Stremon: Said to be (...), of Two Tongues.
Bissalte, People of a double Tongue. Having brought these under his Power, he
fell upon Toron, built by the Chalcideans, but then in the power of the
Athenians. Here by the Treachery of some of the Inhabitants, in the Night he
was let into the Town, and so won Toron. And thus far the Expedition of
Brasidas prosper'd this Year.

In the mean time there was a Battle fought by the Athenians A Battle by the
Athenians with the Beotians at Delium.
at Delium in Beotia, with the Beotians upon the accounts following: The then
present Government in Beotia was displeasing to some, who desired to set up a
Democracy in the Cities. These Malcontents Ant. Chapter 425.
discovered their Designs to the Athenian Generals, Hippocrates and
Demosthenes, and engaged to deliver up the Cities in Beotia. This was a very
welcome Overture to the Commanders: And that the Business might the better be
effected, they divided the Army, and Demosthenes with the greater part made an
incursion into Beotia: But the Beotians being well prepared, having had notice
of the Treachery, he marched back without doing any thing. Hippocrates in the
mean time invaded Delium, possessed himself of the Place; and to prevent the
March of the Beotians that way, fortified Delium with a Wall; which lies near
to Oropia, and the Borders of Beotia lying toward the Mountains. But Pantoedas
the Beotian General, gathered out of all the Cities of Beotia, the best and
choicest Soldiers, and with a great Army and a swift March made for Delium;
for he had with him little less than Twenty Thousand Foot, and a Thousand
Horse. The Athenians on the other side were more in number, but not so well
armed; for coming hastily and suddenly out of the City, many were ill
furnished, both as to Arms and other Necessaries. This was the condition of The
manner of the Fight at Delium. P. 322. Ant. Chr. 425.
both Armies, yet very hot and eager on both sides to fight. In the Army of the
Beotians, the Thebans were in the Right Wing, the Orchomeans in the Left, and
the Beotians in the main Body. Those that were called Heniochans and
Paraebates, that is, the Charioteers, or those that fought in Chariots, were
placed in the Front; these were the best Soldiers, in number Three Hundred.
The Athenians were forced to join Battle, before they were perfectly drawn up
in Battalia; but it was fought with great Courage and Resolution on both sides.
The Athenian Horse charged with that Bravery, that in the beginning they put
the Enemies Horse to flight. Then the Foot engaged, and that part of the
Athenian Army that opposed the Thebans, by the violence of the Enemy's Charge
were quite broken in pieces and routed. But the rest of the Athenians chased
all the other Beotians, and pursued them a long way, with a great Slaughter. On
the other side, the Thebans (being strong Bodied Men) left the chase of their
Enemies, and fell upon the other Pursuers, hewed them down, dispersed and
utterly routed them; and thus the Thebans highly advanced their Reputation by
this signal Victory. As for the Athenians, some of them fled to Oropus, others
to Delium; some made to their Ships, and the rest fled every way, as their Lot
and Fortune led them, till Night put an end to the Pursuit. There were not Ant.
Chr. 425.
above Five Hundred of the Beotians killed, but many more of the Athenians, and
if Night had not come on, most of them had been cut off; but that saved them,
and gave a check to the fury of the Conquerors. Yet the number of the Slain was
so great, that with the Price of the Spoils the Thebans built a great Walk or
Gallery in the Forum, and adorned it with many (...).
Statues of Brass; and even covered over the Temples with Brass, and the
public Buildings in the Market Place, with the Arms and Shields of their
Enemies. And with the Riches got in this Fight, they set up Sports and Shows at
Delium.

After this Victory, the Beotians assaulted Delium with that fury, that the
greater part of the Garrison were killed in defending the Place. Two Hundred
only were taken, the rest escaped to their Ships, and with other Inhabitants
came to Athens. Into this Disaster fell the Athenians by their crafty Designs
against the Beotians.

In Asia, Xerxes the Persian King died, after he had reigned one Year, some say
only Two Months. To him succeeded Sogdianus for the space only of Seven Months;
who being killed, Darius enjoyed the Kingdom Nineteen Years. With Darius Nothus
begins to Reign.
this Year Antiochus of Syracuse, the noble Writer of the Affairs of Sicily
ends his History, beginning at King Cocalus, and consisting of Nine Books.

When Amyntas was chief Magistrate of Athens, Caius Papirius, and Lucius Olymp.
89. 2. Scione a City in Thrace. Ant. Chapter 424.
Julius were Roman Consuls. In their time the Scioneans now slighting the
Athenians, by reason of the late Defeat given them, made a defection to the
Lacedaemonians, and gave up their City into the protection of Brasidas, then
General of the Army in Thrace. And those who escaped out of Lesbos, after the
taking of Mitylene by the Athenians (who were no small Number) (some time
before contriving how to return into their Country) joined together, and
possessed themselves of Antandrus; from whence taking their opportunity, they
issued forth and set upon the Garrison at Mitylene: At which the Athenians
being incensed, command was given to Aristides and Symmachus, to lead the Army
against Aristides and Symmachus sent into Lesbos against the Exiles of Mitylene.
them; who having passed over the Forces into Lesbos, after some few Assaults,
took Antandrus, and put part of the Exiles to the Sword, and expelled the rest
out of the City: And after they had strenghned the Place with a Garrison, they
departed from Lesbos. After this Lamachus, with Ten Ships under his Command,
Sailed for Pontus, and lay with his Fleet at Heraclea, and near the River
Cacheta, lost all his Ships. For abundance of Rain falling, the Rain by the
violence of the Stream, dashed in Pieces all the Vessels against the Rocks
lying upon the Shore. Hereupon the Athenians made a Truce with the
Lacedaemonians P. 323. A Truce propounded, and made for a Year.
for a Year, upon these Conditions, that all that was then under the Power and
Government of each other, should so remain on both sides. And after several
Debates and Consultations, it was Judged to be the wisest course to put an end
to the War, and those destructive Contentions between themselves for ever
after. That which chiefly moved the Lacedaemonians was the earnest desire they
had to release those who were taken in the Island Sphacteria. Thus far the
Truce went on; but they could not agree concerning Scione, though all other
things were consented to on both sides. The Contention was so hot, that all
Ant. Chr. 424. War continued.
further overtures of Peace were at an end, and the War was still carried on
upon the Account of Scione.

About this time the City Menda fell off to the Lacedaemonians, which caused
Menda revolts to the Lacedaemonians.
a greater heat and resolution for the keeping of Scione. To this end Brasidas
removed all the Women and Children, and their best Goods out of Scione and
Menda, and put strong Garrisons into them. The Athenians were so enraged at
this, that they made a Decree to put all the Sciones to the Sword, when ever
they took the City.

To that end they sent Nicias and Nicostrates with Fifty Sail against them:
Menda retaken.
They first set upon Menda, which they took by the Treachery of some within.
Then they Besieged Scione, compassing it round with a Wall, and pressed upon
Scione besieged by the Athenians.
it with continual Assaults. But the Garrison in Scione being very strong, and
well provided with all things necessary, easily defended themselves, and from
the top of the Walls greatly galled the Besiegers. And these were the things
done this Year.

The Year following, Alceus governing at Athens, and Opicter Lucretius, and
Olymp. 89. 3. Ant. Chapter 423.
Lucius Sergius Fidenas.
Fideniates, Roman Consuls, the Athenians cast the Delians out of the Island,
and took the City into their own Hands, because they kept secret correspondence
(as they alleged) with the Lacedaemonians. Being thus expuls'd, Pharnaces the
Persian Lord Lieutenant gave them the City Or Adrametum, a City in Mysia, in
the Lesser Asia.
Adramyttium to inhabit. The Athenians at the same time, sent forth Cleon, with
a great Body of Foot unto the Coasts of Thrace; who arriving at Scione, shipped
part of them that lay before the Town, and sailed with them to Torona. For he
had intelligence that Brasidas was gone from those Parts, and had left but few
Soldiers at Torona. To which Place, he approached as close as he could, and
besieged it both by Sea and Land; at length he took it by Storm, and made the
Women and Children Captives; the Soldiers he bound in Chains, and sent them to
Athens; having left at Torona a small Garrison, he marched with the rest of his
Forces to the River Strymon in Thrace, and thence to the City Scione (which is
distant Thirty Stages from the City Amphipolis) which he fiercely assaulted.
But here having intelligence that Brasidas encamped with his Army at
Amphipolis, he makes against him with a swift March; who being informed of the
approach of the Enemy, sets forth in Battalia to meet the Athenians; whereupon
they presently joined Battle, the Victory continuing very doubtful for some
time where it would fall, both sides bravely behaving themselves: In the mean
time the Generals The Battle of Amphipolis, where the Generals on both sides
were killed. P. 324.
fought with that Resolution, as if each would gain the Victory with his own
Hands; and the Officers themselves, with undaunted Courage rushed into the heat
of the Battle, insomuch as many brave Men on both sides breathed out their
last. At length Brasidas fell in the Bed of Honor, amongst Heaps of his
Enemies slain by his own Hand. Cleon likewise was slain in the thickest of the
Combatants: And now both Armies were at a stand, and in a Consternation at the
loss of their Generals; but at length the Lacedaemonians got the day, and set up
a Trophy. And the Athenians upon a Truce made, buried their Dead, and sailed
back to Athens. When some who returned to Lacedemon gave an account of the
Victory and Death of Brasidas, it is reported that his Mother Ant. Chr. 423.
asked how he behaved himself in the Battle. To whom Answer was made, That he
went beyond all the Lacedaemonians. Upon which, she replied, Her Son Brasidas
was an Honest and Good Man, but much inferior to many other Spartans in
Valor. What she said being noised through the City, the Ephori decreed her
public Honors, because she preferred the Glory of her Country, before the
particular praise of her Son. After this Battle, the Athenians determined to
make Peace concluded.
Peace with the Lacedaemonians for Fifty Years, and did so upon these
Conditions, that the Prisoners on both sides should be discharged, and that the
Cities taken in the War should be restored. And so the Peloponesian War that
had now continued Ten Years of the Peloponesian War.
Ten Years, was in this manner ended at this time.

CHAP. VIII.
The continuance of the Peloponesian War. The War by the Romans against the
Fidinates for putting their Ambassadors to death. The Quarrels between the
Aegistines and the Seluntines in Sicily. The Expedition of the Athenians
against Sicily under Nicias, being the Sixteenth Year of the Peloponesian War.

ARiston was Archon at Athens, when the Romans committed the Consulship Olymp.
89. 4. Ant. Chr. 422. New Commotions.
to Titus Quintius, and Aulus Cornelius Cossus. The Peloponesian War was
scarcely ended, when new Commotions and Dissentions broke out afresh,
occasioned as follows. The Athenians and Spartans, with the common Consent of
all their Confederates, had entered into Terms of Truce and Peace. But in the
mean time they privately confederated in a League Offensive and Defensive,
without taking in the Cities that had sided with either Party; which raised a
suspicion as if there was a Design laid by this secret Association to inslave
all The Cities confederate both against Athens and Sparta. Ant. Chr. 422.
Greece: And therefore the chiefest Cities in Greece sent one to another, and
entered into mutual Leagues to join together against the Lacedaemonians and
Athenians. The most potent Grecian Cities in this Confederacy were Four, Argos,
Thebes, Corinth and Elis. And indeed there was some reason to suspect these Two
Cities had some Design against Greece; for that in the Articles of the League,
there was a Clause superjoyn'd, that it should be lawful for the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians at any time when they thought fit, either to add to, or take any
thing from that which was before solemnly agreed to. Besides, the Athenians had
created Ten Magistrates, who were invested with full power to manage all
Affairs relating to the City. And whereas the Lacedaemonians did the same thing,
it was very evident at what the insatiable Ambition of the Two Cities pointed.
Many therefore of the Cities now resolved to defend the common Liberty, and to
that end considering the power of Athens to be low, by their late overthrow at
Delium, and the honor and glory of Sparta, much diminished upon the account of
so many Captives of the noblest of their Citizens taken in the Island
Sphacteria, they conspired against them, and committed the Sovereign power and
management of the War to the City Argos. For the ancient noble Actions done by
that City, challenged above all others that preeminence and prerogative; for
long before, and to the very time of the * migration of the Heraclidae into
Peloponesus, the greatest Kings of Greece came out of Argos; An. Mu. 2847.
Eighty Years after the taking of Troy, in the time of Saul and Samuel.
and besides, by the advantage of a long Peace, it was grown very rich and
populous.

Argos now concluding that the chief Command was lodged in themselves, picked
out a Thousand of the strongest young Men, and best ability for Estates, whom
they freed from all public Affairs, and maintained at the common Charge. These
were continually by daily Exercise, to inure themselves to Martial Discipline:
Ante Chr. 422.
And by the help of a plentiful allowance, and constant care and diligence, in
a short time they became most expert Soldiers. But when the Lacedaemonians
perceived all Peloponesus had conspired against them, and foreseeing the
greatness and danger of the War, they made preparation for defense of the
Government, as far as was possible. To that end, in the first place, they P.
325.
manumitted a Thousand of the Helots that were with Brasidas: And afterward
they restored the Citizens to their former Privileges that had been taken
Prisoners in Sphacteria, whom they had before degraded by reason of the
disgrace they had brought upon their Country. Moreover they brought in many who
had formerly done great Service in the Wars, by crying them up, and feeding
them by Rewards, to encourage them to show the like instances of their Valor
in the hazards of the approaching War. They carried themselves likewise with
more kindness toward their Confederates, and strove to gain and win by
courtesy and civility, those they had disobliged and alienated from them. But
the Athenians went a quite contrary way; for conceiving that those whom Ant.
Chr. 422.
they suspected to be false, were to be discouraged by fear of Punishment, they
put them in mind of that severe Revenge taken in the business of Scione is an
Island in the Aegean Sea. There Is another Scione in Thrace. See before.
Scione; for there when the City was taken, they put all the Men to the Sword,
and carried away all the Women and Children as Captives, and planted the Island
with the Plateans, who were banished their Country for their faithfulness to
the Athenians.

About the same time, the Campanians in Italy marched against Cuma with a great
Army, and routed and destroyed most of the Cumeans. Then they besieged the
City, and after several Assaults, at length took it by force, and having The
Campanians take Cuma.
plundered it, and carried away all the Inhabitants that were left as Slaves,
they repeopled it with Colonies sent out of their own City.

The chief of the Senate at Athens, was Aristophilus, Lucius Quintius, and
Olymp. 90. 1. An. Mu. 3552. Ant. Chr. 421.
Aulus Sempronius, Roman Consuls, when they of Elis celebrated the Ninetieth
Olympiad, in which Hiperbius the Syracusian was crowned with Victory. And at
that time, the Athenians by command of the Oracle, restored the Island Delos to
the Deleans; and they that inhabited Attramitium in Delium, returned to their
own Country. And now because Pylus was not given up, and restored to the
Lacedaemonians, the War began to break out afresh between the Two Cities, which
being understood by them of Argos, they entered into League with the Athenians.
And the breach growing wider and wider, the Lacedaemonians persuaded the
Corinthians, that leaving their Association with the Confederate Cities, they
would join with them. In this condition and confusion of Affairs stood
Peloponesus.

As to other Places out of the Bounds of Peloponesus, the Aenians, Dolopeans
and Melcans, confederated together, and set upon A City in Macedonia.
Heraclea in Trachinia. The Heracleans marched against them with great Forces,
wherewith they bravely fought the Enemy, but were totally routed, with the loss
of a great part of their Army; the rest by Flight got within their Walls. Then
they sent to the Beotians for aid, who sent them a Thousand of heavy armed Men
from Thebes; by which assistance they repelled their Enemies. In the mean time,
the Olyntheans. made an Expedition against the City A City in the Hellespont.
Micyberna, then a Garrison of the Athenians, and having forced out the Guards
there, possessed themselves of the Place.

Archias was Archon of Athens, and Lucius Papyrius Mugillanus, and Caius
Servilius Olymp. 90. 2. An. Mu. 3553. Ant. Chr. 420.
Structus, were Consuls at Rome, when the Argives proclaimed War against the
Lacedaemonians, because they neglected to offer the usual Frankincense to Apollo
Pythius. At the same time Alcibiades the Athenian General came with his Army
into the Country of Argos, by whom the Argives being Forced, invaded Troezena,
The Argives invade Troezeza near Argos.
which was Confederated with Sparta, and after they had wasted and spoiled the
Country, and burnt many of their Towns, at length they returned. The
Lacedaemonians being greatly enraged at the Injuries done against all Law and
Justice to them of Troezena, denounce War against Argos; in prosecution
whereof, they raised an Army, and thereof made Agis their King, General, who
marched with all P. 326.
speed against the Argives, and after he had made spoil and havoc in the
Country, made up close to the City, and offered them Battle. Hereupon the
Argives being joined with Three Thousand of the Eleans, and as many of the
Mantineans, marched out of the City; and just when they were ready to join
Battle, the Generals on both sides by their Ambassadors, made a Truce for Four
Months; so both Armies returned, without doing any thing: But both the Cities
were incensed at the Authors of the Truce, insomuch as they of Argos cast
Stones at the Officers of the Army, and had ordered them all to be put to
death; which had been executed if by great intercession their Lives had not
been spared; but their Goods were confiscated, and their Houses pulled down.

The Lucedemonians also intended to have put Agis to Death; but upon his Agis
threatened to be put to Death.
promise to wipe off the stain of the late miscarriage by his future Services,
with much ado he was spared. However for the future, they joined with him Ten
Persons, approved for their Wisdom and Prudence, without whose Advice he was
strictly charged not to do any thing for the time to come.

After this, when the Athenians had sent forth a Thousand well-arm'd Men, and
Two Hundred Horse by Sea to them of Argos, under the command of Nichetes Ante
Chr. 420.
and Nichostratus (to whom Alcibiades joined himself (though then in no
command) for the great love and kindness he bore toward the Mantineans and
Eleans,) the Argives in a common Assembly decreed, that notwithstanding the
former Agreement, they should make it their business to carry on the War with
all their Power. To that end all the Officers encouraged every one their own
Soldiers; who readily and heartily followed their Leaders, and encamped out of
the Walls of the City. There it was concluded to be most advisable to begin
first with an Expedition against Orchomenia in Arcadia. To that purpose, having
advanced into Arcadia, they besieged the City, and wearled it out with
Orcomenia taken by the Argives.
daily Assaults; and having taken the Town, they marched to Tegea, determining
to force that likewise. The Tegeans desiring speedy aid from the Lacedaemonians,
they with the strength of their whole City, and of their Confederates, made for
Mantinea, conceiving that by Besieging of that, a stop would be easily put to
the Siege of Tegea. But the Mantineans (being enforced by the Assistance of
their Confederates) marched out with the Youth of their City, and had an Army
in the Field ready to oppose the Lacedaemonians. Presently hereupon Battle was
joined, and a select Band of the Argives (consisting of a Thousand well
disciplined and expert Soldiers) were the first that put the Enemy to flight,
and made a great Slaughter in the Pursuit. But the Lacedaemonians returning from
Ant. Chr. 420. A Battle between the Lacedaemonians and the Mantineans.
the Pursuit and Slaughter of those they had routed in another part of the
Army, fell upon the Conquering Argives, and surrounding them, made no question
but to cut them off every Man: And whereas these brave Men, although far
inferior in number, prevailed in a great measure against their Enemies, the
Lacedemonian King (being earnest to perform his Promise to the Citizens, and to
wipe off the stain of his former disgrace by some great and remarkable Action)
in the Head of his Army, ran through all sorts of Difficulties in the Fight,
and had killed them all upon the spot, if he had not been prevented; for Pharax
(one of the Ten, joined with the King as his Council, a Man of great authority
in Lacedemon) commanded the Soldiers to open a way for the Arcadians, lest
fighting with Men in a desperate condition, they came to experience what Valor
can do when it is driven to a necessity. The King restrained by his Command, a
Passage was made for the Enemy to break through, as Pharax had ordered. And in
this manner; these Thousand Men got off, and the Lacedaemonians having gained an
eminent Victory, set up a Trophy, and returned Home.

The former Year ended, Antopha was chief Governor at Athens, and Four
Military Tribunes, Caius Furius, Titus Quinctius.
Quintilius, Olymp. 90. 3. An. Mund. 3554. Ante Chr. 419.
Marcus Posthumus, and Aulus Cornelius, bore the Office of Consuls at Rome. At
that time the Argives and Lacedaemonians had several Meetings and Messages to
and fro, about entering into a League one with another, which was effected P.
327.
accordingly. Upon this, the Mantineans (now deserted by A League between the
Lacedaemonians and the Argives.
the Garrison put in there by the Argives) were forced to come under the power
of the Lacedaemonians. About the same time, the Thousand choice Men before
spoken of, in the City of Argos, conspired to overthrow the Democracy, and set
up an Aristocracy from among A Sedition in Argos.
themselves: And having many Associates and Abettors in this Affair, of the
wealthiest and most courageous Men of the City, they forthwith seized upon the
Tribunes of the People, and the Heads and chief of those that were for Popular
Government, and cut their Throats. The rest being terrified, repealed all the
ancient Laws, and began to order all Affairs in the Commonwealth, according to
the Will and Pleasure of these Men. And after they had thus governed for the
space of Eight Months, they were by an insurrection of the People deposed, and
the Democracy restored.

Another Disturbance likewise arose in Greece; for upon a Difference happening
between the Phoceans and the Locrians, the matter came to a decision by the
Sword. The Phoceans were Conquerors, Quarrels and a Fight beween the Phoceans
and Locrians.
and killed above a Thousand of the Locrians. In the mean time, the Athenians
under the Command of Niceas, took Two Ant. Chapter 419.
Cities, Cithera in Peloponesus.
Cithera and Nicea a Port Town in Megara.
Nicea, and in Melus in Thessaly.
Melus, (which was taken by Storm) they put all (but Women and Children) to the
Sword, and them they made Captives.

In Italy the Fidenates put the Roman Ambassadors to Death upon a light
occasion. At which base act of Injustice, the People of Rome were highly
incensed, and decreed to revenge it by a War. To this end they made Manius
Aemilius Dictator, and according to the Custom, joined with him Aulus
Cornelius, the Master of the Horse. When all things were in readiness, he
marched against the Fidenates with all expedition, who drew out, and met him;
upon which there was a sharp Engagement, and so continued for a long time; and
after many were cut off on both sides, they parted at length upon equal Terms.

At this time Euphemus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and the Military
Tribunes Olymp. 90. 4. An. Mu. 3555. Ant. Chr. 418.
Lucius Furius, Lucius Quinctius, and Aulus Sempronius again executed the
Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time the Lacedaemonians enforced by the Aid of
their Confederates, made an incursion into Argaia, and took the small Town of
of Argias, killed the Inhabitants, and razed the Castle. Then hearing that they
of Argos had enlarged their Walls out as far as to the Sea, they marched
thither, and pulled them down, and returned Home. The Athenians made Alcibiades
General, who with Twenty Ships under his Command, was ordered to do the utmost
he could to restore the Argives to their former Government; for there was such
Confusion and Disorder there, that great Multitudes of them were for the
advancing of the Aristocracy. Alcibiades therefore as soon as he came
Alcibiades sent to compose matters in Argos.
to Argos, called an Assembly of those that were for the Popular Government,
and caused those who seemed to side with the Lacedaemonians to be banished out
of the City, and having settled the Democracy, returned to Athens. At the end of
the Year, the Lacedaemonians invaded Argaia with a great Army, and making The
Lacedaemonians invade Argaia.
waste and spoil in many Places of the Country, placed the Exiles of Argos in
Orneas, and Fortified and walled the Place round, in regard it lay in Argaia;
and having put in there a strong Garrison, they ordered them to waste the
Country of Argos with continual Excursions. When the Lacedaemonians were marched
back, the Athenians sent Forty Ships, and Twelve Hundred Soldiers Ant. Chr.
418. The 15th Year of the Peloponesian War. P. 328.
to the Assistance of the Argives. With this Aid they marched against Orneas,
and took it by Storm, and putting part of the Garrison and the Exiles to the
Sword, they expelled the rest out of the City. And these were the things done
in the Fifteenth Year of the Peloponesian War.

In the Sixteenth Year, when Aristomnestes was Archon at Athens, and Titus
Claudius Olym. 91. 1. Ant. Chr. 417.
Spurius, Nautius Lucius Sergius, and Sextus Julius, Military Tribunes,
executed the Office of Consuls at Rome, the Ninety First Olympiad was
celebrated at Elis, wherein Exaneus of Acragentum was Victor. At that time the
Bysantines and Chalcedeans joining with the Thracians, passed over with a great
Army into Bithynia, and wasted and spoiled the Country; and after they had
taken several small Towns by force, they executed most horrid cruelty. For
after they had gathered together a great multitude of Prisoners, of Men, Women
and Children, The cruelty of the Thracians. Quarrels between the Agistines and
the Seluntines in Sicily.
they cut all their Throats.

About the same time, the Aegistines and Seluntines in Sicily went to Blows,
upon the Differences between them concerning the Bounds of their Country. For
though the River divided the Territories of the several Cities that were at
variance, yet the Seluntines passed over to the other side, and seized upon the
Lands lying next to the River; and incroaching still by little and little, they
gained the next to them, and laughed and jeered at those they thus abused.
Provoked with these Indignities, the Aegistines at first thought to win them by
fair Words, and dissuaded them all they could from seizing of other Men's
Estates. But when they saw they turned a deaf Ear, the Proprietors rose up in
Ant. Chr. 417.
Arms, and drove them out of the Country, and so recontinued their ancient
Possessions. Upon this, a great Fire of Strife and Contention was kindled, and
Armies were raised on both sides, to decide the Controversy by the Sword. Both
Armies being drawn into the Field, a sharp Battle was fought, in which the
Seluntines got the Day, and killed a great number of the Aegistines.

The power of the Aegistines being very much weakened by this Slaughter, and so
unable of themselves to oppose their Enemy, they First sought Aid and
Assistance from them of Acragentum and Syracuse: But these failing them, they
sent Ambassadors to Carthage for relief; and they likewise refused. Upon which
they sought to get Confederates beyond the Seas: And this proved successful;
for whereas the Leontines had been driven both out of their City and Country by
the Syracusians, those that were remaining of these Exiles consulted together
and determined to enter into a League with the Athenians, from whom they were
descended. The matter was debated and decreed in a Common Assembly of all their
Allies, that Ambassadors should be sent to Athens, to desire their Assistance
for the Relief of the oppressed Cities, and withal to promise that they would
do their utmost endeavor to serve the Athenians in all their Concerns in
Sicily.

When the Ambassadors came to Athens, the Leontines pleaded their Kindred and
Ant. Chr. 417.
ancient Allyances; but the Aegistines promised a great Sum of Money for the
carrying on the War, and with all their power to oppose the Syracusians. Upon
this the Athenians thought fit First to send some prudent Citizens to Sicily,
better to understand the State and Condition both of the Island and of the
Aegistines. When they came to Aegista, the Aegistines with great Ostentation
and Vanity, showed them a great mass of Treasure, in part their own, and part
borrowed. When Debates at Athens about afsisting the Aegistines in Sicily.
the Ambassadors were returned, and the great Riches of the Aegistines was
noised Abroad, an Assembly of the People was called, where the War to be made
in Sicily was proposed, and where Niceas the Son of Niceratus, a Man of great
account amongst the People, argued with great prudence against the War,
alleging it impossible both to contend with the Lacedaemonians, and likewise to
send so great a Force as they must needs do, into parts beyond the Seas. And
alleged, that when they were not able hitherto to subdue Greece, it was in
vain to think to bring the greatest Island of the World under their power. He
added moreover, when Carthage, that was of so large an Empire, and had often
attempted Sicily, was not able to conquer it, could they suppose that the
Athenians, who were far inferior in Strength and Power, could subdue an Island
the most potent in Arms of all others in the World? After he had spoken this
and much more, suitable P. 329.
to the present Occasion, Alcibiades one of the chief of the Nobility of Ant.
Chr. 417.
Athens, persuaded the People to prosecute the War. This Man was the most
Eloquent Speaker of all amongst the Citizens, and for the Nobleness of his
Birth, and greatness of his Estate, and Skill in Martial Affairs, far exceeded
the rest. The People upon his persuasion, without delay rigged out a Fleet of
Thirty Sail from their Confederates, and an Hundred of their own. In these
completely furnished with all Provisions and Necessaries, they put Five
Thousand Men well Armed, and appointed Three Generals, Alcibiades, Nicias, and
Lamachus for this Expedition; and thus were the Athenians then employed. And
now being come to the War between the Athenians and Syracusians, according to
our designed Method at the beginning, we shall pursue the things that followed
in the next Book.

The MAPP of Ancient Greece Expressing especially the Places mentioned in
THVCYDIDES. by THO: HOBBES




THE Historical Library OF Diodorus the Sicilian. BOOK XIII.
The PREFACE.
IF we should imitate others in the compiling of their Histories, we should P.
331.
first in the Preface of every Book, observe some things pertinent to the
Occasion and Subject in Hand, and then descend to the continuation of our
Discourse, upon the Actions and Affairs that follow next in order: For by some
small intermission from writing, we gain a breathing fit; the fruit and
advantage by Prefaces. But in as much as we have promised to endeavor in a few
Books, not only to relate things that have been done, but likewise to
comprehend in that Relation, the time of above Eleven Hundred Years, it is
necessary to avoid Prefaces, and come presently to the matters in Hand. Only
promising this to inform the Reader, that in the Six former Books, are
contained the things done in all Parts of the World, from the Trojan War, to
the time the Athenians decreed the War against the Syracusians, to which from
the Destruction of Troy, is Seven Hundred and Threescore Years: And that we
shall begin this Book with that Expedition against the Syracusians, and end it
at the beginning of the Second Carthaginian War against Dionysius the Tyrant of
Syracuse.

CHAP. I.
The Athenian Fleet rigged out for Sicily. Alcibiades accused; Flies; Is
Condemned; Goes to Sparta out of Italy. The Syracusians send for Aid to
Lacedemon. Gylippus is sent to them. The Battle at Syracuse.

WHen Cabrias bore the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans invested
Olymp. 91. 2. An. Mu. 3531. Ant. Chr. 412.
Lucius Sergius, Marcus Servilius, and Marcus Papyrius, Three Military
Tribunes, with Consular dignity, the Athenians having decreed War against the
Syracusians, rigged out a Fleet, raised Money, and prepared with great
diligence all other things necessary for the Expedition. To this end they
commissioned Three Generals, Alcibiades, Nicias, and Lamachus, to whom they
committed the management of the whole War. The richer sort to ingratiate
themselves with the People, some of them supplied the Fleet with Arms, others
promised to advance Money toward the Victualling the Navy, and providing Pay
for the Soldiers. Many likewise of the People, both Citizens and Strangers,
freely offered Preparations against Sicily.
themselves to the Generals, to be listed and enrolled: And all were so
confident, that they were ready to divide the Country of Sicily amongst
themselves by Lot.

And now the Navy was ready to set sail; when on the sudden in one Night, All
the Images in Athens had their Heads struck off in one Night. Ant. Chr. 412.
all the Statues of the Goddess Minerva through the City (which were very many)
had their Heads struck off. The Populacy conceived this not to be done by any
of the meaner sort, but by some in authority, with a design to destory the
Democracy, and therefore they were highly incensed at the wickedness of the
fact, and promised great Rewards to find out the Authors. In the mean time, one
of the Citizens came to the Senate, and told them, that in the new Moon about
Midnight, he saw several Persons go into the House of a Foreigner, amongst whom
Alcibiades was one. And when the Senate asked him how he could know him at such
a time of the Night? He answered, he discerned him by the light of the Moon: By
which Contradiction he detected his own Falsehood, and never after could the
least Discovery be made of that Fact by any Person whatsoever.

However notwithstanding this Accident, an Hundred and Forty Galleys were
rigged out, besides Ships of Burden and other Ships, for transporting of
Horses, P. 332.
Provisions and other Necessaries, whereof there was a very great number. In
this Expedition there went forth with them above Seven Thousand Men at Arms,
and Slingers, and Horsemen sent from their Confederates, besides those
belonging to their Fleet.

During this time, the Officers had a private Consult with the Senate,
concerning the Administration of Affairs in Sicily, in case they should conquer
the Ant. Chr. 412.
Island. Where at length it was determined, that they of Selinuntium and
Syracuse should be carried away as Captives and Slaves, and that the rest
should have only a Yearly Tribute imposed upon them. The next day the Officers
with the Army, marched down into the The Port of Athens, Five Miles from
Athens, joined to it with a long Wall. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2. c. 85.
Piraeum, and were followed with a great Multitude, both of Citizens and
Strangers throughout the whole City; every one making it his business to take
leave of his Friend or Relation. The Ships lay on every side of the Harbor
with their Fore-decks adorned with Flags and Streamers erect, and shining with
the splendour of the Arms. The Shore round the Harbor was filled with (...)
Altars of Incense, and Silver Bowls, out of which were poured out into Golden
Cups, Drink Offerings to the Gods, by them who worshipped the Deity, and
earnestly prayed for the happy Success of the Expedition.

At length they set sail from the Pyraeum, and sailing round the Coasts of
Peloponesus, arrived at Now Corfu.
Corcyra: For here they were commanded to stay, till they were joined by some
others of their Neighbor Confederates. Being all come up to them, passing
through the Ionian Sea, they came to the Promontory A Promontory of Italy.
of Japygia; hence sailing along the Coasts of Italy, they were refused by the
Tarrentines; and passing by the likewise of Metapontum and Heraclea, they came
to the Thurians, by whom they were courteously received: Loosing from thence,
they made for Crotona, and there bought some Provisions: And sailing by the
Temple of Juno Lacinia, passed under the Promontory called Dioscurias. After
this, leaving Tesasletius (as it is called) and Locris behind them, they
anchored near Rhegium and invited the Rhegians to join with them; who answered,
that they must first advise with the other Italians.

As soon as the Syracusians heard that the Athenians were within their (...).
In the Streights.
Seas, they made Three Generals, invested with Absoute Power, Hermocrates,
Sicanus and Heraclides, who raised Soldiers and sent Messengers through all
the Cities of Sicily, to press them with all earnestness to join with them in
Arms for the common safety of their Country; For that the Athenians (under
Color of a War against the Syracusians) had no other Design but to subdue the
whole Island. To which the Acragentines and Naxians, answered, that they were
resolved to abide firm in their League with the Athenians. The Camarians and
Messenians, declared they were for Peace, and refused to return any Answer to
what was proposed. The Himereans and Seluntians, with them of Gela and Catanea,
promised their Assistance. The Cities of the The Siculi are they that came out
of Italy, and called it Sicily, which was before Sicania. Sicilians is a
general Name for all the Inhabitants.
Siculi (though they favored the Syracusians) yet desired to be at ease, and
not knowing what to resolve, judged it most advisable to consider a while of
the business, that they might be better able to discern what was like to be the
issue of so great a War.

The Aegistines plainly declaring they could not contribute to the Athenians
Ant. Chapter 412.
above Thirty Talents, the Athenian Generals accused them of Treachery; and
setting Sail from Rhegium with their whole Fleet, arrived at Naxus in Sicily,
where they were friendly and courteously received by the Citizens; and from
thence they made to Catana. But they of Catana refused entrance to the
Soldiers, yet admitted the Generals, and called a common Assembly; where the
Athenian Generals treated with them concerning the entering into a mutual League
offensive and defensive; but whilst Alcibiades was making an Harangue to court
(...).
the People, the Soldiers broke through a little Gate into the City, by which
means the Cataneans were forced to join with the Athenians in the War against
the Syracusians.

Whilst these things were acting Abroad, they who were Enemies to Alcibiades,
Alcibiades accused at Athens.
(through private Peaks and Grudges) at Athens took Occasion, from the maiming
and spoiling of the Images, and accused him in the Common Assemblies of a
Conspiracy against the Democracy; which Accusation was much supported and
furthered by what had then lately happened at Argos: For some of the chief of
the City, conspiring with others of their Dependents, to overturn the Democracy
in Argos, were all destroyed by the Citizens. This Attempt of innovation there,
P. 333.
caused the Accusation at Athens to be more readily believed, and therefore the
People being with all earnestness stirred up by the Orators, sent a Ship from
Salamis to Sicily, to recall Alcibiades, in order to abide his Trial.

As soon as it arrived at Catana, Alcibiades was made acquainted by the
Messengers, Ant. Chapter 412
what Order they had from the People; upon which, he (with those who were
accused with him) went on Shipboard into his own Gally, and together with that
from Salamis set Sail from Catana. As soon as he arrived at Thurium, either
through Consciousness of the Guilt of his Impiety, or through the fear of the
greatness of the Danger, he and all those accused with him made their Escape.
Alcibiades withdraws himself.
Those who were on Board the Salamian Vessel, made great inquiry after
Alcibiades; but when he could not be found, they Sailed back to Athens, and
there gave an Account what had happened.

Upon which, the Athenians gave Judgment of Death upon Alcibiades, and all
Alcibiades Condemned.
his Fellow Fugitives, (their Names being only put up to the Court) without
being further heard.

But Alcibiades fled out of Italy to Sparta, and there persuaded the
Lacedaemonians to invade the Athenians: But the Generals that remained in
Sicily, sailed with their Forces to Aegista, and took Hyccara, a small Town of
the Siculi; out of whose Spoils they raised an Hundred Talents. And having
received Thirty Talents more from the Aegistines, they sailed back to Catana;
where having consulted how to posses themselves of a Place near to the chief
Port of Syracuse, with-little or no hazard, they sent thither a Trusty Fellow
of Catana, not suspected by the Syracusian Officers, with Orders to acquaint
them that some of the Cataneans had plotted upon a sudden to set upon the
Athenian Soldiers in the Night, when they had laid aside their Arms, and to
burn all their Shipping in their Harbor: And that this might be the better
effected, they desired the Commanders to appear with their Army, that the
Design might not be defeated. As soon as the Catanean came to Syracuse, he
delivered his Message. The Generals believing what he said, appointed a Night
when they would march out with their Forces, and sent back the Man to Catana.
At the Night appointed, the Syracusians led forth their Men toward Catana; and
the Athenians (with great Silence) made out with their Fleet to the great Port
of Syracuse; and seizing upon Olympius; and all the Places bordering round
about, they there fortified their Camp. But the Syracusians understanding the
Treachery, returned with a swift March, and set upon their Enemies Camp. They
on the other side issued forth, and Battle was joined, in which the Athenians
killed Four Hundred of their Enemies, and put the rest to flight: But the
Athenian Generals discerning that the Enemy exceeded them in the number of
their Horse (that they might be the better provided for the Siege,) sailed back
to Catana.

Messengers likewise were sent to Athens, with Letters to the Democracy to Ant.
Chr. 412.
desire more Horse and Moneys, because the Siege they were about to begin,
would be long and tedious. Upon which, it was decreed, that Three Hundred
Talents and some Troops of Horse should be sent into Sicily.

During these things, Diagoras surnamed the (...). This Diagoras was a Milean;
he questioned in his Writings, whether there were any Gods; for which he was
prosecuted. Vid. Lact. lib. 1. p. 7.
Atheist, accused for his Impiety, for fear of the People, fled out of Attica;
and a Talent of Silver was promised as a Reward by the Voice of the common
Crier, to any that should kill him. In Italy the Romans had War with the Aequi,
and took Lavinium by Assault: And these were the Actions produced this Year.

Pisander now executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans created
P. 334. Olymp. 91. 3. Ant. Chapter 411. The Syracusians crave aid of the
Lacedaemonians.
Four Military Tribunes as Consuls, Publius Lucretius, Caius Servilius, Agrippa
Memenius, and Spurius Veturius. At this time the Syracusians sent Ambassadors
to Corinth and Lacedemon, to desire Aid, and earnestly entreated that they
would not suffer them to be reduced to the utmost extremity. The Lacedaemonians
stirred up by Alcibiades, determined to assist the Syracusians, and made
Gylippus General. The Corinthians sent only Two Galleys under Pythes to go
along with Gylippus into Sicily for the present, while they were preparing a
greater Fleet to be sent after them. Nicias and Lamachus the Athenian Generals
at Catana, Ant. Chr. 411.
having received Three Hundred Talents, and re-inforc'd with Two Hundred and
Fifty Horse from Athens, set Sail for Syracuse, and arriving there in the Night
unsuspected by them of Syracuse, possess themselves of An high piece of Land
near the City over-topping it.
Epipole; which they of Syracuse perceiving, made a Sally with all speed to
drive them thence, but were forced back within their Walls, with the loss of
Three Hundred Men.

After this, there came to the Athenians Three Hundred Horse from Aegina, and
Two Hundred and Fifty from the Sicilians, which made up a Body of above Eight
Hundred Horse: Being enforced, they drew a Trench round Labdalus, and blockt up
the City Syracuse on every side with a Wall. At which the Syracusians were
greatly terrified, and to prevent the building of the Wall, they sallied out;
but after a Skirmish with Horse on both sides, the Syracusians were beaten back
with great loss. Then the Athenians with a part of their Army possessed
themselves of a Place called Polichna, commanding the Port, and drew a Wall
about it, wherein they included the Temple of Jupiter: So that now Syracuse was
Besieged on both sides. With these many Misfortunes, the Syracusians were
greatly discouraged; but when they heard that Gylippus was arrived at Himera,
and raising Men, they began to take Heart. For Gylippus as Gylippus arrives at
Himera.
soon as he came to Himera, with Four Galleys only, after he had secured his
Ships, brought in them of Himera to join with the Syracusians; and from them
and the Geleans, Selinuntians and Sicanians, he raised and listed Men, who when
they were all mustered, made up a Body of Three Thousand Foot, and Two Hundred
Horse; with which he marched through the midst of the Country, and entered into
Syracuse: And after a few Days, led forth his Forces, with those of the
Syracusians, against the Enemy. Whereupon a sharp Battle was fought, A Baatel
fought near Syracuse.
wherein Lamachus the Athenian General was killed. But at length (after many
killed on both sides) the Athenians got the Day.

After this Fight, came in Thirteen Galleys from Corinth, whereupon Gylippus
having drawn the Soldiers out of these Ships, with them, and the Syracusians
set upon the Enemies Camp, and assaulted the Epipole: And though the Athenians
made a Sally, yet after a sharp Dispute, and many of them killed, they were
routed by the Syracusians; who presently demolished the Walls and
Fortifications through all the Epipole. The Athenians having lost this Place,
led away their Army to another Post.

These things thus performed, the Syracusians sent Ambassadors a Second time to
Corinth and Lacedemon for further Supplies. To whom were sent a Thousand Men
from Corinth, Beotia and Sicyon; and from Sparta Six Hundred. In the mean time,
Gylippus traversing the Country about from Town to Town in several Parts of
Sicily, brought in many to join with him in the War; and being reinforced with
Three Thousand Men from the Himereans and Sicanians, Ant. Chr. 411. P. 335.
he marched his Army through the Heart of the Country: But the Athenians having
intelligence of their coming, cut off one half of them by an Ambush; the rest
came safe to Syracuse.

And now they of Syracuse being encouraged with fresh Supplies, determined to
try their Fortune in a Sea Fight: What Shipping they had left, they set forth,
and built others, which they made use and (...), (...) (...)
trial of in the little Harbor.

Nicias the Athenian General, acquainted the People of Athens by Letters, that
the Syracusians were much enforced, and that they were putting forth a great
Fleet, with an intent to come to a Sea Fight; and therefore desired more
Shipping and Moneys to be sent him, and a Colleague to bear part of the Burden
and Care of the War. For Alcibiades being fled, and Lamachus killed, he only
remained, and that very infirm and unhealthful. Upon this the Athenians sent
into Sicily about the Summer Solstice, Ten Galleys, under the Command of
Eurymedon, with an Hundred and Forty Talents of Silver: But withal preparing
and designing to send a greater Fleet at the Spring. And to that end, Ant. Chr.
410.
they raised Men and Money in every Place from among their Confederates. In
Peloponesus the Lacedaemonians by the instigation of Alcibiades, broke the
League they had made with the Athenians, and the heat of this War continued for
the space of Twelve Years.

CHAP. II.
The Lacedaemonians invade Attica. The Fight at Sea between the Syracusians and
Athenians. Eurymedon and Demosthenes arrive in Sicily. A Plague in the Athenian
Camp. Another Fight between the Syracusians and Athenians. The latter routed at
Sea. The Athenians ruined in Sicily. Nicholaus's long Oration. Gylippus his
Answer.

THis Year ended, Cleocritus governed in chief at Athens, and at Rome Four
Olymp. 91. 4. An. M. 3559. Ant. Chapter 410.
Military Tribunes executed the Authority of Consuls; that is to say, Aulus
Sempronius, Marcus Papyrius, Quintus Fabius, and Spurius Nautius. At this time
the Lacedaemonians invaded Attica under Agis their General, and Alcibiades the
Athenian. They seize upon Decelia, a Place very strong and fit for a Garrison,
and there they built a Fort; from whence this War was called the Decelian War.
On the other side, the Athenians sent Charides with Thirty Sail into Laconia,
and decreed Fourscore Galleys, and Five Thousand Soldiers to be sent into
Sicily.

In the mean time the Syracusians in order to a Sea Fight before determined,
made out with a Fleet of Fourscore Sail well Manned, against the Enemy; whom
the Athenians met with a Fleet of Sixty Sail, whereupon began a fierce Fight: A
Sea Fight between the Athenians and Syracusians.
And now the Athenians came running to the Seaside from every Quarter, from
their Posts and Forts, some out of Curiosity to see the Engagement, others to
be assistant to their Countrymen in their Flight, in case they should be
worsted. The Syracusian Officers foreseeing the Athenians were likely to do, as
now they did, had before given secret Orders to those that were left as a Guard
for the City, to Assault the Forts of the Athenians which were full of Money,
Naval Preparations, and other Provisions. The Syracusians therefore easily
possessed themselves of the Forts, which were slightly guarded, and made a
great Slaughter of them that came from the Sea-shoar in aid of their Fellows.
Ant. Chapter 410.
Hereupon a great Noise and Clamor being made about the Forts, and in the
Camp, the Athenians Soldiers now engaged at Sea, were struck with great
Terror, and gave back, and at length betook themselves to the defense of the
Forts and Fortresses that were left; whom the Syracusians pursued, without
observing any order. Whereupon the Athenians discerning there was no hope nor
way left of escaping at Land, (for that the Syracusians had possessed
themselves of Two of their Forts) tackt about, and were forced to renew the
Fight: Upon which, with their whole Fleet, in a Line of Battle, they fell upon
the Syracusians (who were separated one from another, and had their Line broken
and disordered by the Pursuit) and sunk Eleven of their Ships, pursuing the
rest to the Island. After the Fight, both sides set up a Trophy, the Athenians
for their Victory at Sea, and the Syracusians for their Success at Land. The
Fight at Sea having this Issue, and the Victory so hardly obtained, the
Athenians (understanding that Demosthenes within a few Days would be with them
with a Fleet, were resolved not to attempt any thing further, till those Forces
arrived. The Syracusians on the contrary resolved to lay all at stake, and try
the utmost by force of Arms, before the Army of Demosthenes came up. And to
that end, they faced the P. 336. Ant. Chr. 410.
Athenian Fleet, and did all they could every Day to provoke them to a Battle.

About that time Aristo a Corinthian Commander of a Vessel, advised the
Syracusians to make the Fore-Castles of their Ships shorter and lower, which
was of great advantage to them in Fights at Sea afterward: For the
Fore-Castles of the Athenian Galleys were both very slender and high built, by
reason whereof their Beaks made no impression, but where they met with those
equal in height; and therefore the Enemy received no great Prejudice by them.
But the Vessels of the Syracusians (having their Fore-Decks low and strong
built,) often at the first Stroke sunk the Athenian Galleys.

The Syracusians (as is before related) many Days dared the Athenians to Fight
both by Sea and Land, but all to no purpose; for they kept close, and would not
be drawn forth by any means. But afterward (some of the Officers of the Fleet
not being able longer to endure the Insolences of the Syracusians) part of the
Navy set upon them in the great Haven, which at length engaged the whole Fleet.
The Athenians indeed excelled the other in Another Sea Fight.
the swiftness of their Galleys, and in the expertness and diligence of the
Seamen: But because the fight was in a strait and narrow Place, this advantage
was of no use to them.

The Syracusians therefore being confusedly mixed with their Enemies, and giving
them no respite or time to withdraw, they drove them from off their Decks and
their Fore-Castles, with Stones and Spears. And when they had Ant. Chr. 410.
with the Beaks of their Ships pierced through many of the Enemy's Galleys,
they boarded them, and the Fight seemed within the Ships, just like a Battle at
Land. All things thus going to rack on the Athenians side, they fled outright
with great precipitation; whom the Syracusians pursued close, and sunk Seven of
their Galleys, and disabled many more.

The Syracusians being now grown confident, by their late Victories both at Sea
and Land, presently arrives Eurimedon and Demosthenes, with a Demosthenes and
Eurimedon arrive at Sicily.
great Army from Athens, and with many Auxiliaries from Thurium and Messapia an
Island near Sicily called Calabria. Ant. Chr. 410.
Messapia which joined them in their Passage. These Generals brought with them
more than Three Hundred and Ten Galleys, and Five Thousand Men, besides Seamen:
But Arms, Moneys, Engines for a Siege and other Provisions were on board other
Transport Ships. Upon this the Syracusians were again discouraged, judging they
were never able for the future to cope with so potent an Enemy.

Demosthenes having now persuaded his Colleagues to seize upon the Epipole,
(for^ otherwise he could never straiten the City on every side) set upon the
Syracusians in the night with Ten Thousand heavy Armed Men, and as many light
Armed; Ant. Chr. 410
and the Assault being unexpected they took some Forts, and entering within the
Fortifications, demolished part of the Wall. But the Syracusians running
together from all parts to the Place assaulted, and Hermocrates with a choice
Band of lusty Young Men hasting in with aid and assistance; the Athenians were
driven out, and through the darkness of the Night and ignorance of the Passages
were dispersed and scattered far from one another, so that the Syracusians with
their Auxiliaries with a close persuit killed Two Thousand Five Hundred of Ant.
Chr. 410. The Athenians worsted.
them, and wounded many that got off, and possessed themselves of a great
Number of Arms.

After this encounter, the Syracusians sent Sicanus one of the Officers with
twelve Galleys to the rest of the Cities both to inform them of the Victory and
likewise to desire further Aid.

The Athenians (their affairs now declining so much to the worse, and the P.
337. A Plague in the Athenian Comp.
Plague breaking forth in the Army by reason of a stinking marsh Ground near
adjoining) consulted what was sit to be done in the present exigency.
Demosthenes was of Opinion without delay to return to Athens, saying it was far
more commendable to venture their Lives for their Country against the
Lacedaemonians than to lie still in Sicily doing nothing. But Nicias said it was
base and dishonorable Ant. Chr. 410.
to leave the Siege when they were so plentifully supplied, both with Shipping
Men and Money. And moreover, that they should be involved in great Danger by
those whose common practice it was, to asperse the Generals, if they should
make Peace with the Syracusians, and return to their Country without the order
and command of the People. Among those that were then present at the Consult
some approved of the Advice of Demosthenes for returning; others agreed with
Nicias. But nothing being determined, they lay idle without any Action.

In the mean time, great Aids and Supplies came to them of Syracuse from the
Siculi, Selenuntians, Geleans, Himereans and Camarineans, which encouraged them
as much as it discouraged the Athenians. And besides the Plague so raged and
increased that a great part of the Army Perished, which caused them all now to
repent that they had not returned before. The Athenian Army therefore being in
a tumult, and hasting to their Shipping, Nicias himself was forced to a
Compliance. And now both the Generals agreeing in Opinion, the Soldiers Shipped
their Baggage and Lumber, and having all Aboard their Ships, hoist up Sail. And
the Generals caused it to be Proclaimed that upon a Sign given all should be
ready, and if any loytred they should be left behind. But the Night before they
intended to set Sail, the Moon was Eclipsed, which occasioned Nicias (who was
Ant. Chapter 410.
naturally Superstitious, and then in great uneasiness by reason of the Plague)
to advise with the Soothsayers. By whom Answer was given, that they must not
by any means Sail of three Days: Into which Opinion Demosthenes and those of
his party likewise were led through their Superstition. The Syracusians
understanding Another Sea Fight.
by Deserters the cause of the stay, Manned all their Galleys, to the Number of
Seventy Four. And drawing out their Landforces, set upon the Athenians both by
Sea and Land. On the other side the Athenians Manned Fourscore and Six Galleys
and gave the Command of the Right Wing to Eurymedon, against whom was opposed
Agatharcus the Syracusian General. In the left Wing they placed Euthydemus, in
opposition to Sicanus, who Commanded for the Syracusians. Menander Commanded
the middle Battle on the Athenians side, and Pithes the Corinthian for the
Syracusians. And although the Athenians Line of Battle stretched out further in
length than the Syracusians because their Ships were more; yet that which
seemed to be their advantage proved to be their ruin in the Issue.

For Eurymedon striving to surround the Wing opposite to him (by that means
being severed from the rest of the Fleet) was driven by the Syracusians (who
bore down upon him) into the Creek Dascones, before possessed by other
Syracusians; where being hemmed in within the Straits, and forced upon the
Shore, (upon a mortal Wound given) he fell down Dead, and there seven of his
Ships were destroyed. In the heat of the Fight, the report spread abroad that
the General was killed, and many of his Ships lost; upon which the chiefest of
the Galleys Ant. Chapter 410.
which were next in place and order to the Vessels lost, began to give back,
and thereupon the Syracusians pressed forward and (heated by their late
success) fell P. 338.
with great fury upon the Athenians and forced them to an absolute Flight, and
driving them into the Shallows of the Haven, many of the Vessels were stranded
among the Shelvs and Sands. Upon which Sicanus the Syracusian Admiral filled A
Fire-Ship.
a Ship with Fagots, Firebrarnds and Pitch, and set it on Fire among the Ships
floating upon the Shallows. On the other hand the Athenians with all expedition
extinguished the Flames, and when they saw there was no other way left to
escape, they valiantly grappled with their Enemies, and threw them overboard.
In the mean time the Landforces of the Athenians were ready upon the Shore to
Aid them that fled that way, and bestirring themselves with extraordinary
Valor and contempt of all Dangers routed the Syracusians at Land. But they
being Victors at Sea returned into the City, having not lost many Men in the
Sea Fight. But the Athenians lost no less than Two Thousand Men and Eighty
Galleys.

The Syracusians now conceiving that their City was safe, and that their
business remaining was to break into the Enemies Camp and ruin their Army,
blocked up the Mouth of their Haven with Ships joined, and fastened together, to
hinder the Ant. Chapter 410.
Flight of the Athenians by Sea. To which end they made a Bridge with Boats,
Galleys, and other Sihps fixed with Anchors, compacted and fastened together with
Iron Chains. The Athenians perceiving that they were penned up on every side,
and no way of escape remaining, consulted and resolved to sill what Ships they
had remaing with the best of their Soldiers, that with the multitude of their
Shipping, and resoulteness of their Soldiers (now ready to Fight as Men in a
desperate condition) they might strike a Terror into the Syracusians. Hereupon
the chiefest of the Officers and best and most expert Soldiers Embarked and
Manned an Hundred and Fifteen Galleys. The rest of the Army they placed in order
upon the Shore. On the other side the Syracusians (being furnished with
Land-Souldiers for the Defense of their Walls) fitted out Seventy Four Galleys,
attended by many of the young Boys of the City, (not yet of full Age) in other
Ships as Auxiliaries to be ready to aid and assist their Parents. The Walls of
the Harbor and every high Place within the City were filled with Multitudes of
Spectators. For both Women and Children and all others unfit to bear Arms (with
great concern and trembling of Heart) stood to view the Fight in (...).
in order to judge how things were like to go with them. At the same time
Nicias, the Athenian General, viewing the Fleet, and seriously considering the
greatness of the danger, left his Post upon the Shore, and went on board a
Vessel, and sailed round the Athenian Fleet, and called to the Commanders A
great Sea Fight in the Harbor at Syracuse.
and Captains of every Gally, earnestly entreating them with his Hands lift up
to Heaven, that every one would strive to outdo another, and improve to the
utmost the present opportunity, being the last ground of hope they were ever
like to enjoy, for in their valor in the Sea Fight now approaching, lay the
safety and preservation both of them and of their Ante Chr. 410. Nicias stirs
up the Soldiers to Fight like Men of Valor.
Country. Those that were Fathers he put in mind of their Children: Those that
were nobly born he earnestly pressed and exhorted that they would be careful to
avoid what ever would stain the Honor and Glory of their Families: Those that
had been advanced by the People for their former good Services, he advised now
to approve themselves worthy of those marks of Honor they then bore. Lastly, he
put them in mind of the Trophies at Salamis, earnestly adjuring them that they
would not prostitute the Glory of their Country, and become Slaves to the
Syracusians. After this Speech, Nicias returned to the Army at Land. When they
in the Fleet had Sung the A Song before Battle. P. 339.
Paean, they made out with a Design to break the Blockade at the Mouth of the
Harbor. But the Syracusians sailed up in order of Battle against them, with
that speed that they drove them off the Bomb and forced them to Fight. In this
confusion some Sailed toward the Shore, others made into the middle of the
Harbor, and others toward the Fortifications; and thus their Lines being
broke, the Fleet was presently separated and dispersed, by which means the
Athenians, in this manner disappointed, were forced to Fight here and there, up
and down in the Harbor it little Ant. Chr. 41(...)
Squadrons and small Parties: However the Fight was obstinate on both sides.
The Athenians exceeding in Number of Ships, seeing no other hopes of safety,
undauntedly despised all Dangers, and resolved to die Valiantly. On the other
hand, the Syracusians knowing their Parents and Children were observing them,
put themselves forth to the utmost, every one striving to improve his Valor,
to gain the Victory for his Country. Many there were, that when their Ships
were pierced through by the violent Assault of the Enemy, leapt into the Ships
that pierced them, and fought bravely upon their Fore-castles in the midst of
their Enemies. Others with grappling Irons, so joined the Ships together, that
they forced their Enemy to fight on Board, as if they had been at Land. And
there were not a few that when their own Ships were disabled, boarded their
Adversaries, and killed and threw them overboard, and so possessed themselves
of their Vessels. And now the crashing of Ships one against another, and the
Cries and Shouts of the Combatants and Dying Men, was heard in every Place
throughout the whole Harbor: For sometimes one single Vessel was surrounded,
and struck through with the Beaks of many, and so the Water forcing in at the
Breaches, the Ship with all the Men in it, sunk together. And many (after their
Ships were sunk) endeavored to save themselves by Swimming, but were struck
through with Darts, and wounded with Spears, and so miserably perished. In the
mean time, the Masters of the Ships were amazed, Ant. Chapter 410.
to see the Confusion and Disorder of the Fight, seeing nothing but tumult and
horror about them, one Ship often set upon by many, and what was commanded, not
regarded, and the Advice to one, disagreeable to the Circumstances of another;
and after all, none attending to what was said. For what by Storms of Darts,
crashing of Ships, brushing off of Oars, increase of Noise and Clamor of them
that were engaged, and loud Shouts of the Army upon the Shore, encouraging them
upon the Sea, none heard what Orders were given: For the Shore was full of
Soldiers, the Syracusians in one part, and the Athenians in another. By which
means, they that were driven in the Fight near to the Land, were sometimes
succored by them upon the Shore. The Spectators upon the Walls, gave great
Shouts when they discerned any advantage gained by their Friends; but when they
were in danger to be overcome, they filled the Air with doleful Groans and
Lamentations, calling upon their Gods for deliverance. Sometimes some of the
Galleys of the Syracusians were destroyed under the very Walls, and their
Kindred and Relations Butchered before their Faces; so that Parents were the
Eyewitnesses of the Death of their Children, Wives of the miserable end of
their Husbands, and Brothers of their Brothers.

And after the Fight had lasted long (with much Slaughter on both sides) yet
the Battle was still carried on, for none (never so greatly pressed) durst fly
to Land. For the Athenians asked them which made toward the Shore, whether
they intended to Sail to Athens by Land? So the Syracusians on the Shore,
demanded of them that fled toward them, Why they were now ready Ant. Chr. 410.
to betray their Country, who would not suffer them that staid on Shore to
imbarque with them? Did they shut up the Mouth of the Harbor, as if they P.
340.
would prevent the Escape of the Enemy, to the end that they themselves might
have the better Excuse to fly to the Shore? And being that every Man must of
necessity die, what more honorable Death could they desire, than that for
their Country, which is now a witness of the Engagement, and whom they basely
and sordidly desert? With these and the like Reproaches did they who fled to
Land, meet with from the Soldiers placed on the Shore: Whereupon they returned
to the Battle, though greatly disabled in their Shipping, and their Bodies so
wounded, that they were scarce able to defend themselves. At length the
Athenians nearest to the City were forced to fly. Presently after, they that
The Athenians routed in the Sea Fight.
were next gave back, till at length the whole Fleet made away. Whereupon the
Syracusians pursued with a great Shout. Those of the Athenians that escaped
(being driven upon the Shelves and Sands) leaped out of their broken and
shattered Vessels, and fled to the Land Army. The Harbor was now full of Arms
and Wrecks of Ships every where. Threescore of the Athenian Ships were
absolutely destroyed, of the Syracusians Eight were lost, and Eleven disabled.

The Syracusians towed as many of their Galleys to the Shore as they could, and
took out the Dead Bodies of their Citizens and Confederates, and gave them an
Honorable Burial. The Athenians thronged together to the Generals Tents,
desiring them not so much to regard the Ships, as the preservation both of Ant.
Chr. 410.
themselves and the Soldiers. Thereupon Demostbenes declared that more Ships
were forthwith to be manned, in order to force the Blockade, which if done
presently, they might all easily escape.

Nicias was of a contrary Opinion, and advised the leaving the Ships, and to
march up into the heart of the Country to the Cities of their Confederates;
whose Opinion all embraced: And having burnt some of their Ships, they
forthwith made it their business to march away. Their Design of Decamping in
the Night being known to the Enemy, Hermocrates advised the Syracusians to draw
out all their Forces in the Night, and stop all the Passes on the Highways.
But the Officers not approving of this, because many of the Soldiers were
wounded, and all wearied and tired out by the late Engagement, sent some
Horsemen to the Athenians Camp, to inform them that the Syracusians had laid
all the Ways with Soldiers to entrap them in their March. The Horse coming in
late in the Night, (the Athenians believing they were sent out of kindness to
them from the Leontines) were in a great perplexity, and thereupon stayed at
present where they were; though they might have passed with great safety, if
they had not been thus deluded. The Syracusians therefore as soon as it was
light, sent out Soldiers, and secured all the narrow Passes on the Road. The
Athenians divided the Army into Two Parts, their Sick Men and (...)
Carriages they placed in the middle; those that were strong and able to fight,
were in the Front and Rear: Demosthenes led these, and Nicias the other, and so
they marched toward Catana. In the mean time, the Syracusians drew Fifty
Galleys left behind, with Ropes into the City, and ordered all their Seamen
and Soldiers out of the Galleys, and armed them, and so pursued after the
Athenians Ant. Chr. 410.
with all their Forces, and continually vexed, galled, and even tired out the
The miserable Condition of the Athenians in Sicily.
Rear. Pressing thus upon their Backs for Three Days together, and possessing
all the Passes before them, the Way to Catana was quite blockt up. At length
being chased through the Helorine Way, to the River Assinarus, where there was
no going forward, they were absolutely coup'd up, and there the Syracusians
killed Eighteen Thousand of them, and took Seven Thousand Prisoners, among whom
were Demosthenes and Nicias the Generals. The rest were given as a Prey to the
Soldiers; for the Athenians (no Way being left to escape) were P. 341.
forced to deliver up, not only their Arms but themselves, as Captives to their
Enemy's Mercy.

Upon this happy Success, the Syracusians erected Two Trophies, and fixed to
them the Arms of the Generals, and then returned to the City. Hereupon the
whole City gave public Thanks unto the Gods. The next Day an Assembly was
called, to consider what was to be done with the Prisoners. There Diocles, one
of the highest Esteem among the People, delivered his Opinion, That the
Athenian Generals should be first Scourged, and then put Death, and that the
rest of the Prisoners should be sent to the Quarries. And that they that had
any ways assisted the Athenians, should be sold under the Spear; and that no
more than Two About half a Pint.
Cotyles of Corn a Day, should be allowed to every Prisoner. When the Decree
was read, Hermocrates then in the Assembly began to speak, and say, That it was
more commendable to use a Victory with Moderation and Humanity, than to
overcome.

The People murmuring and grumbling at this, as not pleasing to them, one
Nicholaus, who had lost Two Sons in this War, ascends the Desk, supported by
his Servants, by reason of his Age. At which the People ceased their Murmuing,
supposing he would be sharp against the Prisoners. Silence being made, the Old
Man began thus, Ye Inhabitants of Syracuse, I my self have born no small
Nicholaus's Speech.
part of the Calamities of this War; for being the Father of Two Sons, I
readily sent them forth to venture their Lives for the defense of their
Country; and for them were sent a Messenger, who informed (...)e of the Death
of them both; and though I am every Day desiring they were alive, yet
considering the manner of their Deaths, I cannot but judge them happy, and
bewail my own Life, and count my self most miserable: For they by losing of
their Lives, (which as a Debt to Nature, they must of necessity some time or
other have parted with) for the safety of their Country, have left an immortal
Honor behind them. But I now in the end of my Days, being deprived of the
helps of my old Age, am doubly afflicted, whilst I have both lost my Children,
and likewise all hopes of Posterity. For the more glorious their ends Ant. Chr.
410.
were, the more grateful and desirable is their Memory; therefore the very Name
of the Athenians is most deservedly hateful to me, whom you see led and
supported by the Hands of my Servants, and not of my Children. Ye Syracusians,
if I had discerned that this present Assembly had been appointed to consult and
advise something in favor of the Athenians, I should (as Justly I might) for
the many Slaughters and Calamities brought by them upon the Country, and for my
own particular Miseries, most bitterly inveigh against them. But seeing we are
here debating about showing Compassion to the Afflicted, and how to spread
Abroad through all the World, the Honor and Glory of the People of Syracuse, I
now desire with all (...) Sine Cornu, without a Horn.
Lenity and Gentleness, to propose what I conceive may be every way for the
advantage of the Commonweath. The Athenians indeed have justly deserved to
undergo all manner of Punishments for their Madness and Folly: In the first
place for their Impiety toward the Gods, and next for their great injury done
to us. God is certainly good in this, in bringing those into Misery and
Distress, who not contented with their own abundance, fall by an unjust War
upon others. Who would ever have thought that the Athenians, who had brought
over Ten Thousand Talents from Delos, and invaded Sicily with a Fleet of Two
Hundred Sail, and with an Army of Forty Thousand Men, should have Ant. Chr. 410.
been brought so low, into such Calamities as now they are? For after so so
great a Preparation, neither Ship nor Man returned to bring the News of their
destruction. And now, O ye Syracusians, since ye see by experience, that the
Proud and Ambitious are hateful both to God and Man, (adoring the Deity) take
heed of doing any thing cruel and inhumane. For what Honor is it, to destroy
him that lies prostrate at our Feet? What glory to be sierce and cruel in
taking Revenge? For he that is Implacable toward Men P. 342.
in Distress, is injurious to the common frailty and weakness of Mankind. No
Man is so subtle as to be able to baffle Fate; who as it were sporting her self
in Men's Miseries, oftentimes on a sudden draws a black Cloud over their
Prosperity. And here perhaps some may say, The Athenians have most unjustly
committed many Slaughters among us, and now we have power to take full revenge.
Have not the Athenians suffered already above the degree and measure of their
Offense? Have ye not sufficiently punished the Prisoners? Consider when they
delivered up themselves with their Arms into your Hands, they did it relying
upon the mercy of the Conquerors. Therefore it would be a base thing, to
deceive them in the good Opinion and Hope they had of your Humanity. Certainly
they that are implacable and obstinate in their Hatred, will sight it out to
the last; but these instead of Enemies, gave up themselves to you as
Suppliants. For they that render their Bodies to the Enemy Ant. Chr. 410.
in time of the Battle, undoubtedly do it in hopes of Preservation; but if they
are hurried to Execution (though they were persuaded to the contrary) they
indeed fall into an unexpected Calamity; but they who act so Cruelly, may
justly be termed (...)
raging Fools: But it becomes those who would rule others, to recommend
themselves rather by Mercy and Clemency, than to seek to establish their
Grandeur by Force and Power. For they who are driven to Obedience through Fear,
are ready to execute their Hatred, when they see their opportunity to Rebel.
But they love those that rule them with gentleness and moderation, and do all
they can to advance and strengthen their interest. What overthrew the Empire of
the Medes, but then cruelty to their Subjects? For as soon as the Persians made
a defection, most of the Nations together with them rebelled. How did Cyrus who
was but a Private Man, gain the Sovereignty of all Asia, but by his Courtesy
and Kindness to those he had subdued? He did not only forbear to execute
cruelty upon King Cresus, but heaped many Favors upon him. And such was his
Practice toward other Kings and People: His Mercy and Lenity being thereupon
published in every Place, all the Inhabitants of Asia flocked together to him,
and strove to be his Confederates. But why do I speak of Times and Places so
far remote, when in this very City of ours, Gelon from an ordinary Man, became
Prince of all Sicily; all the Cities giving up themselves freely to his
Government? The Courtesy and winning Behavior of the Man, gained upon Ant.
Chr. 410.
every Person, especially his tenderness toward them that were in Distress.
Therefore guided by this Example (at a time when this our City ruled over all
Sicily) let us not slight that which was so commendable in our Ancestors, nor
behave our selves like Beasts, fierce and inexorable toward Men in Misery. It
will ill become us to give occasion to those that envy us, to say (...)
that we used our Success and Prosperity unworthily. How desirable a thing is
it when we are in Affliction, to have some to sympathize with us, and when we
are in Prosperity, to have others to rejoice with us! Victory is many times
gained by Fortune and Chance, but Humanity and Mercy in a time of Success, are
clear instances of the Virtue of the Conqueror.

Wherefore envy not your Country this Honor, whereby they will be Famous all
the World over, when it shall be said that it did not only overcome the
Athenians by Arms, but by Mercy and Humanity. And hence it will appear that
they who ingross to themselves all the praise and commendation due to Mercy and
Generosity, are far outdone by your Lenity and Compassion. And that they who
first dedicated an Altar to Mercy, may find the very same in the City of
Syracuse. And it will be a convincing Argument to all Mankind, that they were
most justly cut off, and we most deservedly crowned with Success; because they
so unjustly fell upon those who afterward showed Mercy to such implacable
Enemies; Ant. Chr. 410.
and that we overcame such a sort of Men as most unjustly made War upon them
who learnt to show Mercy even by the Cruelty and Injustice of their Enemies.
And hence will follow that the Athenians shall not only undergo the Censures of
others, but will likewise condemn themselves, that they should endeavor by an
unjust War to destroy such Men. It is certainly a most comenable thing, to lay
the first Foundation of Friendship, and extinguish Dissentions, P. 343.
by showing of Mercy. A good understanding amongst Friends, is to be
everlasting, but Enmity with Adversaries ought to be but temporary. By this
means the number of Friends would increase, and Enemies would be the fewer. But
to continue Hatred and Discord for ever, and intail them to Posterity, is
neither just nor safe. For sometimes it falls out that they who now seem to be
more potent than the other, in a moment are brought lower than those they
formerly overcame; which is clearly evinced to us by the event of the present
War. They who even now besieged our City, and to that purpose hemmed us in with
a Wall, by a turn of Fortune are now become our Prisoners, as you all see: It Is
therefore our great Prudence in the Miseries of others, to show Compassion, if
we Ant. Chapter 410.
expect to find the same our selves in their Condition. This present Life is
full of Paradoxes and Mutations, as Seditions, Robberies, Wars, among which
Humane Nature can scarce avoid loss and prejudice: Therefore if we shut up all
Bowels of Mercy toward the Distressed and Vanquished, we establish a bloody
Law for ever against our selves. For it is impossible that they who are cruel
toward others, should find Mercy afterward themselves; and that they that act
barbarously should be gently used; or that those who destroy so many Men
against the common custom of the Greeks, when a change of Fortune comes, should
obtain the common Rights and Privileges of all other Men. For which of the
Grecians ever put to Death those that submitted and delivered up themselves
upon hopes and belief of Mercy from the Conquerors? Or who ever preferred
Cruelty before Mercy? or Precipitation and Rashness before Prudence? All
Mankind indeed agree in this, to destroy an Enemy in Fight by all ways
imaginable; but yet to spare those who submit and yield up themselves. For in
the one case Obstinacy is corrected, and in the other Mercy is exercised. For
our Rage is naturally cooled, when we see him that was an Enemy, upon change of
his Fortune, now lie at our Foot, submitting himself to the will and pleasure
of the Conqueror: Especially Men of mild and good Tempers are touched with a
Sense of Compassion, through Affection to the same Common Nature with
themselves. Even the Athenians in the Peloponesian War, when they took many of
the Lacedaemonians in the Illand Sphacteria, yet restored them to the Spartans
upon Ransom. The Lacedaemonians likewise when many of the Athenians and their
Confederates fell into their Hands, used the like Clemency; and it was
Honorably done of them both: For Grecians should lay aside their Enmity after
Conquest, and forbear Punishment after the Enemy is subdued. He that revenges
himself upon the Conquered, after he has submitted to Mercy, punishes not an
Enemy, but rather wickedly insults over the weakness of Mankind. Concerning
this severity one made use of these Savings of the ancient Philosophers, O man!
be not overwise. Know thy self. Consider Fortune commands all things. What I
beseech you was the Reason that all the Grecians in former Ages, after their
Victories, did not make their Trophies of Stone, but of ordinary Wood? Was it
not that as they continued but a short time, so the Memory of former Feuds and
Differences should in a little time vanish? If you are resolved to perpetuate
your Hatred and Animosities, then learn first to slight the inconstancy of
Humane Affairs. Many times a small occasion, and a little turn of Fortune, has
given a check to the Insolences of the Proudest of Men. And if you purpose at
any time to put an end to the War (which is probable) how can you have a better
opportunity than this, in which by your Mercy and Clemency toward the
Conquered, you lay the Foundations of Peace and Ant. Chr. 410.
Amity? Do you think the Athenians by this loss in Sicily, have no more Forces
left, who are Lords almost of all the Islands of Greece, and of the Seacoasts
of Europe and Asia? For not long ago, though they lost Three Hundred Galleys in
Egypt, yet they compelled the King (who seemed to be the Conqueror) to make
Peace with them upon Terms on his Part dishonorable. And heretofore P. 344.
though Xerxes had destroyed their City, yet not long after they overcame him,
and became Masters of all Greece. This noble City thrives in the midst of the
greatest Calamities, and nothing small and mean is the subject of any of its
Consultations. And therefore it is both honorable and profitable, that we
should rather (by sparing the Captives) enter into a League of Friendship with
them, than to widen the breach by destroying of them. For if we put them to
Death, we only gratify our Rage with a little unprofitable Pleasure for the
present; but if we preserve them, they (whom we use so well) will be for Ant.
Chr. 410.
ever grateful, and from all Mankind, we shall reap eternal Praise and Honor.
(...)
Yea, but may some say, some of the Grecians have killed their Prisoners. What
then? if they have been praised and honored for this Cruelty, let us then
imitate them who have been so careful to preserve their Honor; but if the best
and chiefest among us justly condemn them, let not us do the same things with
them, who did apparently so wickedly. As long as these Men who have yielded up
themselves to our Mercy, suffer nothing sad and doleful from us, all the
Nations will blame the Athenians: But when they hear that you have destroyed
the Prisoners against the Law of Nations, all the Shame and Disgrace will fall
upon your selves. And if there be any regard to desert, we may consider that
the glory of the City of Athens is such, that all acknowledge themselves bound
to be grateful for the Benesits and Advantages reapt from thence. These are
they who first enobled Greece with (...)
civil Education; for when by the special bounty of the Gods, it was only among
them, they freely imparted it to all others. These framed Laws, by means
whereof, Men that before lived like Beasts, were brought into orderly Society
to live together according to the Rules of Justice: These were they who first
of all protected those in Distress that fled to them, and caused the Laws for
the receiving and defending of Suppliants in such case, to be inviolably
observed amongst all other Nations; and it were a most unworthy thing now to
deny the benefit of those Laws to them who were the Authors of them. And thus
Ant. Chr. 410.
much in general to all. And now I shall hint something particularly to some of
you, concerning the Duties incumbent upon such as should have regard to the
welfare and happiness of Mankind. You that are the Orators and Men of Learning
of this City, You I say have Compassion on them, whose Country is the Nursery
of all Learning, and honorable Education. All you who are initiated into the
Holy Mysteries, spare and save those by whom ye were instructed. You who have
reaped any advantage by ingenious Education, now be grateful for that
advantage. You who hereafter hope for improvement thence, debar not your selves
by your Cruelty now. For where shall Strangers be instructed in the liberal
Arts, if Athens be destroyed? Some short Resentment indeed they do deserve for
the present Offense, but their many good Acts may justly challenge Returns of
kindess and good will. Besides this merit of the City, if any do but consider
the private Circumstances of the Prisoners, there will be just cause and ground
found to show them Mercy. For the Confederates being under the command of their
Superiors, are forced to be engaged in the same War with them. Wherefore though
it may be thought just to execute Revenge upon them that were the chief Authors
of the Injuries, yet certainly it is very fit and commendable to pardon such as
are Offenders Ant. Chr. 410.
against their Wills. What shall I say of Nicias? who from the beginning
(favoring the Syracusians) dissuaded the Athenians from this Expedition
against Sicily; and was always kind and courteous to all the Syracusians that
ever came thither. How base and unworthy then would it be to put Nicias to
Death, who was our Advocate in the Senate at Athens, and that he (finding no
mercy for all his kindnesses) should undergo a rigorous and implacable Revenge
for his Obedience to his Governors? So that though Alcibiades (who was the
great promoter of this War) avoided by his flight, Revenge both from us and the
Athenians, yet he who was the most courteous of all the Athenians, cannot be
thought worthy of common favor. Considering therefore the Catastrophies of
this present Life, I cannot but compassionate so, unfortunate a condition. For
not long ago, he was esteemed one of the bravest Men of Greece, and most
applauded for the integrity of his Life and Conversation; and the Eyes and
well-Wishes of all the City every where followed him: But now with his Arms
Pinioned in Chains of Captivity, of a P. 345.
deformed Countenance, suffering under the miserable condition of a Slave, as
if Fortune in this Man's Life, gloried to show the greatness of her power,
under whose bountiful indulgence toward us, we ought to carry it (as becomes
the state and condition of Men) with Humanity and Moderation, and not to insult
with barbarous Cruelty, over them who are of the same Stock and Original with
our selves. Nicholaus having thus spoken to the Syracusians, ended his Oration,
and much affected his Auditors with Pity and Compassion.

But Gylippus the Laconian burning with implacable Hatred against the
Athenians, The Speech of Gylippus.
ascends the Tribunal, and speaks thus; I am in great admiration, O ye
Syracusians, to see you led aside by enticing Words, even while you are under
the smart of your miserable Butcheries you really groan under. If in the very
height of Danger you are so cool in your Revenge toward them who came hither
on purpose to ruin your Country, why do we contend when we are not at all
injured? I entreat you by the Gods, O ye Syracusians, to give me leave, while I
freely declare to you my Opinion: For being a Spartan, I must be forced to
speak after the manner of the Spartans: And in the first place, some may
inquire, how comes it to pass, that Nicholaus professes himself to bear so much
Compassion toward the Athenians, who have made his Old Age the more miserable
by the Loss of his Sons? And now appears in the Assembly in a mournful Habit,
and with the shedding of many Tears, pleads for mercy for them who have
murdered his own Children? Certainly he is no good Man, that so far forgets
the Death of his nearest Relations, as to, judge Ant. Chr. 410.
it fit and just to spare them who were their most bitter and implacable
Enemies. How many are here present now in this great Assembly, who are
lamenting for the death of their Children? At which Words, when many of the
Assembly sent forth loud Groans, he added, I discern (says he) that those Sighs
are the Witnesses of the Miseries suffered. How many Brothers, Kindred and
Friends lost in this War, do ye now in vain desire? At which, when many more
manifested their Sorrow; See thou not, (says Gylippus) O Nicholaus! how many
the Athenians have made Miserable? All these without any cause, have they
deprived of their dearest and nearest Relations, who ought so much the more to
hate the name of the Athenians, by how much they bore the greater love to their
Relations, Kindred and Friends. How absurd and unjust a thing is it, O ye
Syracusians, for Men voluntarily to sacrifice their Lives for you, and you not
to revenge their Bloods upon their inveterate Enemies? Nay, being so far from
praising those who have lost their lives in defense of the common liberty, as
to prefer the Safety of the Enemies, before the Honor of those that have
deserved so well. You have made a Law, that the Sepulchers of your Countrymen
shall be adorned and beautified: What greater Ornament can ye invent, than to
destroy their Murderers? Unless it be (if the Gods permit) that by making these
Enemies Freemen of the City, you determine to set them up as living Trophies
for the remembrance of your Dead Friends. But now the Denomination of Enemies
is changed into that of Suppliants. From whence arises this Tenderness? For
they who first compiled Laws concerning these matters, decreed Mercy to the
Distressed, but Punishment to them that acted Wickedly. And now under which of
these Denominations shall we account the Prisoners? As Distressed Ant. Chapter 41^.
and Afflicted? But what evil Spirit was it that compelled them to make War
against the Syracusians without any Provocation? and breaking all the Bonds of
Peace (which is so desirable amongst all) to plot and contrive the destruction
of your City? Therefore as they began an unjust War, let them with Courage or
without, suffer and undergo the events of War: For if they had been Conquerors,
we should have felt their inexorable Cruelty; but now being subdued, they seek
to avoid the Punishment in the most low and humble posture of Distressed
Suppliants. What if they should be answered, that their Covetousness and wicked
Ambition has hurled them into these Calamities? Let them not therefore accuse
Fortune, nor challenge to themselves the name of Suppliants; for this is only
due to them who are fallen into Misfortunes, and yet have preserved their
Innocence and Integrity: But they who make it the P. 346.
business of their Lives to act all manner of Injustice, shut up all the Doors
and Passages of Mercy against themselves. What is it that is most base which
they will not devise? What Wickedness will they not commit? It Is the special
property of Covetousness, not to be content with its present Condition, but
violently to lust after things remote, and what is not our own; which is most
notoriously done by these Men: For though they were the most happy and
prosperous of all the Grecians, yet not being able to bear the weight of Ant.
Chr. 410.
their own greatness, they thirsted after Sicily (though separated from them by
so large a Sea) to divide it by Lot amongst themselves. A most horrid and
wicked thing it is to make War upon them, who never gave any occasion or
provocation: And this these Men have done. These are they who not long ago
entered into a League with us of Peace and Friendship, and then on a sudden
begirt our City with their Forces. Certainly it is a great piece of Pride and
Presumption, to forejudge the Events of a War, and to order and determine the
Punishment of an Enemy, before the Conquest: And this they did not omit; for
before they came into Sicily, it was enacted in their common Assemblies, That
the Syracusians and Selinuntians should be made Slaves, and all the rest
brought under Tribute. And now when so many complicated Vices center in these
Men, as insatiable Covetousness, Fraud and Treachery, insufferable Pride and
Insolency, what Man in his Wits can show them Mercy? especially when it is so
well known how they dealt with them of Mitylene: For after they had subdued
them, although they had committed no Offense, but only desired to preserve
their Liberty, yet they commanded them all to be put to the Sword; a most cruel
and barbarous Act, and this against Grecians, against Confederates, and against
those that had merited better things at their Hands. And therefore let them not
think it grievous to suffer that themselves, which they have executed upon
others: For it is but Ante Chr. 410.
just that he who makes a Law to bind others, should be subject to the same
himself. But why do I speak of this? when they took A Town in Thessaly.
Melus, they most miserably destroyed all the Youth of the City. And the
Scioneans of the Colony of the Meleans underwent the same Fate. So that these
Two sorts of People, when they fell into the cruel Hands of the Athenians, were
so totally destroyed, that there was none left to bury the Dead. They who acted
these things, are not Scythians; but a People who boast of Humanity and Mercy
above all other. These are they that by Public Edict, utterly destroyed these
Cities. Now can ye imagine how they would have dealth with the City of Syracuse,
if they had taken it? Certainly, they who are so cruel toward their own
Confederates, would have invented something more vile and horrid to have
executed upon Strangers. By all the Rules of Law and Justice therefore, there is
no Mercy remains for these Men, who have debarred themselves of all Pity and
Compassion in their present Calamities. For whether can they fly? To the Gods?
whose Worship according to the Laws of the Country, they endeavored to root
up? To Men? whom with all their might they were studying and contriving to make
Slaves? Will they make their Addresses to Ceres and Proserpina, when they came
hither to spoil and lay waste the Island dedicated to them? So it is. But say
some, the People of Athens are in no Ant. Chr. 410.
fault, but Alcibiades who advised, and persuaded to this War. What then? We
know that they who advise, for the most part frame their Speeches that way
which they conceive is most agreeable to the Humor of their Auditors: And he
that is to give his Vote, often trusts to the Orator what he would have to be
urged. For the Orator commands not the People, but the People order the Orator
to propose what is advisable, and then determine what they think fit. Besides,
if we pardon the Malefactors upon their casting the fault upon their Advisers,
we furnish every wicked Fellow with a ready Excuse for the clearing of himself.
To speak plainly, it would be the unjustest thing in the World, to give thanks
to the People for all the good and advantage we at any time reap, and execute
Revenge upon the Orators for all the Injuries we suffer. It Is to be admired to
see some so far besotted, as to judge it fit that Alcibiades now out of our
reach should be punished, and yet the Prisoners now justly brought to judgment
should be discharged; that thereby it might be evident to all, that the
Syracusians are so sottish, as not to have any sense of that which is ill: but
admit the truth be so, that the Advisers were the Cause of the War, then let
the People accuse them because they have led them into such a Disaster. In the
mean time do you (as in Justice P. 347.
you ought) revenge your selves upon the Multitude, by whom you have most
injuriously suffered. The Sum of all is this, If knowingly and advisedly they
have thus wronged you, they deserve to suffer upon that account; if they came
upon you rashly and inconsiderately, they are not to be spared for that Reason,
lest they make it a Practice to injure others others, under pretense of
unadvisedness and inconsideration. For it is not just the Syracusians Ant. Chr.
410.
should be ruined by the rashness and ignorance of the Athenians, nor where the
Damage is irrepairable, to admit of an excuse for the Offenders. Yea, by
Jupiter! But Niceas (say some) pleaded the Cause of the Syracusians, and was
the only Person dissuaded the People from the War. What he said there, indeed
we heard, and what he has acted here, we have now seen. For he who there argued
against the Expedition, was there General of an Army against us; and he who was
then the Syracusian Advocate, but even now besieged and walled in their City.
He who was then so well affected toward you, lately commanded the continuance
both of the War and the Siege, when Demosthenes and all the rest would have
drawn off and returned. I judge therefore you will not have more regard to
Words than things, to Promises than Experiences, to things dark and uncertain,
than to those that are seen and apparent. Yet by Jupiter, I confess, it is a
very wicked thing to perpetuate Enmities and differences. But is not the due
punishment of those that violate the peace, the most natural way to put an end
to Hostilities? It Is certainly most unjust, when it is apparent if they had been
Conquerors, they would have made the conquered all Slaves, to spare them now
they are conquered, as if they had done nothing amiss: For thus getting their
Necks out of the Halter, they will speak you fair for a time, and perhaps
remember the kindness so long as it is for their advantage, but no longer. One
thing more I have to say, If you follow this Advice, besides many other
Mischiefs, you disoblige the Lacedaemonians, who readily undertook this War for
your sakes, and sent hither Aids and Supplies as your Confederates, when they
might have been Ante Chr. 410.
quiet, and suffered Sicily to have been wasted and destroyed. And therefore if
you release the Prisoners, and enter into a new League with the Athenians, it
will evidently appear that you betray your Confederates; and whereas it is now
in your power to ruin and destroy the common Enemies, by discharging of those
who are the best of their Soldiers, you put them in a better condition for a
Second Encounter. I can never be persuaded that the Athenians who bear such an
inveterate Hatred, will ever continue long to be your Friends. Whilst they
cannot hurt you, so long they will make a show of Kindness, but when they think
they have Power enough, then they will execute what before they long designed. To
conclude, I earnestly beseech thee, O Jupiter! and all the Gods, that the
Enemies be not spared, that the Confederacy be not deserted, and that another
danger of Ruin be not brought upon the Country. And to you, O ye Syracusians, I
say if any Mischief happen to you by releasing the Enemy, you leave no color
of Excuse for your selves.

Thus spoke the Laconian; upon which the People changed their Minds, and
confirmed the Advice of Diocles, and without delay the Generals with all their
The Athenian Generals put to Death.
Confederates were put to Death. But the Citizens of Athens were adjudg'd, and
thrust down into the Quarries. But some of them that had been well bred and
instructed in several useful Arts, were by the young Men loosed from their
Fetters and discharged. All the rest almost died miserably through ill usage
Ant. Chr. 410.
in their Imprisonment.

CHAP. III.
Diocles instituted Laws for Sicily; suffered by one of his own Laws. Three
Hundred appointed to govern in Athens. The Athenians beaten at Sea by the
Lacedaemonians at Oropus. Alcibiades recalled from Banishment.

THE War now ended, Diocles prescribed Laws for the Syracusians. But Vid. Book
12. The same Story of Charonidis.
one thing very remarkable happened concerning this Man: For being of an
inexorable Nature, and rigid and severe against the Offenders, amongst other
Laws which he made, one was this; That if any Man came armed into the Court, he
should be put to Death, without any exception of Ignorance, or of any other
Circumstance of the Fact whatsoever. It happened that some Enemies made a
sudden Incursion into the Borders of the Syracusians, and he was to go forth
against them. In the mean time, a Seditious Tumult arose near the Court; P.
348. Diocles kills himself to confirm his own Law.
upon which he hastened thither with his Sword by his Side; which being taken
notice of by a Private Man, who cried out, that he violated the Laws he himself
had made. No by Jove (says he) I Will confirm them: And so drawing his Sword, ran
himself through. These were the Actions of this Year.

After this, when Callias governed in chief at Athens, the Romans chose Four
Olymp. 92. 1. Ant. Chr. 409.
Military Tribunes to execute the Office of Consuls, The Greek has not these
Names as they are here.
Publius Cornelius, Caius Valerius, Cneius Fabius Vibulanus, and Quintius
Cincinnatus. At the same time the Ninety Second Olympiad was celebrated at
Elis, where Exaenetus of Agrigentum was Victor. At this time the Athenians
began to be in contempt by reason of their Misfortunes in Sicily. For soon
after the Chians, Samians, Byzantines and a great part of their Confederates,
fell off to the Lacedaemonians. The People of Athens being upon this Account in
great perplexity, laid aside the Democratical Government, and chose Four
Hundred to manage the Affairs of the Four Hundred chosen to rule in Athens.
Commonwealth. The Sovereign Power being now devolved upon a few, they built
more Galleys, and rigged out a Fleet of Forty Sail. After some Disagreement
amongst the Officers, they sailed to Oropus, where the Enemies Galleys lay at
Anchor: Hereupon a Battle was fought, and the Lacedaemonians prevailed, and took
Two and Twenty Sail.

As for the Syracusians, when the War was ended with the Athenians, they
rewarded the Lacedaemonians their Confederates (of whom Gylippus was General)
with the Spoils taken in the War, and sent with them Five and Thirty Galleys to
assist them against the Athenians, of which Hermocrates, a great Man among the
Citizens, was Admiral. Then all the Booty and Prey was brought together, and
out of the Spoils they adorned the Temples, and rewarded every Soldier
according to his Demerit.

After these things, Diocles a Man of great Authority amongst the People,
prevailed to have the Administration of the Government altered, by choosing the
Magistrates by Lot, and ordered that there should be Lawmakers appointed both
to settle the Commonwealth, and to make new Laws for the future Government. The
Syracusians therefore chose such from among the Citizens as Ant. Chr. 409.
they judged most prudent, of whom the chiefest was Diocles: He was a Man of
such excellent Parts, and of so great Reputation, that the Laws (though
Dioclean Laws in Sicily.
made with the joint help of others) were called from him the Dioclean Laws.
And he was not only admired by the Syracusians whilst he lived, but when he was
dead, they honored him as an Demi God.
Hero, and built a Temple to his Memory, which Dionysius afterward pulled down
when he built the new Wall. All the rest likewise of the Siculi highly valued
this Man: And upon that account many of the Cities through Sicily used the same
Laws that he had instituted, till such time as the Romans brought all Sicily
under the power of Rome. And though in times long after Diocles, Cephalus in
the time of the Government of Timoleon and Polydorus, when Hiero reigned,
instituted Laws for the Syracusians, yet neither of them were ever called
Lawmakers, but Interpreters of the Lawmakers; because the former Laws being
written in old and obsolete Language, were scarce to be understood. And whereas
there are many things in these Laws very remarkable, yet the great Hatred
against Knavery and Dishonesty appears chiefly from this, That the bitterest
and severest Punishments are levelled against all those that violate Justice.
His great dexterity in Civil Affairs is evident hence, That he appointed a
certain Mulct or Fine almost for every Offense or Cause Private or Public,
proportionable to the nature of the thing. He Is very concise in his
Expressions, leaving much to the disquisition of Ant. Chr. 409.
the Learned Reader. The sad manner of his Death is a sufficient Testimony of
the Virtuous Resolution of his Mind. I am the rather desirous to speak more P.
349.
than ordinary of these things, in regard most Authors heretofore mention very
little concerning him.

But to return to the Athenians, when they heard of the ruin of their Army in
Sicily, they took it most grievously, yet slackt nothing in their Contests with
the Lacedaemonians about the Sovereignty, but prepared a greater Fleet, and let
their Money fly Abroad amongst all their Confederates that were resolved to
stick by them to the utmost extremity, to gain and keep the Sovereign Power.
And to that end they gave full Authority to Four Hundred Persons chosen out of
the Citizens to rule and govern the Commonwealth: For in their present Four
Hundred chosen to govern in Athens.
circumstances, they preferred an Oligarchy before their former Democracy. But
the thing did not in the least answer their Expectations; for they were much
more unsuccessful afterward, for they sent forth Two Generals that were at
Dissension between themselves, with a Fleet of Forty Sail against the Enemy.
And although the present distressed Condition, and bad state of Affairs with
the Athenians called aloud for Peace and Concord amongst themselves, yet the
Generals did all they could to widen the breach, and cherish the Enmities and
Animosities they bore one against another. At length sailing to Oropus,
unawares and unprepared, they fought with the Peloponesians, where through
their carelessness The Athenians routed at Sea by the Peloponesians.
at the beginning, and their sloth and inadvertency in the heat of the Fight,
they lost Two and Twenty Ships, and brought the rest with great difficulty into
Eretria.

Upon this the Confederates of the Athenians (considering the Overthrow in Ant.
Chr. 409.
Sicily, and the late ill Management of the Two Commanders) joined with the
Lacedaemonians. Darius likewise the King of Persia, sought earnestly to enter
into Darius seeks to make a League with the Lacedaemonians.
a League with the Lacedaemonians: And to that end, Pharnabazus his Lieutenant
upon the Seacoasts supplied the Lacedaemonians with Money, and sent for Three
Hundred Ships from Phenicia, which he had before ordered to be sent to them to
Beotia. And now when the Athenians were involved in so many Mischiefs at one
time, all Men thought the War at an end. For none had the least hopes that the
Athenians could make any further opposition, not for the least moment of time.
But the thing had a far different issue from that which was commonly supposed;
for such was the brave Spirit of the Athenians, that the event was quite
contrary, which happened upon this occasion. Alcibiades being Banished from
Athens, aided the Lacedaemonians for some time in the War, and was very useful
to them, being an eloquent Orator, daring and bold, of the most noble Family,
and the greatest Estate of any of the Citizens, and therefore esteemed the
chief Man of Athens. This Man having a great desire to be re-call'd from his
Banishment, did all he could to ingratiate himself into the People of Athens,
by doing them some remarkable Service, at such a time as when they seemed to be
in the lowest ebb of Fortune. And therefore having a great interest in
Pharnabazus, Darius's Lieutenant, and understanding that he designed to send
Three Hundred Ships to aid the Lacedaemonians, prevailed with Ant. Chr. 409.
Alcibiades prevents Aid from the Persians to the Lacedaemonians.
him to alter his Resolution. For he suggested to him that it was not safe for
the King to make the Lacedaemonians too strong, nor for the advantage of the
Persians: And that it was much more their interest to keep the Balance equal,
that so the Two Commonwealths might be in continual War one with another.

Pharnabazus conceiving Alcibiades had given him sound and wholesome Advice,
sends back the Fleet to Phenicia: And thus the Aid intended for the
Lacedaemonians, was prevented by Alcibiades. A little time after, he was
recalled, Alcibiades recalled to Athens.
and made General of the Army, and overcame the Lacedaemonians in several
Battles, and raised up his Country from their low Estate, to their former
height of glory. But of these matters we shall speak more fully hereafter, lest
we should transgress the due order of an History by too much Anticipation.

CHAP. IV.
The Government by Four Hundred abrogated in Athens. The Victory by the
Athenians over the Lacedaemonians at Sea, between Sestus and Abydus. The Persian
Garrison driven out of Antandris by the help of the Lacedaemonians. Twenty Two
Years of the Peloponesian War ended. Here Thucydides ends his History.

AFter this Year was ended, Theopompus governed Athens, and the Romans invested
P. 350. Olymp. 92. 2. Ant. Chapter 408.
Four Military Tribunes with Consular Dignity, Tiberius Posthumous, Caius
Cornelius, Caius Valerius, and Caeso Fabius. At this time the Athenians
abrogated the authority of the Four Hundred, and restored the Democracy.
Theramenes Democracy stored in Athens.
was the Author of this Change (a sober and prudent Man) who was the only
Person that advised the recalling of Alcibiades (by whom they recovered their
Strength) and by many other good Offices performed by Theramenes, to the
advantage of the Public, he gained great Authority and Favor with the People.
But not long after, the following things happened.

At this time, in order to carry on the War, Two Generals were chosen by the
Athenians, Thrasyllus and Thrasybulus, who randevouz'd a Fleet at Samos, and
there trained and exercised the Soldiers every Day to inure them to Fighting
at Sea. Mindarus the Lacedemonian Admiral, in the mean while lay for some time
at Miletus, expecting the Aids from Pharnabazus, and hearing that Three Hundred
Galleys were arrived from Phenicia, was confident now he should be able with so
great Supplies, utterly to ruin the Athenian State. But presently after having
intelligence that the Fleet was returned to Phenicia, through the persuasions
of Alcibiades (being now out of all hopes of any assistance from him) he
furnished some Ships he had with him, from Peloponesus, and from other Foreign
Confederates, and sends Dorieus with Thirteen Sail, (which some of the Grecians
had lately sent him out of Italy) to Rhodes: For he had heard that some
innovations were contriving there; with the rest of the Fleet (to the number of
Eighty Three) he made to the Hellespont, because he heard that the Athenian
Navy lay at Samos. When the Athenian Commanders saw them pass by, they hasted
after them with Threescore Sail. But the Lacedaemonians arriving at Chios, the
Athenians determined to sail to Lesbos, to be supplied with more Ships from
their Confederates, lest they should be overpowered by Number. Ant. Chr. 408.


While the Athenians were thus busied, Mindarus with the Lacedemonian Fleet in
the Night, with all speed makes for the Hellespont, and the next Day arrived at
Sigeum. The Athenians hearing that they were sailed off from Chios, having
received from their Confederates at the present only Three Galleys, made after
the Lacedaemonians; but when they came to Sigeum, they found the Lacedaemonians
were sailed from thence, save only Three Galleys, which fell forthwith into
their Hands. Loosing from thence, they came to A Town in Thrace.
Eleuntis, where they prepared themselves for a Sea Fight. On the other side
the Lacedaemonians when they saw their Enemies were fitting themselves for a
Conflict, they likewise for Five Days together employed themselves in
exercising and trying their Rowers, and then ordered their Fleet, which
consisted of Eighty Eight Sail, into a Line of Battle, and stood toward the
Asian Shore. The Athenians on the other side, drew out theirs all along the
Tract lying upon the Borders of Europe; they were indeed fewer in number, but
far more skilful in Sea-Affairs. The Lacedaemonians placed the Syracusians in
the Right Wing, commanded by Hermocrates; the Peloponesians in the Left, under
the Command of Mindarus. Ant. Chapter 408.
On the part of the Athenians, Thrasyllus commanded the Right, and Thrasybulus
the Left Wing. At the first the great Contest was for the Tide, each striving
to gain that. For a long time therefore they sailed round one another; at
length being in a narrow Sea, they fought for a commodious Station. For the
Battle being between Sestus and Abydus, the Tide in those Streights P. 351.
was a great disadvantage to that side it forced upon. But the Athenian Pilots
far excelling the other, by that means did notable Service, in many respects
for the obtaining of the Victory.

For although the Peloponesians exceeded the other in Number of their Ships,
and Valor of the Assailants, yet the Skill and Diligence of the Athenian
Pilots over-ballanc'd all this, and made it of no effect; for when the
Peloponesians with all their Force strove to pierce them, the Athenian Ships
were placed in such excellent order, that no part of their Ships could be
touched, save only the very end of their Beaks. Upon which, Mindarus considering
that they assaulted them in vain, commanded that a few Ships, singly by
themselves should cope with the Enemy: But neither in this case was the
diligence of the Pilots wanting; for with a little motion they easily declined
the strokes of the Beaks of their Enemies Ships, and so pierced them in their
broad-sides, that they disabled many. At length the Dispute waxing very hot,
they not only pierced Ant. Chapter 408.
one another's Ships with their Beaks, but the Soldiers on the Decks Fought
Hand to Hand: But neither side as yet could prevail. And now in the very heat
of the Battle, there appeared beyond a Promontory Five and Twenty Sail sent
from Athens. Upon which the Peloponesians being in a Consternation at A Battle
at Sea near to Abydus, between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. The Athenians
Victors.
this sudden reinforcement, tackt about for Abydus, and were closely and
eagerly pursued by the Athenians. And thus ended the Battle, in which all the
Ships of the Syracusians, Palleneans and Leucadians, Eight of the Chians, Five
of the Corinthians, and Eleven of the Ambraciats were taken by the Athenians,
who on the other side lost Five, which were sunk. After this, the Army under
Thrasybulus, erected a Trophy in the Promontory, where stands the Monument of
Hecuba; and Messengers were sent to Athens, to give intelligence of the
Victory; and he himself sailed with the whole Fleet to Cyzion: For this City a
little before the Battle, had revolted to Pharnabazus, Governor under Darius,
and to Clearchus the Lacedemonian General. This Place not being fortified, was
presently surrendered, and after the Tribute agreed upon, was paid by them of
Cyzium, the Fleet returned to Sestus.

In the mean time, Mindarus the Laoedemonian Admiral, who fled to Abydus,
resits the Shipping, and orders Epicles the Spartan to Eubea, to bring to him
Galleys from thence; who hastens thither, and gets together Fifty Sail, and
Ant. Chapter 408. Mindarus Shipwrackt at Mount Atbos.
fothwith made to Sea; but in passing under Mount Athos, was overtaken with
such a violent Tempest, that all the Fleet was lost, and not a Man escaped,
save only Twelve. In memory of this, there is an Inscription on a Monument at A
City in Peloponesus.
Coronea, as Ephorus observes in these Words.

Out of the Fifty Galleys of Three Oars,
But poor Twelve Men on Rocks were thrown,
Of Athos Mount and saved. With Wind Sea roars,
Rest of the Men or Ships spares none.
About the same time Alcibiades with Thirteen Galleys, sailed to them that lay
at Anchor at Samos. The Athenians had before been informed, that (through
Alcibiades arrives at Samos, pleads his innocence.
the Persuasions of Alcibiades) Pharnabazus would not send the Three Hundred
Ships (as he intended) in aid of the Lacedaemonians. Being therefore courteously
received by them that lay at Samos, he made some Proposals for his Return, and
made many Promises to serve his Country to the utmost of his power, absolutely
denying the Crimes laid to his Charge, and complained of his hard Fortune that
he was compelled (through the crafty Designs of the Enemies) to make use of his
Arms against his Country. His Speech was highly applauded P. 352.
by the common Soldiers, and by Messengers reported at Athens; upon which he
was absolved and created one of their Generals; for considering his Valor and
great Interest every where amongst the Grecians, they hoped it would be much
for their advantage if they again received him into his favor. And besides,
Theramenes one of the greatest authority in the Commonwealth, a Man eminent for
Wisdom and Prudence as ever any before him, advised the recalling Ant. Chr. 408.
of Alcibiades. When the Messengers returned to Samos with this account,
Alcibiades joining Nine Ships more to these Thirteen he brought with him,
sailed to Halicarnassus, and there forced the City to pay him a great Sum of
Money. And then making great devastations in An Island in the Archipelago,
called otherwise Co^.
Meropides, he returns with much Spoil to Samos; and there divides the Spoil as
a common Booty, not only amongst his own Soldiers, but amongst them in Samos,
and by that means gains them all over to his interest.

About this time, Antandros with the assistance of the Lacedaemonians, drove the
Garrison out of their City, and so restored their Country to their Liberty: For
the Spartans being angry at Pharnabazus, for sending the Three Hundred Ships
into Phenicia, entered into League with the Antandrians.

Here Thucydides breaks off his History, containing in Eight Books (which
Thucydides ends his History. Xenophon continues Thucydides. Ant. Chr. 408.
some divide into Nine) the Affairs of Two and Twenty Years. Xenophon and
Theopompus begin theirs, where Thucydides ends. Xenophon continues his History
for the term of Forty Eight Years; but Theopompus goes on with the Affairs of
Greece Seventeen Years, and ends his History at the Sea Fight at Cnidus,
comprised in Twelve Books. Thus stood the state of Affairs in Greece and Asia
at this time. In the mean time the Romans were in War with the Aequi, and
entered their Country with a great Army, and besieged their City called Volas.
Bolasus, and took it.

CHAP. V.
Commotions in Sicily. The Carthaginians invited thither by the Aegistines. A
Sea Fight at Darclanum between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. A Sedition in
Corcyra. The Sea Fight at Cyzicum; and at Cleros by Land, wherein the Athenians
were Victors.

THE former Year ended, Glaucippus was created Archon at Athens, and at Olymp.
92. 3. An. M. 3561. Ant. Chapter 407.
Rome, Marcus Cornelius, and Lucius Furius were again chosen Consuls. About
this time the Aegistines (who had confederated with the Athenians) after the
War was ended in Sicily against the Syracusians) were in great fear (as they
had just cause) lest the Siculi should revenge themselves upon them for the
many acts of Hostility they committed against them. And therefore when the
Selinuntines made War upon them concerning some Boundaries that were in
Dispute, they submitted, lest the Syracusians should take that occasion to join
with the Selinuntines, and so hazard the loss of their Country. But when they
encroached farther upon their Territories than was agreed upon, the Aegistines
desired aid of the Carthaginians, and freely offered their City to their
Protection. When the Ambassadors came to Carthage, and had delivered their
Message to the Senate, the Carthaginians were much perplexed what to resolve:
The desire of so convenient a City strongly inclined them upon one hand, and
the fear of The Carthaginians side with the Aegistines. Ant. Chapter 407.
the Syracusians who had lately destroyed so powerful an Army of the Athenians,
discouraged them on the other. But at length their Ambition to gain the City
previal'd. The Answer therefore to the Ambassadors was, that they would send
them aid. For the management of this Affair (in case it should break out into a
War) they made Hannibal General, who was then according to their Law chief
Magistrate of Carthage. He was the Grandchild of Amilcar (who was killed at
Himera at the Battle fought with Gelon) and Son of Ges^on, who for killing of
his Father, was Banished, and lived at Selinunta. Hannibal therefore in regard
he bore a natural Hatred against the Grecians, and desired by his own Valor to
wipe off the stain of his Family, was very earnest to make himself P. 353.
remarkable by some eminent Service for the advantage of his Country. Therefore
when he understood that the Selinuntines were not satisfied with that part of
Land which was yielded to them, he together with the Aegistines sends
Ambassadors to the Syracusians, referring the Controversy to their
Determination; in Words seeming to propose all things fair and just; but in
Truth with hopes that if the Selinuntines should decline the Arbitration, the
Syracusians would cast off their Confederacy and League with them. But when the
Selinuntines (who sent likewise their Ambassadors) refused to stand to their
Decision, and strongly opposed both the Carthaginean and Aegistean Ambassadors,
the Syracusians were at length resolved both to be at peace with the
Carthaginians, and likewise to stand to their League with the Selinuntines.
Upon which, when the Ambassadors were returned, the Carthaginians sent to the
Aegistines Five Thousand Men from Africa, and Eight Hundred from Campania.
These were formerly Ant. Chr. 407.
hired by the Calcideans for the assistance of the Athenians against the
Syracusians, but after their overthrow sailing back, they knew not under whom
to serve. The Carthaginians therefore bought them all Horses, and giving them
large Pay, placed them in a Garrison at Aegista. But the Selinuntines who were
then both Rich and Populous, valued not the Aegistines one jot.

At the first with a well formed Army, they spoiled the Country next adjoining
to them; at length in regard they far exceeded the Aegistines in number, they
despised them, and dispersed themselves, ravaging all over the Country. The
Aegistean Commanders watching their opportunity, with the help of the
Carthagineans and Campanians, set upon them unawares: And the Assault being
sudden and unexpected, they easily routed and put them to flight. They killed a
Thousand, and took all their Baggage. After this Fight, both sides sent forth
their Ambassadors, the Selinuntines to the Syracusians, and the Aegistines to
the Carthaginians for Aid; which being readily promised on both sides, The
Carthaginian War in Sicily.
this was the beginning of the Carthaginian War. The Carthaginians foreseeing
the greatness of the War, committed the whole management thereof to Hannibal,
giving him power to raise what Forces he thought sit, they themselves Ant. Chr.
407.
in the mean time providing all things necessary. Hannibal all that Summer, and
the next Winter, raises many Mercenary Soldiers in Spain, and lists a great
number of his own Citizens; and besides these, raises Men in every City
throughout all Africa, and equips out a Fleet, intending the next Spring to
pass over all his Forces into Sicily. In this Condition were the Affairs of
Sicily at that time.

In the mean time See p. 61. c. 4.
Dorieus the Rhodean Admiral of the Italian Galleys, as soon as he had quieted
the Tumult in Rhodes, passed over to the Hellespont, with a purpose to join
Mindarus, who then lay at Abydus, getting together from all Parts, what Vessels
he could from the Peloponesian Confederates. When Dorieus was come as far as
Sigeum of Troas, the Athenians (who then lay at Anchor at Sestos) having
intelligence of his Course, made out against him with their whole Fleet of
Seventy Four Sail. Dorieus altogether ignorant of the Preparations The Fight at
Dardanum.
against him, sails on securely: But when he understood what a powerful Navy
was making toward him, he was in great Consternation, and seeing no other
means left to escape, fled to Dardanum, where he landed his Men; and placing a
Garrison in the City, he forthwith furnished the Place with abundance of Arms,
and placed his Soldiers, some upon the Foredecks of his Vessels, and others
all along upon the Shore. But the Athenians making up suddenly Ant. Chapter 407. P.
354.
upon them; endeavored to hale off the Ships from the Shore; and by pressing
upon the Enemy in so many Places at once, they almost wearied them out.
Mindarus the Peloponesian Admiral, hearing the Distress Dorieus was in,
forthwith set Sail from Abidos with his whole Fleet, and made for the
Promontory of ^Dardanum, with Fourscore and Four Sail to assist him. The Land
Forces likewise of Pharnabazus were near at Hand, to support the Lacedemonian
Fleet. When the Navies came near one to another, both sides prepared to Fight.
Mindarus commanding a Fleet of Ninety Seven Sail, placed the Syracusians in the
Left Wing, and he himself commanded the Right. On the Athenians, Thrasybulus
led the Right, and Thrasyllus the Left Wing. The Lines of Battle being thus
disposed on both sides, and the Sign given by the Admirals, the Trumpets all at
once sounded a Charge. And now the Rowers neglecting nothing on their part, and
the Pilots every where minding with all diligence their several Helms, a Bloody
Fight began. For as often as the Ships forced forwards to pierce one another,
so often did the Pilots at the same instant of time carefully move and turn the
Ship, that the Strokes only fell upon the Beaks of the Vessels. The Soldiers
upon the Decks when at first they saw their Broad-sides lie open to the
Assaults of the Enemy, began to be discouraged, but then again presently when
they discerned that the Charge made by the Enemy upon them was eluded by the
Art of the Pilot, their Spirits and Courage Ant. Chr. 407.
revived. Neither were they less active, who fought upon the Decks, for they
who were at a distance, plied the Enemy continually with Darts, so that the
Place where they fell, seemed to be covered over. They who fought at Hand,
threw their Lances one at another, sometimes piercing through the Bodies of
their Opposers, and sometimes the Bodies of the Pilots themselves. If the Ships
fell fowl upon one another, then they disputed it with their Spears: And many
times when they came close, they would board one another, and fight it out with
their Swords. What with the doleful Complaints of them that were hastening in
to the Succor of those that were worsted, and the triumphing Shouts of them
that were Conquerors, every Place was full of Noise and Confusion. The Fight
continued a long time with great obstinacy on both sides, till on a sudden
Alcibiades (who was merely by chance sailing from Samos to the Hellespont with
Twenty Ships) came in view. Before he came near, both sides hoped to have
Succor from them. And both being confident, they fought with more Resolution
on both sides. When he drew near (the Lacedaemonians being still in the dark) he
presently set up a Purple Flag from his own Ship as a Sign to the Athenians, as
it was before ordered and agreed. Upon which, the Lacedaemonians in a great
Fright forthwith fled. But the Athenians encouraged with this happy success,
pursued them with all their might, and presently Ant. Chr. 407.
took Ten of their Ships; but afterward a great Storm arose, which much
obstructed them in the Pursuit: For the Sea was so raging, that the Pilots were
not able to manage the Helm, nor could they make any impression with the Beaks
of their Ships upon the Enemy, because the Ships aimed at, were born back by
the violence of the Waves.

At length the Lacedaemonians came safe to Shore, and Marched to the Land-Army
of Pharnabazus: The Athenians in the mean time endeavored to gain the Empty
Ships, and pressed on with great Valor and Confidence through many hazards P.
355.
and difficulties; but being kept off by the Persian Army, they were forced to
return to Sestus. Pharnabazus was the more earnest in opposing the Athenians,
to the end he might convince the Lacedaemonians that he had no ill Design
against them, when he sent back the Three Hundred Galleys to Phenicia: For he
told them he did it, because at that time the King of Egypt and Arabia had some
Designs upon Phenicia. After this issue of the Fight at Sea, the Athenian Fleet
arrived at Sestus in the Night: And as soon as it was Day, and all their Fleet
was got up together, they set up another Trophy near to the former. Mindarus
arrived at Abydus about the First watch of the Night, and falls a repairing his
shattered and disabled Ships, and sends to the Lacedaemonians for Supplies both
of Land and Sea-Forces. For whilst his Fleet was repairing, he determined with
his Land Soldiers to join with Pharnabazus, and to besiege the Confederate
Ant. Chr. 407.
Cities of the Athenians in Asia: The Of Calcis in Eubea, now Negropont.
Calcideans, and almost all the Eubeans had deserted the Athenians, and
therefore were now in great fear (in regard they inhabited an Island) lest the
Athenians being Masters at Sea, would invade them; they solicited therefore the
Beotians to assist them to stop up Euripus, Euripus a strait of the Sea between
Beotia and Eubea.
by which Eubea might be annexed to the Continent of Beotia. To which the
Beotians agreed, beause by this means Eubea would be but as the Continent to
them, and an Island to others. Hereupon all the Cities set upon the Work, and
every one strove with all diligence to perfect it. And Orders were sent forth
not only to the Citizens, but all Foreigners and Strangers, to attend upon the
Business; and all Hands were to be at Work, that it might be with all speed
effected. The Mould began at Calcis in Eubea on the one side, and at Aulis in
Beotia on the other: For here it was the narrowest. In these straits the Sea
was very boisterous and rugged, but after this Work much more unquiet and
raging, the Passage being made so very strait and narrow: For there was left
only room for one Ship to pass. There were Forts built on both sides upon the
extremities of the Mould, and Wooden Bridges made over the Current Ant. Chr.
407.
for Communication.

Theramenes, indeed at the first being sent thither with Thirty Sail,
endeavored to hinder the Project, but being overpowered with the Number of
those that defended them that were employed, he gave over his Design, and made
away toward the Islands. And purposing to relieve the Confederate Cities who
were under the burden of Contributions, he wasted and spoiled the Enemies
Country, and returned laden with much Spoil and Plunder. He went likewise to
some of the Confederate Cities, and imposed upon them great Mulcts and Fines,
because he understood that they were secretly contriving some Changes and
Innovations. Thence he sailed to An Island in the Aegean Sea.
Paros, and freeing the People from the Oligarchy there, he restored the
Democracy, and exacted a great Sum of Money from them who set up the Oligarchy.

About the same time, a cruel and bloody Sedition arose in Corcyra, which is A
Sedition in Corcyra.
said to be occasioned through private Grudges and Animosities, as much as any
other Cause. In no City of that time, were ever such horrid Murders of the
Citizens committed, nor ever was more Rage to the destruction of Mankind heard
of: For once before this, in their quarrelling one with another, there Ant. Chapter
407.
were Fifteen Hundred Slaughtered, and all of them the chiefest of the
Citizens. But these Murders following were much more miserable, the Sparks of
old Discords being blown up into a devouring Flame: For they in authority at
Corcyra, aspiring to an Oligarchy, sided with the Lacedaemonians, but the People
favored P. 356.
the Athenians.

These Two People contending for the Sovereignty, took different measures: The
Lacedaemonians set up an Oligarchy in the Cities of their Confederates; but the
Athenians established every where in theirs, a Democracy.

The Corcyrians therefore discerning that the great Men of their City intended
to betray them into the Hands of the Lacedaemonians, sent to Athens for a
Garrison, for the defense of their City; upon which, Conon the Athenian
Admiral, sails to Corcyra, and leaves there Six Hundred Messenians drawn out
from Naupactus; and passing from thence with the Fleet, anchored at Juno's
Temple.

In the mean time, Six Hundred of them that were for the Democracy, rushed into
the Forum, and forthwith set upon them that sided with the Lacedaemonians,
casting some into Prisons, killing others, and driving above a Thousand out of
the City. And because they feared the number and strength of the Exiles, they
manumitted all the Slaves, and infranchiz'd all the Strangers. The Exiles
presently fly into the Continent to Epirus, lying over against them. A few Days
after, some of the People who favored them that were ejected, entered the Ant.
Chr. 407.
Forum in Arms, and sending for the Exiles into the City, laid all at stake,
and fought it out. When Night parted them, Proposals were made for a
Pacification, which taking effect, they all continued in their Country with
equal Privileges. And this was the issue of the flight of the Exiles from
Corcyra.

At the same time Archelaus King of Macedonia marched against the Pydneans, who
had revolted, and besieged their City with a great Army; to whose assistance
Theramenes came with some Ships; but the Siege continuing longer than he
expected, he returned A City in Macedonia. Pydnea taken.
to Thrace to Thrasybulus the Admiral of the whole Fleet. But Archelaus at
length takes Pydnea after a strait Siege, and removes the Inhabitants Twenty
Furlongs further from the Sea.

The Winter now near an end, Mindarus randezouzes his Shipping from all
Quarters; for many came both from Peloponesus, and other Confederates. The
Athenian Generals who lay at Sestus, hearing of the great Preparations of their
Enemies, were in no small fear lest if they should be set upon with their whole
Fleet at once, they should lose all their Navy; and therefore hailing down
those Ships they had laid up at Sestus, they sailed round Chersonesus, and
Anchored at Cardia, and thence sent to Thrace to Thrasibulus and Theramenes to
come to them with the whole Fleet with all speed: Alcibiades likewise they
re-call'd from Lesbos. So that now the Fleet was brought together with that
Expedition, that the Admirals longed to fight, and put all to the hazard of a
Battle.

In the mean time Mindarus the Lacedemonian Admiral sails in a direct Course
for Cyzicum, and there lands all his Forces, and besieges the City. Pharnabazus
joins him with a great Army, and by his Assistance takes the Place by Storm.
Upon which the Athenian Admirals were resolved to make for Cyzicum; and to that
end they advanced with their whole Fleet, and sailing round Chersonesus,
arrived at Eleuntis. Then they contrived all they could to pass by Abydus in
the Night, lest the Enemy should have intelligence of the number of their
Ships: Sailing thence to An Island in the Propontis.
Preconnesus, they there lay at Anchor all Night. The next day they landed
their Men in the Territories at Cyzicum, with a command to Chareas (who led the
Army) to march strait to Cyzicum. The Fleet was divided The Fight at Cyzicum.
P. 357.
into Three Squadrons, one under the Command of Alcibiades, another under
Theramenes, and the Third commanded by Thrasybulus. Alcibiades made out with
his Squadron far from the rest, and dared the Lacedaemonians to Fight.
Theramenes and Thrasybulus used their utmost endeavor to close in the Enemy,
so as to prevent their Sailing back to the City. When Mindarus saw only that
part of the Fleet which was with Alcibiades, (having no intelligence of the
rest) he despised them, and with Fourscore Sail (in great Confidence) attacks
them. When he came near to Alcibiades, the Athenians (as they were commanded)
counterfeited a Flight: Whereupon the Peloponesians with great joy hotly
pursued them as Conquerors: But when Alcibiades saw that he had decoyed and
drawn them far off from the City, he lifts up his Sign from his Ship. At which,
all his Squadron at one instant tackt about full in front upon the Enemy: Ant.
Chr. 407.
Theramenes and Thrasybuls in the mean time making to the City, left them no
way to return. Upon this, they that were with Mindarus, considering the
strength of their Enemies, and perceiving how they were outwitted, were in a
great Consternation. At length the Athenians appearing on every side, and the
return of the Peloponesians to the City intercepted, Mindarus was forced to fly
to a Place upon that Coast called Cleros, where Pharnabazus was encamped with
his Army. But Alcibiades making a hot Pursuit after them, sunk and took many of
their Ships, and forcing the rest upon the Shore, endeavored to hale them
thence with grapling Irons. Upon this, there was a greater Slaughter among the
Athenians, in regard the Army upon the Shore assisted the Peloponesians. And
indeed the Athenians (lifted up with their Victory) evidenced more Valor than
Prudence; for the Peloponesians far exceeded them in number; and the Army of
Pharnabazus assisted the Lacedaemonians with great resolution, and fighting from
Land, had the advantage of a certain and fixed station. But when Thrasybulus saw
the aid that was given to the Enemy from the Land, he landed the rest of his
Men with all speed, in order to succor Alcibiades; and commanded Theramenes,
that with all expedition he should join the Foot under the Command of Chares,
and fight the Enemy at Land. Whilst these Orders were Ant. Chr. 407.
in executing, Mindarus the Lacedemonian General, bore all the brunt in
preserving of the Ships Alcibiades had laid hold on. Clearchus the Spartan,
with the Peloponesians and Mercenary Persians fought with Thrasybulus, who for
some considerable time, with his Seamen and Archers bore up with great Valor
against the Enemy, killing many of them, but not without great loss of his own:
And just when the Athenians were enclosed round with the Soldiers of
Pharnabazus, on a sudden falls in Theramenes with his own and Chares his Foot.
Upon this, those with Thrasybulus, who were before almost spent, and quite out
of Heart, gathered Courage; so the Fight was renewed, and continued very hot
and sharp a long time after; till the first that gave ground were the Persians,
and by little and little their whole Body began to break in pieces. At length
the Peloponesians with Clearchus being forsaken of their Fellows (after many
Wounds given and received, and Slaughters on both sides) were forced likewise
to give Ground. These being thus broken and dispersed, Theramenes hasted to
assist Alcibiades, who was sorely pressed in another part. And though now all
the P. 358.
Athenian Forces were joined together, yet Mindarus was not at all startled at
the approach of Theramenes, but divides the Peloponesians into Two Bodies, and
commands the one to engage the fresh Supply, and keeping the other with
himself, earnestly adjures them that they would not stain the honor of the
Spartan Name; especially when the business was now to be disputed with
Alcibiades by Ant. Chr. 407.
a Fight at Land. And now the Battle for the safety of the Ships was renewed
with great Gallantry; and Mindarus in the Head of his Men, exposing himself to
all manner of Dangers, beats down many of his Enemies; but at length was killed
by the Soldiers of Alcibiades, though he fought with that Valor as was
agreeable to the fame and glory of his Country. Upon his Death the
Peloponesians and their consederates all as one Man fled with great
consternation. The Athenians pursued them for a while, but understanding that
Pharnabazus was hastening after them with a great Party of Horse, they returned
to their Ships; and having regained the * City, they set up Two Trophies, one
for their Victory Cyzicum.
at Sea near the Island Polydorus, as it is called, the other for that at Land,
where the Enemy first began to fly. The Peloponesians who were left to guard
the City, with those that escaped out of the Battle, marched away to
Pharnabazus his Camp. The Athenians being now possessed of all the Ships, and
of a great number of Prisoners, were laden with abundance of Spoil, the Fruits
of the Conquest of Two Potent Armies.

When the News of this Victory was brought to Athens, the Success was so
unexpected after all their former Losses, that the People were surpised with
Joy at such a happy turn of Fortune, and offered Sacrifices to the Gods, and
instituted Festivals: And upon this was raised a Thousand-Foot, and a Hundred
Horse of the most Valiant of the Citizens for the carrying on of the War. The
City likewise sent to Alcibiades a Supply of Thirty Sail, to encourage him with
greater Confidence (especially now when they were Masters at Sea) to set upon
the Cities who sided with the Lacedaemonians. Ant. Chr. 407.


CHAP. VI.
The Spartans seek for Peace. The Speech of Endius. The Athenians refuse.

THe Lacedaemonians receiving certain intelligence of their rout at Cyzicum,
sent Ambassadors to Athens to treat of Peace, the chief of whom was Endius.
When he was admitted Audience, he came in, and spoke in the Laconick manner, in
a short and pithy Style; whose Oration I judge not fitting to omit.

The Oration of Endius.
WE have determined to make Proposals of Peace to you, O ye Athenians, upon
these Conditions, That the Cities gained on either side be retained: That the
Garrisons every where be dismissed: That all Prisoners be released, one
Athenian for one Laconian: For we are not ignorant that the War is very
mischievous to us both, but much more to you, which I shall make apparent from
the things themselves, if you hearken a while to what I say. For our use all
Peloponesus is improved and sowed, but of Attica which is not so large, you
have but a part in Tillage. This War has brought over many Confederates to the
Laconians; on the contrary, the Athenians have lost as many as we have gained.
The richest King of the World maintains our Armies, but you force the charge of
the War from the poorest of the Nations. Our Soldiers therefore being so well
paid, fight cheerfully, but yours (being Ant. Chr. 407.
forced every one to bear their own Charges) seek to avoid both the Toil and
the Expense. Moreover, when our Fleet is out at Sea, we are more in want of
Ships than Men; but the greatest part of your Men are in your Ships. And that
which is most considerable, although we are inferior to you at Sea, yet by the
Agreement of all we are your Superiors at Land; for the Spartan knows not how
to fly in a Battle at Land. On the other hand you fight at Sea, not with any
hopes to gain the Sovereignty at Land, but to preserve your selves from utter
Destruction. Now it remains that I give you satisfaction, why when we thus far
excel you in feats of Arms, we should seek to you for Peace. In truth, though I
cannot say, that Sparta has gained any P. 359.
thing by this War, yet I dare affirm their Damage has not been so great as
that of the Athenians. But it is the height of folly, to take pleasure in common
Calamities, because our Enemies are Fellow Sufferers; whereas it had been much
better neither of us had had the Experience. Neither does the content and
satisfaction by the destruction of thine Enemy, balance the sorrow that is
conceived at the loss of thy Friend. But it is not for these Reasons only that
we desire to put an end to the War, but we are prompted hereunto by the Custom
of our Country; for when we saw by these Wars so many horrid Murders, and so
much Blood lamentably shed, we conceived it our duty to make it manifest both
to the Gods and Men, that we are the least concerned in the causing of it.

When the Laconian had spoke this and some other things to the like effect, the
more moderate of the Athenians were inclined to Peace; but those who were
accustomed to sow the Seeds of Dissension, and to make a private gain of the
public Disorders, were for War. Of this Opinion was Cleopho, a Man of great
interest among the People, who coming into the Assembly after he had Ant. Chr.
407.
said many things pertinent to the business in hand, he chiefly encouraged the
People, by magnifying the greatness of their late Successes, and urging all in
such a manner as if Fortune (contrary to her usual Custom) had now forgot to
(...).
dispose and order the Successes of War, by turns and mutual Changes to each
side. But the Athenians at length ru'd this mischievous Advice which was so
little to their advantage; for being thus deceived with flattering Discourses
framed only to please, they were brought so low, that they could never after
recover their former Strength and Grandeur; but these things shall be hereafter
related in their due Place. The Athenians therefore (being thus puffed up with
their Victories, and being very confident because Alcibiades was their General)
concluded they should recover their former Esteem and Reputation in a short
time.

CHAP. VII.
Hannibal the Carthaginian invades Sicily. The miserable destruction of
Selinunte. The ruin likewise of Himera. The Acts of Hermocrates in Sicily.

THE Affairs of this Year thus ended, Diocles was chosen Magistrate of Athens,
Olymp. 92. 4. An. Mu. 3563. Ant. Chr. 406.
and at Rome, Quintus Fabius and Caius Furius were Consuls. At that time
Hannibal the Carthaginian General musters an Army out of Spain and Africa, and
puts them on Borad Threescore long Galleys, and provides Fifteen Hundred
Transport Ships, to convey Provision, Engines, Weapons, and all other things
necessary for a Siege. Passing over the African Sea with his Navy, he arrived
at Lilibeum, a Promontory in Sicily over against Africa. About the same time,
some Selinuntine Horsemen being in those Parts, when they saw so great a Fleet
make toward them, speeded away in all haste, to give intelligence to their
Countrymen of the Approach of the Enemy. Upon which, the Selinuntines
dispatched Messengers to Syracuse, to desire Aid. In the mean time Hannibal
landed his Army, and marked out his Camp, beginning at a Pond called at that
time Lilibeum; but many Years after, it gave name to a Town built in that Place.

Hannibal's whole Army (as Ephorus relates) consisted of Two Hundred Thousand
Foot, and Four Thousand Horse. Timeus says, they were not much above an Hundred
Thousand. He drew up all his Ships into the Creek near Motys, intending the
Syracusians should hereby be assured, that he invaded not Sicily with a design
to make War upon them either by Sea or Land. Then being joined by the
Aegestines and other Confederates, he raised his Camp from Lilibeum, and
marched toward Selinunte. When he came to the River Mazarus, he takes Emporium
at the first Assault. Approaching afterward nearer to the City, he divides his
Army into Two Parts, and encamping round the City, raises his Engines and
Batteries, and begins to assault the Town with great Vigor: For he built Six
high Towers, and brought as many Battering Rams P. 360.
to the Walls, and with the multitude of his Darters and Slingers forced the
Citizens from the Forts and Bulwarks. The Selinuntines had been now a long time
disused from Sieges; and in regard they were the only People of Sicily Ant.
Chr. 406.
that sided with the Carthaginians against Gelon, they little expected they
should have been brought into such Dangers by them whom they had so far
engaged; and therefore were in great Consternation and Amazement, seeing the
abundance of Engines, the greatness of the Army and imminent Danger wherewith
they were environed. Yet they were not altogether without hope; but expecting
speedy Aid from Syracuse and other Confederate Cities, all the People as one
Man joined together, and drove the Enemy from the Walls. The Young Men
courageously slighted all Hazards: The Old Men ran from Place to Place upon the
Walls to furnish the other from time to time with all things necessary for the
defense, beseeching them not to suffer the Enemy to enter. The Women and
Children brought Meat and Weapons to them who were fightfor their Country, not
regarding that Modesty and Sobriety which in times of Peace they were
commendable for: The Fear was so great, that even Women were regardless of the
Dangers.

Hannibal promised the Plunder of the Town to his Soldiers, applies his
Engines to the Walls, and with the best of his Soldiers (whom he relieved from
time to time with fresh Supplies) begins the Assault. At the first Word of
Command, at one instant the Trumpets sounded to Battle, and the whole Army with
a great Shout ran up to their several Posts; the Walls were battered by the
Rams, and the Soldiers from the High Towers, galled the Selinuntines with Ante
Chr. 406.
their Darts: For the Selinuntines enjoying a long Peace, their Hands were not
inured to Action, and therefore were easily driven from thence, the Wooden
Towers being far higher than they. In the mean time, part of the Wall being
battered down, the Campanians willing to make themselves remarkable, on a
sudden, rushed into the City, and at the first greatly terrified those that
were in that part of it; but presently many coming in to assist them, the Enemy
was repulsed with great Loss: For the Rubbish lying in the way where they
entered, when they were driven back to the Breach, they were so cumber'd, that
many were cut off. Night approaching, the Carthaginians drew off.

In the mean time the Selinuntines sent forth some Horsemen in the Night to
Agrigentum, Gela and Syracuse, to desire aid with all speed; for that they were
not able any longer to stand it out against so great an Army. The Geleans and
Agrigentines thought it best to wait for the Aids from Syracuse, that with
conjoined Forces they might set upon the Carthaginians. But the Syracusians
having certain intelligence that Selinunte was Besieged, without delay struck a
Peace with the Chalcideans (with whom they were then in War) and gathered all
their Forces together from every Place. But because they supposed that the City
was only Besieged, and not in any danger to be suddenly taken, they protracted
the time to make the greater Preparation. In the mean time, Hannibal as soon as
it was light, renewed the Assault on every side of the Town, and presently
possessed himself of that part of the Wall where the Breach was made, Ant. Chapter
406.
and of another Breach made in another part near adjoining; and when he had
removed the Rubbish, with the choicest of his fresh Men he sets upon the
Selinuntines, and forces them by degrees to give Ground, but was not able quite
to break them, who now had all at stake. Many fell on both sides. The
Carthaginians P. 361.
were still supplied with fresh Men, but the Selinuntines had none to reinforce
them. And thus the Assault was renewed every Day, for the space of Nine Days,
with great Resolution and Courage, and much loss on both sides. At length when
the Spaniards.
Iberians began to enter at the Breaches, the Women from the tops of the
Houses, filled all Places with Cries and Lamentations. And the Selinuntines now
judging the Town to be lost, endeavored to block up all the nar^row Passages
and Streets, and by that means the Contest continued a long time. But while the
Carthaginians were making their way by force, the Women and Children from the
Tops of the Houses mawl'd them with Tiles and Stones; so that the Carthaginians
for a long time were sorely galled, not being able to come up together in those
narrow Passages, the Walls on both sides being strongly manned; and besides
being so vexed with those that cast down Stones upon the Tops of the Houses.
This throwing down of Darts and other things from the Roofs of the Houses,
continued till Evening: But the Carthaginians still renewing the Fight, by
pouring fresh Men into the City, the other were tired out, their number
decreasing, and their Enemies still increasing, so that the Selinuntines were
at last forced to desert the Straits.

The City thus taken, nothing was to be seen but weeping and wailing among
Selinunte taken and razed.
the Grecians; and on the other side among the Barbarians, exultation and
(...). Ant. Chr. 406.
shouts of Victory: Those were terrified with the greatness of their Misery
every where before their Eyes; These now Victorious, commanded to kill and
destroy where and whom they pleased: At length the Selinuntines got in a Body
together in the Marketplace, and there fought it out to the last Man. The
Barbarians raging in all Parts of the City, rifled all the Houses: The Persons
The cruelty of the Carthaginians in Selinunte.
they found there, they either burnt them and their Houses together, or
dragging them into the Streets, without any respect to Age or Sex, whether they
were Women or Children, Young or old, without the least pity or commiseration,
they put them all to the Sword, and after the barbarous manner of their
Country, they mangled their Carcases; some carried about multitudes of Hands
tied round their Bodies; others in Ostentation, bore about the Heads of the
Slain upon the Points of their Swords and Spears. They only spared Wives who
fled with their Children to the Temples; and to these only was Favor showed,
not out of any Compassion to the Miserable, but out of a fear they had lest the
Women being desperate, without any hopes of Mercy, should burn the Temples, and
by that means they should lose the Riches and Treasures that were laid up in
those Places. For these Barbarians so far exceed all other Men in Impiety, that
whereas others (lest they should offend the Deity) always spare them who fly to
their Temples, the Carthaginians on the contrary moderate their Cruelty toward
their Enemies, for that very end and purpose that they may have a better
opportunity sacrilegiously to rob the Temples. The razing and ruining of the
City continued till late in the Night; all the Houses were burnt or pulled
down; every Place was full of Blood and dead Bodies, Sixteen Thousand being
there put to the Sword, and more than Five Ant. Chr. 406.
Thousand carried away Captives. The Grecians who sided with the Carthaginians,
seeing the inconstancy of the things of this Life, greatly commiserated the
condition of these miserable People; for the Matrons in want of Food and
Sustenance amongst the Flouts and Jeers of an insulting Enemy, passed all that
Night in sorrow and sadness. Some of them were forced to be Eyewitnesses of
the sufferings of their Daughters in such a kind as is shameful to relate; for
the cruel Lust of the Barbarians sparing neither Girls nor Virgins grown up,
afflicted these poor People with unspeakable Misery. The Mothers P. 362.
while they considered the Slavery they were to undergo in Lybia, and how they
and their Children were subjected in great Contempt and Disgrace to the brutish
Lusts of domineering Masters (whose Language they understood not, and whose
Actions were altogether Beastly) were in Grief and Sorrow even to see their
Children alive; for every Injury and Disgrace offered to them, affected them,
as if a Dagger had pierced their own Hearts, when they were not able to yield
them any other Relief but Groans and Lamentations; in so much as they accounted
their Parents and Kindred that had lost their Lives in the defense of their
Country, to be happy, whose Eyes saw not those Brutish and Beastly acts of
Barbarous Cruelty. There were notwithstanding, Two Thousand Six Hundred that
escaped and fled to Agrigentum, where they were received with all manner of
Humanity and Tenderness; for the Agrigentines distributed to every Family, Corn
out of the Public Stores, and desired every private Person (who yet were very
ready on their own accord) liberally to Ant. Chr. 406.
supply them with all necessaries for their Sustenance.

While these things were doing, Three Thousand of the best Soldiers sent from
Syracuse to assist the Selinuntines, came to Agrigentum. But when they heard
that the City was taken, they sent Ambassadors to Hannibal, to demand the
Redemption of the Prisoners, and that he would forbear robbing of the Temples
of the Gods. They returned with this Answer from Hannibal, that in regard the
Selinuntines were not able to preserve their own Liberty, they were now justly
brought into the condition of Slaves. That the Gods were angry at the
Inhabitants, and therefore had forsaken Selinunte. But when they sent
Empediones Ambassador a Second time, Hannibal restored to him all his Estate,
because he always favored the Carthaginians, and sometime before the City was
taken, had advised the Citizens not to withstand: He pardoned likewise all
those Prisoners that were of his Kindred, and permitted those that fled to
Agrigentum to repeople the City, and till the Lands, upon paying Tribute to the
Carthaginians. Thus was this City taken, Two Hundred and Fifty Two Years after
the Building of it.

After Hannibal had demolished it, he marched away with all his Army toward
Himera, with a longing desire to ruin this City. For this Town occasioned the
Banishment of his Father; and here it was that his Grandfather Amilcar Himera
Besieged.
was routed by Gelon, who killed an Hundred and Fifty Thousand of the
Carthaginians, and took almost as many Prisoners. In revenge whereof, Hannibal
speeds away with Forty Thousand Men, and incamps upon an Hill at some distance
from the City, and with the rest of his Army (to whom joined the Sicilians and
Sicanians, to the number of Twenty Thousand Men) he Besieges Ant. Chr. 406.
the Place, and Batters the Walls with his Engines in several Places at once;
and with fresh Succors even wearies out the Besieged; to the effecting of
which, the forwardness of his Men (through the late Successes) was of no small
advantage. Whilst he was undermining the Walls, he supported them with great
Pieces of Timber, and then setting them on Fire, a great part of the Walls on a
sudden tumbled down; upon which there was a sharp Conflict: These striving to
enter by force, the other in dread of undergoing the same fate and destruction
with them of Selinunte; so that the Besieged endeavoring with all their might,
to defend their Parents, Children and Country, beat the Barbarians off, and
with all speed repaired the Wall. For there had before come to their assistance
Four Thousand Syracusians, and some other Confederates from Agrigentum, under
the Command of Diocles the Syracusian. Then Night coming on, it gave a check to
the Fury of the Besiegers, and so there was an intermission of the Assault.

But as soon as it was Day, the Besieged resolving not to be penned up as the P.
363.
Selinuntines were (through Sloathfulness) placed the Guards upon the Walls,
and with the rest of their own, and the Forces of their Confederates, to the
number of Ten Thousand, made a Sally, and broke in on a sudden upon the Enemy.
Whereupon the Barbarians were struck with Terror and Amazement, conceiving that
all the Confederates of the Besieged were come to their Relief. Ant. Chr. 406.
The Salliants therefore being far more daring and (...).
skilful in their Weapons, and especially the last hope of their safety lying
in the good Success of the present Engagement, they cut off all those that
first opposed them. And though the whole force of the Barbarians in (...).
great disorder and confusion fell upon them (for they never suspected that the
Besiegd durst ever have attempted any such thing) yet they were under no small
disadvantages; for Fourscore Thousand Men running in Confusion together, beat
down one another, and more incommodated themselves than their Enemies. The
Himereans in the mean time being in sight of their Parents, Children, and all
their Friends and Relations upon the Walls, exposed themselves without fear, to
all dangers for the common safety. The Barbarians therefore astonished with the
Valor of The Carthaginians routed by a Sally from Himerd.
the Enemy, and unexpectedness of the Onset, turned their Backs, and fled in
great precipitation to their Fellows incampt upon the Hill, whom the Himereans
pursued, calling one to another not to give any Quarter. In this Encounter
there were killed of the Carthaginians above Six Thousand (as Timeus relates)
but Ephorus says Twenty Thousand. Hannibal when he saw his Soldiers so
distressed, drew out those that were encamped, and came to the Relief of his
shattered Troops, setting upon the Himereans now in disorder by the Pursuit:
Upon which, there began another sharp Dispute, in which, at The Himerians
repulsed. Ant. Chr. 406.
length the Himereans were put to flight; but Three Thousand of them stood
their Ground, and bore the brunt of the whole Carthaginian Army; and after they
had signalized their Valor, all died upon the Spot.

After this Fight, Five and Twenty Galleys which were sometime before sent to
the aid of the Lacedaemonians from the Siculi, now returning Home, arrived at
Himera; but a Rumor spread through the City, that the Syracusians with all
their Forces and Confederates were come to the Relief of the Himereans.
Hannibal in the mean time imbarques many of his best Soldiers in his Galleys
which lay at Motys, in order to Sail for Syracuse, to surprise the City now
that it wanted sufficient ^trength to defend it as he supposed. And therefore
Diocles, Commander in chief of them who were sent in aid of the Himereans,
advised the Captains of the Vessels to sail with all speed to Syracuse, lest
when they had lost the best of their Soldiers, in the next Fight, their own
City should be taken by force. To which end it was thought advisable to leave
the City for a while, and to imbarque one half of Diocles's Forces to go along
with the Fleet till they were past the Coasts of Himera, and to leave the other
half for the defense of the City till the Galleys returned. The Himereans took
this grievously, but being it was not in their power to do otherwise, Galleys
were filled in the Night, with Women and Children, and other things to be
transported to Messena.

Then Diocles with those under his Command, prepared for his Journey back into
his own Country, leaving the Bodies of them that were slain unbury'd. And so
many of the Himereans with their Wives and Children went along with him, as
could not be otherwise transported for want of Shipping. But they that were
left for the defense of the City, watched every Night in Arms upon the Ant. Chr.
406.
Bulwarks. And although the Carthaginiaus constantly upon the approach of Day
made frequent Assaults in every Place found the City, yet they upon the Walls
indefatigably bore the brunt, believing the Ships would return speedily; to
which very Day they held it out courageously: But the next Day after that the
P. 364.
Fleet was in sight far off, at that instant the Wall was battered down by the
Engines, and the Spanish Regiment in a full Body, rusht into the City, part of
the Barbarians forcing the Guard from the Walls, and another part that
possessing the Breaches, made way for the rest of the Army to enter. At length
the City was Himcra ruined.
entered, and the Barbarians with all Savage Cruelty, killed all in their way,
till by the Command of Hannibal they forbore their Butcheries: In the mean
time, the Soldiers plundered all the Houses of all things (...).
valuable. Here Hannibal robbed and spoiled all the Temples, and after he had
taken out those that fled thither for Refuge, he set them on Fire, and razed
the City to the Ground, Two Hundred and Forty Years after the settling of the
Inhabitants there. Among the Prisoners, the Women and Children he commanded to
be kept safe; but the Men, to the number of Three Thousand, he caused to be
brought to a rising Ground there near at Hand, where Amilcar his Grandfather
perished by the Army of Gelon, and there with all sorts of Taunts, and marks of
Disgrace, put them all to Ant. Chr. 406.
the Sword. Afterward he disbanded many of his Forces, among the rest, he sent
the Sicilians, who sided with him, to their several Countries, and with them
the Campanians, who made great complaint of the Injustice of the Carthaginians,
for that they contributing so much to their Successes, had not rewarded them
proportionably to the Services they had done them in the War.

However Hannibal shipped his Army, leaving a small Guard with his Confederates,
and with his Transport Ships and Galleys loosed from Sicily, and arrived at
Carthage, laden with abundance of Prey. The whole City came out to meet him,
and received him with loud and joyful Acclamations, as a General that had
performed greater things by far in so short a time than ever any before him.

At this time Hermocrates the Syracusian returned into Sicily. He was in great
Esteem Hermocrates returns into Sicily.
among the Syracusians, because in the War against the Athenians, he was
remarkably serviceable to his Country. He was afterward sent as Admiral with
Thirty Five Sail to the aid of the Lacedaemonians; but by a contrary Faction at
Home, being condemned to Banishment, he delivered up the Command of the Fleet
in Peloponesus, to those who were deputed by the Government. Afterward
Hermocrates banished Syracuse.
having received a considerable Sum of Money from Pharnabazus, whose Favorite
he was, he sailed to Messina, and there built Five Galleys, and hired a
Thousand Soldiers with his own Money; and taking likewise with him a Thousand
of those that were forced from Himera, he attempted with the help of his
Friends to return to Syracuse: But being prevented in this Design, he marched
up into the Country to Selinunte, and took in part of the City with a Wall, and
Ant. Chr. 406.
got together as many of the Selinuntines as survived the late Destruction, and
with them and many others which he received into the Place, he made up a Body
of Six Thousand choice Men. From thence he made an Excursion, and spoiled the
Country of the Moty^ans, overcame them that issued out of the City against
them, and killed many of them, driving the rest within their Walls. Presently
after, he broke into the Borders of the Panorma, now Palermo.
Panormitans, and carried away abundance of Plunder. He killed likewise Five
Hundred of the Citizens that stood in Battalia before their City to oppose him,
and shut up the rest within their Walls, and wasted and spoiled likewise all
the other Countries that were subject to the Carthaginians, for which he was in
high Esteem among the Sicilians. Hereupon the Syracusians likewise presently
began to repent, when they saw that they had Banished one whose Valor merited
so much to the contrary: So that when he was often named and discoursed of in
Public Assemblies, the People gave many hints and signs of their desire to
have him recalled. Hermocrates therefore understanding that his Name was up
among the Syracusians, used his utmost endeavor to return, knowing that his
Enemies and Rivals would oppose it with all their P. 365.
Might: And thus stood things in Sicily at this time.

CHAP. VIII.
Thrasybulus assaults Ephesus. The Lacedaemonians besiege Pylus; surrender
Chalcedon, besieged by Theramenes; and afterward Byzantium, which was betrayed
to Alcibiades.

IN Greece, Thrasybulus sent from Athens with a Fleet of Thirty Sail well
manned, Ant. Chr. 406.
and with a great Army of Foot, and an Hundred Horse, sailed to Ephesus; where
landing his Men in two places, he assaulted the City; but the Townsmen making a
brisk Sally, there began a sharp Engagement; in which four hundred of the
Athenians were killed, for the whole Strength of the City fell upon them,
Ephesus Assaulted by Thrasybulus.
the rest getting to their Ships. Thrasybulus loosed from thence to Lesbos. But
the Athenian Generals, who lay at Cyzicum, passed over to A City in Bythinia in
Asia, over against Constantinople.
Chalcedon, and built a Fort called Chrysopolis, putting into it a sufficient
Garrison; and commanded the Governors to exact the Tenth part of all Shipping,
that passed that way from Pontus. Afterward the Forces were divided, and
Theramenes was left with fifty Sail to besiege Chalcedon and Byzantium. But
Thrasybulus was sent into Thrace, and brought the Cities of that Country, under
the Power of the Athenians. Alcibiades having sent away Thrasybulus with thirty
Sail with the rest of the Fleet, arrived at the Province of Pharnabasus. There
they wasted and spoiled all that large Tract, and filled the Soldiers with
Plunder, and the Generals themselves got together a great sum of Money, by the
Sale of the Spoils, with a Design to case the People of the burden of their
Contributions.

The Lacedaemonians understanding that the Athenian Forces were still about the
Hellespont, sent Forces against Pylus, where the Messenians were in Garrison.
At Sea indeed they had Eleven Ships, of which Five were of Sicily, manned with
Spartans; but their Land Army was but small. With these they besieged the Pylus
besieged by the Lacedaemonians.
Fort, both by Land and Sea. But when Intelligence was brought of this, the
Athenians sent out Thirty Sail, under the Command of Anytus, the Son of
Anthemion, to the Relief of the Besieged. In his Passing thither, a great Storm
arose, so that not being able to recover A Promontory.
Malea, he returned to Athens. Upon which the People of Athens were so
incensed, that they condemned him to die as a Traitor: Anytus brought into this
imminent Danger, redeemed his Life with a Ant. Chr. 406.
Sum of Money; who is reported to be the First Athenian that ever reversed a
Anytus redeemed his Life for Money.
Sentence for Money. In the mean time, the Besieged Messenians in Pylus, stood
it out against all Assaults for a time, in hopes of Relief from Athens: But
being pressed by fresh and renewed Succors from the Assailants, by the Loss of
Men on the one hand, and through want of Provision on the other, they were
forced Pylus surrendered to the Lacedaemonians.
to surrender upon Terms. Thus Pylus was reduced, and brought into the Hands of
the Lacedaemonians; the Athenians having had Possession of it Fifteen Years,
from the time it was fortified by Demosthenes.

During these Affairs, the Megareans took Nisea, then belonging to the
Athenians. Upon which the Athenians sent against them Leotrophides and
Timarchus, with a Thousand Foot, and four Hundred Horse. Against whom all the
Megareans, with the Assistance of some from Sicily, marched out, and drew up in
Battle between the Megareans and the Athenians.
Battalia, upon the Hills called the Horns. There the Athenians fought with
that Valor, that they put the Enemy to Flight, though far more in number than
themselves. In this Battle, great Slaughter was made amongst the Megareans; but
there were only Twenty killed of the Lacedaemonians: For the Athenians, taking
the Loss of Nicea very grievously, waved the Lacedaemonians, and bent all the
Ant. Chr. 406.
Heat of their Pursuit after the Megareans, and in a great Rage cut down
multitudes The Megareans roated.
of them. About this time, the Lacedaemonians made Cratesipidas Admiral, and
manned five and twenty Sail, with Supplies sent from their Confederates, and
Commanded him to succor their Allies; who spent a long time about Ionia, P.
366.
doing nothing Considerable. Afterward, being furnished with Money, by the
Exiles of Chius, he both restored them, and took the (...)
Citadel of the Chians.

When the Exiles were ^eturn'd, they expelled those that Banished them, to the
Number of six Hundred, who possessed Themselves of a place called Atameus.
Atarneus, opposite upon the Continent, naturally fortified; from whence
afterward (growing Strong) they they wearied the Chians with frequent
Invasions. During these things, Alcibiades and Thrasybulus, having fortified
Labsacus, left there a sufficient Garrison; and then sailed with the whole Army
to Theramenes, who was then besieging Chalcedon, having a Fleet of Seventy
Sail, and five Thousand Men under his Command. The Generals, drawing up the
whole Army together in a Body, Block't up the City by a Wall of Timber, drawn
from Sea to Sea. Upon which Hippocrates, made Governor there by the
Lacedaemonians (whom the Laconians A Fight at the Siege of Chalcedon.
call Harmostis) made a Sally both with the Lacedaemonians, and all the
Chalcedonians: And joining Battle with Alcibiades (whose Soldiers fought with
great Resolution) Hippocrates was slain, and many more killed and wounded, and
the rest fled back into the City. Afterward Alcibiades passed over into the
Hellespont, and Chersonesus, with a Design to raise Moneys. But Theramenes came
to Terms with the Chalcedonians, and agreed that they should pay the same
Tribute Ant. Chapter 406.
that they did before; and so drew off his Forces, and came before Byzantium,
designing to block up that place.

In the mean time, Alcibiades having got together a vast Sum of Money, procured
Byzantium besieged; now Constantinople.
many of the Thracians to join with him; and then making a League and
Association with all them of Chersonesus, he loosed from thence with his whole
Amy, and gained Selymbria, a City in the Propontis, now called Seleuree.
Selymbria by Surrender, from whence he exacted a great Sum of Money; and
placing there a Garrison, hastened away to Theramenes at Byzantium, where they
jointly assault the Town with their whole Strength: For they were to subdue a
City that was very large, and full of Resolute Men; for besides the Byzantines,
who were very numerous, Clearchus Harmostes the Lacedemonian, had with him in
the City a Strong Garrison, both of Peloponesians and of Mercenaries; insomuch
that (though they violently assaulted it) for a long time they were not able to
make any considerable Impression upon the Besieged. But the Governor of the
City, being gone to Pharnabazus for Money, some of the Byzantines, who had taken
a Distaste at his Government (For Clearchus was sharp and rigid) betrayed the
City into the Hands of Alcibiades, in this Manner: The Besiegers made as if
they would raise the Siege, and Ship off their Army into Ionia; and to that
purpose, in the Evening, they Sailed away with their whole Fleet, and drew off
their Landforces at some Distance from the Town; but at Midnight the Army
marched back close to the City; and having before sent back their Galleys with
Orders, that they should hale the Ships of the Byzantines out of the Harbor,
and set up a great Shout, as if all the Army were there present, they
themselves with the Landforces kept ready drawn up in a Body, close to the
Walls, in Expectation of the Sign. In the Execution of these Commands, whilst
some of the Ships were broken in pieces by the Beaks of the Ships of the
Athenians, Ant. Chapter 406.
and others by Grappling-Irons were haled forth, and a great and terrible
Byzantium betrayed.
Shout was made, the Peloponesians in the City, ignorant of the Treachery,
sallied out to the Harbor, for the Defense of the City. In the mean time the
Traitors gave the Sign from the Walls, and by Ladders took in the Soldiers of
Alcibiades, while they of the Garrison were out at the Port. But the
Peloponesians being informed of the Treachery, left half the Forces in the
Port, and with the P. 367.
rest, ran with all Speed to guard the Walls, of which the Enemy was now
disposess'd. And although the whole Athenian Army was broke in, yet the Besieged
were not in the least discouraged for a long time; but with the help of the
Byzantines so courageously opposed the Athenians, that the City had never come
into their Hands, if Alcibiades had not made Proclamation that none of the
Byzantines should be injured; which was a thing very seasonably advised: upon
which the Townsmen turned their Arms upon the Lacedaemonians, so that many of
them (fighting it out with great Gallantry) were killed. The rest, to the
number of five Hundred, fled, as Suppliants; to the Altars of the Gods. The
Athenians restored the City to the Byzantines, and renewed the League and
Confederacy. The Suppliants likewise were received upon Terms, that they should
deliver up their Arms, and that their Persons should be Transported to Athens,
there to be disposed of, as the People should think fit.

CHAP. IX.
Theremenes and Alcibiades return to Athens; are admired by the People.
Lysander made General by the Lacedaemonians. Antiochus, one of the Athenian
Generals, beaten at Ephesus, in a Sea Fight. Agis surprises part of the Walls
of Athens; but was beaten off. Alcibiades accused for Assaulting Cuma, a
Confederate City. Conon made Admiral in his place.

AFTER the End of the Year, Euctemones was made Archon of Athens, and Olymp.
93. 1.
the Romans constituted Marcus Papyrius, and Spurius Nautius Consuls. Then was
celebrated the Ninety-third Olympiad, in which Eubatus of Cyrene got the An. M.
3564.
Victory. At this time the Athenian Generals (now possessed of Byzantium)
gained Ant. Chr. 405.
all the Cities of the Hellespont, except Abydus. Then they left Diodorus and
Mantitheus, with sufficient Forces, Governors in the Hellespont; and they
themselves (after they had performed many Famous Exploits, for the Honor and
Safety of their Country) returned with the Fleet, laden with Spoils to Athens.
When they drew near, all the People thronged out with great Joy to meet them,
and a great number of Strangers, both Women and Children ran together into the
Pyreum; the Arrival of the Generals filling all Persons with Admiration. For
they brought along with them no less than two hundred Ships, which they had
taken, and a multitude of Prisoners, with much Spoil; and their own Ships were
gloriously adorned with Arms, Rich Spoils, and Golden Crowns, and such like.
Every Body thronged one upon another to see Alcibiades, so as the City was even
left without an Inhabitant, whilst both Bond and Free longed to have a View of
Him. For he was so highly Admired at that time, that none of the Alcibiades
received with great Applause at Athens.
former Athenians were judged comparable to this Man, who so openly and
confidently had stood it out against the People. They who were Poor, and under
Mulcts and Fines, now hoped they had an Excellent Advocate, who by raising
Tumults and Disturbances in the City, could free them from their Penuries and
pressing Necessities. He was a Man daring above all others, and an Excellent
Speaker: In times of War a Brave Soldier, and as Skilful a Commander; ready
His Description.
in undertaking any Desperate Enterprise, of a very Comely and Bautiful
Countenance, of a Noble Spirit, and Aspiring Mind. All were so filled with
Expectation from him, that they concluded his Return, and the Prosperity of the
City, Ant. Chr. 405.
were coupl'd together. For, as the Lacedemoniuns were Successful and
Victorious whilst he Assisted them, so they hoped that by his Return, their
Affairs would change to the Better.

As soon as the Fleet entered into the Harbor, all Eyes were fixed upon
Alcibiades's Ship; and upon his Landing, they received him with great
Acclamations, and Congratulated his Return and Victories. After he had with all
Courteous Behavior Saluted the People, he called an (...).
Assembly, where having made a long Defeence for the Clearing of his Innocence,
he so insinuated himself into the Good Will of the People, that all cast the
Blame of the (...). P. 368.
Dooms and Judgments against him upon the City it self: And therefore they
restored all his Estate, not long before Consiscated, and threw the Records of
his Condemnation into the Sea; and Reversed all other things that were Decreed
against him: And a Decree was made, That the Certain Priests of Athens.
Eumolpides should take away, and absolve him from that Curse they had
pronounced against him, when he was supposed to have been guilty of Profaning
the Sacred Mysteries. At last they made him General, and gave him full Power,
both by Sea and Land; and committed all their Forces to his Command; upon which
he Constituted. other Generals, as he thought fit: That is to say, Adimantus
and Thrasybulus; and He Himself, with an Hundred Sail, passed over to Andros,
and there possessed Himself of the Fort Alcibiades invades Andros.
Gaurium, and took it in with a Wall. But the Andrians, with the whole Strenth
of the City, and the Succors, sent to them from Peloponesus, sallied out
against them, whereupon a sharp Engagement followed, in which the Athenians
were Conquerors; a great part of them that came out of the Town, being cum off.
Of those that escaped, some were scattered abroad in the Fields, others got
within the Walls. After he had several times attempted to take the City by
Assault, and saw he could not he prevail, left a sufficient Garrison in the
Fort (by him before fortified) under the Command of Thrasybulus, and he Himself
sailed away with the rest of the Army, and wasted and spoiled, Coos, and
Rhodes, and there got a great deal of provision for his Soldiers. As for the
Lacedaemonians, although they had lost most of their Fleet, and the Command of
the Sea, together with their General Mindarus; yet they were not discouraged,
but created Lysander Admiral of their Navy; a most Expert Soldier, Bold and
Daring, Lysander the Lacedemonian General.
and ready to undertake any thing, through all Hazards whatsoever. As soon as
he entered upon his Command, he raised no small number of Soldiers, throughout
all Pelopenesus, and furnished the Eleet with Seamen, as well as in the present
Circumstances he was able; and presently arriving at Rhodes, he got together as
many Ships from thence and the rest of the Towns, as he could, and then sailed
away with what Ships hehad, to Ephesus and Miletus; where being further
supplied from these Cities, and with others from Chios, he set forth from
Ephesus with a Fleet of Seventy Sail. But when he understood that Cyrus; the
Son of Darius, was sent from his Father, with Orders to assist the
Lacedaemonians in the War, he made a Darius sends his Son Cyrus to assist the
Lacedaemonians.
Journey to him to Sardis; and after several Arguments made to encourage the
Young Man, to prosecute the War against the Athenians, he forthwith received
from him Ten thousand Fifteen Sh. apiece Gold.
Daricans for Pay of his Soldiers, with Command from Cyrus to proceed, without
doubting his Assistance; for that he was commanded by his Father to spare no
Costs for the Supply of the Lacedaemonians, in whatsoever they should undertake.

From thence he returned to Ephesus, and sent for the Principal Men of every
Neighboring Town; and having entered into a League and Confederacy with them,
promised if the War succeeded, he would make every one of them a Prince in his
own City. Upon this each strove to exceed another, and supplied him with more
than was required; in so much as they abundantly furnished Lysander with all
things (...). Alcibiades sails to Ephesus.
Necessary for the War, sooner than could in reason be imagined.

When Alcibiades understood that Lysander was preparing a Fleet at Ephesus, he
made away with his whole Navy thither; where he entered the Port without
Opposition, and Anchored with many of his Vessels near Notium, and gave the
Command to Antiochus, the Captain of his own Vessel, with strict Charge not to
Fight till he returned. In the mean time, He Himself sailed with several Men of
War to Clazomenes; which City (yet standing firm to the Athenians) was greatly
oppressed by the Devastations made by some Exiles. But Antiochus, naturally
Rash and Hasty, earnestly desirous to perform something Remarkable by his own
Contrivance, without any Regard to the Command of Alcibiades, Man's Ten of the
Best Galleys, and Commands the Captains and Officers of the Fleet, to be ready
and prepared, with the rest of the Ships, to fall in where there should be
Occasion: Upon this he makes up to the Enemy, and dares 'em to Battle.
Lysander, being informed by some Deserters, that Alcibiades, Ant. Chapter 405. P.
369.
with the Best of the Men of War, were gone off, now conceived he had a sit
Opportunity put into his Hands, to do something worthy of the Spartan Name: In
Order thereunto, he makes forth the whole Fleet against Antiochus; and one of
the Ten (which sailed before the rest, and in which Antiochus was) he presently
sinks, and puts all the rest to Flight, and pursues them till the Athenian
Officers The Athenian Fleet routed at Ephesus.
in the other Vessels, in great Confusion, came up to their Assistance. And now
the Fleets on both sides were wholly engaged, not far off from the Land: In
short, the Athenians (by reason of the Disorder they were in) were beaten, with
the Loss of two and twenty of their Ships. Some few of the Men were taken, but
the rest swam to Shore. As soon as Alcibiades heard of the Defeat, he sailed
back with all Speed to Notium; and having sufficiently Manned, and Refitted his
Galleys, he sailed into the Enemies Port; but Lysander, not daring to Engage,
it was determined to sail away for Samos.

While these things were done, Thrasybulus the Athenian General, with fifteen
Galleys came up to Thasus, an Island in the Aegean Sea.
Thasus, where he routed the Citizens, and killed about two hundred of them;
and then so straightly besieged them, that at length they were enforced to
receive again those that favored the Athenians, into the City, and to take in
a Garrison, and renew their Confederacy with the Athenians. Thence Ant. Chr.
405.
he sailed to Abdera, the most Potent City of Thrace, and brought them over to
the Athenians. These were the things done by the Athenian Generals from the
time they left Athens.

About this time Agis, the Lacedemonian King, lay encamped with his Army Agis
the Lacedemonian King near surprising of Athens.
at Deoelea; where having Intelligence, that the Flower and Strength of the
Athenians were gone away with Alcibiades, he marched up to Athens silently in a
dark Night, having with him eight and twenty thousand Foot, half of which were
Old Soldiers, very well armed; the other half were but Raw, and (...).
Lightly Armed: Besides these, there followed him twelve hundred Horse, nine of
which were Beotians, and the rest from Peloponesus. He was not discerned by the
Watch, till he was close at hand; and so fell upon them unawares, and slew
some, and forced the rest within the Walls. Hereupon the Athenians, both Young
and Old, were commanded generally to betake themselves to Arms, to oppose the
Enemy; upon which, the Walls round the City were presently filled with them
that ran thither from all Quarters. As soon as it was Light, and the Athenian
Commanders saw the Army of the Enemy drawn up (...).
into a Body, four in Depth, and eight Furlongs or Stages in Front; they were
at first not little terrified, especially two parts of the Walls being now
possessed by the Enemy.

But after some time, they sent out a Body of Horse, equal in number to the
Lacedaemonians: Upon which the Horse on both sides engaged, in the face of them
upon the Walls: and the Contest was sharp for a considerable time: For the Ant.
Chr. 405. A Fight by Horse under the Walls of Athens.
Foot drawn up, as is said before, were as yet five Stages from the Walls; and
the Horse fought close under them. On the one side the Beotians, who had
formerly routed the Athenians at Delium, looked upon it as a Dishonorable
thing, to be worsted by them, whom they had before Conquered. On the other, the
Athenians in regard they were known by all them upon the Walls, who were then
Eyewitnesses either of their Valor, or Cowardice, resolved, through all
difficulties whatsoever, to be Conquerours: Accordingly at length they routed
the Lacedaemonians, and made a great Slaughter, and pursued those that fled,
even close up to the Body of their Foot; who making up to them, the Horse
returned into the City. Hereupon Agis (not conceiving it now a fit time to
besiege the City) encamped in A Place near the City.
Academia. The next Day, when the Athenians erected a Trophy, he drew out his
Army in Battalia, and Challenged them to Battle. Upon which the Athenians
marched out, and drew up in a Body under P. 370.
the Walls. The Lacedaemonians gave the Onset; but by reason of the showers of
Darts, wherewith they were galled from the Walls, they were forced to draw off
from the City. And, after great Devastations made in the rest of Attica, they
returned to Peloponesus.

As for Alcibiades, he sails with his whole Fleet, from Samos to Cuma, where
Ant. Chapter 405. Alcibiades unjustly wastes Cuma.
under color and pretense of feigned Crimes, laid to the Charge of the
Inhabitants, he wastes and spoils the Country. And at the first takes a great
multitude of Prisoners, and forces them away to his Ships; but the Cumeans,
with the whole Power of the City, made out against him, for the Defense and
Rescue of their Countrymen: Alcibiades for a while bore the Brunt, but being
overcome by fresh Supplies, both out of the City, and from the Country, the
Army was forced to fly to their Ships, and leave their Captives behind them.

Alcibiades, being much troubled to be thus baffled, sent for the Regiments
from Mitylene, and drew up his Army against the City, challenging the Cumeans
to a Battle. But none coming, forth, after many Devastations, he returned to
Mitylene: But the Cumeans sent to Athens, and put in their Bill against
Alcibiades, in form of Law, for that he had wasted and spoiled, a Confederated
City and Alcibiades accused at Athens by the Cumeans.
Country, which had not in the least done them any Injury; and many other
Accusations they brought against him: For some of the Garrison in Samos
(bearing him a Grudge) passed over to Athens, and accused him in the Public
Assembly, that he was a secret Friend to the Lacedaemonians, and kept a close
and intimate Correspondence with Pharnabasus, for this very purpose; that when
the War was ended, he might gain the Sovereignty of Athens. These Calumnies
being easily credited by the Common People, the Glory of Alcibiades began to
wain; and the rather by reason of his late Ill-success at Sea, and his
Miscarriages at Cuma.

Henceforward the People of Athens began to be jealous of Alcibiades, and
created ten other Commanders, Conon, Lysanias, Diomedon, Pericles, Erasmides,
Aristocrates, Conon made Admiral. Ant. Chapter 405. Alcibiades lost his Commission.
Archestratus, Protomachus, Thrasybulus, and Aristogenes. From among these they
chose out Conon to be Admiral; and forthwith sent him to Alcibiades, to demand
the Fleet from him, who gave up his Charge accordingly; but not daring to
return to Athens, sailed only with one Ship to Padyen in Thrace. For, besides
the Rage of the Common People, he was afraid many Crimes would be laid to his
charge; many (now he lay under the hatches) contriving how to load him with
Accusations, and to upbraid him with his former Faults; the greatest of which
was that concerning the Horses, for which there was set upon him a Mulct of
(...), but in the Margent (...).
Fifty Talents. For when Diomedes his Friend, lent him a Chariot with four
Horses, to go along with him, to Olympia, when he subscribed his Name (as the
Custom was) he affirmed the Horses to be his own; and when he was Victor by
that Chariot and Horses, he not only carried away the Glory, but detained the
Horses from him that so friendly and kindly reposed a Trust in him. Revolving
therefore all these things in his Mind, he was afraid the Athenians, now they
had an Advantage Alcibiades avoids Athens.
against him, would rip up all his former Miscarriages, and lay the greater
load upon him. Therefore he banished himself.

CHAP. X.
Hermocrates killed at Syracuse, attempting to surprise it.

IN this Olympiad, the (...). This was a new Race by a brace of Mules in a
Chariot, called Sinouris. Xen. Hell. lib. 1. Ush. Annal. 155.
Synouris was added to the Olympian Games. And Plistonax, King of the
Lacedaemonians, died, when he had reigned (...) but in the Margent (...).
Fifty Years. To whom succeeded Pausanias, who Governed fourteen Years. The
Inhabitants of Rhodes, out of Ialysus, Lindus and Camirus, Incorporated
themselves into one City, now called Rhodes. Hermocrates the Syracusian,
marched out of Selinunte with his Forces to Himera, and Encamped in the Suburbs
of that late ruined City. Hermocrates causes the dead Bodies to be conveyed to
Syracuse. P. 371.
Where after he had by diligent Enquiry, found out in what place the
Syracusians had their Post, he gathered up the dead Bodies of the Syracusians,
and put them in Chariots richly adorned, and sent them to Syracuse; and he
himself accompanied them, as far as it was lawful for a Banished Man to go, who
was not to set a Foot within the Confines of the Country; and there he
committed the Care of Conveying them to Syracuse to others. He did this to
bring an Odium upon Diocles (who opposed his Return) for his Neglect in not
Burying the Dead; and to regain the Good Will of the People to himself, for his
Humanity.

When the Bodies were brought to the City, there arose a Dissension amongst the
People. Diocles opposed the Burial of them, but the People were unanimously
against him. At length it was resolved, That they should be buried, and the
whole City graced the Solemnity with their Presence, and Diocles was Banished.
However Hermocrates was never the nearer being Restored; for they were very
jealous of him, that if ever he came into Authority, he would usurp the
Sovereignty. When therefore he understood that for the present, it was to no
purpose to strive against the Stream, he returned to Selinunte: But not long
after, being sent to some of his Faction, he hastens away with three thousand
Armed Ant. Chr. 405.
Men, and marching through Geloa in the Night, comes to the Place before
appointed, where all his Soldiers could not readily follow him; so that with a
few he comes up to the Gate in Acridana; where he finds some of his Friends,
who had before possessed themselves of the Places; there he stayed for the rest
of his Men, who came slowly on, and at length joined him. But the Design being
discovered, the Syracusians ran Armed into the Forum; where (a great multitude
of People being got together) they killed Hermocrates, and the most of his
Accomplices. The rest that escaped (after they had cited them to Appear, in
order for their several Trials) they condemned to Banishment. Some therefore
that were ill wounded, were by their Friends reported to be dead, to avoid the
present Fury of the People. Amongst whom was Dionysius, who usurpt the Tyranny.

CHAP. XI.
The Acts of Callicratides, the Lacedemonian General. The Fight at Sea in the
Harbor at Mitylene, between Conon and Callicratides.

THUS things passed for this Year, at the close of which Antigenes was chosen
Olymp. 93. 2. Ant. Chapter 404.
Magistrate of Athens; and Manius Aemilius, and Caius Valerius, Roman Consuls.
About this time Conon the Athenian Admiral, made up a Fleet of those Ships that
lay at Samos, and sent for others from the Confederates; and having now got
together a considerable Navy, he hasted away to fight the Enemy.

The Lacedaemonians appointed Callicratides Admiral; Lysander being discharged
of that Command for some time. This Callicratides was a very Young Man, of
Callicratides made Admiral of the Lacedaemonians.
a Plain and Honest Mind, and an Innocent Conversation; not as yet tainted with
the Vices and ill Manners of other Nations, and was highly esteemed among the
Spartans, for his Justice and Integrity; and every Man owned, that he never
swerved from the Rules of Justice, either in Public or Private Affairs: But on
the contrary, if at any time any offered to corrupt him with Bribes, he highly
resented it, and punished them accordingly. Having now received his Commission,
he sails to Ephesus, and there had the Fleet delivered up to him by Lysander;
which His Acts.
with the rest that he got together from other parts, made up a Navy of an
hundred and forty Sail. The Athenians then lay at Anchor at Delphinum.
Delphinum in Chios: Against whom he made with his whole Fleet, and in his way
besieged a Fort of the Athenians; the Garrison there, being about five hundred,
were terrified at the greatness of the Navy, and surrendered the Place upon
Articles of Safe Conduct. Then Callicratides demolished the Fort, and sailed
against A City in Ionia. Am. Chr. 404. P. 372.
Teios; and surprising the Place in the Night, got within the Walls, and sacked
the City. Passing thence to Lesbos, he lay with his Army before Methymna,
wherein was an Athenian Garrison. At first he prevailed little, though he pressed
hard upon it with daily Assaults: But not long after, being let in by the
Treachery of some within, he sacked the City, but put none to the Sword, and
restored the Place to the Methymneans. Things thus prosperously succeeding, he
hastened to Mitylene, and committing the Heavy-Armed Men, to Thorax the
Lacedemonian, commanded him to march with all speed with the Land-Army, whilst
he himself made with the Fleet, to the Shore. In the mean time Conon, the
Athenian Admiral, so prepared his Fleet, Conon the Athenian Admiral.
(which consisted of seventy Sail) for a Sea Fight, that he excelled all the
Admirals that were ever before him. With these he came to the Aid of Methymna;
but when he found it was taken, he lay with his Fleet at an Island, one of
those called the Hundred Islands. About Break of day next Morning, when he
discerned the Enemy's Fleet making up to him, conceiving it not advisable to
fight with a Fleet that was more than double his number, he resolved to sail
off; and having snapt up some of the Enemy's Galleys by the way, determined to
fight rather at Mitylene; concluding Ant. Chr. 404.
that if he were Conqueror, he could there pursue them with greater Advantage;
and if he were Conquered, he had the Port near at hand, wherein to shelter
himself. Upon this he Embarks all his Soldiers, and commands the Rowers to row
but gently and slowly, that the Enemy might come up nearer to him. The
Lacedaemonians, the nearer they came, were more eager to press on, in confidence
that they should overtake and destroy those that were behind in the Rear. But
Conon, by degrees falling down behind the rest, the Commanders of the best of
the Peloponesian Ships, pursued with all Eagerness. By this Means, the Rowers
now waxed faint, and were drawn away far from the rest of the Fleet: which
Advantage being observed by Conon, and that they now approch'd near to
Mitylene, he set up the Purple Flag from A Sea Fight at Mitylene, between Conon
and Callicratides.
his own Ship, which was a Sign to the Officers to join Battle. Upon which the
Athenians all at one time tack't suddenly about, and made upon the Enemy; and
the whole Fleet, reiterated the A Song used before Battle. Ant. Chr. 404.
Pean, and the Trumpets sounded a Charge.

Upon this sudden Change, the Peloponesians were amazed, and made what have
they could in this Extremity, to put themselves into a Line of Battle; but
having so little time to tack about, they were in great Confusion; especially
in regard the Ships, where their proper place was, which they had deserted,
were so far behind. Conon therefore, improving the Opportunity put into his
Hands, makes straight upon them; and before they could put themselves in Order
of Battle, pierces some of their Ships through, and brushes off the Oars of
others. But not one of those Ships that engaged on that Wing against Conon,
stirred; but with their Oars reversed, bravely kept still in one place, till
their whole Fleet came up. But the left Wing of the Athenian Fleet put them
(with whom they were engaged) to flight, and hotly pursued them a long time.
But when all the Peloponesian Fleet came up together, Conon considering the
multitude of his Enemies, drew off, and with forty Ships returned to Mitylene.
In the mean time the whole Peloponesian Fleet, which had spread themselves
every way, greatly amazed the Athenians (who had before pursued them that fled)
and lying in their way to prevent their Return to the City, forced them upon
Shore; whither being closely pursued by the Peloponesians, the Athenians
(seeing no other Remedy) forsook their Ships, and got to Land, and so fled to
Mitylene.

Callicratides having thus possessed himself of thirty Ships, and seeing that
the Enemy's Fleet was now broken, concluded that for the future he was to fight
upon Land; and therefore sailed straight to the City. Upon which Conon
expecting the City would be besieged, made what Preparation he could to block
up the Mouth of the Haven. For in that part where it was shallow, he sunk small
Vessels, laden with Stones; where it was deep, he filled great Ships of burden
with Stones, and P. 373. Ant. Chr. 404.
sixth them with Anchors. The Athenians, and a great number of Mitylenes, out of
the Country, flockt into the City through fear of the War, and forthwith
prepared all things necessary for their Defense in the Siege.

And now Callicratides commanded his Men to Land, and encamped near the City,
and there erects a Trophy for his Naval Victory. The next Day, with some of his
best Ships, he made toward the City, with a Design both to enter the Port, and
to break the Enemy's (...).
Boom; giving strict Command that none of them should be far from his own Ship.
Conon on the other hand Man's the Smaller Galleys, with some of his Soldiers,
and places them in the Mouth of the Haven in Front, against the Enemy, and puts
on Board the longer Vessels the other part of his Army. Some likewise A Stout
Fight in Defense of the Haven at Mitylene.
were ordered to guard the Shallows, that so the Port might be defended on
every side, both by Sea and by Land: And he himself with his own Squadron,
fought in that part which was open into the Harbor. They that were in the
great Ships, pelted the Enemies with Stones from the Main-Yard: Those that were
placed near the Shore, opposed them that endeavored to Land. The Peloponesians
all this while were nothing Inferior to their Enemies, in Courage and
Resolution; for, Charging with their Ships in a full Body, and with the Best of
their Men upon the Decks, it resembled both a Fight at Sea and Land together:
And they fell on with such Fury, that they even Dared to hurl themselves upon
the Fore-Castles of the Athenian Ant. Chr. 404.
Ships; judging that they whom they had so lately beaten, were not able to
stand the Shock. On the other hand, the Athenians and Mitylenes concluding
there was no other hopes for Safety left but in Victory, resolved to die rather
than to desert their Posts. This Obstinacy on both sides continued the Fight a
long time; whilst every one, without the least Fear, exposed himself to all
manner of Dangers: Many upon the Decks, were sorely galled by showers of Darts
on every hand: Some mortally wounded, fell from the Decks into the Sea; those
that were yet untouched, or at least unsensible of their Wounds, were resolved
notwithstanding to stand it out to the last. Many were killed by Stones cast
down upon them from the Main-yards, which being both very big, and thrown from
an high place, fell with the greater force and violence, At length, after the
Fight had continued a long time, and many fell on both sides, Callicratides
commanded a Retreat to be sounded, in order to refresh his Men: But not long
after he puts them on board again, and renews the Fight. And after a long
Conflict, by the multitude of his Ships (which overpowered the Athenians) and
Valor of those upon the Decks, he so far prevailed, that he drove the
Athenians from their Post: Upon which they fled into the inner part of the
Harbor; and now the Passage being open, Callicratides casts Ancho^ close to
Mitylene: For, gaining the Place about which the Contest was, he was possessed
of the whole Harbor, which yet was out of the Walls of the City. For the Old
City is a little Island, but that which is added of latter tim^^, lies straight
beyond into the Land: Between those two runs a certain Euripus, or Current of
the Sea, by which the City is more strong and defensible. Mitylene besieged by
the Lacedaemonians.
Callicratides therefore, having landed his Men, besieg the City, and begirt it
on every side. And this was the Condition of Mitylene at this time.

CHAP. XII.
Therma built in Sicily by the Carthaginians. They raise Forces to invade
Italy. The noble Temple at Agrigentum. The ancient Grandeur of that City. The
Riches of Gellias a Citizen there, and some others. Agrigentum besieged. The
Syracusians under Daphneus rout the Carthaginians near Agrigentum. Imilcar
seizes the Syracusian Fleet, and takes all the Provision going to Agrigentum,
which was afterward quit by the Inhabitants: Their miserable Condition. The
Phalarian Bull.

IN Sicily the Syracusians sent Ambassadors to Carthage, to complain of the
late War made upon them, and to persuade them to Peace for the time to come. To
which the Carthaginians returned a doubtful Answer. In the mean time they raise
again a numerous Army, and were unanimously resolved to do their utmost to
subdue all the Cities of Sicily: But before they transported their Armies, P.
374.
having got together out of Carthage, and other Cities in Africa many that were
willing to transplant themselves, they built a new City called Therma, near
Therma built in Sicily by the Carthaginians. Olymp. 93. 3. Ant. Chr. 403.
the hot Baths in Sicily.

The Affairs of this Year concluded; at Athens Callias was made chief
Magistrate, and at Rome, Lucius Furius, and Cneius Pompeius were created
Consuls. At this time the Carthaginians pusst up with their Successes in
Sicily, and coveting the gaining of the whole Island, determined to that end,
to raise a great Army; and thereof made Hannibal General (the same that had
razed Selinunte and Himera) and invested him with full power for the management
of the War. But because he endeavored to excuse himself by reason of his Age,
they joined Imilco in Commission with him, the Son of Hanno, one of the same
Family. These Generals consulted together, and sent some eminent Carthaginians
with great Sums of Money, to raise Soldiers both out of Spain and the Now
called Majorca and Minorca near Spain.
Baleary Islands. They raised likewise throughout Lybia, Carthaginians and
Africans, and out of every City such as were most able for War. There came
likewise to them from the Nations and Princes of their Confederates Abroad,
both Mauritanians and Numidians, and some from the Parts near to Cyrene.
Besides these, there were transported into Africa, Campanians hired out of
Italy. These Campanians they had experienced to be very useful to them, when
those whom they had left in Sicily, by reason of some old Grudge they bore the
Carthaginians, were suspected to be ready to side with the Sicilians. At
length, when all the Forces together were mustered at Carthage, Timeus reports
they were not much above an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Men; but Ephorns
affirms that they were Three Hundred Thousand.

The Carthaginians now prepare all things necessary for the Transporting of The
Invasion of Sicily. Ant. Chr. 403.
the Army; they equipt out all their Men of War, and brought together no less
than a Thousand Transport Ships. Forty of their Galleys were sent before into
Sicily, which were presently encountered with as many by the Syracusians at
Eryx, where after a long and sharp Dispute, Fifteen of the Carthaginian Ships
were sunk, the rest by the advantage of Night fled clear away. When the News of
this Defeat was brought to Carthage, Hannibal the General sailed away with
Fifty Galleys, contriving both to make the Enemy's Victory fruitless, and the
better likewise to secure the transport of his Army. When the coming of
Hannibal was noised through the Island, all were of Opinion that he intended
forthwith to transport all his Forces thither: Upon which, all the Cities
(hearing of the greatness of his Preparations, and that they were now like to
lay all at stake) were struck with fear and amazement. The Syracusians
therefore sent Ambassadors both to the Grecians in Italy, and to the
Lacedaemonians, to desire aid and assistance. They sent Letters likewise to all
the Magistrates of the Cities up and down, to entreat them that they would stir
up the People to join every where in Arms for the common Defense of the Liberty
of their Country. The Agrigentines considering the greatness of the
Carthaginian Army, concluded (as the thing was in truth) that they were
likeliest first to feel and undergo the pressure and weight of the War; and
therefore determined that all the Corn and other Fruits of the Field, and every
thing else that was valuable, should be brought out of the Country into the
City: For at that time both the City and Country of the Agrigentines were very
rich; Ant. Chr. 403.
of which it will not be inconvenient to say something here more largely. Their
Vineyards were large and very pleasant, and most part of the Country abounded
with Olives, so much as that they were transported and sold at Carthage. P.
375. A Description of the Riches of Agrigentum in Sicily.
For inasmuch as Africa at that time was not planted with this sort of Fruit,
the Agrigentines grew very rich by their Trading with the Lybians. Many Marks
of their great Wealth remain to this very Day; to speak a little of which, I
conceive will not be a digression from the present Subject.

And First, The stately. Buildings and Ornaments of their Temples, especially
the Temple of Jupiter, do sufficiently witness the Grandeur and Riches of the
Men of that Age. The rest of the Sacred Buildings, are either burnt or
destroyed by the frequent Stormings of that City. When the Temple of Jupiter
Olympus was near to the laying on the Roof, a stop was put to the Building by
the War; and the City being afterward sacked, the Agrigentines were never able
(from that time to this Day) to finish it. This Temple at Agrigentum was Three
Hundred and Forty Foot in length, Threescore in breadth, The Description of the
Olympian Temple in Agrigentum. Ant. Chapter 403.
and in height (besides the Foundation,) an Hundred and Twenty. It Is the
greatest in the Island, and for the largeness of its Foundation, may compare
with any other elsewhere: For though the Design was never finished, yet the
ancient Platform is still visible; for whereas some build up their Temples only
with Walls, or compass them round with Pillars, this is built both with the one
and the other; for together with the Walls, there rise lofty Pillars round on
the outside of the Wall, and Foursquare within. The Compass of every one of
these Pillars on the outside, are Twenty Foot, and so far distant one from
another, as that a Man may well stand between each; within they are of the
compass of Twelve Foot. The largeness and height of the Portico's are
wonderful; on the East Side of which, is carved the Giants War; of exquisite
and incomparable Workmanship. On the West Side is carved the Destruction of
Troy, where may be seen all the brave Heroes and Commanders in their proper
Habits, most admirably represented. In those former times likewise there was a
Pond out of the Walls of the City cut by Art, Near a Mile.
Seven Furlongs in Compass and About Ten Yards.
Twenty Cubits in depth: Into this, with wonderful Art, were drawn Currents of
Water, by which they were abundantly supplied with all sorts of Fish ready for
their use, at all public Entertainments. Upon this Pond likewise fell
Multitudes of Swans and other Fowl which entertained the Spectators with great
Delight.

The Grandeur of the City was likewise apparent, by the stateliness of the Ant.
Chr. 403.
Sepulchers, some of which were adorned with the charging Horses of the Heroes
there interred; others with those little Birds that the Children, both Girls
and Boys fed and bred up in their Parents Houses. All which, Timeus affirms he
saw in his time. In the Ninety Second Olympiad there were no less than Three
Hundred Chariots of Agrigentum all with white Horses, that attended upon
Exenetus, the Victor at the Olypmick Games, and brought him mounted in a
stately Chariot with great Pomp into the City. Their nice and delicate way of
Living (till it came to their very Children) both as to their Food and Raiment,
was to that degree, that they wore Garments of Cloth of Gold, and had their
Water-Pots and Boxes of Ointment, of Gold and Silver. There was one Gellias the
Richest Man of all the Agrigentines, at that time, who built several Gellias's
Riches.
Rooms for public Entertainment in his own House, and placed Porters at his
Gates, charging them to invite all Strangers that passed by, to come in to be
his Guests. Many others of the Agrigentines imitated his Example, who made it
their business (after the ancient manner) to converse freely and courteously
with them they thus invited. And therefore Empedocles says thus of them --
Hospitibus sancti portus, sine labe malorum.


It happened once, that Five Hundred Gelonian Horsemen came to his House in
Ant. Chr. 403.
Wintertime; whom he liberally entertained, and furnished every one of 'em out
of his Wardrobe with Cloaks and Coats. Polyclitus in his History declares, P.
376.
that when he was a Soldier in Agrigentum, he saw a Wine-Cellar in his House,
in which were contained Three Hundred great (...).
Vessels cut out of one and the same Rock, each of which received an Hundred
(...).
Hogsheads. And that near to these was placed a Cistern of pure white tempered
Mortar, containing a Thousand Hogsheads, out of which the Liquor ran into the
Vessels. It Is said that this Gellias was of a very mean Presence, Gellias a
Rich Man of Aggenmtum, of mean Aspect, but admirable Parts.
but of admirable Parts and Ingenuity. Being once sent an Ambassador to the
Centuripines; a People in Sicily: Their City called Centuripinum. Plin. Not.
Hist. lib. 3. c. 8.
Centuripines; when he entered into the Assembly, all the People fell a
Laughing, seeing the mean Aspect of the Man, so disagreeable to his great Fame
and Reputation in the World. Upon which, he made this sharp Retort, That what
they saw in him was not to be wondered at, because the Agrigentines always send
the comliest and handsomest Men to the noblest Cities, but to those that were
mean and of little note such as himself.

And not only Gellias, but likewise many other Agrigentines were very rich.
Antisthenes, another rich Man.
Antisthenes surnamed Rhodes, at the Marriage of his Daughter, feasted all the
Citizens through every Street, and procured above Eight Hundred Chariots to
attend upon the Bride: And not only Horsemen out of the City, but many who were
invited out of the Country, went before the new Married Lady in Ant. Chr. 403.
great Pomp and Splendor. To add to the Solemnity of the Day, there were great
Preparations for Illuminations in the City; for he ordered that as soon as they
saw a Flame of Fire upon the top of the Castle, the Altars in all the Temples,
and the Piles of Wood in all the Streets, and the Fuel he had prepared and
provided in the Taverns, should be kindled together all at the same moment:
Whose Command being observed at the very same instant, when the Bride was led
forth by a Multitude that bore Torches before her, the whole City was as it
were in a Flame, and the common Streets and Ways of the City were not able to
contain those that attended at this Solemnity; all were so zealous to further
and encourage the Gallantry and Magnificence of the Man. At that time there
were more than Twenty Thousand Citizens of Agrigentum; but taking in Strangers
with them, they were no less than (...).
Two Hundred Thousand.

It is reported of Antisthenes, when he saw his Son pressing upon a poor Man
his Neighbor, and would force him to sell a little Spot of Land to him, he
chid his Son, and advised him to forbear a while; but his covetous Desire
increasing the more, he told him he should not strive to make his Neighbor
Poor, but rather desire he should become Rich; for being Rich, he would covet a
greater piece of Land, which when he was not able to pay for lack of ready
Money, he would be content to raise Money by the Sail of that which he then had.

In short, the Excess and Luxury of the Agrigentines, by reason of their Ant.
Chapter 403.
Riches was such, that not long after, in the very height of the Siege, which
ended in the Sacking of the City, a Decree was made, that none of them that
were upon the Guard in the Night, should have above a Bed, a Tent, a Woollen
Mantle and Two Pillows. When this seemed a hard Law, and disturbance to their
Ease and Repose, we may easily judge how soft and luxurious they were in all
other things. As we were not willing to let these things pass altogether, so we
shall now break off, lest we omit things more useful and necessary.

The Carthaginians having landed their Forces in Sicily, marched straight
against Agrigenttum besieged by the Carthaginians.
the Agrigentines, and divided their Army into Two Parts, and encamped in Two
several Places; one Camp was upon certain Hills, where were placed Forty
Thousand Spaniards and Africans; the other was near the City, fortified with a
deep Trench and a Wall. At the first they sent Ambassadors to the Agrigentines,
P. 377.
to invite them to join with them as Confederates, and if they did not approve
of that, then that they would be neuters, and enter into League of Peace and
Amity with the Carthaginians. When both Offers were rejected, they forthwith
pressed on the Siege with all Vigor. Upon this, the Agrigentines listed all
that were able to bear Arms, and marshalled them, some of which they placed
upon the Walls, and others were appointed as Reserves to relieve their Fellows
as occasion offered. Dexippus the Lacedemonian was the Man that directed them
in all things, who was lately come to their Assistance with Five Ant. Chr. 403.
Hundred Soldiers from Gela: For he lived about that time (as Timeus relates)
at Gela, in great Esteem for the sake of his Country: And therefore Application
was made to him by them of Agragentum, that he would hire as many Soldiers as
possibly he could, and come to their Relief: Besides these, they hired Eight
Hundred Campanians who had formerly served under Imilcar. These kept the Hill
Athenea which lay over, and commanded the City, a very commodious Post.

Imilcar and Hannibal the Carthaginian Generals having viewed the Walls, and
found out a Place where it was most easy to enter, brought Two Towers of
Agrigentum Besieged.
incredible bigness against the City: The first Day out of these they made an
Assault, and after they had killed and cut off many of the Citizens, sounded a
Retreat. The next Night the Besieged made a Sally and burnt the Engines: But
Hannibal intending to assault the Town in several Places at once, commanded his
Soldiers to pull down all the Monuments and Tombs, and with the Rubbish to
raise Mounts as high as the Walls, which was presently done, forwarded by so
great a Multitude. But then a sudden Pang of (...).
Religion seized upon the Army; for Thero's Monument (a large and stately
Structure) was beaten down by a Thunderbolt, which by the advice of some of the
Soothsayers then present, put a stop to the perfecting of the Design, and
forthwith the Plague A Plague among the Carthaginians. Ant. Chr. 403.
broke out in the Army, by which many were destroyed in a short time, and not a
few seized with tormenting and miserable Pains, among whom Hannibal himself
perished. Some that were upon the Watch, reported they saw in the Night, the
Apparitions of them that were dead. Upon this, Imilcar seeing the Soldiers
were possessed with the fear and awe of the Gods, first forbore to demolish the
Sepulchers: Afterward he made (according to the Custom of his Country)
Supplications to the Deities, and sacrificed a Boy to Saturn, and threw Note
the malice of the Devil, and the blindness of the poor Heathens.
a Company of Priests into the Sea, as a Sacrifice to Neptune. Notwithstanding
all this, Imilcar forsook not the Siege, but choking up the River with Rubbish
close to the Walls, brought up his Engines, and renewed his Assaults every Day.

In the mean time, the Syracusians weighing the Condition of the Agrigentines,
and fearing lest they should undergo the same Fate with them of Himera and
Selinunte, were desirous to send them aid; And to that end having increased
their Army by the Forces of their Confederates from Italy and Messina, they
made Daphneus General, and having mustered the Army, they set forwards, and in
their March were joined by the Camarineans, Geleans, and some others out of the
heart of the Country, and all marched strait for Agrigentum, having a Fleet of
Thirty Galleys, which sailed all along over against them near the Shore.
Daphneus had with him above Thirty Thousand Foot, and no less than Five
Thousand Horse. Imilcar upon intelligence of the approach of the Enemy, sent
forth against them the Spaniards.
Iberians and Campanians, and no less than Forty Thousand out of the rest of
the Army. When the Syracusians had passed the River Himera, they were met by
the Barbarians: Upon which, Battle was joined, and after the Dispute Ant. Chr.
403.
had continued a long time, at length the Syracusians got the Day, who routed
the whole Army, with the Slaughter of above Six Thousand Men, and The
Carthaginians routed.
pursued the rest to the very City. But the Syracusian General perceiving his
Men to be in disorder and confusion by their Pursuit, began to fear lest
Imilcar breaking in upon them with the rest of his Army should recover the Day;
for he remembered how Himereus had formerly lost all by such an Oversight. The
P. 378.
Barbarians flying into that part of the Camp which lay nearest to Agrigentum,
the Besieged concluded they were beaten and fled, and therefore earnestly
desired their Commanders that they would lead them forth, crying out, Now was
the time come for the utter ruin and destruction of their Enemies. But the
Officers (whether corrupted by Money (as it was reported) or possessed with
fear lest Imilcar should slip into the Town when the Soldiers were gone forth)
would not stir, but commanded the Soldiers to abide within the Town; by which
means they that fled, came safe into the Camp. But Daphneus marched forward,
and encamped in the place where the Enemy before lay; to whom flockt presently
the Soldiers out of the Town with Dexippus, and forthwith a Council of War was
held, where all showed themselves very uneasy and discontented, that the
opportunity was neglected in taking full. Revenge of the Conquered Ant. Chr. 40.
Barbarians, and that their Officers when they might have so easily destroyed
them by a Sally out of the Town, had suffered so many Ten Thousands clearly to
escape. Hereupon a Tumult arising in the Assembly with a great noise and
clamor, one Menes a Camarinean, one of the Officers, stood up, and accused the
Commanders of Agrigentum to such a degree, that he so exasperated the whole
Assembly, that they that were accused, could not be heard to speak for
themselves; but Four of them were out of hand stoned by the enraged Multitude.
The Fifth called Argeus, in favor of his Youth, was discharged. Dexippus
likewise the Lacedemonian was ill spoken of, that he who was General of so
considerable a Body of Men, and ever esteemed a Man more expert in Martial
Affairs than most others, should carry it so basely and treacherously. After
the Council was broke up, Daphneus endeavored to force the Carthaginians Camp;
but discerning it to be excellently well Fortified, drew off. Then he blockt up
all the Passages with his Horse, intercepted the Forragers, and prevented all
Provision being brought in to the Enemy, whereby they were reduced to great
straits and necessities; for not daring to engage, and yet in the mean time
starving for want of Bread, their Misery was the greater, and many were
famished to Death.

Upon this, the Campanians, and almost all the rest of the Mercenaries in a
Body came to Imilcar's Tent, to demand their allowance of Bread, and threatened
to fall off to the Enemy if they had it not. But Imilcar being informed that
the Syracusians had loaded their Ships with abundance of Corn for Agrigentum
(upon which he relied as his last shift) persuaded the Soldiers to be patient
Ant. Chr. 403.
a few Days, and in the mean time, pawned to them the drinking Vessels of the
Carthaginian Soldiers: Hereupon he sent for Forty Galleys from Panormus and
Motya, and lay in wait for the Ships that brought the Provision. For the
Syracusians never suspected the Carthaginians durst appear at Sea, being now
Winter, and who had some time before lost their Power and Dominion there.
Therefore sailing on with great assurance, they were on a sudden attacked by
Imilcar, with Forty Sail; who presently sunk Eight of their Ships, and drove
the rest upon the Shore: All which being thus taken, the Scene of Affairs was
so changed on both sides, that the Campanians that were with the Agrigentines
P. 379.
(perceiving the desperate Condition of the Grecians) corrupted with Fifteen
Talents, fell away to the Carthaginians. Besides, the Agrigentines at the
beginning of the Siege, when things went ill with the Carthaginians, were very
profuse and prodigal, both in their Corn and other things, and therefore when
the Affairs of the Barbarians were much altered to their advantage, the
Besieged (being so many Thousands penned up together) were insensibly and by
degrees brought into great want. It Is reported that Dexippus the Lacedemonian
also was bribed with Fifteen Talents; for he on a sudden told the Italian
Commanders, that it was better to withdraw, and carry on the War in some other
Place, for here they were likely to be starved. The Officers therefore
considering of Ant. Chr. 403.
what he had said, marched away with the Army to the Sea, as if now the time
limited by their Commissions had been determined.

After their departure, the Generals with the other Officers met in a Council
of War, and ordered that an Account should be taken what Provision was left in
the City; and when a Return was made of the Scarcity, they saw it was
absolutely necessary to quit the Place; whereupon they commanded all to be
ready to be gone the next Night. Upon this, there was a lamentable outcry The
lamentable Condition of the Inhabitants of Agrigentum.
in every House throughout the whole City, of Men, Women and Children, being in
a distraction through fear and dread of the Enemy on the one hand, and care of
their Goods and Estates on the other, which now they must be forced in a great
measure to leave to the Rapine of the Barbarians, and as an aggravation, being
those very things wherein a little before they placed their happiness. However,
at length, seeing that Fortune had stripped them of all their Riches, they judged
it was wisdom to do what they could to save their Lives. Then might be seen not
only the mighty wealth of a flourishing City forsaken, but also a multitude of
miserable People left behind; for those that were sick and infirm, were
disregarded by them of their own Family, whilst every one sought to preserve
himself; and those that through Old Age could not remove, were in the like
condition. Many that preferred Death before the Ant. Chr. 403.
leaving of their Country, killed themselves, choosing rather to dye in their
own Houses. But that multitude of People that did go forth, were guarded by the
Soldiers to Gela, so that all the Ways and Country toward Gela, swarmed with
a promiscuous multitude of Women and Children; amongst whom, were young Ladies,
who though they had now changed their former soft and delicate way of Living,
into the fatigues and sorrows of tedious Journeys, yet being quickened and
stirred up by fear, bore all Difficulties with eminent Patience. They all came
at length safe to Gela; and afterward Leontium was given to them by the
Syracusians to inhabit.

Imilcar entering the City with his Army, not without some fear and jealousy,
Agirgentum taken by the Carthagineans.
killed almost all he found in it, not sparing those that fled into the Temples
for refuge, but haling of them from the Altars, slew them with great cruelty.
There (its said) Gellias, who was so eminent above the rest of his Countrymen,
in the greatness of his Wealth, and integrity of his Conversation, ended his
Life with the Loss of his Country: For he with some others fled to the Temple
of Minerva, hoping the Carthaginians would not commit any outrages against the
Gods: But when he perceived the cursed Impiety of the Men, he set Fire to the
Temple, and together with the Wealth that was there (consecrated to the Gods)
burnt himself; by one act preventing Three Evils as he conceived; the Impiety
of Gellias, burns himself in the Temple.
the Enemy against the Gods, the Rapine and Plunder of the vast Treasure that
was there, and (that which was the greatest) the abuse of his own Body.

Imilcar having spoiled and plundered all Places both Religious and Profane,
got together from the Spoil so much Riches as a City that had been inhabited by
Two Hundred Thousand Men, and never taken before since it was built; and that
was the richest of all the Grecian Cities, might by an easy Computation Ant.
Chr. 403.
in that time heap together; especially since the Citizens made it their
business to be stately and magnificent in a wonderful manner in every thing
they undertook: For many curious Pictures drawn with admirable Art, and an
infinite P. 380.
number of Statues of all sorts, cut and wrought with singular ingenuity, were
found here by the Conqueror. The best and choicest things (among which was the
Phalarian Bull) he sent to Carthage; the rest of the Spoil he The Phalarian
Bull.
caused to be sold under the Spear. Timeus in his History, with great
earnestness denies that there ever was any such Bull, when as Fortune since has
disproved him; for Scipio Africanus Two Hundred and Threescore Years after this
destruction when Carthage was razed, amongst other things which were then at
Carthage, restored that famous Bull to the Agrigentines, which remains at
Agrigentum now at the time of the writing of this History; of which I have been
the more desirous to speak, because Timeus with much bitterness inveighs
against the Historians that were before him as altogether unpardonable; and yet
he himself in those things wherein he most pretends an earnest and diligent
search after Truth, does nothing but merely trifle; for in my Opinion we ought
to have a favorable regard and respect to those Authors we differ from,
because they are but Men, and the truth of things that are long before Ant.
Chr. 403.
past, are not easy to be discovered. On the other Hand, those Writers that
are careless and negligent in their Inquiries, are justly to be censured; and
those especially may be well judged regardless of Truth, who make it their
Business to flatter some, and out of Envy to cast Dirt upon others.

CHAP. XIII.
The Syracusian Officers accused. Dionysius made General of the Syracusians. He
moves to have the Exiles recalled. He Is invested with the sole Command. At
length by several Artifices gains the Sovereignty.

IMilcar having gained the City after Eight Months Siege, a little before the
Winter Solstice, did not presently sack it, to the end the Soldiers might
quarter there all the Winter. When the ruin of Agrigentum was noised Abroad,
the whole Island was struck with such Terror, that some of the Sicylians fled
to Syracuse, and others transported themselves, their Wives, Children and
Movables into Italy. When the Agrigentines that had escaped, came to Syracuse,
they accused the Commanders, affirming that they had betrayed their Country
into the Enemies Hand; but the Syracusians cast the blame upon the other
Sicilians, because they chose such a sort of Officers who endangered the loss
of all Sicily by their Treachery.

But when a Senate was called at Syracuse, they were in such a Consternation as
none durst move or advise any thing concerning the War. And being all thus at a
stand Dionysius the Son of Hermocrates renewed the Accusation against the
Officers, That they had Betrayed Agrigentum to the Carthaginians, and stirred
up the People forthwith to take Revenge, and not to wait for Formalities of Law
in execution of Justice. But Dionysius being Fined according Ant. Chr. 403.
to Law by the Magistrates as a disturber of the public Peace, Philistus (who
afterward writ a History, a very rich Man) paid the Fine for him, and bid him
speak his Mind freely, and promised him to pay whatever was imposed upon him,
if they fined him all the Day long.

Dionysius being thus encouraged, he stirred up the People, and filled the
Assembly with Tumult by his Criminations, charging the Commanders, that for
Dionysius's Accusation of the Officers at Agrigentum.
Bribes they had drawn off and forsaken the Agrigentines. He accused likewise
many others of the best of the Citizens, traducing them that they aimed to
introduce an Oligarchy; and told the Senate, That Commanders were not to be
chosen according to their greatness in Power, but according to the Good Will
and Regard they bore toward the People: For the Great Ones Lording it over
them, had them in Contempt, and enriched themselves by the Losses of their
Country; but Men of Low Fortunes never attempt any thing of such a nature,
knowing their own disability.

When he had spoken what he had designed, and so agreeable to the Humor P. 381.
of the People, he set all the Assembly on a Flame; for the People before bore
a secret Hatred to the Commanders, because they were suspected to have dealt
falsely in the management of the War, and now being the more exasperated by the
Speech of Dionysius, they forthwith deprived them of their Commands, and chose
others in their room, amongst whom was Dionysius, a Dionysius chosen one of the
Generals.
Man of great Esteem and Reputation with the Syracusians, for his approved
Valor in several Battles against the Carthaginians.

Having gained this step of Preferment, he contrived all ways imaginable how to
advance to the Sovereign Power over his Country; for after he was invested Ant.
Chr. 403. His Contrivances to gain the Sovereign. Power.
with the Command, he never associated with the other Commanders, nor joined
with them in any Council of War. In the mean time he caused Rumors to be
spread Abroad, that they kept secret Correspondence with the Enemy, hoping
thereby to get them laid aside, and so to have the sole Command of the Army
lodged in himself. While he was executing these Projects, the most prudent
Citizens suspected him, and every Assembly gave very hard and ill Words. On the
other hand, the common People ignorant of his Deceit and Fraud, praised every
thing he did, and published every where, that now at length they had got a
faithful and constant Guardian and Defender of the City.

The Consults concerning Preparations for War being very frequent, and
Dionysius discerning that the Syracusians were in a great Fright, he advised to
recall the Exiles: For he said it was a very absurd thing to receive Aids of
Strangers from Italy and Peloponesus, and yet to be backward in making use of
their own Countrymen to withstand the common Danger, who are solicited by the
Enemy with great Promises of Reward to join with them, and yet are content to
wander up and down amongst Strangers, and dye rather than do any thing
prejudical to their Country. For though they were Banished for stirring Ant.
Chr. 403.
up Sedition in the City, yet such kindness showed 'em, would in gratitude
oblige them to fight cheerfully for their Country. When he had spoken many
things to this purpose, he at length procured the Suffrages of the People; for
none of his Colleagues durst contradict him, for that they both feared the Rage
of the People, and likewise plainly saw, that nothing would redound thence, but
hatred to themselves, and more love and favor to him.

Dionysius did this, for that he looked upon the Exiles to be Men fit for his
purpose, such as were given to change, and therefore ready Tools to make use of
to serve his Ambition; who would delight to see their Enemies Throats cut,
their Goods and Estates confiscate, and themselves restored. The Decree
therefore for the recalling the Banished being published, they presently
returned.

And now Letters coming from Gela, to desire Assistance to be speedily sent
them, Dionysius made use of this fair opportunity for the carrying on his
Design; for he forthwith marched to Gela with Two Thousand Foot, and Four
Dionysius relieves Gela.
Hundred Horse, where Dexippus the Lacedemonian was Governor, with a strong
Garrison: When he found the City in a Seditious Uproar raised by some against
the People, he condemns them that were accused in a Public Assembly, puts them
to Death, and confiscates their Estates, and with part of the Money paid the
Soldiers, that were in Garrison under Dexippus, all their old Arrears, and the
rest he distributed amongst the Soldiers that came with him from Syracuse,
declaring their Pay ordered by the City should be double. By this Ant. Chr. 403.
means he wan both the Hearts of the Soldiers at Gela, and of those that went
with him thither. The Geleans likewise cried him up to the Skies, as one that
had freed them from Slavery: So that out of Envy to the great Men of the City,
they decreed the Supreme Power to Dionysius: Upon which, they sent Ambassadors
to Syracuse to publish there his Praises, and likewise to show the Decrees of
the City, by which they had honored him with many marks of respect.

In the mean time Dionysius endeavored to bring over Dexippus into his
Councils, P. 382.
but not being able to prevail, he determined to return to Syracuse with all
his Forces. But the Geleans hearing that the Carthaginians had determined to
set upon their City with their whole Power before any other, earnestly
entreated Dionysius that he would not leave them, nor suffer their City to
undergo the same Calamity with them of Agrigentum. To whom he promised to
return in a short time with greater Forces; and so left Gela.

Afterward when the People came from the Theater from the Plays, Dionysius at
that very Hour returned into Syracuse; whereupon the Citizens came thronging
about him, and inquired what News he brought concerning the Carthaginians: To
whom he answered, That he had nothing to say of them, in regard their own
Officers and Governors were more mischievous to the Commonwealth than the
Enemies themselves; for whilst the Citizens led away Ant. Chr. 403.
by their Flatteries, were diverted with Sports and Plays, they themselves
impoverished the Commonwealth, and defrauded the Soldiers of their Pay. And
now, that the Enemy at this very time, is making incredible Preparation for
War, and are even upon the Borders of Syracuse, with a mighty Army, yet it is
not at all by them regarded. To what end they acted thus, he suspected long
since, but now he saw clearly their Drift. For Imilcar (he said) had sent by an
Herald to him, pretending to redeem some Captives, but in truth secretly to
persuade him not to use that Authority he had, to pry too narrowly into things
that were in doing, or at least not to obstruct them, if he was not willing to
join in the Execution. Therefore he declared he was not willing any longer to
be General, but was ready to lay down his Commission. For it was altogether
intolerable that he only should hazard the loss of all he had with the rest of
the Citizens, whilst others made Merchandise of their Country: Yea, by this
means, he should become Partaker with them in their Treachery. The People being
enraged by what he had said, and his Words divulged through the whole Army,
every one went to his own House, in great fear and perplexity.

The next Day an Assembly was called, where he loaded his Fellow Commanders
with many Accusations; and by stirring up the People against them, greatly
advanced his own Reputation. At length some in the Assembly cried out, to make
him Generalissimo; and not to have the thing to be done when the Enemy was even
Battering the Walls; alleging that the greatness of the War required a General
that was able to do eminent Service for the Commonwealth. And for the Traitors,
it was better to inquire of them in another Ant. Chr. 403.
Assembly hereafter; being now it was not so agreeable to the present posture
of Affairs. It was also remembered, that heretofore, when Gelon had sole the
Command, they had overcome (...). Dionysius made sole General.
Three Hundred Thousand Carthaginians.

Upon this, the People (who are always apt to close with the worst Advice)
suddenly made Dionysius General with sole and absolute Power.

After things thus succeeded according to his Hearts Desire, he signed an
Order, that the Soldiers should receive double Pay; alleging, that hereby
they would be encouraged to fight more readily and cheerfully; and bid the
Syracusians not trouble or disturb themselves about Money, for there would be
ways readily found out to bring in sufficient Supplies. But when the Assembly
was broken up, there were many of the Syracusians that condemned what was done,
as if they had had no hand in confirming it: For after they had more seriously
considered the thing, they foresaw Tyranny would follow. Thus while they sought
after Freedom, they most imprudently placed a Tyrant over their Country.

Dionysius therefore to prevent the change of the Peoples Minds, began to
contrive how he might procure a Guard for his Person: If he could gain this
point, he concluded he could easily fix himself in the Sovereignty. Upon this,
he commanded all that were able to bear Arms, not above Forty Years of Age,
with Thirty Days Provision and their Arms, to march to the City Leontium: For
this City was a Garrison belonging to the Syracusians, full of P. 383.
Strangers and Exiles; whom he hoped would be assistant to him, being Men given
to Innovations; and to this he was the more encouraged, for that he Ant. Chr.
403.
knew but few of the Syracusians would be there. For the better effecting of
this Design, he encamped all Night in the Field; and as he lay there, he
Dionysius his Project to get a Guard.
feigned a Plot against his own Person, and caused a great Noise and Clamor to
be made by his Servants and Attendants, upon which he fled to the Castle: Where
after he had kindled several Fires, he sent for a strong Guard, and so passed
that Night.

As soon as it was Day, and the Multitude were got together into the Leontium.
City, he used many probable Arguments suited to the matter in Hand, and brought
over the People to give him liberty to choose Six Hundred Men, such as he
thought best for his Guard. And herein Dionysius is said to imitate Pisistratus
the Athenian, for he wilfully wounding himself (as if he had been assaulted by
Treachery) came forthwith into the Assembly, and by that means (as it is
reported) got a Guard from the Citizens, by whose help he gained the Supreme
Authority.

By the same Fraud, Dionysius cheating the People, became absolute Lord and
Master over his Country; for he presently chose above a Thousand Men, such as
were strong in Body, and low in Purse, and put them in Arms, and encouraged
them with many large and glorious Promises. Then he brought all the Mercenary
Soldiers to an entire Observance, and Obedience to him, by his winning and
courteous Speeches. He made an alteration likewise in the Ant. Chapter 403.
Regiments, giving Commissions to them that he could most trust. Then he sent
away Dexippus the Lacedemonian into Greece, for he suspected him, lest he
should become an Head to the Syracusians, in case they should take an occasion
to seek to recover their Liberty. And now he sends for the Mercenaries from
Gela, and gets together from every Place, all the Exiles and Lewd Fellows, not
doubting but by the help of these to establish himself in the Kingdom.

After his Return to Syracuse, when he had lodged his Forces in the (...).
Dionysius declares himself King.
Arsenal, he openly declared himself King: The Syracusians took this
grievously, but were necessitated to be silent, because it was not in their
power to do any thing else: For the whole City was full of Strangers that were
in Arms, and all were in fear of the Carthaginians, who had a vast Army near at
Hand.

Dionysius now presently marries the Daughter of Hermocrates (he who had routed
the Athenians in Sicily) and gave his own Sister in Marriage to Polyxenus,
Hermocrates his Brother in Law. This he did to strengthen himself, by matching
into an Honorable Family. After this, he summoned a General Council, and
contrived all ways imaginable, how to be rid of Daphneus and Demarchus, the
most powerful of all his Adversaries.

Thus Dionysius from a Scrivener, and a Man of poor and mean Abstract, got the
Sovereignty of the greatest City among the Grecians, and maintained Ant. Chr.
403.
his Dominion all the Days of his Life for the space of Thirty Eight Years.
What things he afterward did, and how he enlarged his Dominion, we shall
relate in its proper Place: For very probably he gained the largest Dominion,
and of the longest continuance of any that ever has been compassed by
Usurpation.

After the Taking of the City Agrigentum, the Carthaginians transported to
Carthage all the dedicated things laid up in the Temples, the Statues and
Things of greatest value; and having burnt all the Temples to Ashes, and
plundered the City, they quartered there all Winter: And in the mean time
furnished themselves with Engines and all sorts of Weapons, with a Design to
Besiege Gela, the first thing they did the next Spring.

CHAP. XIV.
The Famous Battle of Arginuse at Sea, wherein the Athenians, were Victors. The
Officers accused for not Burying the Dead. The Speech of Diomedon. The Death of
Sophocles.

THE Athenians weakened with continual Losses, made all Strangers and
Foreigners Free of their City that would engage with them in the War. When a
great multitude were Incorporated into the City, the Commanders Listed all that
were fit for War, Equipped out of a Fleet of Sixty Sail, with which (every way
well provided) they sailed to Samos, where they found other Commanders, who had
brought together Fourscore more Galleys from other Islands; and having procured
P. 384.
ten more from the Samians, they weighed Anchor, and made with their whole
Fleet (consisting of an Hundred and Fifty Sail) to the Islands Three Islands,
lying between Lesbos and Eolis, near to Cane.
Arginuse, with a Design to raise the Siege at Mitylene. But Callicratides, the
Lacedemonian General, having Intelligence of the Approach of the Enemy, left
Etonicus with a great Force, to maintain the Siege, and sailed himself with all
Speed, with a Fleet of one Hundred and forty Sail, well Manned, to Arginuse.
These Islands were then inhabited, and had a little Town in them Peopled by the
Eolians. They lie between Mitylene and Cuma, near to the Continent and the
Promontory Or Cane. Ant. Chapter 403.
Catanides. The Athenians, in regard their Navy, The Famous Battle of Arginuse.
lay not far from thence, heard time enough of the Advance of the Enemy's
Fleet: yet because the Wind was very high, they waved fighting that day, and
prepared to engage the next. The like did the Lacedaemonians; for the Augures on
both sides dissuaded each from fighting. For the Head of the Lacedaemonians
Sacrifice, being laid upon the Shore, was suddenly washed away by the violence
of the Waves. Upon which the Priest foretold the death of the Admiral: To which
it is reported Callicratides made Answer, That the Glory of Sparta would not be
obscured by his Death. Thrasybulus likewise, the Athenians Admiral, who had the
Chief Command that Day, had this Dream; the Night before, he dreamt that he,
and six other Commanders, in a full Theater at Athens, acted the Tragedy of
Euripides, called Phenissa, and that the Enemies acted that called The
Suppliants; and that at length he obtained a Thebes was built by Cadmus, and
called Cadmea; and the Thebans lost so many (though they got the Victory) in the
Old War of Thebes, that it was called Cadmea Victoria. The seven Generals that
came against Thebes, were all killed but one. See Diodor. lib. 4. 267, 268.
Cadmean Victory, and all of them were killed, like those at the Siege of
Thebes: which when the Sooth-sayer heard, he interpreted it, That seven of the
Chief Commanders should fall in the Fight. But in regard that the Intrails
portended Victory, they commanded nothing should be said of their Deaths, but
only to their Friends; but that they should publish abroad to the whole Army,
that Victory was certainly promised by the View of the Sacrifices.

Then Callicratides calling the Soldiers together, made a Speech to them
suited to the Occasion; and further added, I am so cheerful and ready to
undergo all hazards for The Brave Speech of Callicratides.
the sake of my Country, that although the Augur has foretold my Death, by the
Portents of the Sacrifice; yet inasmuch as he has also pronounced assured
Victory to You, I am impatient of delay, and ready and willing presently to
die. And that the Army may not Ant. Chr. 404.
be disturbed, and in confusion by the Death of their Admiral, I now appoint
another, who may succeed me, in case I fall; and that is Clearchus, a Man known
to be an experienced good Soldier. Callicratides stirred up many with these
words, to imitate his Valor, and to hasten the Battle. The Lacedaemonians now
encouraging one another, imbarqu'd; so likewise the Athenians (hearten'd by
their Officers) went aboard, and every one placed themselves according to their
Squadrons. Thrasybulus and Pericles commanded the Right Wing, (this was
Pericles the Son of that Pericles, the Famous Orator, whose Surname was
Olympus.) But the Command of part of this Wing he delivered to Theramenes, who
was at first but a Common Soldier, but afterward at several times, commanded
considerable Forces: the rest of the Officers he placed in their Order
throughout the whole Fleet; and compassing the Islands called Arginuse, he drew
out his Fleet in a Line, as long as possibly he could. On the other side,
Callicratides advancing into the open Sea, commanded the Right Wing: The
Beotians were in the Left, commanded by Thrasonidas the Theban. But when they
saw that they could not reach to equal the Line of the Enemy, because the
Islands stretched out so far, he divided his Navy into two parts, and fought in
two places. This amazed the Beholders from all Ant. Chr. 403. P. 385.
parts, as if four Fleets, with no less than three hundred Sail, close
together, were hotly engaged. For this was the greatest Sea Fight that ever was
fought, by Grecians against Grecians, that any History commemorates. And now at
one instant all the Trumpets were commanded by the Admirals to sound a Charge,
and the Armies on both sides set up great Shouts in their turns, one against
another, and plying their Oars with great heat and earnestness, every one
strove who should be the first in making the Onset. For there were many, that
by reason of the long continuance of the War, were well instructed for Fights
at Sea; and the Battle was very hot and obstinate on both sides, in regard the
Best and Stoutest Men were got together to fight, in order to get or lose all
at once: For none doubted but this Battle would put an end to the War, which
side soever got the Victory. But Callicratides, knowing by the Predictions of
the Augurs, that he was to die, endeavored to make his Death Honorable and
Glorious. Therefore he made up fiercely upon the Galleys of Nausias, the
Vice Admiral, whom he sunk, with those next to him, at the first Charge; others
he disabled, striking them through with the Beaks of his Ships, and others he
made useless for Fight, by brushing off their Oars. At length he struck the
Ship of Pericles with such violence, that he tore off one great part from
another. But the Forepart of his own Ship was so fixed by the Fierceness of
the Stroke in the Prow of his Enemies Ship, that he could not clear himself
off: Upon which Pericles cast Grappling-Irons into Ant. Chr. 403.
Callicratides his Vessel, and so forced him up close side to side; and
thereupon the Athenians in a great Body, boarded him, and put all in the Ship
to the Sword. Here it is reported, that Callicratides (after he had behaved
himself with great Gallantry a long time, and received many Wounds in all parts
of his Body) at length wearied out, fell Callicratides killed.
down dead: The Report of his Death, running through the Fleet, the
Peloponesians struck with a Pannick Fear, began presently to fly: But though the
Right Wing fled, yet the Beotians in the Left, stuck to it, and fought stoutly
for some time; for they of Eubea (being in the same common Danger) were very
Faithful to them, and all those that had revolted from the Athenians, were
afraid lest they (if they recovered their former Power) would revenge
themselves upon them that had deserted 'em. But when the Beotians saw that the
greatest part of the Fleet was routed and broken in pieces, and that they were
more and more pressed upon by multitudes that made up upon them, they fled
outright. Some of the Peloponesians fled to Chius, others to Cumea. But the
Athenians pursued 'em very far, and filled all the Seacoasts with Carcasses of
the Dead, and Wrecks of Ships. After this, some of the Commanders advised, that
the Bodies of those that were slain, should be taken up, because the Athenians
used severely to punish them, who neglected that last Office. Others were
rather for sailing back forthwith to Mitylene, and in the first place to raise
the Siege: But presently arose a most violent Tempest, by which the Ships were
greatly shattered and broken; so that by this, and the toil of the late
Engagement, the Spirits of the Soldiers were very low, so that the taking up
the Bodies of the Dead was deferred. Atlength, the Storm raged and increased to
that degree, that they could neither gain Mitylene, nor Ant. Chr. 403.
perform what they ought for the Dead: So that being driven back by the Storm,
they arrived with the Fleet at Arginuse. In this Fight the Athenians lost five
and twenty of their Ships, and most of their Men in them. But the Peloponesians
seventy seven. There The Athenians Victors at Arginuse.
were so many Ships and Men destroyed, that all the Seacoasts of Cumea and
Phocea, seemed to be filled with Carcasses and Wrecks.

Eleonicus, who was besieging Mitylene, having certain Intelligence of the
Defeat Mitylene relieved. P. 386.
of the Peloponesians, sent away all the Shipping to Chios; he himself marched
away with the Land-Army, to a Confederate City of the Tyrrenians, being afraid,
lest, by a Sally out of the Town, when the Athenian Fleet came up, his whole
Army should be cut off. When the Athenians arrived at Mitylene, they took
thence Conon along with them, with forty Sail, and passed over to Samos, and
there wasted and spoiled all their Enemy's Country.

After these thing, the Lacedaemonians in Eolis and Ionia, and the dispersed
Islands, met in a Common Council at Ephesus; and after many Bandings and
Discourses, pro and con, they at length resolved to send an Ambassador to
Sparta, to desire that Lysander might be constituted Admiral of the Navy: For
that he approved himself with great Commendation, when he was in Command, and
was judged to be the most Ante Chr. 403.
Shilful General.

But because the Lacedaemonians would not alter the Ancient Custom of their
Country, they made Aratus Admiral; and sent Lysander with him, as a Private
Man, to be his Assistant; with this strict Command, That the General should
always follow his Advice and Council. Thus being sent forth to manage the
Command of the Fleet, they got togetherfrom Peloponesus and their Confederates,
as many Galleys as possibly they could.

The Athenians when they received the happy Tidings of their Success at
Arginuse, highly applauded the Commanders for the Victory; but were very angry
that they neglected to bury those, who had lost their Lives in the Defense of
the Government.

Theramenes and Thrasybulus, coming before the rest to Athens, the other
Officers The Officers accused at Athens for not Burying the Dead.
suspecting they would accuse 'em to the People for their Neglect, in not
Burying the Dead, sent Letters against them, whereby they signified, that the
Care of Interring them that were slain, was committed to them, which was the
Chief Cause of all the Mischief that afterward fell upon the other Officers.
For whereas they might before have easily made Theramenes, and the rest of his
Party, their Patrons and Advocats in the Accusations laid against them, being
Men that were excellent Speakers, and of great Interest; and that which was
most considerable, were best acquainted with every thing that was done in the
Battle; Now on the contrary, they had so Ant. Chr. 403.
far disobliged 'em, that they became their most bitter Enemies and
Prosecutors. For when the Letters were read to the People, they were presently
all on fire against Theramenes: But he having cleared himself, their Rage was
all turned again upon the other Officers. The People therefore assigned 'em a
Day to be heard, and ordered the Forces to be delivered over to Conon, whom
they exempted from this Bill; all the rest they commanded by an Absolute Decree
forthwith to return: Among whom Aristogenes and Protomachus, fearing the Rage
of the People, fled: But Thrasyllus, Calliades, Lysias, Pericles, and
Aristocrates, returned to Athens, with agreat number of Ships, upon this
Confidence, that by the Mediation of those they had brought along with them,
who were very many, they should be acquit. But after the Assembly came
together, the People yielded a quick Ear to the Accusations, and whatever the
The Orators, or Counsel for the People.
Demagogues said, it was well taken; but when the Accused began to speak, a
Tumult arose, and they could not be heard in their own Defense. And besides,
the Relations of them that were killed, did no little further their Ruin; who
came weeping and wailing into the Senate, earnestly desiring that the
Commanders might suffer for their Neglect, The Brave Athenian Officers put to
Death by the People.
in not Burying them, who had valiantly lost their Lives for their Country. At
length, the Friends of the Dead, and those that prosecuted with Theramenes (of
whom many were then present) prevailed. And thereupon the Commanders were
condemned to die, and their Estates to be conficate. Sentence being thus given,
just as they were leading to Execution by the (...), Sheriffs.
Lictors, Diomedon, one of them, an Excellent Soldier, and reputed a Just Man,
and Eminent in all other Virtuous Qualifications, stood up, and Silence being
made through the whole Assembly, thus began: -- Ye Men The Speech of Diomedon.
of Athens, we heartily wish that the Sentence now pronounced against us, may
issue in the Prosperity and Happiness of this City: But since Fortune has
prevented us Ant. Chapter 403.
from paying our Vows, and giving Thanks to the Gods, for the Victory, it is
most just and fit You should perform it: See therefore that Ye do it to Jove,
to Apollo, and P. 387.
the Glorious Goddesses; for by Prayers to them, we have overcome the Enemy.
When he had said this, he was hurried away with the rest to Execution; many of
the Best of the Citizens bemoaning his Fate with Tears, For he who now went to
suffer, never in the least complained of the Hardness of his Case, but only
advised his Countrymen: (who then acted so wickedly) to make their Addresses to
the Gods; which was a clear Indication of a Man of a Pious and Generous Spirit,
little deserving such base and unworthy Usage. In short, the Eleven Commanders
were all put to Death, by the Officers appointed by Law, though they had never
done the City the least Injury; but on the contrary, benefited their Country,
by a Victory gained in a Sea Fight, the Greatest that was ever fought, by
Grecians against Grecians; and besides were Men whose Valor had been
remarkable, in several Battles, and who had had Statues before erected in
Memory of their Victories. The People were then so desperately mad and Ant. Chapter
403.
enraged by the Orators, beyond all Bounds of Justice, that they gratified
their Anger and Revenge, upon Men that were not only Innocent, but deserved
rather Honor and Rewards.

But not long after, both the Accusers that stirred up the People, and the
People themselves, who gave Credit to their Criminations, sorely Repented of
what was done, as if God himself had taken Revenge of them for the Fact: For
they that were so willing to be deluded by these Malicious Instigations, not
long after received the Reward of their Folly; when not One, but thirty
Domineering Masters were by force set over them. Then was Callixeus (he that
gave Sentence of Death against the Accused) upon this Change of the People,
charged as one that had deceived them, and without being admitted to any
Defense, was Committed, and carried to the Common-Goal; but by the help of some
Friends, breaking through the Walls, he fled to the Enemy at Deoelea; so that
by the Avoiding of Death at this time, he was pointed at, as it were, by the
Finger, for his Notorious Wickedness, not only at Athens, but amongst all the
other Grecians abroad, all the Days of his Life after.

These are almost all the Things that are reported to be done this Year.
Amongst Philistus the Historian.
the Writers, Philistus concludes the First Part of the Affairs of Sicily with
this Year, and with the Taking of Agrigentum; comprehending in seven Volumes;
the History of above Eight hundred Years. He begins the other Part where the
former ended, and proceeds in his Relations contained in four Books. About this
Time died Sophocles, the Death of Sophocles.
Tragedian, the Son of Theophilus, ninety Years of Age. He gained eighteen
Victories upon the Stage: It Is reported of him, That when he Acted his last
Tragedy, and Euripides.
came off Conqueror, he fell into so violent a Laughter, that he fell down
dead. Appollodorus, Ant. Chr. 403.
a Writer of Chronicles, reports that Euripides likewise died this Year. But
others relate, That being entertained with Archelaus, King of Macedonia, once
walking abroad into the Fields, some Dogs met him, by whom he was torn in
pieces; and so miserably perished, a little before this Year.

CHAP. XV.
Lysander made Sole Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet. He takes Caramium. The
Ruin of the Athenian Fleet at Aegos Potamos. Athens taken by Lysander. The End
of the Peloponesian War.

THE Year next before being ended, Alexias was made Archon of Athens this Year;
Olymp. 93. 4.
and at Rome three Military Tribunes again executed the Places of Consuls,
Caius Julius, Publius Cornelius, and Caius Servilius. During their Magistracy,
after the Commanders An. M. 3567.
were put to Death, the Athenians made Philocles General of the Army; and Ant.
Chr. 403.
delivering the Fleet to him, sent him away to Conon, Commissioning them with a
Philocles and Conon, jointly Commissioned
Joynt-Power, in the Management of the War. When he came to Conon at Samos, he
Manned all the Ships to the number of an hundred seventy three. Twenty of these
he left there, and with the rest he and Conon set Sail for the Hellespont.

Lysander, in the mean time, High-Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet, with 35
Sail, P. 388.
which he had got together from Peloponesus, and their Confederates, next
adjoining, Ant. Chr. 403.
passed over to Ephesus; and fitted out a Fleet, which he sent for from Chios.
Then he goes to Cyrus, the Son of Darius, and receives from him a great Sum of
Money, for A cruel Sedition at Miletus.
Payment of the Army. Cyrus being sent for by his Father into Persia, intrusts
the Management of the Affairs of his Provinces to Lysander; and commands all
the Tribute The Feast of Bachus. Usher's Annal. 161.
to be paid to him: who being now fully supplied with all things necessary for
the War, returns to Ephesus. At this Time some in Miletus, that favored an
Oligarchy, by the help of the Lacedaemonians, abolished the Democracy. And to
that End, in the beginning of the Sedition, when the Dionysian Festivals were
celebrated, forty that were the Greatest Enemies against their Faction, were
surpised in their Houses, and murdered. Afterward, observing their
Opportunity, when the Forum was full of People, they cut off the Heads of 300
of the Richest of the Citizens. In the mean time, above 1000 of the most
Considerable Persons of Quality, who were for the Democracy, afraid of the
Present imminent Danger, fled to Pharnabasus, the Persian Lord Lieutenant, who
received them very courteously, and bestowed upon every one a Worth 15 Shill.
English.
Stater of Gold, and ordered The Island mentioned Acts 27. 16. Vsh. An. 161.
Clauda, a Castle of Claudia for their Residence.

Lysander, with a great Navy, making for This is said to be mistaken for
Caramium, a Bay in Caria; for that Thasus is an Isle, and lies far off, and was
taken some time after. Vsh. Ann. 160. Aemil. Probus in the Life of Lysand.
Thasus, a City of Caria, in League with the Athenians, takes it by Storm, and
puts all the Men to the number of 800 to the Sword, and sold all the Women and
Children for Slaves, and razed the City to the Ground. After this he sailed to
Attica, and many other Places; but did nothing memorable. Therefore we have
nothing to write further concerning these Matters. The Sum of all is, having
taken Lampsatus, he dismissed the Athenian Garrison there, and sent them Home;
and after he had (...), Sub hasta vendidit. Ant. Chapter 404.
plundered the City, restored it to the Inhabitants.

The Athenian Admirals, having Intelligence that the Lacedaemonians had besieged
Lampsacus with all their Forces, got together all their Fleet from every place,
and with all speed made for Lampsacus, with an hundred and fourscore Sail; but
hearing that it was taken, they Anchored at In the Strait of the Hellespont.
Aegos Potamos, and there lay. Not long after they weighed Anchor, and made out
against the Enemy, and dared them every Day to a Battle; but when the
Peloponesians would not stir, the Athenians began to consider what was best to
be done, for that they could not stay long there with the Fleet. Hereupon
Alcibiades came to them, and assured them that Medocus and Seuthes, Kings of
the Thracians, who were his special Friends, had offered him a great Army, if
he would fight against the Lacedaemonians; and therefore, if he might have some
share in the Command, he engaged either to force the Lacedaemonians to sight at
Sea, or to fight them at Land, by an Army out of Thrace. This Alcibiades did to
evidence how great his desire was to procure some Eminent Advantage to his
Country, and by fresh Service, to regain their former good Opinion of him. But
the Athenian Commanders Ant. Chr. 403.
concluded, that if matters fell out ill, all the Blame would be laid upon
them; and if well, Alcibiades would reap all the Honor of the Victory.
Therefore they ordered him to withdraw, and not to come near the Army for the
future.

The Enemy still avoiding a Fight, and Provision growing scarce in the Army
Philocles, The Surprise of the Athenians at Aegos Potamos Egos, or Potamos.
who commanded that day, ordered the rest of the Officers of the Fleet, to ship
their Men, and follow him, who having thirty Sail in readiness, forthwith
loosed out of the Harbor. Lysander having Intelligence of this, by some
Deserters, makes out to Sea with his whole Navy, puts Philocles to Flight, and
sails up to the rest of the Athenian Fleet. Hereupon the Athenians which lay
there (in regard they had but few of their Men on Board) were all in a great
Fear, and Consternation, through the unexpected Approach of the Enemy. Lysander
therefore, understanding the Confusion and Disorder of his Enemy's Fleet,
commanded Etonicus on Shore with the Land-Army, who P. 389.
forthwith being now landed, judged it highly necessary to improve the present
Opportunity; and therefore suddenly forces into part of the Enemy's Camp: And
Lysander himself coming up with all his Fleet, well Manned and provided, haled
as many of the Athenian Vessels as there were in the Harbor, with
Grappling-Irons, to the Shore. Upon this the Athenians were so amazed, and
struck with such a sudden astonishment, Ant. Chr. 40^.
(not having time either to make out to Sea with their Ships, or to form
themselves into a Body at Land) so that after a short Resistance, they turned
their Backs. Hereupon some forsook their Ships, others fled out of the Camp;
every one seeking where he could best preserve himself. Scarce ten of all the
Commanders and Officers of the Fleet escaped; amongst whom was Conon, who not
daring to return to Athens, out of fear of the People, fled to Evagoras, Prince
of Cyprus, his special good Friend. Many of the Soldiers fled by Land to
Sestos. Lysander possessed himself of all the rest of the Fleet, and took
Philocles, one of the Generals, prisoner, and carried him to Lampsacus, where
he put him to death. Then he commanded Messengers to Lacedemon The total Rout
of the Athenians at Aegos Potamos.
to carry the News of the Victory; and ordered one of the Best of the Galleys
to transport 'em, magnificently, adorning it with the Arms and Spoils taken
from the Enemy.

Next, he marched with his whole Army to Sestos, in pursuit of those that fled
thither, took the City, and dismissed the Athenians upon Terms. From thence he
sailed with all speed to Samos, and forthwith prepares to besiege the City; but
sent away Gylippus (he who so eminently assisted the Syracusians at Sea) to
Sparta, with fifteen Ant. Chr. 403.
hundred Talents of Silver, besides the Spoils. The Money was made up in little
Bags, and to every Bag was fixed a A little Thong of Parchment, wrapped about a
Staff, and then taken off; which would agree exactly with another Staff at
Sparta when it was lapt about it; and so the Letters could be read.
Seytale, upon which was written the Sum of Money therein contained. Gylippus,
being ignorant of what was done, unties the Bags, and takes out three hundred
Talents; but his Theft being discovered to the Ephori, by the Scytales, he
fled, and thereupon was condem^'d to die. Clearchus, the Father of Gylippus, in
former times, for his having received Money of Pericles, not to invade Attica,
likewise fled, and was adjudg'd to die, and lived all his Days a Banished Man
among the Thurians in Italy. These two Men, who were otherwise Virtuous; yet by
these sordid Acts, stained and blemished all the Worthy Actions of the rest of
their Lives.

When the Athenians were fully satisfied that they were totally ruined, they
determined to strive no longer to be Masters at Sea; but now employed all their
Care to repair their Walls; and block't up the Haven, expecting nothing more
certain than a Siege, which happened accordingly; for presently both Agis and
Pausanias, the Lacedemonian Generals, broke into Attica with great Forces, and
encamped under the very Walls of Athens. And Lysander entered the Pyraeum, with
above two hundred Sail. The Athenians, though they were pressed on every side
with so many Mischiefs, yet stood out, and easily defended the City for some
time. But the Peloponesians resolved in Council, in regard it would be very
difficult to force the Place, to withdraw their Forces out of Attica, and by
their Navy, to hinder all Provision from being brought into the City: Which
being put in Execution, the Athenians were reduced into extreme Want of all
things, especially of Food; which was used to be imported to them by Sea.

Want pressing upon them every day more and more, the City was filled with the
Dead. Upon which, those that survived sent forth Ambassadors, and procured the
Terms and Conditions following; viz. That the Long Fortifications of the
Piraeum, Athens taken. Ant. Chr. 403.
and their Walls should be demolished: That they should never have above ten
Long Ships: That they should leave all the Cities, and be Subject to the
Lacedaemonians. And The End of the Peloponesian War.
thus ended the Peloponesian War, after it had continued Seven and twenty
Years; a War of the longest Duration of any come to our Knowledge.

CHAP. XVI.
Agrigentum sacked by Imilcar the Carthaginian. The Carthaginians besiege Gela.
Dionysius goes to the aid of Gela. The Skirmishes before Gela. Camarina
deserted by the Order of Dionysius. The Soldiers enraged at Dionysius, he
hastens to Syracuse. Imilcar makes Peace with Dionysius, and returns to
Carthage. The end of the first Carthaginian War with Dionysius.

A Little while after. Darius Nothus, who ordered the rebuilding of the Temple.
P. 390.
Darius King of Asia died, having reigned Nineteen Years; Artaxerxes Mnemon, in
whose Twentieth Year Nehemiah came to Jerusalem. The Carthaginians Spoils in
Sicily.
Artaxerxes his Eldest Son succeeded him in the Kingdom, and reigned 43 Years.
About this time Apollodorus the Athenian reports, that Antimachus the Poet
flourished. Imilcar the Carthaginian General, at the return of the Spring,
sacked the City Agrigentum in Sicily, and carried away the Carved Work, and
richest Furniture out of all those Temples that were not utterly consumed by
the Fire. From hence he made an inroad with his whole Army into the Country of
Geloa. From whence, and from the Camarineans (having made great Devastations,)
he filled his Camp with all sorts of Plunder. Then marching for Gela, he
incampt at a River of the same Name. There was a brazen Statue of Apollo, of a
wonderful bigness at Gela in the Suburbs of the City, which the Carthaginians
took and sent away Ant. Chr. 403.
to Tire. The Geleans had dedicated it by the Command of the Oracle of Apollo.
But the Tyrians some time after, when they were Besieged by Alexander the
Macedonian, reproached the Image, as if it sided with the Enemy. But after that
Alexander had taken the City, the very same Day of the Week, and the very Hour
(as Timeus reports) that the Carthaginians committed the Sacrilege against
Apollo at Gela, the Grecians honored the God with many magnificent Gifts and
costly Sacrifices, as he by whose help they had won the City. Though these
things happened in times far distant one from another, yet because the thing
(...). The Carthaginians besiege Gela.
was very remarkable, I thought it no digression to compare one Event with the
other in this Place.

The Carthaginians when they had cut down all the Trees about Gela, fortified
themselves by a Wall and deep Trench drawn round their Camp; for they expected
that Dionysius would come to the aid of the Besieged with a great Army. They of
Gela had at the beginning of the Siege to avoid Danger, determined to send away
their Wives and Children to Syracuse; but when the Women all ran together to
the Altars in the Forum, earnestly praying that they might undergo the same
Fate with their Husbands, they were suffered to stay. After this, the Soldiers
in the Town dividing Ant. Chr. 403.
themselves into several Squadrons, sent out part Abroad; who being well
acquainted with all the Ways and Passages, fell upon the Enemy that were
straggling here and there, and not only brought in Prisoners every Day, but
killed many. And when the Carthaginians had battered down part of the Walls
with their Rams, the Besieged stoutly defended them, and what was beaten down
in the Day, both Women and Children joined with the rest and repaired in the
Night: For they that were young and able, were continually in Arms, and engaged
with the Enemy; the rest were diligently employed in working and other
necessary Services. To conclude, they bore the brunt with that Valor and
Resolution, that though their City was unfortify'd, and they received no Aid
from their Confederates, and their Walls were broke down in many Places, yet
Fear did not at all abate their Courage.

In the mean time Dionysius Tyrant of Syracuse, sent for the Grecian Succors
in Dionysius hastens to aid Gela.
Italy, and Aids from his Confederates, and employed every one almost that was
able to bear Arms in Syracuse, and joined the Army of the Mercenaries with the
rest. The whole amounted not to above Fifty (as some report) but (as Timeus
relates) not above Thirty Thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse, with Fifty Sail
of Ships. With these Forces he hastens to the Aid of Gela. When he arrived at
the City, he encamped near the Sea: This he did that his Forces might not be
divided, but might fall upon the Enemy both by Sea and Land at once; for by
skirmishing with his Ant. Chr. 403.
light Armed Men, he prevented their Foraging. And by his Horse, and the help
of P. 391.
his Shipping, he endeavored to intercept all Provisions that should be
brought to the Carthaginians from any part of their Dominions. However he
effected nothing, after he had continued there Twenty Days. After this, he
divided his Foot into Three Bodies; one he delivered into the Hands of the
Sicilians, with a Command that having the City on the Left, they should fall
upon the Trenches and Fortifications of the Enemy: Another Body made up of
Succors from the Confederates, he ordered should leave the City on the Right,
and march to the Shore. He himself with the Mercenaries designed to pass
through the City, to the Place where the Carthaginian Engines were placed; and
commanded the Horse, that as soon as a Sign was given by the Foot, they should
pass the River, and disperse themselves over the Fields; and if they discerned
that their own Party prevailed, they should join 'em, and if worsted, should
succor them. He commanded likewise the Officers of the Fleet, that as soon as
the Italian Bands came up, they should sail near to the Enemies Camp. While
every one was executing the Orders given him in charge, the Carthaginians
opposed the Enemies landing, and made it their business to defend that part of
their Camp toward the Shore where it was not fortified. At the very same
instant, the Italians coming in near the Shore, set upon the Carthaginians
Camp, and there intercepted many that had issued out to prevent the Landing:
And when they had put them to Ant. Chr. 403.
flight that were left to guard that part, they assaulted the whole Camp. Upon
which the Carthaginians with the greatest part of their Army (now returned)
hotly engaged them, and with much ado drove them back beyond the Trenches which
they had gained, and passed. The Italians being overpowr'd with the multitude
of the Barbarians, were forced to retreat, and fell into a straight and narrow
Pass within the Lines, none of their Fellows advancing to support them; for the
Siculi who were far off, came not up in convenient time; and Dionysius's
Mercenaries because they could not march swift enough through the Streets of
the City, could not succor them. Indeed the Gel^^ns for a little way made a
Sally to relieve the Italians, but fearing the Walls would be left naked, they
halted and returned; so that the Iberians and Campanians, with the Carthaginian
Auxiliaries, fell very sharply upon the Greeks of Italy, and killed above a
Thousand of them; but the Pursuers being driven back by Darts and other Shot
from the Ships, the rest came safe into the Town. In the mean time the Siculi
being engaged with the Carthaginians in another part, killed many of them, and
pursued the rest up to their very Camp. But both the Iberians, Campanians and
Carthaginians coming to the aid of the Africans, the Siculi having lost Six
Hundred Men, returned into the City. The Horse likewise when they saw all was
lost, made to the City, especially for that the Enemy was pressing upon them on
every side. Dionysius having passed through the City with his Mercenaries with
great difficulty, when he understood that his Army was broken, marched back, and
sheltered himself within the Walls of the Town: Then calling a Senate of those
that were Ant. Chr. 403.
Friends, they consulted concerning the present state of the War; where it was
concluded by all, that (because the Enemy was so strong) that was now no Place
to put all to hazard. Dionysius therefore sent forth a (...), an Herald.
Trumpet in the Evening, to gain a Cessation of Arms for the burying of the
Dead till the next Day. Then about the first Watch of the Night, he sent a
Multitude of People out of the Town, and he himself about Midnight marched
forth with the Army, leaving behind him 2000 light Armed Men, commanding them
to make Fires all the Night long, and set up continual Shouts that the Enemy
might believe that the whole Army was still in the Town; but as soon as it
began to be light, those left behind with a swift March followed Dionysius's
Army. When the Carthaginians understood the Cheat, they led P. 392.
the Army into the City, and made a Prey of whatever was left in the Houses.

When Dionysius came to Camarina, he caused all the Citizens, with their Wives
The Sedition of the Camarineans and Geleans.
and Children to remove to Syracuse; and because Fear would not admit of any
delay, some carried what Gold and Silver they were able; others with their
Parents and little Children hastened away, without the least regard to their
Estates. Some who were old and sick, were left behind by their Friends and
Relations, every one thinking that the Carthaginians were at his Heels: For the
late ruin and destruction of Sclinunte, Himera and Agrigentum struck all with
such a terror, and filled every one with such an apprehension of the Beastly
cruelty of the Barbarians, as if it had been then present before their Eyes;
for they put all the Captives to the Sword, showed no Compassion to any; some
they crucified, and others they tormented with intolerable Scoffs and
Reproaches. The Soldiers of Dionysius seeing Men, Women and Children driven in
Droves from Two several Cities in one and the same Country, were much incensed,
pitying the sad Condition of the miserable People: For when they saw young
Gentlemen and Ladies in marriagable Estate, unbecoming their State and Age,
tumultuously and regardlesly to be driven, led and dragged in Droves through the
Highways, the time not allowing any regard or respect either to old and grave
Men, or young and tender Women, they were not a little affected: And especially
it greatly grieved them, to see decrepit old People forced beyond the strength
of nature, to go as fast as those that were young. These were the things that
enflamed the Soldiers with Rage against Dionysius; for they suspected that he
did this on purpose, that he might gain the Sovereignty over the rest of the
Cities, through their fear of the Carthaginians: For they muttered among
themselves, how small a time he gave his Assistance; that none of his Mercenary
Soldiers were killed; that he fled so hastily when he had suffered so little
Loss, and especially when no Enemy pursued. Therefore all those who had long
wished for an opportunity to revolt, now did their utmost to shake off the Yoke
of his Tyranny, prompted thereunto (...).
as it were by the instinct of a Divine Providence. So that all the Italians
forthwith left his Camp, and marched homewards through the Heart of the Country.
The Syracusian Horsemen likewise watched for an opportunity how they might
readily kill the Tyrant on the Road: But observing the Mercenaries constantly
to attend Ant. Chr. 403.
close to his Person (unanimously with one consent) they set Spurs to their
Horses, and rode away to Syracuse, where they entered into the Arsenal without
any opposition; A Revolt by the Horsemen from Dionysius.
the Guard being altogether ignorant of what was done at Gela. Upon their
coming there, they forthwith rifled Dionysius's Palace, and carried away all
his Gold, Silver and rich Furniture out of his House, and most cruelly and
filthily abused his Wife, to vex and molest the Tyrant the more, and that this
sort of Revenge might Their vile abuse of his Wife.
be a clear Evidence to him, of the Conspiracy against him.

Dionysius suspecting upon his March what was done, hastens to the City with
all the Horse and Foot he could confide in, with all possible speed; for he
concluded he had no better course to take to disappoint the Horsemen that were
gone, than to prevent all intelligence, judging his Design would be more easily
accomplished, if he were sooner at Syracuse than they could believe; which
happened accordingly: For the Horsemen thought that Dionysius durst neither
stay with, nor be far from his Army. And therefore now as confident that they
had gained their purpose, they noised Abroad that Dionysius pretended to fly
from Gela for fear of the Carthaginians, but in truth he fled from the
Syracusians. In the mean time Dionysius having marched without stop almost 19
Leagues, or 50 English Miles. P. 393.
400 Furlongs, came about Midnight to the Gates of Acradine, with 100 Horse,
and 500 Foot, and finding them shut against him, caused Reeds there ready
gathered out of the Fenns (with which the Syracusians used to burn Lime) to be
put to the Gates: While the Gates were on Fire, those that marched flower came
up to him: And when they were burnt down, he forthwith entered through Acradine
with all the Forces with him. Upon which, those Horsemen (who were very few)
that were of the Noblest Birth, and greatest Wealth (without staying for the
Peoples help) got together in the Marketplace to oppose the Enemy; but were
presently surrounded with the Mercenaries, and every Man killed with Darts and
Pikes. Then Dionysius scouring the Streets of the City, put all to the Sword he
met that were running Dionysius's Rage and Cruelty in Syracuse.
here and there to aid their Fellows; and not only so, but entered likewise
into the Houses of those he took to be his Enemies, of whom, he cut the Throats
of some, and banished others. The rest of the Horsemen escaped out of the Walls
to that part of the City called Acradine. About break of Day the next Morning,
all the rest of the Mercenaries, and the whole Sicilian Army came to Syracuse;
but the Geleans and Camarineans incensed against Dionysius, turned off to
Leontium.

Imilcar at length forced by the Circumstances of his Affairs, sends an (...),
in Modern Times a Trumpet.
Herald to Syracuse, to offer Terms of Peace to the Conquered: This was very
acceptable News to Dionysius, and thereupon Peace was made upon these
Conditions, That besides the ancient Colonies the Sicanians, Selinuntes,
Agrigentines and the Himereans, should be under the Power of the Carthaginians:
That they of Gela and Camerine should be suffered Ant. Chapter 403. A Peace by the
Carthaginians with Dionysius.
to inhabit in their own Cities, yet without Walls, and be Tributary for the
future to the Carthaginians: That the Leontines, Messenians and all the
Sicilians should be free, and enjoy all their own Laws and Liberties, save that
the Syracusians should be subject to Dionysius. When all these Articles were
ratified, the Carthaginians past over to Lybia, after they had lost above one
half of their Army by the Plague, which afterward raging through Lybia,
Multitudes perished both of the Carthaginians and their Confederates.

And now we are come to the end of the Wars; of the Peloponosian War in Greece,
and of the first Carthaginian War with Dionysius in Sicily: And so having
finished what we hitherto designed, we shall treat in the next Book of those
Affairs thar fell out afterward.

BOOK XIV.
It Is Common and Natural to every Man to be touched to the Quick, to hear
himself PREFACE.
Evil spoken of. For even they that are so notoriously Wicked that they cannot
escape Reproaches, yet if they be told of their Faults, are presently in a
Rage, and do all they can to palliate and cover their Crimes with finespun
Excuses. Every one therefore ought to be very careful to avoid the doing of
that which is of bad report, especially those that are in high Place and Power,
and advanced above others in Dignity. For their actions, by reason of their
eminency in the World, being more conspicuous than others, their Faults and
Miscarriages likewise are more obvious. Therefore, let none in such places of
Power and Authority, think to avoid Censures and Reproaches, if they are
Corrupt and Unjust in their Administration. For should they escape Infamy and
Disgrace during their Lives, yet let them be assured, that aftertimes will
publish that Truth (to the stain of their Memory) which was stifled and
smothered some time before. Let this therefore startle wicked Men to consider,
that they leave behind them an ugly Representation of themselves, to the view
of Posterity for ever.

For though those things that follow after Death do nothing at all concern us,
(as some Philosophers have spread abroad among the Common People) yet a wicked
Course of Life is far the worse, inasmuch as the remembrance of it is hateful
to all Posterity. Of which truth, he who seriously considers things related in
this Book, may find ready at hand most clear and evident Examples. For the
Thirty Tyrants of Athens, who by their Covetousness and Ambition involved their
Country in dreadful Calamities, thereby in a short time not only lost their
Authority, but left behind them an immortal stain and dishonor to their Names.
And the Lacedaemonians, who had undoubtedly gained the Sovereignty of all
Greece, lost what they gained, when they began to oppress their Associates and
Confederates: For the Thrones of Princes are supported by Justice and Mercy,
but are overturned by Cruelty and Oppression of their Subjects. As we may see
in the Example of Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, who though he had the
smiles of Fortune above all the other Princes before him, yet Plots were to
entrap him all his Life long; so that for fear of being Assassinated he was
necessitated to wear an Iron Breast Plate upon his Coat, and after his Death,
became an Instance and Example of the Peoples hatred to all succeeding
Generations. But we shall speak of these things P. 396.
in their proper Places.

And now we come to those Affairs that have a Coherence with them before
related, only distinguished by difference of Times. For in the foregoing Books
we have treated of Things that were done from the sacking of Troy, to the End
of the Peloponnesian War, and the Athenian Dynasty; which comprehends the space
of Seven hundred Seventy nine Years. In this we shall add what next follows in
order, and begin with the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, and from thence come down
to the Taking of Rome by the Gauls, wherein is contained the History of
Eighteen Years.

CHAP. I.
A Peace between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. The Athenians disagree about
the Manner of their Government. The Government by Thirty. The Cruelty of the
Thirty Tyrants, and especially toward Theramenes.

BY the Dissolution of the Government at Athens (which happened the Seven
hundred and Eightieth year current from the Destruction of Troy) the City was
involved in an Olymp. 94. 1. An. M. 3568. Ant. Chapter 402.
Anarchy; at that time werefour Military Tribunes appointed at Rome to execute
the Consular Dignity, Caius Furius, Caius Servilius, Caius Valerius, and
Numerius Fabius. And this Year was celebrated the Ninety Fourth Olympiad, in
which Cocynas of Larissa was Victor. About this time the Athenians (their Power
being broken) obtained a Peace with the Lacedaemonians, and liberty to govern
according to their own Laws, upon Condition they demolished their Walls, which
they pulled down accordingly, but could not agree among themselves about the
Form of their Government. For they that were for an Oligarchy gave their Votes
for the restoring that ancient Government. But the greatest part who stood up
for the Democracy, preferred the Government by the Senators, declaring that to
be the truest Democracy.

When this banding one against another had continued some days; they for the
Oligarchy sent to Lysander the Spartan, hoping thereby to gain the Point, in
regard he was ordered (now the War was at an End) to settle the Government of
the Cities, and in every Place he set up an Oligarchy. To this end they sailed
to him to Samos, where he then was, having lately taken the City. When they
arrived and had craved his assistance he promised them his Aid; and thereupon
(after he had made Thorax Governor of Samos) passed over to the Pireum with an
hundred Sail. Then calling a General Assembly, he advised them to choose Thirty
Men, who should Govern the Commonwealth, and Manage all the Affairs of the
City. Theramenes opposed this Proposal, repeating the Articles of Ant. Chapter 402.
the Peace, whereby it was agreed, That they should be governed according to
the Laws of their own Country; and declared it would be a most intolerable
piece of Injustice, The Thirty Tyrants chosen at Athens.
if (against the Sacred Ties of an Oath) their Liberties must be thus ravished
from them. Lysander answered, That the Athenians had first broken the League
themselves, because they did not pull down their Walls within the time agreed,
and grievously threatened Theramenes, and told him, That unless he desisted
from his Oppositions against the Lacedaemonians, he would put him to Death.

Upon this, both Theramenes and the People, being in a great Fright, were
forced by a general suffrage to abolish the Democracy: and Thirty Men were
forthwith chosen to be Governors of the Commonwealth, in Name called Fit
Magistrates, but in Deed and in Truth nothing but Tyrants. But because the
Justice and Moderation of Theramene P. 397.
was evidently discerned by the People, they judged he would be a Bridle to the
Covetousness Theramenes chosen one of the Thirty.
of the rest of those placed over them, and thefore chose him to be one of the
Thirty.

The Duty and Office of these Men was to choose the Members of the Senate; to
create Magistrates, and to make Laws for the Government of the City. But they
forbore to make any Laws upon many specious pretenses. Yet they filled the
Senate and all the Ant. Chapter 402.
Places in the Magistracy with their own Creatures; who were called Pretors,
but in truth, were merely the Tyrants Tools.

At first they executed Justice upon Malefactors with great Severity, to the
putting of them to Death: So that as yet they were well spoken of, and
commended by every honest Citizen. But not long after, when they resolved to be
Lawless, and set up an Arbitrary The Cruelty of the Thirty Tyrants of Athens.
Power: they sent for a Garrison from the Lacedaemonians, upon pretense that
they would mould all things in the Government to the advantage of their
Interest. For they knew very well that without a Foreign Force, they could not
execute those Slaughters and Butcheries they designed, for that all would as
one Man rise up against them in their own defense.

When the Garrison from Lacedaemon was come, they presently gained the Governor
Callibius, with Bribes and other fawning and flattering Addresses. Then they
singled out some of the richest Citizens, such as they thought fit, and
charging them as Innovators, and Plotters against the Government, put them to
Death, and consiscated their Estates. But when Theramenes opposed his
Colleagues, and others (who were Zealous for the Commonwealth) stood up for the
Defense of their Liberties; the Thirty called a Senate, in Ant Ch 402.
which Critias, the President, loads Theramenes with many grievous Crimes, and
chiefly, that he betrayed that Government, in the Administration of which he
himself voluntarily accepted a share with the rest. Theramenes, in Answer to
what he said, so cleared himself of every particular laid to his Charge, that
he gained the good Opinion of the whole Senate. Upon which, Critias, with the
rest of his Faction, (being afraid lest this Man should Theramenes accused by
the Tyrants.
overturn the Oligarchy) surrounded him by the Soldiers, with their Swords
drawn, with an intent forthwith to seize him.

But Theramenes foreseeing their purpose, rushes through, and flies to the
Altar in the Haled from the Altar in the Senate.
Senate House, crying out, That he fled to the Gods, not that he hoped thereby
to save his Life, but that the Impiety of his Murderers might be the more
aggravated, by the violation of the Sacreds of their Religion: But though he
was thence violently haled by the Sheriffs, (...).
Lictors, yet bore all with an undaunted Spirit, being well principled in the
Precepts of Philosophy, by his late Master Socrates. The People generally
lamented his sad Misfortune, and unworthy Usage; but none durst rescue him by
reason of the Soldiers that closed him round. But Socrates the Philosopher, and
two of his Servants ran in, and endeavored to hinder the Lictors. But
Theramenes entreated them they would forbear, declaring he could not but honor
their Love and Courage showed on his behalf, but that it would be his greatest
Misery if he should be the Cause of the Death of those who so greatly loved
him. Socrates therefore, and the rest, (when they saw none to come in to their
assistance, and that Ant. Chapter 402.
the stronger Faction more and more increased) let fall their design.
Theramenes thus forced from the Altars, was led through the Marketplace to
Execution by the Officers, who had him in charge. But the common People
(affrighted with the armed Men) Theramenes Executed
while they bewailed the Condition of this miserable Man (as one most unjustly
condemned) at the same time likewise deplored their own Bondage and Slavery.
For every poor Man seeing the Virtue of Theramenes so despised and trampled
under foot, foresaw that they by reason of their mean and low Condition, would
be valued no more than things set behind the Door.

After they had executed him, the Thirty, upon false Accusations, put to death
several Many other: Executed.
others of the rich Men whom they had written down in a List, and when they
were dead, seized upon all they had: Among whom was Niceratus, the Son of
Nicias the General, who was formerly sent against the Syracusians. He was a Man
civil and courteous to all, and almost the Richest and of greatest Interest of
any Man in Athens; there was not therefore a Family but it lamented his Death,
the Memory of his kind and sweet Disposition forcing Tears from every one. yet
the Tyrants did not in the least remit any thing of their acts of Injustice and
Violence, but growing still rather worse and worse in all manner of Villainies,
they cut the Throats of Threescore of the richest Men in They cut the Throats
of the Richest in the City. Ant Chapter 402. P. 398.
the City, that they might roll in their Estates. The miserable Citizens being
thus Slaughtered and Butchered, every day, almost all that had any thing to
lose fled out of the City.

Then they put to death Autolicus, a most excellent and fluent Orator. And at
length, every Man that was in any respect Eminent or Remarkable, they
sacrificed to their raging Lusts. By these Cruelties they so wasted and
destroyed the City, that above The Cruelty of the Tyrants.
one half of its Inhabitants ran away and left it.

And although the Lacedaemonians saw the City thus spoiled and ruined, yet they
laughed in their Sleeves, having no desire it should ever recover its strength
any more, as was very evident by many convincing arguments. For they made a
Decree, that all the Fugitives from Athens in every part of Greece, should be
carried back bound to the Tyrants; and whosoever did oppose the Execution of
this Decree, should be fined Five Talents.

This was in truth looked upon as a very cruel and inhumane Edict, but the
other Cities stood so much in awe of the Power of the Spartans, that it was
every where obeyed. But the Argives were the first that showed their Abhorrence
of the Lacedaemonian cruelty, and pitying the miserable Condition of the
Exiles, received them with all tenderness of Compassion. The Thebans likewise
decreed a Mulct to be imposed upon him that did not to his power assist any
Fugitive whom he saw to be carried away by Force. To this pass were brought the
Affairs of Athens.

CHAP. II.
Dionysius his Projects to strengthen himself in the Sovereignty of Sicily. The
Syracusians Revolt. They are dispersed.

IN the mean time Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily having made Peace with the
Carthaginians, Ant. Chapter 402.
bent all his Care to strengthen himself in the Sovereignty. For he judged that
the Syracusians, now brought under by the War, had nothing to do but to seek
after the recovery of their Liberty. Perceiving therefore the Island belonging
to the City (which was naturally fortified) would be easily defended by a small
Garrison, he divided it from the rest of the City by a strong Wall, in which he
built many high Towers, near one to Dionysius strengthens himself in Sicily.
another, and under it Guard-houses and Lodgings, which would contain great
numbers of Men: He built likewise there at great expense a (...).
Castle which commanded the City, that it might be a shelter ready to fly to
upon any sudden commotion; with the same Wall he took in the Arsenal near to
the little Port called Laccius capable to receive Threescore Sail, and had a
Gate through which only one Ship at a time could enter. Then he marked out the
best pieces of Land, and gave them to his Friends and Officers: the rest he
equally distributed amongst the Citizens, and in the number of Citizens he
accounted Manumitted Slaves, and called them Neopolites, New Citizens. He
bestowed likewise Houses every where upon the common People (except those
Houses that were in the Island) and those he gave as a Reward to his Friends
and Mercenaries.

Having now firmly fixed himself in the Throne (as he conceived) he marched out
with an Army against the Sicilians, with a design to being them into Slavery,
who as yet were free, especially those who had lately assisted the
Carthaginians. To this end he lay Dionysius besieges Herbessus, now called
Palazzulo. Ant. Chapter 402.
before the City of Herbessus, and furnished himself with every thing necessary
for the Siege. They of Syracuse that were listed upon this Expedition, having
got Arms into their hands, met together in private Cabals, and blamed one
another for that they did not assist the Horsemen in deposing of the Tyrant. It
happened at that time, that one of Dionysius's Captains threatening a Soldier
for his saucy Language, and presently offering to beat him upon his sharp
Retorts, the Soldiers were so enraged, that they killed the Officer, whose Name
was Doricus; and calling out with a loud voice to the Citizens to A Conspiracy
against Dionysius.
stand up for their Liberty, they sent for the Horse from Aetna; for they at
the beginning of the Tyranny left the Tyrant and possessed themselves of that
Castle. Dionysius being now terrified with the defection of the Syracusians,
broke up the Siege, and hasts away with all speed to Syracuse, and to possess
himself of the City before any of his Enemies. Upon his flight thither the
Fomenters of the Rebellion created them their Captains and Leaders, who had
killed the Officer, and being joined with the Horse from Aetna, they encampt in
the Hills over the City.
Epipoli (as they are called) lying over against the Tyrant, blocking up his
passage into the open Field. These Revolters likewise continually sent
Messengers to Messina and Rhegium to solicit their aid at Sea for the recovery
of their Liberty. For these Cities at that time commonly set forth no less than
Fourscore Galleys well Manned which they then sent to the Syracusians to assist
them. Besides all this, they in the Epipoli promised by the Common Crier a
great reward to him that should kill the Tyrant; and, P. 399.
that they would Enfranchize all Foreigners that would come over to them. And
now having provided Engines for the battering down of the Wall, they Assaulted
the Island every day, and kindly received all Strangers that came to them. Upon
this, Dionysius Dionysius penned up in the Island. Ant. Chapter 402.
seeing himself forsaken of the Mercenaries, and that he was so straightly penned
up, called his Friends together to consult what was best to be done in the
present Exigency. For he so far despaired of keeping the Sovereignty, that he
did not so much as seek how he might subdue the Syracusians, but by what kind
of Death he might put an end to his Life; lest he should be forced to a
shameful Abdication of the Government. Heloris one of his Friends, (but others
say the Poet his Father) told him, that the memory of his being a King, would
be the Glorious Ornament of his Sepulcher; and Polyxenus his Father-inlaw
advised him to break through upon the swiftest Horse he had, and get away to
those parts under the power of the Carthaginians, and crave help of the
Campanians, whom Imilcar had left to defend his Conquests in Sicily. But
Philistus (who afterward writ the History) gainsaid Polyxenus, and said,
Dionysius, it does not become thee by the swiftness of thy Horse to fly away
from thy Principality, but rather (...).
with thy whole strength to hold it fast within thy very Thighs. Dionysius
closed with this Advice, and resolved to suffer any thing rather than
voluntarily lay down the Power he had gained. Whereupupon he sent Commissioners
to them in Rebellion to desire liberty for himself and those with him to depart
out of the City; and in the mean time a Messenger was secretly sent to the
Campanians to promise them as much Money as they should demand, if they would
come and raise the Siege. Matters being agreed upon, the Syracusians consented
that Ant. Chapter 402.
the Tyrant should have liberty to be gone with Five Ships only. After this,
things began to cool; and a part of them that lay at the Siege, were discharged
and drawn off as useless; and many of the Foot roved about in the Fields, as if
the Tyranny had now been altogether at an end. In the mean time the Campanians
encouraged by such generous Promises, first marched to Aegyrus, and there
leaving their Baggage with Aegyris The Campanians come to assist Dionysius.
the Prince of the Place, with Twelve hundred Light Horse speeded to Syracuse;
where suddenly arriving, they surpised the Syracusians, and killing many of
them, they broke through into the Fort to Dionysius. About the same time Three
hundred Mercenaries arrived, and came in to the assistance of the Tyrant; so
that now he began to pluck up his Spirits. But the Syracusians when they
perceived that the Tyrant began to gather strength again, were divided into
Parties, some were for continuing the Siege, others were for disbanding the
Army, and leaving the City. As soon as Dionysius came to understand this, he
Sallies out with what he had, and coming upon them when they were in a
distraction, Dionysius makes a Sally^ and routs the Syracusians. Ant. Chapter 402.
easily put them to flight, and pursued them to the place called the New City:
Yet he killed not many there; for riding amongst his Men, he commanded them not
to kill those that fled. The Syracusians were now suddenly scattered all over
the Fields; and a while after above Seven thousand in a body came up to the
Horsemen, and surrendered themselves. After the Burial of the Syracusians that
were killed, Dionysius sent Messengers to Aetna to invite the Exiles there to
lay aside their animosities, and to return to their Country, faithfully
promising them that he would pardon and forget all that was past. Upon this,
some who had left Wives and Children behind them (through the irresistible
force of natural Affection) complied with the invitation. The rest (when the
Messengers cried up his Humanity in burying of the Dead) answered, That
Dionysius himself deserved no other Courtesy, and prayed to the Gods that he
might presently meet with P 400.
it. So that these at Aetna could not by any means be wrought upon to trust the
Tyrant's Word, but continued at Aetna, waiting for a fit opportunity to pull
him down.

Dionysius carried himself with all the Respect and Tenderness imaginable
toward those that returned, to encourage the rest to come back to their
Country. Then he discharged the Campanians with great Rewards, for he durst not
trust their fickle and unconstant Humor. When they came to Entella they
prevailed with the Citizens to receive them into the Town, and to infranchise
them as natural Inhabitants: but in the Night they treacherously The Cruelty of
the Campanians at Entella
fell upon the Townsmen and cut all their Throats, and Marrying their Wives,
possessed themselves of the City.

CHAP. III.
The Lacedaemonians establish an Oligarchy in every City; Dionysius disarms the
Syracusians. Alcibiades killed; the manner of his death. Clearchus his Tyranny
in Bizantium. The Battle of Porus by him against his Countrymen the
Lacedaemonians. Lysander projects to out the Heraclides of the Sovereign Power.

IN Greece, after the end of the Peloponnesian War, the Lacedaemonians, by the
general consent of all, had the Sovereign Command both at Sea and Land.
Whereupon they Created Lysander again High Admiral, with Power to establish the
Those for an Oligarchy.
Hermoste (as they called them) in every City wherever he came. For because
the Democratiste were Enemies to the Lacedaemonians, they ordered an Oligarchy
to be settled in every City, and imposed a Tribute upon all they subdued. And
although they made no use of Money at any Ant. Chapter 402.
time before, yet now they Treasured up from the Tributes paid in by the Cities
a Thousand Talents every Year.

When they had settled the Affairs of Greece, as they thought best for the
support of their Aristus s^nt by the Lacedaemonians to Syracuse.
Authority, they sent Aristus, a Noble Person to Syracuse, under color to
abrogate the Tyranny, but in truth and underhand to confirm it. For they
concluded, that if they were instrumental to fix him in his new got Empire,
they should ever oblige him to be a Friend to them. Aristus after he came to
Syracuse had private Conference with Dionysius concerning these Matters; and
yet in the mean time encouraged the People with fair promises to restore them
to their former Liberties: But instead of that he betrayed Nicoteles, Aristus
betrays some of the Citizens to the Tyrant.
the General of the Syracusians, and others who trusted in his Fidelity, and
caused them all to be put to death, by which he strengthn'd the Tyrant, and by
so base an Act stained his own Reputation, and dishonored his Country.

After this, when the People of Syracuse had left the City in the time of
Harvest, to gather the Fruits, Dionysius enters into every one of their Houses,
and takes away all the Dionysius disarms the Citizens.
Arms he could find: and presently after draws another Wall about the Castle,
builds Shipping, and takes into Pay a great number of Strangers, and prepares
whatever was necessary for the supporting of his Dominion; having experienced
that the Syracusians would endure any thing rather than Slavery.

While these things were acting here and there, Pharnabazus, Darius's
Lord Lieutenant, to gratify the Lacedaemonians, surpised Alcibiades and killed
him. But in regard Ephorus Alcibiades killed.
gives an account of other things to be the causes of his death; I conceive it
may not be altogether unprofitable if we relate what this Author has recorded
concerning the manner how Alcibiades lost his Life.

In his Seventeenth Book he says, that Cyrus secretly compacted with the
Lacedaemonians to make War against Artaxerxes, which coming to the Ears of
Alcibiades, he forthwith hasts away The manner of Alcibiades his death.
to Pharnabazus, and informs him of the Intrigue, and desires from him a
Passport to go to Artaxerxes, judging it fittest for him to give the first
information of the Conspiracy to the King. But that when Pharnabazus heard
this, he was resolved to be the first discoverer himself, and therefore
forthwith sent a Messenger in whom he could most confide, and by him laid all
open before the King. That when Alcibiades saw that Pharnabazus would not p.
401.
furnish him with Letters to make way for him to the King's Palace, he made a
Journey to the Lieutenant and Governor of Paphlagonia, and desired his
assistance to get to the King: And that Pharnabazus fearing lest the King
should come to understand the Truth, sent some to lie in wait for Alcibiades in
the way, and to murder him: and that these finding him in his Inn in Phrygia,
raised up a Pile of Wood round his Lodging in the Night, and set it on fire;
and that Alcibiades endeavoring to save himself in the midst Ant. Chapter 402.
of the Flames, partly by the Fire, and partly by Darts cast at him by his
Enemies, there perished.

About the same time Democrates the Philosopher died, being Ninety Years of
Age. And Lasthenes the Theban who wan the Prize this Olympiad, is said to run a
Race on foot with a Running Horse, from From Coronea to Thebes 30 Miles, both
in Beotia in Greece.
Coronea to the Walls of Thebes, and won the Match. In Italy the Volsci set
upon the Roman Garrison at Verulanum in Latium. Olymp. 94. 2. Ant. Chapter 401.
Verugine, took the City it self, and killed many of the Garison-Soldiers,

After the Affairs of this Year thus past, Euclides became Chief Magistrate of
Athens. And Four Military Tribunes bore the Consular Dignity at Rome, Publius
Cornelius, Numerius Fabius, Lucius Valerius, and Terentius Maximus. During the
time of their Governments, the Affairs of Byzantium were but in an ill posture,
by reason of their intestine Seditions, and their Wars with the Thracians their
Neighbors. Not being able to put an end to their Civil Discords, they desired
a Governor from the Lacedaemonians; to which end Clearchus was sent to them, who
after the whole Power was put into his hands, got together a great number of
Mercenaries, and acted more like a Tyrant than a Governor. For First, having
invited the Magistrates of the City to a Feast, after a public Sacrifice
Clearchus acts like a Tyrant in Byzantium.
he caused them all to be put to Death. Presently after when there was none
left to Govern the City, he strangled Thirty of the Chief Men of Byzantium, and
seized upon all their Goods to his own use. He likewise put to death some of
the richest of the Citizens under color of pretended Crimes, and others he
banished. Having thus enriched himself, Ant. Chapter 401.
he Listed vast numbers of Foreign Troops, and confirmed and strengthened
himself in the Sovereignty. When the Cruelty and Power of the Tyrant was spread
abroad; the Lacdemonians at the first sent Messengers to him to advise him to
lay down his Government: But when he flatly refused, they sent an Army against
him under the Command of Panthedas; but when Clearchus heard of his coming, he
marched away with his Forces to Selymbria, of which he had before possessed
himself. For by reason of his Cruelty in Byzantium he foresaw, that not only
the Lacedaemonians, but the Citizens would be his Enemies; and therefore
concluding that he could with more safety march out against his Enemies from
Selymbria, he brought all his Money together with his Army thither. When he
came there and heard of the approach of the Lacedaemonians he withdrew out to
meet them, and at a place called Porus they engaged. The Battle was doubtful a
long time, but at length the valiant Spartans prevailed, and the Tyrants Army
was miserably Clearchus routed at Selymbria by the Lacedaemonians. Is employed
by Cyrus the Brother of Artaxerxes Mnemon. Ant. Chapter 401.
destroyed. Clearchus with a few escaped to Selymbria, and was there a while
besieged, but afterward in a great fright he fled out of the Town in the
night, and sailed over to Jonia, where becoming familiar with Cyrus the King of
Persia's Brother, he was made General of his Army. For Cyrus being made Chief
of all the Princes and Governors of the Sea Coasts, and being of an high and
aspiring Spirit, determined to make War against his Brother Artaxerxes; Looking
therefore upon Clearchus to be a fellow of a bold and daring Spirit ready for
any adventure, furnished him with Money, and ordered him to raise an Army of as
many Foreigners as he could, hoping he had new got fit a Companion to assist
him in the execution of those bold Attempts he had taken in hand. As for
Lysander the Spartan, after he had settled all the Cities subject to the
Lacedaemonians, according P. 402.
to the Orders and Directions of the Ephori, some to be governed by a (...), a
Decemvirate, a Government under 10 Persons.
Decemvirate, others by an Oligarchy, became of great Note and Reputation at
Sparta: For by his Conduct he had put an end to the Peloponnesian War, and
thereby had gained for his Country the Sovereign Command both at Sea and Land
without control. Being puffed up with this Success, he designed to put an end to
the Reign of the Heraclidae, and to that end endeavored so to contrive the
matter, as to procure a Decree, That any Spartan whatsoever should be capable
of being elected King. Thereby he hoped that the Regal Power would presently be
devolved upon himself, for the Great and Noble Services that he had done. But
considering that the Lacedaemonians were led much by Lysander contrives to cut
the Line of the Heraclidae, and to be chosen King of Sparta; Seeks to bribe the
Oracles.
the Answers given by the Oracle, he resolved to bribe the Prophetess of
Delphos with a large Sum of Money: For he concluded, that if he were favored
by the Oracle, his Business was done according to his Heart's desire. But when
he saw that by his repeated and continual Promises of Reward, day by day, he
could not prevail, he addressed himself upon the same account to the Priest of
the Oracle at Dodona, by one Pherecrates of the Family of Apolloniatus, who was
familiarly acquainted with the Officers of that Temple.

But being disappointed here likewise, he took a Journey to In Africa near
Carthage.
Cerene, under color to pay a Vow to Jupiter Hammon, but in truth to no other
purpose than to bribe that Oracle: To that end he carried with him a great Sum
of Money to bring over the Priests of that Temple to his Interest: For Lybis,
the King of that Country, had been his Father's Guest, and for the great Love
and Friendship that there was between them, the Brother of Lysander, was called
Lybis. But notwithstanding all his hopes to prevail, by his Interest in the
King and the Fullness of his Purse, he was not only frustrated of his Ant. Chapter
401.
Hope there, but the Priests of the Oracle sent Ambassadors to Sparta, and
accused Lysander for his offering of Bribes to corrupt the Oracle. Upon which,
when he was returned to Lacedaemon, he was called to answer to the Charge: But
he so subtly managed his Cause, that he came off clear; and nothing was
discerned concerning his Prospect to abolish the Government of the Heraclidae.
But, a little after his death, when some Notes of Accounts were sought for in
his House, there was found a Speech eloquently penned, which he had framed to
persuade the People, That the King's might be chosen out of any of the Families
of Sparta.

CHAP. IV.
Dionysius his Actions in Sicily. The Oropians subdued by the Thebans. The
Lacedaemonians quarrel with the Eleans. Dionysius fortifies the Epipodae.

AS soon as Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, after his Peace made with the
Carthaginians, had quieted all at home, he prepared to bring all the Towns and
Cities of the Chalcideans into his Power; that is to say, Naxus, Catana, and
Leontium. And he was the more earnest to gain these, because they lay near unto
Syracuse, and would much facilitate the Enlargement of his Dominions. To this
end he marches with his Forces to Enna, and takes the Castle, the Exiles there
not being able to resist so great an Army.

Thence he goes against the Leontines, and encamps at the River Tyria, not far
from the The Acts of Dionysius in Sicily, in order to enlarge his Dominion.
Ant. Chapter 401.
City, where he presently draws out his Army, and sends a Trumpet to the Town,
commanding them to surrender the Place, supposing that out of Fear they would
submit. But when he perceived the Leontines slighted his Commands, and prepared
to furnish themselves with all things necessary for a Siege; having not then
with him his Engines of Battery, he drew off for the present, and wasted and
spoiled the Country round about.

Thence he marched against the Siculi, pretending these were the People he
chiefly aimed at in the War, thereby to make the Naxians and Cataneans the more
secure. When he lay near to Enna, he persuaded Acimnestus of Enna to take upon
him the Sovereignty, promising to assist him. This Acimnestus accomplished. But
when he would not receive Dionysius into the City, he began to storm, and
change his Measures, and stirred up the Enneans to throw off his Authority.
Upon this, toregain their Liberty, they suddenly ran P. 403.
together armed into the Market place; and now the City was full of Tumult and
Confusion; at which instant Dionysius hearing of the Sedition, and getting
together his trustiest Friends, he advanced to a Place where was no Guard, and
there on a sudden rushing into the City, takes Acimnestus, and delivers him up
to the Wills of the Enneans, and returned without doing any hurt to the Place.
Not that he did this either out of Love to Justice, or to them; but that he
might be trusted for the future by the rest of the Cities.

Removing from thence, he besieged the City of Now St. Nicholas in Sicily. Ant.
Chapter 401.
Erbita; but not succeeding there, he made Peace with them, and led away his
Army against Catana; for Arcesilaus the Governor had promised to betray it: And
in accomplishment of his Treachery, about midnight let him in within the Walls,
and so he gained the City. Then he disarmed all the Citizens, and placed there
a sufficient Garrison. Afterward Procles the General of the Naxians (won over
by Promises of great Rewards) betrayed the City to Dionysius. When he had
rewarded the Traitor, and set all his Kindred at liberty, he razed the City,
and gave the Spoil thereof to his Soldiers, and carried away all the rest of
the Citizens as Slaves. He dealt not better with the Inhabitants of Catana,
whom he (...), i. e. sub hasta vendidit, sold under the Spear.
sold for Slaves to the Syracusians. The Country of the Naxians he gave to the
neighboring Sicilians, but the City of Catana he bestowed upon the Campanians
for an Habitation.

From thence he again moved to Leontum and besieged it with all his Forces, and
by his Messengers required them to submit to his Government, and join
themselves as one Body to the City of Syracuse. The Leontines seeing no hope of
Relief, and considering the ruin of the Naxians and Cataneans, were seized
with great terror, lest they themselves should be swallowed up in the like
destruction, therefore they concluded it most advisable to yield to the present
time, and so submitted to the Conditions offered, and left their Country, and
went to Syracuse.

Archonide, Prince of the Erbitans (after the People of Erbita had made peace
with Dionysius determined to build a new City, for he had many Mercenaries, and
a mixed multitude Alesa built by Archonides.
of Strangers who fled thither for fear of the War by Dionysius; and many
likewise of Erbita freely gave up their Names to follow him to this new
intended Colony. With this multitude he possessed himself of a little Hill,
Eight About a mile.
Stages or Furlongs from the Sea, and there laid the foundation of the City
Alesa: But because there were other Cities in Sicily that bore that name, he
added to it, as it were, a Surname, and called it from himself Alesa
Archonidis. In process of time when the City abounded in wealth, partly by
reason of its Traffic by Sea, and Privileges granted to it by the Romans:
Ant. Chapter 401.


a great desire to finish this Fortification, with all speed he gets together a
great multitude from all parts of the Country, out of which he chose Threescore
thousand that were Freemen and fit for his purpose, and proportioned the
several parts of the Work amongst them. To every Furlong he ordered an Overseer
or Master-Workman, and to every About 20 Yards.
Plethrum a Mason, and Two hundred Laborers. Besides these, a great number
were employed in cutting out of the Quarries rough and unwrought Stone.

He had likewise Six thousand yoke of Oxen appointed in several places for
carrying on of the Work. The multitude of the Workmen wrought great admiration
in the Spectators, whilst every one was diligent to perfect that which was
allotted to his share. For Dionysius to encourage 'em, promised great Rewards
here to the Architects, there to the Carpenters, and here again to the
Laborers; and he himself with his Friends, would often oversee the Work, whole
Days together, going every where from one place to another, taking care to ease
and relieve them that were tired out. At length laying aside all State and
Majesty, he wrought like a private person, and would be the first that Ant. Chapter
400.
should set upon Works of the greatest difficulty, and endure as much hardship
as the meanest Labourer; by which means every one strived who should do most,
insomuch, as besides their daily Labors they wrought some part of the Night;
so great was the Ambition of the very common People to finish the Work; so that
(beyond what could have been believed or imagined) Almost four Miles.
the Wall was finished in the space of Twenty Days, Thirty Furlongs in length,
and so proportionable in height; that for its strength it seemed to slight the
force of any Assailant. For it had many high Towers that stood at convenient
distances one from another, and it was built of hewn Stone most artificially
jointed and compacted, every Stone Four Foot square.

CHAP. V.
The War beeween Cyrus and his Brother Artaxerxes King of Persia. Cyrus routed.
The Grecian Forces in straits; their brave Behavior; and long and troublesome
March out of Persia into Greece.

AT the end of the Year Exenetus was made Archon or Lord Chancellor of Athens,
and Six Military Tribunes, Publius Cornelius, Cesus Fabius, Spurius Nausius,
Caius Valerius, Marcus Sergius, and Junius Lucullus executed the Consular
Dignity at Rome. At this time Cyrus Chief of all the Lord-Lieutenants of the
Maritine Provinces, now determins Olymp. 94. 4. Ant. Chapter 399. Cyrus makes War
against Artaxerxes.
to prosecute that War against Artaxerxes his Brother, which he had long before
been ruminating in his Mind: for this young Man was of a very high Spirit, and
much addicted to Martial Affairs. To this end he Musters a great Army of
strangers, and furnishes himself with all things necessary for the Expedition;
but did not as yet discover to his Army what he intended, but gave out that he
raised an Army to go against some Tyrants in Cilicia who had rebelled against
the King. He sent moreover an Ambassador to the Lacedaemonians to put them in
mind of the Services he had done 'em in the War against Athens, and to desire
their Aid in the design he had now on foot. Upon this, the Lacedaemonians
conceiving this War would be their advantage, forthwith decreed Aid to be sent
to Cyrus, and presently sent Orders to Samus the Admiral, of their Fleet, to
observe whatever was commanded him by Cyrus. Hereupon Samus having then Five
Ant. Chapter 399.
and twenty Galleys of three Tire of Oars under his Command, with these passed
over to Ephesus to Cyrus's Admiral, offering his Assistance in every thing he
should be Commanded. The Lacedaemonians sent over likewise under the Command of
Chricosophus, Eight hundred Corseteers. One Tamos was Admiral of the Barbarian
Fleet, and had under his P. 406.
Command Fifty Galleys well equipped. As soon as the Spartan Fleet arrived,
both Fleets set Sail, as if they intended for Cilicia.

When Cyrus had got together at Sardis the choicest Soldiers of Asia, and
Thirteen thousand Mercenaries, he made those Persians that were of his kindred,
Governors of Lydia and Phrygia, but the Chief Command of Jonia and Eolia he
bestowed upon his trusty Friend Tamon of Memphis. Having settled these Matters,
he then presently marched with his Army toward Cilicia and Pisidia, a Rumor
being spread abroad that some of those Nations had made a Defection. He had out
of Asia Seventy thousand Men, of which Three thousand were Horse: Out of
Peloponnesus and other parts of Greece Thirteen thousand Mercenaries. Clearchus
the Lacedemonian was General of all the Peloponnesians, except the Acheans:
Proxenus of the Beotians; Socrates of the Acheans; and Meno commanded the
Thessalians. The Persians led the Barbarians every one in their proper
Companies and Regiments, and Cyrus was Generalissimo; who had now discovered
the design of this Expedition to his Officers, but wisely concealed it from the
Common Soldiers, lest by the greatness of the Attempt they should be
discouraged, and so desert him. And further, considering the great Journey they
were to march, he took special care of the Soldiers, was very familiar with
every one, and made plentiful Provision for them in every Ant. Chapter 399.
place.

At length, having passed through Lybia and Phrygia, and the Countries
bordering upon Cilicia, they came to the Borders and Gates leading into
Cilicia. The Passage there is very straight and rugged for the space of Twenty
Two Miles and an half.
Furlongs, hemmed in on either side with vast and very high and inaccessible
Mountains. From these Mountains on both sides a Wall was drawn cross the
Passage to defend it, in which were those Gates before mentiond. When his
Forces had passed through this way, he entered into a Champain Country, inferior
to none in Asia for sweetness and pleasantness: Through these pleasant Fields
he marched to Tarsus, the largest City of Cilicia, which he easily forced to
submit.

When Syennesis, King of Cilicia, heard of this great Army, he was greatly
perplexed what to do, because he saw he was in no condition to cope with so
great a Force. But being sent for by Cyrus with promises of safe Conduct, he
came to him, and being acquainted with the Design, promised his assistance
against Artaxerxes, and straitway joined Cyrus with a small Party, under the
Command of one of his Sons: But being a crafty Man, and preparing for the
Worst, he sent the other secretly to the King to inform him of the great Forces
that were coming against him; and that though he himself (much against his
Will) was forced to join with Cyrus, yet he was still Loyal and Faithful to the
King, and would fall off and return to the King's Standard when he had
opportunity.

In the mean time, Cyrus spent Twenty days in refreshing his Army, and Listing
of more Soldiers. Then breaking up his Camp, he acquainted all the Common
Soldiers, that this Expedition was intended against Artaxerxes. Upon this every
one weighing the thing seriously with himself, and considering the vast length
of the Way they were to march, and how many Enemies Nations they were to pass
through, took the Matter very grievously. For a Rumor was spread abroad that
it was four Months march to Bactria, Ant. Chapter 399.
and that the King had an Army of (...).
Four hundred thousand Men. Upon which the Soldiers were so transported with
Fear and Rage, that they resolved to kill all their Officers as Traitors. But
when Cyrus (not without many Entreaties) interposed his Authority, and assured
them that he not did intend to lead them against the King, but against a
certain Governor in Syria, the Mutiny ceased: And upon the Increase of their
Pay, they all returned to their former Love and Esteem of their General.

Having now marched almost through all Cilicia, he took Shipping and arrived at
last by P. 407.
Sea at Issus, the utmost City of that Country near the Seaside. At the same
time, the Lacedaemonian Fleet arrived there, and landed their Men, assuring him
of the Friendship of the Spartans, where they delivered to Cyrus Eight hundred
Foot, under the Command of Chirosophus: They pretended that these were sent
privately to Cyrus, by his Friends, when in truth, all was done by the Decree
and Order of the The Senate at Sparta.
Ephori. For the Lacedaemonians had not as yet proclaimed open War against the
King, but kept their Counsels secret till they spied a fit Opportunity, and how
things were like to go.

Decamping from thence, Cyrus moves toward Syria, and ordered the Admirals to
sail along near unto the Shore, and attend upon him as he marched by Land. When
he came to the Gates.
Pile (as they are called) and found the Entrance without any Guard, he was
much pleased; for he was full of Fear lest some had seized the Passes before
him. For the Place is naturally very straight, and defended by Craggy Rocks on
every side, so that it may be kept by a very few Men. For there are two
Mountains that rise up on either side near one to another, the one mounting up
with sharp Rocks of a prodigious height, and the other called Libanus,
beginning at the very Entrance into the only Passage Ant. Chapter 399.
that leads through those Places, and runs out as far as to Phenicia. The space
lying between these two Mountains is about A Quarter and an half of a Mile.
Three Furlongs wide, strongly fortified, shut up with straight and narrow
Gates. When Cyrus had passed through here, he discharged the Fleet, and sent it
back to Ephesus; for he had no occasion to use it, being now to march through
the Heart of the Country.

After twenty Days march he came to Thapsacus, near to the River Euphrates.
After he had continued here Five days, and had gained the Hearts of the
Soldiers by plenty of Provision, and rich Spoils and Booties, he called a
Council, and discovered to 'em his whole design. But perceiving that the Army
was very uneasy upon what he said, he earnestly entreated all of them, that
they would not now Desert him, and endeavored to pacify them, by promising
(besides other Rewards) a 3 l. 2 s. 6 d.
Mina apiece to every Man, as soon as he came to Babylon: Upon which, being
thus encouraged, and having their Expectations raised high, they at length
consented. Hereupon, Cyrus passed his Army over Euphrates, and went forward
without making any Halt; and as soon as he came to the Borders of Babylon he
gave leave to his Army to refresh themselves.

Artaxerxes the King, had some time before notice given him by Pharnabazus, of
the secret Preparations of Cyrus against him, but now having certain
Intelligence of his March, he called all his Forces together from every place
to Ecbatana in Media; and with what Force he then had marched against Cyrus,
not being willing to stay for the Aids from India and other Nations, who he
perceived would be too long in coming up to him by reason of the great
Distances of the several Places from whence they came. His Army (as Ephorus
relates) amounted to no less then Four hundred thousand Horse and Foot.

When he came within the Borders of Babylon, he Encamped at Euphrates,
purposing there to leave his heavy Baggage: For he knew the Enemy was not far
off, and therefore Ant. Chapter 399.
had just Cause to fear their desperate and daring Attempt: He drew therefore a
Trench Threescore Foot in breadth and Ten in depth, and Barricaded it with
Carts and Carriages as with a Wall; here he left his Baggage and those that
were Sick and Weak with but a slender Guard, but he himself with a swift March
made toward the Enemy who were then near at hand.

When Cyrus saw the King's Army advancing, he forthwith commanded all his Army
P. 408. The Battle between Cyrus and Arraxerxes: It was fought at a Placed
called Cynaxa, 500 Furlongs from Babylon. Plut. Artaxerxes.
to their Arms. The Lacedaemonians and some Mercenaries were in the Right Wing,
stretched out to the River Euphrates, under the Command of Clearchus the
Macedonian, with whom were joined above a Thousand Paphlagonian Horse. The Lest
Wing was commanded by Arideus, consisting of Phrygians and Lydians, and in this
were about a Thousand Horse more. In the middle Battle was Cyrus himself, with
a Guard for his Person consisting of the best Persian Soldiers and other
Barbarians, to the number of Ten thousand Men; before whom marched as a
Vaunt-guard a Thousand Horse gallantly accoutred, with Grecian Swords and Coats
of Mail. On the other side, Artaxerxes placed a great number of hooked Chariots
in front of his whole Army, and committing the two Wings to the Command of
Persian Officers, he himself remained with the Main Body, guarded with no less
then Fifty thousand choice Men.

When the Armies came within A Quarter and half of a Mile.
Three Furlongs one of another, the Grecians sang the The Pean was a song to
Mars before the Fight, and to Apollo after the Victory. Ant. Chapter 399.
Pean, and then silently led the Van; and as soon as they came within the Cast
of a Dart they ran in upon the Enemy with great Fury; for so Clearchus had
ordered them, conceiving, that if they fought at a great Distance, their whole
Bodies would be Marks for their Enemies, during all the time of the Fight;
whereas if they engaged close at Hand, they would be less subject to the Darts
and Arrows of the Persians. As soon as the Main Body with Cyrus came up to the
King's, a Shower of Darts and Arrows like a Tempest, fell upon them, as great
as can be imagined might be discharged by a Body of Fifty thousand Men. But
after they had fought a while with their Darts at a distance, at length they
fell to it hand to hand. The Lacedaemonians and Mercenaries at the first Charge
routed that Part of the Army that opposed them, far exceeding the Barbarians
both in dexterity of Fight and the resplendant brightness of their Arms. For
all the Barbarians were but lightly armed, and many of the Regiments were of
the meanest Soldiers, and the greatest part but raw and unexpert in War. The
Grecians on the contrary, by so long and continual exercise of their Arms in
the late Peloponnesian War, were grown very skilful and excellent Soldiers; so
that they put their Adversaries presently to flight, and made a great slaughter
of the Barbarians. It so happened that both the Generals (who were contending
for the Kingdom) being in the main Battle on either side, and weighing how
fatal the issue would be, made one against the other, purposing to decide the
Controversy by their own hands; and Destiny seemed now to engage these two
Brothers in a Duel, as if it had been in imitation of that ancient and stout
Combat between The Sons of Oedipus King of Thebes, killed one another in a
Combat, fighting for the Kingdom. Plut. Lives. Ant. Chapter 399.
Eteocles and Polynices, so memoriz'd by Poets in their Tragedies. Here Cyrus
made the Onset, and at a distance threw his Javelin with all his force at the
King, and brought him down to the Ground, who was presently taken up as dead,
and carried out of the Fight by them that were about him. Upon this
Tissaphernes, a Noble Persian, steps into the King's place, encourages the
Soldiers and sights valiantly himself; endeavoring to revenge the supposed
Death of the King, flew about into every Place with the choicest of the Troops,
and made a dreadful Slaughter wherever he came, insomuch as his Heat and
extraordinary Courage was taken notice of by them that were at a great distance.

Cyrus likewise lifted up with the Success of his Arms, siercely rushes into
the midst of the Battle, and signalized his Courage with the slaughter of many
of his Enemies. But rashly, running himself into eminent Dangers, he at length
received a mortal Wound from a common Soldier of the Persians, and there fell
down dead: Upon whose fall the Spirits of the Royalists revived and renewed the
Fight, and at last by the Number of their Forces, and Confidence of success,
wearied out their opposers.

Arideus, Cyrus's General and Commander in the other part of the Army, at the
first P. 409.
valiantly received the Charge of the Barbarians: But afterward (the Wing of
the Enemy stretching in length far beyond him, and the Rumor of the Death of
Cyrus coming to him, as a further Discouragement) he retreated with those under
his Command to a Post very commodious for that purpose. Clearchus perceiving
the main Body of their Army to be routed, and the rest ready to fly, stopped
his own Men in their pursuit; for he feared that if the whole Army of the
Barbarians should fall upon the Grecians, they would be all utterly cut off. In
the mean time, the Body where the Persian King immediately commanded, having
routed the Party that engaged them, rifled Cyrus's Camp. Afterward Ant. Chapter
399.
(it now growing toward Night) in one Body they made against the Greeks, who
valiantly (like Men of brave and generous Spirits) received the Charge; the
Barbarians did Cyrus's Army Routed.
not long stand their ground, but being worsted by the Valor and Dexterity of
the Grecians were presently put to flight.

Clearchus, after he had made a great slaughter among them, (it being now dark)
erected a Trophy, and then retired to his Camp about the time of the second
Watch. The Battle thus ended, an account was taken of those that were slain on
the King's side, which amounted to above Fifteen thousand, the greatest part of
whom were killed by the Lacedaemonians and Mercenaries, under the Command of
Clearchus. On the other side, of Cyrus his Army were slain Three thousand. No
account is given of any of the Grecians that were slain, but only a few wounded.

The next day, Arideus, who retired to his former Post (as we have before
related) sent to Clearchus to desire him to join their Forces, that so they
might better secure themselves by the advantage of Places near to the Sea side.
For Cyrus being dead, and the King's Forces now Victors, a Terror seized the
whole Army, and every one repented himself of his bold and rash attempt to
Depose Artaxerxes.

Hereupon Clearchus called a Council of War of all the Captains and Officers of
the Army, to advise what was to be done in the present Exigent of Affairs.
While they were in Consult, there came to them Messengers from the King, the
Chief of whom was one Philenus, a Grecian, of the Island Now Zant.
Zacyn(...)s. When they were introduced, they declared their Message in this
manner: Thus says King Artaxerxes; In as much as Cyrus is killed, and I am now
Conqueror, lay down your Arms, make haste to my Gates, and consider how to
appease me, that ye may find some favor. Upon these words all the Officers
answered as Leonidas Ant. Chapter 399.
had done in time past when Xerxes sent to the Guard at Thermopyle to give up
their Arms, which was to this purpose, That if at any time after they should
become Xerxes' s Friends, they should be more able to do him service with their
Arms than without them; and if they were forced to be his Enemies they could
better defend themselves in fighting against him. After Clearchus had returned
this Answer to the same effect, Proxenus the Theban, said thus: We have now
lost almost all we have, only our Hearts and our Arms are still our own, and as
long as we keep these we doubt not but by our Courage we may be able to better
our Condition; But when we part with our Arms our Valor is Useless and
Unprofitable: And therefore bid them tell the King, That if he designed any
Attack upon them, they were ready with their Arms to oppose him. Sophilus
likewise, one of the Commanders, is reported to have said, That he wondered at
the King's demands; For, says he, if the King thinks himself stronger than the
Grecians, let him draw down his Army upon us, and take our Arms by Force: But
if he means only to persuade us, and intends to give us thanks for the favor,
let him first say so. To this Socrates P. 410.
the Achean added, The King, said he, deals with us without Sense or Reason;
for that which he would have to be taken from us, he demands forthwith to be
delivered to him, and that which we are to expect in return, we must seek for
after as Suppliants, by Petition and Entreaty. To conclude, If he be so
ignorant how things stand, as that he thinks fit to Command the Conquerors, as
if they were Conquered, that he may learn the better to judge whether side
carries away the Victory, let him set upon us with his innumerable Army. But if
he very well knows that we Ant. Chapter 399.
are Conquerors, and yet seeks deceitfully with a Lie to circumvent us, how can
we rely upon his Promises for things to come? The Messengers were dismissed
with these Answers, and so departed.

Clearchus afterward marched with his Squadron, to the Place where the rest of
the Army The troublesome March of the Grecians out of Persia into their own
Country.
that escaped out of the Battle were posted; and when all the Forces were got
together they entered into a Council of War concerning their marching back to
the Seaside, and so from thence how to go on. In this Consult it was judged
most advisable, not to return the same way they came; for that a great Part of
it was Desert and Barren, and the more Hazardous, because the Enemy would be
pressing continually upon their Heels: At length it was resolved, with a swift
March to lead the Army toward Paphlagonia, yet not so fast but that they might
furnish themselves with Provision in the way. But the King, as soon as he begun
to be healed of his Wounds, and heard of the Enemy's being retired, supposing
that they fled, hastened after them with all speed; and because they moved but
slowly, at last he overtook them, and Night drawing on Encamped near at hand.
About break of day next Morning the Grecians drew up in Battalia; upon which he
sent Messengers to them, and for that time granted to them a Truce for three
Days: within which it was agreed that the King should suffer them to pass
quietly through his Country, and that he should allow them Guides to the
Seaside, and furnish them with Provision in their march for their Money. And
that all the Mercenaries under the Command Ant. Chapter 399.
of Clearchus and Arideus should pass peaceably through all places, provided
they committed no outrages. Upon which, they set upon their Journey, and the
King marched back with his Army to Babylon, and there rewarded them that had
behaved themselves courageously in the Battle; amongst whom Tissaphernes was
judged the bravest Man, and therefore he honored him with many Rich and
Princely Gifts, and bestowed his Daughter upon him in Marriage, using him ever
after as his fast and faithful Friend. He made him likewise Governor and
Lord Lieutenant of all the Provinces that had been under the Command of Cyrus,
upon the Seacoasts. But Tissaphernes perceiving that the King was Tissaphernes
pursues the Grecians.
irreconcileably incensed against the Grecians, promised to destroy 'em all if
he would furnish him with an Army, and be reconciled to Arideus: for through
him, he said, he should be able to circumvent all the Grecians in their Journey.

This Advice was very acceptable to the King, and therefore he suffered him to
choose the best of the Soldiers, and as many as he thought fit out of the whole
Army, Within the Parenthesis this, or some thing like in sense is omitted in
the Greek.
With these in all haste he pursued the Grecians, and at length encamped not
far off from them, and sent Messengers to them to desire that Clearchus and the
rest of the Commanders would come to him and hear what he had to say to them.
Upon which, almost all the Colonels and Captains (as became them) went along
with Clearchus to Tissaphernes; and about Two hundred Soldiers followed after
to buy Provision. Tissaphernes called all the Colonels and Chief Officers into
his Tent, but the Captains and other inferior Officers stood without. In a
short time after upon the putting forth of a Purple Flag from the top of his
Pavilion, the Commanders within were (...) seized, and others (appointed for
that Ant. Chapter 399. Tissaphernes's Treachery in killing the Grecian Commanders.
purpose) killed all the rest that stood without; and the other Soldiers that
came to buy Victuals were killed in every place here and there as they were
found; only one made his escape to the Camp, and there related the Slaughter.
Upon the hearing of this bloody Fact the Soldiers in great Consternation ran in
confusion to their Arms, having neither General, Colonel, or almost any other
Officer.

When none was willing to undertake the Charge, they chose several Officers
from Cheirisophus chos^n General of the Greeks. P. 411.
amongst themselves, and fixed upon one of those to be the General, which was
Cheirisophus the Lacedemonian. The Army hereupon being Marshalled by these
Officers into that Order which was judged best, set forward toward
Paphlagonia. Tissaphernes in the mean time sends the General and the other
Commanders bound in Chains to Artaxerxes, who put them all to death, but only
Menon whom he released: for he was supposed to have been willing to have
delivered up the Grecians, because he was angry with them for not surrendering
themselves. After this horrid Act, Tissaphernes with his Forces pursued the
Greeks, and picked up stragglers here and there, but durst never face their
whole Army, because he was afraid of the rage and valor of Men in a desperate
condition. And therefore setting upon them now and then only in such places as
he judged most for his advantage, he made no great slaughter of them, but with
small and inconsiderable loss on the Grecians part, pursued them as far as the
Country of the The Carducians are People in Media, not subject unto Persia.
Carducians. But then perceiving he was not likely to gain any advantage by
attacking the Enemy thus in the Rear, he marches away with his Army toward
Jonia.

But the Grecians spent seven days in passing over the Mountains of the Or
Carduchi.
Carducians, and in that time suffered very much from the Inhabitants being a
Warlike People, and well acquainted with the Passes in those parts. They were a
free People, and Enemies to the King, and very good Soldiers, especially
skilful and experienced in Hurling great Ant. Chapter 399.
Stones out of Slings, and shooting in Bows of a vast bigness, and more than
ordinary strength. These People galled the Grecians from the rising Grounds,
killing, and miserably wounding many of them; for their Arrows being above Two
Cubits long, pierced both their Shields and Breast-plates, so that no Armor
could repel their force. And it is said that these sort of weapons were so
extraordinary big, that the Grecians used to cast these as Saunians instead of
their Thong-Darts.

When they had passed this Country with great difficulty, they came to the
River Which divides Armenia from the Carduchi.
Centrites, and passed over here into Armenia, which was then under the
Government of Teribazus, Lord Lieutenant to the King of Persia, with whom they
made a League, and so passed quietly as friends through his Province. But as
they marched over the Mountains of Armenia, the Snow was so very deep, they
were in danger every Man to be lost. For at the first when the Wind begins to
rise, the Snow falls but leisurely and by degrees, so that it occasions no
great molestation or trouble to the Travelers: But then presently the Wind
increasing, the Snow falls so tempestuously, and on a sudden covers the ground
so thick and deep that none can possibly see before them, nor know where they
are. Hence Fear and Terror seized upon the whole Army, seeing nothing but
certain Destruction Ant. Chapter 399
was behind 'em if they returned, and no possibility to advance forward by
reason of the depth of the Snow; besides, Winter was then very sharp and coming
on apace, A Tempest upon the Grecians at Land.
and such a Tempest of Wind, with a storm of Hail arose, and blew like a
Whirlwind into their very Faces, that the whole Army was forced to stand still.
For none being able to endure so sad and lamentable a March, every Man was
necessitated to abide in the place where the Storm found him: And tho all were
in extreme want, yet they patiently endured that whole Night and Day the
sharpness of the Winter's Cold, attended with all manner of uncomfortable
circumstances. For all their Arms were covered with Snow which fell continually
in great abundance. Their Bodies were stiff and benumbed with Ice (which became
more sharp and biting, after the Air was calm and still) and so grievous were
the pressures they lay under, that they took no Rest all the Night long. Some
indeed cherished themselves with a little Fire they had kindled; others had
their Bodies so benumbed with Cold, that little hopes of Life remained, having
all their Fingers and Toes perished. When the Night was over, they found most
of their Carriage-Horses and Cattle Lame and Useless, many Men dead, and not a
few there were, who though they had some Life remaining, yet through the
sharpness of the Cold their Bodies were immovable; and some were as if they
were stricken blind by the whiteness of the Snow, and P. 412.
every Man had certainly perished if they had not by going a little further
found some small Villages, where there was plenty of Supplies for their
necessities: Here the People went down underground by steps, and the Cattle by
other passages made through the Earth; and in these little Cells were stored
both Hay for the Cattle, and great plenty of all things necessary for the
support and sustenance of Man's Life. After they had staid here Eight Days,
they came at length to the River In Colchis running into the Euxine Sea.
Phasis.

There they abode Four Days, and then passed through the Country of the
Chaoniti. rather Colchi.
Chaoniti and Phasians, where being fallen upon by the Inhabitants in their
march, they made a great slaughter among 'em, and possessed themselves of their
Towns, which were full of Provision and other rich booty, and there they rested
Fifteen Days. Thence marching through the Country of the Chalcideans, in the
space of Seven Days they arrived at the River called A River in Caria.
Harpasus About 132 Yards.
Four Plethra broad. From thence they marched through the Plains of the
Tascutians, where they had plenty of all things, and spent three Days in
refreshing themselves. In four Days after they came to the great City called
Belonging to the Macrones, a People of Pontus. Ant. Chapter 399.
Gymnasia. Here the Prince of the Country entered into a League with them, and
allowed 'em Guides as far as to the Sea: After Fifteen days journey they came
to the Mountain Chenius, where they that were in the Van, as soon as they
discerned the Sea afar off, were transported with exceeding Joy, and gave up so
great a shout, as they that were in the Rear suddenly put themselves in a
posture of Defense, supposing some Enemy had broke in upon them; But as soon as
they all came to the top of the Hill, from whence they might have a prospect of
the Sea, they lift up their hands and gave Thanks to the Gods as if now they
were past all danger for the future. There they got together great heaps of
Stones, and of them raised up high Altars, upon which they fixed the spoils
taken from the Barbarians as Eternal Monuments of their Expedition. They
bestowed a Silver Cup and a Persian Garment upon the Guide; who pointing to
them the way to the A People of Pontus.
Macrones, took his leave.

After the Grecians entered the Country of the Macrones, they made a League with
them; in confirmation of which the Grecians received a Spear from the
Barbarians, and gave another to them: for this was a certain pledge of the
faithful observance of their Leagues (received from their forefathers) as the
Barbarians alleged: When they had passed the Mountains in these parts, they
came down into the Country of the Colchians, where a great body of the
Inhabitants came forth against them, whom the Grecians routed, and killed vast
numbers of them: Then possessing themselves of a Hill, naturally desencible,
thence they wasted the Country, and bringing all the spoil thither, they
plentifully refreshed themselves. In these places were multitudes of
Bees-hives, from whence might be had large Honey-combs: But a mischief to
admiration happened to them that The strange effect of a sort of Honey.
tasted of them; for as many as eat never so little went presently Mad, and lay
upon the ground as if they were dead. And because many fed themselves with
these Combs, a great multitude lay up and down here and there as if they had
been slain in a Field-Battle. This was a very sad day to the whole Army, being
amazed with the strangeness of the thing, and the number of those that lay
grovelling upon the ground. But the next Ant. Chapter 399
day about the same hour all came to themselves again, and rose up of sound and
perfect Mind, and found themselves in no other condition than as if Health and
Strength had been restored 'em by drinking of a Medicinal potion. Being thus
recovered, three days after they came to City in Capadocia. P. 413.
Trapezon a Greek City. This is a Colony of A People of Pontus in the City
Sinope. Gymnick Plays, i. e. Wrestling, Leaping, Running, Qu^its, Fighting with
Clubs, in which sports they were naked. Isidor. Origin. Lib. 18. C. 17, 18.
Sinopians, and belonging to the Colchians: Here they continued Thirty Days,
being bountifully entertained by the Citizens, and there sacrificed to Hercules
and to Jupiter Soter, and celebrated the A City in Pontus.
Gymnick Games. It Is the common Fame that the Ship Argos with Jason and his
companions arrived here. Hence Cheirisophus the General was sent to Byzantium
to procure Shipping to convey them thither; for he and Anaxibius the Bizantian
Admiral were accounted intimate and special friends; thither therefore he
speedily sails. The Grecians in the mean time being furnished with two small
Vessels by the Trapezons, made incursions both by Sea and Land upon the
neighboring Barbarians. Thirty days they had waited for the return of
Cheirisophus: but he staying longer than they expected, and their Provision now
growing scant, they departed from thence, and after three days reached unto *
Gerasunta, which is likewise a Grecian City, built by the Vide antea. Ant. Chapter
399.
Sinopians, After they had staid here a few days they marched into the Country
of the Mesynecans, but here they were assailed by the Inhabitants in great
Bodies, and in an Engagement killed a great number; those that escaped fled to
a Town they inhabited, defended with wooden (...).
Towers, Seven Stories of Chambers one above another. This Town the Grecians
assaulted, and at length took it by Storm. This Place was the Metropolis and
chiefest Fort of the Country, and in the highest part stood the King's Palace.
It is the Law of the Country here, that the King must continue in this Palace
during his Life, and thence issue out all his Edicts to the People. The
Grecians related that they passed through no Nation more barbarous than this:
for the Men stick not to have carnal knowledge of the Women in open view; and
the better and richer sort fatten their Children with boiled Walnuts. and are
stigmatized with diverse marks burnt into their Flesh, both upon their Backs and
Breasts. The Grecians marched through this Country in Eight days, and through
the next called Tibaris in Three. Thence they passed to Gotyora a Greek City
and Colony of Ant. Chapter 399.
the Sinopians, where they abode Fifty days, wasting and spoiling the barbarous
Nations bordering upon Paphlagonia. Here the Heraclians and Sinopians furnished
them with Shipping, in which both they and their Cargo were conveyed into their
own Country.

Sinope was built by the Milesians, situated within the Confines of
Paphlagonia; of the greatest account and Authority of any in those parts. Here
Mithridates (so famous in our Age by his Wars against the Romans) kept his
Court. Cheirisophus (who was sent away for Shipping, but all in vain) returned
to the Army. But the other Sinopians having entertained them with all the
demonstrations of Kindness and Humanity, took care to convey them to Heraclea,
a City of the Megarensians. From thence the whole Fleet arrived at a Peninsula
called Acherusia, where Hercules (as the Fable is) drew Cerberus out of Hell.
Thence they marched by Land through Bithynia, where they fell into great
hazards and hardships by the Attacks of the Inhabitants, who assaulted them in
every place as they passed. However, at last (with great difficulty) they came
to Chrysopolis, a City of Chalcedonia This is mistaken, as appears afterward
by the number of those that went with Xenophon into Thrace. Vide postea. Olymp.
95. 1.
Three thousand eight hundred being only left of Ten thousand. From hence some
of 'em with ease and safety returned every Man into his own Country; the rest
joined in a Body at Chersonesus, and besieged a City bordering upon Thrace. And
this was the issue of Cyrus his Expedition against his Brother Artaxerxes.

CHAP. VI.
Thrasybulus opposes the Thirty Tyrants. The Cruelty of Psammiticus King of
Egypt, toward his old Friend Tamos that fled to him for succor from the
Persians. Dercyllidas sent General against the Persians into Asia. Conon made
Admiral of the Persian Fleet.

IN the mean time, the Usurping Tyrants at Athens every day were banishing or
putting The Cruelty of the Thirty Tyrants at Athens continued. The Acts of
Thrasybulus.
to Death some or other. At which Cruelty while the Thebans were much Incensed,
and courteously entertained the Exiles, Thrasybulus, Sirnam'd Tyrius, (but a
Citizen of Athens, and forced to fly to avoid the Rage of the Thirty Usurpers)
by the aid of the Thebans, underhand possessed himself of a Place in Attica
called Phila. It was a very strong Castle, an Twelve Mile and a half. P. 414.
Hundred Stages distant from Athens: By which means an easy Passage might be
had at all times to invade Attica.

As soon as the Tyrants had Intelligence of what was done, they led forth their
Forces in order to Besiege the Place; but as soon as they were set down before
it, there fell a great Snow: Whereupon, while some were very busy in removing
their Tents, the Common Soldiers concluded that some of their Army was put to
flight by an Enemy at hand, that had broke in suddenly upon them; upon which,
being struck with a * Panick Fear, (...).
they drew off and Encamped in another Place. The Thirty, when they saw the
Citizens of Athens (those that had no share in the Administration of the
Commonwealth with the Xenophons Hellen. Lib. 2. Ant. Chapter 399.
Three thousand) to be hot and earnest to Dissolve the Government, Encamped in
the Pireum, and over-awed the City with Foreign Soldiers; and in the mean time
put to Death some of Elusina and Salamis, for joining in a Conspiracy with the
Exiles.

Whilst these things were acting, great numbers of the Fugitives flocked to the
Camp of Thrasybulus, Not in the Greek, but in the Latin, yet necessary for the
Sense.
and at the same time there came to him Ambassadors from the Thirty, under
color to treat concerning some Prisoners, but in truth privately to advise him
to dismiss the Fugitives, and to share with them in the Covernment of the City
in the room of Theramenes, and that he should have liberty to restore any Ten
of the Exiles to their Country, such as he thought fit to choose. To which
Thrasybulus answered, That he looked upon his Banishment to be far more
honorable than the whole Power and Dominion of the Thirty, and that he would
never put up his Sword till all the Citizens from every Place were received,
and the People restored to their former Liberties, descended to them from their
Ancestors.

When the Tyrants perceived the Defection increased (through hatred of their
Tyranny) and that the Number of the Exiles increased, they sent their
Ambassadors to Sparta to desire aid; and they themselves in the mean time got
together what Forces they could, and Encamped at a Place called Acarnas.
Thrasybulus leaving but a small Guard in the Castle, marches out against them
with Twelve hundred of the Exiles, and setting upon them in the Night at
unawares, kills many of them, and the rest (being terrified with the Tumult and
Confusion occasioned by the Surprise) he forces in great precipitation to fly
into the City. And presently after the success of this attack, he marches
against the Pireum, and possesses himself of Munychia, a barren Hill, but
strong and well fortified. Upon this the Tyrants brought all their Forces into
the Pireum, and assaulted Munychia by Critias Ant. Chapter 399.
their General; whereupon was a sharp Encounter a long time. For the Tyrants
had the advantage of Number, and the Exiles of the strength of the Place. At
length the Forces of the Thirty (being discouraged and Critias slain) retired,
but the Exiles judged it not advisable to pursue them.

Frequent Assaults were afterward made upon the Exiles; at length the Army of
Thrasybulus broke in on a sudden with great violence upon the Enemy, and not
only routed them, but gained possession of the Pireum.

A great Multitude who hated the Tyranny, continually flocked out of the City
into the Pireum, and all the Exiles from every place (hearing of the Success of
Thrasybulus) hasted thither to him, so that at length the number of the Exiles
exceeded the other; upon which Encouragement they began to besiege the City.
But they within, to the end a Peace might be concluded upon fair terms, cast
off the Thirty, and sent them out of the City, and Established a Decemvirate
with Sovereign Power. But as soon as these Ten were settled in the Magistracy
(instead of minding any thing relating to the Peace) they turned absolute
Tyrants, and sent to Lacedaemon for Forty Ships and a Thousand Soldiers, under
the Command of Lysander. Pausanias then King of Lacedaemon, both out of Envy to
The Thirty Deposed, Liberty restored to Athens. P. 415.
Lysander, and for that he understood the rest of the Greeks had an evil Eye
against Sparta, marched with a great Army to Athens, and reconciled the Exiles
and the Citizens. Thus at length the Athenians were restored to their Country,
and now began to govern according to their own ancient Laws. Those that were
afraid lest they should suffer due Punishment for their former Wickedness, had
Liberty to remove themselves to Elusina. Ant. Chapter 399.


About this time they of Elis fearing the Power of the Lacedaemonians, made
Peace with them upon these Terms, That they should deliver their Ships to the
Lacedaemonians, The Eleans make Peace with the Lacedaemonians.
and suffer the neighboring Cities to govern according to their own Laws. And
now Lacedaemon being at leisure and at Peace with all her Neighbors, prepares
for War against them of Messina. Some of them then held a Castle in Cephalenia,
others inhabited in Naupachus (within the Country of the Locrians (called
Hesperians) formerly given to them by the Athenians. But they cast them out of
both, and restored the Castle to the Cephalenians, and the other to the
Locrians. The miserable Messinians (through the ancient hatred of the
Lacedaemonians) were expelled every where, and were forced to leave Greece
marching away with their Arms; some sailed to Sicily, and Listed themselves
Soldiers under Dionysius; others to the number of Three thousand made to A City
in Lybia in Africa.
Cyrene, and joined with other Exiles there: For at that time a great Sedition
was among the Cyrenians after Aristo with some others had possessed themselves
of the City, by whom Five hundred of the principal Men of the City on a sudden
were slain; upon which, all the Persons of Quality fled out of the Town.
Hereupon, the Exiles of Cyrene joined with the Messinians, and marched in a
Body against them who kept the City: The Parties engaged, and in the Fight a
great slaughter was made of the Cyrenians, and almost all the Messinians were
cut off. After the Fight, Messengers were sent to and fro, and the matter at
length was composed by the Cyrenians among themselves, who engaged by solemn
Oath one to another, That all Injuries should be afterward for ever forgotten;
so that they lived together from that time peaceably in the Government of their
Common wealth. About this time the Romans sent Colonies to them called Velitrae.
Ventras.

The Year ended, Laches was made Lord-Chancellor of Athens. At Rome the
Consular Ann. M. 3572. Olym 95. Ant. Chapter 398.
Dignity was given again to Military Tribunes, Manlius Claudius, Livy says
Marcus Emilius, Appius Claudius, Marcus Quintilius, Lucius Julius, Marcus
Posthumous, and Lucius Valerius.
Marcus Quintius, Lucius Julius, Marcus Furius, and Lucius Valerius. Then was
celebrated the Ninety Fifth Olympiad, in which Minos the Athenian was Victor.
At the same time Artaxerxes King of Asia, after the Defeat of Cyrus, sent
Pharnabazus is here put for Tissaphernes. Ush. An. 169.
Tissaphernes to take into his Care and Charge all the Governments on the Sea
Coasts; upon which the Provinces and Cities which had sided with Cyrus were
greatly terrified, lest they should be punished for what they had done against
the King: And therefore sought to qualify Tissaphernes by their Messengers; and
every one to the utmost of his Power endeavored to procure his Favor. But
Tamos, the Chiefest of them, (Lord Lieutenant of Ionia) put his Wealth and all
his Children on board, (except one called Gaus, who was afterward the King of
Persia's General) out of fear of Tissaphernes, and sailed into Egypt for
Protection, to Psmammiticus the King, (Descended from the ancient Psammiticus)
whom he had formerly obliged by several good Offices, and therefore hoped he
should find there shelter and safe Harbor, to secure him from the impending
Storm of the King's Wrath. But Psammiticus neither valuing former Benefits, nor
regarding the Law of Nations to them in distress, (out of Covetousness to gain
the Money and the Ships) cut the Throat of his Friend and Suppliant, and of all
his Children. The Cruelty of the King of Egypt.


In the mean time, the Grecian Cities throughout Asia, hearing of the Descent
of Tissaphernes, sent Ambassadors to the Lacedaemonians, and earnestly
entreated them, that they would not suffer them to be utterly destroyed by the
Barharians. Upon this they promised forthwith to send them Aid, and by their
Ambassadors solicited Tissaphernos, that he would not invade the Grecian
Cities with his Army. However, regardless of their Ambassadors, P. 416.
he set upon the Cumeans in the first place, and wasted and spoiled the Country
round about, and took a vast Number of Prisoners: And afterward besieged the
City; but by reason of Winter coming on, he could not take it, and therefore
(after he had received a great Sum of Money for the Redemption of the Captives)
he raised his Siege. Ant. Chapter 398.


The Lacedaemonians in defense of the Greek Cities, made Thimbro General in the
War against the King, and gave him the Command of a Thousand Spartans, with
Orders to War between the Lacedaemenians and Persians.
raise as many Men more from among their Confederates, as he thought fit for
the present Service. Upon which, Thimbro goes to Corinth, and mustering the Aid
he had got together from several places, he passes over to Ephesus, with no
more than Five thousand Men: After he had raised Two thousand more from the
Confederate Cities and other places (having with him not above Seven thousand
Men) he marched an About Fifteen Miles.
Hundred and twenty Stages, and took Magnesia at the first Assault, a City
within the Government of Tissaphernes. Then he came to Trallis, a Town in
Ionia, and determined to Besiege it; but not being able to effect any thing to
purpose there, by reason of the strength of the place, he returned to Magnesia.
This place was then unwall'd, therefore (fearing lest. Tissaphernes should
retake it after he was gone;) he removed it higher to the next Hill, called
Thorax. From whence he made several incursions upon the Enemy, and loaded his
Soldiers with variety of Plunder.

But hearing that Tissaphernes was near at hand with a great Body of Horse, he
forthwith retired to Ephesus.

About this time part of those Soldiers that went along with Cyrus against his
Brother, returned into Greece, every one to their own Country. Others, (the
greater part of them that were always accustomed to Military Employment) to the
number almost of Five thousand, chose Xenophon for their General, who with
those Forces made an Expedition against the Thracians. who inhabited A
Promontory in Pontus.
Salmidessus. This is a long Creek lying shooting out along the Left side of
Pontus, well known for the many Ship-wracks that have been there: by reason
whereof the Thracians near those parts use to seize upon the Merchants that
have escaped to Shore, and carry them away as Captives. Xenophon therefore with
his Forces breaks into their Country, overcomes them in Battle, and burns many
of their Towns and Villages. From hence they are sent for by Thimbro, with
promise Ant. Chapter 398.
of being well paid, upon which they marched to him, being very eager to assist
the Lacedaemonians against the Persians.

During these Actions, Dionysius in Sicily, builds a Town at the foot of Aetna,
and from a certain famous Temple, calls it Adranus. In Macedonia, King
Archilaus when he Dionysius builds Adranus in Sicily.
was Hunting was killed by Craterus (whom he dearly loved) after he had Reigned
Seven years; and his Son Orestes (yet a Child) succeeded him. After the death
of Archelaus Aetropus, the Tutor and Guardian of Orestes Governed the Kingdom
for the space of Six years. At the same time in Athens, Socrates the
Philosopher accused by Anytus Socrates condemned.
and Melitus of Atheism, and corrupting the Youth, was condemn' to dye, and
after executed by drinking of a Cup of Poison. Of which wicked Action the
People in a short time after repented, when in vain they could have wished that
Excellent and worthy Man alive again: therefore they turned all their Fury upon
his Accusers, and killed them, without staying for any Formalities of Law.

When the Year was ended, Aristocrates bore the Office of Archon at Athens for
the Year ensuing: And at Rome, Six Military Tribunes were invested with
Consular Dignity, An. M. 3573. Olymp. 95. 2. Ant. Chapter 397. P. 417.
Caius Servilius, Lucius Virginius, Quintus Sulpitius, Aulus Manlius,
Manlius, Capitus, Quintus Servilius.
Clodius, and Marcus Sergius.
Marcus Ancus. During their Magistracy, the Lacedaemonians understanding that
the Affairs of the War were ill managed by Thimbro, sent Dercyllidas General
into Asia. Upon his arrival, he forthwith marched with the Forces against the
Cities of * Capitolinus.
Troas, and in a trice took For Larissa.
Arisba, Hamaxitus, and Colone, afterward Ilium, Cebrene, and all the rest of
the Cities in the Territory of Troas, some by Tricks and Surprise, and others
by Storm.

After this, he and Tissaphernes. A Sedition at Heraclea.
Pharnabazus agreed upon a Truce for eight Months; and in the mean time he fell
upon the Thracians in Bythinia, and wasted their Country, and then drew his
Army into Winter Quarters.

At that time a great Sedition broke out in Heraclea in Thrachinia, and
thereupon the Lacedaemonians sent Eripidas to compose the Differences, who when
he came there, procured a Council to be called, and having beset the Senate
round with armed Men, seized the Authors, and put all to death, to the number
of Five hundred Men. He likewise marched with an Army against the Inhabitants
of Oetas, who had made a Defection; and after many Hardships he had reduced
them unto, he forced them out of those Places, and the greatest part of them,
with their Wives and Children, fled into Thessaly, and five Years after were
transplanted into Boeotia.

During these Affairs the Thracians in great Bodies made an Irruption into the
The Chersonese is an Istmos near the Hellespont, containing 37 Furlongs, i. e.
above Four Miles from one Sea to another. Xenoph. Hell. Lib. 3.
Chersonese of Thrace, wasting and ravaging the Country every where, where they
possessed themselves of all the fenced Cities. Upon this, they of the
Chersonese sent for Dercyllidas the Lacedaemonian out of Asia, who transported
his Army thither, and drove the Thracians out of the Country; and drawing a
Wall cross from one Sea to the other, fortified the Chersonese so as that by
this means he prevented the Incursions of the Thracians for the time to come,
and so he returned with his Forces into Asia, after he had been bountifully
Ant. Chapter 397.
rewarded for his Services. During the time of the Truce, Tissaphernes Conon
made Admiral by the Persians.
Pharnabozus went up to the King, and he and others persuaded him to equip a
Navy, and make Conon the Athenian Admiral, for he was a very skilful and expert
Soldier, the best that was then in Cyprus, with King Evagorus. Pharnabazus
having wrought upon the King, and received Five hundred Talents for that
purpose, forthwith made it his business to set forth a Fleet, and after he had
sounded Conon, concerning his acceptance of Chief Command at Sea, he created
him Admiral, making him many great and fair Promises in the King's Name.
Hereupon Conon accepts the Place, in hopes not only to recover the Sovereignty
of the Seas for his Country, by subduing the Lacedaemonians, but to advance his
own Reputation by the success of his Arms. But in regard the whole Fleet was
not as yet ready, he sailed away only with Forty Sail into Cilicia, and there
prepared himself for the War.

Pharnabazus likewise, and Tissaphernes having raised Men out of their several
Provinces,. The Persians and Lacedaemonians make a Truce near Ephesus. Ant. Chapter
397.
marched forth, and made their way toward Ephesus, because the Enemies Forces
lay there. There were with them under their Command Twenty thousand Foot, and
Ten thousand Horse. Dereyllidas the Lacedemonian hearing of the Enemies march,
drew forth his Army, having no more than Seven thousand Men; but when the
Armies drew near one to another, a Truce was agreed upon, and a certain time
prefixed, within which, Pharnabazus might send the Articles to the King to know
his pleasure, whether he would have Peace or War, and that Dereyllidas might
inform the Spartans how Affairs stood in the mean time. And upon these terms
the Armies drew off into their several Quarters.

CHAP. VII.
The War between the Rhegians and Dionysius: He prepares to make War upon the
Carthaginians. Most of the Cities submit to Dionysius. He returns to the Siege
of Motya. It Is taken. Forces sent from Carthage against Dionysius. A Sea Fight
between the Carthaginians and the Sicilians. Syracuse Besieged. The Speech of
Theodorus against Dionysius. A grievous Plague in the Carthaginian Army. A
great destruction of the Carthaginian Fleet in the Harbor of Syracuse. The
miserable condition of Imilco in his own Country. The Troubles of the
Carthaginians.

THE Rhegians, formerly a Colony of the Chalcideans, were now uneasy under the
growing Power of Dionysius, for he had enslaved the Naxians and Gataneans, who
were P. 418. The Rhegians jealous of Dionysius.
of their own Blood and Nation; and the Rhegians seeing that they themselves
were in the same common danger with those already expressed, were in a great
Consternation, lest they should all be brought under the same Calamity.
Therefore they judged it most advisable, and highly to concern them, to make
War upon him, while they had an opportunity, before the Tyrant grew too strong.
Those that were banished from Syracuse by Dionysius joined in this War, being
furnished with all things necessary for that purpose by the Rhegians: for there
was a great multitude of them at that time at A City in Italy.
Rhegium, who (being pressed by the Rhegians, with the necessity and advantage
they were likely to reap by the War) resolved to make use of the first
opportunity. To that end Officers were at length chosen, and with them they
sent Six thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse, with Fifty Crabyes, when they
were landed they solicited the Messenian Commanders to join with them, telling
them it would be a most dishonorable thing if they should suffer The Rhegians
invade Sicily,
a Grecian City, and next to them, to be utterly destroyed by a Tyrant. The
Officers being thus persuaded, led forth the Soldiers without the order of the
State. The number was Four thousand Foot, and Four hundred Horse, and with them
Thirty Galleys. Before they had marched to the utmost borders of Messina, there
was raised a great Mutiny Ant. Chapter 397.
among the Soldiers, by a Speech made to them by Laomedon a Messinian; For he
advised 'em not to be the Agressors upon Dionysius, who had not hitherto
offered them any injury. Upon which the Soldiers of Messina (because the People
had not by their Suffrage ordered this War (presently followed his Advice, and
forsaking their Captains returned The Rhegians return.
home. Whereupon the Rhegians considering themselves not able to carry on the
War alone, now the forces of Messina were fallen off, returned likewise to
their own City. As for Dionysius, he had (upon the first notice of the Design
upon him) drawn out his Forces to the utmost Confines of Syracuse, expecting
the Enemy; but hearing by his Spies that they were marched back, he likewise
returned with his to Syracuse.

After this, when they of Rhegium and Messina sent Ambassadors to him to treat
upon Terms of Peace (he conceiving it much to the advantage of his Affairs to
prevent all other Hostilities and Disturbances from these Cities) made Peace
with them. He likewise observed, that many of the Grecians ran into the
Carthaginian Garrisons, not only bringing along with them their Goods and
Estates, but the Laws and Customs of their several Cities; and therefore
concluded, that as long as the Peace continued with the Carthaginians, those
that were yet his Subjects would from time to time be sheltring themselves Ant.
Chapter 397.
under their Protection; to remedy which, he conceived that if he renewed the
War against Carthage, all those that were fled to them being oppressed by the
Carthaginians would return to him. And he was the more encouraged, for that he
heard that in Africa a Plague then raged, and swept away many of the
Carthaginians. Having now therefore a fit opportunity to declare War against
them, as he conceived, he determined to make it his chief Care to prepare
Necessaries for so great an Expedition, being to engage with the most Potent
Nation that then had any footing in Europe; and judging (as he very well might)
that it was likely to be a great War, and of long continuance. To this end he
forthwith gets together all sorts of Artificers, some out of the Towns and
Cities of his own Dominions, and others hired with more than ordinary Wages out
of Italy and Greece. For he resolved to make a vast number of all sorts of Arms
and Weapons; likewise Galleys, both of three Oars on a Bank, and of Five, which
last were never used before. For this purpose a great multitude of all sorts of
Workmen were brought together, to every one of whom he ordered their proper
Work according to their several Trades, and appointed some of the best and most
substantial of the Citizens to be Overseers, promising great Rewards for the
encouragement of the diligent. He himself directed the Form and Fashion of
every sort of Weapon, because Mercenary Soldiers came flocking in to him out of
many different Countries: for he purposed that every one should P. 419.
use such Arms (both Offensive and Defensive) as they were accustomed unto in
their own Nations; for he concluded, that as it would strike a greater Terror
into his Enemies, Ant. Chapter 397.
so his Soldiers would Fight much the better with those Arms that they had most
commonly used.

The Syracusians did all they could to forward him in his design; so that every
one strove who could most advance the Work. For not only the Porches and back
parts of the Temples, but the public Schools and Walks, and Galleries about
the Forum, and every place up and down were full of Workmen; and besides these
public places, Arms were made in great number in every large House belonging
to any Citizen. The Art of making (...).
Engines to hurl great Stones was now first known at Syracuse, for that at this
time the most excellent Artificers were met together from all parts. For the
great Wages and large Promises of Rewards to the perfecting of the Work, made
the Tradesmen and Artificers very intent and industrious. And besides all this,
Dionysius himself came every day to oversee the Workmen, speaking kindly and
courteously to them, and when he saw any more than ordinarily diligent, and
quick of dispatch, that Man would be sure to receive some Reward or Honor as a
mark of his Favor, and sometimes for further encouragement he would invite
such to Dine or Sup with him. The Artificers thus encouraged, wrought with all
diligence (striving to outvie one another) so that there were made a vast
number of strange Weapons, and Warlike Engines for Battery. He Ant. Chapter 397.
built likewise Galleys with their Boats, both of Three and Five Oars on a
Bank, of which last he was the first Inventer. For when he understood the first
Galley of Three Oars was made at Corinth, he was desirous a Colony from thence
(as the Syracusians were) should be the first that should enlarge the number.
Having therefore provided plenty of Materials to be brought over from Italy, he
sent away one half of the Workmen to Mount Aetna (where in those days were
abundance of Firr and Pitch Trees) the rest he commanded to sail to Italy, and
ordered them Carts to convey the Timber to the Sea side, and Ships and Seamen
there to receive them, and thence without delay to transport them to Syracuse.

When Dionysius had got together Materials sufficient for his purpose, he
forthwith set about building above Two hundred Galleys, and to resit an Hundred
and Ten. Besides, he built several Holds round the Harbor for the receiving of
the Ships, to the number of an Hundred and sixty; of which, many would receive
two Ships apiece. He likewise repaired and covered over with new Planks, and
Hundred and fifty old and useless Vessels: This great preparation struck the
Beholders with admiration, to see so vast a number of Ships and all belonging
to them, built together in one place. For indeed the preparation was such, that
if a Man did cast his Eyes upon the Ships, and consider the great Costs and
Expenses in fitting them out, he would presently conclude, that all the Power
and Riches, of Sicily were there employed. And then to turn and look upon the
Army and Engines, he would judge that there was no Art or Trade, but what there
had showed the height of their skill, to the utmost of what could possibly be
done in that kind. And though he had performed all these with so much Cost and
Care, that nothing seemed to be wanting, or could be added to make them
Magnificent and Glorious; yet for further State Ant. Chapter 397.
and Grace to the preparation he made, an hundred and forty thousand Bucklers,
or Targets, as many Swords and Helmets, and caused to be forged Fourteen
thousand Corssets, of all sorts of excellent Workmanship: These he appointed
and ordered to the Horse, and to the Colonels and Captains of the Foot, and to
the Mercenaries who were of his Lifeguard. He prepared likewise Engines of
Battery of all fashions, and a vast number of Darts. The City of Syracuse
provided one half of the long Ships, with Masters, Pilots, and Rowers of their
own Citizens. For the rest Dionysius hired Foreigners. After all the Ships and
Arms were ready and complete, he then began to call his Army together: for he
thought it not advisable to do it before, to the end to avoid Charge and
Expense. About this time Astydamus the Writer of Tragedies began to open his
School; he lived Sixty years: And this year the Romans as they were besieging
the Veians, by a P. 420.
Sally out of the City were totally routed, and shamefully put to flight.

After the former Year expired, Ithycles was made Lord Chancellor of Athens, and
at Rome Six Military Tribunes bore the Consular Dignity; Lucius Julius, Marcus
Furius, An. M. 3574. Olymp. 95. 3. Ant Chapter 369.
Marcus Emilius Mamercus.
Emilius Marcus Cneius Cornelius.
Caius Cornelius, Cesus Fabius, and Lucius Valerius.
Paulus Sextus. This Year Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse when he had finished
his preparation of Ships and Arms (as is before Declared) began to muster his
Forces. To this end he chose out of the City Companies, such as he thought
fittest for his purpose, and sent for such as he thought most serviceable from
those Towns that favored his Interest: He hired likewise Soldiers out of
Greece, and especially from the Lacedaemonians: For from them (to whom he owed
the growth and increase of his Power) he received as many Soldiers as he would
for the completing of his Army: For designing to raise a numerousArmy of
Strangers, and to this end offering large Pay, he had multitudes came in to
him; and because he had determined upon a War which would be very great, he
carried himself with all the camplacency imaginable to all the Cities through
the Island, with a purpose thereby to gain their good Will and Approbation.
Knowing likewise that they of Rhegium and Messina who bordered upon the Sea,
were able to bring great Forces into the Field, he began to fear lest they
should join with the Carthaginians when they returned into the Island, for he
concluded that no small advantage would accrue to that side to which those two
Cities inclined. Being in this perplexity, he gave to the Messinians a large
part of the Country next adjoining to them, thereby the more to oblige them to
his Interest. He dispatched likewise Ambassadors to Rhegium, to desire that they
would contract affinity with him, and to that end bestow upon him a Virgin of
their own City to be his Wife; in grateful remembrance of which he would give
them a large portion of Land next adjoining to their Territories, and that he
would endeavor to advance and increase the Wealth and Prosperity of the City,
to the utmost of his Power. For after he had lost his former Wife, the Daughter
of Hermocrates, who was killed in the late defection of the Horsemen, he
desired Issue by another, supposing he should firmly settle himself in his
Sovereignty by the kindness and obliging demeanor of his Children toward the
People. But a Council being called at Rhegium to consider of the Proposal,
after great banding Ant. Chapter 396. The Rhegians refuse Affinity with Dionysius.
on both sides it was resolved not to enter into any such Affinity.

Dionysius being disappointed in this Project, sends Ambassadors to Locris upon
the same Embassy: They embraced the Motion: Upon which he Marrys Dorides, the
Daughter of Xenetus, at that time the most eminent Citizen of that place. A few
days before the Marriage he sends to Locris a Gally of (...).
Five Oars on a Bank (a piece of new and rare Workmanship) adorned with Gold
and Silver Flags, and Streamers to convey her over, and receives the Lady upon
her Landing at Syracuse, into the Castle. He Married likewise a Noble Lady of
Syracuse, called Aristomacha, whom he brought to his Palace in a (...)
Chariot drawn with four white Horses. Upon his celebrating this double
Marriage at one and the same time, he often Feasted both the Soldiers and most
of the Citizens. For now he laid aside his Cruelty as a Tyrant, and minding the
distribution of Justice, carried himself more courteously and favorably
toward his Subjects, forbearing his former bloody Slaughters and Proscriptions.

Some few days after his Marriage he called a Senate, and there stirred up the
People of Syracuse to a War against the Carthaginians, urging that they were
the most implacable Enemies P. 421. Dionysius stirs up the Citizens of Syracuse
to a War against Carthage.
of the Grecians in the World, and especially, were continually plotting and
contriving how to ruin the Sicilians. The reason, says he, that they are now
at present quiet, is because the Plague rages so violently amongst them, and
has swept away great numbers of the Africans; but you will presently see that as
soon as they are free, and have recovered their strength they will invade Si^ily
with all their Power, which Island they have for a long time most greedily
gaped after. Therefore, said he, it is much safer and better Ant. Chapter 396.
to fall upon them now they are weak, than to stay till they have recovered
themselves. He added moreover, that it would be a most unjust and dishonorable
thing to suffer Barbarians to enslave the Cities, who the more they coveted
their Freedom, and the fonder they were of their Liberties, would be certainly
more ready to engage in the common Cause with their Countrymen.

Having debated this Matter in a long Discourse, he easily gained upon the
Syracusians for their consent, for they were as desirous of the War as
Dionysius himself: and especially they hated the Carthaginians, because by
their means they had been brought under the power of the Tyrant: and then they
hoped that out of fear of the Enemy abroad, and Plots by them that had been
oppressed at home, Dionysius would be more moderate than he had been in former
times. And that which weighed more than all was, that they hoped if they were
Conquerors in this War (and Fortune favored them) they should recover their
ancient Liberties.

When the Assembly was dissolved, he granted License to the People of Syracuse,
to seize upon all the Goods and Estates of the Carthaginians; for there were
many of them in Syracuse that were very rich; and many Merchants had Ships then
lay laden with rich Goods and Merchandise in the Harbor. The Syracusians
therefore on a sudden flew upon the Prey. Other Cities likewise in Sicily
drove out the Carthaginians that inhabited amongst them, and took and carried
away all their Estates. For though they all hated the Tyranny of Dionysius, yet
it was a delight to them to join in the War against the Carthaginians, by
reason of the barbarous and beastly cruelty of the Men. And therefore those
Ant. Chapter 396.
Grecians that inhabited the Cities within the power and jurisdiction of the
Carthaginians, when they saw that now open War was Declared against them by
Dionysius, gave instances likewise of their hatred against the Africans: for
they not only seized upon all their Estates, but likewise their Persons, and
executed all manner of Cruelty and Disgraces upon the Bodies of these miserable
wretches in memory and retribution of those that they themselves before
suffered when their Cities were destroyed by them, And they went on and
continued this sharp Revenge upon them, to the end they might learn for the
future by this example of Retaliation, not to execute such barbarous Cruelties
upon them, they should afterward subdue. For hereby they would be taught
(having learnt by experience) that in the events of War, and common Turns of
Fortune, the Party subdued, must expect to suffer that which they themselves
before executed, upon those they had conquered,

Dionysius having now prepared all things necessary for the War, determined to
send Messengers to Carthage to denounce War against them, in the name of the
People of Syracuse, P. 422.
unless they restored all the Greek Cities they had subdued to their Ancient
Laws and Liberties. Thus were the Thoughts of Dionysius at this time employed.
With this year Ctesias ends his History of the Persians brought down from Ninus
and Semiramis. At Ctesias his History ends.
this time flourished the famous Poets for Dithyrambick Verse, Philoxenus,
Cythereus, Timotheus, Philesius, Telestes of Selinunte, and Bolyeidus an
excellent Limner and Musician.

Upon the expiration of the former Year Lisiades entered upon the Chief
Magistracy An. M. 3572. Olymp. 95. 4. Ant. Chapter 395.
at Athens. And six Military Tribunes were invested with the Consular Dignity
at Rome, viz. Publius Mellius, Marnius Spurius, Furius Lucius, and three
others. At that time the Syracusian Tyrant (being furnished with all things
necessary for the War, according to his Hearts desire) sends an Herald with a
Letter to the Senate at Carthage, in which was written, That the People of
Syracuse had Decreed to make War upon the Carthaginians, unless they quitted
all the Grecian Cities in Sicily. The Herald, according to Order, Sails over
into Africa, and delivers the Letter to the Senate, which being read first in
the House, and then to the People, it occasioned no small disturbance and
perplexity to the Carthaginians, through fear of the War coming so suddenly
upon them, for the Plague had destroyed an infinite number of People, and they
were altogether unprovided of every thing necessary. Therefore they had now
nothing to do but to observe how far the Designs of the Syracusians would
proceed, and whither they would tend, and in the mean time, to send some of the
Senate, with a considerable Sum of Money to raise Soldiers out of Europe.

Dionysius now marches out of Syracuse toward Aeryx with Syracusians,
Mercenaries and The Second Carthaginian War with Dionysius. Ant. Chapter 395.
Confederate Auxiliaries. Not far from this Hill stood the City Motia, a Colony
of Carthage, which was a strong Castle and inlet into Sicily: By reducing of
this they hoped they should gain no small advantage, and prevent the Enemy. To
this end he stirred up the People every where to Arms, and Auxiliaries from all
the Greek Cities came in to him all along in his March. For they were eager and
hot for the War, both because they hated the Slavery they suffered under the
Carthaginians, and were likewise pricked forward with the ardent Desire and
Hopes they had at length to recover their Liberties. First the Camerineans
joined him: then the Geloans and Acragentines. Then he sent to them of Himera,
who inhabited further off in another part of Sicily: With these and the
Selinuntines who joined with him in his March, he came to Motya; His Army
consisted of Fourscore thousand Foot, and above three thousand Horse. In his
Fleet he had little less than Two hundred long Galleys, or Men of War, and to
attend these, there were at least Five hundred Ships of burden, full of Warlike
Engines, and all manner of Provision.

When they of Eryx saw the wonderful Preparation that was made, and being
terrified with the greatness of the Army, and withal hating the Carthaginians,
they sided with Dionysius. But they of Motya, in expectation of Aid and Relief
from Carthage, were not affrighted at the Greatness of Dionysius's Army, but
were resolved to abide a Siege. For they knew very well that the Syracusians
would besiege them in the first place, because they were so wholly devoted to
the Interest of Carthage. This City is situated in an Island about Motya
besieged by Dionysius. Ant. Chapter 395.
half a League from the Shore of Sicily, large and beautifully Built, and the
Inhabitants very Rich. A straight and narrow Way had been made by Art from the
Island to the Shore; which they of Motya at that time ruined, to prevent so
ready an access for the Enemy. Dionysius after he had taken a View of the
Situation of the City with his Architects, began to fill up the Place between
the Island and the Shore with Rubbish, and brought his Galleys into the Mouth
of the Harbor, and lay at Anchor with his Ships of Burden near to the Shore.
This done, he leaves Leptinus the Admiral of his Fleet to carry on the Siege,
and he himself with the Land Army sets upon the Cities that were Confederated
with the Carthaginians.

All the Cities of Sicily terrified with the greatness of his Army, presently
submit to him, except only Five, viz. Ancyra, Solas, Egista, Panormus, and
Entella: Upon which he Spoils and Wastes the Territories of the Solantines,
Panormitans, and Ancyreans, and cuts down all their Trees: But besieges the
City of the Egistines and Entellans, and by fierce and continual Assaults, uses
his utmost Endeavor to take them by Storm. And thus now stood the Affairs of
Dionysius.

In the mean time, Imilco, the Carthaginian General, was busy in Raising of
Men from all Parts; and making other Preparations, but forthwith sends away the
Admiral with P. 423.
ten Galleys, with a Command secretly to weigh Anchor and make straight for
Syracuse, and in the Night to destroy the Ships that he should then find in the
Harbor. His Project was by this means to divide the Enemies Forces,
constraining Dionysius to send away part of his Fleet to defend Syracuse. The
Admiral without delay observes his Orders, and entering the Harbor of Syracuse
in the Night privately (not discerned of any) breaks in pieces, sinks and
destroys almost all the Ships that were then in the Port, and sails back
toward Carthage.

Dionysius having wasted and spoiled the Fields and Territories of all them
that were under the Protection of the Carthaginians, and driven the Enemy every
where within their Ant. Chapter 395.
Walls, returns with his whole Army to Motya; supposing that when he had
reduced this the rest would all presently surrender. And now setting more hands
at work he speedily fills up the Channel with heaps of Stone and Rubbish, and
by that means makes his approaches with his Batteries nearer to the Town. But,

About this very time, Imilco the Carthaginian General, hearing that Dionysius
had brought his Ships into the Harbor, forthwith Manned an Hundred of his best
Galleys, supposing that by a sudden and unexpected Attack, he should easily
possess himself of the Fleet as Imilco arrives in Sicily.
they lay in the Harbor, (none being out at Sea to obstruct his Design) which
if it succeeded he should raise the Siege at Motya, and carry the War to
Syracuse.

To this End, he looses from Carthage with an Hundred Sail, and arrived in the
Night upon the Coasts of Selinunte, and so sailing round the Promontory of
Lilybeum, about break of Day reaches Motya; where surprising the Enemy he
breaks some of their Ships to pieces, and burns others, Dionysius not being
able then to afford any assistance. Then he enters into the Port, and so orders
and places his Ships, as if he designed to set upon the Fleet as they lay. Upon
this, Dionysius commands his Army to march down to the Mouth of the Harbor:
But seeing that the Enemy had possessed themselves of the Passage, he durst not
bring his Ships out of the Port; for he knew that the Mouth being very narrow
and straight, a few Ships were able to Fight with many above their Number, and
Ant Chapter 395.
to Advantage. And therefore, having many Soldiers, he easily drew the Ships
over the Land into the Sea, at a further distance from the Harbor, and so
preserved them.

In the mean time, Imilco pressing upon those Galleys that lay foremost and
next to him, was by multitude of Darts repulsed; for many Darters and Slingers
were placed upon the Decks. The Syracusians likewise from Land killed great
numbers of the Enemy, by their sharp Arrows shot out of their Engines of
Battery. And in truth these sort of Darts struck great terror into the Enemy,
being the first time that they were used and found out. When the Carthaginian
saw he could not accomplish his design, he drew off and sailed back for Africa,
judging it in nowise prudent to Engage in a Sea Fight with an Enemy double his
number.

When Dionysius, by the help of many Workmen had perfected the Bank or Rampire,
he applied all sorts of Engines of Battery to the Walls, battering the Towers
with the Rams, and driving the Defendants from the Bulwarks with the shot from
the (...).
Engines. He approached likewise to the Walls with (...), With 6 Chambers one
above another.
six floor'd Towers which moved upon Wheels, and were as high as any House.

However, the Citizens of Motya, although they were now in imminent Danger, and
destitute of all aid from their Consederates, yet feared not all the Force and
Power of Dionysius, but (...). P. 424. Ant. Ch 395.
bravely opposing the Assailants, they first placed Soldiers clothed in Coats
of Mail upon the Masts of their Ships, who hoisting up their Main-yards threw
burning Firebrands and Sticks dipped in Pitch, down upon the Engines, which set
them presently on Fire; upon which the Sicilians ran in, and having quenched
the Flame, so plied their work, that with the frequent and Repeated Batteries
by the Rams, a great part of the Wall fell down. Upon which both sides rushing
into the Breach with great Fury, there was a sharp Engagement: For the
Sicilians thinking the Town now had been their own, endured any thing out of
the insatiable desire they had to revenge themselves upon the Carthaginians,
for the many Injuries they had suffered by them. On the other hand, the
Besieged to avoid A brave Defense at Motya.
the misery of Bondage and Slavery, and seeing no hopes to escape either by Sea
or Land, resolved valiantly to Die. At length despairing to defend the Walls
any longer, they stopped up all the Sally Ports and betook themselves to the Hold
and Buildings at the Foot of the Walls, which were perfectly built as another
strong Wall. From hence the Soldiers of Dionysius were put harder to it than
they were before; for when they had got within the Walls (thronging in one upon
another) and thought they had now gained the Town, they were presently most
miserably galled by them that were on the Tops and Roofs of these Buildings.
However, with all the speed they could by the help of their wooden Towers, they
advanced their Scaling-Ladders to the Houses that were next to them; and now
they sought hand to hand from the Towers and the Tops of the Houses which
equaled one another in height: And here the Motyans stood to it, and fought
with undaunted Resolution, having their Wives and Children in their Eyes, and
possessed with the sense of the imminent danger of the Ruin and Destruction
both of them and theirs: For some moved with the earnest Prayers of their poor
Parents then present, entreating them not to suffer them to be made a scoff and
scorn to their Enemies, renewed their Courage, and without any regard to their
Lives rushed into the midst of the Assailants: Others hearing the Cries and
Complaints of their Wives and Children, made the more haste rather Ant. Chapter 395.
to die valiantly, than to see the Captivity and Slavery of their dearest
Relations. There was no way left to escape or fly out of the City, for they
were hemmed in by the Sea, which was commanded by their Enemies. The Cruelty of
the Graecians which they had already executed upon their Prisoners, and in all
likelihood would execute upon them, was that which chiefly terrified the
Carthaginians and made them desperate. And therefore nothing remained but
either to Conquer or Die.

This Obstinacy of the Besieged, occasioned great Toil and Hardship to the
Sicilians: For they were lamentably hurled off the Scaffolds which they had
made; and besides, the straitness of the Place (by which they were greatly
prejudiced) they fought with Men that were Desperate and prodigal of their
Lives.

Thus therefore being Engaged, some giving and receiving Wounds fell on the one
hand, others repulsed by the Motyans, were thrown down Headlong from the
Scaffolds and House Tops, and so miserably perished on the other. At length the
Assault having continued on this manner several whole days together, and every
Evening Dionysius by a Trumpet sounding a Retreat to his Men, the Motyans were
inured now to this way of Fighting: After therefore both sides were drawn off,
Dionysius sent forth Archylus the Thurian, with some of the best Regiments, who
on a sudden in the dead of Night by Scaling-Ladders go^ over the shattered
Houses, and having possessed himself of a convenient Pass, presently the rest
(which were sent to his assistance by Dionysius) came in to him. But when the
Motyans perceived it, with great Courage and Resolution they set upon them to
beat them back, and though they had not timed it right, yet their Valor was
not in the least impaired: So that there was now begun a fierce Encounter: Upon
which (many more likewise mounting over) the Sicilians with much ado
(over-powering them by their multitude) at length drove them from the Post; and
presently by the Mould and Bank that Ant. Chapter 395. P. 425. Motya taken.
was raised Dionysius his whole Army broke into the City, and now every place
was strewn with dead Bodies. For the Sicilians resolving to revenge themselves
upon the Carthaginians for their former Cruelties, without any regard either to
Age or Sex, slew all before them, putting Man, Woman, and Child to the Sword.
But Dionysius having a mind to sell all the Citizens for Slaves, thereby to
raise Money, commanded the Soldiers to forbear killing the Prisoners: But when
he saw that none regarded him, but that the Sicilians raged like wild Beasts,
he ordered a Crier by public Proclamation to declare, That he would have the
Motyans to fly for refuge to the Grecian Temples. Upon which the Common
Soldiers stopped their hands, but forthwith sell a plundering and spoiling all
through the City, and carried away abundance of Silver and Gold, rich Garments,
and all sorts of other Wealth and Treasure. For Dionysius for the Encouragement
of his Soldiers for the time to come, had given them the Plunder of the City.

After all was over, he rewarded Archylus who first mounted the Wall, with an
Hundred Above 300 l.
Minas, and all the rest every one according to his Merit. As many of the
Motyans as were left alive he sold for (...), Sold under the Spear.
Slaves: But Daimenes and some other Greeks who joined with the Carthaginians
and were taken Prisoners, he commanded to be (...).
Crucified. After this he put a Garrison into Motya, and made Bito the
Syracusian Governor; the greater part of the Garrison were Sicilians. Then he
ordered Leptinus the Admiral with an Hundred and Twenty sail, to watch the
Carthaginians at Sea; and likewise to make Incursions (as he had before
designed) upon Egista and Entella. He himself returned with the Army to
Syracuse, Summer now drawing near to an End. At this time Sophocles the Son of
Sophocles, began to make Tragedies at Athens, and came off Twelve times a
Conqueror. Sophoeles the Tragedian.


When this Year was ended, Phormio entered upon the chief Magistracy at Athens;
and at Rome six Military Tribunes executed the Consular Authority; Cncius
Genusius, Lucius An. M. 3576. Olymp. 96. 1. Ant. Chapter 394.
Atilius, Marcus Pomponius, Gains Duilius, Marcus Veturius, and Valerius
Publius. At this time was celebrated the Ninety Sixth Olympiad, in which
Eupolis of Elis was Victor.

In the time of their Governments, Dionysius, Lord of Syracuse, marched from
thence with his Army, and invaded the Territories of the Carthaginians. When he
was wasting Dionysius still carries on the War against the Carthaginians.
and spoiling the Country, the Halicyans out of Fear of him sent. Ambassadors
to his Camp, and became Confederates. But they of Egesta made a sudden and
unexpected Sally upon the Guards of the Besiegers and burnt their Tents, which
caused a great Consternation and Tumult through the Camp, For the Flame
catching and running along at a great distance was not easily quenched, so that
some of the Soldiers in quenching of the Fire were destroyed, and many Horses
were burnt and the Tents together: But Dionysius went on spoiling and wasting
the Country without any Opposition.

In the mean time, Leptinas the Admiral, who lay then with the Fleet at Motya,
was very intent in observing the Enemy at Sea. And the Carthaginians having
certain Intelligence Ant. Chapter 394.
of the strength of Dionysius, resolved to exceed him in all warlike Provision
and Preparation whatsoever. To which end (according to their Laws) they made
Imilco their King, The great Preparations of the Carthaginians against
Dionysius.
and raised Forces out of all parts of Africa and Spain, of which some were
their own Confederates, and others Mercenaries: At length they got together an
Army of above Three hundred thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, besides
Chariots to the number of Four hundred. They had likewise a Fleet to the number
of Three hundred long Galleys, for Men of War, and Six hundred Ships of Burden
(as Ephorus relates) to Tran^port all manner of Provision, Engines of Battery,
and all other Necessaries for the War. But Timeus affirms, P. 426.
that not above a Hundred thousand were transported from Africa into Sicily,
with which Three thousand of the Sicilians joined when they came over. Imilco
delivered Commissions sealed up to every one of the Officers, with a Command
they should not open them till they were out at Sea, and then to Execute their
Orders. He did this, that the Spies which might be amongst them, might not be
able to inform Dionysius of the Design of the Fleet. The Orders were, That they
should make straight to Panormus; Upon this they all set sail with a fair Wind:
The Transport Ships made directly in to the open Sea, but the Galleys sailed
along the Coast of Africa.

When the Transport Ships and Ships of Burden with a fresh Gale came within
sight of Sicily, Dionysius sent out Leptines with Thirty Sail against them,
with Order to Sink and Destory as many as he could, who forthwith made up to
them, and fought those he first met with, and sunk several with all the Men in
them. The rest (though they were heavy laden) by the help of the Wind
fortunately veering about, easily escaped; but about Fifty were sunk down
right, in which were lost Five thousand Soldiers, and Two hundred Ant. Chapter 394.
Chariots.

In the mean time, Imilco arrived at Panormus, and landing his Men marched
directly against the Enemy, Comanding the Fleet to sail along upon the Coast
near to him. In his march he entered Eryx by Treachery; and thence hastened with
all speed to Motya: Motya retaken by Storm.
And because Dionysius was then busy in besieging of Egista, Imilco had the
Opportunity to take Motya by Storm.

Although the Sicilians were very earnest and desirous to fight the Enemy, yet
Dionysius judged it more advisable for him to draw off to some other Place,
because he was both far off from his Confederates, and his Provisions too began
to grow very low. Determining therefore to be gone, he advised the Sicilians
for the present to quit their Cities, and join themselves to the Army,
promising to plant them in a richer, and in no less a Country than their own,
and telling them that when the War was ended, as many as would, might return to
their former Habitations: upon this, some few of them embraced the Offer, lest
if they refused they should have been plundered by the Soldiers: The rest
deserted, together with the Haliceans, who sent Ambassadors to the
Carthaginians, and renewed their League with them. Dionysius therefore made
with all speed to Syracuse, spoiling and wasting the Country all along as he
marched. But Imilco seeing all things succeed according to his Hearts desire,
marched with his Army against Messina, earnest to possess himself of that City,
by reason of its fit and convenient situation; for the Haven there was very
commodious, capable to receive his whole Fleet, which consisted of about Six
hundred Ant. Chapter 394.
Sail; and by that means having the Command of the Sea in those parts, he
judged he should be able to intercept all the Shipping that should be sent both
from Italy and Peloponnesus; to aid them of Syracuse, While he was musing and
considering of these things, he made Peace with them of Hymera, and the
Inhabitants of Cephalaedium. And taking in the City of Lipara, he imposed a
Mulct of Thirty Talents upon the Islanders. Then Imilco marches to Messina in
order to besiege it.
he marched straight away with his Forces for Messina (his Fleet sailing near
at hand over against him) and in a short time encamped at Pelorides, not above
a Betwixt Seven and Eight Miles.
Hundred Stages from thence. When they of the City-heard of the approach of the
Enemy, they began to disagree about the concerns of the War. For some of them
understanding the great strength of the Carthaginian Army, and seeing how they
deserted by their Confederates, and that they wanted their Horse which were
then at Syracuse, were of Opinion that the City could not be defended. Besides,
to their further discouragement, their Walls were down in many places, and they
had now no time to make necessary P. 427.
Preparations for their Defense. Therefore they sent away their Wives and
Children, and all their choicest Goods, and the richest of their Treasures to
the neighboring Cities. Others there were who remembered an old Prophecy,
whereby it was foretold by the Oracle, That the Carthaginians should be
carriers of Water in that City: which was commonly interpreted in that Sense,
as might portend most advantage to themselves, as if the Carthaginians should
be Slaves in Messina. From hence they were very confident, and by this means
greatly encouraged others, so that they resolved to undergo the utmost
extremity in defense of their common Liberty.

They sent out therefore presently a select number of their briskest young Men
to Pelorides to prevent the Enemies Inroads into the Country; who did according
to Order: Upon which, Imilco seeing the Messinians dispersed and scattered, in
order to oppose his Descent, he commanded Two hundred Ships to make toward the
City; For he hoped Ant. Chapter 394.
(as he might easily conjecture) that the whole Garrison of Messina would be so
earnest in opposing his breaking into their Borders, that the City would be
left unguarded, so that it would be easy for his Fleet to enter; and at that
time the North Wind blew fresh, by which means the Ships were carried with a
full Gale straight into the Harbor; and though the Guard sent to Pilorides
hastened back with all speed, yet the Enemies Fleet was in before they
returned. And now the Carthaginian Army coming in on every side, speedily
battered down the Walls, entered and took the City Messina. As many of the
Messinions as engaged with the Enemy died valiantly upon the spot; the rest
fled to the next Cities: many of the common People fled to the Mountains near
at hand, and were dispersed and scattered into several Garrisons in the
Country: Some were taken by Messina taken by the Carthaginians.
the Enemy, others that were got into narrow Creeks about the Harbor, flung
themselves into the Sea, thinking they should be able to swim over to Which is
not above a Mile and an half to Rhegium in Italy.
Land on the other side; but of Two hundred scarce Fifty recovered the Shore of
Italy. Afterward Imilco entered Messina with his whole Army; and the first
thing he set upon, was the Besieging the Castles and Forts near to the City,
but being very strong and bravely defended by them that had fled thither, when
he saw he could not win them by force, he returned to the City; And having
refreshed and recruited his Army, resolved to march against Syracuse.

The Sicilians bearing an inveterate hatred to Dionysius, having now a fair
opportunity all of them (except the Assarines) fell to the Carthaginians.
Dionysius therefore, to the end he might be supplied with Men, sets free all
the Slaves and Servants of the Syracusians, and with them sufficiently Manned
Threescore Galleys: he was furnished likewise Ant. Chapter 394.
with a Thousand Mercenaries from the Lacedaemonians: Passing likewise from
place to place through the Country, he fortified all the Castles and strong
Holds, and furnished them with Provision. But his greatest care was to fortify
the Castles of the Leontines, and to that end laid up Stores and Magazines
there, brought in from all parts. He likewise persuaded the Campanians, who at
that time inhabited in Catana, to remove and reside at the City Aetna, because
it was a place of great strength.

After things thus settled Dionysius led forth his Army an hundred and sixty
Stages from Syracuse, and encamped near to a place called Taurus. He then had
with him Thirty thousand Foot, and something above Three thousand Horse: His
Navy consisted of a Hundred and fourscore Ships, of which there were but few
that had Three Oars on a Bank. In the mean time Imilco demolished Messina, and
commanded his Soldiers to pull down Messina razed.
the Houses to the ground, so as not one stick should be left standing, or one
Stone upon another; which was effectually executed by burning some and pulling
down others. For by so many hands the business was done in a trice: and such
was the ruin and desolation of the City, that that place which was so lately
full of Inhabitants, could now scarce be known where it stood. For Imilco
considering how remote it was from the P. 428.
Confederate Cities, and yet the best Port and Situation in all Sioily, judged
it absolutely necessary either to ruin it as he had done, or at least so far
to destroy it, as that it could not be repaired in a long time, And thus
Imilco, having sufficiently discovered his implacable hatred to the Grecians,
commanded Mago the Admiral to sail with the whole Fleet to the Promontory of
Taurus. Here the Sicilians inhabited in great numbers, but Ant. Chapter 394.
without any Head or certain Commander. Dionysius had heretofore given the
Country of the Naxians to these Sicilians; but they induced by the Promises of
Imilco then dwelt upon this Hill (which was naturally fortisy'd) and there at
that time they were, and so continued after the War, in a City strongly Walled,
called Tauromenium, from its situation Tauromenium built.
upon Taurus.

Imilco himself by swift marches came with his Army to the before mentioned
place of Naxia, Mago sailing all along near to the Coast: But because Mount
Aeina had a little before vomited out Fire as far as to the Shore; the Army at
land could not march so as to have the Fleet near at hand to attend them. For
the passages by the Sea-Shoar were so spoiled and choked up by Rivers and
Streams of Fire from Aetna, that the Army Imilco's march hindered by streams of
Fire from Aetna.
was forced to take a Compass and march round the Mountain. Therefore Imilco
commanded Mago to sail toward Catana, and he himself with the Army hastened
through the heart of the Country to join again with the Fleet at that City.

For he was afraid lest when the Forces were divided and far asunder, the
Sicilians should set upon Mago by Sea; which happened accordingly. For
Dionysius having intelligence that Mugo sailed very slowly, and that the Land
Army was engaged in along and difficult March, hastened with all speed to
Catana, that he might fight Mago by Sea before Imilco's Army came up. For he
hoped that being upon the Shore near at hand with his Land Forces, it would
much encourage his own, and discourage the Enemy: And that which was the most
considerable was, That if his Fleet were worsted, both Ships and Men had a
place ready to retreat unto for their safety Ant. Chapter 394.


Things thus ordered, he sent forth Leptines with the whole Fleet against the
Enemy, commanding him to engage in close Order, and not to break his Line upon
any account, unless he were over pressed with multitude. There were in Mago's
Fleet Ships of burden A Fight at Sea between Mago and Leptines.
and Galleys with brazen Beaks, to the number of Five hundred. The
Carthaginian's, as soon as they saw the Coasts full of Ships, and the Grecian
Navy making out straight upon them, were greatly amazed, and began to tack
about and make into the Shore But presently recollecting themselves, they
considered the insuperable hazard they should run themselves into, if they
should fight, both with the Soldiers at Land and them in the Ships at one time,
therefore they resolved to try it out at Sea, and so putting themselves into a
Line of Battle, waited to receive the Enemy, Leptines eagerly forcing on with
Thirty of the best Galleys in the Van (with more Valor than Prudence) began
the Fight, and presently falling in upon the first Squadron, sunk several of
their Ships: But when Mago with his Fleet all joined together, they surrounded
the Thirty Sail, the first exceeding in Number, and the other in Valor.

And now was begun a sharp Engagement, which looked like a Fight upon Land, the
Ships grapling close one to another, for there was no distance left for them to
strike with their Beaks, but they fought hand to hand with their Forecastles
close in front together: Some, while they were attempting to board their
Adversary, were hurled overboard; Ant. Chapter 394. P. 429.
others effecting what they designed, fought valiantly aboard in the midst of
their Enemies Ships. At length Leptines overpowered with number, was forced to
hoise up Sail, and fly; the rest of the Fleet coming on upon the Enemy, who
were in disorder, were easily routed by the Carthaginians; for the Flight of
the Admiral encouraged them, and greatly discouraged and distracted the
Sicilians.

The Fight thus ended, the Carthaginians made a very hot pursuit, and sunk and
destroyed, above a Hundred Vessels; and they that were in the Transport-Ships
that lay along the shore, killed the Seamen as they saw them swimming to get to
the Forces that were upon the Land; so that many being killed near the Land,
the Shore was full of Carcasses and Wrecks: the Dionisians being not able in
the least to help them. Many Dionysius's Fleet routed.
were killed on the Carthaginians side; but there were above a Hundred Galleys
of the Sicilians sunk and taken, and more than Twenty thousand Men killed.

After the Fight, the Carthaginian Navy anchored at Catana, whither they
brought along with them the Ships they had taken, and drawing them up to the
shore, refitted them, that the Eves as well as the Ears of the Carthaginians
might be entertained with the Greatness of their Victory.

Upon this Misfortune, the Sicslians judging that by returning to Syracuse they
should suffer much, and be brought into great Straits by being suddenly
besieged, persuaded Dionysius rather to fight Imilco; alleging, That by an
unexpected Onset, the Barbarians would be terrified, and by that means they
might in great probability repair their late Dionysius marches back to Syracuse.
Overthrow. Dionysius inclining to this Advice, and preparing to march against
the Enemy, some of his Friends told him he ran a great hazard, and had reason
to fear lest Imilco would invade Syracuse with his whole Fleet, and so he
should lose the City. Upon this he altered his Resolution, knowing that Messina
was lately lost by such an Oversight; hereupon he hastened to Syracuse, not
thinking it safe for that Place to be without a strong Garrison. Many of the
Sicilians upon this were much displeased, and therefore some returned to their
own Habitations, and others dispersed themselves into several Castles and Forts
near at hand.

Imilco in two days march came to Catana, and caused the Ships that were there
to be drawn up into the Harbor, by reason of the present Wind and Storm: Here
he staid some days and refreshed his Army, and from thence sent Ambassadors to
the Campanians at Aetna to court them to a Defection from Dionysius, promising
to bestow on them large Possessions, and that they should be equal Sharers in
the Spoils of the War. He likewise acquainted them, that the Campanians of
Entella had sided with the Carthaginians, and had supplied them with Aids
against the Sicilians. In sum, he told them that the Greoians bore an
inveterate Hatred to all other Nations whatsoever. But the Campanians having
given Hostages to Dionysius, and sent the best of their Soldiers to Syracuse,
were forced to stick to the League they had made with him, though they had a
desire rather to fall to the other side.

After these Misfortunes, Dionysius being now afraid of the Power of the
Carthaginians, Dionysius sends for Aids to other Countries.
sends Polyxenus, his Father-in-Law, Ambassador to the Greoians in Italy,
Lacedaemon; and Corinth, to desire their Assistance, and that they would not
stand by, and see the Greek Cities in Sicily to be utterly destroyed. He sent
likewise several (...), Pressmasters, or one to list Foreigners. Ant. Chapter 394.
P. 430.
Paymasters into Reloponnesus, with great Sums of Money to raise what Men they
could, not sparing any Cost.

But Imilco now enters with his Navy, richly adorned with his Enemies Spoils,
into the great Haven of Syracuse; this filled the Citizens with Terror and
Amazement; for a Navy of Two hundred and eighty Sail of Men of War, in
excellent order, entered the Port; and after them came in above a (...), pro
(...).
Thousand Transport-Ships, wherein were above (...) deest. Imiclo enters the
Part of Syracuse with his Navy.
Five hundred Soldiers: So that the Ships were near Two thousand Sail; insomuch
as the whole Haven (though it were large) was so filled with Shipping, that it
was almost covered over. When the Navy had cast Anchor in the Harbor,
presently appeared the Land* Army on the other side, consisting (as some
report) of Three hundred thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, besides Two
hundred Long-Ships. Imilco the General Encamps near the City.
pitched his Tent in the Temple of Jupiter; the rest of the Army encamped round
him, about A male and a half.
12 Stages distant from the City.

A while after, Imilco draws out his whole Army in Battalia under the Walls of
Syracuse, daring the Syracusians to Battle; and at the same time ordered a
Hundred of his best Ships to enter into all the rest of the Harbors, the more
to terrify the Syracusians, and to convince them that the Carthaginians were
Masters at Sea; but when he saw none durst come out against him, he marched
back to the Camp.

After this, he most shamefully, for the space of Thirty days, wasted and
spoiled all the Country round about, to the end to gratify his Soldiers on the
one hand, and to discourage his Enemies on the other. He wan also the Suburbs
of Part of Syracuse.
Achradina, and plundered the Temples of Ceres and Proserpina. But he paid for
his Sacrilege within a short time after; for his Fortune began to change, and
things to go worse and worse with him every day. And whenever Dionysius took
Courage and skirmish'd with the Enemy, the Syracusians came off Conquerors.
Such Terror sometimes seized the Carthaginians in the Camp, that in the Night
they would run with great Terror and Confusion to their Arms, as if an Enemy
had broken in upon them. Besides, a Disease at length seized upon them, which
was the cause of all the Mischiefs which afterward overtook them, of which we
Ant. Chapter 394.
shall speak hereafter, that we may observe due course and order of Time in the
Relation.

Imilco now eager to block up the City, demolishes almost all the Sepulchers,
amongst which were the Monuments of Gelo and his Wife Demareta, of rich and
excellent Workmanship. He raised likewise three Forts near the Sea, one at
Plenmynium, another about the middle of the Port, and the third near the Temple
of Jupiter.

In these he laid up Stores of Meat and Drink, and all other Necessaries,
believing the Siege would continue long. He sent away likewise the
Transport-Ships to Sardinia and Africa, to bring from thence Corn and all other
Provisions.

About this time Polyxenus, Dionysius's Father-in-Law (being returned from
Italy and Peloponnesus) brought with him Thirty Galleys (Men of War) from the
Confederates, under the Command of Pharacidas the Lacedaemonian. After this,
Dionysius and Leptines made out to Sea with some Galleys to endeavor to get
some Provision into the Town; and while they were cruising about, the
Syracusians from the City espied a Ship laden with Provision coming up to
Imilco's Army; upon which, they made out with Five Sail upon it, and took it
and brought it into the Town. As they were sailing away with their Prize, Forty
Sail of the Carthaginians pursued them; upon which, the whole Syracusian Fleet
presently hoisted up Sail, and engaged, took the Admiral, and sunk and
destroyed The Syracusians beat the Carthaginians at Sea. P. 431.
Twenty Ships more: The rest they put to flight, and pursued the Carthaginians
to their main Fleet, and dared them to Battle; but they amused with this sudden
Disaster, stirred not. Then the Syracusians fastened the Galleys they had taken
to the Poops of their own Ships, and brought them into the City.

Being now puffed up with this good Success, they proudly vaunted, That
Dionysius was often overcome by the Carthaginians, but that now when they had
not him with them, they triumphed, and were returned Conquerors. And in their
Cabals here and there they would frequently discourse, and ask one another, why
they should suffer themselves Ant. Chapter 394. Designs to depose Dionysius.
to be made Slaves by Dionysius, especially when they had now so fair an
Opportunity to depose him? For till of late they said they were disarmed, but
now by occasion of the present War, they had again got Arms into their Hands.

While these things were thus whispered up and down, Dionysius lands at the
Port, and presently after calls an Assembly, and in an Harangue highly praises
the Syracusians, wishing them; That as they had done, so they would still
continue to show their Valor and Courage for the time to come, promising them,
that in a short time he would put an end to the War. When the Assembly was
ready to break up, Theodorus a Syracusian, a Man of great Authority among the
Nobility, and one that had done remarkable Service for his Conntry, stood up,
and boldly made this Speech concerning their Liberties.

The Speech of Theodorus.
ALthough Dionysius has interlac'd his Discourse with many Lies, yet what he
said in the close of his Harangue, That he would make a speedy dispatch of the
War, he may truly perform, if he himself (who has always been beaten) be not
the General, but forthwith restore us to our own Laws and Liberties: For there
are none of us that can freely and cheerfully venture our Lives in the Field,
when there is not a Pin to choose whether we be conquered by the Carthaginians,
or being Conquerors become Slaves at home to Dionysius: For whilst Conquerors
or Conquered, we are sure either to serve the Carthaginians on the one hand, or
a more severe and tyrannical Master on the other. If the Carthaginians prevail,
by paying of Tribute we shall enjoy our Laws, but this Tyrant robs our Temples,
seizes our Estates, takes away our Lives, and deprives Ant. Chapter 394.
Masters of their Servants to fill up the number of his Mercenaries. And he
that has acted as great cruelties in a time of Peace, as any that have been
executed upon the storming of Cities in a time of War, now promises to put an
end to the Carthaginian War. But it as highly concerns us (Oh fellow Citizens)
to be rid of the Tyrant within our Walls, as to put an end to the War without.
For the Castle which is now Garrisoned by our own Slaves, is built as a Fort
against the City it self, and the Mercenary Soldiers are kept in Pay to keep
the Syracusians in Slavery, and he himself Lords it over the City, not as a
good Magistrate for the execution of Justice; but as sole and absolute Lord, to
Rule according to the Dictates of his own insatiable Desires. The Enemy now
enjoys but a small part of the Country, but Dionysius has bestowed all that he
has conquered upon them that have given assistance to the advancement of his
Tyranny: Why are we content so long tamely to suffer these base Abuses? such,
as a generous Spirit would rather choose to Die, than to be brought into a
hazard and danger to suffer and undergo. We (to say the Truth) courageously
endure the extremest hardships in fighting against the Carthaginians; but we
are so poor-spirited, that we dare not speak a word for the Laws and Liberties
of our Country against a most cruel Tyrant. We that dare bravely Charge so many
thousands of our Enemies, are dastardly afraid of one (...)
Tyrant, that has not the Courage of a generous. Slave: No Man ever presumed to
compare or equal Dionysius with Gelo, for he (through the innate goodness of
his Disposition) with the assistance of the Syracusians and other Sicilians
restored all Sicily to their Liberty: But this vile Man when he found the
Cities free, either exposed them to the Will of the Enemy, or he himself made
them perfect Slaves. The other, after he had fought many Ant. Chapter 394.
Battles in the Cause of Sicily, was so successful that an Enemy was not to be
seen: But this Tyrant running away from Motya through the whole Island, at
length penned himself up, not daring to look his Enemy in the Face, yet fierce
and cruel enough toward the Citizens. The other for his Valor and remarkable
Services done for his Country, had the Sovereignty freely and willingly
bestowed on him, not only by the Syracusians, but by all the Sicilians. But
this Man who has usurped the Sovereign Power, to the ruin of the Confederates,
and slavery of the Citizens; Why should he not be hated P. 43^.
by all, who is not only unworthy of the Supreme Power, but deserves a thousand
Deaths besides? Through him Gela and Camerina are spoiled, Messina razed and
laid in rubbish, and Twenty thousand of our Confederates destroyed. And things
are now brought to that pass, that all the Greek Cities throughout Sicily are
ruined, and we are all cooped up into one. Among other Mischiefs and Miseries
Naxus and Catana are by him sold for naught; many of the best situated and
Confederate Cities razed to the ground. He fought twice with the Carthaginians,
and was beaten in both. As soon as ever the Sovereign Power was given into his
hand, he forthwith deprived the Citizens of their Liberties, putting to death
all those that stood up for the Laws of their Country, and banishing those that
were Rich to gain their Estates; giving their Wives in Marriage to their
Servants, and to the lowest of the People, and putting Arms into the hands of
Strangers and Barbarians. All these wickednesses, Oh, Jupiter, and all Ant. Chapter
394.
the Gods! has this hangman and base mean fellow committed. Where is now the
love of the Laws and Liberties among the Syracusians? Where are the noble
Actions of our Ancestors? by whom were destroyed at Himera Three hundred
thousand Carthaginians; not to say any thing of the Tyrants deposed by Gelo.
But that which is to be most admired is, that though your Fathers, even but
yesterday, did rout so great an Army of the Athenians that came against
Syracuse, and that in such a manner, as that they left not one to be a
Messenger of their destruction; though (I say) you have so fresh an Example of
your Fathers Valor, yet that you should bow your Necks to the Yoke of
Dionysius, and at this instant time when you have Arms in your hands, is most
strange. Certainly some good providence of the Gods has brought you now hither
together in Arms, that you may have an opportunity to regain your Liberty. Now
is the day come wherein you may show your selves Men of Courage, and
unanimously rescue your selves from so base and shameful a Slavery. It was an
easy matter when we had no assistance, and the City was full of Mercenary
Soldiers to keep us under, but now that we are Armed, now that we have
Confederates to assist us, and stand by us as Spectators of our Valor, let us
not yield an Inch, but make it manifest to all, that it was not Cowardice but
want of opportunity that made us seem to be willing and content to be Slaves.
May we not be ashamed to have an Enemy to be our General, one who has
Sacrilegiously robbed all the Temples in the City; to entrust one in matters of
the greatest public concern, that none (in his wits) would trust with his own
private Estate. And when we see that all Men generally are more than ordinarily
Religious in times of War and imminent Dangers; Can we hope that such a
notorious Atheist as this should be instrumental to put an happy issue to this
War? And if any Man will Ant. Chapter 394
but seriously consider, he may easily conclude, that Dionysius is more afraid
of Peace than War. For he knows that the Syracusians (through fear of the bad
consequences of commotions at this present) dare not attempt any thing against
him: But he foresees that if the Carthaginians be conquered, the Syracusians
being then in Arms, and encouraged with the success will seek to redeem
themselves, and regain their Liberty. And this was the cause (as I conceive)
that in the former War he most treacherously depopulated Gela and Camerina, and
stripped 'em of all their Inhabitants; and likewise agreed as part of the
Articles of the League; That many of the Greek Cities should never after be
inhabited by the Grecians. This was likewise the Cause, that afterward in a
time of Peace, And against the Conditions agreed on, he enslaved Naxus and
Catana, razed the one down to the ground, and gave away the other to the
Campanians, a Colony out of Italy. and when he perceived that after the Cities
were thus ruined, the rest were continually plotting how to rescue themselves
from this Tyranny, he then for a diversion began this Second War against the
Carthaginians. For the Sacred Bonds of an Oath did not so much awe him to the
keeping of his League, as the fear of these Sicilians that remained did torment
him, whose destruction he continually watched all opportunities to effect. When
the Enemy, lately weak and weather-beaten, landed at Panormus, though he might P
433. Ant. Chapter 394.
easily then have fallen upon them with his whole Army, yet was very far from
doing any such service for his Country. Afterward he suffered Messina (that
large City and commodious Port) for want of Relief, to be laid wast, not only
because there were many Sicilians by that means cut off, but likewise that all
Aids by Shipping from Italy and Peloponnesus might be intercepted by the
Carthaginians. Then at last he fought upon the Coasts near to Catana, even
close to the City, that the Enemy if they were beaten might have ready shelter
in the Port of their own Allies. After this, and the Fight was over, a Storm
arose, by reason whereof the Carthaginians were forced to draw up their Ships
into the Harbor, at which time we had a fair opportunity of ruining them,
their Land-Army not being then come up, and their Ships, many of them thrown
upon the Shore by the violence of the Storm. If we then had set upon them with
our Land-Army, they must all necessarily have either fallen into our hands, if
they had come to Land, or by the violence and rage of the Sea the Shore had
been filled with wrecks. But I know I need not spend many words in accusing
Dionysius among the Syracusians: For if the incurable Injuries and Wrongs
themselves will not raise the Spirits of the Sufferers, How can words prevail
to take revenge of this Miscreant? When besides all that they have suffered
they may clearly see, That he is the most impious wretch of the Citizens, the
cruelest Tyrant, and most slothful and careless General: For as often as we
fight the Enemy under his Conduct, so often are we beaten: But now when we
lately Engaged our selves without him, we routed the Enemies whole Fleet with a
few Galleys. We ought therefore to provide a new General, lest while we make
use of one who has Sacrilegiously robbed the Temples, we fight against God
himself. For the Deity Ant. Chapter 394.
apparently opposes them who make such an Atheist their Head and Governor. For
to see all our Forces in the height of their strength dispersed and scattered
when he is with them, and yet a small part of our Army Conquerors when he is
absent, What does it but evidence to all the special and remarkable Presence of
the Gods? Therefore, Oh ye Syracusians, if he will freely (...).
Abdicate his Covernment, let us as freely consent that he may depart out of
the City with all that belongs to him: But if he refuses so to do, now we have
an opportunity to regain our Liberty. We are now here all together, we have
Arms in our hands, and those that will assist us both out of Italy and
Peloponnesus are near at hand. And by the Law the Chief Gommand in the Army
ought either to be given to some of the Citizens, or to some of the
Corinthians, who are the natural Inhabitants, or to the Spartans who now
Command all Greece.

When Theodorus had thus spoken, the Syracusians (much perplexed in their
Minds) and * (...).
doubtful what to do) looked back upon their Confederates, Upon which,
Pharacides the Lacedemonian Admiral of the Fleet (lately sent to their
assistance) ascended the Tribunal; and every Man now hoped he would be very
earnest in persuading of them to stand up for their Liberties. But he being
Dionysius his Guest, and then one of his Family, told them that he was sent by
the Lacedaemonians to assist the Syracusians and Dionysius against the
Carthaginians, and not to deprive him of his Kingdom: and while he was
(contrary to all Men's expectations) opposing what had been said, the Mercenary
Soldiers Ant. Chapter 394.
all flocked about Dionysius, but the Syracusians, no little amazed, sat
still; but raged in their Minds against the Spartans: For not long before,
Aretas the Lacedemonian had betrayed 'em under the Covert and Pretense of being
sent to free them from their Slavery; and now Pharacides obstructed the
Syracusians in their endeavors to free themselves. However, Dionysius was now
in a great fright, and forthwith Dissolved the Assembly; and afterward courted
the People with very fair and smooth words, presenting some with large Gifts,
and inviting others to his Feasts and Banquets. But as to the Carthaginians, A
Plague in the Carthaginians Army. P. 434.
after they had ruined the Suburbs, and rifled and plundered the Temples of
Ceres and Proserpina, a Plague seized upon their Army, and the more to increase
and sharpen the Vengeance of the Gods upon them, both the time of the year and
the multitudes of Men thronging together, greatly contributed to the
inhancement and aggravation of their Misery: For the Summer was hotter than
ordinary, and the place it self was the great occasion that the distemper raged
above all bounds. For the Athenians in the very same place, not long before,
were in multitudes swept away by the Plague, for that because it was a marshy
and spungy Ground. In the beginning of the Distemper, before the Sun arose,
through the coldness of the Air that came off from the Water, their Bodies
would fall a shaking and trembling; but about Noon, being so close pent up
together, they were choked with the heat. The Infection was brought in among
them by the South Wind, which swept them away in heaps, and for a while they
buried them: Ant. Chapter 394.
but the number of the Dead increasing to that degree, that those that attended
the Sick were likewise cut off, none durst come near to the infected, and
(besides the want of attendance) the Distemper seemed to be incurable. For
first, Catarrhs and Swellings of the Throat were caused by the stench of the
Bodies that lay unbury'd, and the putrefaction of the Soil. Then followed
Fevers, Pains in the Back, Heaviness of the Loins, Dysenteries, Botches and
Biles over the whole Body. Thus were many tormented by this Plague; others were
struck Mad, and ran about the Camp like Wild Beasts, and beat every one they
met. All the help of Physicians was in vain, both by reason of the violence of
the Distemper, and the sudden dispatch it made of many: For in the midst of
great Pains and horrible Torments, they died commonly the Fifth or at the most
the Sixth Day; so that they who died by the War, were accounted happy by all.
And it was further observable, That all that attended upon the Sick, died of
the same Distemper: And that which aggravated the Misery was, that none were
willing to come near to the Distressed and Languishing Persons in order to
administer to them any sort of help. For not only Strangers, but even Brothers,
and dear and familiar Friends and Acquaintance, were forced out of fear of the
Infection, to avoid and forsake one another. Dionysius therefore hearing of the
miserable condition of the Carthaginians, manned Fourscore Sail, and ordered
Ant. Chapter 394.
Pharacides and Leptines the Admirals at spring of Day to fall upon the Enemies
Fleet. And he himself before the Moon was up in the Night, got his Army
together, and marching to the Temple of Cyanes, came up without being
discovered to the Enemies Camp about break of day: He had sent the Horse, and a
Thousand Foot of the Mercenaries before him, to fall upon that part of the
Enemies Camp that lay up further into the Land. These Mercenaries hated
Dionysius more than any other that were about him, and were often making
disturbance, and mutining upon all occasions; Therefore Dionysius ordered the
Horse, as soon as they were engaged with the Enemy, to fly and leave the
Mercenaries to be cut off, which was accordingly observed, and they were all
killed upon the spot. Dionysius himself determined to assault the Camp and the
Castles both at once. The Barbarians upon this sudden and unexpected incursion
of the Enemy, running in great consusion and disorder to their Arms, gave him
an opportunity to take the Castle, called Polictma by Storm. On the other side,
in the mean time, the Horse, with some Galleys made to the Fort near Dascon,
and took it; And forthwith came up the whole Fleet, and the Army Assaulted the
rest of the Forts with a mighty Shout, which struck the Barbarians with great
terror and amazement; For at the first they all ran to defend their P. 435. The
miserable condition of the Garthaginians. Ant. Chapter 394.
Camp, but now seeing the Enemies whole Fleet come up, they bestirred
themselves as much to preserve their Navy that then lay at Anchor: But all
their Care was to little purpose, for they were prevented by the suddainness of
the surrprize. For while they were ascending the Decks, and hasting on board,
the Enemies Ships came up with that fierceness upon them, and so pierced their
Broad sides, that some were sunk down right at the first shock; others by
repeated and frequent Assaults were broken in pieces, so that the Carthaginians
were filled with dread and horror. And while the best and greatest of their
Ships were up and down pierced through and through, the Air resounded with a
terrible noise by the crashing of the Vessels, broken by the Beaks of the
Galleys, and the Shore over against them was presently filled with dead Bodies.
The Syracusians still more and more encouraged by their Success, while each
strove who should first leap into their Enemies Ships, in every place killed
and dispersed and scattered Barbarians, astonished and amazed with the fear of
the present destruction. Neither was the Land Army wanting in their Assistance,
in which Dionysius then was (by chance) having rid to Dascon some time before.
For finding there Forty Ships of Fifty Oars apiece, besides Ships of Burden
that lay near to them, and some Galleys, they threw Fire amongst (...). The
strange burning of the Carthaginian Ships.
them; upon which the Flame mounting up, and spreading it self far and wide,
set all the Ships on fire, and neither Merchants nor Mariners were able to stop
the violence of the Flame, which (the Wind being then high) ran along from the
Ships at Anchor and caught upon the Transport Ships which lay near to them; And
the Men to avoid the Fire, leaping out of the Ships into the Sea, and the
Cables snapping asunder, the Ships fell foul one upon another, by reason
whereof some broke in pieces, many were burnt, and others by the violence of
the Winds scattered and dispersed here and there, so that all one way or other
were destroyed. And here a Show, as upon a Theater was represented to the
Citizens while the Fire ran through the Transport Ships from one to another,
and the Flame mounted the Masts, and consumed the Main Yards, and the ruin of
the Barbarians seemed like the overthrow of such as were destroyed for some
notorious Ant. Ch 394.
Impiety by Thunder and Lightning from Heaven. Upon these Successes both young
and old that were able took Boats and passed over to the Harbor, to rifle
those Ships that were almost consumed by the Fire, and to save such as might be
refitted, and those that were yet sound and untouched, to tow them by their
Boats to the City. Yea, such was the exceeding Joy and Emulation of all to
share in the Honor of the Victory, that those whom Age might well have excused
from intermedling with matters of War, yet now beyond their Age and natural
Strength made themselves remarkable, And now the Victory spread swiftly through
the City, upon which the Women and Children and whole Families left their
Houses and ran to the Walls and filled them with Spectators, of whom some lift
up their Hands to Heaven, and gave thanks to the Gods, others cried out that
the Barbarians were justly punished for their profaneness in rissing and
plundering of the Temples. For indeed it seemed as if the Gods themselves were
engaged in the Fight, where so many Ships were on fire with the Flame mounting
into the Air, above the Masts, and the Grecians only standing by (with joyful
Acclamations) as Eyewitnesses of every happy Event. And on the contrary, the
Barbarians amazed and astonished Ant. Chapter 394.
with the dreadful misfortune (in great Confusion, and with mournful Cries)
bewailing themselves. But Night put an end to the Battle, and Dionysius
encamped near to the Barbarians at the Temple of Jupiter.

The Carthaginians being thus routed both by Sea and Land, sent Ambassadors
privately to Dionysius to offer him Three hundred Talents, which they had then
ready in their Camp, if he would permit the remainder of their Army to
transport themselves into Africa. To this Dionysius answered, that he could not
suffer all to be gone, but he was content that those who were Citizens of
Carthage might depart privately in the Night, but no other. For he knew well
enough that neither the Syracusians nor his Confederates P. 436.
would ever suffer him to grant to them any such liberty. But he did this
because he was unwilling utterly to destroy the Carthaginians, that the
Syracusians (through fear of them) might find no opportunity or leisure by
disturbing of him, to seek after the regaining of their Liberty. Having
therefore agreed with the Carthaginians that they should be gone the fourth
Night next after, he draws his whole Army into the City. Upon which, Imilco
delivered the Three hundred Talents to some appointed for that purpose, Imilco
gives 300 Talents to Dionysius to have liberty to depart into Africa.
who conveyed them secretly in the night into the Castle; When the time
appointed was come, Imilco filled Forty Galleys with Citizens of Carthage, with
an intent to be gone, leaving the rest of the Army behind him. And he was no
sooner entered into the Port, but some Corinthians discerning that Dionysius
trifled away the time in getting the Soldiers and Officers together, were
impatient, and forthwith made after them. And by rowing hard, at length got up
to the Carthaginian Ships that were in the Rear, which they sunk, by piercing
them through with the Beaks of their Ships. Afterward Dionysius drew The
Carthaginians pursued. Ant. Chapter 394.
out his Army; but the Sicilians, who sided with the Carthaginians, were almost
all fled through the heart of the Country, and escaped to their several Cities,
before the Syracusians could reach up to them. In the mean time when Dionysius
had placed Guards at several Passes to intercept them that fled, he marched
with his Army in the Night to the Enemies Camp: Upon which, all the Barbarians
now betrayed both by their General and the Carthaginians, and likewise by the
Sicilians, fled away in great fear and amazement, of whom part were taken
falling in among their Enemies Guards, that waylaid them; others, and the
greatest part, threw away their Arms, and cried for Quarter. But the Spaniards
with their Arms got into a Body, and sent a Trumpet to Dionysius to offer
themselves to him as Confederates: Upon which, he made a League with them, and
joined them to the Regiments of his Mercenaries. The rest of the common
Soldiers he took, and whatever was left of the Bag and Baggage he gave for
Plunder to the Soldiers. And thus was the sudden change and turn of the
Carthaginian Affairs; From whence all Men may learn, That whoever they be that
above measure exalt themselves, may come in short time to be convinced how weak
and inconsiderable creatures they are, They, who a little before were possessed
of all the Cities of Sicily but Syracuse (which they accounted themselves
likewise sure of) were presently brought into such a strait, as to be afraid
lest they should lose their own Country: And they who lately destroyed the
Sepulchers of the Syracusians, were now Eyewitnesses of a Hundred and fifty
thousand Carcasses of their own Men that perished by the Plague, lying rotting
upon the ground without the Honor of Burial. They who had before burnt up all
before them belonging to the Syracusians, by a sudden change of Fortune now,
saw their whole Fleet wrapped up, and consumed Ant. Chapter 394.
in Flames. They who not long ago in great Pride and Ostentation entered into
the Port of Syracuse, boasting of their Successes, little thought that within a
while after they should be forced to fly away in the night, and treacherously
leave their Confederates to the Mercy of their Enemies. The General himself,
who had pitched his Tent in the Temple of Jupiter, and had robbed the Temples
of the Riches laid up in them, shamefully fled away with a few to Carthage, and
though he escaped with Life, yet he could Imilco's Misery in his own Country. P.
437.
not fly from the Vengeance of the Gods for his Impiety; but lived all his Days
in disgrace in his own Country, reproached and scorned by all. Nay, he was
reduced to that extremity of Misery, that he wandered about round all the
Temples of the City in Rags, convinced of his own Impiety, and doing Penance
for his notorious Wickedness; and and at length Murdered himself, and Died in
extreme Want and Poverty; by his example Murders himself.
leaving behind him an awe of the Gods among the Citizens. For presently after,
many other calamities of War overtook them: For this overthrow being spread all
over Africa, their Consederates who hated them before, now for their
treacherous deserting of the Soldiers at Syracuse, abhorred the Carthaginians
much more than they did before. And therefore stirred up by Rage on the one
hand, and encouraged to contemn the Carthaginians by reason of their late
misfortune on the other, they resolved to stand up for their The Confederates
rise up in Arms against the Carthaginians.
Liberty. And having sent Ambassadors into all parts, they raised an Army, and
at length encamped themselves in the Field. Upon which, there presently came in
to them, not only Free Men but Slaves, so that in a small time they made up a
Body of Two hundred thousand Men.

In the first place they took Tunis, not far from Carthage from thence they
marched in a body, fought and beat the Carthaginians, and drove them within
their Walls. At length the Carthaginians (against whom the Gods thus apparently
fought) with faint and trembling Hearts, assembled themselves together to
supplicate the Deity to be appeased and to put an end to his Wrath and
Indignation against them. And presently a Spirit of Ant. Chapter 394.
Devotion (joined with Fear) possessed the whole City, whilst every one
expected to become miserable Slaves. Therefore all were of Opinion that the
Gods who were offended, should by all means in the first place be atton'd. And
although they never before Sacrificed to Proserpina or Ceres, yet now the
chiefest of the Citizens were consecrated to be Priests for this Service. And
having set forth the Statues of the Gods with all Pomp and Solemnity, they
ordered the Sacrifices for the future to be made according to the Grecian Rites
and Ceremonies. And they carefully made use of those Grecians that were with
them, and who were best acquainted with the Rites of their Religion, to
officiate in the Sacrifices. But after this they prepared another Navy, and all
other things necessary for the carrying on of the War.

In the mean time the Rebels, though they were a vast number of Men, yet they
wanted good and expert Officers; and that which was worst of all, they wanted
sufficient Provision for such a multitude, which the Carthaginians were
supplied with, having enough brought to them by Sea from Sardinia. And besides
all this, the Revolters fell a quarrelling among themselves about the Supreme
Command of the Army; and some, bribed with Money by the Carthaginians, fell off
and deserted the common Cause. And hence it came to pass, that (through want of
Provision, and Treachery of some of their Associates) this great Rabble broke
in pieces, and were dispersed here and there, every one to their own Country,
and Places of Habitation, and so freed Carthage from the great Ant. Chapter 394.
Fright they were lately in. And this was the State of Affairs in Africa at
this time.

As for Dionysius, he discerning that the Mercenaries bore him no Good Will,
and therefore, lest they should depose him, seized upon Aristotle their
General, upon which the common Soldiers ran to their Arms, and in great Rage
demanded their Pay. But he, to appease them, told them, That he would send
Aristotle to Lacedemon to be tried there by the Democracy, and gave them (who
were about Ten thousand) the City and Country of Leontum for their Pay, which
they readily accepted for the sweetness and pleasantness of the Place, and
divided the Land amongst themselves by Lot. Then he raised other Mercenaries,
to whom, and to those that were Freemen of his own Family, he committed the
Care and Protection of his Government.

After the Overthrow of the Carthaginians, all those that remained of them that
belonged to the Cities that were taken by the Carthaginians throughout Sicily,
got together, and being restored to their several Countries, began to get
Strength again. And Dionysius repeopled Dionysius repeoples Messina.
Messina with a Thousand Lecrians, Four thousand Medimneans, and Six hundred
Melesians of Peloponnesus, who were Exiles from Zacynthus and Naupactus. But
when he discerned that he had offended the Lacedaemonians, by planting the
Messinians (whom they had driven out) in so eminent and considerable a City, he
removed them into another Ant. Chapter 394.
Place in the Province of Abacena, near the Sea, limiting them within certain
Bounds. The Messinians called this City Tyndarides, and living peaceably among
themselves, and receiving P. 438.
many into the Freedom of their City, they increased in a short time to above
the Number of Five thousand. After many Expeditions and Incursions into the
Territories of the Sicilians, they took Smenteum and Morgantium, and entered
into League with Agyris the King of the Agyroneans, and Damon the Petty Prince
of the Centorrippineans, likewise with the Erbiteans and Astorines.
Cephaledium, Selunta, and Enua, were also brought under their Power and
Government by Treachery. And they made Peace with them of Erbissa, and so stood
the Affairs of Sicily at that time.

CHAP. VIII.
Agesilaus made General against the Persians by the Lacedaemonians; goes to
Ephesus. They send to the King of Egypt for Assistance. The Persians routed at
Sipylus by Agesilaus. Tissaphernes's Head cut off in a Bath at Larissa. The War
between the Phoceans and Baeotians.

IN Greece, when the Lacedaemonians foresaw the great War they were likely to
have with the Persians, they made Agesilaus, one of their two Kings, their
General, who raising Six thousand Men, and choosing Thirty of the most eminent
Citizens to be Members of the Senate, passed over out of Europe to Ephesus.
There he raised Four thousand more, and so marched into the Field with an Army
of Ten thousand Foot, and Four Ush. Ann. 174. rather Four thousand Horse. (...).
Hundred Horse.

After the Camp followed a Rabble, (for the sake of Pillage and Plunder,) not
inferior in Number to the Army it self. He ran through the Plains of the
Caystrions, and wasted and spoiled all that belong to the Persians as far as to
Cumae. Moving from thence, he spent the greatest part of the Summer in spoiling
and wasting Phrygia, the Country next adjoining; and having loaded his Army
with Pillage and Spoil, about the latter end of Autumn returned with his Army
to Ephesus.

While these Things were acting, the Lacedaemonians sent Ambassadors to
Otherwise called Nepherites.
Nephreus King of Egypt, in order to procure his Assistance in the War; who
sent to the Spartans Tackle and Furniture for a Hundred Galleys, and Five
hundred thousand Bushels of Wheat instead of Soldiers. Pharax therefore, the
Lacedemonian Admiral, loosing from Rhodes with a Hundred and twenty Sail,
arrived at Cassandra a Castle of Caria, distant a Hundred Ant. Chapter 394. The
King of Egypt sends Tackle for Ships and Wheat to the Lacedaemonians.
and fifty Stages from Caunus. Setting sail from thence, he besieged Caunus and
Conon the Persian Admiral, who then lay there with a Fleet of Forty Sail. But
Artaphernes and Pharnabazus approaching to the Relief of Caunus with a great
Army, Pharax raised his Siege, and returned with his Fleet to Rhodes.

After this, Canon got together Fourscore Galleys, and with these sails over
the Chersones. In the mean time, the Inhabitants of Rhodes refuse to suffer the
Peloponnesian Fleet to enter Rhodes revolts foom the Lacedaemonians.
their Harbor, and Revoit from the Lacedaemonians, and receive Conon with his
Navy into their Port and City. And presently after, they who brought Corn out
of Egypt, (designed for the Lacedaemonians,) not knowing any thing of the
Defection of the Rhodians, sailed boldly to the Island. Upon which, Conon the
Persian Admiral, with the help of the Rhodians, brought them and their Loading
into the Port, and stored the City with Corn. And there came likewise other
Ships to Conon, Ten from Silicia, and Fourscore from Phenicia, under the
Command of the Lord Lieutenant of the Province of S^don.

But afterward Agesilaus drawing out his Army into the Plain of Caystrus, and
the Places Ant. Chapter 394. Agesilaus p^^lages in Asia.
near to Sipylus, plundered and spoiled the Inhabitants. Upon which,
Tissaphernes, with an Army of Ten Thousand Horse, and Fifty Thousand Foot, came
upon the Backs of the Lacedaemonians, and killed all the Stragglers as they were
forraging and ranging about the Country. But Agesilaus, with a Phalanx (drawn
up in a Square) possessed himself of the rising Grounds at Sipylus, watching
his opportunity to set upon the Enemy: and from thence overran all the Country
as far as to Sardis, and amongst others wasted and P. 439.
destroyed a Paradise.
Garden belonging to Tissaphernes, set with all sorts of Trees, and other
Things for Delight, and Divertisement in time of Peace, beautified with very
great Art and Cost. Marching thence, when he came half way between Sardis and
Thyberne, he sent Xenocles the Spartan in the Night with Fourteen hundred Men
into a Wood to lie in Ambush, in order to intercept the Enemy, he himself
(about spring of Day) marching forward with the Army: As soon as he had passd
the Ambuscade, the Barbarians in great Routs Tissaphernes by an Ambuscade.
Fury on the sudden set upon his Rear; upon which he forthwith wheeled about,
and when they were hotly engaged, he lift up a Sign to them in Ambush, who
forthwith with a great Shout came in and fell upon the Enemy, who seeing
themselves surrounded, (in great Fear and Terror) betook themselves to their
Heels, of whom Six thousand were killed in the Pursuit, and a great number of
Prisoners taken, and the Lacedaemonians seized the Enemies Camp, which was very
rich. Tissaphernes himself amazed at the Valor of the Spartans, in a great
Fright fled out of the Battle to Sardis. Agesilaus was moved to march up higher
into the other Provinces, but because the Sacrifices did not point out to him
any good Success, he returned with his Army to the Seaside,

Artaxerxes King of Asia hearing of the routing of his Army, was both Afraid
and Angry; Afraid of the Lacedaemonians, and Angry at Tissaphernes, who was the
occasion of the War. And Parysatis the Queen Mother had not long before prayed
Artaxerxes, even upon her Knees, to take Revenge upon Tissaphernes; for she
bare him a mortal Hatred, Ant. Chapter 394.
because he was instrumental to frustrate the Expedition of her Son against his
Brother, Artaxerxes therefore makes Tithraustes General, and commanded him to
seize Tissaphernes, giving him likewise Letters directed to all the Cities and
Governors of the Provinces, ordering them to observe his Commands. As soon as
Tithraustes came to Colosse in Phrygia, by the help of the Governor of Larissa
he seized Tissaphernes in a Bath, and cut off his Tissaphernes killed by the
King's Order.
Head and sent it to the King. After which, he made a Truce with Agesilaus for
Six Months.

While Affairs went thus in Asia, the Phoceans made War upon the Boeotians, and
prayed War between the Boeotians and Phocian, called the Boeotian War.
Aid and Assistance from the Lacedaemonians. Upon which, Lysander was sent
thither with a few Soldiers, who raised more after he came to Phocis; but not
long after, Pausanias King of Sparta was sent to Phocis with Six thousand,
whereupon the Boeotians drew out their Forces, and being joined by the
Athenians their Confederates, found Haliartus besieged by Lysander and the
Phoceans. Whereupon a Battle was fought, in which Lysander, and many of the
Lacedaemonians with their Confederates, were killed. The Boeotians pursued not
far, but Two hundred Thebans lost their Lives, by falling down some steep
Precipices through their own Carelessness. This was afterward called the
Boeotian War. But Pausanias hearing of the Defeat of the Lacedaemonians, entered
into a Truce with the Boeotians, and returned with his Army into Peloponnesus.

In the mean time, Conon the Persian Admiral committed the Care of the Fleet to
Hieronymus and Nicodamus, two Athenians, and he himself hastened away to the
King sailing Ant. Chapter 394. Conon employed by the King of Persia against the
Lacedaemonians. P. 440.
to Silicia, and from thence passing to Thapsacus in Syria, he put himself in a
Barge, and sailed down the River Euphrates to Babylon. Here being admitted to
the King, he promised, That if the King would but furnish him with Money and
other Necessaries as he should think fit, he would undertake to ruin the
Lacedemonian Fleet. The King was much pleased, and highly Commended and
Rewarded him, and ordered a Paymaster to attend him, and pay him as much Money
as he should from time to time require He gave him likewise liberty to choose
what Persian he would to be his Colleague and Assistant in the Command; and he
thereupon chose Pharnabazus, and after he had taken Order for all Things,
(according to the utmost of his Power,) he went down to Sea.

CHAP. IX.
The Confederate War by the Argives and others against the Lacedaemonians. The
Battle at Aricas. The Fight at Nemea. Pisander the Lacedemonian Admiral routed
in a Sea Fight at Cnidus by the Persian Fleet, commanded by Conon the Athenian.
The Corinthian War against the Lacedaemonians, and the great Sedition there.

AT the end of the year Diophantus was made Lord Chancellor at Athens, and at
Rome Six Military Tribunes were invested with the Consular Authority; that is
to say, Olymp. 96. 2. Ant. Chapter 393.
Lucius Valerius, Marcus Furius, Quintus Servilius, Quintus Sulpitius, Mistaken.
Claudius Marcus Valerius Maximus.
Ogron, and Lucius Furius. The Confederate War.
Marius Appius. In the time of their Governments, the Boeotians and Athenians,
the Corinthians and the Argives, Confederated: For they conceived, that if they
(being the most considerable and largest Cities of Greece) did but stick close
one to another, they might easily overcome the Lordly Power of the
Lacedaemonians, and the rather for that they were hated of their Confederates
for their Tyrannical Government. To this end they first ordered a General
Assembly of Members from the several Cities to meet at Corinth, where being
met, they ordered all Things necessary concerning the War. Afterward they sent
Messengers from City to City, and by that means took off many from siding with
the Lacedaemonians. And presently there joined with them all Eubea generally,
the Leucadians, Acarnanians, Ambraciots, and Chalcideans of Thrace. They then
endeavored to bring into the Confederacy the Inhabitants of Peloponnesus; but
none of them would hearken to them: For Sparta lying close to the sides of
Peloponnesus, was as a Castle or Bulwark for the Defense of the Country.
Medius, the Prince of Larissa in Thessaly, was about that time engaged in a War
with Lycophrone Tyrant of the Phera a City in Macedonia.
Phereans, to whom upon his Request this General Assembly sent in Aid Two
thousand Men, who being furnished with these Aides, takes Pharsalus, (a
Lacedemonian Garrison,) and sells all the Inhabitants for Slaves. After this,
the Boeotians, with them of Argos, separating themselves from Medius, took
Heraclea in Trachinia, being let within the Walls in the night, and there they
put all the Lacedaemonians to the Sword; but suffered the Peloponnesians to
depart with all that belonged to them. Then they recalled the Trachinians to
inhabit the City, whom the Lacedaemonians had forced to till the Land, though
they were the ancient Inhabitants of the Country.

And not long after, Istmenias the General of the Boeotians leaving the Argives
to guard the City, caused the Eneans and Achamaneans to desert the
Lacedaemonians, and having raised among them and other Confederates many
Soldiers, he marched with an Army of no less than Six thousand Men against the
Phoceans. Not long after he encamped near Aricas, a City of Locris, (the
Birthplace of Ajax, as it is said,) where the Phoceans, under the Ant. Chapter 393.
Conduct of Lacisthenes a Laconian, came out against him and fought him: The
Dispute was very sharp for a long time, but at length the Boeotians got the
Day, and pursued the The Battle at Aricas.
Enemy till it grew dark, of whom they killed above a Thousand, and lost Five
hundred of their own. After this Battle, both Sides disbanded their Armies, and
the Phoceans returned to their own Country, and the other to Corinth; where
having called a Senate, and encouraged by this good Success, (as they conceived
of it,) they mustered at Corinth (raised out of all the Cities far and near) to
the Number of about Fifteen thousand Foot, and Five hundred Horse.

The Lacedaemonians seeing that the greatest Cities of Greece had confederated
against them, determined to send for Agesilaus, and the Army he had with him,
out of Asia. Yet P. 441.
in the mean time they marched out against the Enemy with Three and twenty
thousand The Battle at Nemea.
Foot, and Five hundred Horse, which they had raised out of their own City, and
from among their Confederates. And not long after a Battle was fought at the
River Nemea, which continued till Night parted them, wherein part of the Army
on both sides prevailed one against the other. There fell of the Lacedaemonians
and their Confederates, Eleven hundred; but of the Boeotians and their
Confederates, were slain Two thousand Eight hundred.

As soon as Agesilaus had landed his Army in Europe, he was encountered by a
great Body Ant. Chapter 393.
of Thracians, whom he routed, and killed the greatest part of them. Thence he
marched through Macedonia, on purpose to pass that way Xerxes had formerly
done, when he came with a powerful Army into Greece. Having therefore passed
through Macedon and Thessaly, he went on forward to the Straits of Thermopylae,
and passed through that way.

In the mean time Conon and Pharnabazus, the Persian Admirals lay at Doryma in
the Chersonese with a Fleet of more than Ninety Men of War; and being informed
that the Enemies The Sea Fight at Cnidus.
Navy lay at Cnidus, they prepared for a Sea Fight. Periarchus is here mistaken
for Pisander. Ush. Ann. 179.
Periarchus the Admiral of the Lacedemonian Fleet weighing Anchor from Cnidus,
arrived at Physeus in Chersonesus with Eighty five Galleys; and loosing from
thence, fell upon the King's Fleet, and had the advantage against those Ships
he first attacked: But upon the Persian Galleys coming up in a full Body to
rescue their Fellows, his Confederates fled, and made to the Shore; but he
judging it a base and dishonorable thing for a Spartan to turn his Back,
tacked about to front the Enemy, and fighting with great Gallantry, (after he
had destroyed many of the Persians in the heat of the Fight) was at length
killed, and so fell with Honor worthy Pisander killed, and the Lacedaemonians
routed at Sea.
of his Country. Then they with Conon pursuing the Lacedaemonians to the Shore,
took Fifty of their Galleys, but the most part of the Men swam to Land and
escaped, only Five hundred were taken Prisoners; and the rest of the Galleys
came to Gnidus.

But Agesilaus being strengthened with Forces from Peloponnesus, entered with an
Army Ant. Chapter 393.
into Boeotia, where the Boeotians and their Confederates forthwith met him at
Coronea, and The Lacedaemonians beat the Boeotians.
engaged, in which Battle the Boeotians put that Wing of the Lacedaemonians to
slight that opposed them, and pursued them to their Camp; but the rest, after a
small Resistance, were routed by Agesilaus and his Party. Whereupon the
Lacedaemonians looking upon themselves as Conquerors, in token of Victory
erected a Trophy, and gave Leave to the Enemy to bury their Dead. For there
were killed of the Boeotians and their Confederates above Six hundred; and of
the Lacedaemonians and their Associates above Three hundred and fifty; Agesilaus
himself being sorely wounded, and carried to Delphos to be cured.

After the late Sea Fight, Pharnabazus and Conon invaded the Confederates of
the Lacedaemonians with their whole Fleet; and first forced them of Coos to a
Defection, from the Lacedaemonians, then those of Nisea, a Town on the East Side
of the Isthmos of Peloponnenesus.
Nisea, and Tios, a City in Paphligonia.
Tios or Teium. Afterward the Chians (forcing out the Garrison there) revolted
to Conon.

The Mitylenes, Ephesians, and Erythreans likewise followed the Examples of the
former. And thus all the Cities on a sudden revolted, some of which (casting
out the Lacedemonian Garrisons) took the opportunity absolutely to free
themselves; others from that time gave themselves up into Conon's Hands, and
from that time forward the Lacedaemonians lost the Sovereignty of the Sea.

Conon determining to sail for Attica with his whole Fleet, weighs Anchor, and
by the P. 442.
way beinging over the Islands of the Cyclades, Islands of the Aegean Sea near
Delos, lying in a Round, and therefore so called.
Cyclades to his side, he makes straight for Cythera, an Island over against
Crete.
Cythera, which he gained upon the first Approach, and taking Hostages of the
Cythereans for their Fidelity, he sent them away to Laconia; and when he had
put a strong Garrison into the City, he sailed for Corinth, where he had
Audience of the Senate; and then entering into a League, and leaving Money with
them for the carrying on of the War, he returned into Asia. About this time
Eropus King of Macedonia died, after he had reigned Six Years; his Son
Pausanias succeeded him, and reigned only One Year. Theopompus of Chius ends
his History with this Year, and with the Sea Fight at Cnidus, containing the
Relation of the Grecian Affairs in Twelve Books; begun at the Sea Fight at
Cynossema, where Thucydides ends, comprehending Seventeen Years. Ant. Chapter 393.


After the end of the last Year, Eubulides was made Lord Chancellor of Athens,
and Olymp. 96. 3. An. M. 3578. Ant. Chapter 392.
Six Military Tribunes executed the Consular Dignity at Rome, (Lucius Sergius,
Aulus Posthumous, Publius Cornelius, Sextus Centius, Quintus Manlius, and
Lucius Julius, and Lucius Furius.
Anitius Camillus.) At that time Conon the Persian Admiral arrived in the
Pireum at Athens with Fourscore Sail, and promised the Citizens to rebuild the
Walls of the City. For the Walls and long Thighs of the Pyream were demolished
by the Lacedaemonians, according to the Articles of the Peace when the Athenians
were brought very low, and their Power broken by the Peloponn^sian War. To this
end Conon hired many Workmen, and ordered several out of Conon comes to Athens.
the Fleet to be assisting to the carrying on of the Work, so that the greatest
part of the Builds the Walls of the Pireum.
Wall was finished in a short time. For the Thebans sent in Five hundred
Carpenters and Masons, and several other Cities gave their Assistance. But
Teribazus, General of the Land Forces in Asia envying Conon's Successes,
contrived falsely to charge him, as if he only made use of the King's Soldiers
to get Towns and Cities for the Athenians; therefore sending for him to Sardis,
upon his appearance he seized him and threw him into Ant. Chapter 392.
Prison.

But now at Corinth some that had thirsted after the chief Rule and Command in
the Government, entered into a Conspiracy, and at the time of the public Plays
killed many The Sedition at Corinth.
in the Playhouse, and filled the City with Tumult and Sedition. And being
assisted by the Argives they cut the Throats of a Hundred and Twenty Citizens,
and Banished Five The Corinthian War.
hundred more. The Lacedaemonians raised Forces in order to reduce these
Murderers by Force of Arms: But the Athenians and Beotians came with an Army to
their assistance, but with an Eye to bring the City into their Subjection. But
the Exiles with the Lacedaemonians and other Confederates, in the Night came up
to the Lecheum and (...).
Arsenal, and took it by Storm. The next day the Townsmen drew out their Forces
under the Command of Iphicrates, but were routed by the Lacedaemonians, who
slew a great number of them. After this, the Beotians and Athenians together
with the Argives and Corinthians, marched down with their Forces to the
Lecheum, and at first (after a short Resistance) forced their way into the
Castle. But the Lacedaemonians and Exiles (Valiantly renewing the Fight,) drove
out the Beotians, and all with them, who were forced to return into the City,
with the loss of about a Thousand Men.

And now the time of Celebrating the Isthmian Games approached, and a Contest
fell out amongst them concerning the Ordering and Management of the Sports: And
after much wrangling, the Lacedaemonians prevailed, and gave to the Exiles the
Authority of ordering that Affair: And because almost all the Skirmishes and
Encounters in this War happened near to Corinth, it was called the Corinthian
War, and lasted Eight Years.

CHAP. X.
The Quarrel between the Rhegians and Dionysius. Mago the Carthaginian settles
Affairs in Sicily. Routed at Abacena by Dionysius. Rhegium near surpised by
Dionysius. The Acts of Iphicrates at Corinth, Phlias, and Sicyon. Amyntas lost
his Kingdom of Macedonia, but was restored. The Romans take Veii; Dedicate a
Golden Cup to Apollo. Their Ambassadors are taken by the Pirates of the
Lipari-Islands, but discharged by Timasitheus.

MOreover, about this time they of Rhegium quarrelled with Dionysius in Sicily,
because P. 443. Ant. Chapter 392. Quarrels between the Rhegians and Dionysius.
he had fortified Messina, as if he intended thereby some Mischief against
them. Upon which they received into their Protection all that were driven out
by Dionysius, and all others that hated his Government. Then they gave Mylas to
the late Inhabitants of Naxus and Catana to be inhabited by them; and sent
Heloris with an Army to besiege Messina; and while he in the first place
besieged the Castle, the Townsmen with the Mercenaries of Dionysius drew out
and fell upon him, routed him, and killed above Five hundred of his Followers.
Then they presently set upon Mylas and took it, and and discharged all the
Naxians that were there (...).
upon terms of mutual Friendship, who went to the Sicilian and Grecian Cities,
some to one place and some to another.

Dionysius now having made a League with the Cities that lay upon the
Seacoasts, determined to pass over with an Army against Rhegium: But for the
present his Design was retarded by the Sicilians at Tauromenum, whom therefore
he resolved in the first place to reduce; Dionysius besieges Tauromenium.
to which end he marched thither with all his Forces, and Encamped on that side
toward Naxos, and continued his Siege all Winter, in hopes that the Sicilians
would leave the Hill, because they had not been long there. But they having
heard their Fathers declare that the ancient Sicilians (the former Inhabitants
of that Place) were expuls'd thence by the Grecians when they arrived there,
and built Naxus, they therefore concluded they had just cause both to defend
their own Country, and to revenge the Injury done to their Ancestors by the
Greeks, and so they defended the Place with great Resolution.

In the mean time, while the Dispute was hot on both sides, (...). Ant. Chapter 392.
the Winter Solstice drew near at hand, and Winter coming on apace all the
Places near the Castle were full of Snow; and Dionysius conceiving that the
Sicilians by reason of the strength of the Place and height of the Walls, kept
but a slender Guard in the Castle, he ascends those high and steep Places in a
dark and tempestuous Night, and with much difficulty (by reason of the
steepness of the Rock, and depth of the Snow) at length with a scarr'd Face and
half blind with Cold and Snow; possessed himself of one part of the Castle:
Then presently forcing into another, he laid open a Passage for his Army into
the City: Upon which the whole Power and Strength of the Sicilians ran
together, and drove the Dionystans out of the City and Castle; and he himself
(by a blow upon his Brigandine) in the pursuit was knocked down, and was very
near falling alive into the hands of his Enemies. And in regard the Sicilians
had the advantage of high Ground (from whence they galled the other) above Six
hundred of Dionysius's his Men were killed, and many lost their Arms, Dionysius
himself Dionysius near killing.
saved only his Corslet. After this Misfortune, they of Agrigentum and Messina
(those that sided with Dionysius being at a great distance) were altogether
intent upon regaining their Liberty, and therefore sent back Dionysius's
Ambassador, who was ordered to them to renew and continue the Confederacy and
League that then was between them and the Ty^ant.

About this time Pausanias, King of Sparta, fled out of his Country, by reason
of some heinous Crimes laid to his charge by the Citizens when he had reigned
Fourteen Years: Agistpolis his Soft succeeded him, and continued as many years
more? Then likewise died Pausania^; King of Macedon, whom Amyntas treacherously
murdered after he had reigned only one Year. Amyntas, who thus thus got the
Kingdom, held it Four and twenty Years.

At the End of the Year, Demostratus was chosen Archon of Athens, and six
Military Olymp. 96. 4. Ant. Chapter 391.
Tribunes, Lucius Titinius, Publius Licinius, Publius Melius, Quintus Maenius.
The Acts of Mago in Sicily. P. 444.
Mallius, Gneius Genutius, and Lucius Attilius, governed as Consuls at Rome. In
their time Mago, the Carthaginian General was busy in Sicily, endeavoring to
settle the Affairs of Carthage there, which were then but in an ill Condition,
since the last slaughter and ruin of their Army. To this end he carried himself
with all Mildness and Humanity toward all the Cities within his Government,
and received all others into his Protection that were Enemies to Dionysius, and
entered into Leagues with many of the Sicilians. At length he raised an Army,
and marched against Messina, and when he had wasted the Country he returned
with rich Booty, and Encamped near Abacena, a City of his Confederates. But
Dionysius with his Army marched up to him, and upon his approach both Armies
were drawn out in order of Battle, upon which there was a sharp and hot
Engagement, in which the Carthaginians were routed and fled to the City, with
the loss of above Eight hundred Men: And Dionysius returned to Syracuse. But
within a few days after he made an Expedition against Dionysius sets upon
Rhegium in Italy.
Rhegium with an hundred Sail well Manned; and coming upon them on a sudden in
the Night, he set the Gates on Fire, and reared Scaling-Ladders to the Walls. A
few only of the Rhegians at first ran to repulse the Enemy, and busied
themselves in extinguishing the Fire; but by the advice of Heloris the
Governor, they left the Fire, and fell with all their force upon the Enemy, and
by that means saved their City. For if they had continued Ant. Chapter 391.
still in quenching the Flames, so small a number could not have kept out the
Dionysians till the rest of the Citizens had come in to their assistance. For
by throwing of Timber and other combustible matter from the Tops of the Houses
next adjoining, they rather increased the Fire. Dionysius being thus
disappointed in his design, wastes and destroys all the Country round about
with Fire and Sword; but afterward made a Truce with them for one Year, and so
returned to Syracuse.

In the mean time, the Grecians in Italy perceiving that Dionysius his
Covetousness and The Grecians confederate in Italy against Dionysius.
Ambition extended as far as to their Countries, entered into a general League,
and appointed a public Place for their Common Assemblies. By this means they
hoped that they should both be able to oppose Dionysius, and likewise have an
Army always ready to fight the Lucanians, who were ever and anon making inroads
upon them.

While these things were doing, the Exiles that were in the Lecheum at Corinth,
being let into the City in the Night, endeavored to possess themselves of the
Walls, but were The Lacedaemonians beaten by Iphicrates near Corinth.
driven out again by Iphicratis, and forced to fly to the Arsenal, with the
loss of Three hundred Men. Within a few days after, part of the Spartan Army
marched through the Territories of Corinth, and were suddenly fallen upon by
Iphicrates and some other Confederates, who out off the greatest part of them.
And marching from thence with his Light-armed Men against Phlias, he engaged
with them that came out of the Town, and killed above Three hundred of them.
Hence he made against Sicyon, who drew out under Ant. Chapter 391
the Walls and fought him, but were beaten and forced into the City, with the
loss of Five hundred Citizens.

After these things, the Argives with all their Forces came against Corinth,
and took both Corinth taken by the Argives.
the Castle and City, and joined that Territory to their own. Iphicrates the
Athenian had had a design to be Master of that Territory, as a Place conducing
much to the gaining and keeping the Principality of Greece. But the People
opposing it, he Abdicated the Government, and the Athenians ordered Cabrias to
Corinth in his room.

In Macedonia Amyntas, the Father of Philip, was ejected out of his Pella.
City by the Illyrians, who made an inroad into his Country, and despairing to
keep his Kingdom, he gave the Furius Camillus.
Olynthians the Territory next adjoining to them. However, though he lost his
Kingdom at this time, yet soon after he recovered it by the help of the
Thessalians, and reigned afterward Four and twenty Years. Yet there are some
that write, that after the Expulsion of Amyntas, Argeus reigned in Macedonia
for the space of Two years, and then Amyntas was restored. About the same time
Satyrus, the Son of Sparticus, King of Bospherus, P. 445.
died, after he had reigned Fourteen years, and Leuco his Son succeeded him for
the space of Forty years.

In Italy, after Eleven years Siege of the Veians, the Romans created Cornelius
Scipio. Ant. Chapter 391. The Romans take Veii.
Marcus Furius, Dictator, and One of the Isles of Lipari near Sicily.
Publius Cornelius, General of the Horse. Having raised an Army they stormed
Veii by undermining the Castle, razed the City and sold the Inhabitants for
Slaves; after which the Dictator triumphed, and the People of Rome dedicated a
Golden Cup to the Oracle at Delphos, out of the Tenth of the Spoils. But they
that carried the Offering were fallen upon by * Thieves or Pirates belonging to
the Isles of Lapari, and were carried * Like them of Algier.
thither. Yet when Timasatheus who was then chief Magistrate of * Lisopara,
heard of it, he not only protected the Messengers from all Injuries, but caused
the Cup to be restored, and suffered them to pass safely to Delphos: Who, when
they had delivered the Cup into the Treasury of the Messana in Peloponnesus.
Messinians, returned to Rome. And when the Romans understood how nobly
Timasatheus had dealt with the Ambassadors, they presently so far honored him,
as to enter into a League of Alliance and Friendship with him; and an Hundred
thirty and seven years after, when they took Lipara from the Carthaginians,
they ordered all the Posterity of Timasatheus to be quit of Tribute, and free
in all other respects.

CHAP. XI.
The Acts of Thrasybulus the Athenian General. The Carthaginians under Mago
begin a new War in Sicily against Dionysius. A Peace concluded. Rhodes falls
off from the Athenians. Evagoras becomes King of Salamis in Cyprus. Makes War
against the Persians. The Acts of Thimbro, the Lacedemonian General in Asia.

WHen the Year was ended, Philocles was made Lord-Chancellor of Athens, and
Olymp. 97. 1. Ant. Chapter 390.
six Military Tribunes Publius Cornelius Scipio,
Publius Sextus, Publius Cornelius Cossus. Thrasybulus made the Athenian
General. The Acts of Thrasybulus
Crassus, Ceso Fabius, Lucius Furius, Quintus Servilius, and Marcus Valerius
executed the Office of Consuls at Rome. At this time was celebrated the Ninety
Seventh Olympiad, in which Terites was Victor. And then the Athenians ordered
forth their General Thrasybulus with Forty sail of Men of War, who hastened to
Ionia, and there being furnished with Money from the Confederates, he weighed
Anchor from thence and arrived at Chersonesus, where he staid a while and
procured Medocus and Seuthes, Princes of Thrace, to become Confederates.
Presently after, he passed over to Lesbos, and anchored with his Fleet near to
Eressus: But by a violent Storm Three and Twenty of his Ships were then lost.
However, with those that were left he endeavored to reduce the Cities of
Lesbos to their Obedience, for all had made a Defection, except Mitylene; and
first he sets upon Methymna, and fought with the Citizens led by Therimacus, a
Spartan, whom he killed, with many of the Methymnians his followers, and drove
the rest within their Walls; and after he had made great Spoil and Havoc in
the Country, Eressus and Antissa were surrendered to him: Then (being furnished
with Shipping from Chius and Mitylene,) he failed to Rhodes.

And now the Carthaginians having (after the Slaughter at Syracuse) at length
recovered Mago invades Sicily with an Army from Africa, and other Parts.
their Strength, resolved to renew their Attempts for the bettering their
Affairs in Sicily; and because they determined to try their Fortune by a Battle
at Land, they passed over but with a few long Ships; but raised Soldiers out of
Africa, Sardinia, and from among the Barbarians in Italy, and armed them all
completely at their own Charge, and with these they Landed in Sicily to the
number of Fourscore thousand, under their General Mago; who marching through
the Territories of the Sicilians, caused many Cities to desert and fall off
from Dionysius, and at length Encamped at the River Chrysa in the Country of
the Argyrineans, near the Road leading to Morgantinum: But when he could not
bring over Ant. Chapter 39^.
the Argyrineans to join with him either by fair means or foul, he made an
Halt, and especially because he heard an Army was upon their march against him
from Syracuse. For P. 446.
Dionysius having intelligence of the Motion of the Carthaginians through the
Heart of the Dionysius marches against the Carthaginians.
Country, without delay, got together what Forces he could, both Syracusians
and Mercernaries, and marched against the Enemy with no fewer than Twenty
thousand Men. And when he came near to the Enemy's Camp, he sent Ambassadors to
Agyris, Prince of the Agyreans, who at that time was the greatest and most
Powerful Prince of Sicily next to Dionysius: For he had almost all the Castles
and Strong holds lying round about, under his Power and Government, and the
City of the Agyreans, which he commanded, was at that time very Populous,
having in it no less than Twenty thousand Citizens. Besides, it was
sufficiently provided with all sorts of Victuals, and a vast Treasure was laid
up in the Castle, which Agyris had hoarded up from the Confiscations of the
Richest of the Citizens whom he had put to Death. Dionysius therefore entering
with a few into the City, gained Agyris to join with him, promising to bestow
on him a large Territory next adjoining to him if he succeeded in the War.

Agyris then Freely and Liberally furnished Dionysius's Army with Bread and all
other Agyris joint with Dionysius. Ant. Chapter 390.
Provision, and afterward drew out all his Forces, and joined with him in the
War against the Carthaginians.

But Mago being in an Enemies Country (and every day more and more pinched with
want of every thing that was necessary) was very uneasy. For the Argyreans
being well acquainted with all the Ways and Passes, often surpised his Men and
intercepted all Provision. The Syracusions were for fighting with all speed;
but Dionysius would not yield to that, affirming, That Time and Want would ruin
the Carthaginians without Fighting. Upon this delay the Syracusians were so
enraged that they deserted his Camp: Hereupon he was in a great Fright, and
forthwith made free all the Slaves. Yet afterward the Carthaginians sending
Ambassadors to treat upon Terms of Peace, he made Peace with them Dionysius
makes Peace with the Carthaginians.
and forthwith restored the Servants and Slaves to their Masters.

The Conditions were like the former, but something fuller in this, That the
Sicilians should be Subject to Dionysius, and that he should have Tauromenium.

When the Articles were Signed and Confirmed, Mago left Sicily, and Dionysius
after his taking possession of Tauromenium, banished thence most of the
Sicilians; and placed in their room the Choicest of his Mercenaries. Thus stood
the Affairs of Sicily at this time. And in Italy the Romans took Rather
Phalerium.
Falerum, a City of the Falisci by storm.

After the End of the Former, this Year Nicoteles executed the Office of chief
Magistrate Olymp. 97. 2. Ant. Chapter 389.
at Athens, and three Military Tribunes, Marcus Furius, Caius Aemilius, and
Catlus Berus were vested with the Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time they
of Rhodes that sided with the Lacedaemonians, expelled all the Citizens that
favored the Athenians; and when they got together in Arms to defend their
Interest, the Lacedaemonian Confederates routed them with the slaughter of
many, and proscribed all the rest that made their Escape. And The
Lacedaemonians fled to Rhodes.
because they were afraid lest the Citizens should be contriving some
Innovations, they sent for Aid from Lacedaemon. Upon this, the Lacedaemonians
setting out seven Galleys, sent away Eudocimus, Philodicus, and Diphila, to
manage Affairs there; who arriving at Samos, caused the City to fall off from
the Athenians. Then coming to Rhodes, they busied themselves in settling and
composing Matters there. And now the Lacedaemonians seeing their Affairs to
succeed and prosper, they resolved again to recover the Dominion of the Sea,
Prepare a Fleet.
and to that end prepared a Fleet, and by degrees brought in more and more
Confederates to join with them. And for the same purpose they failed to Samos,
Rhodes, and Cnidus, and getting together Shipping from all Parts, they Listed
from thence the best Seamen they could get, and at length bravely Equipped a
Fleet of Twenty seven Galleys. P. 447.


At that time Agesilaus, King of Lacedaemon, hearing that the Argives lay
Encamped at the Siege of Corinth, made an Incursion into the Territories of
Argos with all the Forces of Sparta, except one Regiment, and having Plundered
and Spoiled the People of their Goods and Cattle, and cutting down the Trees
all along through the Country, he returned to Sparta.

In Cyprus Evagoras of Salamis, a Man of a Noble Family, (for he was descended
from Ant. Chapter 389.
the Founders of that City) who was then sometime before expuls'd the City by a
Sedition, Evagoras made King of Salamis.
(but returned not long after) with a small number of Men his Consederates
drove Abdemon the Tyrrian, Petit-Prince of Salamis (a Friend and Allie of the
King of Persia) out of the City, and so at first became King only of Salamis,
the Greatest and Richest City of Cyprus, but in a short time after, growing
Rich, he raised an Army and purposed to bring the whole Island under his
Dominion. To which end he gained some Cities by Force, and others he wan by
fair Promises. But the Amathusians, Solians, and Citians, (resolving to stand
it out) sent Ambassadors to Artaxerxes for aid, and charged Evagoras The King
of Persia prepares for War against Evagoras.
with the Killing of Agyris, the Persians Confederate, and promised to be
assistant to the King in getting the Island into his Hands. The King therefore
both to clip the Wings of Evagoras that he might not grow too strong, and for
that he considered the commodious Situation of the Place for the supply and
provision of the Shipping, whereby he might defend Asia, gave order to send Aid
to the Islanders.

Dismissing therefore the Ambassadors, he sent Letters to all the
Sea-Port-Towns and their Governors, to build with all speed what Ships they
could, and to furnish them with Tackle, and all things necessary for the Use of
the Navy. He commanded likewise Hercatomnus.
Hecatomnus, Lord Lieutenant of Caria, to make War upon Evagoras: And he
himself (going through the Cities of the Upper Asia) sailed thence with a great
Army to Cyprus. And such were the Affairs of Asia at this time.

In Italy the Romans, after they had made Peace with the Falisci, began the
Fourth War against the Equi; and took Sutrium by Storm, but lost the Town of
Verrugo.

When this Year ended, Demostratus was chosen Archon, or Lord-Chancellor of
Athens; Olym 97. 3.
and Lucius Lucretius, and Servilius Sulpitius. Ant. Chapter 388. Thimbro sent into
Asia.
Servilius Cossus, were Roman Consuls. At this time Artaxerxes declared Strutha
his General, and sent him down with an Army to the Seacoasts against the
Lacedaemonians; and they hearing of his March sent Thimbro their General into
Asia against him, who possessed himself of the Castle Jonda, and of the high
and steep Mountain Corossus, about Forty About 5 Mile.
Stages distant from Ephesus. From thence he wasted and spoiled the King's
Provinces with Eight thousand Men that he had raised in Asia. But Struthas (who
with a great Body of Horse, and Five thousand Heavy-arm'd Men, and with above
Twenty thousand Light-armed, Encamped near to the Lacedaemonians) at length,
when Thimbro was out with a Party, and had loaded himself with Plunder, on a
sudden and by surprise, fell upon him and killed him, and took and killed many
of his Soldiers, and the rest (being but few) escaped to the Castle Cnidiniam.

At the same time, Thrasybulus the Athenian General, loosing from Lesbos,
arrived with his Fleet at Aspendus, and Anchored at the River Eurymedon, and
tho he received Contributions from them of Aspendus, yet some of his Soldiers
Ravaged and Plundered the Country, P. 448.
which highly provoked the Aspendians, in so much, that in the Night, they set
upon the Athenians, and killed many of them, together with Thrasybulus himself;
which struck Thrasybulus killed. Ant. Chapter 388.
such a Terror into the Captains and Officers of the Fleet, that they forthwith
returned to their Ships, and sailed to Rhodes, where finding that the City had
deserted them, they joined with the Exiles, that posess'd themselves of a
certain Castle, and put themselves in Array against the City. But as soon as
the Athenians heard of the Death of Thrasybulus, they dispatched away Argyrius
to be General in his room. Thus stood the Affairs of Asia at that time.

CHAP. XII.
Dionysius his Expedition against Rhegium. The War between the Lucanians and
Thurians in Italy. The Thurians cut off by their own rashness. Leptines
generously saved those that swam to his Ships, though he was a Friend to their
Enemies. Dionysius his second Expedition into Italy, Besieges Caulonia and
routs Heloris. Makes Peace with the Rhegians. Razes Caulonia to the Ground, and
transplants the Inhabitants to Syracuse. Watches an Occasion to be revenged on
them of Rhegium. Besieges it. He sends rich Chariots to the Olympic Games. His
Poetry ridiculed.

IN Sicily Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, though he had a Design, and did
what he could to bring all Sicily and the Neighboring Greeks in Italy under
his Power, yet deferred the Expedition against them to some other time, as we
said before. Having therefore Dionysius prepares to Besiege Rhegium.
in the mean time, considered how greatly it would advance his Affairs if he
could gain Rhegium (the Key of Italy) he now drew out his Army into the Field.
He had then under his Command Twenty thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse, and a
Hundred and Twenty Galleys. With these he passed over to the Borders of Locris,
and thence marching through the Heart of the Country he wasted and spoiled all
the Territories of Rhegium with Fire and Sword: His Fleet attending over
against him he at length Encamped with all his Forces near the Sea. But the
Italians hearing of the Arrival of Dionysius, and his Design upon Rhegium, with
all speed put forth sixty Sail from Crotona for the aid of the Rhegians.
Whereupon, Dionysius made forth against them with fifty Galleys, and though
they made to the Shore to avoid him, yet he pursued them so close that he threw
Grappling-Irons into them, to draw them off from Land; and all the Sixty Sail
had cettainly Ant. Chapter 388.
fallen into his hand, if the whole Body of the Rhegians had not with showers
of Darts forced him from the Shore, and by the Advantage of a Storm (that then
arose) haled up Dionysius overtaken by a Storm.
the Ships to Land. And tho Dionysius fought very Valiantly, yet he lost seven
Galleys, and no less than Fifteen hundred Men on the Rhegian Shore; and both
Ships and Men being thrown upon the Shore by the Storm, many of the Seamen were
taken Prisoners by the Citizens. The Tyrant himself flying in a Vessel of Five
Oars escaped drowning very narrowly, and landed at length with much difficulty,
about Midnight at the Port of Messina. And because Winter now drew on, having
made a League with the Lucanians, he returned with his Army to Syracuse.
Returns out of Italy to Syracuse.


After this, the Lucanians made an Incursion into the Territories of the
Thurians, upon which they sent forthwith to their Confederates for assistance:
For the Greek Cities throughout all Italy had agreed together, That if the
Lucanians fell upon any one of them, all the rest should come into the help of
them that were so oppressed. And if any City should not have their Forces ready
to defend them, the Chief Commanders should be put to Death.

As soon therefore as the Cities had notice by the Posts of the march of the
Enemy, the Thurians all unanimously prepared for the Encounter, and hastily and
unadvisedly in an imprudent Heat, (not waiting for their Confederates) with
above Fourteen thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse, marched against the Enemy.

The Lucanians hearing of their approach, suffered them to enter into their
Country: Ant. Chapter 388.
Upon which they pierced into Lucania with great Violence, and at the first
were so successful as that they took a Castle, and carried away thence much
Plunder, which was in truth but as a Bait laid in their way for their
Destruction. For while they were puffed up and grown high-crested with this
Success, they contemned the Enemy, so far as that they daringly ventured
through straight and craggy Passages (through the heat of Ambition and
Covetousness) eager to possess themselves of a City and Country so blessed with
The Thurians miserably Entrap'd by the Lucanians in Italy. P. 449.
the Fullness of all things as that was: But as soon as they came into the Plain
surrounded with high and steep Hills on every side, the Lucanians coming in
with their Forces from all Parts intercepted all the Passages, leaving them no
hopes of return any ways. And showing themselves on every side from the tops of
the Hills, the Grecians were struck with great Fear and Terror, both with the
Greatness of their Army, and the Difficulty of the Places: For the Lucanians
were no fewer than Thirty thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse. While the
Graecians were in this perplexity, unexpectedly surrounded with insuperable
danger, the Barbarians marched down into the Plain, and Battle being join'd'
the Italians were overpowered by multitude, and above Ten thousand of them
killed upon the spot; (for the Lucanians gave no Quarter, as they were before
ordered) the rest fled to a Hill near the Sea side, from whence espying some
long Ships sailing toward them, hoping that they came from Rhegium (out of
eagerness to save themselves) they leaped into Ant. Chapter 388 The generosity
Leptines to the distressed
the Sea, and some of 'em by swimming got to the Ships. But this Fleet proy'd
to be Ships sent by Dionysius to the assistance of the Lucanians, under the
Command of Leptines his Brother, who very generously received them that swam
into his Ships, and set them all on Shore (being about a Thousand) and
prevailed with the Lucanians to accept a Thurians.
Mina for every Man for their Ransom, and he himself engaged for the payment,
and so ordered Matters among them, that the Lucanians and Italians made peace
one with another. Mina about 3 l. 2s. 6 d.


From this time Leptines was in great favor and much esteem with the Italians,
having made an end of the War, more to his own, than to the advantage of
Dionysius; who was in hopes that by means of the differences between the
Lucanians and the Greeks of Italy, he should be able with much ease to
accomplish his Designs there: but if he should make Peace, he judged his
Conquest would be difficult. Therefore he discarded Leptines, and created
Thearides his other Brother Admiral of the Fleet. During these Transactions the
Romans divided the Country of the Veians; distributing to every one Four
Plethra, an hundred Foot, or an Acre.
Plethra of Land, but as others say Eight and Twenty. At the same time they
made War upon the Aequi, and took Liflus by Storm. They sent Forces likewise
against the The Volsci, whose Chief City was Velitta.. Olymp 97. 4. Ant. Chapter
387. Dionysius passes again into Italy.
Veliternines who had revolted. Satricum likewise made a Defection; and a
Colony was sent forth into * Certium.

At the close of the year Antipater was chosen Chief Governor of Athens, and
Lucius Valerius, and Aulus Manlius were Roman Consuls. Now Dionysius King of
Syracuse Declared openly his Design of a Descent upon Italy, and to that end
loosed from Syracuse with a numerous Army: For he had with him above Twenty
thousand Foot and Three thousand Horse, a Navy of Forty long Ships, or Men of
War, besides Three hundred Transport Ships for carrying of Corn and Provision.
He arrived at Messina the Fifth day, and there refreshed his Army; from thence
he sent away Thearides his Brother with Forty Sail to the Lipari Islands, for
it was reported that Ten Ships of Rhegium lay there; Thearides therefore
hastening thither found out the Ships in a place fit for his purpose, and
possessing himself of them, with all their Men on board, he forthwith returned
to Messina to Dionysius, who delivered the Prisoners bound in Chains to the
custody of the Messinians. Then he Transported his Forces to Or Caulum in
Locris. P. 450. Heloris made General for the Italians against Dionysius.
Caulonia, and laid close Siege to the Caulonia besieged by Dionysius
City on every side, and battered it with his Engines.

But the Greeks in Italy as soon as they heard of the Landing of Dionysius's
Forces, raised Men and got together an Army from all parts. Crotona at that
time was very populous, and many that fled and that were forced out of Syracuse
inhabited there. The Chief Command and management therefore of the War was
committed to them, and Heloris the Syracusian was made General of all the
Forces. He was a valiant Man, and they concluded he would be faithful, because
he hated the Tyrant, who had banished him out of his Country. When he had
mustered all the Confederate Army at Crotona, and ordered all things as he
thought fit, he hasted away with a swift March toward Caulonia, hoping by
coming upon them suddenly and unexpectedly, he should not only raise the
Siege, but likewise rout them with ease, being harassed and tired out with
their continual toil and labor in assaulting the Town. His Army consisted of
Twenty thousand Foot, and Two Ant. Chapter 387. A Fight between Heloris and
Dionysius near Caulonia.
thousand Horse. Having marched the greatest part of his way, he encamped at
the River Heloris; thereupon Dionysius drew off from the City to meet the
Italians: Upon which, Heloris at the head of Five hundred of the choicest Men
in the Army marched before the rest. Dionysius encamping about Forty Furlongs
Five Miles.
Stages from the Enemy, understood by his Spies that the Italians drew near,
upon which he forthwith very early in the Morning, roused his Soldiers from
Sleep, and commanded them to march forward, and about break of day fell upon
the Helorians, with his Army in good order of Battle, giving the Enemy no time
to get into a Body: so that Heloris was in a great strait, and with those he
had with him, bore the brunt of the Enemies whole Force; but in the mean time
he sent away some Friends to the Camp to bring up the rest of the Army with all
speed, who diligently executed their Orders; Upon which, the Italians hearing
in what hazard their General was, ran in a great hurry to his assistance. But
Dionysius with a well-ordered Body of Men, doing execution in every place, cut
off Heloris and almost all his Party, though they fought with great Resolution
and Gallantry. For the Italians coming in to their help, but scattering, and by
parties, (...) Sicilians (keeping orderly together) easily overcame them.
However, the Crecians for some time despised danger, and suffered Dionysius
routs the Italians. Ant. Chapter 387.
much, though they saw great numbers of their fellows lie dead upon the spot. But
when they heard of the death of their General (in great confusion) they trod
down and killed one another, and at last, being totally discouraged and out of
heart, they fled outright: Upon which many were killed up and down in the
fields, and the rest betook themselves to a Mount sufficiently fortified and
very defensible, save that it wanted Water. Dionysius blocked up the place with
his Army, and closely guarded it all that day, and the following night: The
next day they that were in the Hill (being much incommoded by the heat, and by
lack of Water) sent a Trumpet to Dionysius, that they might have liberty to
ransom themselves:) Who at length (growing moderate in the height of his good
Fortune) sent them word that they should lay down their Arms, and surrender
themselves upon discretion. Upon return of these harsh and hard Terms, they
held out longer for some short time: But being grievously pressed by the
necessity of Nature, and almost Starved, they surrendered themselves about the
Eight Hour. Dionysius hereupon numbered them as they came down, by striking the
ground with a Staff, and they amounted to above Ten thousand. They were all
afraid he would have been as cruel as a wild Dionysius deals nobly with the
distressed Italians.
Beast; but he then approved himself the mildest of all Men living. For he
discharged all the prisoners without Ransom, and made Peace with them, and
suffered the Cities to Govern according to their own Laws. For which great
Grace and Favor he was highly Honored, and his Name was so great that they
presented him with Golden Crowns. And this was the most worthy Action that ever
he did almost throughout his whole Life.

From hence he marched with his Forces against Rhegium, with a design to
besiege it. He marches to Rhegium.
to be revenged for their slight of him, in denying him a Wise from some of
their own City. The Rhegians were greatly terrified at his approach, for they
had neither Confederates nor Forces of their own sufficient to cope with him;
besides, they foresaw that there was no Mercy to be expected, if the City were
taken: Therefore they sent an Ambassador P. 451.
to him to entreat him to show them Favor, and to use them like Men. Upon
which he demanded a Tribute of Three hundred Talents, and that they should
deliver into his hands all their Fleet (which were Seventy in number) and send
out to him an Hundred Hostages, all which terms were agreed unto.

Whereupon he moved toward Caulonia, and transported all the Inhabitants of
that place to Syracuse, and incorporated them into the City, and granted to
them freedom from the public Taxes for the space of Five Years. As for
Caulonia it self, he razed it to Caulonia razed.
the Ground, but gave the Territory to the Locrians. About the same time, the
Romans (after the taking of the City Lifaeca from the Aequi,) celebrated the
stately Plays which the Consuls had vowed to Jupiter.

After the end of the year, Pyrrhio executed the Office of Lord Chancellor of
Athens Olymp. 98. 1. Ant. Chapter 396.
the next, and Four Military Tribunes, Lucius Lucretius, Servius Sulpitius,
Caius Aemilius, and Caius Rufus, were invested with the Consular Dignity at
Rome. Then was acted the Ninety eighth Olympiad, wherein Sosippus the Athenian
carried away the Prize. About * Lucius Furius.
the same time Dionysius the Prince of Syracuse entered A City of the Brutians
in Italy.
Hipponium with his Army, and Transported all the Citizens to Syracuse, and
when he had razed the Town, he gave the Lands to the Locreans; for he was
always very desirous to oblige them, because they so readily complied with him
in the business of his Marriage. On the other hand he studied Revenge upon the
Rhegians for their denial. For when he sent an Ambassador to them to Treat with
them to send him a Virgin of some of their Citizens to be his Wife: It Is said
the Rhegians answered his Ambassadors, that he should have none from them
except it were the Hangman's Daughter. Being highly incensed at this gross
abuse (as he took it to be,) he continually studied how to be revenged. For he
made not peace with Ant. Chapter 386.
them the year before out of any design of Kindness or Friendship with them,
but only out of a desire he had to possess himself of their Fleet of Seventy
Sail. For he knew he could easily take the City, when they could have no aid or
assistance by Sea. To this end he made several Halts, and delayed as much as he
could his drawing his Forces out of Italy, waiting for some colorable pretense
or occasion to break his League with the Rhegians, without any refleicton upon
his Honor. Drawing therefore his Forces down to the Sea side, he prepares all
things necessary for his passage; and then desires that the Rhegians would
furnish him with Provision for his Army, and he would send them as much back
again from Syracuse. His design in this was, that if they refused to supply
him, he thought he might have a just ground to raze their City; and if they
readily answered his Request, then, after their Corn and Provision was spent
(upon laying Siege to the Town) he might with more ease (through their scarcity
of Food) possess himself of the place. The Rhegians, not suspecting any thing,
for some few days furnished him liberally. But when he delaid and trifled away
the time, sometimes pretending himself sick, other times framing other excuses;
they at length smelt his design, and therefore forbore sending any further
Provision to his Camp. Upon which, Dionysius seeming to be much enraged at this
affront, returned to them all the Hostages, and beg(...)ing the Town round with
his Forces, assaulted it every day; and with a great number of Engines (of an
incredible bigness) so battered the Walls, as if they had been shaken by a
Storm and Tempest, so earnest was he to gain the City. The Rhegians on the
other hand, (having made Ant. Chapter 386. Dionysius assaults Rhegium.
Phile their General) ordered all that were of Age and Strength to take up
Arms, and to keep strict Guards; and spying a fit opportunity, they made a
vigorous Sally; and burnt the Enemies Engines; and often skirmish'd out of the
Walls with that Valor, and Resolution (to the exasperating of the Enemy) that
they both lost many of their own, and killed no few of the Sicilians: Nay,
Dionysius himself was so wounded with a Lance P. 452.
about the Privy Parts, The Scrotum.
that he was very near losing his Life, it being a long time before he
recovered. Notwithstanding, though the Siege was tedious, and the Rhegians
resolved to defend their Liberty, yet he employed his Soldiers in continual
Assaults, not in the least receding from his former design and purpose. The
Olympic Games in the mean time drawing on, he sent to that Solemnity many
Chariots drawn with Four Horses apiece, Sends Chariots and Gifts to the
Olympic Games.
and exceeding swift; and likewise Tents glistering with Gold, and adorned with
rich and various Embroideries of admirable Workmanship; and with these he sent
likewise the most skilful Singers to advance his own praise by the reciting of
Poems composed by himself; For he was (even to madness) given to Poetry, and he
committed the care and oversight of all these things to his Brother Thearides,
(who when he came to the ground (by the multitude of the Chariots, and richness
and splendour of the Tents and Pavilions) attracted the Eyes of all the
Beholders. And when the Singers began to recite the Poems of Dionysius, the
People at first ran together, and greatly admired the sweet and pleasant Airs
of (...). Ant. Chapter 396.
the Stage Players. But as soon as they perceived how bad and Ballad like the
the Verses were, they ridiculed Dionysius, and despised him to that degree,
that they rist'd the Tents. Lystas likewise the Orator then at Olympid, advised
the People that they should not admit any of those Procurators sent by so
wicked a Tyrant to have any thing to do with those Sacred Sports. At which time
he made the Speech styled by him The Olympic Oration. And how the Race began,
and it so happened, that the Chariots of Dionysius were some of 'em driven out
of the Line, others were broken in pieces by dashing one upon another. Neither
did the Ship prosper better which conveyed the Procurators: For in their return
from the Games to Sicily, they were forced by violence of a Tempest to
Tarentum, a City in Italy. And it is reported that when they came to Syracuse
they spread it abroad, That the badness of Dionysius's Verses had not only
disgraced the Singers, but prejudiced both the Chariots and the Ship. However,
though he knew that his Verses were hissed at, yet still he addicted himself to
Poetry, being told by his Flatterers, that those thrt envied every thing that
was Noble and Brave, would at length admire what they then despised. At that
time the Romans slew a great number of the Volsci in the Battle at Gurasum.

CHAP. XIII.
The Peace of Antalcidas. The War by the Persians against Evagoras in Cyprus
The miserable Condition of Rhegium: It Is Surrendered. The cruel usage of Philo
the Governor of Rhegium, and of his Son. The Expedition of the Galls against
Italy. The Romans routed by the Galls at the River Allia. Rome taken by the
Galls. The Romans Besieged in the Capitol. The Volsci Revolt from the Romans.
The Galls routed by Marcus Furius in their return. All cut off afterward in
the Plains of Trausium.

WIth these Actions the year ended, and now Theodotus was made Chief Magistrate
Olymp. 98. 2. Ant. Chapter 385.
of Athens, and Six Military Tribunes executed the Consular Authority at Rome:
Quintus Caesus, Sulpitius Aenos, Caesus Fabius, Quintus Cervilius Quintus
Sulpicius.
Publius Cornelius, and Servius Cornelius. The Peace of Antalcidas.
Marcus Claudius. At this time the Lacedaemonians tired out with the War both
against the Greeks and Persians, ordered their Admiral Antalcidas to go to
Artaxerxes to strike up a Peace. When he had delivered his Embassage to the
King, he answered, that he would make Peace with the Grecians, upon condition,
that all the Greek Cities in Asia should return to their Obedience, and that
the rest of the Grecians should all Govern their Cities, according to their own
Laws; and that if any should stand out and not submit to these Conditions, it
should be lawful for him to make War upon them, by them that did agree. These
Terms were allowed, and so the Lacedaemonians rested from War. But the Athenians
and Thebans, with some others were much vexed, and highly concerned to see the
Cities of Asia thus betrayed, but not being able to contend with Persia by
their own strength they were forced to embrace Peace upon the same Terms.

And now the King being free from the long and tedious War with the Grecians;
he prepared and made ready an Army for the Cyprian War. For Evagoras had raised
a vast P. 453.
Army almost throughout all Cyprus, taking advantage of Artaxerxes his being
engaged in a War with the Greeks.

In the mean time Dionysius having continued the Siege of Rhegium now for the
space of Eleven Months, and obstructed all ways and means of Relief, he brought
the Besieged to the utmost extremity, through want of all things necessary, For
it is reported that at that time a Bushel of Wheat was sold for Five 15 l. 12 s.
6 d. The miserable condition of Rhegium. Ant. Chapter 385.
Minas: and the Famine was so great that they first eat up their Horses, and
then all other Beasts of Burden, and at length fed upon boild Skins and
Leather. And at the last they came out of the Town, and like Cattle began to
eat the Grass that grew under the Walls: so that to supply Nature they were
forced to feed upon those things proper to the Beasts of the Field for want of
Man's ordinary Food. When Dionysius heard what the Rhegians did, he was so far
from commiserating them who were sunk in Misery, below the common condition of
Mankind, that he added to their Affliction, and put in his Carriage Horses, and
other Draught Cattle to Graze there where they used to feed, and so eat up all
that poor Provision which Rhegium surrendered.
was only left for them. The Citizens being thus overcome by extreme Famine (no
longer to be born) were forced to deliver up themselves and their City to the
Tyrant's Mercy. When he entered he found heaps of Carcasses lying in the Streets
who perished for want of Bread: and those that were alive were like walking
Ghosts, lean, and almost pined away by Famine: However, he got together above
Six thousand Prisoners, and sent them to Syracuse, with Orders, that whoever
paid a Mina might be redeemed: and for those that were not able, he sold them
all for Slaves. Phyto the Governor he The cruel usage of Phito the Governor of
Rhegium.
bound in Chains, and caused his Son to be hurled into the Sea, and fastened
Phyto himself to the top of one of his highest Engines, that the severity of
his punishment might be taken notice of by all, and sent one of his Guard to
tell him that his Son was drowned the day before; to whom Phito answered, that
his Son was by one day more happy than his Father. After this he ordered him to
be whipped through the City, and to be scoffed and scorned, and undergo all
sorts of Cruelty; A Crier the mean time making Proclamation; That the Raseal
was so severely dealt with, because he stirred up the City to the War. But
Phito (who had all along through the Siege approved himself a valiant Commander,
and during Ant. Chapter 385.
his whole Life was Esteemed and Honored) was not then the least discouraged
at Death, but with an undaunted Courage cried out That he thus suffered because
he would not betray the City to Dionysius; However, God would revenge him of
the Tyrant in a short time. This admirable Courage and brave Spirit of the Man
began to work compassion in some of Dionysius's Soldiers; so that they began to
murmur: Upon which, Dionysius (being afraid lest Phito should be rescued) left
off tormenting him, and ordered the miserable Man with all his Kindred to be
drowned in the Sea. Thus suffered this worthy Man, who deserved much better
than to undergo so heavy and dreadful a punishment. And many Grecians there
were who grieved for his sad misfortune, and several Poets in after times made
Elegies upon his mournful and lamentable end.

At the same time when Dionysius lay at the Siege of Rhegium, the Gauls who lay
beyond the Alps passed over those straits with a numerous Army, and possessed
themselves of all the Country lying between the Apenine Hills and the Alps,
driving thence the Tyrrhenians The Galls enter Italy.
the natural Inhabitants. Some say they were Colonies sent thither from Twelve
Cities in A Province in Italy.
Tyrrhenia; Others say they were Pelasgians, who before the Trojan War fled out
of Thessaly at the time of Deucalion's Flood, and settled themselves in these
parts. As for the Gauls they were a People that were divided into several
Tribes, and dwelt in several Countries. Those called the Senones inhabited the
Mountain furthest from the Sea of all the other Mountains, and because the Heat
was excessive and troublesome to Ant. Chapter 385. P. 454.
them, they resolved to seek for themselves some more commodious Habitations.
To this end they sent forth the ablest of their young Men well Armed, to find
out some other Seats, who making an irruption into Hetruria. rather.
Tyrrhenia with Thirty thousand Men, wasted and spoiled the Territories of the
Caulonians.

About this time the Romans sent Ambassadors into Tyrrhenia to gain
intelligence what this Expedition of the Gauls meant: Who when they came to
Clusium, and saw the Armies Hetruria.
on both sides drawn up in Battalia ready to engage, with more Valor than
Prudence, they joined with them of Clusium, and sought with the Enemy. And one
of the Ambassadors by good fortune killed one of the Noblest Commanders of the
Gauls; who when they heard of it, sent Ambassadors to Rome, to require the
Ambassador who had killed the Gaul to be delivered up to them, as one that had
begun an unjust War. Upon which, the Senate would have persuaded the
Ambassadors to have accepted Money in satisfaction of the injury; But when they
refusd it, it was Decreed that the Person should be delivered. Upon this, the
Father of him who was to be given up into the Enemies hands (being then of
Consular Dignity, and one of the Military Tribunes, and being likewise very
rich, and of great Interest and Account with the Commonalty) referred the
decision of the matter to the People, and so easily procured the Judgment and
Decree of the Senate to be repealed. From this time the People began to rescind
the Decrees of the Senate, though ever before they always submitted to them. Ant.
Chapter 385.


But the Ambassadors of the Gauls returned to their Camp, and Declared what
Answer was given them by the Romans: Upon which they were in a great Rage, and
increased their Army with new raised Forces out of their own Country, and
forthwith marched toward Rome with above Seventy thousand Men.

When the news came to Rome, the Military Tribunes commanded all that were able
to bear Arms, to List themselves, who marching out of the City passed over
Tyber, and came with all their Forces unto a Allia, Ten Miles from Rome.
River Fourscore Furlongs from Rome; where when they understood that the Enemy
was near at hand, drew up their Army in this manner; Their best Soldiers, to
the number of Four and twenty thousand, they posted all along from the River to
the Hills adjoining, the rest were placed upon the rising Grounds. On the other
hand the Enemy out winging the Romans, their strongest and ablest Soldiers
(whether on purpose or by chance is uncertain) fronted those weaker and
unexperienced Soldiers on the Hills. And now the Trumpets on both sides sounded
a Charge. Whereupon the Armies ran one upon another with a great shout. And
those Gauls that set upon them that were upon the Hills, presently cleared the
place of them, who fled in great confusion to their own Men into the Plain; so
that by their flight, and the hot pursuit of the Gauls, they broke and
disordered their own Army, and put them likewise to the Run. And while the
greatest part of them made to the River, and in great precipitation The Romans
routed by the Gauls. Ant. Chapter 385.
and confusion, trod down one another, the Enemy without intermission killed
all still that were in the Rear, so that the whole Field was covered with dead
Bodies. Some of the stoutest of those that fled to the River, swam over with
their Arms, prizing them as much as their Lives: But many of them, (through the
violence of the Stream, and the weight of their Arms) were drowned. Some with
great difficulty (after they had fled a long way, and in by paths, with much a
do) escaped. However, many (still pursued close by the Enemy, who made a great
slaughter among them upon the Bank of the River,) threw away their Arms and
swam over Tiber. And though the Gauls had cut off so many upon the Shore, yet
such was their continued Rage, that they cast their Darts and Javelins after
them that took the Water. And many Darts being P. 55.
hurled amongst shoals of them that were swimming, no small execution was done,
so that some were killed forthwith, and others so wounded, that through loss of
Blood, and strength of the Current, they were spent and carried away by the
Stream.

The greatest number of those that escaped from this sad Overthrow of the
Romans, took into Ve^^ lately ruined by them, and fortifying the Place as well
as they could, received the rest that fled thither. Those few who swam the
River, and returned unarmed into Rome, related how the whole Army was
destroyed, which sad News greatly amazed all those that were left in the City:
For the Strength and Flower of the Citizens being now cut off, they looked upon
themselves unable in the least to resist. And besides, Ant. Chapter 385.
to aggravate their Misery, it seemed to them impossible to fly with their
Wives and Children, without the greatest Hazard imaginable, the Enemy being so
near: Therefore many of the ordinary sort removed with their whole Families to
the neighboring Towns and Villages. But the City-Magistrates encouraging the
People, ordered that Victuals and all other Necessaries should be brought into
the Capitol; by which means, both the Castle and Capitol was filled not only
with Meat and Provision, but with Silver and Gold, and all sorts of rich
Garments and Attire, Goods of all kinds throughout the whole City being heaped
together in this one Place; for they had but three Days time to remove what was
moveable, and to fortify the Place: For the Gauls spent the first Day
(according to the Custom of their Country) in cutting off the Heads of those
that were slain; the other two Days they lay quiet in their Camp, now close to
the City. For when they discerned that the Walls were left bare and undefended,
and yet heard a confused Noise (occasioned by the bringing in of Houshold-Goods
and other Things useful into the Capitol) they suspected some Stratagem was
designing against Rome taken.
them. But the fourth Day, when they came to understand the Truth, they broke
down the Gates, and laid all the City in rubbish, except a few Houses upon
Mount Pallatine: And though afterward they pressed upon them in the Capitol with
continual Assaults, yet they within suffered little by it, but many of the
Gauls perished. However, they stuck The Capitol besieged.
close to the Siege, hoping though they could not gain the Place by force, yet at
least in time, when all the Provision and Victuals was spent, they might
possess themselves of the Fort.

While the Roman Affairs were thus perplexed, the Tuscans their Neighbors made
an Incursion with a great Army into their Territories, and wasted and destroyed
all before them. But when they had got many Prisoners and much Spoil and
Plunder into their hands, the Romans that had fled to Veii set upon them on the
sudden, and put them to flight, and not only recovered all the Spoil, but
likewise possessed themselves of all their Tents: And by this means being
furnished with a great number of Arms, they armed Ant. Chapter 385.
their Fellow Soldiers, who hitherto were unarmed since the late Defeat, and
got together a Company of Country-Fellows from several Parts, and likewise
armed them: For they had a design to raise the Siege of the Capitol, but were
most perplexed and concerned how to give notice of their Purpose to the
Besieged, in regard the Gauls so straightly blocked it up. Upon this, one Pontius
Caminius undertook to get into the Capitol; to which end he passed on himself
alone, and privately in the night swam over the River, and ascending a steep
Rock of the Capitol with great difficulty, drew himself up, and so came to the
Besieged, and acquainted them that they of Veii were in a Body, and that they
intended to fall upon the Gauls upon the first Opportunity; and having
delivered his Message, he returned to Veii the same way he came. But when the
Gauls perceived, by the Impressions of a Man's Feet, that some Person had
lately passed that way into the Castle, they determined to attempt to make an
Entry by climbing the Rock in that part: And to that end, about midnight (the
Guards being careless, trusting to the Strength of the Place) some of the Gauls
got up to the top, but were not taken notice of by the Watch, but the Geese,
dedicated to Juno, that fed there (seeing them appear P 456.
above the Walls) presently made a great gagling and noise, which so alarmed
the Watch, that they all ran to the Place; upon which, the Gauls now betrayed
and afrighted, durst not proceed any further.

In the mean time, that famous Man Marcus Manlius hasting to the Defense of the
Place, cut off the Hand of a Gaul, as he was raising himself to recover the
Wall, and by Ant. Chapter 385.
a thrust in his Breast with the Boss of his Buckler, cast him down headlong
from the top of the Rock; and another being destroyed after the same manner,
the rest in all haste retired; and because the Rock was very steep (being in a
great terror and amazement) they all miserably perished. The Romans hereupon
sending Ambassadors to 'em to treat upon Terms of Peace, obtained it upon these
Conditions: That upon receiving a Thousand pound weight of Gold, they would
leave the City, and depart out of the Roman Territories.

After this, because the Houses were destroyed, and many of the Citizens
killed, the Romans gave leave to every one that would to build, and roof'd and
covered all the Houses at the Public Charge, which were therefore ever after
to this day called the Public Houses. And because every Man built according to
his own Humor where he pleased, the Streets were made very narrow and crooked,
which (notwithstanding the Riches of the City) in succeeding Times could never
be reformed. Some have reported, that the Roman Matrons gave all their golden
Ornaments for the redeeming of their Country; for which they have this Honor
allowed them, That they may at any time be carried in Chariots through the City.

The Romans being thus impoverished and brought low by the late Calamity, the
Volsci took the advantage, and raised Arms against them. Upon which, the
Consular Tribunes got their Forces together, and marched out into the Campus
Martius (as it is called) and encamped about 25 mile. Ant. Chapter 385.
Two hundred Stages from the City. The Volsci far exceeded the Romans in
number, and set upon their Camp: Upon which, the Senate, much concerned for
them in the Field, made Marcus Furius Dictator, who ordered the young Men in
the City to take up Arms, with whom he marched out in the night, and came upon
the backs of the Volsci (when they were very busy and intent in assaulting the
Romans) and easily put them to flight: Upon which, they within the Camp
sallying out, the Volsci by this means were hemmed in on every side, and almost
all cut off. And thus this Nation, who were before a strong and potent People,
by this Overthrow were brought extreme low and weaker than any of the Nations
round about them.

The Dictator afterward hearing that Bola was besieged by the Aequi, marched
thither, and killed most of the Besiegers. Thence he moved to Sutrium.
Sutrinum, a Colony of the Romans, but then possessed by the Aequi, and falling
upon them on the sudden, he made a great Slaughter among them, and restored the
City to them of Sutrinum.

About this time the Gauls in their march from Rome besieged Veascus, a
Confederate City of the Romans; upon which, the Dictator marched against them,
fought and routed them, and seized their Bag and Baggage, amongst which was the
Gold weighed at Rome, and recovered almost all the Prey and Plunder they had
gained in taking of the City. And though he had performed all this good
Service, yet the Tribunes of the People Ant. Chapter 385.
through Envy denied him a Triumph. Yet some relate, that he did Triumph in a
Chariot drawn with four white Horses for the Victory against the Thuscans, and
within two Days after was fined by the People in a great Sum of Money, which we
shall mention hereafter in its proper place.

Those Gauls that went to Japygium, designed to return through the Roman
Territories; but the Cerii laid an Ambush for them in the Night, and cut them
all off in the Plains of Trausium.

Callisthenes the Historian began his Grecian Memoirs from this Year, wherein
the Peace P. 457.
was made between the Graecians and Artaxerxes, and ended them with the Year
the Temple of Delphos was taken and rifled by Philomelus the Phocian,
comprehending an Account of Affairs for the space of Thirty Years in Ten Books.
And now being come to the Peace between Artaxerxes and the Greeks, and the
Danger threatened to Rome by the Gauls, according to our purpose at the
beginning, we shall put an end to this Book.

BOOK XV.
HAving throughout the whole Work used the Common and accustomed Liberty P.
458. PREFACE.
of an Historian, we have both praised the Good, and condemned the Bad as they
have fallen in our way, to the end that those whose Genius and Inclination
prompts them to Virtue, may be the more encouraged to Noble Actions, in hopes
of having the Glory of their Names continued to all succeeding Generations; and
on the other hand, that they that are bent to Wickedness may be curbed and
restrained from the Heat, at least, of their Impiety, by those marks of
Dishonor and Disgrace fixed upon them.

Since therefore we have brought down our History to the times wherein the
Lacedaemonians fell by the sudden and unexpected Slaughter at Leuctra, and the
like again not long after at Mantinea, whereby they lost the Sovereignty of
Greece; We judge it part of our Province to keep close to the former Course and
Method of Writing, (and therefore by the way in the first place to blame and
reprehend the Lacedaemonians who justly deserve it: For who cannot but judge
them worthy of Censure, and that justly, who having a well-settled Empire and
Government descended to them from their Ancestors, and by their Valor
supported and defended for the space of above Five hundred Years, should now in
a Moment ruin it by their own Folly and Imprudence? For they that were before
them, preserved the Grandeur and Glory of their Conquests, by their Lenity and
Tenderness toward their Subjects, but these their Posterity by their Cruelty
to their Confederates, and Pride and Ambition in making War upon the Grecians,
most deservedly lost all by their Rashness and Inconsideratness. For those that
hated them for the Injuries they had before suffered, greedily took the
advantage now they were low, to revenge themselves on them as their Enemies.
And they whose Forefathers were never before Conquered, were so much the more
despised, by how much they deserved the greater Contempt, who by their Vices
had stained the Virtue and Glory of their Ancestors.

The Thebans therefore (who for many Ages before were forced to stoop to them
as their Superiors; having now (beyond all Men's expectations) conquered the
Lacedaemonians) were made Chief Commanders of Greece: But the Lacedaemonians,
after they had once lost their hold, could never after recover their ancient
Glory and Dignity. But enough of this, we shall now return to the Course of our
History.

The preceding Book, the Fourteenth in Order, ends with the Ruin of Rhegium by
Dionysius, and the Taking of Rome by the Gauls, which happened the Year next
before the Expedition of the Persians into Cyprus against Evagoras. We shall
her begin this Book with that War, and end it with the Year next preceding the
Reign of Philip the Son of Amyntas.

CHAP. I.
Artaxerxes's Expedition against Evagoras in Cyprus. The Actions there at Sea
and Land. The Lacedaemonians begin new Quarrels in Greece. As first with
Mantinea. Dionysius gives himself to Poetry. Peace concluded with Evagoras by
Orontes the Persian General. Terabazus brought to his Trial. Judgment upon
corrupt Judges. Terabazus acquitted.

IN Athens Mystichides was Archon, and at Rome three Tribunes were invested
with Consular Olymp. 98. 3. Ant. Chapter 384. P. 459. Artaxerxes his Expedition
into Cyprus against Evagoras.
Authority; Marcus Furius, Caius and Aemilius, when Artaxerxes King of Persia,
began his Expedition against Evagoras King of Cyprus The King had spent much
time in preparation for the War, and raised a great Number of Forces both for
Sea and Land from all Parts. For his Land-Army consisted of Three hundred
thousand Horse and Foot; and he Equipped a Fleet of above Three hundred Galleys
Orontes was made General of the Land-Army, and Terabazus a Man highly honored
among the Persians, Admiral of the Fleet. These headed their Armies at Phocea
and Cuma, and descended to Cilicia, and from thence passed over to Cyprus,
where they very vigorously bestirred themselves for the carrying on of the War.

In the mean time, Evagoras entered into a League with Acoris King of Egypt,
who supplied him with a great Number of Men, being himself then in War with the
Persians. Evagoras assisted by the King of Egypt. Ant. Chapter 384.
He was likewise privately furnished with Money by Hecatomnus, the Governor of
Caria, to help him to hire Foreigners. And several other Enemies of Persia,
some secretly, others openly, confederated with him in the War. He had likewise
many Cities of Cyprus under his Command, with whom joined Tire in Phenicia and
other Places. Moreover, he had a Navy of Ninety Sail, of which Twenty were from
Tire, and the rest of Cyprus. His Land-Army consisted of Six thousand of his
own Subjects, but those from his Confederates were many more: Besides, being
richly supplied by them with Moneys he hired abundance of Mercenaries. And the
King of (...), for (...).
Arabia and other Princes, who were jealous of the King of Persia, sent him
great Forces. Being thus supported he applied himself to the War with great
Courage and Resolution.

And in the first place with his Privateers (of which he had many) he
intercepted the Enemies Transport-Ships laden with Victuals and Provision, and
sunk some, disabled others, and took several besides; so that there began to be
great Scarcity and Want of Corn in the Persian Camp, in regard the Merchants
durst not sail to Cyprus, where that great Army and Body of Men were got
together: And this occasioned a great Mutiny its the Army, for the Mercenaries
for want of Bread knocked some of their Officers on the Head, and filled the
Camp with Mutiny and Tumult to such a degree, that the Persian Colonels, and
Admiral of the Fleet called Gaos could scarcely quell it. The Fleet therefore
sent to Cilicia for Provision, which returned with a great Quantity of Corn
from thence, by which the Camp was ever after plentifully supplied. But as to
Evagoras, Acoris sent to him out of Egypt Money, Corn, and all other things
necessary, sufficient for his Occasions. Ant. Chapter 384.


Evagoras finding that his Navy was far too weak for the Enemy, furnished out
Threescore Ships more, and sent for Fifty besides from Acoris, so that now he
had a Fleet of Two hundred Sail. And having his Navy thus bravely Furnished and
Equipped ready for a Battle (after he had some time Trained and Exercised his
Men not without terror to his Enemies) he prepared for a Fight at Sea. But it
happened, that as the King's Fleet passed by toward Citium, falling suddenly
upon them in an orderly Line of Battle, he gained by far the Advantage,
fighting in good order with Ships in Confusion and Separated, (and with
Premeditation engaging with Men surpised and taken at unawares) he presently
at the first onset routed them: For charging in a Body together, upon Ships
dispersed and in confusion, they sunk and took several of them. But afterward
when the Persian Admiral and other Officers gathered up their Spirits, they
bravely received the Enemies Charge, so that the Engagement grew very sharp, in
which Evagoras at the beginning had the better, but Gaos with great Courage
bearing in upon him with his whole Evagoras routed at Sea.
Fleet, the Evagrians fled with the loss of many of their Galleys.

The Persians having gained this Victory, mustered both their Land and
Sea-Forces at P. 460.
Citium, where furnishing themselves with all things necessary, they went
jointly to besiege Salamis, and blocked it up both by Sea and Land. But
Terabazus, after the Sea Fight put over to Cilicia, and went to the King to
bring him the News of the Victory, Ant. Chapter 384.
from whom he brought back Two thousand Talents for the carrying on of the War.

Evagoras before the Fight at Sea had routed part of the Enemy's Army at Land,
which much encouraged him to further Attempts: But after his sad Misfortune at
Sea, and that thereupon he was straightly besieged, his Spirits grew very low:
However, conceiving it necessary to continue the War he put the Supreme Power
into the hands of his Son Pythagoras, Evagoras goes to Egypt.
and left him to defend the City, and he himself privately in the Night
undiscorn'd by the Enemy, with Ten Galleys loosed from Salamis, and sailed into
Egypt; where having Audience of the King, he endeavored to persuade him to
make War upon the King of Persia with all the Power he had.

While these things were on foot in Asia, the Lacedaemonians (without any
regard to the League made) decreed to march with an Army against Mantinea, for
the Reasons following. There was now Peace all over Greece; by the Negotiation
of Antalcidas, by virtue whereof all the Cities were freed from Garrisons, and
governed according to their own Laws. But the Spartans (naturally Ambitious,
and a long time contriving how to begin a War) looked upon the Peace as a heavy
Burden, and (coveting to gain their ancient Dominion) began to endeavor
Innovations. To this end by their Tools and Creatures, they stirred up
Seditions in the Cities, and thence took occasion to disturb the present State
of Affairs. For they who were Freed and set at Liberty to govern according to
the Laws of their own Country, called them to an account who acted as
Magistrates under the Lacedaemonians, and being somewhat severe and sharp
(through the fresh Resentment of the late Injuries suffered) they banished
many; upon this the Lacedaemonians Ant. Chapter 384.
protected those who were depressed by the contrary Faction, and restored them
by force of Arms, and by that means first imposed upon the weaker Cities, and
brought them into Slavery: But afterward they gave Laws to Cities and Places
of great Account, not having kept the League two years together. And now
because Mantinea was near to The Lacedaemonians begin to make War upon the
Mantineans.
them, and full of Valiant Men, and by the Peace grown very Rich, they were
jealous of it, and resolved to bring down the Lordly Spirits of those
Inhabitants: In the first Place therefore, they sent Ambassadors to them to
require them to demolish their Walls, and to settle themselves again in those
Five Villages from whence they anciently removed to Mantinea: But their demands
being slighted, they forthwith marched thither with their Forces and besieged
the City.

Upon this, the Mantineans, sent Ambassadors to Athens for Aid, but the
Athenians would by no means do any thing that might be construed a Breach of
the Public League, so that they valiantly Defended the Place, and opposed the
Enemy with their own Forces. And thus Greece now began again to be embroiled in
new Wars.

In Sicily Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse being steed from the War with the
Carthaginians, Reigned a long time in Peace and Prosperity; and with great
intention of Mind employed himself in writing of Verses, and sent for Poets far
and near, whom he had in high Esteem, and made his Familiars, to whose
Judgments and Opinions he referred the Censure of his Poems. Being flattered by
these in Panegyricks of Praise for their own Interest, he grew highly conceited
of himself, and was Prouder of his Poems than of his Conquests. Philoxenus, a
Composer of Dithyrambicks, and one Familiar with him, a very excellent P. 461.
Poet in his kind, when at a Feast some of the Foolish Verses of the Tyrant
were recited, he was asked how he approved of them, who answering something too
Freely and Plainly, Ant. Chapter 384.
incurred the Tyrants displeasure: Who looking upon himself abused (through
Envy) commanded his Guard to carry him away to work as a Slave in the Quarries.
But the next Day, through the Mediation of Friends he was reconciled to him.
And afterward, at a Feast to which he had again Invited the same Persons, when
he was in his Cups he highly extolled his own Poems, and Singing some of them
(which he thought none could Excel) He asked what he thought of those? To which
he answered not a Word, but called for Dionysius his Guards and wished them to
carry him away to the Quarries Dionysius at that time for the Jest sake put it
off with a Laughter, thereby (as he thought) taking off the Edge of the
Reproof. But not long after, when both Dionysius and the rest of the Poets
wished him to forbear that unseasonable Freedom of Censuring, Philoxenus made a
Promise that seemed to be a (...).
Paradox, That for the future, He would both speak the Truth, and also please
Dionysius himself; and he performed his Word: For when the Tyrant afterward
recited some Verses which set forth some sad and mournful Passages, He asked
him how he approved of them? He answered, Miserable! therein performing what he
had promised by the ambiguity of the Word. For Dionysius understood it as if he
meant the subject Matter of the Verses was very Sad and Miserable; and set
forth very pathetically, which sort of Poesy was rarely attained unto but by
those who were of the higher form of Poets; and therefore he looked upon
himself highly applauded by him; but others interpreted what he said with more
truth, that that word Miserable denoted the Badness of his Verse.

Not far unlike to this, was that which happened to Plato the Philosopher, whom
Dionysius sent for, because he was a Man eminent in Philosophy, and for some
time at the first he greatly honored him. But taking offense at something he
said to him, he hated him Dionysius sells Plato.
to that degree, that he ordered him to be brought into the Common
Marketplace, and there sold as a Slave for Five 15l. 12s. 6d.
Minas: But the Philosophers (who consulted together upon the matter) after
redeemed him, and sent him back to Greece, with this Friendly Advice, That a
Philosopher should very rarely Converse with Tyrants; and when he did; he
should be of a Gaining Behavior.

However, Dionysius went on with his Study of Poetry, and sent Stage Players
that could sing excellently well, to the Olympic Games, there to sing his
Verses, who indeed at the first caught the Auditors by the Ears with the
sweetness of their Voices; but when they considered further of the Matter and
Composure of the Poems, they went away, and set up a great Laughter. When he
heard how his Verses were Despised and Hissed off the Dionysius's Verses
despised.
the Stage, he fell into a great Fit of Melancholy, which growing upon him Day
by Day, he raged at length like a Madman, and cried out, That every one Envied
him, and were Plotting to take away his Life, till it came to his very intimate
Friends and Relations. In this temper he arrived at last to that height of
Madness and Melancholy, that he put He grows Melancholy.
many of his Friends to Death upon False Accusations, and Banished several
others amongst whom were Leptines, his Brother, and Philistus, Men of Valor
and undaunted Courage, who had done remarkable Service for him in the War. They
fled to the Thurians in Italy, and were there in great Esteem among them: But
afterward they were restored to the Tyrant's favor by his own seeking, and
were not only brought back to Syracuse, but regained his former good Opinion,
and enjoyed their Places of Power and Authority as they did before. And
Leptines married Dionysius his Daughter. And these were the Transactions of
this Year. P. 462.


When Dexitheus bore the Office of Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Titus.
Evagoras returns to Cyprus.
Lucius Lucretius, and Servitius Sulpitius, were Roman Consuls, Evagoras, King
of Salamis, returned out of Olymp. 98. 4. Ant. Chapter 338.
Egypt into Cyprus, where when he found the City closely besieged, and all his
Confederates to have Deserted him, he was forced to send Ambassadors to seek
for terms of Peace. Terabazus, who had the Sovereign Power and Command,
returned him answer, That he would make Peace with him, upon Condition he would
quit all the Cities of Cyprus, and be content only with Salamis, and yield a
yearly Tribute to the King, and be observant to all his Commands, as a Servant
to his Master: To which terms, though they were very hard, he submitted,
excepting that one, That he should be obedient in all things as a Servant to
his Master. But he said he would agree to be Subject to him as one King to
Terabazus accused by Orontes.
another: Which Terabazus would not consent unto; upon this, the other General,
Orontes, who envied Terabazus, sent Letters privately to Artaxerxes to accuse
him; as first, That whereas it was in his Power to take Salamis by force he
waved it, and had treated with the Enemy, in order to bring about some (...).
Innovations for the common Advantage of them both: That he had entered into a
private League with the Lacedaemonians: That he had sent Messengers to the
Oracle at Delphos, to consult about making War upon the King: And as a matter
of the greatest concern that he might gain all the Officers of the Army to be
his Creatures; he had Bribed them with Gifts, Preferments, and many large
Promises. When the King had read these Letters (believing all to be true) he
writ back to Orontes to seize upon Terabazus, and to send him forthwith to him:
Whereupon he executed the Command, and when Terabazus came before the King, he
desired he might Terabazus seized.
be brought to his Legal Trial; upon which he was committed into Custody: But
the Trial was long deserr'd, because the King presently after was engaged in
the War against the Carducians.

In the mean time, Orontes now Chief Commander of the Army in Cyprus, seeing
Evagoras Ant. Chapter 383.
courageously defend the Place, and perceiving his own Soldiers discontented
with the seizing of Terabazus and to slight his Commands, and fall off from the
Siege, fearing some sudden Misfortune, sent to Evagoras, and a Peace was
concluded upon the same Terms he would have agreed with Teribazus. And thus
Evagoras (beyond his own Expectation) Peace made with Evagoras.
freed from absolute Slavery, entered into a League, upon Conditions that he
should pay a Yearly Tribute to the King, and be Sovereign Lord of Salamis, and
Subject to the King no otherwise than as one King to another. And thus ended
the Cyprian War which was spun out near Ten years, though most of that time was
only spent in Preparation, and not above two Years of it in actual War.

But Gaius, the Vice Admiral of the Fleet, who had married the Daughter of
Terabazus, was in great pain lest he should suffer something or other out of
suspicion of his being Familiar and Conversant with Terabazus: Therefore he
resolved to be before hand with the Gaius revolts from the King of Persia.
King, and to that end being well furnished with a brave Navy, and having the
Love of the Sea-Captains and Officers, he began to advise and consider of a
Defection; and forthwith without any further stop entered into a League with
Acoris, King of Egypt, against the great King of Persia. He stirred up
likewise the Lacedaemonians by his Letters, and amongst P. 463.
other large and glorious Promises, he engaged he would assist them in settling
their Affairs in Greece, and maintaining and supporting their Sovereignty. And
in truth the Ant. Chapter 383.
Spartans had sometime before been contriving how to recover the Sovereign
Power over the Graecians, and at that time had given clear indications (by
their disturbances) of their design to Enslave the Cities. And that which
furthered the Matter was, they repented of the Peace made with Artaxerxes,
because they were Charged and Accused to have betrayed all the Graecians in
Asia by that League with the King, therefore they were very ready to catch at
an Opportunity to renew the War; and to that end very cheerfully made a League
with Gaius.

After Artaxerxes had ended the War with the Cadusians, he brought Terabazus to
his A People (...)g between the Euxine and Caspian Seas. Judges flead alive.
Terabazus brought to his Trial.
Trial, and referred the Cognizance of his Cause to Three Honorable Persons.
Near this time some Corrupt Judges were flead alive, and their Skins spread
round the Judgment-Seats, that those that sat there might always have an
Example before their Eyes of the Punishment due to Injustice, to deterr them
from the like.

The Accusers therefore of Terabazus produced against him the Letters of
Orontes, earnestly pressing them as sufficient Evidence to convict him. On the
other hand, Terabazus, that he might make it evidently appear that the
Accusation was a mere Scandal, contrived between Orontes and Evagoras, produced
the Agreement between them, whereby Evagoras was to obey the King as a King
himself, and no otherwise; and that the Terms upon which Terabazus would have
made Peace, were, That Evagoras should be observant to the King as a Servant to
his Master. And as to the Oracle, he brought all those Graecians Ant. Chapter 383.
that were at that time present, to testify, That the God returned not any
Answer relating to the Death of any Person. And as to the good Correspondence
between him and the Lacedaemonians, he declared that he entered into a League
with them not for any private Advantge of his own, but for the Profit and
Advantage of the King. For by this means (he told them) the Graecians in Asia
being divided from the Lacedaemonians were made better Subjects and more
Obedient; and going on with his Defense, he put the Judges in mind of his
former remarkable Services to the Crown.

Amongst those which clearly manifested his Faith and Loyalty to the King, and
which Terabazus killed two Lions to save the King.
deserved the greatest Commendation, and chiefly (as was said) wan the King's
Heart, was this, That when the King was one day in his Chariot a Hunting, two
Lions ran fiercely upon him, and tearing the two Chariot-Horses in pieces, they
made at him, at which instant Therabazus came fortunately in, killed both the
Lions, and so rescued the King. It Is likewise reported of him, that he was a
Person of extraordinary Valor, and of so sound and solid a Judgment in
Council, that the King never miscarried when he followed his Advice.

When Terabazus had ended what he had to say in his own defense, all the Judges
with Terabazus acquitted.
one Voice acquitted him, and pronouc'd him Innocent of all the Crimes and
Offenses laid to his Charge. But the King afterward sent for the Judges to him
severally, and examined every one by himself, upon what Grounds of Law they
pronounced the Accused, Innocent. To whom the first answered, That the Matter
of the Accusation was Uncertain and Dubious, but his good Services were Clear,
Apparent and Manifest to all. Another said, That tho those things objected
against him were true, yet that all his Faults were over-ballanced by his
Deserts. The Third justified his Vote to discharge him, by declaring, Ant. Chapter
383.
That he had no regard to his Merits, because the King had rewarded them above
their Deserts, but upon strict Examining the Nature of every particular Charge,
it did not appear to him that the Party accused was guilty of any of them. Upon
which the King commended the Judges, as Just and Upright Men, and advanced
Terabazus to the highest Places of Honor. But as to Orontes, he discarded him
as a False Accuser, and noted P. 464.
him with all the Marks of Ignominy and Disgrace. And thus stood Affairs in
Asia at this time.

CHAP. II.
Mantinea Besieged by the Lacedmonians. Dionysius aims to gain the Islands of
the Adriatic Sea. The Parii built Pharos. Dionysius his Expedition into
Hetruria Prepares for War against the Carthaginians. The Sicilians routed at
Cronion. The quarrel between the Clazomenians and them of Cuma, about Leuce.
The War between Amyntas and the Olynthians. The Lacedaemonians seize the Citadel
Cadmea at Thebes. Eudamidas breaks into the Olynthians Country.

IN Greece the Lacedaemonians pressed on the Siege of Mantinea; and the
Mantineans bravely defended the place all that Summer. For they were reputed
the most valiant Men of all the Arcadians, and therefore the Spartans in former
times were used to account these their fastest and truest Friends in all Fights
and Engagements. But when Winter drew on, and the River running under the Town
swelled high by the Rains, the Lacedaemonians damned up the River with Earth and
Rubbish, and turned the Current into the City, so that all the place round
about was like to a standing Pool; by reason whereof the Houses fell down,
which amazed them of Mantinea, that they were forced to deliver up the City:
Which being thus taken, the Citizens suffered no other hardships from Mantinea
taken.
the Lacedaemonians, save only that they were ordered to return to those Ancient
Villages from whence at first they came: they were forced therefore to leave
their Country, and Ant. Chapter 383. Dionysius designs upon Aepyius.
settle themselves and their Families in the Villages.

About this time Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse had a design to gain the
Cities lying upon the Adriatic Sea, and that which chiefly moved him to it,
was because he covered to be Master of the Jonian Sea (as they call it) to the
end he might have a free and open passage to Epirus, and to have Towns and
places for his Ships ready to touch at. For he was every day making preparation
to Transport great number of Forces into Epirus, and to rifle and plunder the
rich Temple at Delphos. To this end he made a * Molussus a part of Epirus.
League with the Illyrians by the help of Alcetas the Molossian, who was then
an Exile at Syracuse And the Illyrians being then engaged in a War, he sent
them Two thousand Soldiers, and Five hundred Grecian Arms: the Arms they
distributed amongst the strongest and stoutest of their Men, and the
Auxiliaries they mixed here and there in several of their own Companies and
Regiments. The Illyrians having now raised a great Army; made an irruption into
Epirus, in order to restore Alcetas to his Kingdom, and wasted and spoiled the
Country without opposition or control. Afterward a sharp Battle was fought
between them and the Molossians, in which the Illyrians were Victors, and
killed A great slaughter of the Molossians.
above Fifteen thousand of the Molossians, which Slaughter of the Epirots being
made known to the Lacedaemonians, they sent them aid to curb and bridle the
fierceness and cruelty of the Barbarians.

During the transaction of these Affairs, the Paros, an Island of the Egean Sea
near Delos. Lyssus built by Dionysius in Pharos.
Parii by the encouragement of an old Prophecy, sent forth a Colony to the
Adriatic Coast, where they built Pharos by the help of Dionysius, in an Island
so called. For not many years before he had sent a Colony thither, and built
the City Lyssus: by the advantage of which place (when he had little else to
do) he raised an Arsenal for Two hundred Galleys, and Walled the Town in so
large a Circuit, that it exceeded in compass all the Cities of Greece. He
likewise built stately Schools and Colleges on the on the side of the River Or
rather Anapis in Sicily. Olymp. 96. 1. A. M. 3588. Ant. Chapter 382. P. 465. Ant.
Chapter 381. P. 465.
Anapus, with Temples and other beautiful Fabrics to advance the Glory and
Greatness of the City.

And now ended the Year: when Diotrephes, for the next was Archon of Athens;
and Lucius Valerius, and Aulus Manlius were Roman Consuls. At Aelis was
solemnized the Ninety ninth Olympiad, in which Dicon the Syracusian wan the
Prize. At this time the Pharii (who were now seated in the Island Pharos)
Walled in the City they had built near the Sea side, not in the least injuring
the Barbarians, the Ancient Inhabitants of the Island; but allotted them a
place very strong, and excellently well fortified. But this nestling of the
Greeks was a great Eyesore to the natural Inhabitants; therefore they sent for
the Illyrians bordering upon the Continent over against them, who passed over
to Pharos in many small Vessels, to the number of Ten thousand Men and upwards,
and fell upon the Greeks and killed many of them. But he who was made Governor
of Lyssus by Dionysius, with a great Fleet, set upon the Shipping of the
Illyrians; and took and sunk all of them, killed Five thousand of their Men,
and took Two thousand prisoners.

Dionysius being now in great want of Money, began an Expedition with
Threescore Galleys into Tyrthenia by the Greek, but mistaken.
Hetruria, under color to scour the Seas of Pirates, but in truth to rob a
famous Temple in those parts, which was very full (...).
of rich Gifts and Donations. It stood in the Suburbs of Agylla, a City of
Hetruria, where was the Arsenal which they call the Towers. He landed in the
Night, and forcing in at break of day, accomplished his Design. For there being
but a small Guard in the Castle, he easily overpowered them, rifled the
Temple, and took out above a Thousand Talents.

And though they of Agylla sallied out to repel the Enemy, yet he routed 'em,
took many Dionysius rifles a Temple at Agylla in Hetruria to get Money.
prisoners, and after he had wasted and spoiled the Country, sailed back to
Syracuse, where he raised no less than Five hundred Talents by the sale of the
Spoils. Having thus filled his Coffers he raised Soldiers from all parts, and
got together a great Army, so that it was evident (to the apprehension of all)
that he designed War against the Carthaginians. And these were the things done
this year.

Afterward the Dignity of Archon was conferred upon Phanostratus at Athens.
And Olymp. 99. 2. Ant. Chapter 381.
the Romans made Four Military Tribunes Consuls, Lucius Lucretius, Servius
Sulpitius, Caius
Lucius Emilius, and Lucius Furius. At this time Dionysius the Tyrant of
Syracuse being prepared for the War against Carthage, watched for a fair
occasion to color and countenance his Design. Discerning therefore that the
Cities subject to the Carthaginians were inclined to a Revolt, he received into
his Protection as many as would come to him, and entered into a League with
them, carrying himself with great complacency and winning behavior. Upon this,
the Carthaginians first sent Ambassadors to him, and demanded the restitution
of the Cities, which being denied, was the occasion of a new War.

The Carthaginians therefore entered into Confederacies with their Neighbors,
and all Another War with the Carthaginians by Dionysius. Ant. Chapter 381.
joined together in the War against the Tyrant. And because they prudently
foresaw the greatness of the War, they Listed Soldiers out of the choicest of
the Citizens, and laid up great Sums of Money wherewith they hired a vast
number of Foreigners: And having made Mago their General (who at that time bore
the Title of King) they Transported many Thousands of Soldiers both into Italy
and Sicily, for they had decreed to make War upon them both at once. Dionysius
likewise himself divided his Forces, some against the Italiots and others
against the Carthaginians: Whereupon many light skirmishes passed between
Parties here and there every day, but nothing was as yet done of any moment.
But there afterward happened Two great Battles that were especially famous and
remarkable, in one of which, at a place called Cabala, Dionysius made himself
noted Dionysius routs the Carthaginians at Cabala in Sicily.
for his Valor, and routed the Enemy, killing above Ten thousand of them, and
taking Five thousand prisoners, forced the rest to fly to a Hill that was
fortified, but altogether without Water. In this Fight Mago their General was
killed, behaving himself with great Gallantry and Resolution. The Carthaginians
terrified with the greatness of this Slaughter, sent forthwith Ambassadors to
make Peace with Dionysius; but he P. 466.
returned them Answer, that there was only one way left for them to make peace
with him, and that was forthwith to quit all the Cities of Sicily, and to
reimburse all the charge of the War. This Answer was looked upon as harsh and
proud. Therefore they betook themselves to their old Arts of Fraud and Deceit.
For they seemed as if they allowed of his terms, but pretended that it was not
in their power to deliver up the Cities to him, therefore they desired a Truce
for some few days that they might consult with the Magistrates concerning this
Affair, which he agreed unto. He was much transported at the Ant. Chapter 381.
Truce, having now a prospect presently (as he conceived) to be Lord of all
Sicily. In the mean time the Carthaginians buried Mago their King with great
Pomp and State, putting his Son into the same place, who though he was very
young, yet there were marks and appearances in him of more than ordinary Wisdom
and Valor. This new General spent all the time of the Truce in Training and
Disciplining of his Soldiers, so that, what with his daily Diligence, exact
Directions, and frequent exercise of their Arms, he had an Army both readily
subject to Command, and hardy and strong for Service. And now the time of the
Cessation expired, and the Armies on both sides came hastily into the Field;
and at Cronion was a sharp Engagement, where God gave the Carthaginians Another
Battle at Cronion, where Dionysius was beaten.
the Victory to make amends for their former slaughter. For they who were grown
proud, and boasting by their Victory a little before, were now as low and poor
spirited. On the other hand, they who were altogether dejected, and in despair,
by reason of their overthrow, had their Spirits on a sudden raised by their
great and unexpected success. For Leptines who commanded one of the Wings, a
valiant Man, signalized himself, and there sell in the Bed of Honor, after he
made a great slaughter amongst his Enemies. After whose Fall, the Carthaginians
plucked up their Spirits, and at length put their Enemies to flight. Dionysius
with those choice Men he had with him, at the first worsted those that charged
him; but when the death of Leptines was known, and the other Wing was discerned
to be broken and dispersed, that part of the Army with Dionysius fled likewise:
Upon which, the whole Body betaking themselves to their heels, the
Carthaginians made a hot pursuit, and gave Orders that no Quarter should be
given, so that all being killed that came to hand, every place for a long way
together was strow'd and covered with dead Bodies. The Carthaginians in revenge
of their former loss had made so Ant Chapter 301.
great a slaughter, that when the slain came to be buried, they were found to
amount to above Fourteen thousand Sicilians; and it was by the advantage of
Night only, that the rest escaped. The Carthaginians having now gained so great
and remarkable a Victory, returned to Panormas: However, (as it became Men)
they used their Prosperity with great Moderation, and sent Ambassadors to
Dionysius to offer him Terms of Peace, which he readily embraced; And all was
concluded upon these conditions, That both sides should keep what they had
before the War, save only that the Carthaginians should have the City and
Territory of Selinuntia, and part of the Country of Agrigemum, Peace concluded
by the Carthaginians with Dionysius.
as far as to the River Alycum, and that Dionysius should pay a Thousand
Talents to the Carthaginians. And thus stood Affairs in Sicily at that time.

In Asia, Gaius, Admiral of the Persian Fleet, who had rebelled against the
King, after he had engaged the Lacedaemonians and Egyptians to his Interest,
was Murdered secretly Gaius Murdered. P. 467. Tachos Rebels against the King
of Persia. Ant. Chapter 381.
by some body unknown, and so fall'd of his Designs. After whose Death Tachos
pursuing the same Design, got an Army together and built a City upon an high
Rock joining to the Sea, called Leuca, where he built a Chapel to Apollo: but
he died likewise a little after; upon whose death the Clazomenians, and they of
Cuma fell at strife and variance for the Town, which at first they went about
to decide by force of Arms: But afterward by the advice of some Person
consulting the Oracle of Delphos, to know to which of the Cities Leuca should
belong, The Prophetess Answered, That it should be theirs who should first
sacrifice at Leuca; but that both should set forth from their Cities at the
rising of the Sun, upon one and the same day, as they themselves should agree
upon. Accordingly Contention between them of Cuma and them of Clazomenia about
Leuca.
the day was set, the Cumeans in the mean time looked upon themselves to have
the advantage, because their City was nearer than the other. But the
Clazomenians, though they were more remote, yet contrived this project to gain
their end. They sent some of their Citizens chosen by Lot to a Colony of theirs
not far from Leuca, and from thence at Sun rising they began their Journey, and
so finished their Sacrifices before them of Cuma. Having gained Leuca by this
trick, in memory thereof they appointed a yearly Festival, which they called
Prophthasia, from this their coming first to Leuca. These things thus done, all
Rebellions in Asia were at an end; and the Lacedaemonians now after the death of
Gaius and Tachos would have no more to do with Asia; but set their Heads at
work how to advance their power in Greece. And having persuaded some of the
Cities, and forced others to receive their Exiles, they possessed themselves of
the Sovereighty of the whole, manifestly against the League amongst all the
Grecians made by Antalcydas, by the help of the King of Persia.

In Macedonia King Amyntas (after he was overcome by the Illyrians, in despair
of being able to help himself) bestowed a large Tract of Land upon the
Olynthians, which lay near to them, as never thinking to be restored again to
his Kingdom. The Olynthians enjoyed this Peace for some time, but when the King
recovered strength, and was re-instated into his former Dignity, he demanded
restitution of the Land, which the Olynthians denied. Upon which, Amyntas
raised both an Army of his own, and entered into a League with the
Lacedaemonians, and prevailed with them to send a General with a great Army
Amyntas quarrels with the Olynthians.
against the Olynthians. The Lacedaemonians resolving to fix in those parts of
Thrace, raised an Army out of their own Citizens and Confederates, to the
number of Ten thousand Men, over which they made Phoebidas, that Spartan,
General, and commanded him to join with Amyntas and make War upon the
Olynthians. They sent out another Body against the Phaeuntians, whom they
subdued, and forced to submit to their Government.

About this time the Two Lacedemonian Kings having different Sentiments
disagreed one with another. For Agesipolis was a lover of Peace, and a Just and
Wise Man, and therefore Declared against oppressing the Greeks. For he said
that Sparta would become infamous amongst all the People, if after they had
been instrumental in making the Grecians in Asia Slaves to the Persians, they
should now enslave all the Cities of Greece to themselves, whose Liberties they
had sworn in the common League to preserve inviolable. On the other hand
Agesilaus being naturally Turbulent and inclined to War, thirsted after
Dominion over the Grecians.

Afterward when Menander was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and six Military
Tribunes, Olymp. 99. 3. An. M. 3590. Ant. Chapter 380.
Quintus Sulpitius, Caius Fabius, Servius Cornelius. The Citadel Cadmea seized
by the Lacedaemonians. P. 468.
Cornelius Servilius, Quintus Servilius, Sextus Annius, and Caius Marcius bore
the Consular Dignity at Rome, the Lacedaemonians seized upon Cadmea, the Citadel
of Thebes, for the Reasons following. They had for some time before considered
how Boetia was full of Towns and Cities, and that the Inhabitants were Men both
of stout Hearts, and strong Bodies; and especially that Thebes which continued
to that Day in its ancient State and Grandeur, was even the Guard and Bulwark
of all Beotia; therefore they were afraid lest at some fit opportunity or
other, they should become Lords of Greece: For this Reason they gave private
Instruction to their Commanders, to seize upon Cadmea as soon as they could spy
out an opportunity. Phoebidas the Spartan General in his March against the
Olynthians (remembering his Instructions) Surpised Cadmea, which so enraged the
Thebans, that they rose in Arms, but were beaten, and he Banished three hundred
of the most eminent Citizens, and put all the rest into a great fright; and
leaving there a strong Garrison, Marched away in pursuance of the business he
had chiefly in hand.

All the Grecians every where complained of the Lacedaemonians for this unworthy
Act. And they indeed themselves Fined Phaebidas for it, but could not be
brought to withdraw the Garrison. And thus the Thebans were Robbed of their
Liberty, and brought under the power of the Lacedaemonians. But the Olynthians
resolutely persisting in the War against Amyntas King of Macedon, Phaebidas was
ordered to lay down his Commission, and Eudamidas his Brother was made General,
and sent away with Three thousand heavy armed Men to carry on the War against
the Olynthians, who breaking into the Olynthians Country, Ant. Chapter 380.
jointly with Amyntas fell upon them; but the Olynthians being good Soldiers,
and overpowring the other in Number, beat them both. Upon this the
Lacedaemonians raised a great Army, and made Teleutias, King Agislaus his
Brother General, who was a Man of high Esteem among the Citizens for his
Valor, who as soon as he entr'd to the Borders of Olynthus, was joined with
the Forces of Eudamidas; and now being strong enough to fight the Enemy, he
first Spoiled and Wasted the Country, and Divided the Prey (which he had got
together in abundance) amongst the Soldiers. Afterward the Olynthians marched
out with their own, and the Forces of their Confederates. Upon which the Armies
Engaged and at the beginning, the Battle was doubtful; but afterward the Fight
was renewed with that extraordinary Courage and Resolution, that Teleutias The
Olynthians beat the Lacedaemonians.
bravely acquitting himself, and above Twelve hundred Lacedemontans more, were
there killed upon the Place. The Spartans being nettl'd at this Success of the
Olynthians, made greater Preparations in order to repair their Loss: So on the
other hand, the Olynthians suspecting that the Lacedaemonians would bring down
greater Forces upon them, and that the War might continue long, furnished
themselves with store of Corn and Provision, and Aids from their Confederates.

Demophilus was now Archon at Athens, and Publius Cornelius, Lucius Verginius,
Lucius Olymp. 99. 4. Ant Chapter 379.
Papurius, Valerius.
Marcus Furius, Valerius Aulius, Manlius * Lucius, and Lucius.
Posthumous Quintus, Military Tribunes, were Consuls at Rome when the
Lacedaemonians decreed War against the Olynthians, and made their King
Agesipolis General over an Army of Force sufficient Aulus Manlius.
for the Expedition. As soon as he entr'd the Enemies Country, he joined with
those that were Encamped there, and forthwith fell to Action. The Olynthians
this Year fought no considerable Battle; but kept the Kings Army in play (whom
they were afraid Posthumous. War with the Olynthians by the Lacedaemonians.
to Encounter) with continual pickeering, and light and frequent skirmishes.

CHAP. III.
Polypidas sent General by the Lacedaemonians against the Olynthians. A great
Plague in Carthage. The Beotian War. Cadmea retaken. A Confederacy of the
Cities against the Lacedaemonians. Cleombrotus attempts to Surprise the Pireum
at Athens. The Athenians Seize Actea in Eubea. Agesilaus enters Beotia. The
Sea Fight at Naxus.

AFter the end of the Year, Pytheas was Created Chief Magistrate of Athens; and
P. 469. Olymp. 100. 1. An. M. 3592. Ant. Chapter 378.
six Military Tribunes bore the consular Authority at Rome, Titus Quintius,
Lucius Servilius, Lucius Julius, Aquilius Lucius.
Decius, Lucretius Anchius, and Servius Sulpitius. At that time was Solemnized
the Hundred Olympiad at Elis; in which Dionysiodorus the Tarentine bore away
the Prize. In the mean time Agestpolis King of Lacedemon died in the fourteenth
Year of his Reign; and his Brother Cleombrotus succeeding him, Reigned Nine
Years. But the Lacedaemonians Constituted Polybidas General, and sent him forth
against Polybidas subdues the Olynthians.
the Olynthians. He swore all his Soldiers to be true and faithful to him, and
gained many Victories, managing the War with the Valor and Conduct that became
a good General. At length improving his good Fortune and frequent Sucesses, he
drove the Olynthians within their Walls, and pinning them up, so Terrified
them, that he forced them to Submit to the Lacedaemonians as their Sovereign
Lords. As soon as the Ant. Chapter 378.
Olynthians were Enrolled among the Confederates of the Spartans, many other
Cities sought to come under the same Protection. And now the Power of the
Lacedaemonians was in its greatest Strength, as being Lords of all Greece, both
by Sea and Land; Sparta in its strength.
For the Thebans were overaw'd by a Garrison; the Corinthians and Argives were
tired out with Wars one with another; the Athenians for their Covetousness and
Cruelty exercised among those they had Subdued, were despised by all the
Grecians. On the other hand all were afraid of the Lacedaemonians, because they
were very Populous, expert Soldiers, and unweari'd in their Attempts: Insomuch
that the greatest of the Princes in those times (I mean the King of Persia, and
Dyonysius the Tyrant of Sicily) Courted the Spartans and were ambitious of
their Alliance.

Afterward when Nico governed at Athens, and Six Military Tribunes were Created
Olymp. 100. 2. Ant. Chapter 377.
Consuls at Rome; Lucius Papyrius, Caius Cornelius, Lucius Manlius, Caius
Servilius, Valerius Aulius, and Quintius Fabius, the Carthaginians entered with
an Army into Italy, and Restored the Hipponiats to their City, whence they had
been Expuls'd, and kindly received * Menenius.
all the Exiles that came in to them from all Parts.

Not long after a great Plague happened in Carthage, which Raging more and
more, A Plague in Carthage. Ant. Chapter 377.
swept away abundance of the Inhabitants; insomuch that they were in great
danger to have lost their Sovereignty. For the Africans slighted and deserted
them, the Inhabitant; of Sardinia (supposing they had now a fit opportunity)
Revolted, and rose up in Arms against them. Moreover, a Remarkable Judgment of
God fell upon Carthage The Carthaginians kill one another in the Streets.
at this time, for the City was all on a sudden in an uproar, filled with
Tumult, Fear, and Horror; and many running Armed out of their Houses (as if an
Enemy had entr'd the Place) Fought, Wounded and Killd one another in the
Streets. At length the Gods being Appeased by Sacrifices; and they delivered
out of their sad Afflictions, they presently Subdued the Africans, and
Recovered Sardinia.

After these things, when Nausinicus chief Governor of Athens, and four
Military Olymp. 100. 3. An. M. 3594. Ant. Chapter 376. The Boetian War.
Tribunes, Marcus Cornelius, Servilius Quinctius, Marcus Furius and Lucius
Quinctius were Clothed with the Consular dignity at Rome, the Beotian War (so
called) broke out, between the Beotians and the Lacedaemonians upon the Accounts
following. The Lacedaemonians against all Law and Justice forcibly detained the
Citadel of Cadmea, and had forced many Persons of Quality to fly out of their
own Country: The Exiles therefore upon a private Consult among themselves (by
the help of the Athenians) returned in the Night into their City, and in the
first place killed all those they judged sided with the Lacedaemonians,
surprising them in their Houses, when they were asleep; then they stirred up
all P. 470. The Thebans get in a Body to retake the Citadel.
the Common People to appear for their Liberties, upon which the whole City of
Thebes readily came in to their assistance; and getting into a Body, clapped
about Cadmea at break of Day. In the mean time the Lacedemonian Garrison that
was in the Citadel, which consisted of no fewer than Fifteen hundred Men, sent
a Messenger to Sparta to inform them of the Insurrection in Thebes, and to
desire Aid with all speed. However Ant. 376.
they from the Bastions in the Citadel beat off the Besiegers, killing and
wounding many. Upon this the Thebans concluding that great Forces would be
brought out of Greece to the assistance of the Lacedaemonians, sent Ambassadors
to Athens, to put them in mind how they had been assisted by the Thebans at
that time when they rescued their Commonwealth from the Slavery they suffered
under the Thirty Tyrants, and therefore that they should press them that they
would hasten with all the force they had to help them to Reduce Cadmea, before
any Aid came from Sparta.

The People of Athens, as soon as they heard what was desired by the Thebans,
decreed that without delay, a Strong and Considerable Army should be sent to
help them The Athenians assist the Thebans.
to regain their Liberty, both to demonstrate their Gratitude for their former
Services, and likewise hoping thereby so to oblige the Thebans as that they
should ever find them fast and constant Friends to assist them at all times,
against the growing and boundless power of the Lacedaemonians. For the Thebans
were looked upon not to be Inferior to any in Greece, for number or valor of
Men. In conclusion, the Athenians made Demophoon General over Five thousand
Foot, and Five hundred Horse, who drew out before Day next Morning, and hasted
away with a swift March, that he might be before the Lacedaemonians; however the
People of Athens were ready and prepared to March out with all their Forces
into Beotia, if the Thebans had occasion for them. Demophoon with great
expedition (beyond expectation) appeared in view of them of Thebes; and
Soldiers came together with the like Zeal and Earnestness from other Cities of
Beotia, so that the Thebans had now a numerous Army, consisting of no less than
Twelve thousand Ant. Chapter 376.
Foot, and about Two thousand Horse; and all Cheerfully and Readily bestirred
themselves to Besiege the Citadel. The Army divided themselves into parties,
and assaulted the Place by turns, persisting without any Cessation Night and
Day. In the mean time, they in the Castle (encouraged by their Officers) bore
the Brunt with great Courage; hoping to receive speedy Succors from the
Lacedaemonians: And indeed they Valiantly stood it out while they had any
Victuals left, killing and wounding many of the Assailants, having the
advantage of the strength of the Fort. But when their Provision grew low, and
the Lacedaemonians lingr'd in sending Relief, the Garrison began to Mutiny.

For the Lacedaemonians were for the standing of it out to the last Man; but the
Auxiliaries from the Confederate Cities (who were the greater number) were for
delivering it up; so the Spartans, who were but few, were forced to Surrender
the Citadel, and being dismissed according to Articles, returned to
Peleponnesus. At length the Lacedaemonians The Citadel is surrendered.
came with their Army to Thebes, but having lost their opportunity through the
slowness of their March, all was to no purpose. But they Tried three of the
Officers of the Garrison by a Council of War, and Condemned two of them to Die,
and imposed so great a Mulct and Fine upon the Third, as that he was never able
to pay it. Afterward the Athenians returned into their own Country, and the
Thebans spent much time in vain in the Siege of Thespis. During these affairs
the Romans sent a Colony of Five P. 471.
hundred Citizens into Sardinia upon Terms of being free from Tribute.

Afterward, when Callias was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and four Military
Tribunes, Olymp. 100; 4. Ant. Chapter 375.
Lucius Papyrius, Marcus Publiu.
Publius, Cornelius.
Titus Ti^o.
Cornelius, and Luc. Quinctius.
Quintus Lucius were honored with the Consular Dignity at Rome (after the
Lacedaemonians had miscarried at Thebes) The Beotians took Courage, and entering
into Associations, raised a great Army, because they foresaw that the
Lacedaemonians would presently enter with a strong Body into Beotia.

The Athenians likewise sent Persons of the greatest Quality amongst them to
persuade the Cities subject to the Lacedaemonians, not to neglect the present
Opportunity now offered to recover their Liberties. For indeed the
Lacedaemonians were grown to that height, that they Lorded it with great Pride
and Oppression over their Subjects: Therefore many of them were inclined to
comply with the Athenians. The first that made a defection were they of Chios
and Byzantium, after them Rhodes and Mitylene, and some other Islands. And now
the Commotions and Disturbances of the Cities of Greece more and more
increasing, many of them joined with Athens: Upon which the People of Athens
encouraged by this Confederacy, Decreed a general Diet or Senate of some chosen
A general Ass^mbly of the Cities at Athens against Sparta. Ant. Chapter 375.
out of every City, from among all their Allies, to Consult of the present
state of affairs. And it was agreed by common Consent, that the Senate should
sit at Athens, and that every City, whether great or small, should send only
one Representative, and every one should be governed by their own Laws, but
under the Conduct and Administration of the Athenians.

However the Lacedaemonians though they saw the Current and Tide so strong as that
they were not able to Stem it, yet they endeavored all they could by fair
Words; and many specious promises, to Court the Deserters to return to their
Obedience; not neglecting in the mean time to prepare for the War, in as much
as they discerned, it would be Great and of long Continuance, in regard the
Athenians and other Grecicans, (met together in that public Assembly) all
joined with the Thebans.

Whilst these things were acting in Greece, Acoris King of Egypt, for some time
before Acoris King of Egypt raises an Army against the Persians.
bearing a grudge to the Persian King, raised a great Army of Foreigners from
all parts. For giving large Pay, and being otherwise very Bountiful, he got
together a great number of Grecians in a short time; who listed themselves into
his Service. But wanting a skilful General, he sent for Chabrias the Athenians
an excellent Commander, and one highly honored for his Valor, who undertook
the Employment, but without the consent of the People, and so prepared himself
with all diligence for the War against the Persians. But Pharnabazus declared
Commander in Chief by the King, having made great preparations of Money for the
War, sent Messengers to Athens to complain Chabrias sent out of Egyyt.
against Chabrias, letting them know that by his accepting of the chief Command
under the King of Egypt, he had greatly Alienated the King of Persia from the
People of Athens. Then he demanded that they would send to him Iphicrates, to
assist him in the Command of the Army. Upon this the Athenians (who made it
their great Concern to stand right in the Kings good Opinion and to keep
Pharnabazus firm to their Interest) Ant. Chapter 375. P. 475. Iphicrates sent to
the Persians.
without delay recalled Chabrias out of Egypt, and commanded Iphicrates to
assist the Persians.

The Lacedaemonians and Athenians some years before had struck up a Peace
amongst themselves, which continued to this very time. But after that
Sphodriades was made General Sphodriades attempts to surprise the Pireum at
Athens.
by the Spartans, (a Man of a proud and haughty Spirit, rash and headstrong)
Cleombrotus the Lacedemonian King egged him on to surprise the Pireum at Athens
without the assent of the Ephori. To this end being furnished with Ten thousand
heavy Armed Men, he attempts to enter the Pireum in the Night; but the
Treachery being detected by the Athenians, his project came to naught, and he
returned as he came: And though he was brought before the Senate at Sparta, for
this rash and inconsiderate Action, yet being Patronized by the Kings, he was
against all Law and Justice discharged. The Athenians being incensed with this
apparent abuse, published a Decree, That in as much as the Lacedaemonians had
openly violated the League, that War should be made upon them for the repair of
the Injury. To this end therefore Timotheus, Chabrias, and Calliffratus (Men of
great Account in the City, who were made Generals for this Expedition) were
Commissioned to raise Twenty thousand Foot of Corsleteers, and five hundred
Horse, and to Equip a Fleet of Two hundred Sail.

The Athenians likewise brought the Thebans as Members into the public Senate,
upon the same Terms and Conditions with the rest. It was also Enacted by the
suffrage of the Senate, That the Lands which had been divided by Lot, should be
restored to the ancient Proprietors; and that no Athenian should challenge any
Right to any Lands that lay out of Attica. By this fair dealing the Athenians
regained the love of the Grecians, and again strengthened themselves in their
Government. And this was the cause which moved many other Cities of Greece to
side with the Athenians. The chiefest Cities of Eubea (except Actia) with great
Heat and Zeal entered into an Association with Athens. But in regard they of
Actia had received many kindnesses from the Lacedaemonians, and on the other
hand, had been grievously oppressed and harrass'd by the Athenians, they bore
an implacable hatred toward the one, and stuck close and firm in their
Alliance to the other. In sum, there were seventy Cities that entered into this
Confederacy and Association, all which had Voices upon the same Terms and
Conditions in the Senate. So that the Forces of the Athenians increasing every
Day, and those of Sparta decreasing, these two Cities began now again to lie in
equal Balance.

The Athenians therefore (who saw all things go forward according to their own
hearts desire) transport'd Forces into Eubea both to fix their Confederates,
and to suppress their Foes. In this Island one Neogenes a little before these
times, with the assistance of Jason Ant. Chapter 375. Neogenes makes himself King
of Eubea.
of Pherus, with a Band of Men had seized upon the Citadel of Actea, and
declared himself King of those Parts, and of the City In Eubea, now Negtopont.
Oropus. But governing proudly and Tyrannically, the Lacedaemonians sent
Therippidas against him, who at the first would have persuaded him by fair
means to leave the Castle; but when he could not be so wrought upon, he stirred
up the Inhabitants near adjoining to recover their Liberty, and took the Castle
by storm, and restored the Oropians to their former freedom. For this reason
the Hestrieans always loved the Lacedaemonians, and kept a firm League of
Friendship with them. But Chabrias the General, with the Forces sent from
Athens, wasted and spoiled the Country of the Hestreians, and walled Metropolis
(as it is called) situated upon a Hill naturally fortified, and left there a
Garrison; and he himself sailed to the Cyclade Islands, and reduced Peparethus
and Sciathus, and others Subject to the Lacedaemonians:

When the Lacedaemonians saw that they could not put a stop to the Defection of
their P. 473.
Confederates, they laid aside their Severity, and took other Measures to win
the Cities by more gentle Methods: And by this means they gained upon those of
their Confederates that were yet left. And because they discerned that the War
was coming on apace, and that great care was required for the management of
their Affairs, among other Preparations they diligently applied themselves to
put their Army into a better posture, and Ant. Chapter 375. The Lacedaemonians
prepare for War.
more aptly to dispose of their Troops and Regiments, and to have their Forts
and Garrisons more faithfully kept and secured: For they divided their Cities
and Soldiers, raised there for the present War, into Ten parts: The first were
Lacedaemonians; the second and third, Arcadians; the fourth, Eleans; the fifth,
Acheans; the sixth, Corinthians and Megareans; the seventh, Sicyons,
Phliasians, and Acteans; the eighth, Acarnanians; the ninth, Phocians and
Locrians; the last, Olinthians and Confederates of Thrace. The manner and way
of their Order and Marshalling was thus: One Corsleteer, or heavy-arm'd
Soldier, was accounted equal to two lightly armed; and one Horseman to four
heavy-arm'd Footmen. The Army thus disposed, King Agesilaus was made
Generalissimo; for he was famous Agesilaus the Lacedaemonian General.
both for his Valor and Prudence, and never had been worsted in any Encounter
to that very time: For as he was highly admired in other Wars, so in the War by
the Lacedaemonians against the Persians, he routed Armies far greater than his
own, and bore down all before him, wasting and spoiling a great part of Asia;
and if the Spartans had not called him home (through the Urgency of Affairs in
his own Country) he had not been far from ruining the whole Kingdom of Persia:
For he was a Man very brisk and daring, and yet withal prudent, addicting
himself to Great and Noble Actions; and therefore the Spartans (when the
greatness of the War required a Skilful Commander) chose him to be General
above all others.

Upon which, Agesilaus entered Boeotia with above Eighteen thousand Foot,
amongst whom were five Regiments of Lacedaemonians, every Regiment consisting
of Five hundred. Ant. Chapter 375.
The Lacedaemonian Band called the These were commonly 600.
Scirite, joined not with the rest of the Army; but kept their proper Post
round about the King, and always were ready to succor that part that was most
pressed upon. And because it was made up of the best Soldiers, it was of
Agesilaus enters Boeotia.
the greatest Esteem of any part of the Army, and most commonly instrumental to
the gaining of every Victory. Besides the Foot before mentioned, Agesilaus had
with him Fifteen hundred Horse. As soon as he came to Thespis (a Lacedaemonian
Garrison) he encamped near the City, to refresh his Army after their long March.

When the Athenians heard that the Lacedaemonians had entered into Baectia,
they forthwith sent Five thousand Foot and Two hundred Horse to the Aid of
Thebes. The Thebans having mustered and rendezvous'd their Forces, possessed
themselves of a Hill which ran out a great length, distant twenty Stages from
the City, and posted themselves there for the advantage of the Ground (being
difficult of access) and there waited for the Enemy: For the great Reputation
of Agesilaus did so terrify them, that they durst not engage with him upon
equal Terms in the open Field. Agesilaus now advances with his Forces against
the Boeotians; as soon as he came near the Enemy (to make trial whether they
had a mind to fight) he sent out against them some light-armed Men, which were
soon beaten back by the Thebans from the higher Ground: Upon which (to strike
them with the more Terror) he drew out his whole Army in Battalia upon them.
Whereupon Chabrias the Athenian, Commander of the Mercenaries, ordered the
Soldiers to appear in a posture of Defiance to the Lacedaemonians; and to that
end to stand in their Ranks and Orders, with their Shields laid down at their
Feet, and with their Spears advanced, so to present themselves to the view of
the Enemy, which they obeyed at the first Word of Command. Agesilaus admiring
their excellent Order, and their P. 474. Ant. Chapter 375. Agesilaus dares the
Thebans to fight in the open Field.
Contempt of their Enemies, thought it not safe to attempt to force up those
steep Places. and to try their Valor at such Disadvantages, having
experienced, that by violent pressing upon them, they would be necessitated to
stand it out to the utmost extremity. Therefore he did all he could to provoke
them to descend into the Plain; but when he could not get them to stir, he sent
out a Phalanx of Foot, and a Party of light Horse, and wasted and spoiled the
Country without control, and got together abundance of Prey and Plunder. But
those that were ordered to attend upon Agesilaus as his Council, and the
Colonels and Captains of the Regiments wondering that he being ever accounted a
valiant Man, and a good Soldier, and now furnished with an Army far stronger
than the Enemy, should notwithstanding wave an Engagement. Agesilaus gave them
this Answer, That now the Lacedaemonians were Conquerors without fighting,
since the Thebans durst not move out of their place to give a stop to the
spoiling of their Country; and if he should force them to fight after they had
willingly yielded the Victory, the uncertain Fortune of War might be such as
might on a sudden ruin the Lacedaemonians. The Man by this Conception of his
seemed modestly to foretell the Event; for that which followed after did clearly
evince, That what he said was the Oracle of God, and not the mere Voice of a
Man. For the Lacedaemonians within a short time after, when they set upon the
Thebans with a numerous Army, and forced them to fight for their Liberties,
involved themselves in unspeakable Calamities: For in the first place, when
they were routed at the Battle Ant. Chapter 374.
of Leuctra, a great number of their Citizens were cut off, amongst whom was
their King Cleombrtus. And afterward at the Battle of Mantinea, they were
utterly ruined, and (beyond all Men's thoughts of any such thing) quite lost
the Sove raignty of Greece: For in this Fight (especially) Fortune made it her
Business to bring swift Destruction upon the Proud and Haughty, and to teach
Men not to aspire beyond the Bounds of Moderation and Modesty. So that
Agesilaus acted prudently in being content in his former good Success, and
preserving his Army entire without loss or prejudice.

Some time after, Agesilaus marched back with his Army into Peloponnesus; but
the Thebans, now delivered from the Danger they were in by the Conduct of
Chabrias, highly admired his witty Stratagem; who though he had performed many
Noble Exploits in the Wars yet he gloried more in this than in all others
before, and by the favor of the Chabrias highly honored by the Thebans.
People procured Statues to be erected in memory of the Project, representing
the thing as it was done.

The Thebans, after the departure of Agesilaus, set upon Thespiae, and killed
the Guard, which consisted of Two hundred Men; but making several Assaults upon
the City, though all in vain, they drew off, in order to their return with their
Forces to Thebes. Upon which, Phebidas the Lacedaemonian, the Governor of
Thespiae (who kept the Place with a strong Garrison) made a Sally upon the
Thebans in their retreat, and through his pressing on too rashly (after many
Wounds received, and signalizing his Valor) he lost his own Life, and the
Lives of above Five hundred of his Fellows. Phebidas Killed


Not long after, the Lacedaemonians marched against Thebes with the same Army:
And then again the Thebans possessed themselves of some other Places that were of
difficult access, by which means they did indeed hinder the wasting and
spoiling the Country, but dared not at first to engage with the Enemy in the
Plain. But upon the appearance of Agesilaus Ant. Chapter 374.
in the Van of the Army, they began to march slowly toward him, and after long
time the Armies at length engaged with great Heat and Fury. At the first
Agesilaus had the advantage; but when he discerned the whole City of Thebes to
sally out upon him, he A Fight near Thebes. P. 475. The Lacedaemonians are
repulsed. A Sea Fight.
sounded a Retreat: Whereupon the Thebans judging themselves nothing inferior
to the Lacedaemonians, erected a Trophy, and never after stuck to engage with
the Spartans. And this was the issue of the Fights at Land.

But about the same time there was a great Fight at Sea between Naxus and
Paros, upon this occasion: Pollis the Lacedaemonian Admiral, had intelligence
of a great quantity of Corn that was passing by Sea to Athens; upon which, he
made it his Business to lie in wait to surprise the Transport-Ships. The
Athenians (being informed of the Design) sent out a Fleet to guard the Ships
laden with the Provision, and brought them all into the Pireum.

After this, Chabrias the Athenian Admiral sailed with the whole Fleet to
Naxus, and besieged The Sea Fight at Naxus.
it, and battering it with his Engines, used his utmost endeavor to take it by
storm: But while he was earnest in prosecuting his Design, Pollis the
Lacedaemonian Admiral, came up with his Fleet to the Assistance of the Naxians;
upon which, the Fleets engaged charging one another in a Line of Battle. Pollis
had a Navy of Sixty five Sail, and Chabrias Eighty three. Pollis in the Right
Wing valiantly charged the Athenians in the Left, Commanded by Cedon the
Athenian, whom he killed, and sunk his Vessel. He fell likewise upon others,
and broke some of them in pieces with the Beaks of his Ships, and put the rest
to flight. Which Chabrias discerning, he ordered some Ships near him to the
Ant. Chapter 374.
Relief of those that were overpowered, and so rescued them: He himself, with
the greatest part of the Fleet under his Command, with great Valor broke in
pieces and took many of his Enemy's Galleys. But however, though he obtained the
Victory, and put the Enemy's whole Fleet to flight, yet he would not pursue,
remembering the Battle at Arginusa, where though the Athenians were Victorious,
yet the People instead of a Reward, put the Officers to death, only because
they did not bury their Parents who were killed in that Fight. Fearing
therefore the like Fate, he waved the Pursuit, and took up the Citizens
swimming and floating here and there, and so preserved those that were alive,
and ordered the Dead to be buried. In this Battle the Athenians lost Eighteen
Galleys, and the Lacedaemonians Four and twenty; and Eight were taken with all
the Men.

Chabrias crowned with this glorious Victory, returned with great and rich
Spoils to the Pireum, and was received by the Citizens with great Honor and
Acclamation. This was the First Victory at Sea gained by the Athenians since
the Peloponnesian War; for at Cnidus they prevailed not by the Strength of
their own Forces, but by the Assistance of the King of Persia.

While these things were acted in Greece, Marcus Manlius was put to death at
Rome for aspiring to the Monarchy.

CHAP. IV.
The Treballians make Incursions into Thrace. Chabrias the Athenian General
Assassinated. The Thebans rout the Spartans at Orchomena. Artaxerxes seeks to
make Peace among the Graecians. Peace concluded. The Thebans only disagreed.
The Commendation of Epaminondas. Seditions in several Cities of Greece.

WHEN Chariander was Archon at Athens, and Servius Sulpitius, Lucius Papyrius,
Olymp. 101. 1. Act. Chapter 373.
Marcus Cornelius,
Cornelius Titus, and Titus Quintius. P. 476. Treballians make an Inroad into.
Thrace. Are slaughtered by the Abderites.
Marcus Quintius, Four Military Tribunes, were in Consular Authority at Rome,
the Hundred and First Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, and Damon of Thurium
bore away the Prize. At that time the Treballians in Thrace (being in great
Scarcity of Corn) made an Incursion with Thirty thousand armed Men, into their
Neighbors Territories to get Provision. To that end they entered the Borders
of the Abderites in another part of Thrace, and wasted and spoiled the Country
without any Opposition; and having laden themselves with abundance of Plunder,
they returned so carelessly and disorderly, as that the whole City of Abderita
falling upon them when they were scattered and dispersed, killed above Two
thousand of them. To revenge which, the Exasperated Barbarians made a second
Inroad into the Abderites Country. But they being encouraged by the late
Victory, and strengthened with the assistance of their Neighbor Thracians,
drew up in Battalia against the Barbarians. The Armies furiously engaged, The
Abderites cut off. The Abderites rescued by Chabrias
when on a sudden the Thracians drew off and left the Abderites to themselves:
Who were presently hemmed in by the Barbarians, and almost every Man cut off.

As soon as this grievous Slaughter of the Abderites was noised abroad, and
they were now ready to be besieged, in comes Chabrias the Athenian with his
Army, and not only delivers the Abderites, but drives the Barbarians out of the
Country. And after he had Chabrias assassinated. Ant. Chapter 373.
strengthened the City with a strong Garrison, he was basely assassinated, the
Person by whom not known. Upon this, Timotheus was made Admiral of the Athenian
Fleet, and sailing to Cephallenia he blocked up the City with his Navy, and
wrought upon the Cities of Acarnania to side with the Athenians. Presently
after he entered into League with Acetas, The Acts of Timotheus the Athenian
General.
King of the Molossians; and now having in his power all the Countries subject
to the Cities in those Parts, he routed the Lacedaemonians in a Sea Fight at
Leucades; and all this he did in a very short time, and with much Ease, partly
by fair Words, and partly by force of Arms and his excellent Conduct: so that
he not only gained Esteem and Reputation amongst his own Fellow Citizens, but
likewise amongst all the Graecians. And thus was it with Timotheus at this time.

During these Transactions, the Thebans (with Five hundred the Valiantest Men
of their The Thebans march against Orchomena.
City) marched against Orchomena, and performed an Exploit worthy of Memory.
The Spartans kept this City with a strong Garrison, and making a Sally upon the
Thebans there was a sharp Encounter, in which they routed the Lacedaemonians
though they were double in number, which never happened to them before in any
age; but the thing might (...).
have been born well enough if they had been few and had been conquered by the
far greater number. Henceforth the Courage of the Thebans increased, and they
grew every day famous for their Valor: And now it was apparent, that they were
likely to gain the Sovereignty of all Greece. As to the Writers of this time.
Hermeas of Methymna ends his History of the Affairs of Sicily with this Year,
comprehended in Ten, but as others divide them, in Twelve Books.

The Year following, when Hippodamus was Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Four
Olymp. 101. 2. An. M. 3597. Ant. Chapter 372.
Military Tribunes, viz. Lucius Valerius Crispus,
Lucius Valerius, Aulus Manlius,
Crispus Manlius, Fabius Servius Sulpirius,
Servilius, and Lucius Lucretius. A General Peace made by the Mediation of
Artaxerxes. P. 477. The Thebans disagree to the Peace.
Sulpitius Lucretius were Roman Consuls. Artaxerxes used his utmost Endeavor
to quiet all things in Greece, that he might raise the more Mercenaries for the
Carrying on the War against the Egyptians: For by this means he hoped the
Graecians being freed from Domestic Broils would be in a Condition to assist
him abroad. To this end, he sent Ambassadors into Greece to Negotiate in this
Affair amongst all the Cities. And this Embassy was very welcome to the
Graecians, who were near tired out with continual Wars; so that a General Peace
was concluded upon these Conditions: That all the Cities should for the future
be governed by their own Laws, and all the Garrisons be withdrawn. And there
were certain Grecians appointed as Commissioners to see the Garrisons drawn out;
who accordingly went to every City where there was any Soldiers, and ordered
them to leave the Place.

In the mean time, the Thebans only through every Town disagreed to these
Terms, and exempted all Beotia as Tributary only to themselves: But the
Athenians opposed this with all earnestness, and this Affair was banded in the
Common Assembly of the Greeks, by Callistratus a Tribune of the People, on the
behalf of the Athenians, and by Epaminondas on the behalf of the Thebans, after
which, all the rest of the Grecians persisted in their resolution to stand to
the League, leaving out the Thebans, who (relying upon the Wisdom and Prudence
of Epaminondas) boldly opposed the Decree made by the General The Thebans left
out.
Assembly.

For being that the Lacedaemonians and Athenians had been all along hitherto
contesting for Ant. Chapter 372.
the Sovereign Command of Greece, and at length had agreed upon these Terms,
That the Lacedaemonians should have the Command at Land, and the Athenians at
Sea, they were very uneasy to think that now a Third should carry away the
Sovereignty from them both, for which reason they would not allow the Cities of
Beotia to be under the Power of the Thebans. But the Thebans (who were Men of
strong Bodies and stout Hearts, and had lately beaten the Laredaemonians in
several Fights) bore themselves very high, and were in hopes to gain the
Sovereign Command at Land. Neither were they frustrated in their design for the
Reasons before mentioned, and likewise for that they had at that time many
Excellent Officers and Valiant Commanders; amongst whom the most Famous were
Pelopidas, Gorgias, Epaminondas his Commendation.
and Epaminondas; which last was not only the Best and most Expert Commander of
any of his own Country, but even of all the Grecians; and was likewise a Man of
great Learning in the Liberal Sciences, and especially in the Pythagorean
Philosophy: Being besides of excellent Natural Parts, and Mother-Wit, it was no
wonder if he exceeded others in performing those things that were more than
ordinarily remarkable. For with a small Body of Men he Engaged with the whole
Power of the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates, and so routed those
(formerly unconquerable) Warriors, that he killed their King Cleombrotus, and
cut off almost the whole Army of the Spartans. And by the advantage of his
singular Wisdom, and Virtuous and Liberal Education, such things were performed
by him as were (...). Ant. Chapter 372.
admirable beyond all Expectation. Of which we shall speak more fully hereafter
when we come to treat particularly of those Things.

But now to return to the Course of our History; It was agreed, That every City
New Troubles in Greece.
should govern according to their own Laws; but presently after, all the Cities
were again involved in great Tumults and Seditions, especially those in
Peloponnesus. Some few of these had been Enslaved in the late Domineering time,
and being now restored to their Democratical Government, they made but an all
Improvement of it, for they banished many Honest Citizens that were falsely
Accused, and as unjustly Condemned; and by the prevailing Power of the
Seditious, nothing was more frequent than Banishment and Confiscation of Goods;
and those chiefly were the Sufferers that had been Magistrates in the time of
the Lacedaemonian Government; for because in those time they carried it
something imperiously toward the People, not with that regard to Justice as
they ought, now that the Commonalty were restored to their Liberty they too
much resented their former Injuries.

The Exiles therefore of Phialea, were the first that Consulted and Joined
together, and seized upon Herea, a strong and well-fortify'd Castle; and from
thence made frequent Incursions into the Territories of Phialea. And at the
time when the Feasts of Bacchus Throats cut in the Theater at Phialea.
were celebrated, (upon the sudden) they rushed upon the People in the Theater,
and cut many of their Throats, having before persuaded a considerable Number to
join with them in this wicked Confederacy, and afterward they returned to
Sparta. Then the Exiles of Corinth, who were in great numbers at Argos,
determined to force their own return. Ant. Chapter 372. The Exiles killed at
Corinth P. 478.
In order hereunto some of their Servants and Friends were received into the
City; but the thing being discovered to the Magistrates, they could not lie
long concealed, but being just ready to be seized (through fear of Punishment)
they killed one another. But the Corinthians, upon suspicion that many of the
Citizens were concerned in the Plot, put several to Death, and Banished others.

In the City Megara likewise some were contriving how to overturn the
Government, Plots at Megara and Sicyon.
who being convict of the Treason, many were put to Death, and not a few
Banished So at Sioyon many were Executed upon a full Conviction, for
endeavoring to bring in Innovations. At length, many of the Philasian Exiles
having seized upon a Castle in that The Exiles of Phalasia kill many of the
Townsmen.
Territory, got together a great Army of Mercenaries, and fought with the
Townsmen, and got the Day, having killed above Three hundred of the Philasians.
But not long after, the Exiles were betrayed by their Guard, and routed by them
of Philasia, with the loss of Six hundred Men, and the rest being forced out of
the Country, fled to Argos. And such was the miserable Condition of
Peloponnesus at that time.

CHAP. V.
The Persians send an Army into Egypt to reduce the Revolters. Iphicrates a
skilful Commander. Sedition at Zacynthus. Platea razed by the Thebans. The
Lacedaemonians seize upon the Island Corcyra, relieved by the Athenians under
Ctesides. Evagoras murdered in Cyprus by an Eunuch. Dreadful Earthquakes and
Innundations in Peloponnesus. A great Comet seen in Greece.

SOcratides the ensuing Year was Archon at Athens, and Quintus Servilius,
Crassus, Servilius Cornelius, Olymp. 101: 3. Ant. Chapter 371.
Sporius Papyrius, and Lucius Aemilius. Pharnabazus and Iphicrates march into
Egypt.
Fabius Albus, four Military Tribunes, executed the Office of Consuls at Rome.
At that time the King of Persia marched against the Egyptians (who had
revolted some time before) the Army was commanded by Pharnabazus, and
Iphicrates the Athenian; the Barbarians by Pharnabazus, and Twenty thousand
Mercenaries by Iphicrates, who was in so much favor with the King for his
excellent Conduct, that he entrusted him with that Command. Pharnabazus had
spent many years in preparation for this War.

Iphicrates therefore, knowing the readiness of his Tongue, and the slowness of
his Actions, one Day accosted him in this manner. That he wondered that one who
was so voluble in his Speech, should be so slow in Execution. To which
Pharnabazus answered, That he was Master of his Words, but the King of his
Actions. When the King's Forces came to Acco, or Ptolemais in Phaenicis.
Aces in Syria, and were there mustered, there were found Two hundred thousand
Barbarians to be under the Conduct of Pharnabazus, and Twenty thousand Grecians
under the Command of Iphicrates. The Number of the Navy was Three hundred (...).
Galleys of three Tire of Oars on a Bank, and Two hundred of (...).
Thirty Oars a-piece: And a vast number of Transport Ships to carry Provision,
and other things necessary for the Army.

About the beginning of the Spring, the Officers with all the Forces both at
Sea and Land made for Egypt: When they came near to the River Nile, they found
the Egyptians ready and prepared for Battle; for Pharnabazus had been very
tedious in this Expedition, and given the Enemy time enough to prepare for
their Defense. For it is the constant practice of the Persian Generals (in
regard they have no absolute power) upon every special occasion to send to the
King to know his Pleasure, and to stay till they receive his particular
direction.

In the mean time, Nectanabis, the King of Egypt, had perfect knowledge of the
Strength of the Persian Forces; but he placed his greatest Confidence in the
Strength of Ant. Chapter 371.
his Country, the Entrance into Egypt being very difficult on every side, and
the Passage blocked both by Sea and Land by the seven Mouths of Nilus. For at
every Mouth A Description of the Forts built upon Nile to secure the Passes
into Egypt.
where Nile falls into the Sea, was a City built with large Forts or Castles on
either side the River, joined together by a Bridge of Timber, which commanded
all Ships that sailed that way, and of all these he had most strongly fortified
Pelusium; for being the next Frontier Town toward Syria, they conceived the
Enemy would first attempt to enter in to the Country that way: Therefore they
drew a Trench round the City, and where there was any place, whereat any
Vessels might in any probability enter, there they raised Walls to obstruct the
Passage. And where there were any Fords by which the way lay open into Egypt
by Land, he brought the Water over them; and where any Ship might pass he
filled up those Places with Stones and Rubbish. By which means it was very
difficult, P. 479.
and scarce possible, either for Ships to sail, or Horse or Foot to march.
Pharnabazus his Officers therefore seeing Pelusium so strongly and wonderfully
Fortified and well Manned, thought it most advisable to forbear to attempt to
enter by Force, and rather to sail to some other Mouth of the River, and
endeavor a Passage for the Fleet there. Ant. Chapter 371.
Whereupon they put off to Sea again, and being out of Kenning, that they might
not be discerned by the Enemy they steered their Course for Mendesicum.
Mendesium, another Mouth of Nile, where the Shore runs a great way out from
the Main Land. Here they Landed Three thousand Men, and Pharnabazus and
Iphicrates assaulted a Fort built upon the very Mouth of the River; but the
Egyptians came down with Three thousand Horse and Foot to the Relief of the
Place; Upon which there was a sharp Engagement, in which the Egyptians being
overpowered with Multitude, (for more came in running to them The Egyptians
worsted at Mendusium.
from their Ships) were hemmed in, and a great Slaughter made amongst them, but
very few being taken Prisoners; the rest were forced to fly into a little Town
hard by. But the Soldiers of Iphicrates entered pell mell with them of the
Garrison into the Place, and having thus taken it by Force they demolished it,
and carried away the Inhabitants as Captives.

After this, there arose a Difference between the Generals, which brought all
to naught. Quarrels between Pharnabazus and Iphicrates.
Iphicrates learnt from the Captives, that there was a Garrison called Memphis,
which Place was of the greatest Consequence of any throughout all Egypt;
therefore he advised that they should sail with the Fleet thither before the
rest of the Aegyptians's Army got together; but Pharnabazus and all his Forces
were for staying till all the Persian and Land Forces came up, and so there
would be less danger in the Expedition. But Iphicrates then offered to
undertake the Reduction of the City with those Mercenaries that were then with
him, if he might have but Liberty. Upon which, Pharnabazus grew Envious at the
Iphicrates undertakes to take Memphis. Ant. Chapter 371. Is discouraged by
Pharnabazus. Ant. Chapter 371. Memphis strongly Garrisoned.
Valor and Confidence of the Man, and began to be Jealous lest all Egypt
should be conquered only by his Arms, and therefore denied his request.
hereupon, Iphicrates made a Solemn Protestation against them, declaring that
all this Expedition would be Fruitless and Vain, through their Neglect, if they
let slip the present Opportunity. But Pharnabazus envied him the more, and very
undeservedly gave him opprobrious Language.

In the mean while, the Egyptians (having now gained more time) put a strong
Garrison into Memphis, and marched with all their Army to the little Town before
demolished; and prevailing in sundry skirmishes against the Persians, they
never let them rest, but growing still stronger and stronger, made a great
Slaughter of them, and grew every day more obstinate. But the Persian Army
having now staid a long time about this The Little Town.
Castle, the River Nile (by force of the Etesian Winds, i. e. Yearly Winds. The
Persians return into Asia.
Etesian Winds) beginning to overflow, insomuch as all the Land was covered
with Water (whereby Egypt was now more inaccessable, and by that means as it
were Fortified) the Commanders (for that Nature seemed to Fight against them)
resolved forthwith to leave Egypt.

As soon therefore as they returned into Asia, Pharnabazus renewed the Quarrel
with Iphicrates: Upon which, Iphicrates (fearing he should be laid by the Heels
as Conon formerly had been) consulted how to withdraw himself privately from
the Camp. To this end, (having prepared a Vessel for his purpose) he went on
board in the Night, and so sailed to Athens: But Pharnabazus sent Ambassadors
after him, and accused him as being the occasion of the Miscarriage of the
Design relating to the Reducing of Egypt. To whom the Athenians answered, That
if he were Guilty they would punish him according to his Ant. Chapter 371.
Desert: But in a very short time after they made him Admiral of their whole
Fleet.

In this place we think it not much beside our purpose if we say something
concerning what is reported of the Valor of Iphicrates. He is said to be a
very Skilful Commander, and of a quick and ready Wit in contriving any useful
Project and Stratagem: Having Iphicrates skilful in making of Arms. P. 480.
therefore gained large Experience and Judgment in Martial Discipline, by his
long and continual Exercise in the Wars of Persia, he found out many things of
great advantage in matters of War, especially he employed himself in contriving
the making of New sorts of Arms.

It was hitherto a Custom among the Graecians to carry great and heavy Shields:
But because these by their Weight much hindered the Soldiers in their March, he
changed the Form of them, and ordered Targets of a moderate Size in their room:
In which alteration he had a respect to two things, one that their Bodies
should be sufficiently defended, and by the other, that by their Lightness they
might be the more easily managed. Experience presently approved the Invention,
and they who from their Heavy Arms were before called Hopliti, Heavy armed Men,
were from these New Targets called Peltasti, Targateers. He changed likewise
the Fashion of their Spears and Swords. The Spears he caused to be made half as
long again as they were before, and the Swords longer almost by two Parts. This
Alteration was likewise presently approved by Use and Experience, and the
Reputation of the General was highly advanced by the Usefulness of his
Ingenious inventions. Lastly, he altered the very Soldiers Shoes that they
might both be easier to march with and sooner, and more readily cast off; and
therefore they are called at tjos very day Iphicraticks. He invented many other
things belonging to Martial Affairs, Ant. Chapter 371.
which would be too tedious here to relate. But thus all that large preparation
for an Expedition into Egypt came to nothing.

During these Affairs the new frame of Government throughout all Greece filled
the Cities with Tumult and Commotions; and because of the Anarchy in most
places, Seditions Seditions in the Cities of Greece.
abounded. They who were for an Oligarchy, had the Lacedaemonians to Patronize
them; Those that appeared for a Democracy were protected by the Athenians. For
both the Cities for a while kept the League made between them inviolable. But
upon their siding with the Cities (as they were inclined to the one or the
other) without any regard to the former Articles of the Peace; they presently
broke out into War.

At that time the Inhabitants of Now Zant. Zazynthus drives out all the
Magistrates.
Zacynthus being enraged against their Magistrates (encouraged thereunto under
the protection of the Lacedaemonians, and provoked with the memory of their
former Injuries) drove them all out of the City; who fled to Timotheus the
Athenian Admiral, and were received into the Fleet, and joined with him in the
War. He patronized their Cause, and transported them into the Island (where
they seized upon a strong Castle called Arcadia) and by the assistance of
Timotheus, very much molested and damnify'd the Townsmen. They of Zacynthus
desired aid from the Lacedaemonians, Ant. Chapter 371. The Lacedaemonians assist the
Zazynthirns.
who first (before they would begin a War) sent to the People of Athens, and by
their Ambassadors accused Timotheus: But when they discerned that they inclined
to favor the Exiles, they bestirred themselves to Equip out a Fleet; and
having Manned Thirty five Galleys, they sent them to the aid of the
Zacynthians, under the Command of Aristocrates.

Whilst these things were in doing, some in Corcyra that favored the
Lacedaemonians, A Plot in Corcyra to overturn the Democracy.
appeared against the People, and sent to Sparta to be assisted with all speed
with some Shipping, promising to deliver up Corcyra into their hands. Upon
which, they (knowing very well the importance of that Island for the recovery
of the Dominion at Sea) hastened away to get possession. And to that end
commanded Alcydas to pass over to Corcyra with Two and twenty Sail; they giving
out, that this Fleet was to go for Sicily, but in truth with a design (under
color of being Friends to the Corcyreans) by the help of the Exiles to seize
upon the City. But the Inhabitants coming to understand the Fraud and intended
Cheat of the Lacedaemonians, strongly fortified the place, and kept diligent
Watch and Ward, and sent Ambassadors to Athens for assistance. Upon P. 481. The
Athenians side with the Zazynthians and Corcyreans Platea sends for an Athenian
Garrison. Ant. Chapter 371.
which, the People decreed to send Succors forthwith, both to the Corcyreans
and to them of Zacynthus; Upon which, Ctesecles was presently sent to Zacynthus
to command the Exiles: but the Fleet to be sent to Corcyra was but then in
fitting out. In the mean time they of Platea having entered into a League with
the Athenians, and decreed to deliver up their City into their protection, sent
for a Garrison from Athens. At which the Boeotarchae Platea razed by the
Boetians.
Governors of Boeotia being exceedingly offended (to prevent the Athenians)
forthwith led out a great Army against the Plateans, and having entered the
Confines of Platea (by this sudden and unexpected Irruption) they found many of
the Citizens straggling in the Fields, who were presently snapt up by the
Horsemen; the rest fled into the City, and having no Confederates to assist
them, were forced to deliver up themselves, upon such Terms and Conditions as
the Enemy was pleased to allow 'em: For they were to leave the City, and take
away with them only their Household Goods, and never more set foot in Baeotia.
After this the (...).
Thebans razed Platea, and took Thespia (that sided against them) by assault.
The Plateans fled to Athens with their Wives and Children, and were there
kindly received into the Franchises and Liberties of the City. And in this
condition stood the Affairs of Baeotia all that time. The Lacedaemonians had now
sent Mnasippus Mnasippus sent to Corcyra by the Lacedaemonians. The City
Cor-Tyra in the Island Corcycyra.
with a Fleet of Sixty five Sail, and Fifteen hundred Men under his Command to
Corcyra, which after he arrived at the Island, and had taken the Exiles on
board, he sailed into the Haven, and presently possessed himself of Four of
their Galleys, and forced the rest upon Land, which they of (...).
Corcyra burnt, to prevent their falling into the Enemies hands: he routed them
likewise in a Land Fight, (though they had advantageously possessed themselves of
a Hill,) insomuch as all the Corcyrians every where were in fear and amazement.
The Athenians had some time before sent Timotheus the Son of Conon, to the aid
Ant. Chapter 371. Timotheus sent by the Athenians to Corcyra came too late.
of the Corcyreans, with a Navy of Sixty Sail; but before he came in to succor
them, he sailed into Thrace, and brought over many of the Cities there to the
Athenian Interest, and enlarged his Fleet with Thirty Sail: But because he came
too late to the assistance of them of Corcyra, the people of Athens were very
angry at him, and took away his Commission; yet when he returned to Athens with
a great number of Ambassadors, that came along with him to confirm the Leagues
with the Athenians, and besides, brought in ^^motheus disearded.
the Fleet in good Order, being more than they were by Thirty Sail; the People
rescinded the former Decree, and restored him to his Command. Before this they
had Restored.
likewise prepared Forty Galleys more, (so that their whole Fleet was
Fourscore;) and had made also plentiful Provision of Corn, Arms and all other
things necessary for the War: But for the present they sent Five hundred Men to
the aid of them of Corcyra, under the Command of Ctesides, who entered
privately in the Night into * Corcyra, where he found the Townsmen in bad
circumstances by their Sedition, and ill management of Cresides c^mes to the
City Corcyra from Athens.
Affairs relating to the War: But forthwith quieting all Parties, he made it
his business to put all things in a posture of Defense, and by this means put
Heart and Courage into the Besieged. In the first place he made a Sally and cut
off Two hundred of the Enemy. Presently after in a sharp Engagement he killed
Mnasippus and many of his Army: And Mnasippus killed. Ant. Chapter 371. P. 482.
now when the War was almost at an end in Corcyra, arrived Timotheus and
Iphicrates with the Athenian Fleet; who coming too late, did nothing worth
remembering, save that they took Nine Galleys, Men and all, sent by Dionysius
out of Stcily to the assistance of the Lacedaemonians, under the Command of
Cissides.
Cassidas and Crinippus; and by the Sale of the Captives raised Threescore
Talents, with which they paid off the Soldiers.

While these things were acting, Nicocles an Eunuch in Cyprus, treacherously
murdered Evagoras Murdered in Cyprus.
King Evagoras, and made himself King of Salamis. In Italy the Romans fought
with the Prenestines, and routed and killed many of them.

Afterward when Asteius was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Six Military
Tribunes, viz Olymp. 101. 4. Ant. Chapter 370. Earthquakes in Pe^oponnesus.
Marcus Furius, Lucius Furius, Aulus Posthumus, Lucius Lucretius, Marcus
Fabius, and Lucius Posthumus executed the Office of Consuls at Rome, there
happened such dreadful Earthquakes and Inundations in Peloponnesus (throughout
all the Cities, and over all the Country.) that are incredible to relate. For
never in any former Ages did the like Calamity fall upon the Grecian Cities,
which were now swallowed up together with their Inhabitants; and certainly some
Divine Power contrived and executed this remarkable ruin and destruction of
Mankind: Nay, the time when it was done aggravated the greatness of the
calamity. For the Earthquake happened not in the day (when the distressed might
have found out some way or other to have helped themselves) but in the night;
when the Houses by the violence of the shake fell down in confused heaps; so
that (by the darkness of the Night, and the suddenness of the ruin) Men were
in that perplexity, that they knew not which way to turn themselves for
security; insomuch as the greatest part of the Inhabitants, (buried in the
rubbish of the Houses) miserably perished. But as soon as Ant. Chapter 370.
it was Day some came running out of the Houses, and thinking they had escaped
the danger, fell into a far greater and unexpected mischief; for the Sea raged
to that degree, and broke in with that violence, that it swallowed up them and
their Houses together.

Two Cities of Achaia, one called Helica, and the other Bura, chiefly suffered
by this sad accident: of which two, Helica was of the greatest account of any
of the Cities of Helica and Bura swallowed up.
Achaia.

There was a very hot dispute concerning the cause of this Evil. Indeed the
Natural Philosophers do generally ascribe all such Events to Natural Causes,
and necessary Circumstances, and not to any Divine Hand; But they who have more
reverend Thoughts and Sentiments of a Deity, give a very probable account of
this Matter, that this Destruction was the effect of the Anger of the Gods, for
the impious violation of the Rights of Religion, of which we shall give a more
particular account. The Three Cities of Jonia were accustomed to have a general
Assembly of all the Jonians at Mycale, and thereabouts, where in a certain
solitary place (according to Ancient Rites) they offered many costly Sacrifices
to Neptune: which Pan Ionian A general Festival of the Ionians.
Panionion Festivals, the Ionians not being able to solemnize at that place, by
reason of the frequent Wars and Disturbances, they removed those Assemblies to
a more secure place not far from Ephesus. But sending to Delphos to consult
there with the Oracle, they were commanded to take Images from the most Ancient
Altars of their Forefathers (meaning from Helica, a City of the Country
formerly called Ionia, but now Achaia.) Upon this they declared in the public
Assembly of the Achaians, the occasion of their Embassy, and desired them to
grant their Request. But Ant. Chapter 370.
they of Helica had an Ancient Prophecy, That then they would he in the
greatest danger, when the Ionians sacrificed upon the Altar of Neptune;
remembering therefore this, they would not suffer the Ionians to take the
Images, alleging that that Temple was not common to all the Achaians, but
peculiar to themselves only. The same Addresses were made to them of Bura, who
were of the same Mind with them of Helica. However the Ionians by public Edict
of the Achaians, (that the Prophecy might be fulfilled) offered Sacrifices upon
the Altar of Neptune. Upon this they of Helica seized upon all the Goods of the
Ionians, and committed the Ambassadors to Prison, and so carried it very
impiously toward the Deity: Therefore they say that Neptune being angry, to
revenge himself upon their Impiety, (by this Earthquake and Inundation of the
Sea) brought this grievous calamity upon those Cities. And that it was done by
him they use this for an Argument, That it is generally believed that this God
has the power of Inundations and Earthquakes in his own hand; and that
Peloponnesus had been ever reputed the Habitation of Neptune, and the Country
Dedicated to him, and that all the Peloponnesian Cities worshipped this God
above all others. Besides this, they give a further reason of this sad Ant. Chapter
370.
Accident. There are (as they say) in Peloponnesus great Cavities underground,
which by the Sea flowing here and there through the Earth, are turned into
great Ponds and Lakes of Water. And indeed it is very certain that there are
Two Rivers in that Peninsula, which apparently fall into the Caverns of the
Earth. For the Rivers which run by A City in A^cadia.
Pheneum in former Ages sunk in one place into the Earth, and became invisible,
being swallowed up in these Caverns under ground. Erasinus River.
Another was lost at a great opening of the Earth at Stymphalus; in Arcadia.
Stymphius, and ran unseen under ground for the space of Two hundred Stages,
and rose up again near the City Argos. To what is related is further added,
That none suffered but only they who were guilty of the Impiety
beforementioned. And this shall suffice to be said of the Earthquakes and
Inundations in Peloponnesus. Afterward;

When Alcisthenes was Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Eight Military Tribunes,
viz. Olymp. 102. 1. Ant. Chapter 369.
25 Mile.
Lucius Lucius Publius Valerius.
Valerius, Publius Ancius, Caius Terentius, Lacius Menenius, Caius Sulpitius,
Titus Papyrius, Lucius Aemilius, and Marcus Fabius. A Coinet in Peloponnesus.
Fabius Marcus bore the Consular Authority at Rome, the Hundred and second
Olympiad was celebrated at Aelis, wherein Damon the Thurian was Victor. At that
time God (by some Signs and Prodigies) foretold the Fall of the Lacedemonian
Sovereignty over Greece, after they had enjoyed it near Five hundred Years: For
a great Comet (which from its shape was called the Fiery Beam) was seen in the
Heavens several Nights. And not long after, the Lacedaemonians being overcome in
a great Battle, suddenly (beyond all Men's imagination) lost their Dominion.
Some Ant. Chapter 369.
among the Natural Philosophers ascribe the Original of this Comet to proceed
from Natural Causes, and say that these sort of Meteors at some stated times do
happen of necessity. And that the Eminent Chaldeans in Babylon, and other
Astrologers have certainly and exactly foretold the appearance of these Comets.
And that it is not to be admired though such things do happen accordingly, but
that it would be a greater wonder if they should not; being that all things
have their proper Courses, and turns, and at length by incessant Motions are
brought into Act in fixed and stated Times and Seasons. It Is related that this
Comet was so very light, that it cast a shadow upon the Earth like the Moon.

CHAP. VI.
Artaxerxes sends again to make Peace among the Grecians. All compli'd but the
Thebans. The Spartans raise an Army against the Thebans. Epaminondas made the
Theban General. The famous Battle of Leuctra. The terrible Seditions and
Cruelties in Argos. Jason of Pherae stirs up the Thessalonians to gain the
Sovereignty of Greece. Pollydore Prince of Pherea in Greece poisoned by his
Brother Alexander. Plot to depose Alexander. King of Macedonia Treated with, to
that purpose.

ABout this time Artaxerxes King of Persia hearing that Greece was fallen into
new Broils, sent Ambassadors again to exhort them to live in peace one with
another, according to the late Establishment. The Grecians readily compli'd
with the Advice, and Peace made again by the Mediation of Artaxerxes.
and all made Peace again among themselves, except the Thebans. For they were
not admitted into the League because they challenged all Beotia to be under
their own Government. And it was Decreed that all the Cities should be bound by
Oath to observe the League. Being therefore excluded (as they were before) they
kept Beotia under the sole Jurisdiction of their own City. Upon which the
Lacedaemonians being enraged, resolved to make War upon them as the common
Enemies of Greece. For their growing Power began to be suspected, lest (being
Masters of all Baeotia) they should some Ant. Chapter 369. The Lacedaemonians decree
War against the Thebans. P. 484.
time or other catch an opportunity to deprive Sparta of the Sovereign Command.
Especially for that they were a Warlike Nation, Inferior to none in Greece, and
by their daily Exercise in the public Schools, their Bodies became far
stronger; and besides had many valiant Commanders, and especially three,
Epaminondas, Gorgias,: and Pelopidas. And to this may be added, That the
Thebans by reason of the Nobility of their Ancestors (who were famous in the
Heroic times) were of Proud and Lordly Spirits, and ever aspiring to great
matters. Upon this account the Lacedaemonians this Year raised an Army, composed
of their own Cities and of their Confederates, and prepared themselves for War.
So that

When Phrasichides was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and the Romans appointed
Eight Military Tribunes to execute the Office of Consuls, viz. Publius Manlius,
Caius Erenucius, Olymp. 102. 2.
Caius Sextius, Tiberius Julius, Lucius Julius*
Lucius Marcus Albinius.
Labinius, Publius Fibonius, Caius Manlius, and Lucius Antistius, The Thebans
excluded from the common League, were forced by their own strength alone, to
bear the brunt of the War against the Lacedaemonians; for by the Articles of the
Peace (Ratified and confirmed by all) none of the Cities were to send them any
Aid or Relief. Therefore the Lacedaemonians (now that the Thebans were wholly
desert'd) decreed a War against them, and were resolved to subject Thebes to
the Lacedemonian State. And forasmuch as all observed that the Lacedaemonians
made extraordinary preparations, and that the Thebans on the other hand had
none to stand by them, every body was of opinion that they would be easily
Conquered by the Spartans. And therefore all that wished them well were much
troubled and concerned for them, to see Ant. Chapter 368.
their inevitable Ruin approaching. But their Enemies on the contrary rejoiced,
a, if the Thebans were even already subdued.

When the Lacedaemonians had raised their Army, they Created Cleombrotus
General. And in the first Place sent Ambassadors to Thebes to demand that all
the Cities of Beotia Cleombrotus General for the Spartans.
should be allowed to Govern themselves according to their own Laws, and that
Platea and Thespiae should be Rebuilt, and that those Territories should be
restored to the Ancient Proprietors. To which the Thebans answered, That as
they did not concern themselves with the matters of Laconia, so the
Lacedaemonians ought not to meddle with the Affairs of Beotia. Upon receiving of
this answer, the Lacedaemonians (without any further delay) ordered Cleombrotus
to March with the Army against Thebes. And the Lacedemonian Confederates were
very ready to join in this War, hoping that the Beotians would be subdued
(...), without dust.
with little or no fighting, and without any great Labor or Pains.

Marching on therefore, they Encomp'd at Cheronea, and there waited for their
Confederates, who came in but slowly. In the mean time the Thebans hearing of
the Enemies March, sent their Wives and Children for security to Athens. Then
they made Epaminondas General of the Army, and entrusted him with the
management of the whole Epaminondas General of the Thebans. Ant. Chapter 368.
War, joining with him six Beotians and Governors of Beotia as his Council. He
listed whoever was of Age able and fit to bear Arms among the Thebans, and
likewise among the other Beotians, and having now an Army not above Six
thousand, with these he Marched out of Thebes; at which Instant of time some
Prodigies were seen, which boded no good Success. For as they were going out at
the Gates, there met them an Herald that (according to ancient Custom) led a
blind Man (that had ran away) and cried aloud, Bring him not out of Thebes, nor
put him to Death, but carry him back again and save his Life. The old Men took
this Cry of the Herald for an evil sign: But the young Men held their peace,
lest by their Timorousness they should seem to have a desire to diswade
Epaminondas from the Expedition, he had undertaken. To those that were pressing
upon him first to consider well of these Presages, he answered in this Verse,

(...). In Homer.

It is a happy sign to fight for his Country.
Such a frank resolution had no sooner dashed and caused those that were
Timorous to Blush, but another Prodigy more frightful happened. For a Secretary
went before carrying P. 485.
a Or Lance.
Javelin, to which a Scroll was annexed, to signify that the Army was to obey
the Orders and Commands of their Generals. It fell out that a high Wind blew
off this Scroll, and fixed it upon a Pillar of a Tomb, in which very place some
Lacedaemonians and Peloponnesians, that formerly followed Agesilaus were buried,
and had been there slain: Upon which the ancient Men again with protestations
dissuaded him from going any further with the Army, seeing the Gods so
evidently opposed the design. But the General returned them no answer, but
cheerfully Marched on preferring at that time the Honesty and Justice of his
Cause, before uncertain Observations and Conclusions upon Signs and Prodigies.
And though Epaminondas who was a great Philosopher managed all this Affair with
great Prudence and Discretion, yet in the mean time he incurred the Censure of
many. But not long after when success of the Action evinced the Excellency of
Ant. Chapter 368.
his Military Conduct, we see him instrumental in performing many things to the
great Advantage and Service of his Country. For he Marched away directly, and
gained the Streights near Coronea, and Encamped there. Cleombrotus, when he
heard that the Enemy had possessed themselves of that Pass, not looking upon it
Feazible to regain it, turned aside another way by Phocis, and Marched along by
the Seashore, where though the way was very rugged and difficult, yet at length
he came without any prejudice to the Confines of Beotia: But in his passage he
took in some small Towns, and gained some Galleys. At last he arrived at
Leuctra, and there Encamped, and refreshed his Army.

In the mean time the Beotians Marching forward, drew near to the Enemy; and as
soon as they recovered the Hills, and saw the greatness of the Lacedemonian
Army, Covering the Plains of Leuctra, they were not a little amazed. Hereupon
the Booetarchs called a Council of War to Consider whether it were advisable to
go on, and Fight upon The Six Governors of Beotia, who were Epaminondas's
Council.
such unequal Terms, or else to March Back, and Engage with the Enemy in some
more commodious Place. It happened that upon this Consult, the Votes were
equal: For there being Six of these Boeotarchs or Governors of Boeotia, Three
were for going Back, and the other Three for abiding where they were, and to
try their Fortune by a Battle, of which last Number Epaminondas was one. While
the matter stood thus doubtful, and nothing could be determined, the Seventh
Boeotarch at length came in, and Epaminondas Ant. Chapter 368.
persuaded him to give his Vote on his side, and so he carried it. And thus it
was determined to lay all at Stake and try it out by a Battle. Epaminondas then
perceiving that the Soldiers were still superstitiously possessed with the
former ominous Signs, and Prodigies, endeavored by all the Art and Industry
possibly he could to remove these Opinions and Suspicions of his Soldiers. To
this end, upon some Persons coming newly into the Camp, from Thebe's, he caused
a Report to be spread abroad, that all the Arms that hung up in Hercules Temple
were on a sudden gone and not to be found, and that it was commonly noised in
Thebes, That the Ancient Heroes had taken them away, and were gone out to the
assistance of the Thebans. He Suborned likewise another to say, he lately came
up out of Trophonius his Cell, and he affirmed that the Oracle there Commanded
This Trophonius was said, to be the Son of Apollo, and had a Temple at Lebadie
in Beotia, dedicated to him; where was a Cave, of which strange things are
related; see Steph. and others. Pausan lib. 9. c. 39. a large description, and
by his own experience, as he says. P. 486. Ant. Chapter 368.
him to tell them that when they had gained the Victory at Leuctra, they should
institute the Coronet Festivals to Jupiter. From whence arose that Custom of
keeping a yearly Solemnity by the Boeotians at Lebadia. And besides this Skill
and Prudence of the General, Leandras the Spartan (who was Banished from
Lacedemon, and then in Arms with the Thebans) was not little serviceable in
this Affair. For being called into the (...) (...).
Assembly, he affirmed that the Spartans had an ancient Prophecy, That when
they were beaten by the Thebans at Leuctra, they should lose their
Principality. At length some of the Inhabitants of the Country who undertook to
Interpret the Oracles came to Epaminondas, and declared that it was decreed by
the Gods, That a great slaughter should be made of the Lacedaemonians at the
Tombs of the Daughters of Leuctrus and Schedasus, for the Reasons herein after
related. Leuotrus was he from whom the Field was so called. And his Daughters,
and the Daughters of one Schedasus, Virgins, in the Flower of their Age, were
Deflowered by the Spartan Ambassadors; the young Women not able to endure that
great Dishonor and Disgrace, (with many Imprecations against that Nation who
sent such wicked Ambassadors) laid violent hands on themselves. When these and
other such like things were alleged, Epaminondas called the Soldiers together,
and in an Oration fitted for the purpose, encouraged them to the Battle: Upon
which the Soldiers (being now freed from their Superstitious conceits) changed
their minds, and longed to be Engaged with the Enemy.

About this time came some Auxiliary Forces to the Thebans from Thessaly,
Fifteen hundred Foot, and Five hundred Horse, under the Command of Jason. This
Man advised both the Thebans and the Lacedaemonians (upon consideration of the
uncertainty of the Events of War) to agree upon terms of Peace; which took its
effect. And now Cleombrotus withdrew his Forces out of Beotia, and in his March
a great Army from the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates under the Command of
Archidamus the Son of Agesilaus met him For the Spartans seeing the Courage and
Resolution of the Beotians, and not judging it advisable to slight Men that
seemed to be resolved, and to run upon the Pikes at all adventures, had sent
forth his other Army (by their multitude at least) to give a check to the
Insolency of the Enemy. Drawing up therefore in a Body together (and looking
upon it a base and mean thing, below the Dignity of the Spartans so much as to
think the Valor of the Beotians worthy of any regard,) without any respect had
to the late League, they rashly and precipitately returned to Leuctra: Where
they found the Beotians (with great earnestness) expecting and desiring a
Battle. Upon this, the The Battle at Leuctra.
Armies on both sides were drawn up in Battalia in this manner, on the part of
the Lacedaemonians, Cleombrotus and Archidamus the Son of Agesilaus (both
descended from Hercules) Commanded the two Wings: On the other side Epaminondas
Marshalled his Army after a new and peculiar manner, by which excellent
Stratagem he gained that glorious Victory never to be forgotten. For he chose
out of the whole Army the best and strongest of the Soldiers, and placed them
in that Wing where he himself would Command. In the other he placed his weaker
Men, with a Command not to abide the Enemies Charge, but by a soft and slow
retreat to avoid the shock. Having therefore thus ordered an oblique Phalanx,
he resolved to try the Fortune of the Day with the other Wing under his
Command. And now the Trumpets Sounded a Charge on both sides, and on first
onset the Armies set up a great shout: The Lacedaemonians came on with both
their Wings in fashion of an half Moon: On the other hand the Beotians
Retreated with one of their Wings, and charged fiercely on the Enemy with the
other. When they came to the swords point, both Fought very desperately, and at
first the Victory was very doubtful, but at length they with Epaminondas by
their Valor and close Order, broke in upon the Peleponnesians, and made a
great slaughter amongst them; For Ant. Chapter 368.
they were not able any longer to bear the weight of the Shock wherewith they
were pressed, but some were slain downright upon the Spot, others mortally
Wounded bravely receiving all their wounds upon their Breasts. As long as
Cleombrotus the Lacedemonian King was alive, it was uncertain whether side
would carry away the Victory, because he had a strong Body of Targateers with
him, who fought resolutely in his defense. But as soon as he fell down dead,
(after many wounds received and much Valor shown on his part, though all
ineffectual) they thronged together about his Body where they hewn down in
heaps one upon another. And now this Wing being without a leader, the
Epaminondians charged the Lacedaemonians with that fierceness that they forced
them by degrees into disorder. However the Lacedaemonians fought so bravely for
the Body of their King, that at length they possessed themselves of it, though
they were not able to gain P. 487.
the Day. For those choice Bands with Epaminondas standing to it as
unconquerable (encouraged likewise both by the words and example of their
Leader) the Lacedaemonians at length (with much ado) began to give ground. And
indeed at first they did not (to Ant. Chapter 368.
appearance) break their Order of Battle in their Retreat; but when the
slaughter increased, and they had now no Commander to give necessary Orders,
the whole Army fled outright. The Epaminondians pursued them close, and with
the slaughter of a multitude of their Enemies gained a glorious Victory. For by
their engaging with the most famous Warriors of Greece, and becoming
Victorious with an Army far short in Number of their Enemies, they highly
advanced the reputation of their Valor. But Epaminondas the General was judged
worthy of the greatest Honor and Esteem, because chiefly by his Valor and
Prudence he had routed those Commanders of Greece, who were never before
Conquered. The Lacedaemonians lost in this Battle no fewer then four thousand
Men: Of the Beotians were killed about Three hundred. Afterward they made a
Truce for the burying of the Dead, and the return of the Lacedaemonians into
Peloponnesus. And this was the Issue of the Battle of Leuctra.

The Year following, when Dysnicetus was Praetor of Athens, and four Military
Tribunes, Quintus Servilius, Lucius Furius, Caius Licinnius and Publius Clelius
Executed the Olymp. 102. 3. Ant. Chapter 367.
Consular Dignity at Rome, the Thebans marched with a great Army against
Orchomenum, with a full purpose utterly to ruin that City. But they were
advised by Epaminondas, in regard they sought to gain the Principality of
Greece, that it was their Interest to use their Victory with Moderation.
Whereupon they left off their design, and received the Orchomenians as their
Consederates: Afterward they made a League with the Phoceans and Atolians, and
so returned into Beotia.

At that time Jason Prince of In Thessaly.
Pherae (whose power grew every Day) invaded In Thessaly
Locris with a great Army, and razed near Phocis and Parnassus.
Heraclea in Trachinia after it was betrayed into his hands, and bestowed their
Territories on the Near Mount Oeta and Thermopile in Phthiotis.
Octeans and Melieans. Thence Marching into Perrhebia, he courted some of the
Cities into submission, and gained others by force of Arms.

The Thessalians seeing him mount up so fast, and in so short time, began to be
jealous In Thessaly. Ant. Chapter 367. Cruel Seditions in Argos.
of the growth of his Power, and the heat of his Ambition.

But in the mean time there arose such a Sedition, followed with such
Butcheries in Argos, that the like had never been before in any of the Cities
of Greece: Which new and unheard of Cruelty was called by the Grecians Knocking
on the Head with Clubs.
Scytalism, from the manner of the slaughter Committed. And the Cause of the
Tumult was this: Argos was Governed by a Democracy; The (...).
Orators, and those that affected Popularity, stirred up the Mob against the
great Men of the City; which caused them for their own preservation, (and to
free themselves from the false accusations that were prosecuted against them)
to Plot and Contrive how to overturn the Democratical Government. And when some
who were suspected were called in question, others fearing they should be put
to the Rack, Murdered themselves. For One in the height of his Torments
Confessed, and Accused Thirty of the greatest Men of the City to be in the
Conspiracy; upon which the People (without any further Trial,) Knocked them all
on the Head, and Confiscated their Estates. P. 488.
And whereas there were many others seized upon suspicion of the Plot (and the
false Accusations managed against them by the Orators, with all the
aggravation* imaginable) the People were so enraged, that whoever were accused
(of whom there was a vast number, and all very Rich) were Condemned to Death;
so that there were Executed Ant. Chapter 368.
above Sixteen hundred of the greatest and most powerful Men of the City:
Neither were the Orators themselves spared; for when they slack'd in the
Prosecution of the Calumnies (because they were afraid left some sudden
mischief would overtake them by reason of the extraordinary Cruelties that were
Committed) the People concluded that they had deserted their Cause, which put
them into such a ferment of Rage and Fury, that they killed all the Orators
that were then in the City; which seemed to be Executed upon them by the Hand
of some revenging Deity, as a reward of their Villainies. After the Tumult was
ceased, the People returned to their former quiet, and paeceable dispositions.

About this time Lycomedes of Tegeata persuaded the Arcadians to join together
in one Body of a Commonwealth and to Constitute a General Council, consisting
of Ten thousand Men, who should have absolute power to Determine all matters
relating both to War and Peace. But a Tumult happening among the Arcadians, the
controversy was decided by the Sword; many being killed, and above Fourteen
hundred Banished, some to Sparta, others to In Arcadia.
Pallantium. Those that fled to the Pallantines were by them delivered up into
the hands of their Enemies, who cut all their Throats. The other put on the
Lacademonians to make an Inroad into Arcadia: Upon which, Agesilaus King of
Sparta with an Army made up of the Citizens and Exiles, broke into the
Territories of Tageata, because they were looked upon to be the Fomenters of
all the Broils and Banishments amongst the Arcadians, and wasted and spoiled
the Country, which together with a strait Siege laid to the City, greatly
terrified the Arcadians.

While these things were acting, Jason who ruled at Phercae (a Man excellently
well Ant. Chapter 367 Jason puts on the Thessalians to seck for the Sovereignty of
Greece.
versed in Military Affairs) who had now many of the Neighboring Countries for
his Confederates, persuaded the Thessalians to end eavour to gain the
Sovereignty of Greece to themselves. For he alleged that whoever would Fight
for it, might now gain it as a reward of their Valor. For that it was evident
that the Lacedaemonians were miserably Ruined at Leuctra; and the Athenians were
only Masters at Sea, and the Thebans far unworthy of such a Dignity; and in
Conclusion, that the Argives had weakened themselves with their own Civil
Dissentions, and bloody Broils. Upon this, the Thessalians made Jason General
of all their Forces, and Committed to him the whole Management of the War, who
having now received the Supreme Command, Marched into some of the neighboring
Countries, and entered into a League with Amyntas King of Macedonia.

This Year there happened what was very remarkable; For Three great Princes
Di'd Three great Princes Die in one Year.
near one and the same time, Amyntas the Son of Tharrhaleus (after he had
Reigned in Macedon Four and twenty Years) died, leaving behind him three Sons,
Alexander, Perdiccas and Philip. Alexander Succeeded, but Reigned but one Year.
Then Agesipolis King of Lacedemon after one Year's Reign died likewise: His
Brother Cleomenes succeeded him, and sat at the Helm Four and thirty Years. At
last Jason of Pherae, whom the Thessalians had lately made their General (though
he Governed with great Moderation and Kindness toward his Subjects) was
Assassinated by Seven young Men, as Ephorus says, who (in hopes of Praise and
Commendation) had Conspired for that purpose: But others write that he was
Murdered by his Brother Polydore, who Reigned not above one Year Jason
^ssassinated by his Brother Polydore.
after him. Here Durius the Samian begins his History of the Affairs of Greece.
And these were the things done this Year.

Afterward, when Lysistratus Governed in Chief at Athens, a great Sedition
arose in Olymp. 102. 4. Ant. Ch 367. P. 489.
Rome, for some were for making of Consuls, others were for Creating Military
Tribunes in their room: And by reason of this dissension there was an Anarchy
for some time. But at length, Six Military Tribunes were chosen, which were
Lucius Amilius, Caius Veturius. Polydore poisoned by his Brother Alexander.
Verginius, Serulius Sulpitius, Lucius Quintius, Caius Cornelius, and Caius
Valerius. About the same time, Polydore the Pherean Prince of Thessaly (when he
was drunk) was poisoned by a deadly Potion given him by his Brother Alexander,
who Succeeded him, and Reigned eleven Years. And as he got into the Throne by
wickedness and injustice, so he ruled (as he ever designed) with Tyranny and
Oppression: And whereas all those before him by their Moderation and Kindness
to their Subjects, gained the Love and Good Will of all, he by his severe and
tyrannical Government, became the Object of all Men's hatred. Therefore some of
Larissa who from their high Birth were sirnam'd Alevadari, (fearing what might
be the Effect of his Wickedness) Conspired to Dethrone him. To this end they
made a Journey into Macedonia, and Treated with Alexander the King, in The
Tyrant endeavored to be deposed.
order to Assist them in Deposing of the Tyrant. While they were Negociating
this Affair, Alexander the Pharean (having Intelligence of the preparations
making against him) raised a considerable Army, designing to Engage with the
Enemy in Macedonia; but the King of Macedon being joined with the Deserters,
brought his Forces presently to Larissa, Ant. Chapter 367.
and so prevented him: When he came there, the Citizens opened the Gates to
him, and so he became Master of all but the Castle, which he afterward took by
Force. The The City Cranon likewise surrendr'd to him, and he promised to
restore all the Cities to He Is caused to Fly by assistance from the Macedonian
King.
the Thessalians. But afterward (not valuing his Word or Honor) he Garrisoned
them, and detained them all in his own hands. But Alexander the Pherean in a
great Fright Fled to the City Pherea. And this was then the Condition of
Thessaly.

CHAP. VII.
The Lacedaemonians send Polytropus into Arcadia; who is Slain, and his Party
Routed by Lycomedes. An Invasion by Epaminondas and Pelopidas into
Peloponnesus. Sparta Besieged. The Antiquity and History of Messina in Greece.
Pallane taken by the Arcadians. A Wall drawn between Cenchrea and Lecheum to
hinder the Thebans Inroad into Peloponnesus. Epaminondas breaks through into
Peloponnesus; Assaults Corinth.

IN Peloponnesus, in the mean time, the Lacedaemonians sent a Thousand heavy
Armed Men of their own Citizens, and Five hundred Deserters from Argos and
Beotia, into Arcadia, under the Command of Polytropus, who when he came to
Orchomenon in Arcadia, put a Garrison into it, being a City that favored the
Spartans. But Lycomedes of Mantinea (then Commander in Chief of the Arcadians)
with a Body of Men, to the number The Mantenieans March against Orchomenon.
of Five thousand, Marched against Orchomenon, and upon their arrival the
Lacedaemonians drew out their Forces, where happened a sharp Engagement, in
which the Lacedemonian General was slain, and two hundred more with him: The
rest by the hot Pursuit of the Enemy were forced back into the City. However,
though the Arcadians then got the Victory, yet they so far feared the power of
Sparta, that they durst not depend upon their own strength in Contending with
the Lacedaemonians, and therefore taking into their Confederacy the Argives and
the Eleans, they first sent Ambassadors to Athens to desire them to be their
Consederates, which being denied, they then Addressed themselves to the Thebans
for the same purpose. Upon which the Beotians (together with the Phocians and
Locrians their Confederates) drew out their Forces, and Marched directly into
Peloponnesus, under the Command of Epaminondas and Pelopidas. For all the other
Beotarchs had willingly given up the sole and absolute Command of the Army to
those two, being Men eminent for Prudence and Valor. Ant. Chapter 367.


When they entered into the Confines of Arcadia, they were met by all the
Arcadians, Eleans, Argives, and the rest of their Confederates. And now they
had an Army of above An Invasion into Peloponesus P. 490. Epaminonda^ and
Pelopidas.
Fifty thousand Men, and after a Council of War had, the Generals resolved to
March forthwith to Sparta, and to Wast and Spoil all the Country of Laconia.
But the Lacedaemonians having lost the Flower and strength of their young Men in
the Battle at Leuctra, and many in several other Fights here and there, were
thereby reduced to a very small number of Fighting Men of their own Citizens:
And whereas some of their Confederates deserted, and others were brought low by
the same means as those before, they knew not which way to turn themselves. So
that they were forced to seek for Aid The Lacedaemonians seek for Aid of the
Athenians.
and Assistance from them, (I mean the Athenians) upon whom they had some time
before Imposed Thirty Tyrants, and whose Walls they had Demolished, and whose
City they had decreed to Raze even to the Ground, and lay it Open and Common
with the rest of the Country, for the grazing of Flocks and Herds. But
necessity has no Law, and the Turns of Fortune are invincible, through which
the Lacedaemonians were brought into that strait, as to become Suppliants to
their most Implacable Enemies for Relief. However, they were not deceived in
their hopes; for such was the Brave and generous Spirits of the Athenians, that
they feared not the Power of the Thebans, but decreed to Assist the
Lacedaemonians to the utmost they were able, though they were now ready even to be
swallowed up and made perfect Slaves. To this end they listed in one Day Twelve
thousand lusty young Men, and forthwith ordered Iphicrates the General to March
away to the assistance Iphicrates sent to assist the Spartans. Ant. Chapter 367.
of the Spartans. Accordingly, having Men that were very forward, he hasts away
with a swift March. Neither were the Lacedaemonians less active or forward; but
now even when the Enemy were Encamped in the Borders of Laconia, they Marched
out of Sparta, with all the Strength they could make, which was but small, yet
with the same Courage, and Valor as they had formerly done.

In the mean time, Epaminondas his Army conceiving it very difficult to enter
into the Enemies Country; and therefore judging it was not convenient to
attempt it with the whole Army together, they resolved to divide their Forces
into four Bodies, and so to make the Attack in several Places at once. The
first Marched to the City Rather Hellasia.
Sellatia, and and drew off the Inhabitants of that Territory from the
Lacedaemonians. The Argives, who were in another Body, upon their entrance into
the Borders of Tageata, Engaged with a Guard that kept that pass, and killed
the Chief Officer, Alexander a Spartan, and Two hundred more of his Men;
amongst whom there were some Beotian Exiles. The third Body, in which were the
Arcadians, and most in number, broke into the Country called Sciritis, where
Iscolas, a Man of great Valor and Prudence, kept Guard with a considerable
Body of Men. This brave and gallant Commander performed an heroic Action,
worthy to be Recorded to all Posterity. When he foresaw that both he, The brave
act of Ischolas.
and all those with him, were sure every Man to be cut off by their Engaging
with so great and unequal a number; in the first place he looked upon it as a
dishonor to the Spartan Name to desert the Post assigned him, and yet judged
it to be much for the Service and Advantage of his Country if he could preserve
the Soldiers. To the admiration therefore of his Valor he contrived a way how
to answer the ends of both; wherein he bravely Imitated the gallant Spirit of
King Leonidas in former times at Thermopile. For he sent away to Sparta the
choicest of his Soldiers that were young and Ant. Chapter 361.
lusty, to the end they might be helpful to their Country in Fighting, now all
lay at Stake: And he himself, with those that were Old, kept close together,
and in a brave defense, slaughtered multitudes of their Enemies, but at length
being surrounded, and hemmed in by the Arcadians, they were every Man of them
cut off.

The fourth body of the Eleans having all places more clear and open before
them, arrived at length at Sellacia: For it was ordered that all the Forces
should meet together at that place, where being all now joined, they marched
toward Sparta, and wasted the Country all before them with Fire and Sword. And
now the Lacedaemonians seeing their ancient Country Liconia (that had never
known what Waste and Spoil meant for the space of Five hundred years before) to
be thus cruelly harassed and destroyed, could no longer forbear, but were ready
to run upon their Enemy as it were with open mouth. But being by some
Magistrates that came from the City, commanded not to hasten away P. 491.
too far out of the Bounds of their Country (lest some other should make an
inroad into it in the mean time) and being likewise advised to recollect
themselves, and think seriously of defending the City; with much ado they
submitted to the Advice.

In the mean time, Epaminondas having passed his Army over the Mountain
Taygetus, and arrived at the River Eu^ota (which was then very high, being
Wintertime) he endeavored all he could to get over. The Lacedaemonians
perceiving how his Troops were disordered and dispersed through the difficulty
of the Passage, laid hold upon this fit occasion to fall upon them. Leaving
therefore their Wives, Children, and Old Men as a Guard for the City, they made
out against the Enemy in good Order with all the Young and The Thebans attacks
by the Spartans. Ant. Chapter 367.
Strong Men of the Town, and by a sudden and hot Charge cut off a great number
in their passing the River: But the Boeotians and Arcadians valiantly standing
their Ground, surrounded their Enemies. However, the Spartans, after they had
killed a great number of the Boeotians, at length broke through, and returned
to the City, leaving behind them remarkable Instances of their Valor.

Presently after, when Epaminondas came up with his whole Army (to the Terror
of Epaminondas besieges Sparta.
the Inhabitants) to the City, the Spartans, by the advantage of the Strength
of the Places, killed great numbers of them. And now all hands were at work,
and very earnest to gain the City, insomuch as that they seemed to be in a fair
way to take Sparta by storm. But the Assailants (through their Over-heat and
Violence) being many of them killed and others wounded, Epaminondas caused a
Trumpet to sound a Retreat, and so called them off. Presently after, the
Thebans made their approach to the City, and challenged the Spartans to come
forth and fight with them, or else to acknowledge themselves Inferior, and not
able to contend with them. To whom they answered, that when they saw their
opportunity they would be sure not to decline Fighting, though they laid all at
Stake. The Army therefore now drew off from the Siege, and having wasted and
spoiled all Laconia, and laden themselves with rich Prey and Plunder, returned
into Arcadia. Afterward the Athenians (who came too late, and did nothing
worth taking notice of) Marched back into Attica.

In the mean while Four thousand Men came in to the Assistance of the
Lacedaemonians from their Consederates. To these they added a Thousand Helots
newly Manumitted and set Free, and Two hundred Beotian Fugitives, and many more
from the neighboring Towns and Villages; so that now they were strong enough
to Cope with the Enemy. And these Forces being kept together and daily
Exercised, grew more and more daring, and fit for public Service in the Field.
Ant. Chapter 367.


But Epaminondas being Naturally inclined to things that were Great, and
ambitious to Messina Rebuilt by Epaminondas.
Eternize his own praise and Honor, persuaded the Arcadians and the other
Allies to re-edifie and replenish Messina with new Inhabitants (which had been
destroyed by the Lacedaemonians, Above 280 Years. Sir. Walter Rawleighs History
of the World, lib. 2. 1. part. c. 27. fol. 359.
and lay Wast and Desolate many Years,) for that it was most commodiously
Situated for the Invading of Sparta at any time; having procured their Consent,
he inquired after all the ancient Inhabitants that were living in any Place:
And enfranchizing many others that were willing to settle themselves there, he
Repaired Messina, and made it very Populous, and divided the Land belonging to
the City by Lot amongst the new Inhabitants, and filled the Country about with
stately Seats and beautiful Buildings, and so raised up a noble Grecian City
out of its Ruins, to its former State and Grandeur, for which he was highly
Honored.

I conceive it will not be amiss in this place, in regard Messina has been so
often taken and Ruined, If I say something in short of this City from its
beginning. Anciently the An account of the several States of Messina.
Family of Neleus and Nestor to the time of the Trojan War possessed it:
Afterward Orestes the Son of Agamemnon and his Posterity enjoyed it, till the
Return of the Heraclidae. Then Cresphontes chose Messina for his share, and his
Posterity Reigned there for some time; but they being Ejected, it came into the
power of the Lacedaemonians, who became * Cresphontes.
Lords thereof. For after that Teleclytus King of the Lacedaemonians was slain
in a P. 492. The first Messinian War. Olymp. 9. This War began Olymp. 9. 2. in
the Reign of Manasses. Ended 14 Olymp. 1. Sir. Walter Rawleigh's Hist. World.
356. lib. 2. c. 27.
Battle, the Messinians at length were subdued by the Spartans. This War is
said to have continued Twenty Years; and that the Lacedaemonians had taken a
solemn Oath that they would never return to Sparta, till they had taken
Messina. At that time were Born those called the Partheniae, who afterward
enjoyed the City Tarentum. The Messinians in aftertimes being oppressed by the
Lacedaemonians, The second Messinian War, 39 Years. Ant. Chapter 367.
Aristomenes stirred them up to Revolt, and destroyed many of the Spartans. At
which time Tyrreus the Poet was sent by the Athenians to the Spartans to be
their General. But there are others that say, that Aristomenes flourished in
the time of the Twenty years War. The last War made upon them was after that
terrible Earthquake, which almost Ruined Sparta, and destroyed all its
Inhabitants. At that time those that remained of the Messinians (together with
the Helots, who Revolted with them,) Inhabited Ithon, because Messina had lain
Wast many Years together before that time. But being unfortunate in every
Encounter, they were at length utterly Ruined, and driven out of their Country;
and settled themselves in Naupachus, which was given them to Inhabit, by the
Athenians: And from thence some removed to Cephalenia, and others into Sicily,
where they built the City Messina, so called from them. And now the Thebans in
the last place by the Advice of Epaminondas (who Invited the Messinians from
all Places where they were) Rebuilt Messina, and restored to the new
Inhabitants all the ancient Territories formerly belonging to the City. And
thus Great and Various were the Changes and Turns of Messina.

The Thebans having dispatched all these things in the space of Eighty five
Days, leaving a strong Garrison for the defense of Messina, returned to their
own Country. And the Lacedaemonians having now unexpectedly rid themselves of
the Enemy, sent some of the greatest men of their City to Athens, and upon a
Treaty concerning the Principality, it was agreed that the Athenians should be
Masters at Sea, and the Lacedaemonians have the chief Command at Land. But
afterward both Cities executed the Sovereignty in Common.

About the same time, the Arcadians Created Lycomedes General, and sent him
away Pallene, taken by Sterm by the Arcadians.
with five thousand strong and lusty young Men to Besiege Pallene, in Laconia;
who took it by Storm, and put above Three hundred Lacedaemonians there in
Garrison, to the Sword: And having plundered the City, and wasted and spoiled
the Country, returned home before the Lacedaemonians could send them any Relief.

The Beotians (likewise being desired by the Thessalians to Free them from the
Tyranny of Alexander the Pherean, then but feeble, and almost broken) sent
Pelopidas with a Pelopidas sent into Thessaly.
strong Army into Thessaly, with Orders to Manage affairs there to the
advantage of the Beotians. When he came to Larissa, he possessed himself of the
Castle then Garrisoned by Alexander; thence he Marched into Macedonia, and made
a League with King Alexander, and received Philip his Brother as an Hostage,
and sent him to Thebes. And having perfected whatever he thought might be for
the Service of the Beotians, he returned into his own Country.

Things standing thus, the Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans unanimously agreed to
make Several Countries Confederate against Sparta. P. 493.
War upon the Lacedaemonians, and to that end, to send Ambassadors to the
Beotians, to persuade them to join with them in the War. They accordingly
Consented, and sent forth an Army of Seven thousand Foot, and Five hundred
Horse, under the Command of Epaminondas, and the other Beotarchs. The Athenians
hearing of the preparations of the Beotians against Peloponnesus, sent an Army
against them, under the Command of Ant. Chapter 367.
Chabrias their General, who when he arrived at Corinth, raised Men out of
Megera, Pellene and Corinth, and made up an Army of Ten thousand Men; who being
joined with the Lacedaemonians and other Confederates at Corinth, their whole
Forces were no less than Twenty thousand. They made it first their Business to
guard all the Passages, and to do all they could to prevent the Beotians from
breaking into Peloponnesus: To this The narrow Pass of Peloponnesus, between
two Seas, Lechaeum lying on the West and Cenchrea, on the East.
end they drew a Wall with a deep Trench from * Cenchrea to * Lechaeum, to
block up the entrance that Way. The thing was done with that quickness and
expedition, (through multitude of Hands and diligence of those Employed) that
the Place was Fortified before the Beotians could reach thither.

As soon as Epaminondas came up to the Place, upon diligent view of the
Fortification, he discerned that that part kept by the Lacedaemonians was the
Weakest, and therefore did all he could to draw them out to a fair Field
Battle, though they were almost three times his Number. But when he saw they
would not stir, but kept themselves within their Epaminondas breaks again into
Peloponnesus.
Fortifications and Trenches, he made a fierce Assault upon them, Storming them
in every Part: But the Action was Hottest and Sharpest on both sides, where the
Lacedaemonians were Posted, for there the place was of easiest Entrance, and
most difficult to be kept. But Epaminondas having with him the flower of
Thebes, with much ado beat off the Lacedaemonians, and so clearing the Way,
broke in with his Forces, and laid the passage plainly open into Peloponnesus,
which was an Action nothing Inferior to any he had done before. Hereupon, he
forthwith Marched to Trezene and Epidaurus, and Wasted Ant. Chapter 367.
and Harrass'd the Country round about, but could not take the Cities, being
very strongly Garrisoned; but Sicyon, Phe^ in Elis.
Pheunte, and some others submitted to him. Then he Marched with his Army
against Corinth: And having routed the Townsmen in an Encounter, he pursued
them to the very Walls: Where some of the Beotians puffed up with their good
Success, Rashly broke through the Gates into the City; upon which the
Corinthians in a great Fright shut themselves up in their Houses. But Chabrias
the Athenian General, both Cordially and Faithfully, made Head against the
Beotians, and Drove some of them out of the City, making a great slaughter of
the rest. In the heat of this Action the Beotians approached to Corinth with
their whole Army in Battalia, to the great Terror of the Inhabitants: Upon
which, Chabrias with his Athenians, forthwith made a Sally out of the City, and
having possessed himself of the Hills Adjoining, there bore the brunt of the
Enemies Charge. On the other side the Beotians encouraged, being strong of
Body, and of long experience in Feats of Arms, doubted not, but to Rout the
Athenians. But the Chabrians (by the advantage of the higer Ground, and
continual Succors coming in to them out of the City (so defended themselves,
that they Killed, and grievously Galled their Assailants, and beat them off: So
that the Beotians after the Loss of a great Number of their Men, not being able
to do any thing, drew off their Forces. But Chabrias having thus Baffled the
Enemy, for his Valor, Faithfulness, and Military Conduct, was Cried up, and
greatly Admired.

CHAP. VIII.
Dionysius sends Gauls and Spaniards to the assistance of the Lacedaemonians.
Pelopidas and Istmenias clapped up by Alexander, Tyrant of Pherea, The Boeotians
pursued by the Phereans: brought off by Epaminondas then a private Soldier. The
Fight between the Arcadians and Lacedaemonians. Dionysius falls upon the
Carthaginian Territories in Sicily. Dionysius dies. The cause of his death. The
cruelty of Alexander the Pherean at Scotusa. Epaminondas breaks again into
Peloponnesus. Coos Peopled and Walled. The end of the Laconick and Beotick War
by the Mediation of the Persian King.

ABout this time arrived at Corinth Two thousand Gauls and Spaniards, sent by
Dionysius the Tyrant to the Lacedaemonians from Sicily, who had Five Months Pay
advance. Olymp. 102. 4. Ant. Chapter 366.
The Grecians to try their Valor drew them out against the Enemy; who so far
approved themselves stout and valiant Men, as that they routed and killed many
of the Beotians and their Confederates. And after they had been very useful in
the War, and purchased Aids arrived at Corinth from Dionysius.
to themselves Praise and Esteem both for their Courage and Service, and had
been rewarded according to their Merits by the Lacedaemonians, they were sent
back into Sicily at the end of the Summer.

After these things Philiscus Ambassador from Artaxerxes King of Persia came
into Greece P. 494. Artaxerxes sends again to compose Matters in Greece, but in
vain.
to persuade the Grecians to be at Peace among themselves; to which all
willingly complied except the Thebans, who were so obstinate that they refused
the Conditions, having before brought all Beotia in subjection to their own
Government. There being therefore no hopes of Peace, Philiscus returned into
Asia, leaving behind him Two thousand-Mercenaries, who received their Pay for
the Service of the Lacedaemonians.

Whilst these things were doing, Euphron of Sicyon (a bold and rash Fellow, not
inferior Euphron gains the Sovereignty of Sycion.
to any in that kind) with the assistance of the Argives, plotted to gain the
Sovereignty; and to that end, Fortune favored him so far, that forthwith he
banished Forty of the Citizens, and confiscated their Goods and Estates, by
which he raised a vast sum of Money, wherewith he hired a Guard of Foreigners,
and so possessed himself of the Command of the City.

Nausigenes being Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Four Military Tribunes, viz.
Lucius Papyrius, Lucius Menenius, Servius Cornelius, and Servius Sulpitius,
executing the Consular Olymp. 103. 1. Ant. Chapter 366.
Authority at Rome, the Hundred and Third Olympiad was celebrated at Elis, in
which, Pythostratus the Athenian carried away the Prize, This Year Ptolemy
Alorites, the Son of Amyntas, treacherously Murdered his Brother Alexander,
and Governed the Kingdom of Macedonia for the space of Three Years. At the same
time Pelopidas in Beotia emulating the Glory of Epaminondas, and perceiving
what great Service he had done in Peloponnesus for the Commonwealth of Beotia,
made it his business to advance his own Reputation, by enlarging the Power and
Sovereignty of the Thebans in other parts out of Peloponnesus. To that end, and
joining with Ismenia (his special Friend, and a Man of great Esteem for his
Valor) he took a journey into Thessaly, where, upon Discourse Pelopidas and
Ismenias unexpectedly secured by Alexander of Pherea.
with Alexander, Tyrant of Pherea (when he never expected any such thing) he
and Istmenias were both seizd, and clapped up in prison. This Fact highly
incensed the Thebans, upon which they sent Eight thousand heavy Armed Men, and
Six hundred Horse into Thessaly. At whose coming Alexander was in a great
fright, and sent Ambassadors to Athens to Treat with them for their assistance.
Upon this, the People of Athens forthwith dispatched away Thirty Sail, and a
Thousand Men under the Command of Autocles: But while he sailed round Eubea,
the Thebans entered Thessaly. And though Alexander was well furnished with Foot,
and exceeded the Beotians in Horse, yet the Beotians at the first concluded
they should put an end to the War by one Fight, especially being enforced by
the Thessalians: But being deserted by them, and Alexander assisted by the
Athenians The Boeotians brought into a great strait in Thessaly.
and other Confederates, and Meat and Drink and all other Provision being
scarce, the Baeotarchs were resolved to return home, and accordingly drew off;
and in their march through the Plain they were fallen upon in the Rear by
Alexander's Horse, who killed and wounded many of the Beotians. At length, not
being able either to keep their Ground or go forward, they knew not which way
to turn themselves, or what to do; Ant. Ch 366. Brought off by Epaminondas.
and to aggravate the perplexity they were in, they were in want of Food. In
this desperate condition Epaminondas (who was then but a private Soldier) was
chosen General by the Army; who presently placed the best and choicest of the
Light Armed Men, and the Horse in the Rear; with these he repulsed the Enemy
that pressed upon the backs of the Beotians, and by frequent skirmishes,
(making head as occasion served,) and keeping his Troops in good Order, he
brought off the Army safe. Thenceforth more and P. 495.
more advancing his own Reputation by his Noble Actions, he wan Praise and
Renown both amongst his Citizens, and all their Confederates. But

The Beotarchs.
Magistrates of Beotia set great Fines upon the Officers and Leaders in this
late Expedition, and so raised a great deal of Money; But in regard the
Question may be very well asked, How it came to pass that so great a Man was
placed in so low a Post as a Common Soldier in that Expedition into Thessaly?
It Is fit a Reason should be given in justification of Epaminondas. When he had
in the Fight at Corinth beaten off the Lacedaemonians, who guarded the
Fortification, he might have killed a great number of them; but resting
satisfied that he had gained the Pass, he forbore all further pursuit. Being
therefore suspected that he spared the Lacedaemonians out of a design to
ingratiate himself into their Favor; those that envied his Glory, watched an
opportunity to accuse him of Treason. Upon which, the People were so
exasperated, that they deprived him of his Command, and ordered him to serve as
a Common Soldier. But having by his Noble Actions wiped off those stains of
Dishonor cast upon him, he was restored by the People to his former Dignity.

Not long after, a sharp Battle was fought between the Lacedaemonians and the
Arcadians, in which the former obtained a famous Victory; and was the first
Fight since that at Fight between the Arcadians and Lacedaemonians. Note. Not
one Man lost.
Leuctra, wherein they had any considerable success. There were above Ten
thousand of the Arcadians slain, and not one Man lost of the Lacedaemonians. The
Priests at Dodona had before foretold, That this War should end without any
Mourning on the Lacedaemonians part. After this Battle the Arcadians were in
that fear of the Lacedaemonians, that they built the City called Megalopolis, in
a place commodiously situated for their security, and brought into it the
Menalians, and Parrhasians, out of Twenty Villages in Arcadia. And this was the
state of Greece at that time.

In Sicily Dionysius the Tyrant having raised a great Army, resolved to take
advantage of Ant. Chapter 366. Dionysius invades the Carthaginian Territory in
Sicily.
the present Opportunity, and to fall upon the Carthaginians, who were then but
in a very ill Condition, by reason of the Plague that raged amongst them, and
their being deserted by many of the Africans. And because he had not the least
color and ground for the War, he pretended that the Carthaginians Incroach'd
and made Incursions into his Country. Having therefore an Army of Thirty
thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, besides a Navy of Three hundred Sail,
with these he Invades the Carthaginian Territory, and presently wan Salinunte
and Entella, and wastes and harrasses all the Country round about: Then taking
Aeryx, he at length besieged Lilybeum: But the strength of the Garrison
presently forced him to raise his Siege Afterward, being informed that the
Arsenals belonging to the Carthaginians were burnt down, and therefore
conceiving their whole Fleet was destroyed he grew secure and despised the
Enemy; so that he laid up Thirty of his best Galleys in the Haven at Eryx, and
sent all the rest back to Syracuse. But the Carthaginians forthwith Manned out
Two hundred Sail, and entering the Port at Eryx, unexpectedly on a sudden
Dionysius's Fleet surpised in the Harbor.
came up to the Ships there, and carried away most of them out of the Harbor:
But Winter drawing on, both sides made a Truce, and returned with their Armies
to Winter Quarters. And not long after, Dionysius fell Sick, and Died, having
reigned Thirty Dionysius dies.
Eight years; whose Son Dionysius succeeded him, and governed Twelve years.

Here it will not be a matter foreign to the design of our History, if we
relate the Cause of his Death, and what happened to this Prince a little before
that time.

When he had caused a Tragedy of his, called the Leneians, to be acted at
Athens, and Ant. Chapter 396. An Account of Dionysius and the manner of his Death.
P. 496.
was proclaimed Victor: one of the Singers or Musicians in the Chorus, hoped to
gain an Honorable Reward by bringing him the first News of his Victory: To
that end he Sailed to Corinth, and thence took Shipping for Sicily, and with a
fair Wind arrived at Syracuse, and presently gives the Tyrant an account of his
Victory: Upon which he was so Transported with Joy, that he bountifully
Rewarded the Man, and that he might give thanks to the Gods by costly
Sacrifices, for such an happy piece of News, he made splendid Entertainments,
in Feasting and Drinking. But in this sumptuous Reception of his Friends,
drinking to Excess, and overcharging Nature, he fell into a most violent
Distemper, which killed him. He had been formerly forewarned by an Oracle, That
he should then die, when he should overcome those who were better than himself.
This doubtful Prophecy he applied to the Carthaginians, looking upon them to be
more powerful than he himself. And upon that account (though he was often
Fighting with them) it was his Custom to wave the Victory, and own himself to
be overcome. However he was not able to avoid his Desteny. For though he was but
an ill Poet, yet by the Judgment of the Athenians, he carried away the Victory
against those that far excelled him in that Art: So that his Victory over them,
and the time of his death, very well agreed to the sense of the Oracle.
Dionysius the younger, as soon as he came to the Crown, called a Senate, and
there courted the People, and desired them to continue the same good will and
respect to him, that they had born to his Father. Afterward having first
Solemnized his Fathers Funeral with great Pomp and State at the King's Gates in
the Castle, he ordered the Affairs of his Kingdom so as to set himself fast in
the Throne.

At this time Polyzelus was Archon at Athens: and at Rome (through intestine
Broils and Seditions) was nothing but an Anarchy. In Greece, Alexander Tyrant
of Pherea Olymp. 103. 2. Ant. Chapter 365. The cruelty of Alexander of Pherea.
bearing a grudge to them of Scotusa in Thessaly, called them to a Common
Assembly, and when they appeared, he encompassed them with his Guard, and put
'em every one to the Sword, and threw their Carcasses into the Ditches over the
Walls, and plundered the City.

At the same time Epaminondas the Theban with all his Forces, broke into
Peloponnesus, with whom joined the Achaians, and several other Confederates,
and restored Dymon or Dyme, a City of Achaia.
Dymon, A City of Achaia in Locris, now called Lepantum.
Naupachus and Calydon in Atolia about 7 Miles from the Sea. Olymp. 103. 3.
Ant. Chapter 364.
Calydon to their ancient Liberties, and then made another Expedition into
Thessaly; in which they freed Pelopidas out of the hands of Alexander the
Tyrant of Pherea. The Phliasians were about the same time besieged by the
Argives: But Chares sent from Athens in Aid of the Phliasians, raised the
Siege, having Routed the Argives in two Battles, and so returned to Athens.

At the end of this Year Cephisodorus was Created chief Governor of Athens,
and Four Military Tribunes clothed with Consular Dignity, governed at Rome,
viz. Lucius Furius, Paulus Manlius, Servitius Sulpitius, and Servius Cornelius.
At that time Themesio the Prince of Eretria took Oropus, belonging to the
Athenians; but lost it again on a sudden. For the Athenians coming upon him
with far greater Forces than he was able to Cope with, he applied himself to
the Thebans for Assistance, and delivered the City into their hands (as a
pledge) which they never after would Restore.

While these things were Acting, they of Coos seated themselves in the Coos a
City so called in the Island Coos, in the Aegean Sea.
City they now enjoy, and put it into that State and Grandeur it now has. For
it was made very Populous, and a large Wall drawn round about it, with great
Costs and Expense, and furnished with an excellent Harbor. From this time
forward, it grew more and more both in its public Revenues, and private Wealth
and Riches of its Inhabitants, in so much as it vy'd with the chiefest and most
famous Cities. Ant. Chapter 364.


During these Transactions, the King of Persia sent Ambassadors to persuade
the Graecians to agree and lay aside their Animosities one against another.
Upon which the Laconick and Baeotick War (as they call it) which from the time
of the Battle at Leuctra P. 497. An end of the Laconick and Boeotick War.
had continued above Five Years, was now at length ended. About these times
Flourished several famous Men, worthy for their Learning to be for ever
remembered. As Isocrates the Orator, and his Scholars, Aristotle the
Philosopher, and Anaximenes of Lampsacus, and especially Plato the Athenian,
and the last of the Pythagorean Philosophers. Besides these, Xenophon the
Historian, (now very old) for he makes mention of the Death of Epaminondas,
which happened shortly after this time. Aristippus, and Antisthenes, and Echines
of Sphetus (one of the Scholars of Socrates) were living at this time.

CHAP. IX.
New stirs in Greece. The Battle between the Eleans and Arcadians near Lassion.
The Quarrel between the Pisate and them of Elis about the Olympic Games. A
Fight at the Time and Place of the Games. The Thebans prepare a Fleet in Order
to gain the Dominion at Sea. Rhodes, Chios, and Byzantium brought into the
Thebans by Epaminondas. The Thebans make War upon Orchomenon: The Reason.
Orchomenon razed. The Thessalians War with Alexander the Pheraeen. Pelopidas
Killed; his Praises.

THIS Year Chion was chief Governor at Athens, and these Military Tribunes
Executed Olymp. 103. 4. Ant. Chapter 363.
the Consular Authority at Rome, viz. Quintus Servilius. New troubles in Greece.
Servius, Caius Veturius, Aulus Cornelius, Marcus Cornelius, and Marcus Fabius.
In their time, while all Greece was at Peace, on a sudden new Stirs and
Preparations for War began to break out, between some of the Cities. For the
Exiles of Arcadia made an Excursion out of Elis, and Seized upon the strong
Castle of A part of the Country of Elis
Triphilia, called Lassion. The Archadians and Eleans, had been quarrelling a
long time about Triphilia: And upon several Turns of Fortune, first one, and
then the other got the Possession; which being at this time in the hands of the
Arcadians, the Eleans under the Shelter and Color of the Arcadian Fugitives
dispossessed the Arcadians. They, (Enraged at this Affront and Injury,) by
their Ambassadors, first demanded the Redelivery of the Place, but their demand
was slighted, thereupon they procured the Athenians to join with them in the
War, and Besieged Lassion. A Battle near Lassion, between the Eleans and
Arcadians.
But the Eleans came presently into the Assistance of the Exiles. Upon which a
Battle was Fought near Lassion: In which the Eleans were Routed, being
overpowr'd by number, and lost above two hundred Men. The Seeds of War being
now Sown, the Controversy between the Eleans and the Arcadians grew hotter
every Day: For the Arcadians pufft up with the late Victory, presently Marched
their Army into the Country of Elis, and took the Cities Marganus, Cronion,
Cyparissia, and Coryphasion.

In the mean time Ptolomaeus Alorites, in Macedonia was treacherously Murdered
by his Brother Perdiccas after he had Reigned three Years; Perdiccas succeeded
him, and enjoyed the Kingdom five Years.

At this time Timocrates was Archon at Athens, and three Military Tribunes
invested Olymp. 104. 1. Ant. Chapter 362.
with Consular Authority ruled at Rome, viz. Titus Quintius, Servilius
Cornelius, and Servius Sulpitius. The Hundred and fourth Olympiad was now
Celebrated by the Pisate and the Arcadians, where Phocides the Athenian was
Victor.

About this time it happn'd that the Of Pisa, in the Reign of Elis. Quarrels
between the Pisate and the Eleans about the Olympic Games.
Pisaeans (upon the account of some old Fables and Stories they had amongst
them) to regain the ancient Honor and Dignity of their Country, challenged it
as their Right to Convene and Manage the Olympic Games. Judging it therefore
now a fit time to dispute this matter, they took in the Arcadians (the Enemies
of the Eleans) as their Confederates in the War: With whose Aid and Assistance
they Marched against the Of the City Elis. P. 498.
Eleans, who had then appointed the Games. Whereupon the Eleans with all their
Forces made out against them, upon which there was a very sharp Encounter. The
Grecians who were then come together to this Solemnity, stood as Spectators
with Crowns upon their Heads (out of reach of all danger) and at every brave
Action of either Party gave up great shouts. The Pisaeans at length being
Conquerors managed the Sports; but the Eleans never accounted this Olympiad in
their Annals, because they looked upon it to be acted by Force, and against Law.

During these Transactions of Affairs, Epaminondas the Theban (who was in great
Esteem among the People) made a Speech to the Citizens, in which he stirred
them up Epaminondas stirs up the Thebans to gain the Dominion at Sea.
to gain the Dominion of the Sea. In this Oration (which he had premeditated
long before) he showed them that the thing was easily done, as it was
advantageous and profitable for the Commonwealth, and amongst other things he
likewise told them, that being Sovereigns at Land, they might be easily Masters
at Sea. For although the Athenions in the War against Xerxes had a Navy of Two
hundred Sail well Equipped and Furnished; yet they were under the Command of
the Lacedaemonians, who had but Ten. When he had spoken what he had to say
suitable to the occasion, he brought the Thebans to a Compliance.

It was therefore forthwith Decreed by the People that a Hundred Galleys, and
as many Docks should be built, and that application should be made to the
Rhodians, Chians, and Bizantians for their Assistance to forward the Work.
Epaminondas himself being sent away with some Forces to the aforementioned
Cities, so terrified Lachetes the Athenian General (who was sent with a Strong
and well Furnished Fleet to obstruct the Designs of Ant. Ch 362.
the Thebans) that he forced him to Sail back, and reduced those Cities to the
Obedience of Thebes: And no doubt but if this Man had lived some time longer,
he had gained for the Thebans the Sovereign Command both at Sea and Land. But
not long after being killed at the Battle at Mantenea (where he obtained a
famous Victory for his Country by his own fall) all the prosperity of the
Thebans presently died (as it were) with him. But we shall Treat of these
things more particularly and distinctly shortly hereafter.

About the same time likewise, the Thebans resolved to Invade Orchomenon, for
the Reasons The Thebans design to B siege Orchomenon.
following. Some of the Theban Fugitives had a purpose to change the Government
of Thebes into an Aristocracy, and to that purpose, joined in Confederacy with
Three hundred Horsemen of Orchomenon. These Horses were used to Rendezvous at a
certain Day appointed and ordered by the Thebans, and therefore they contrived
that at that very Day (when ever it should be) they would fall upon the City.
And being there were many others that were engaged to be assisting in effecting
this Design, they took a fit opportunity at length to meet together. Then some
of the chief Conspirators (who began to repent of the Treason) discovered all
to the Beotians, and by betraying their fellows, saved their own Lives: Upon
this all the Horsemen by Command of the Magistrates were seized, and being
afterward brought before the Senate, they were all Judged to be put to Death,
and that the Inhabitants of Orchomenon should be sold for Slaves, and their
City razed to the Ground. The Thebans had born an old grudge toward Ant. Chapter
36^.
them of Orchomenon for many Generations, because that in the times of the Or
demy-gods.
Heroes, they forced them to pay Tribute, till Hercules set them free. Having
therefore now got an opportunity, and a good color (as they conceived) to
revenge themselves, they Marched with their Forces against Orchomenon. And
presently making themselves Masters of the City, they put all the Men to the
Sword, and sold the Women and Children Orchomenon taken and razed.
for Slaves.

At this same time, the Thessalians made War upon Alexander the Prince of
Pherea, but being often beaten, and having lost many Men, they solicited the
Thebans to send Aid Pelopidas sent by the Thebans against Alexander of Pherea.
P. 499.
to them, under the Command of Pelopidas. For they knew he was a brave spirited
Man, and an excellent Commander, and an inveterate Enemy of Alexander, upon the
account of his late Imprisonment. The Beotians hereupon called a general
Council, and gave Audience to the Ambassadors; and having heard their Message,
they readily complied in all things to their request, and forthwith ordered
Pelopidas to their assistance, with Seven thousand Men, who presently Obeyed,
and just as he was Marching out with the Army, the Sun was Eclipsed; which
prodigy perplexed many: for there were some of the Soothsayers who declared,
that by this Marching out of the Army, the Sun of the City should be Eclipsed,
meaning nothing else but the death of Pelopidas. However Pelopidas (nothing
moved with what was said, but led on by his inevitable destiny) Marched
forward. When he came into Thessaly, he found that Alexander with above Twenty
thousand Men had possessed himself of the higer Grounds: Upon this he Encamped
in the Face of the Enemy, and being afterward joined with the Thessalians, he
Fought the Phereans. But Alexander prevailing by the advantage of the Ground,
Pelopidas (desiring to Ant. Chapter 362.
put an end to the dispute by his own personal Valor) Charges up to Alexander
himself, who with those select Bands that were about him, valiantly stood his
Ground; upon which the Battle grew very hot, in which Pelopidas acting the part
both of a good Soldier and skilful Commander, covered the Place with the Bodies
of his Enemies. At length he put the Enemy to flight, and gained the Victory,
but he himself (through many Wounds he had received) fell down Dead, and so
Heroically ended his Days. And now Alexander being Conquered in another Battle,
and thereby having all his Forces broken in pieces, he was forced upon Terms of
Peace to restore to the Thessalians all the Towns he had before taken: And to
deliver Magnetes and Phithiodis Cities of Achaia, Alexander beaten, makes
Peace, and restores the Cities.
to the Beotians and be their Confederates, and for the future, to be content
only with Pherea. However, though the Thebans gained a glorious Victory, yet they
declared every where, that they were Conquered, because of the death of
Pelopidas. For they looked upon the Victory not to Compensate the loss of so
brave a Man. For he had often done many great and worthy Services for the
advantage of his Country, and much enlarged the Bounds and Territories of the
Theban Commonwealth: As in freeing the City by the Exiles when they recovered
the Citadel of Cadmea, all generally ascribed that noble The brave Acts of
Pelopidas.
Action to Pelopidas; which was the chief cause of all the advantages, and
happy success that happened to the Thebans afterward. Then at the Fight of
Tegea, Pelopidas was the only Man of the Boeotarchs that overcame the
Lacedaemonians, the most potent People of all the Grecians. Which was the first
time the Thebans erected a Trophy (for the greatness of the Victory) over the
Lacedaemonians. Afterward at the Battle at Leuctra, he was Colonel of the
sacred Band, and was the first that broke in upon the Lacedaemonians, Ant. Chapter
364.
and so became the immediate Author and Instrument of the Victory. Besides in
the Expeditions against the Lacedaemonians (being General of Seventy thousand
Men) he erected a Trophy for his Victory over them in the very Face of Sparta,
who never knew before what it meant to be Besieged. Being sent Ambassador to
the King of Persia to Negotiate the affair of the common Pacification he gained
in that Treaty, Messena for his own Country: Which the Thebans rebuilt after it
had lain desolate Three hundred Years. And now at last (in the Battle against
Alexander) notwithstanding he far exceeded him in the number of his Forces) he
not only obtained a glorious Victory, but became famous for his extraordinary
Valor, though with the loss of his Life. And during these Wars he was in that
reputation among the People, that from the return of the Exiles, to the time of
his Death he was always one of the Boeotarchs: Never none before being ever
thought worthy of so great an honor. In as much therefore as Pelopidas P. 500.
was thus highly Esteemed, and gained the reputation of all, for his Courage
and Conduct, its fit he should have his due Commendation from us likewise, in
this our History.

About the same time Clearchus of the City of Heraclea aspired to the
Sovereignty of Pontus: and prevailing in his Enterprise, made it his whole
business to imitate Dionysius the Tyrant, and governed the Heracleans in great
Splendour, for the space of Twelve Years.

During these Affairs, Timotheus the Athenian General, having with him both Sea
and Land Forces, Besieged Torone, and Potidea, and took them by Storm, and
Raised the Siege of Cyzicum.

CHAP. X.
The War between the Tegeans and Mantineans. The Beotians side with the
Tegeans. Epaminondas made General. The Battle of Mantinea, where Epaminondas
was killed; but the Lacedaemonians routed. The commendation of Epaminondas.

AT the end of the Yea Chariclides was created Lord Chancellor of Athens; and
Olymp. 104. 2. Ant. Chapter 361.
Lucius Aemilius Mamercus, and Lucius Sextius Lateranus, Roman Consuls. At
which time the Arcadians and Piseans (by compact joining together) celebrated
the Olympian Games at Olympia, and possessed themselves both of the Temple, and
all the Riches that were there. And because the Mantineans carried away and
converted to profane uses many of the Dedicated things, these Sacrilegious
Persons made it their business to promote and carry on the War against the
Eleans, lest if Peace were made they should be called to account for their ill
gotten Goods. And therefore when the rest of the Arcadians War between the
Tegeans and Mantineans.
would have compromiz'd Matters, they stirred up Sedition against their own
Countrymen. Being therefore divided into Two Factions, one headed by the
Tegeans, the other by the Mantineans, the Feud grew to that height, that at
last they came to decide the Controversy by force of Arms; and they of Tegea
sent an Ambassador to the Beotians to desire their assistance: Whereupon the
Beotians, without delay, made Epaminondas General, and sent him with a strong
Army to the aid of the Tegeans. But the Mantineans (being terrified with the
Beotian Army, and the Great Name of Epaminondas) The Thebans join with the
Tegeans under Epaminondas.
sent their Ambassadors to the Capital Enemies of the Beotians, (the Athenians
and Lacedaemonians) to solicit them to join with the Mantineans in the War.
Great Forces therefore being raised on both sides, many great Battles were
fought in Peloponnesus; And the Lacedaemonians (as soon as they could) broke
into Arcadia, lying next to them. About Lacedaemonians join with the Mantineans.
the same time Epaminondas was marching forward with his Army, and being come
near to Mantinea, he heard that the Lacedaemonians with all their Forces were
wasting and spoiling the Territories of Tegea; Conceiving therefore that Sparta
was left naked, he undertook a weighty Affair, but Fortune favored not his
Enterprise. For he marched with his Army in the night against Sparta: But Agis
King of Lacedemon (suspecting the Craft and Subtilty of Epaminondas) prudently
conjectured what possibly might be designed therefore to prevent Epaminondas,
he dispatched away some Cretian Couriers to Sparta, to acquaint them that the
Boectians were just then upon their march in order to surprise the The design
of Epaminondas to surprise Sparta, prevented.
City; and that he himself would make all the have possibly he could to relieve
them: and therefore charged them to look to the Place, and not in the least to
be afraid, for he would be presently with 'em. The Cretians observed their
Orders with all Expedition by which the Lacedaemonians (strangely, and on a
sudden) prevented the ruin of their Country. For if the stratagem had not
been discovered, Epaminondas had certainly surprizd Sparta. So that the Policy
and contrivance of both the Generals justly challenge their due praise; yet the
prudent Care of a skilful Commander must here especially be attributed to the
Lacedemonian. Epaminondas having now marched all the Night long, at break of
day came up to Sparta But Agesilaus who was left to guard the City, (having had
P. 501.
intelligence but a little before,) did what he could to put the City into a
posture of Defense. To this end he commanded the Boys that were of any
considerable bigness, and the Old Men to the roofs of the Houses, that they
might be in a capacity to drive back the Enemy from thence: Then placing all
the strong and lusty Men in the several difficult Passes that led into the
City, and blocking up all other places, where possibly an entrance might be
made, he waited for the coming of the Enemy.

Epaminondas having divided his Army into Three parts, made an Assault round
the Town at one and the same time, but when he discerned in what order the
Spartans were Ant. Chapter 361. Epaminondas Assaults Sparta.
placed to oppose him, he presently understood that his Design was discovered:
However, though he was much obstructed by the strait and narrow Passages, and
forced to fight in small Parties with great Bodies of Men at once, and many
were killed on both sides, yet he would not draw off till the Lacedemonian Army
came up near unto Sparta. The Spartans therefore being now enforced with so
great a strength, and Night coming on, he left off the Assault. Draws off.


Then he was informed by some Prisoners, that the Mantineans with all the Power
of the City were hastening toward him to the assistance of the Lacedaemonians:
Upon which he marched away and encamped not far from the City. But presently
commanding his Soldiers to eat their Suppers, and leaving there a Body of
Horse, whom he commanded to kindle Fires all the Night, he marched away with
the rest of the Army, with a design on a sudden to cut off all them that were
left in Mantinea. The next day (having marched a long way) he unexpectedly
Assaulted them of Mattinea, but failed in his Design; and though he had (as a
diligent Commander) provided all things that were necessary The taking of
Mantinea prevented.
yet Fortune now opposed him, and so he lost the Prize. For as soon as he came
near the City, that was then naked, and without any Defense, Six thousand
Athenian Auxiliaries entered into Mantinea at the other end of the Town under
the Command of Hegelocus, a person of good Esteem among the Citizens; who
having put a sufficient Garrison into the City, with the rest stood in Battalia
ready to engage. And presently appeared the Armies, both of the Lacedaemonians
and the Mantineans. And now every one prepared to put all Ant. Chapter 361.
to the hazard of a Battle, and therefore sent for their Allies out of all
parts; The Aeleans, Lacedaemonians, Athenians, and some others sided with the
Mantineans: their Forces amounted to above Twenty thousand Foot, and Two
thousand Horse. The most considerable persons of Arcadia for Riches and Valor,
together with the Acheans, Boeotians, Argives, and some of the Peloponnesians,
and other Confederates joined with the Tegeans, in the whole, to the number of
above Thirty thousand Foot, and Three thousand The Battle at Mantinea.
Horse.

And now the Armies on both sides took the Field in order to decide the Matter;
and drew up in Battalia: and the Soothsayers from the view of the Sacrifices
(offered here and there) Declared Victory to their several Parties. The
Mantineans and the rest of the Arcadians (because the War was in their own
Country) were in the Right Wing, supported by the Lacedaemonians, drawn up next
to them. Next to the Lacedaemonians were placed the Aeleans and Achoeans, and
some others of the weaker part of the Army completed that Wing. The Left Wing
consisted of the Athenians: On the other side the Thebans placed themselves in
the Left Wing, opposite to the Arcadians: And the Argives held the Right. The
rest of the Army Aeubeans, Locrians, Sicyons, Messineans, Maleans P. 502.
and Aeneans, and the other Confederates made up the main Battle. The Horse on
each side were placed on both Flanks. The Armies being thus drawn up, while
they stood facing one another for some time, the Trumpets at length sounded a
Charge, and the Armies set up so great a shout, as if both sides were assured
of the Victory. The Horse from the Wings first Charged one another, with the
greatest Fury imaginable: The Athenian Horse Charged the Thebans, but were
worsted, not so much by the Valor and Hardiness of the Thebans, or their skill
in Martial Affairs, (for in these the Athenians were inferior to none) as by
their number, and being better Armed and appointed, and far exceeding the other
in Order and manner of Battle. For the Athenians had very few Darters amongst
them, whereas the Thebans had thrice as many, besides Slingers and Archers from
the Thessalians, who were used to be exercised in that way of Fighting from
their Childhood, and by that means were always very serviceable in all
Encounters.

The Athenians therefore, what with being Gaul'd by the Light Armed Men, and
overpowered by the Horse, were forced to fly. Yet because they fled out from
the Wings, they easily repaired the Damage they sustained, for they broke not
into their own Foot in their flight, but falling in with some Eubeans, and some
other Mercenaries, that were sent out before to take in some Hills near the
place, (with whom they had a sharp Engagement) they put every Man of them to
the Sword. For the Theban Horse did not pursue them that fled, but Charged in
upon the Enemies Foot with a design to break through 'em: upon which, the
Dispute was very hot and sharp; but at length the Athenians fled outright: But
the Colonel of the Aelean Horse who was in the Rear-guard of the The Mantinean
Army.
Army) succored them; and cuting off many of the Boetians, renewed the Fight.
And thus was the Rout in the Athenians Left Wing in a great measure repaired by
the Aelean Horsemen. In the Engagement by the Horse in the other Wing, the
success was doubtful a little while. But within a short time the Mantineans
were put to the Rout by the multitude and strength of the Boeotian and
Thessalian Horsemen, and with great Loss were forced to fly for shelter to
their own Battalion of Foot. And this was the issue Ant. Chapter 361.
of the Engagement between the Horse. The Foot as soon as they Engaged fought
with wonderful heat and resolution. Never was there greater Armies in the Field
in any Battle between Grecians and Grecians; nor more brave and excellent
Commanders, or that ever approved themselves with more Valor and Courage. For
the Boeotians and Lacedaemonians who were in that Age counted the best Land
Soldiers in the World, fronted one another, and began the Onset with that Fury
as if they valued not their Lives in the least. They first began with their
Lances, which being for the most part broken in pieces by the violence and heat
of the Charge, they fell to their Swords. Then setting Foot to Foot all sorts
of Wounds, curable and Mortal, slight and deadly, were given and received
without remitting any thing of their first Heat or Resolution; And they
continued in this sharp Engagement with that Valor, and so long a time
(neither side giving the least ground) that Victory seemed to hover over both
(uncertain where it would fall) For every one slighted and contemned Danger,
and (desiring nothing more P. 503.
than to make himself remarkable by some Glorious piece of Service for his
Country) with a brave Gallantry of Mind coveted to exchange Life for Honor.
After the Battle had continued long, and none were able to judge who would be
the Conquerors; Epaminondas (conceiving the present state of the Parties
engaged required his assistance) resolved to decide the Matter with the hazard
of his own Life. To that end taking a choice Band of the most able Men he had
with him, and drawing them up in close Order, he forthwith Charged at the head
of them, and was the first that cast his Javelin and killed the Lacedemonian
General, and then broke into the midst of his Enemies; Ant. Chapter 361.
then others presently following (beating down all before him) he clave asunder
the Enemies Battle. For the Fame of Epaminondas, and the strength of that Body
he then had with him, struck such a Terror into the Lacedaemonians, that they
turned their backs, and began to make away: Upon which the Boeotians pursued
close, and killed all that were in the Rear, so that heaps of Carcasses covered
the Ground. At length when the Lacedaemonians perceived that the fierceness and
heat of Epaminondas had precipitated him too far, they all in a Body made up
upon him, throwing infinite number of Darts at him, of which he put by some,
and received others upon his Target, and plucked others out of his Body with his
own hands, and threw them back into the face of the Enemy. At last whilst he
was most Heroically bestirring himself to gain the Victory for his Country, he
received a Mortal wound in his Breast by a Dart By one Anticiates a Spartan.
Justin. Epaminondas falls.
thrown with such a force, as that the Wood broke, and the Iron with the
Trunchion remained in his Body, so that by the greatness of the wound he
suddenly fell to the ground. And now the Contest grew very sharp and hot for
the recovery of his Body, and after a great slaughter made, the Thebans being
of much stronger Bodies than the Lacedaemonians, at length put their Enemies to
flight. The Boeotians pursued them a little way, but presently returned, as
looking upon it absolutely necessary to have the power of the Bodies. The
Trumpets therefore sounding a Retreat, both Armies drew off; and each party
erected a Trophy, both pretending to the Victory. For the Athenians possessed
the Bodies of all those Eubeans and Mercenaries that were slain at the Hill: On
the other side the Boeotians that had routed the Lacedaemonians, and were
Masters of the dead, challenged the Victory. And for some time neither side
sent any Trumpets to Treat for burying the Ant. Chapter 361.
Dead, lest they that were first should be thought to yield the day. Yet at
last the Lacedaemonians first sent a Trumpet to procure Liberty to bury their
Men: Whereupon all were buried that were slain on both sides.

But Epaminondas (yet living) was brought back into the Camp; and when the
Physicians that were sent for, told him that he would certainly Die as soon as
the Dart was drawn out of his Body, he was not at all daunted: But first called
for his Armor-bearer, and asked whether his Shield was safe? When he answered
it was, and showed it to him; then he inquired whether side had got the day.
The Youth making return that the Boeotians were Victors: Why then, says he,
Now is the time to die: And forthwith ordered the Dart to be drawn out. And
when all his Friends round about him cried out, and one with great Lamentation
expressed himself thus; And what, O Epaminondas, Do thou die Childless? No,
by Jupiter (said he,) But I leave behind me Two Daughters, whereof the one is
Victory at Leuctra, and the other at Mantinea. And so upon drawing out the head
of the Dart, he quietly breathed out his last, without any show of Trouble, or
Disorder Epaminondas dies of his (...)und.
of Mind.

And because it was our usual Method to give an Honorable Testimony of Worthy
and Deserving Men after their Deaths, we think we might be justly blamed if we
should The Commendation of Epaminondas.
omit so brave a Man, without a peculiar remark. For he seems to me to be not
only the most skilful General, and of the most Just and Generous Disposition of
any of his own time, (among whom the most famous were Pelopidas the Theban,
Timotheus, Conon, Chabrias, Iphicrates, Athenians, and Agesilaus the Spartan
(who was a little before him) but likewise P. 504. Ant. Chapter 361.
of any that lived before him in the time of the Medes and Persians, as Solon,
Themistocles, Miltiades, Cimon, Mironides, Pericles, and some other Athenians;
and Gelo the Son of Dinomenes in Sicily, and some others, whose several
Excellencies if any will compare with the Military Art, and the Glory of the
Arms of Epaminondas, he shall soon find him to exceed them in many degrees. For
among them some one peculiar Excellency was only remarkable in each particular
Person; but in him a Constellation of Virtues were Housed together. For in
Strength and Comeliness of Body, Volubility of Tongue, Gallantness of Spirit,
Contempt of Wealth, and impartial Justice (and that which was far before all
the rest) in Valor and Skill in Martial Affairs (absolutely necessary for a
General) he far excelled 'em all. When alive, he gained the Sovereign Power for
his Country; but by his Death they lost it again, and their Affairs declined to
the worse ever afterward; and at length by the Sloth and Ignorance of their
Commanders they were utterly ruined, and reduced to perfect Slavery. And this
was the end of Epaminondas, a Man honored, and esteemed of all.

After this Battle, the Grecians being tired out with continual Wars, and
contented now to draw stakes, put an end to the War, and entered into a general
League Offensive and Defensive, in which the Messineans were included. But the
Lacedaemonians (by Peace made. Ant. Chapter 361.
reason of the implacable Hatred they bore the Messineans) would not subscribe
the Articles of Peace: And therefore they of all the Grecians were the only Men
that swore not to the League. As to the Writers in this year; Xenophon the
Athenian concludes his History of the Wars of Greece with the death of
Epaminondas. Anaximenes likewise Xenophon' s History ends. Anaximenes.
of Lampsacus writ the First Part of his History of the Grecian Affairs (...).
from the Origin of the Gods, and the First Being of Mankind to the Battle of
Mantinea, and the death of Epaminondas, containing almost all the Affairs both
of the Grecians and Barbarians in Twelve Volumes. Lastly Philistus, who writ
the History of Dionysius the younger in Two Books, ends them here.

CHAP. XI.
A Defection from the Persians in Asia. Tachos King of Egypt declares War
against the Persians. The War between Tachos and his Son Nectabanus. The Death
of Artaxerxes Mnemon. Agesilaus Routs the Egyptians that pursued him; and
restores Tachos to his Kingdom: Stirs again in Greece after the Battle of
Mantinea, between the Megalopolitans and the Neighboring Towns. Peparethos
Besieged by Alexander of Pherea. He Routs Leosthenes at Sea. Charietes the
Athenian Admiral, his Villainies.

THIS Year, Molon was Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Lucius Genucius, and
Quintus Olymp. 1^4. 3. Ant. Chapter 360.
Servilius Roman Consuls. In their times the Inhabitants of the Sea Coasts of
Asia, made a defection from the Persians; and some of the Governors of the
Provinces, and Chief Commanders, began new Broils, and rose up in Arms against
Artaxerxes. Tachos likewise King of Egypt declared War against the Persians,
and employed Tachos the Egyptian King declares War against the Persians.
himself in Building of Ships, and raising of Land Forces: he brought over also
the Lacedaemonians to join with him, and hired many Soldiers out of the Cities
of Greece. For the Spartans bore a grudge against Artaxerxes, because he had
ordered the Messinians to be comprehended in the public League among the
Grecians. This great Conspiracy caused the Persian King likewise to bestir
himself to raise Forces. For he was to engage in a War with the King of Egypt,
the Grecian Cities in Asia, the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, and the
Lord Lieutenants and Chief Commanders of The Persian Lord Licutenants Conspire
against Artaxerxes. Ant. Chapter 360. P. 505.
the Sea Coasts, all at one and the same time. Among these, Ariobarzanes Lord
Lieutenant of Phrygia was Chiefest; who had possessed himself of the Kingdom of
Mithridates after his Death: With him joined Mausolus Prince of Caria, who had
many considerable Towns and Castles under his Command, the Metropolis of which
was Halicarnassus, wherein was a most stately Citadel, the Royal Seat or Palace
of Caria; and with these were Confederated Orontes Governor of Mysia, and
Autophrodates of Lydia, and of the Ionian Nation, the Lycians, Pisidians,
Pamphylians and Cilicians; and besides them, the Syrians, and Phenicians, and
almost all that bordered upon the Asiatick Sea: by this great defection, the
King lost one half of his Revenues, and what remained was not sufficient to
defray the necessary charges of the War.

They who fell off from the King, made Orontes General of the Army, who after
he had received the Command, and Moneys enough to pay Twenty thousand hired
Soldiers for one whole Year, betrayed the Confederates that had so entrusted
him. For Orontes betrays all the Confederates.
being corrupted with large Bribes, and promised to be the only Governor of
all the Provinces bordering upon the Sea, if he would deliver up the Rebels
into the power of the King, he was wrought upon, and in the execution of his
Treachery, he first Seized upon them that brought him the Money, and sent them
Prisoners to the King; and then betrayed several Cities and Companies of hired
Soldiers, to such Lieutenants as the King had sent into those parts. The like
Treachery happened in Capadocia; which was accompanied with something more than
ordinary remarkable. Artabazus the King of Persia's General, had invaded
Capadocia with a great Army, whom Datamis the Governor of that Province
opposed with a strong Body of Horse, and Twenty thousand Foot of Mercenaries.
The Father in Law of Datamis, and General of his Horse (to ingratiate himself
with the King and provide for his own safety) stole away in the Night with the
Horse to Artabazus, having so agreed with him the Day before. Datamis
(encouraging his Mercenaries to be faithful to him, by promises to Reward them
liberally) with all speed Marched after these Treacherous Rascals, and overtook
them just as they were Ant. Chapter 360 The treachery of Mithrobarzanes against
Datamis, in Cappadocia.
joining the Enemy: Upon which the Soldiers of Artabazus, likewise fell upon
these Runnagate Horse, and killed all before them. For Artabazus (at the first
being Ignorant, not knowing the meaning of the thing) thought that he who had
betrayed Datamis, was now acting a new piece of Treason; therefore he Commanded
his Soldiers to fall upon the Horse, that were advancing toward them, and not
spare a Man. So that Mithrobarzanes (for that was the Traytor's Name) being got
between them that took him for a Traitor, and those that pursued him, as one
that they knew was really such; was in an inextricable Labyrinth: Being
therefore in this strait (and having no time The strait he was brought into
now further to Consider) he made it his business to defend himself with all
the Resolution imaginable, and so plied both parties, that he made a great
slaughter amongst 'em. At length Ten thousand Men and upwards being killed,
Datamis put the rest to Flight, and Cut off in the pursuit great numbers of
them, and at length caused the Trumpet to sound a Retreat, and called off his
Men. Some of the Horsemen that survived returned to Datamis and begged for
pardon; the rest wandered about, and knew not whither to turn themselves. But
Datamis caused his Army to surround Five hundred of those Traitors and to dart
them to Death. And though he had formerly gained the reputation of an excellent
Soldier; yet now by this instance of his Valor and prudent Conduct, his Name
grew much more famous than before. Artaxerxes the King being informed of this
Stratagem, made all the haste he could to be rid of Datamis, and within a short
time after, cut him off by an Ambuscade*

Whilst these things were in acting, Rheomithres was sent by the Rebels into
Egypt, to Ant. Chapter 360
Tacho the King, and having received Five hundred Talents, and Fifty Sail of
Men of War, he returned to Leucas in Asia; and sending for many of the
revolting Lords, and Officers to come to him thither, he laid hold of them, and
sent them all away Prisoners to the King; and by this piece of Treachery
regained the King's favor, who was formerly much displeased with him.

Now Tacho King of Egypt had prepared all things necessary for the War: But he
P. 506. Tacho's Forces in Egypt. Agesilaus sent to Aid the King of Egypt.
Chabrias, Tacho's Admiral.
had a Fleet of Two hundred Sail, Ten thousand Grecian Mercenaries, and
Fourscore thousand Egyptian Foot. He gave the Command of the Ten thousand
Mercenaries to Agesilaus, who was sent from the Lacedaemonians with a Thousand
Men to the Aid of the Egyptians; because he was counted the best Soldier of
any among them, and had the repute of a most expert Commander. Chabrias was
made Admiral of the Fleet, who was not sent there by public Authority, but
(upon the persuasion of Tachos,) served him as a private Man, The King reserved
to himself the Generalship of all the Army. But Agesilaus would have persuaded
him to continue in Egypt, and to manage the War by his Lieutenants; but he
would not hearken to it, tho he advised him to the best. For when the Army was
far distant from Egypt, and now encamped in Phenicia, the Governor of Egypt
whom he had deputed in his absence, revolted, and sent to Nectanabus the Or
rather his Brother or Sisters Son. Ant. Chapter 360. Tacho submits to the King of
Persia. The death of Artaxerxes Mnemon. Ant. Chapter 360.
King's Son to take upon him the Kingdom of Egypt, which kindled Nectanabus.
the King of Aegypts Son, Rebels.
the Sparks which afterward broke forth into a most cruel and bloody War. For
Nectanabus being made General of the Egyptian Forces, and before sent out of
Phenicia to take in some Cities in Syria, being privy and consenting to the
Treason against his Father, drew the Commanders of the Army* by large Gifts,
and the Soldiers by as large promises, to join with him in the War. Egypt
therefore being now possessed by the Rebels, Tachos was so terrified at the
thing, that he fled through Arabia to the King of Persia, and begged his pardon
for what he had done; whom, Artaxerxes not only forgave, but made him General
of the Army he had raised against the Egyptians.

Not long after the King of Persia died, having Reigned Three and forty Years.
Ochus succeeded him, and governed. Three and twenty Years, and took upon him
the surname of Artaxerxes. For Artaxerxes ruling the Kingdom with great Justice
and Integrity, and being an earnest promoter and lover of Peace, and prosperous
in all his Affairs, the Persians decreed, that all the succeeding Kings should
be called by his Name. And now Tacho the King of Egypt returned to Agesilaus,
and presently Nectanabus led above Tacho, returns to Agesilaus.
an Hundred thousand Men against his Father, and dared him to try his Title to
the Kingdom by the Sword. When Agesilaus discerned that the King was fearful,
not daring to Engage, he heartned him up all he could, and bid him be of good
Courage; for it was not Number; but Valor that carried away the Victory. But
not being able to prevail, he was forced to go back with him, into a certain
large City, there to shelter himself; where they were presently Besieged by the
Egyptians, who after the loss Ant. Chapter 360. Tacho and Agesilaus besieged.
of a great number of their Men in assaulting the Town; drew a Trench and a
Wall round the City; which was suddenly finished by having many hands at Work.
At length when Provision failed, Tacho gave up all for gone: But Agesilaus
(encouraging the Soldiers telling 'em all would be well) in the Night broke
through the Enemies Guards, and to admiration got off safe with all his Men:
But the Egyptians (pursuing close at their Heels, and being in an open Champion
Country) purposed by their great Numbers to enclose them round, and so to Cut
them off every Man.

But Agesilaus in the mean time having possessed himself of a place secured on
both sides by Water, from the River (conveyed through Sluices and Trenches made
by Art) waited there for the Enemy. And having drawn up his Men in such Order
as best suited with the Ground, (and being defended by the Arms of the River, so
as he could not be hemmed in) he there fought with the Egyptians: Whose numbers
were of so little advantage Agesilaus routs the Egyptians P. 570. Tacho
restored. Agesilaus's death.
to them in that Place, and the Grecians Valor so far before them, that
Agesilaus made a great slaughter amongst 'em, and put the rest to flight. After
which Tacho was easily, and with little ado restored to his Kingdom: And he
rewarded Agesilaus, (the only Instrument of his Restoration) by many
honorable Gifts, and so dismissed him, who in his return Homewards fell Sick
in Cyrene, and there Died. His Body was made up with Honey, and brought back to
Sparta, where he was royally Interred.

Hitherto things proceeded this Year in Asia. But in Peloponnesus though after
the Battle at Ant. Chapter 360. New troubles in Peloponnesus.
Mantinea a general Peace was made among the Arcadians, yet they scarce
observed the League for one Year, but fell into new Broyls, and Wars one with
another. It was one of the Articles of the League, that every one should return
from the Battle into their several Countries. Therefore those neighboring
Cities, that had been Translated, and forced to Seat themselves in Megalopolis,
(which then they bore very grievously) now of their own accord, returned to
their old Habitations: But the other Megalopolitans endeavored to force them
to leave their ancient Seats again. Hence arose a great Contest; they of the
old Towns craved the Assistance of the Mantineans, and the rest of the
Arcadians, and likewise of the Eleans and other Confederates of Mantinea. On
the other Hand, they of Megalopolis addressed themselves to the Athenians for
their Aid and Assistance; who (without delay) ordered Three thousand heavy
Armed Men, and Three hundred Horse, under the Command of Pammenes. Whereupon he
Marched to Megalopolis, and afterward (by Storming some of the Towns, and
Terrifying others,) he forced them all at length to return to Megalopolis. And
thus were these Towns reduced into one City, and the Tumult which came to this
height, appeased and composed.

Among the Historians of this time, Athenas of Syracuse, began his History of
Dion with this Year, comprised in Twenty three Books: He continued likewise the
History of Philistus, seven Years further in one Book; and handling matters
summarily, made it one entire and perfect History.

Afterward when Nicophemus was chief Magistrate of Athens, and Caius Sulpitius
and Olymp. 1^4. 4. Ant. Chapter 359.
Caius Licinius Executed the Consular Authority at Rome, Alexander Tyrant of
Pherea, Manned forth several Privateers to the Cyclade Islands, and having
taken some of them by force, carried away a great number of Captives. Then he
landed his Soldiers in A Port of Achaia. Alexander of Pherea routs the Athenian
Fleet at Panormus. Leosthenes, Condemned to Death by the Athenians.
Peparethos, and Besieged the One of the Cyclade Islands now Lemene, called
Peparethos.
City. But the Peparethians being relieved by the Athenians Garrison, under the
Command of Leosthenes (who had been before left there) Alexander set upon the
Athenians themselves. It so happened, that as they were watching, and had set a
Guard upon Alexander's Fleet, which then lay at Panormus, he fell upon them on
a sudden, and obtained an unexpected Victory: For he not only rescued his Men
out of the Imminent dangers, wherewith they were surrounded at Panormus, but
likewise took five Athenian Galleys, and one of Peparethus, and Six hundred
Prisoners. The Athenians being enraged at this misfortune, Condemned Leosthenes
to Death, and Confiscated all his Goods, and made Charetes Commander in his
stead, and sent him with a considerable Fleet into those parts; who spent his
time only in scaring the Enemies, and oppressing the Confederates. For Sailing
to Corcyra (a Confederate City) he stirred up such Seditions, and Tumults
there, as ended in many Slaughters, Rapines, and plundering of Men's Goods and
Estates, which caused the Athenians to be ill spoken of by all the
Confederates, committing many other villainies, and to sum up all in a few
Words; he did nothing but what tended to the disgrace and dishonor of his
Country.

Dionysiodorus and Anaxis, Boeotian Writers, who Composed an History of the
Grecian Affairs, end their Relations with this Year. And now having given an
Account of those Affairs, and things done before the Reign of Philip (according
to our first design) P. 508.
we shall put an end to this Book. In the next following, shall be Comprehended
what Ant. Chapter 359.
ever was done by that King, from the beginning of his Reign, to the time of
his Death, with other things that happened in the known parts of the World.

ASIAE Veteribus Cognit^ Tabula


BOOK XVI.
It Is the Duty of all Writers of History, whether they Treat of the Actions of
Kings, PREFACE.
or of particular Cities, to relate the Whole from the Beginning to the
Conclusion. For we conceive that hereby the History is both better remembered,
and more clearly Understood. For imperfect Relations, without Knowledge of the
Issue of what is begun, gives an unpleasant Check to the Diligent Reader's
eager Expectation. But where the Matter is drawn down by a continued Thread to
the end of the Narration; such Writings make the History complete in all its
Parts, but more especially, if the Nature of things done, do lead the Writer,
as it were, by the Hand: This Course is by no means to be neglected.

Since therefore we are now come to the Affairs of Philip, Son of Amyntas, we
according to the former Rule shall endeavor to comprehend in this Book all the
Actions of this King. For he reigned as King of Macedon Two and Twenty Years,
who making use at the first but of small means, at length advanced his Kingdom
to be the Greatest in Europe; and made Macedon (which at the time of his coming
to the Crown was under the servile Yoke of the Illyrians) Mistress of many
potent Cities and Countries. And through his Valor the Grecian Cities
voluntarily submitted themselves to him, and made him General of all Greece.
And having subdued The Phocians.
those that Robbed and Spoiled the Temple at Delphos, coming in aid of the God
there, he was made a Member of the Senate of the Amphictyons; and for a Reward
of his Zeal to the Gods, the Right of Voting in the The Court of the
Amphictyons was the great Court of Greece which sat at Delphos in Phocis, like
to the States General at the Hague. Vid. Paus. Lib. 10. Cap. 8. The Phocians
had two Votes in that Assembly.
Senate which belonged to the Phocians (whom he had overcome) was allotted to
him.

After he had overcome the Illyrians, Paeones, Thracians, Scythians, and the
Countries adjoining to them, his Thoughts were wholly employed how to destroy
the Persian Monarchy: But after he had set free all the Grecian Cities; and was
promised Forces to be raised for the Expedition into Asia, in the midst of all
his preparations he was prevented by Death: But he left those, and so many more
Forces behind him, that his Son, Alexander, had no occasion to make use of the
Assistance of his Confederates in the Overturning of the Persian Empire. And
all those things he did not so much by the Favor of Fortune, as by the
Greatness of his own Valor. For this King excelled most in the Art of a
General, Stoutness of Spirit, and Clearness of Judgment and Apprehension. But
that we may not in a Preface set forth his Actions before hand, we shall
proceed to the orderly Course of the History, making first some short Remarks
of the Times that went before.

CHAP. I.
Philip, an Hostage at Thebes, makes his Escape; Beats the Athenians; After
makes Peace with them: Subdues the Paeones, and routs the Illyrians and makes
Peace with them.

WHEN Callimedes was Archon at Athens, in the Hundred and Fifth Olympiad (in
which Porus the Cyrenian was Victor) Cneius Genucius, and Olymp. 105. An. M.
3612. Ant. Chapter 358.
Lucius Aemilius, Roman Consuls, Philip the Son of Amyntas, and Father of
Alexander, (who conquered the Persians) came to the Crown in the manner
following.

Amyntas being brought under by the Illyrians, was forced to pay Tribute to the
Conquerors; who having taken his youngest Son Philip as an Hostage, delivered
him to be kept by the Thebans; who committed the young Youth to the Care of
Polymnis was the Father of Epaminondas:
the Father of Epaminondas, with order to look to his Charge with all
Diligence, and honorably to Educate and Instruct him.

A Pythagorean Philosopher was at that time Tutor to Epaminondas, with whom
Philip being brought up, he improved more than ordinary in the Pythagorean
Philosophy. And both these Scholars employing the utmost of their Parts and
Diligence in the Prosecution of their Studies, both by that means became Famous
for their virtuous Qualifications. Epaminondas (it is known to all) having run
through many Hazards and Difficulties, beyond all expectation gained the
Sovereignty of all Greece for his Country: And Philip having the same
Advantages, showed himself nothing inferior to Epaminondas in glorious
Achievements: For after the Death of Amyntas, his Eldest Son Alexander
succeeded him in the Kingdom; but Ptolemy Alorites murdered him and Usurped the
Government; and he himself was served with the same Sauce by Perdiccas; who
being afterward overcome in a great Battle by the Illyrians, and killed (...),
In a Critical Conjuncture.
in the very time when there was most need of a King, Philip, the Brother, made
his escape and took Possession of the Kingdom now in a very shattered
Condition: For there were above Four Thousand Macedonians killed in the Fight,
and those that survived were in such Consternation and Fear of the Illyrians,
that they had no heart left for the Prosecuting of the War. Ant. Chapter 358.


About the same time the Paeones, Neighbors to the Macedonians, (in contempt
of them) wasted their Country; and the Illyrians raised again great Forces, and
designed another Expedition against the Macedonians. And to aggravate the
matter, one Son of Ae^opus, who formerly had Usurped the Kingdom of Macedon.
Pausanias, of the Royal Family, by the assistance of the King of Thrace,
endeavored to Invade the Kingdom of Macedon, The Athenians likewise (Enemies
to Philip) endeavored to restore Argaeus, another Son of Aeropus.
Argaeus to the Kingdom of his Ancestors, and to this purpose had sent away
their General Mantias, with Three Thousand well-arm'd Men, and a most excellent
well provided Navy. Hereupon the Macedonians, by reason of the late Defeat and
the Storm that then threatened them, were in great Fear and Perplexity: However,
notwithstanding all the Difficulties and Fear of those things that were at
hand, Philip nothing discouraged with those dreadful Clouds of Mischief that
seemed to hang over his Head, by his Speeches in the daily Assemblies, retained
the Macedonians in their Duty; and by his Eloquence (wherein he excelled)
stirring them up to be courageous, revived their drooping Spirits. Then setting
upon Reforming the Military Discipline, he completely armed his Men and Trained
them every Day, teaching them how to handle their Arms, and other Postures of
War. He likewise instituted the new way of Drawing up into a close Body,
imitating the Heroes at Troy in locking their Shields one within another; so
that he was the first that found out the Macedonian Phalange.

He was very Courteous and Gaining in his Converse, and wan the Peoples Hearts
both by his Bounty at present, and his generous Promises of future Rewards;
very Politickly likewise (as it were by so many Engines) defending himself
against the many and various Ant. Chapter 358.
Mischiefs that were pressing upon him. For when he discerned that the
Athenians made it their great business to recover Amphipolis, and that Argaeus
was endeavored to be restored to his Kingdom for that end, he left the
Amphipolis.
City of his own accord, suffering them to govern themselves according to their
own Laws.

He sent likewise an Ambassador to the Paeones, and some of them he corrupted
with Bribes; others he ensnared with fair and winning Promises, and for the
Present made Peace with them, He prevented likewise Pausanias from being
restored, by bribing the King that was ready to assist him for that purpose.

In the mean time Manthias the Athenian Admiral being arrived at Methone in
Macedonia.
Methone, there lay; but sent Aegaeus before with a Body of Mercenaries to
Aegae in Macedonia.
Aegae. Coming to the City, he endeavored to persuade the Aegaeans to allow of
his Return, and to appear the first for his Restoration to the Kingdom; but
none consenting, he went back to Methone.

Presently after, Philip advancing with a well appointed Army, set upon them,
and cut off many of the Mercenaries; the rest, who had fled to a Hill near at
hand (having first delivered up to him the Fugitives) he dismissed by Agreement.

Philip being now Conqueror in this first Battle, greatly encouraged the
Macedonians, and made them hearty and eager to undergo further Toils and
Difficulties.

Whilst these things were acting, the Thracians planted a Colony at Crenides,
as it was heretofore called, which the King afterward called Philippi, after
his own Name, and filled it with Inhabitants. From this Time Theopompus of
Chi^s begins his History of Philip, and continues it in Fifty eight Books, of
which Five are controverted.

Afterward Eucharist us was Archon of Athens, and Quintus Servilius and Lucius
Genucius were Consuls at Rome, when Philip sent Ambassadors to Athens with
Proposals of Peace, Olymp. 105. 2. An. M. 3613. Ant. Chapter 357.
and prevailed with the People upon the account that he was content to quit all
his Right in Amphipolis.

Being therefore thus freed from the War with the Athenians, and hearing that
Agis King of the Paeones was dead, he judged that a fair Opportunity was
offered him to invade the Paeones: And to that end he entered their Country
with a considerable Army, overcame them in Battle, and forced them to stoop to
the Macedonian Yoke.

But still the Illyrium, now Dalmatia; and the Inhabitants Dalmatians, or
Sclavonians.
Illyrians remained an Eyesore to him, whom his Heart and all his Thoughts
were continually at work to bring under. To that end he called a General
Council, and by a Speech (fitted for the Occasion) having spirited the Soldiers
to the War, he led an Army into the Illyrians Country of no less than Ten
thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse.

Bardylis King of the Illyrians hearing of his coming, first sent Ambassadors
to Philip to renew the League between them upon these Terms, That both of them
should keep those Towns that they then had. To which Philip answered, That he
was very desirous of Peace; but resolved not to admit of it, before that the
Illyrians had quitted all the Towns belonging to the Kingdom of Macedon.

The Ambassadors therefore being returned without effecting any thing, Bardylis
(confiding Ant. Chapter 357
in the Valor of his Soldiers, and encouraged by his former Victories) marched
forth against his Enemies with a strong Army, having with him Ten thousand
choice Foot, and Five hundred Horse.

When the Armies drew near one to another, they suddenly set up a great Shout,
and so fell to it. Philip being in the Right Wing with a strong Body of
Macedonians, commanded his Horse to wheel about, to the end to charge the Enemy
in the Flank; and he himself charged the Front; upon which there was an hot
Engagement.

On the other side, the Illyrians drew up in a (...), like a Til^.
foursquare Body, and valiantly joined Battle.

The Valor of the Armies on both sides was such, that the issue of the Battle
was doubtful a long time; many fell, but many more were wounded; and the
Advantage was now here, and then there, according as the Valor and Resolution
of the Combatants gave Vigor and Life to the Business.

At length, when the Horse charged both upon the Flank and the Rear, and Philip
with his stoutest Soldiers fought like a Hero in the Front, the whole Body of
the Illyrians were routed, and forced to fly outright, whom the Macedonians
pursued a long way. After many were killed in the pursuit, Philip at length
gave the Signal to his Men to retire, and erected a Trophy, and buried the Dead.

Then the Illyrians sent another Embassy, and procured a Peace, having first
quitted all the Cities belonging to Macedon. There were slain of the Illyrians
in this Battle above Seven thousand Men. Having thus given an account of things
done in Macedonia and Illyrium, we shall now relate the Affairs of other
Nations.

CHAP. II.
The Actions of Dionysius the Tounger in Sicily, and other Parts. Dion's Flight
to Corinth, and his Return to Sicily. Andromachus Peoples Tauromenum. The Civil
Wars in Euboea. The Social War between the Athenians and other Nations. Philip
takes Amphipolis and other Cities. His Policy to gain the Olynthians and other
Places in Greece.

IN Sicily, Dionysius the Younger, Tyrant of Syracuse, who came some time
before to Ant. Chapter 357
the Kingdom (being of an unactive Spirit, and much inferior to his Father)
under the Veil of a peaceful and gentle Disposition, endeavored to cover his
Sloth and Cowardice; and therefore though the War with the Carthaginians
descended upon him as well as the Kingdom, yet he made Peace with them.

In a careless manner likewise he made War for some time upon the Lucanians in
Italy.
Lucanians; and though he had the Advantage in some of the last Fights, yet he
was very fond of the Terms and Conditions offered for the putting an end to the
War.

He built two Cities in Apulia, the better to secure the Passage of his
Shipping through the Ionian Sea: For the Barbarians dwelling on the Seacoasts,
had a great number of Pirates roving up-and-down, whereby the Adriatic Sea was
greatly infested and made troublesome to the Merchants.

Afterward giving himself up to his Ease, he wholly neglected all Warlike
Exercises; and though he was Lord of the Greatest Kingdom in Europe, and had a
Dominion bound fast with a Diamond (as his Father was used to boast) yet
through his effeminate Sloth and Idleness, he lost it on a sudden. How it was
taken from him, and how he carried himself in every Particular, we shall
endeavor now to declare.

At this time Cephisodorus was Lord Chancellor at Athens, and Caius Licinius
and Caius Sulpitius were Consuls at Rome, when Dion the Brother of Hipparinus,
one of the most Olymp. 105. 3. Ant. Chapter 356.
Noble Persons among the Syracusians, fled out of Sicily; and afterward by the
Braveness of his Spirit, and excellent Accomplishments, restored not only the
Syracusians, but other Sicilians to their ancient Liberties: Which was
occasioned thus:

Dionysius the Elder had Issue by both his Wives: By the second Wife, the
Daughter of Hipparians (who was in great Esteem among the Syracusians) he had
two Sons, Hipparinus and Narsaeus. Dion was the Brother of this second Wife; a
Man well skilled in Philosophy, and the most expert Soldier in his Time of all
the Syracusians. The Nobleness of his Birth and Greatness of his Spirit, made
him suspected by the Tyrant, because upon that account he seemed to be a fit
Instrument to overturn the Tyranny. Dionysius therefore fearing him, determined
to send him further off from him, and so to put him to death. Dion foreseeing
what was designed, at first discovered it to some of his Friends: Afterward he
fled out of Sicily to Peloponnesus, taking along with him Megacles his Brother,
and Cariclides the General of the Army under the Tyrant. When he arrived at
Corinth, he solicited the Corinthians to assist him in the Recovery of the
Syracusians Liberty: And presently got together a Band of Mercenaries, and
employed himself in procuring of Arms: Upon which many Volunteers coming in to
him with all sorts of Arms, he mustered a considerable Force of Mercenary
Soldiers. Then having hind two Ships, he put his Men and Arms on board; and
with these only passed over from Now Zant.
Zacynthus (near adjoining to Cephalenia) to Sicily; and commanded Chariclides
to follow him presently after to Syracuse, with some few Galleys, and other
Ships of Burden.

While these things were acting, Andromachus of Tauromenum, the Father of
Timoeus the Historian, a Man eminent both for his Riches and Wisdom, brought
together from all Parts all the Exiles of Naxus (which Dionysius had razed) and
gave them the Hill called Ant. Chapter 356.
Taurus, lying above Naxus. And because he and his Family had continued there a
long time, he called it Tauromenium, from their Residence in Taurus. The
Inhabitants afterward grew very rich, and the City became famous by its
prosperous Increases in worldly Blessings. But in our Age the Tauromenians were
removed out of their Country by Caesar, and the City received a Roman Colony.

In the mean time, the Inhabitants of Euboea fell a quarrelling one with
another, and one Party sought to the Boeotians for Aid, and the other to the
Athenians; and so a War broke out throughout all Euboea. But though there were
many light Skirmishes amongst them, sometimes the Thebans prevailing and at
other times the Athenians; yet they never fought any great Battle.

At length the Island being wasted by this Civil War, and many Men destroyed
all over the Land, with much ado (being made more wise by their own Slaughters)
they came to an Agreement, and so concluded a Peace: And the Boeotians
returning home, laid down their Arms.

The Athenians now fell into a War called The Social War (which continued three
Years) The Social War.
upon the account of the Defection of the Chians, Rhodians, them of Coos, and
the Byzantines: To which War Chares and Chabrias were sent with an Army, as
Generals: Making against Chius, of the same Name with the Island.
Chius, they found the Chians assisted by the Byzantines, Rhodians, Choians,
and Mausolus the petty King of Cana in Lesser Asia.
Cana. These Generals dividing their Forces, besieged the City both by Sea and
Land. Chares commanded the Landforces, and assaulted the Walls, and fought
with them of the Garrison in the open Field, who made Sallies upon him. But
Chabrias was engaged in a sharp Fight at Sea in the very Harbor; and his Ant.
Chapter 356.
Ship being pierced through with the Beaks of the Enemy's, he was greatly
distressed: And those who were in the other Ships, thought fit to comply with
the Time, and so fairly ran away. But the Admiral choosing rather to die
gloriously, than give up all dishonourably, in defending of his Ship received a
Wound, which put an end to his Ant. Chapter 356.
Life.

About the same time, Philip King of Macedon, after his Victory over the
Illyrians in that great Battle, having subdued all them that dwelt as far as to
the Marshes of Lychnitides, and made with them an Honorable Peace, returned
into Macedonia. And having thus by his Valor raised up and supported the
tottering State and Condition of the Macedonians, his Name became great and
famous among them. Afterward being provoked by the many Injuries of them of
Amphipolis, he marched against them with a great Army, and applying his Engines
of Battery to the Walls, made fierce and continual Assaults, and by the
Battering Rams threw down part of the Wall, and entered into the City through
the Ruins, with the slaughter of many that opposed him; and forthwith banished
those that were his chiefest Enemies, and graciously spared all the rest.

This City, by reason of its commodious Situation in Thrace, and Neighborhood
to other Places, was of great advantage to Philip: For he presently after took
Pydna; but made a League with the Olynthians, and promised to give up to them
Potidaea, which they had a long time before much coveted. For in regard the
City of the Olynthians was both Rich, Potent, and Populous, and upon that
account was a Place of great advantage in time of War, therefore those that
were ambitious to enlarge their Dominion, strove always to gain it: So that
both the Athenians and Philip earnestly contended which of them should prevail
to have them for their Confederates. But however, Philip having taken Potidaea,
drew out the Athenian Garrison, and used them with great Civility, and suffered
them to return to Athens: For he bore a great Respect to the People of Athens,
because that City was eminent and famous for its Power and Grandeur.

He delivered up likewise Pydna in Macedonia Ant. Chapter 356.
Pydna (which he had subdued) to the Olynthians, and gave them all the Grounds
and Territories belonging to it. Thence he marched to Crenidas in Macedonia,
called Philippi, now Philippo.
Crenidas, which he enlarged, and made more populous, and called it after his
own Name Philippi. Besides, he so improved the Gold-Mines that were in those
Parts (which before were but inconsiderable and obscure) that by building of
Workhouses he advanced them to bring in a yearly Revenue of above a Thousand
Talents. So that heaping up abundance of Riches, in a short time, by the
confluence of his Wealth, he advanced the Kingdom of Macedonia to a higher
Degree of Majesty and Glory, than ever it was before: For he coined Pieces of
Gold (called of him Philippicks) and by the help thereof, raised a great Army
of Mercenaries, and bribed many of the Grecians to betray their Country. Of all
which, a particular Account shall be given hereafter, in the Course of the
History. And now we shall bend our Discourse to what follows.

CHAP. III.
Dion's March and Entry into Syracuse. Dionysius comes to the Island, part of
Syracuse: Assaults the Wall erected from Sea to Sea: Is beaten by Dion.
Alexander of Phaerea murdered by his Wife and his Two Brothers. Philip relieves
the Thessalians from the two Brothers.

A Gathocles was Archon at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Caius Publius, or
Poetelius, were Consuls at Rome, when Dion the Son of Hipparinus landed in
Sicily, to pull Olymp. 105. 4. Ant. Chapter 355. An. M. 3615.
down the Tyranny of Dionysius. This Dion to admiration overturned the greatest
Dominion in Europe, with the most inconsiderable Force that ever any did before
him: For who would ever believe, that a Man who landed only with Two Ships of
Burden, should overcome a King who was furnished with Four hundred Long Ships.
Galleys; had an Army of an Hundred thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse; and
was provided with Arms, Money, and Provision, suitable and sufficient to supply
so many and great Forces as we have related? And who (over and besides all that
we have said) was possessed of the Greatest of all the Greek Cities; so many
Ports and Arsenals, Castles so strongly fortified and unexpugnable, and such a
number of potent Auxiliaries? But that which much forwarded the Successes of
Dion, was his great Spirit and valorous Resolution, and the Good will and
Kindness the People, whom he came to set free, bare toward him. And that which
was more than all these, the Sloth and Esseminateness of the Tyrant, and the
Hatred of his Subjects. All these things concentring in one Moment of Time,
they produced incredible Effects, not to have been imagined: But to leave off
Prefacing, we shall now come to relate Affairs more particularly.

Dion therefore loosing from Zazynthus, near to Cephalenia, arrived at Minoa
(as it is called) in the Territory of Agrigentum. This City was built by Minos,
formerly King of Crete, at such time as he was entertained by Cocales, King of
the Sicanians, in his seeking after Daedalus.

At this time this City was in the hands of the Carthaginians, whose Governor
Paralus, Dion's Friend, was cheerfully received by him. Upon this Encouragement
he unloaded his Ships of Five thousand Arms, and entrusted them with Paralus,
desiring him to furnish him with Carriages to convey them to Syracuse: And he
himself, with a thousand Mercenaries Ant. Chapter 355.
that had joined him, makes to the same Place. In his March he prevailed with
the Agrigentines, Geloans, some of the Sicanians, and the Sicilians that
inhabited the midland, the Camarineans likewise and Madinaeans, to join with
him in freeing the Syracusians from their Slavery; and with these he marched
forward to give a Check to the Tyrant. In his March armed Men flocking in to
him from all Parts, in a short time he had an Army of above Twenty thousand
Men. And besides these, many Grecians and Messenians were sent for out of
Italy, and all with great cheerfulness came readily to him.

As soon as Dion came to the Borders of the Syracusian Territories, a Multitude
of unarmed Men, both out of the City and Country, met him: For Dionysius, out
of Fear and Jealousy of the Syracusians, had disarmed many.

He was by chance at that time at the Cities he had lately built in The Coasts
of the Adriatic Sea.
Adria with a great Army: In the mean time, the Officers that were left to
guard the City, endeavored, in the first place, to retain the Citizens in
their Duty, and to prevent their Defection; but when they saw they could not,
by all the means they could use, bridle the impetuous Rage of the People, they
got together all the foreign Soldiers, and all others within the City that
favored the Tyrant's Party; and having completed their Regiments, resolved to
fall upon the Rebels. Then Dion distributed the 5000 Arms among the Syracusians
that were unarmed, and the rest he furnished as well as he could, as Arms came
to his hands. He then called them all together to a Public Assembly, and told
them that he was come to restore the Sicilians to their Liberty; and to that
end commanded such Officers to be created, as were fittest to be made use of
for that purpose, and for the utter ruin of the Tyranny. Upon which, they all
cried out with one unanimous Voice, That Dion and his Brother Megacles should
be chosen Generals, and invested with absolute Power and Command. And so
without delay, from the Assembly (having first disposed the Army in order of
Battle) he marched straight to the City; and none appearing in the open Ant.
Chapter 355.
Field to oppose him, he confidently entered within the Walls, and through One
of the Four Parts of Syracuse; the other are the Island; th^n Tyche and
Neapolis.
Achradina marched on into the Forum, and there encamped, none daring to oppose
him: For there were no fewer with Dion in his Army than Fifty thousand Men. And
all these with Coronets upon their Heads entered into the City, led by Dion,
Megacles, and Thirty Syracusians, who alone of all the Exiles in Peloponnesus
were willing to run the same common Fate with their Fellow-Citizens.

At this time the whole City exchanged Slavery for Liberty, and Fortune turned
Sorrow, the Companion of Tyranny, into pompous Mirth and Jollity: And every
House was full of Sacrifices and rejoicing; and Men burnt Incense every one
upon his own Altar, thanking the Gods for what at present they enjoyed, and
putting up Prayers for an happy Issue of Affairs for the time to come. Then
were heard many Shouts of Joy by the Women all over the City, for their sudden
and unexpected Happiness, and the People rejoicing through all Corners of the
Town. There was then neither Freeman, or Servant, or any Stranger, but all were
earnest to see Dion, who for his Valor and Courage was cried up by all above
what was fitting for a Man. Yet was it not altogether without some Reason, the
Change was so great and so unexpected: For having lived Fifty Years as Slaves,
through so long a time they had almost forgotten what Liberty meant, and now by
the Valor of one Man they were on a sudden delivered from their Calamity.

About that time Dionysius staid at Caulonia in Italy; but sent to Philistus
his Admiral, who was then with the Fleet about the Adriatic Coasts, and
commanded him to sail away straight for Syracuse. And both of them speeding
away to the same Place, Dionysius came to Syracuse the seventh Day after the
return of Dion: And now thinking to put a Trick upon the Syracusians, he sent
Ambassadors to treat of Peace, by whom he made use of Ant. Chapter 355.
many Devices, to persuade them that he would restore the Democracy, if he
might but have some remarkable Honors conferred upon him by the Government. He
desired therefore that Ambassadors might be sent to him, with whom calling
together a Senate, he might put an end to the War.

The Syracusians having their Expectations raised to so high a Pitch, sent some
of the Chief of their Citizens to him as Ambassadors, who had Guards presently
put upon them, and Dionysius one day after another put off their Audience. In
the mean time, perceiving that the Syracusians in hopes of Peace neglected
their Guards, and were unprepared for an Encounter, he opens the Gates of the A
Castle in a Place called the Part of Syracuse.
Acropolis in the Island, and suddenly Sallies out with a strong well appointed
Party.

The Syracusians had there drawn a Wall from Sea to Sea, which the Dionysians
terribly assaulted with a great Shout. And having entered it with the Slaughter
of many of the Guard, they engaged with the rest that came in to defend it.
Dion therefore being thus deluded, (against the Articles of the Truce) comes
down with a stout Party to oppose the Enemy, engages them, and makes a great
Slaughter within a Within a Stage.
small Compass of (...)
Ground: For although the Fight was but a small distance from the Walls within
the Town, yet a vast Number of Men were got together within this little spot;
so that the stoutest Men on both sides were hotly Engaged. The large Promises
egged on the Dionysians on one side, and hopes of Liberty stirred up the
Syracusians with a Resolution for Victory on the other: The Obstinacy therefore
on both sides being equal, the Fight was a long time doubtful: Many fell, and
as many were wounded, receiving all their Wounds upon their Breasts: For those
that first led on courageously, died to preserve those that followed; those
that were next, covered the Heads of them that were tired out with their
Shields, and valiantly underwent all manner of Dangers, and endured the Utmost
that could befall them, out of their Heat and Zeal to come off Conquerors. But
Dion resolving to do Ant. Chapter 355.
something remarkable in this Engagement, and that by his own Valor he might
gain the Day, broke violently into the thickest of his Enemies; and laying
about him Herolike hewed down multitudes, and wholly broke in pieces the Body
of the Mercenaries, and was left alone standing in the midst of his Enemies
Troops; and though he was pelted with abundance of Darts received upon his
Buckler and Helmet, yet by the Strength and Goodness of his Arms he avoided the
Danger; but receiving a Wound upon his Right Arm (through the Greatness and
Extremity of the Pain) he began to faint, and was not far from falling into the
Hands of the Enemy, but that the Syracusians (highly concerned for the
Preservation of their General) charged in a full Body upon the Dionysians, and
rescuing Dion (now almost spent) put the Enemy to flight. And the Citizens
prevailing at another part of the Wall, the Foreign Forces of the Tyrant were
forced to fly into the Castle in the Island.

The Syracusians now having gained a glorious Victory, and confirmed their
Liberty by Conquest, set up a Trophy in defiance of the Tyrant, who being thus
beaten, and now perceiving that all was lost, and an End put to his
Sovereignty, fortified the Castle with a strong Garrison; then being permitted
to carry off the dead Bodies of those that were slain, to the number of Eight
hundred, he buried them honorably, crowning them with Crowns of Gold, and
richly clothing them in Purple Robes: By this extrarordinary Honor and Respect
shown to the Dead, he hoped to draw in others more readily and Cheerfully to
venture their Lives for the support of his Principality. Then he bountifully
rewarded them that had valiantly behaved themselves in the late Engagement: And
sent some to the Syracusians to Treat upon Terms of Peace. But Dion studied
excuses to delay Ant. Chapter 355.
the Business; And in the mean time finished the rest of the Wall without any
interruption.

Thus having deceived the Enemy with an Expectation of Peace, as they had done
him before, he admitted the Ambassadors to Audience; Upon which they making
proposals for Peace, Dion answered, that there was only one way left for the
obtaining of a Peace; and that was for Dionysius to lay down his Government,
and be contented only with some Honors to be conferred upon him. Which answer
the Tyrant taking in disdain, as Haughty and Peremptory, he called a Council of
War to consult with his Officers how he might be revenged of the Syracusians.

He abounded with all things except Corn, and was likewise Master at Sea:
Therefore he infested the Country with Depredations, and by Foraging for some
time got Provisions, but with great difficulty; at length he sent forth
Transport Ships and Money to buy Corn and other Provisions: But the Syracusians
though they had but few Galleys, yet at fit Times and Places they surpised the
Merchants, and a great Part of the Corn that they imported. And thus stood the
Affairs of Syracuse at this time.

But in Greece, Alexander the Tyrant of Phaerea, was murdered by his Wife, a
Theban, Alexander of Phaerea murdered.
and his two Brothers, Lycophrones and Tisiphonus. They were at first in great
repute for killing of the Tyrant; but afterward growing Ambitious, and having
hired many Foreign Soldiers, they set up for themselves; and put to death many
that were averse from their Designs; and having got together a strong Party,
they kept the Soverejgnty by force of Arms.

But the Aleuadae (as they are called) Persons famous for the Nobleness of
their Birth, conspired to oppose the Tyrants: But not being able to perfect so
great a Business of themselves, they procured the Assistance of Philip King of
Macedon, who returned into Ant. Chapter 355
Thessaly, and subdued the Tyrants, and restored the Cities to their Liberty,
and carried himself with the greatest demonstrations of Kindness imaginable
toward the Thessalians; so that ever after in all his Wars, not only he but
his Son Alexander had them to be their constant Friends and Confederates.

Among the Writers Demophilus, the Son of Ephorus the Historian (who continued
the Demophilus, Calisthenes, Dyillus.
History of the Sacred War, left imperfect by his Father) began at the time
when the Temple of Delphos was seized and robbed by Philomele the Phocian.

That War continued Eleven Years, till such time as the Sacrilegious Robbers of
that Temple were miserably destroyed.

Calisthenes likewise comprehended in ten Books the Affairs of the Graecians,
bringing down his History in a continual Thread, to the Spoiling of the Temple
by the Wickedness of Philomele: And Dyillus the Athenian, begins his History
from this Sacrilege, and gives an Account of the Affairs of Greece and Sicily
in those Times, in Seventeen Books.

CHAP. IV.
The first Rise of the Brutii in Italy. Dionysius his Admiral invades the
Leontines. A Fight at Sea between Heraclides and Philistus, Admirals; one of
Dionysius, the other of Dion. A Faction in Syracuse. Dion leaves the
Syracusians. Their sad Condition. Relieved by Dion.

WHen Elpinus bore the Chief Magistracy of Athens, and Marcus Popilius Laenos,
Olymp. 106. 1. Ant. Chapter 354. An. M. 3594. Isackson's Com.
and Cneius Manlius Imperiosus were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome,
the Hundred and Sixth Olympiad was celebrated, in which Porus of Malia was
crowned with Victory.

In Italy a promiscuous Multitude got together about Lucania * from several
parts of the Country, most of them Servants that had run away from their
Masters. At first they The first Rise of the Brutii in Italy.
employed themselves in Robbing and Stealing, presently by a common Practice of
skulking in the Fields, and making Incursions, they learnt the Use and Exercise
of Martial Discipline and Feats of War. And prevailing in several Encounters
against the Inhabitants, they increased to a vast Body and Number of Men.

In the first Place they took and plundered the City Trojana; then seizing upon
Arponius and Thurium, and many other Cities, they formed themselves into a
Commonwealth; and because they had many of them been Servants, they assumed
the Name of * Brutii. And thus the Nation of the* Brutii grew up in Italy.

At this time in Sicily, Philistus, Dionysius his General, Sailed to Rhegium,
and transported (...), rather Brettians; for they were called Brutii by the
Romans as a Brutish People.
above Five hundred Horse to Syracuse: And joining to these a greater Body of
Horse, and Two Thousand Foot, he invaded the Leontines, who had fallen from
Dionysius. (...) Surprising therefore the Walls secretly in the Night, he
possessed himself of part of the City; upon which followed an Hot Engagement,
and by the help of the Syracusians, who came into the Aid of the Leontines,
Philistus overpowered with number, was forced out again.

In the mean time, Heraclides, Dion's Admiral, being left in Peloponnesus, and
hindered by Storms and contrary Winds, (so that he could not arrive at Sicily
time enough to be assistant to Dion in his return into his Country, and to be
helpful in rescuing the Syracusians from Slavery) arrived at length with Twenty
Sail of (...), Long Ships. Ant. Chapter 354.
Galleys and Fifteen hundred Soldiers: Who being a Man of Noble Birth and of
great Esteem, and judged worthy of so great a Trust, he was declared Admiral by
the Syracusians, and he and Dion joining Head and Hand together, managed the
War against Dionysius.

About the same time Philistus being made Lord High-Admiral by Dionysius, and
having a Fleet of Sixty Sail well provided, entered the Lists in a Sea Fight
with the Syracusians, who A Fight at Sea between Dion's Admiral and Dionysius
his Admiral.
had a Navy not fewer in number than the Dionysians. Whereupon there was a
sharp Fight, in which the Valor of Philistus at the first prevailed: But at
length being surrounded by the Enemy, the Syracustans from all parts making it
their great business to take him alive, he to avoid the Disgrace and Miseries
usually attending upon a State of Captivity, killed himself, after he had
served the Tyrant to the utmost of his Power, and had signalized his
Faithfulness above all the rest, and chiefest of his Friends. The Syracusians
being Victors drew the mangled Body of Philistus through the whole City, and at
length cast it out to the open Air without Burial.

Dionysius having now lost the most Valiant of all his Friends, and knowing not
where to find another fit for the Place, sent Ambassadors to Dion, with an
Offer at first of half the Kingdom; and presently after consented to give up
the Whole. But when Dion answered, That it was but just he should surrender the
Castle to the Syracusians, upon having only some Money, and some marks of
Honor conferred upon him: The Tyrant hereupon said, He was ready to deliver up
the Castle to the People, upon Condition that he and Ant. Chapter 354.
the Mercenaries, with all the Treasure they had got, might pass over to Italy.
Dion's Advice was, That the Terms should be accepted: But the People being
wrought over to a contrary Opinion by the importunate Orators, opposed Dion,
for that they doubted not but to take the Castle by Storm. Dionysius hereupon
committed the Custody of the Castle to the Stoutest of the Mercenaries; but he
himself having brought aboard all his Treasures and Houshold-Goods, without
being discovered, set sail and Landed in Italy.

In the mean time the Syracusians were divided into Factions, while some were
for Heraclides A Faction in Syracuse.
to have the Chief Command in the Army, and likewise the Sovereign Power,
because he was judged a Person that was not ambitious of the Tyranny: But
others were for intrusting the Chief Power and Authority in the Hands of Dion.
Moreover, there were great Arrears due to the Soldiers that came out of
Peloponnesus to the Assistance of the Syracusians: The City therefore being
very low in Money, and the Soldiers defrauded of their Pay, they gathered
themselves into a Body, being Three thousand valiant Men, all old and expert
Soldiers, far excelling the Syracusians in Courage: These moved Dion to go
along with them, and leave the Syracusians, that they might be revenged of them
in due time as a Common Enemy: Which he at first denied; but the present
Exigency of Dion leaves the Syracusians.
Affairs requiring it, he at length took upon him the Command of the
Foreigners, and joining himself to them, marched to the Leontines: But the
Syracusians getting into a Body, pursued the Mercenaries, and engaged them in
their march, but were forced to retire with the loss of a great Number of their
Fellow Citizens.

But Dion, tho he had obtained a great Victory, yet he was willing to forget
the Injuries offered him by the Syracusians. For when they sent a Trumpet to
him to have Liberty Ant. Chapter 354*
to carry off the Bodies of the Dead, he not only agreed to that, but freely
discharged many Prisoners without Ransom. For many when they were ready to be
knocked on the Head in the Pursuit, declared they were Favorers of Dion's
Party; and by that means escaped present Death.

Afterward Dionysius sent Nypsius, a Citizen of Naples, a Valiant and expert
Soldier, as his General, and with him Transport-Ships laden with Corn and
other Provision, who loosing from Locris, made straight for Syracuse.

In the mean time, the Garison-Soldiers of the Tyrant in the Castle, though they
were driven then to the utmost Extremity for want of Bread, yet endured Famine
for some time with great Resolution. But at length Nature stooping to
Necessity, and having no prospect of Relief any other way, they called a
Council of War in the Night, and resolved to surrender the Castle and
themselves to the Syracusians the next Day. Night therefore being now ended,
the Mercenaries sent Trumpets to the Townsmen to treat of Peace, which was no
sooner done, but presently Nypsius at spring of day arrives with the Fleet, and
anchored in the Port of A Fountain called Arethusa near Syracuse.
Arethusa. Whereupon, on a Sudden their present Necessities were turned into
large and plentiful Supplies of all sorts of Provision. Then the General having
landed his Men, called a Council of War, and in an Oration, fitted for the
present Occasion, so spoke to 'em, that he wrought 'em to a Resolution
cheerfully to undergo all future Hardships to the utmost Extremity. And thus
the Acropolis ready to be delivered into the Hands of the Syracusians, was
unexpectedly preserved. Hereupon, Ant. Chapter 354.
the Syracusians with all speed Manned out as many Galleys as they had at hand,
and on a sudden fell upon the Enemy, while they were discharging their Vessels
of their Corn and Provision: And although this Incursion was Sudden and
Unexpected, and that the Garrison in the Castle opposed the Enemies Galleys in a
tumultuous and disorderly Manner, yet it came to a formal Sea Fight, in which
the Syracusians got the Victory, and sunk some of the Enemy's Ships, took
others, and forced the rest to the Shore. Being encouraged with this Success,
they offered to the Gods abundance of Sacrifices for the Victory: But giving
themselves in the mean time to Quaffing and Drinking, and likewise Slighting
(...), Lifted up like Metors in the Air.
and Despising them in the Castle as a beaten Enemy, they were careless in
their Guards: So that Nypsius desirous to repair his late Loss by a new
Engagement, orders a select Body of his Men in the Night, and on the sudden
assaults the Wall lately built; and finding the Guard, through overmuch
Confidence, and their Surfeiting and Drunkenness, fallen fast asleep, set
Scaling-Ladders (made for the purpose) to the Walls: By which means some of the
stoutest Fellows of the Garrison mounted the Wall, killed the Sentinels, and
opened the Gates. This sudden Assault being made upon the City, the Syracusian
Commanders (...).
not yet recovered of their drunken Fit, endeavored to help their Fellows as
well as they could. But through their Wine not knowing how to use their Hands,
some were knocked on the Head, others took to their Heels. And now the City
being taken, and almost all the Soldiers issued out of the Castle and entered
within the Walls, and the Citizens by reason Syracuse taken by Dionysius his
Soldiers in the Castle.
of this sudden and unexpected Surprise, and the Confusion that was amongst
them, being even at their Wits end, all places were filled with Slaughter and
Destruction: For the Tyrant's Soldiers being above Ten thousand Men, and in
good Order and Discipline, Ant. Chapter 354.
none were able to withstand them, but through Fear and Confusion, and the
Disorder of an ungovernable Multitude, through want of Officers, all went to
wrack. When they came into the Forum, being now Conquerors, they presently
rushed into the Houses, and Ransacked and Plundered all to a vast Value of
Wealth, and made Captive a great Multitude of Women, Children and Servants. In
the straight and narrow Passages and some other Places, the Syracusians made
Resistance, and never ceased fighting; Multitudes being killed and as many
wounded. And even all the Night long they killed one another as they fortuned
to meet in the Dark; and there was no place in the City but what was covered
The sad Condition of the Syracuse.
and strewn with Dead Carcasses.

As soon as it was Day, the Light discovered the Greatness of the Calamity and
Misery. The Citizens having now no means left to be delivered, but by the Aid
and Assistance of Dion, sent forth some Horsemen with all speed to the City of
the Leontines, earnestly to entreat him, that he would not suffer the Country
to be a Prey to the Enemy, but that he would pardon their former Miscarriages,
and commiserate them in their present Distress, and relieve and raise up their
Country from that low and despicable Condition wherein they then were.

Dion who was a Man of a brave Spirit, and had a Soul well principled with the
Rudiments of Philosophy, and so was mild and easy to be Persuaded, remembered
not the former Injuries of the Citizens, but hired his Soldiers to march away
to the Expedition, and with these he made a swift March to Syracuse, and came
to the Hexapylae. There he The Six Gates so called.
drew up his Army, and marched forward with all speed; and there met him above
Ten thousand Women and Children, and old People, who fled out of the City; who
all prostrated themselves at his Feet, and beseech'd him with Tears that he
would rescue them Ant. Chapter 354.
from their wretched and miserable Condition. The Soldiers of the Castle having
now accomplished what they aimed at, after they had plundered all the Houses
about the Forum, set them on fire, and then breaking into the fest made a Prey
of all they found in them, at which very nick of time in the very height of
their Rapines, Dion forcing into the City in many places at once, sets upon the
Enemy now eager in plundering, and killed Syracuse relieved by Dion.
all he met as they were carrying away all sorts of Houshold-Goods bundled upon
their Shoulders. For coming upon them on the sudden, as they were Scattered and
Dispersed here and there bringing away their Prey, they were all easily knocked
on the Head. After Four thousand and upwards were slain, some in the Houses and
others in the Streets and Highways, the rest fled into the Castle and clapped
the Gates upon them, and so escaped.

Dion, when he had performed this Exploit (the most Glorious of any ever
before) quenched the Fire, and so preserved the Houses that were all on a
Flame, and firmly repaired the Wall that fronted the Castle; and so by one and
the same piece of Work, he both defended the City and strengthened the Garrison
within the Acropolis. Then he cleans'd the Town of the Dead Bodies, erected a
Trophy, and Sacrificed to the Gods for the Deliverance of his Country.

On the other hand, the People to testify their Gratitude to Dion, called a
General Assembly, and by an unanimous Vote made him Dion made Chief Magistrate
over the Syracusians.
chief Governor, with full and absolute Power, and conferred upon him the
Honors due to a Demy-god.

Afterward, agreeable to the Glory of his other Actions, he freely pardoned
all that had maliciously injured him, and by his frequent Admonitions brought
the People to mutual Peace and Concord: For all the Citizens of all Ranks and
Degrees highly honored and applauded him, as their great Benefactor, and as
the only Savior of their Country.

CHAP. V.
The Continuance of the Social War. Iphicrates and Timotheus joined Admirals
with Chares, by the Athenians. Iphicrates and Timotheus accused by Chares, and
fined and removed. Chares joins with Pharnabasus, and routs the Persians. The
End of the Social War. Philip subdues the Confederates.

IN Greece the Social War growing on apace, wherein the Chians, Rhodians,
Coons, and Byzantines joined together against the Athenians, great Preparations
were made on both sides, to make a Decision of the Quarrel by a Sea Fight. The
Athenians, though they had rigged out a Fleet of Sixty Sail, under the Command of
Chares; yet they sent out others for the further strengthening of them that
were employed before, under the Commands of Two of the most Eminent of their
Citizens, Iphicrates and Timotheus, who were invested in equal Power of Command
with Chares, to carry on the War against their rebellious Confederates.

On the other side, the Chians, Rhodians, and Byzantines, being furnished with
an Hundred Sail from their Confederates, waste and spoil the Islands Imbrus and
Lemnos, belonging Ant. Chapter 354.
to the Athenians: Thence they made for Samos with a great Army, and harassed
the Country, and besieged the City both by Sea and Land. Many other Islands
likewise under the Government of the Athenians they wasted and spoiled, and by
that means got together a Treasure for the carrying on of the War.

The Athenian Generals therefore joining their Forces, resolved in the first
place to besiege Byzantium: But the Chians and their Confederates raising their
Siege at Samos, and preparing to relieve Byzantium, the Fleets on both sides
met in the Hellespont. And now just as they were ready to join Battle, there
arose suddenly a violent Tempest which prevented their Design. However, Chares
was resolved to fight, though Nature herself, with the Wind and Seas, conspired
against him; but Iphicrates and Timotheus, by reason of the Storm, refused.
Chares (attesting the Faithfulness of the Soldiers) accused his Colleagues of
Treason, and wrote Letters to the People of Athens, whereby he informed them
that they waved fighting purposely out of Design. At which the People were so
incensed, that they condemned them both; and having fined them in many Talents,
revoked their Commissions.

Chares now having the sole Command of the Fleet, designing to free the
Athenians from Ant. Chapter 354.
Charge and Expense, did a very rash Act: Pharnabasus had revolted from the
King, and was now ready to engage with a very small Force the Persian
Lord-Lieutenants, who had in their Army Seventy thousand Men: Chares joins this
Man with all his Forces, so that they totally routed the King's; and
Pharnabasus in Gratitude for the Service, gave him as much Money as was
sufficient to pay all his Soldiers. This Act of Chares was at first very
grateful and acceptable to the Athenians; but after that the King, by his
Ambassadors, complained of the Injury done him by Chares, they altogether
changed their Notes, and were as far the other way: For a Rumor was spread
abroad, that the King had promised Three hundred Sail for the Aid and
Assistance of the Athenians Enemies: Upon which the People were so terrified,
that they decreed to agree Matters with the Revolters; and finding them as
willing to embrace Terms of Peace as themselves, the Business was The End of
the Social War.
easily composed. And this was the end of the Social War, after it had
continued four Years.

In the mean time, in Macedonia Three Kings; that is to say, of Thrace, the
Paeones, and Illyrians, confederated against Philip. These Princes, being
Borderers upon the Macedonians, could not brook without Envy his growing Power:
And though they had had Experience that they were not his equal Match singly
(being not long before conquered by him) yet by joining their Forces together,
they confidently concluded, that they should be able to deal with him. But
Philip coming suddenly upon them while they were raising their Forces, and as
yet without any formed Troops being in readiness; in this Surprise he broke
them in pieces, and forced them to stoop to the Yoke of the Macedonian Kingdom.

CHAP. VI.
The Beginning of the Sacred or Phocian War. Philomelus seizes the Temple at
Delphos, after he had routed the Locrians. How the Oracle at Delphos was first
discovered; and the Beginning of the Tripode. The Athenians and others join
with Philomelus.

AFter Callistratus was created Archon at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Caius
Plotius Olymp. 106. 2. An. M. 3595. Ant. Chapter 353. The Sacred War.
Consuls of Rome, the War called The Sacred War broke forth, which continued
Nine Years: For Philomelus the Phocian (inferior to none in Impudence and
Wickedness) having seized the Temple at Delphos, occasioned the Sacred War, on
the Account following.

After the Lacedaemonians were routed by the Thebans at the Battle of Leuctra,
the Thebans made great Complaints against them in the Court of the Amphictyons,
for their seizing of Cadmea: Upon which, they were adjudg'd to pay to them a
great Sum of Money. The Phocians likewise were accused, and condemned by the
same Court to pay many Talents to the Use of the Oracle at Delphos, because
they had intruded into a large Piece of Land, called Cirrhaea, belonging to the
Oracle, and had tilled and plough'd it.

But the Mu^ct being neglected to be paid, the The Priests and Officers of the
Temple.
Hieromemones accused the Phocians in the Senate of the Amphictyons, and prayed
them if the Money were not paid, that the Lands of the sacrilegious Persons
might be confiscated, and devoted to the Deity. They requird likewise, that the
rest that were condemned (among whom were the Lacedaemonians) should pay what
was due upon that account; and prayed, That if they did not observe what was so
ordered, that then they should be prosecuted as hateful Enemies by all the
Grecians. This Decree of the Amphictyons being ratified and approved of by all
the Greeks, the Country of the Phocians was upon the point of being devoted to
those Sacred Uses. Philomelus, who was in greatest Esteem at that time amongst
them, told the People, That Ant. Chapter 353.
the Fine was so excessive, that it could not possibly be paid; and to suffer
their Country to be sacrificed, it would not only argue them to be cowardly and
poor spirited, but be dangerous to that degree, that it would tend to the utter
Ruin of them and their Families: And he did all he could to make it out, that
the Decree of the Amphictyons was most unjust, and highly injurious, inasmuch
as for a little and inconsiderate Spot of Land, they had imposed a Mulct far
exceeding the Proportion and Merit of the Offense; and therefore advised them
to rescind the Decree, and that there were Reasons sufficient to justify their
so doing: And among others he alleged, That heretofore the Oracle was under
their Power and Protection; and cited the Verses of Homer, the most ancient and
famous of all the Poets, as a Witness of the Truth of what he said, who speaks
to this effect:

(...),
(...).
Epistrophus and Schedius did command
(Iphitus valiant Sons) the Phocian Band,
Who Cypariss and Pitho tilled -- Ogilb.
Therefore the Contest is to be for the Custody and Patronage of the Temple,
which he said belonged to the Ancestors of the Phocians; and that if they would
commit to him the absolute Power, as Chief Commander in this Affair, he
promised to manage it with the utmost Care and Dexterity.

Upon which, the Phocians (out of fear of the Mulct imposed upon them) created
Philomelus sole and absolute General. Hereupon Philomelus diligently pursued
the Performance of his Promise; and to that end presently made a Journey to
Sparta, and had private Conference concerning the Business with Archidomus,
King of the Lacedaemonians, alleging, That it was as much the Interest and
Concern of Archidomus, as his, to have the Decrees of the Amphictyons
rescinded; for that the Amphictyons had injured likewise the Lacedaemonians
unjustly, by giving Judgment against them. He thereupon discovered to him his
Design of seizing upon the Temple at Delphos; and that if he prevailed
inbringing the Oracle under his Care and Patronage, he would make void all the
Decrees of the Amphictyons. Archidomus approved well of what he said; but for
the present would not appear openly to be aiding in the matter, but assured him
that he would join in all things privately, in supplying him with Money and
mercenary Soldiers. Philomelus then having received from him Fifteen Talents,
and adding as many more to them of his own, raised Soldiers from all Parts: A
thousand he listed from among the Phocians, whom he called Those that carried
short Shields.
Peltastates. And after he had got together a considerable Force, he set upon
the Temple: Some of the Delphians called Thracidae opposed him; but those he
slew, and gave up all they had to the Plunder of the Soldiers. He commanded the
rest (whom he perceived to be in no small Fright) to be of good Courage, for
they should suffer no prejudice.

And now the Report of seizing the Temple was spread far and near; upon which,
the Locrians, who were next Borderers, marched against Philomelus with a
considerable Army, and fought him near Delphos, but were routed; and after a
great Slaughter made amongst them, fled, and made back to their own Country.
Ant. Chapter 353.


Philomelus puffed up with this Victory, cut the Decrees of the Amphictyons out
of the Pillars, and destroyed all the Records concerning them that were
condemned. In the mean time, he caused Reports to be spread abroad in every
place, that he neither designed to rob the Temple, nor commit any other
Mischief, but only to recover an ancient Right descended to them from their
Ancestors; and to that end had a desire to make void the unjust Decrees of the
Amphictyons, and so to defend the ancient Laws of the Phocians. But the
Boeotians assembled in Council made a Decree to relieve the Temple, and
forthwith raised an Army.

Philomelus in the mean time drew a Wall round the Temple, and raised many
Soldiers, and added to their Pay half as much more as their Due amounted unto;
and making choice of the best Soldiers among the Phocians, he enrolled them;
and in a short time got together so great an Army, as amounted to no less than
Five thousand Men: So that possessing himself of all the Passages to Delphos,
he became formidable to his Enemies. Then marching into the Territories of the
Locrians, he wasted a great part of the Country; and at length encamped near a
River that ran close by a very strong Fort, which he besieged; but after some
Assaults, not being able to take it, he raised the Siege, and engaged with the
Locrians, in which he lost Twenty of his Men; whose Bodies not being capable to
recover by Force, he sent a Trumpeter to have them delivered.

The Locrians denied the Bodies, and made answer, That there was a general Law
among all the Grecians, that sacrilegious Persons should be cast forth, and not
allowed any Ant. Chapter 353.
Burial. Highly provoked with this Repulse, he fought again with the Locrians,
and with great Valor and Resolution slaughtered some of his Enemies, and
possessed himself of their Bodies; and so forced the Locrians in exchange to
deliver the Dead.

And now being Master of the Field, he ranged up and down, and wasted the
Country of Locris; and loading his Soldiers with Plunder, returned to Delphos.

Afterward desiring to know from the Oracle what would be the Issue of the
War, he forced Pythia the Prophetess to ascend the Tripode, and (...). To give
an Oracle.
give him an Answer. Since that mention is here made of the Tripode, I conceive
it not unseasonable to give an account of what has been handed down to us
concerning it from ancient Times. It is reported, that this Oracle was first
discovered by some Goats; for which reason such Creatures are most commonly
sacrificed by the Delphians, when they come to enquire of the Oracle. The
Discovery is related in this manner: There was an Opening or Gulf in the Earth
in that How the Place of the Oracle at Delphos was first discovered; and the
beginning of the Tripode. Ant. Chapter 353.
Place, now called the Adytum of the Temple; about this the Goats straggled as
they were feeding: For at that time they of Delphos had no Religious Regard to
the Place. It often happened, that when any Goat came near the Gulf, and looked
down, it would fall a leaping and dancing in a wonderful manner, and make an
unusual Noise, far different from that at other times. A Shepherd wondering at
the Novelty of the thing, drew toward the Place to learn what was the Cause;
and looking down, he acted the same Part with the Goats: For as they were moved
and acted as by some Enthusiasm, so he likewise was inspired with a Spirit of
Prophecy. The News presently spreading abroad among the Inhabitants, how
wonderfully they were affected that looked down into the Chasm, many flocked to
the place, and out of Curiosity made Experiments; and as many as came near,
were always acted with a Spirit of Divination. For these Reasons, the Place was
counted the Residence of some Oracle: For some time therefore it was a
practice, that those who had a desire to know Future Events, would approach to
this Denn, and there return Answers of things that were to come one to another.
But whereas many through an Excess and Transport of Mind would leap into the
Gulf, and so were never seen more; it was judged advisable by the Inhabitants
(to avoid the like danger for the future) that some one Woman should be
consecrated Prophetess, and that by her the Answer of the Oracle should be
delivered; and that an Engine should be made for her whereon she might sit; and
by that means be inspired without any danger, and give Answers to them that
consulted with her concerning Future Events.

This Machine had three Feet, from whence it was called the Tripode, whose
Figure and Three Bases.
Shape almost all the Tripodes of Brass made to this day do imitate. But
sufficient, we conceive, is said concerning the manner of finding out the Seat
of the Oracle, and for what Reasons the Tripode was made,

It Is reported, That at the first, Virgins were assigned to this Office,
because that in their Nature they are more pure and harmless, and of the same
Sex with The Sister of Apollo.
Diana: And besides, for that they were judged fittest to keep the Secrets of
the Oracle. But it is said, that of latter time, one Thessalus Echecrates coming
to the Oracle, upon sight of the Virgin-Prophetess, for her admirable Beauty,
fell in love with her, and ravished her: Which wicked Fact caused the Delphians
to make a Law, That no young Virgin, for the future, but a Ant. Chapter 353.
grave Woman of fifty Years of Age (in a Virgin's Dress, to keep up the Memory
of the ancient Mode in Divination) should preside, and return the Answers.
These are the old fabulous Stories that are told concerning the first discovery
of the Oracle.

But to return to the Acts of Philomelus; who being now Lord of the Temple;
commanded Pythia to answer him from the Tripods, according to the ancient Rite
and Custom of the Country. When the Prophetess answered him, saying, This is
the Custom of the Country; he commanded her with Threats to ascend the Tripode:
Whereupon she submitting by force to the Authority of the Imposer, answered
him, That it was lawful for him to do what he list. At which he was very
jocund, and said he had received an Answer fit for his Purpose: And thereupon
presently caused the Answer to be recorded, and exposed to be read; that so it
might be evident to all, that the God had given him liberty to do what he
pleased. Then he called a General Assembly, and rehearsed to them the Divine
Oracle, and bid them all to be constant and courageous; and then betook himself
again to the Business of the War. Moreover, a Prodigy appeared to him in the
Temple of Apollo; for an Eagle hovering over it, and at length casting her self
down to the ground, pursued the Pigeons (that were fed and kept in the Temple)
from place to place, so that she snatched away some even from the Altars
themselves. Those that were versed in interpreting things of this Nature,
declared that this portended that Philomelus and the Phocians should possess
themselves of all the Treasures of the Temple. Being greatly puffed up with
this Encouragement, he singles out the choicest of his Friends to send as
Messengers Ant. Chapter 353.
abroad, some to Athens, others to Lacedaemon, and others to Thebes, and other
most remarkable Cities of Greece, with this Apology: That he had seized upon
Delphos, not with any design to commit any Sacrilege, but to regain the
Patronage of the Temple for his Country; and declared that he was ready to give
an exact account to all the Greeks of the Money, and all the dedicated Gifts
there, both for weight and number, whoever should require the same. At length
he desired, that if any, out of Envy or Malice, should make War upon the
Phocians, that they would rather join with him against such, or at least stand
Neuters. The Ambassadors quitting themselves with all diligence in this matter,
the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and some others, entered into the Confederacy,
and promised them assistance: But the Boeotians, with the Locrians, and some
others, were of a contrary Mind, who took up Arms in defense of the Oracle
against the Phocians. These were the things done in the Course of this Year.

CHAP. VII.
The Battle at Phaedra between Philomelus and the Locrians. The Parties engaged
in the Phocian War. The Battle between the Boeotians and Phocians. Philomelus
killed. Onomarchus made General: His Dreams, Successes and Death.

NOW Diotinus executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and Cneius Manlius, and
Caius Martius of Consuls at Rome; when Philomelus having a prospect of the
Storm Olymp. 106. 3. Ant. Chapter 352. An. M. 3596.
of War that was rushing in upon him, hired a great number of Soldiers, with
whom he joined the most expert and choicest of the Phocians. But though he was in
want of Money, yet he still forbore to meddle with the Sacred Treasures; but
got sufficient to pay the Mercenaries out of the Estates of the greatest men
among the Delphians. When he had raised a considerable Army, he marched into
the Field, that all might take notice that he was ready to fight with any Enemy
that appeared against the Phocians. Upon this the Locrians The Battle at the
Rocks of Phaedra. See the Story in Ovid. Epist. Phaedra to Hippolytus.
made out against him, and fought with him at a Place called, The Rocks of
Phaedra, whom he routed; and killed multitudes of them, and took many
Prisoners, and forced some of them to cast themselves down headlong from the
Top of the Rock.

After this Battle, the Phocians grew very high crested upon the account of
their prosperous Success. The Misfortune on the other hand, greatly discouraged
the Locrians; they sent therefore an Ambassador to Thebes, to desire them to
afford their assistance both to them and the Oracle. The Baeotians both out of
their Piety toward the Gods, and for Confirmation of the Decrees of the
Amphictyons (wherein they were greatly concerned) solicited by their
Ambassadors, the Thessalians, and others of the Amphictyons to join with them
in the War against the Phocians. Upon which (after that the Amphictyons had
decreed War to be made upon the Phocians) there arose great Uproars and
Factions throughout all Greece. Some were for assisting the Oracle, and for
prosecuting the Phocians with Revenge as Sacrilegers; others were for defending
them. And while both the Cities and Countries were thus distracted in their
Councils, the Baeotians, Locrians, Thessalians, Perrhabeans, The Parties in the
Phocian War.
the Doreans, Delopians, Athamanes, Achaians, Phthiots, Magnesians, Aenianeans,
and some others, resolved to assist the God. The Athenians and Lacedaemonians,
and some other of the Peloponnesians, joined as Confederates with the Phocians.
The Lacedaemonians, with some others, readily joined for these Reasons, viz.
When the Thebans had overcome them in the Battle at Leuctra, they prosecuted
the Spartans in the high Court of the Amphictyons, because Phaebidas the
Spartan had seized upon Cadmea, and demanded Five hundred Ant. Chapter 352.
Talents in compensation of the Injury; but the Lacedaemonians being fined so
much, and not paying the Mulct imposed, at the time limited by the Law, the
Thebans exhibited a new Complaint against them for the double Injury.

The Lacedaemonians therefore being condemned by the Amphictyons in a Thousand
Talents, and being much indebted and behind-hand, made use of the same Pretense
the Phocians did before, (that is) That the Amphictyons had pronounced an
unjust Sentence against them. And therefore (though it was for the Public
Good) yet they forbore to undertake the War of themselves upon the Quarrel of
the Condemnation; but judged that it might carry a better Face, if they could
avoid the Decree of the Amphictyons, under the Covert of the Phocians. For
these Reasons they were very forward to Patronize their Cause; and in the mean
time contrived to gain the Tutelary Right of the Temple to themselves.

And now upon certain Information, that the Thebans had prepared a very great
Army against the Phocians, Philomelus resolved to strengthen his Forces with
more Mercenaries: But in regard more Money was requisite for carrying on of the
War, he was necessitated to make use of the (...), Gifts Consecrated.
Sacred Treasures, and therefore rifl'd the Temple. And because he promised
half as much more as their ordinary Pay to the Mercenaries, a vast Number of
Men flocked in to him, and for the sake of the Largeness of the Pay, multitudes
listed themselves: But no moderate and sober Man gave up his Name to be
enrolled in the Lists of the Army, out of a Pious and Religious respect to the
Oracle. In the mean time every base Fellow, that for the sake of Gain valued
not the Gods a pin, but flocked eagerly to Philomelus: And so in a short time
he got together a strong Body of Men, greedy to share in the Sacred Treasures
of the Temple. And thus abundance of Wealth was the Means whereby Philomelus
presently formed a complete Army; and without delay marched into the Country of
Locris, with above Ten thousand Horse and Foot. The Locrians being A Battle
between the Locrians and Phocians, with Horse only.
joined with the Baeotians, met him; whereupon there happened a Fight with the
Horse on both sides, in which the Phocians were Conquerors.

Not long after, the Thessalians, with the Assistance of them that bordered
upon them, to the Number of Six thousand, marched into Locris, and engaged with
the Phocians at an Hill called Argola, and were worsted. Afterward the
Baeotians coming in to their assistance with Thirteen thousand Men, and the
Actaeans out of Peloponnesus, in assistance of the Phocians with Fifteen
hundred, both Armies near unto one and the same place, Encamped one over
against the other. It then happened that a great number of the Mercenaries as
they were foraging, fell into the Hands of the Baeotians, and all of them being
brought before the Walls of the City, they commanded a Proclamation to be made,
that those Men who had joined in Arms with the Sacrilegers, were adjudg'd by
the Amphictyons to be put to Death, and it was no sooner said but the thing was
executed, and all were run through with Spears and Darts. This so exasperated
the Mercenaries of the Phocians, The Phocians darted to Death by the
B(...)tians.
that they earnestly pressed Philomelus that the Enemy might be dealt with in
the same kind, and would not suffer him by their restless Importunities to be
quiet, and presently they took many of the Enemy, as they were dispersed in the
Fields, and brought them alive to the General, who delivered them up all to the
Soldiers to be Darted to Death. The like done by the Phocians to the Baeotians.
By this Retaliation it came to pass, that the Enemy left off this Insulting
and Cruel kind of Execution.

Afterward, both the Armies moving into another part of the Country, and in
their march passing through Woods and rough Places, on a sudden, and
unexpectedly, the Forelorn-Hopes of both met one another, upon which they at
first Skirmish'd, and at length it came to a fierce and bloody Battle, in which
the Baeotians over-pow(...)ing the Phocians in number, totally routed them; and
multitudes both of the Phocians and Mercenaries were slain in the pursuit, by
reason of the rough and difficult Passes out of the Woods. Philomelus, in these
Streights and Exigencies, behaved himself with great Courage and Resolution,
and after many Wounds received, was forced to an high Precipice; and seeing no
possible way and means how to escape, and fearing the Punishment and Torments
Prisoners used to undergo, cast himself down headlong from the Rock; and The
Death of Philomelus.
thus (meeting with the due Reward of his Sacrilege) he ended his days: But his
Colleague, Onomarcus, taking upon him the Command of the Army, marched back with
those that had escaped the Slaughter, and received those that fled as they came
straggling in to him.

In the mean time, while these things were doing, Philip of Macedon took
Methone, pillaged it, and laid it equal with the Ground; and forced all the
Villages and Countries to Philip raises Methone.
submit to the Macedonian Yoke.

In Pontus, Leucon, King of Bosphorus, died after he had Reigned forty years:
And Spartacus his Son succeeded him, and Reigned five years. And in the mean
time, the War began between the Romans and the Falisci, in which there was
nothing done worth taking notice of, but only harrassing the Country of the
Falisci by Incursions.

In Sicily, Dion, the General of the Army, was Murdered by the Mercenaries of
Zacynthus; and Callippus, who instigated them to the Fact, was made Chief
Commander in his Dion slain. Ant. Chapter 352.
place, and enjoyed it for the space of Thirteen Months.

When Eudemus executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and the Romans entrusted
the Consular Dignity with Marcus Fabius and Marcus Popilius, the Baeotians,
after the Victory Olymp. 106. 4. Ant. Chapter 351. An. M. 3597.
gained over the Phocians, returned with their Forces into their own Country,
supposing that Philomelus, the Author and Ringleader of the Sacrilege (being
justly punished both by the Gods and Men) by his remarkable End, would deter
others from the like piece of Wickedness. But the Phocians having at present
some respite from War, went again to Delphos, and calling together a General
Council of all their Confederates, they consulted concerning the Renewing of
the War. Those that were Lovers of Justice were for Peace; but the Profane and
Impious, and such as minded only their Gain and Advantage were for War, and
used their utmost Endeavors to find out some or other that would Patronize
their wicked Designs.

Onomarchus therefore, in a premeditated Speech (the chief End of which was to
advise them to stick to what they had before resolved) stirred up the People to
renew the War; not so much for the Advancement of the Public Good, as to
promote his own private Advantage. For he had many Mulcts as well as others,
imposed upon him by the Amphictyons; which not being able to pay, and therefore
judging that War was more desirable than Peace as to his Circumstances, by a
plausible Speech he incited the Phocians to persist in what Philomelus had
begun. Upon which, being then created General, he enforced himself with many
Foreign Soldiers, and recruited his broken Troops; and having Onomarchus made
General of the Phocians. Vid. Justin. Lib. 8. Ant. Chapter 351.
augmented his Army with a Multitude of Foreign Mercenaries, he made great
preparation to strengthen himself with Confederates, and other things necessary
for the carrying on the War. And he was the more encouraged in his Design by a
Dream which he had, which did presage (as he thought) his future Greatness and
Advancement: In his sleep it appeared to him as if the Brazen Colossus,
Dedicated by the Amphictyons, and standing in the Temple of Apollo, had by his
own Hands been (...), Been made anew.
made Higher and much Onomarchus his Dream.
Bigger than it was before. Hence he fancied, that the Gods portended that he
was to become famous in the World for his Martial Exploits. But it fell out
quite otherwise, for on the contrary it signified, That the Mulct imposed by
the Amphictyons upon the Phocians, for their Sacrilege and Violating the
Treasures of the Temple, would be much Enlarged and Advanced to a greater Sum
by the Hands of Onomarchus; which at length came to pass.

Onomarchus therefore, after he was created General, caused a great Number of
Arms, both of Iron and Brass to be made; and Coined Money both of Gold and
Silver, which he sent abroad here and there to the Consederate Cities;
especially he sought to gain the Magistrates by these Baits and Largesses.

Moreover he corrupted many of the Enemy, drawing some into the Confederacy,
and working upon others to sit still in the mean time. And all this he easily
effected, through the Covetousness of those he wrought upon. For by his Bribes
he prevailed with the Thessalians, the most considerable of the Confederates on
the other side, to stand Neuter. Those among the Phocians that opposed him, he
clapped up in Prison, and put them to Death, and exposed their Goods to public
Sale; He then marched into the Enemies Country, and took Thronius by Assault,
and sold all the Inhabitants for Slaves. The Amphissenians Ant. Chapter 351.
likewise being greatly terrified, he forced to a Submission, and possessed
himself also of the Cities of the Doreans, and wasted and spoiled the Country.
Thence, he marched into Boeotia, and took Orchomenus, and when he was even
ready to sit down before Chaeronea, he was worsted by the Thebans, and so
returned into his own Country.

About this time Artabazus, who had rebelled against the King, still continued
his War The Boeotians help Artabazus, and beat the King of Persia's Forces.
with those Lord Lieutenants of the Provinces that were ordered out against
him. At the first, while Chares the Athenian General assisted him, he vallantly
stood it out against the Enemy. But when he left him, wanting aid, he made his
Application to the Thebans for Relief; who thereupon sent Pammenim General with
Five thousand Men over into Asia; who joining with Artabazus, routed the
Royalists in two great Fights, and thereby advanced both his own Reputation,
and the Glory and Honor of his Country. For it was the Admiration of all Men,
That the Boeotians, at the very time when they were deserted by the
Thessalians, and in eminent Danger by the Phocian War, which then threatened
them, should transport Forces into Asia, and be Conquerors in all their
Engagements.

In the mean time a War broke out between the Argives and the Lacedaemonians,
who War between the Argives and Lacedaemonians. Chares takes Sestos, and puts
many to the Sword. Ant. Chapter 351.
beat the other at Orneas, and took the Town, and then returned to Sparta.
Chares likewise, the Athenian General, with his Fleet entered the Hellespont,
and took Sestos, the most considerable Town upon that Coast, and put all the
young Men that were able to bear Arms, to the Sword, and carried away, the rest
as Slaves.

About the same time, Cersobleptes the Brother of Cotys, Enemy to Philip, but
in League with the Athenians, delivered up all the Cities in Chersonesus,
(except Cardia) to the Athenians, who sent Colonies thither to inhabit the
Towns, which were to be divided amongst them by Lot.

Philip therefore discerning that the In Thrace. Methon in Thrace razed by
Philip.
Methoneans designed to deliver up their City, (which was of great moment in
the War) to his Enemy, laid close Siege to it, which the Citizens defended for
some time; but being too weak to cope with him, they were forced to surrender
it upon these Conditions, That all the Citizens should depart out of Methon
with all their Clothes.

Being possessed of the Place, he razed the City to the Ground, and divided the
Territory among the Macedonians. During this Siege, Philip lost one of his Eyes
by the stroke of a Dart.

Afterward being sent unto by the Thessalians, he marched with his Army into
Thessaly. And in the first place, in Aid of the Thessalians, he fought with
Lycophron, Tyrant of Pheraea.

Lycophron then made Application to the Phocians for Assistance, who thereupon
sent to Lycophron Tyrant of Pheroea.
him Phayllus, the Brother of Onomarchus, with Seven thousand Men: But Philip
routed the Troops of the Phocians, and drove them out of Thessaly. Upon which,
Onomarchus thinking to be Lord of all Thessaly, came to the Assistance of
Lycophron with his whole Army.

Philip opposed him, both with his own and the Forces of the Thessalians, but
Onamarchus Onomarchus routs Philip in two Battles.
overpowering him by Number, routed him in two several Battles, and killed many
of the Macedonians; in so much as Philip was brought into very great Streights.

His Soldiers were hereupon so dejected, that they were ready to desert him;
but with much ado, and many Persuasions, he at length brought them over to a
due Obedience, Ant. Chapter 351.
and within a short time after returned into Macedonia. But Onomarchus made an
Expedition into Boeotia, and fought and routed the Boeotians, and possessed
himself of Coronea.

In the mean time Philip marches again with his Army out of Macedon into
Thessaly, and incamps against Lycophron the Tyrant of Pherea, who being too
weak for him, sent for Aid to the Phocians, promising to use his utmost
Endeavor to order and dispose of all Things throughout Thessaly for their
Advantage. Whereupon Onomarchus came to his Assistance by Land with above
Twenty thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse.

Philip having persuaded the Thessalians to join with him, raised above Twenty
thousand Foot and Three thousand Horse.

Forthwith a bloody Battle was fought, in which Philip by the Advantage and
Valor Philip routs Onomarchus.
of the Thessalian* Horse got the Day, and Onomarchus and his Men ^^ed toward
the Sea.

It happened that Chares the Athenian Admiral passed by with a great Navy, at
the same instant as a cruel Slaughter was made among the Phocians, and
therefore those that fled cast away their Arms, and endeavored to swim to the
Galleys, amongst whom was Onomarchus.

In conclusion, there were slain of the Phocians and Mercenaries above Six
thousand, amongst whom was the General himself; and there were taken Prisoners
no less than Three thousand.

Philip Crucified, p. 75.
hanged Onomarchus, and the rest as Sacrilegers he caused to be thrown into The
Death of Onomarchus.
the Sea.

Onomarchus thus coming to his End, Phayllus his Brother was created General of
the Phocians: And he, to repair the Damage sustained, raised great Numbers of
Foreign Mercenaries, doubling the former and usual Pay, and further
strengthened himself with Addition of his Confederates; he made likewise a
great Number of Arms, and coined both Gold and Silver.

About the same time Mausolus, a Petty King of Caria, died, after he had
reigned Mausolus dies, after he had reigned Four and twenty Years. Clearchus
assassinated.
Four and twenty Years. To whom succeeded Artemesia, (who was both his Sister
and Wife,) for the space of Two Years.

At that time likewise Clearchus, Tyrant of Heraclea, when he was going to the
Feasts of Bacchus, was Assassinated, in the Twelfth Year of his Reign.
Timotheus, his Son, succeeded him, and reigned Fifteen Years.

In the mean time the Thuscans, at War with the Romans, harrass'd and wasted a
great part of their Enemies Territory, making Incursions as far as to the River
Tiber, and then returned to their own Country.

The Friends of Dion raised a Sedition at Syracuse against Callippus, but being
dispersed and worsted, they fled to the Leontines. Not long after, Hipparinus
the Brother of Dionysius arrived with a Navy at Syracuse, and fought with
Callipppus and beat him; upon which he was driven out of the City, and
Hipparinus recovered his Father's Kingdom, and enjoyed it Two Years.

CHAP. VIII.
Phayllus continues the Phocian War. Aryca razed. Phayllus dies of a
Consumption. War between the Lacedaemonians and Megapolitans. Chaeronea taken
by Phalaecus. War between the Persians, Egyptians, and Phaenicians. Salamis in
Cyprus besieged. The Cruelty of Artaxerxes Ochus toward the Sidonians. The
Calamity of Sidon.

WHEN Aristodamus was Archon at Athens, and Caius Sulpitius bore the Consulship
at Rome, the Hundred and seventh Olympiad was celebrated, wherein Smicrinus
Olym. 107. 1. Phayllus, General of the Phocians.
the Tarrentine was Victor. Then Phayllus the Phocian General, after the Death
of his Brother, began to repair the Affairs of the Phocians, now almost at the
(...)
last Gasp, through the late Rout and Slaughter of the Soldiers. For being
possessed of a vast Treasure, he raised a great Army of Mercenaries, and
wrought over many to join with him in the War: And being very free of his
Purse, he not only brought over private Men to his Party, but prevailed with
famous Cities to be his Confederates: For the Lacedaemonians sent him a
Thousand Soldiers, the Acheans Two thousand; but the Athenians Five thousand
Foot, and Four hundred Horse, under the Command of Naustcles.

Lycophron and Pitholaus, Tyrants of Pherea, after the Death of Onomarchus,
being destitute of Succors, delivered up Phera into the Hands of Philip; and
though they were discharged, upon their Oaths to be quiet, yet they got
together Two thousand Mercenaries, and went over to Phayllus to assist the
Phocians: And not a few of the smaller Cities assisted them by their bountiful
Contributions of their Money toward the Soldiers Pay. For Gold feeding and
enkindling Men's Covetousness, from a Prospect of Gain pushed them forward to
grasp at their own Advantage. Upon these Encouragements, Phayllus marches with
his Army into Boeotia, but is overcome at Orchomenon, and lost many of his Men.

Afterward there was another Battle at the River Cephisus, wherein the
Boeotians had the better, and killed Four hundred, and took Five hundred
Prisoners. A few Days after a third Fight was at Coronea, where the Boeotians
had again the Advantage, and killed Fifty of the Phocians, and took an Hundred
and thirty Prisoners.

But having done at present with the Affairs of the Boeotians and Phocians, we
return to Philip, who when he had overcome Onomarchus in so signal a Battle,
freed the Pheraeans from the Yoke of Tyranny, and restored the City to its
Liberty. And having settled all other Matters in Thessaly, he marched toward
Pylas, to fight with the Phocians: But being Ant. Chapter 350.
denied Passage by the Athenians, he returned into Macedonia, which Kingdom he
had enlarged both by the help of his Sword, and likewise by his Piety toward
the Gods.

In the mean time Phayllus marched with his Army against the Locrians, called
Epi^nemidii, and assaulted and took by force some Cities; but one called Aryca
he gained in the Night by Treachery, but was presently repulsed and beaten out,
with the Loss of Two hundred of his Men. Afterward encamping at a Town called
Abas, the Boeotians surprised the Phocians in the Night, and killed a great
Number of them* Upon which Success they were so encouraged, that they made
Incursions into the Phocians Territories, and harrassing and spoiling the
Country round about, heaped together abundance of Plunder. But in their return,
coming to relieve Aryca, (which was then besieged,) Phayllus sell suddenly
Aryca razed by Phayllus.
and unexpectedly upon them, and routed them; and then taking the City by
Storm, plundered it, and razed it to the Ground. But at length he fell into a A
Consumption. Some say, he was burnt in the Temple at Abas. Phayllus died.
lingering Distemper, and continued a long time, and after great Torments in
his Body, (as he justly deserved,) he died, leaving Phalecus the Son of
Onomarchus (Incendiary of the Sacred War) to be General of the Phocians, who
being as yet but a very raw Youth, he appointed Mnaseas, one of his Friends, to
be his Tutor and Governor.

Some time after the Boeotians attacked the Phocians in the Night, and killed
Mnaseas the General, and Two hundred of his Soldiers. Not long after, in an
Engagement between a Party of Horse at Chaeronea, Phalecus being worsted, lost
many of his Men.

During these Transactions, there were great Commotions in Peloponnesus upon
these Occasions. War between the Lacedaemonians and the Megalopolitans. Ant. Chapter
350.
The Lacedaemonians fell out with them of Megalopolis; and therefore Archadamus
their General made Incursions into their Borders: With which, the
Megalopolitans being highly incensed, and not being able to contend by their
own Strength, sought for Relief from their Confederates. Upon which, the
Argives, Sicyons, and Messenians, assisted them with all the Force they could
make. After them, the Thebans came in to their Assistance with Four thousand
Foot and Five hundred Horse, under the Command of Cephisiones. Being thus
strengthened, the Megalopolitans made an Expedition, and encamped at the
Fountains of Aphaeus. On the other side, the Lacedaemonians were joined with
Three thousand Foot from the Phocians, and with an Hundred and fifty Horse from
Lycophron and Pitholaus, who were lately deposed from their Government over the
Pheraeans. And having got together a considerable Army, they encamped at
Mantinea. But marching hence to Orneas, a City belonging to the Argives, they
took it before the Enemy could come up to them; for this Place was in League
with the Megalopolitans: And though the Argives broke forth upon them, yet they
were overcome in the Engagement, and lost above Two hundred Men.

Then the Thebans, double to the Lacedaemonians in Number, but much inferior to
them in their Order of Discipline, came upon them; upon which there was a sharp
Engagement, and even while the Victory was doubtful, the Argives flag'd, and
made away with all their Confederates to their Cities. But the Lacedaemonians
entered into Arcadia, and took Elisunta by Storm, and after they had plundered
the Town, returned to Sparta.

Not long after, the Thebans with their Confederates routed the Enemy at
Telphusa, and with the Slaughter of many of them, took Anaxandrus the General,
and several others, to the Number of Sixty, Prisoners. Presently after they
became Conquerors likewise in two other Battles, and cut off many of their
Enemies. At length, after a remarkable Victory gained by the Lacedaemonians,
the Armies on both Sides returned to their several Cities; and the
Lacedaemonians and Megalopolitans entering into a Truce, the Thebans returned
into Boeotia.

In the mean time Phalaecus continuing still in Boeotia, took Charonaea; but
upon the Cha^oraea taken by Phalaecus.
Thebans coming into its Relief, he was forced to quit it again. Afterward the
Boeotians entered Phocis with a great Army, and wasted and spoiled a great part
of it, and harrass'd all the Country round about, and plundered and destroyed
every thing that was in their way. They took also some little Towns, and
loading themselves with abundance of Plunder, returned into Boeotia.

When Thessalus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Titus
Quintius Olymp. 107. 2. Ant. Chapter 349. An. M. 3598.
executed the Consulship at Rome, the Thebans wearied out with the Toils of the
Phocian War, and brought very low in their Treasure, sent Ambassadors to the
King of Persia to solicit that King to supply them with a Sum of Money; to
which Artaxerxes readily consented, and without delay furnished them with Three
hundred Talents. However there was little or nothing done this Year worth
taking notice of between the Boeotians and Phocians, save some Skirmishes, and
harrassing one another Countries.

In Asia, the Persian King having invaded Egypt some Years before with a
numerous Army; but miscarrying in his Design, at this time renewed the War
against the Egyptians, and after many worthy Actions performed by his Valor
and Diligence, he recovered Egypt, Phaenicia, and Cyprus. But that the History
may be made more plain and evident, we shall first declare the Causes and
Grounds of the War, looking back a little to the Times proper for the Occasion.

The Egyptians having heretofore rebelled against the Persians; Artaxerxes,
Surnamed The War of Artaxerxes Ochus with the Egyptians and Phenicians.
Ochus, notwithstanding sat still and quiet, being no ways addicted to Arms.
And though Armies under the Command of several Captains were set forth, yet
through the Treachery and Unskilfulness of the Generals, many times he was
Unfortunate and Unsuccessful. Upon which Account, though he was greatly
contemned by the Egyptians, yet his Love to his Ease and Pleasure had that
Ascendent over him, as to enforce him patiently to bear the Disgrace. But now
when the Phaenicians and Kings of Cyprus, Ant. Chapter 349.
in imitation of this Disloyalty of the Egyptians, and in Contempt of him,
were all running into Rebellion, the King was at length roused, and determined
to make War upon them. But he judged it not Advisable or Prudent to manage the
War by his Deputies and Generals, but resolved to go himself, and try his own
Fortune and Conduct in the Defense and Preservation of his Kingdom. To that end
he made great Preparation of Arms, Darts, Provision and Forces; and raised
Three hundred thousand Foot, and Thirty thousand Horse; and rigged out a Fleet
of Three hundred Galleys, besides Six hundred Ships of Burden, and other
Transport Ships for all sorts of Provision. The War in Phaenicia first broke
out upon these Occasions.

In Phaenicia there is a famous City called Tripolis, its Name agreeing with
the Nature of the Place; for three Cities are contained within its Bounds, a
Furlong distant one from each other, one called the City of the Aradii, a
People of Phaenicia.
Aradians, the other of the Sidonians, and the third of the Tyrians. It Is the
most eminent of all the Cities of Phaenicia, being that where the General
Senate of all the Phaenicians do usually meet and consult about the weighty
Affairs of the Nation. The Kings, Lords Lieutenants and Generals then in Sidon,
carrying themselves by their severe Edicts rigorously and haughtily toward the
Sidonians, the Citizens being so abused, and not being able longer to brook it,
studied how to revolt from the Persians. Upon which, the rest of the
Phaenicians being wrought upon by the other to vindicate their Liberty, sent
Messengers to Nectanetus the King of Egypt, then at War with the Persians, to
receive them as Confederates, and so the whole Nation prepared for War. And
being that Sidon then exceeded all the rest in Wealth, and even private Men by
the advantage of Trade were grown very Rich, they built a great Number of
Ships, and raised a potent Army of Mercenaries; and both Arms, Darts and
Provision, and all other Things necessary for War, were prepared. Ant. Chapter 349.
And that they might appear first in the War, they spoiled and ruined the (...)
The King's Paradise, Garden, or Orchard.
Kings Garden, cutting down all the Trees where the Persian Kings used to
Recreate and Divert themselves. Then they burnt all the Hay which the Lord
Lieutenants had laid up for the use of the Horses, At last they seized upon the
Persians, who had so insulted over them, and haled them to Punishment. And in
this manner began the War of the Persians with the Phaenicians. For the King
being informed what the Rebels had so impudently acted, threatened to Revenge it
upon all the Inhabitants of Phaenicia, especially upon the Sidonians. To this
end he Rendevous'd all his Army, both Horse and Foot, at Babylon, and presently
marched away against the Phaenicians. In the mean time, while the King was upon
his March, the Governor of Syria, and Mazaeus Lord Lieutenant of Caelicia,
joined together against the Phaenicans: On the other side, Tennes King of Sidon
procured for their assistance Four thousand Greek Mercenaries from the
Egyptians, under the Command of Mentor the Rhodian; with these, and a Body of
the Citizens, he engaged with the Lord Lieutenants, and got the Day, and
expelled them out of Phaenicia.

While these Things were acted in Phaenicia, the War in Cyprus began at the
same time, the one depending much upon the other. There were Nine great Cities
in this Island, under whose Jurisdiction were all the other smaller Towns.
Every one had its several King, who managed all public Affairs; yet subject to
the King of Persia.

These all entered into a Confederacy, and, after the Example of the
Phaenicians, shook off the Yoke; and having made all necessary Preparations for
the War, took upon them the Absolute Power and Sovereignty in their own several
Dominions. Ant. Chapter 349.


Artaxerxes being enraged at this Insolence, writ to Or Garieus.
Idrieus Prince of Caria (then lately come to the Throne, a Friend and
Confederate of the Persians, as all his Ancestors were before him) to raise him
both Land and Sea-Forces, for his Assistance against the Kings of Cyprus. Upon
which, he forthwith rigged out a Fleet of Forty Sail, and sent on board Eight
thousand Mercenaries for Cyprus, under the Command of Phocion the Athenian, and
Evagoras, who had been for some Years before King of the Island. As soon as
they lander in Cyprus, they marched then straight to Salamina, the greatest of
the Cities, where they cast up a Trench, and fortified themselves, and so
straightly besieged the City both Salamina in Cyprus besieged, or Salamis.
by Sea and Land. The Island had continued a long time in peace and quietness,
and therefore was grown very Rich; so that the Soldiers who had now the Power
to range over the Country, had got together great Booties: Which Plenty and
Confluence being noised abroad, many sn the opposite Continent, in hope of
Gain, came slocking out of Syria and Silisia to the Persian Camp. The Army of
Phocion and Evagoras being increased to double the number, the Petty Kings were
brought into great Straits, and much terrified: And in this Condition was
Cyprus at that time.

About this time the King of Persia marched with his Army from Babylon, and
made toward Phaenicia: But Mentor, General of the Sidonians, when he heard how
great an Army was approaching, and considering how unequal in number the Rebels
were, he privately consulted his own Safety: To that end he secretly dispatched
away from Sidon a faithful Servant of his own, called Thessalion, to
Artaxerxes, promising to betray Sidon to him; and that he would effectually
assist him in subduing of Egypt; he being in that respect more especially able
to serve him, for that he was well acquainted with all the Places in Egypt, and
knew exactly the most convenient places over the River Nile. The King was
wonderfully pleased when he heard what Thessalion said, and promised he would
not only Ant. Chapter 349.
pardon Mentor for what he had done, but would bountifully reward him, if he
performed what he had promised. But Thessalion further added, that Mentor would
expect that the King should confirm his Word by giving out his Right Hand. Upon
which the King was so incensed (as being distrusted) that he gave up Thessalion
into the hands of the Officers, with Command to cut off his Head. When he was
led to Execution, he only said thus: Thou, O King, do what thou please; but
Mentor, who is able to accomplish all I have said, will perform nothing that is
promised, because thou refusest to give him Assurance on thy part. Upon hearing
of which, the King altered his Mind, and commanded the Officers to discharge
the Man; and so he put forth his His Hand to ki^^.
Right Hand to the Thessalion, which is a most sure and certain Earnest among
the Persians of performance of what is promised. Then he returned to Sidon, and
secretly imparted to Mentor what he had done.

In the mean time, the King counting it his greatest Happiness if he could
subdue Egypt (which he had before attempted in vain) sent Ambassadors to the
chiefest Cities of Greece, to solicit for some Auxiliary Forces from them. The
Athenians and Lacedaemonians returned Answer, That they would continue still
Friends to the Persians; but that they could not supply them with Forces. But
the Thebans commanded a thousand heavy-arm'd Men to be sent to the Assistance
of the King, under the Command of Locrates. The Argives likewise furnished him
with Three thousand Men; but sent no Captain with them, because the King had
expressly by Name appointed Nicostratus to Command them, and they were unwilling
to contradict him. He was a Man of great Account, both as to Council and
Execution, having both Valor and Prudence assistant one to another. And
because he was of vast Strength of Body, imitating Hercules in his Arms, he
carried both a Club and a Lion's Skin in every Battle. Neither were the
Grecians, who inhabited Ant. Chapter 349.
upon the Sea Coasts of Asia, wanting on their parts, but sent out Six thousand
Men: So that all the Auxiliary Forces from the Grecians, amounted to Ten
thousand. But before these came up, the King had passed through Syria, and
entered Phaenicia, and encamped not far from Sidon.

In the mean time, while the King spent a considerable time in making
preparation, the Sidonians had been very active and diligent in furnishing
themselves with Arms and Provisions; and besides, had drawn a treble deep and
broad Trench, and an high Wall round the City. They had likewise a brave Body
of tall, handsome and stout Men of the Citizens, well exercised and trained up
in martial Discipline out of the Schools: And this City went far beyond all the
rest of the Cities of Phaenicia for Wealth, and all other sumptuous Ornaments,
both for State and Grandeur: And that which was not the least among the rest,
they were furnished with a hundred Galleys, of three and five Oars on a Bank.

And now Here Mentor is put for Tennes in the Greek.
Tennes became a Party with Mentor (who Commanded the Mercenaries out of Egypt)
in the Treachery; and left Mentor to keep a certain Quarter of the City, in
order to help forward the Execution of the Treason; and himself went out with
Five hundred Soldiers, upon pretense to go to the Common Assembly of the
Phaenicians: For he had in his Company a Hundred of the Best Quality of the
Citizens to be Senators, as was pretended: But these he caused to be seized and
delivered up into the hands of Ariaxerxes, as soon as they came near where the
King was, who received him as his Friend, but ordered the Hundred Noblemen, as
Authors of the Rebellion, to be darted to death.

Presently after, when Five hundred more of the Chiefest of the Sidonians came
to him Ant. Chapter 349.
with all the Badges of Submission imaginable, he called Tennes back, and asked
him whether he was able to deliver the City into his Hands (for he earnestly
desired to possess himself of the Place upon any Terms whatsoever, rather than
upon Treaty, to the end that the utter Ruin of the Citizens might be a Terror
unto the rest) when Tennes assured him he was able to effect it, the King being
still implacable, caused all the Five hundred (who carried Olive-Branches
before them as Suppliants for Mercy, and as Tokens of Submission) to be shot to
death with Darts. Afterward Tennes readily persuades the Egyptian Mercenaries
to receive him and the King within the Walls; and so by this treacherous Tennes
the Betrayer of Sidon put to death by the King, who made use of his Treason.
Sidon taken: Its miserable Condition, according to the Prophecy of Ezekiel. 28. 21.
Contrivance, Sidon came again into the Hauds of the Persians. Then the King
judging that Tennes could do him no further Service, caused his Throat to be
cut likewise.

In the mean time, the Sidonians had burnt all their Shipping before the King
came, lest any of the Inhabitants, consulting their own particular Safety,
should get away by Sea. At length, when the Sidonians saw that the Enemy was
entered, and many Thousands of Men ranging here and there, and dispersed all
over the City, they shut themselves up with their Wives and Children in their
Houses, and set them on fire, and so all consumed together. It Is said there
were above Forty thousand (with Houshold-Servants) that perished in these
Flames.

After this Destruction of the Sidonians, by which the whole City and
Inhabitants were consumed to Ashes, the King sold the Rubbish and Relicts of
the Fire for many Talents: For being the City was very Rich, there was found a
vast Quantity of Gold and Silver melted down by the Flames. Thus sad was the
Calamity under which the Sidonians suffered. The rest of the Cities being
terrified with this Destruction, Presently surrendered themselves to the
Persians. A little before this, Artemesia the Princess of Caria died, having
Ant. Chapter 349.
governed Two Years: Idreius her Brother succeeded in the Principality, and
reigned Seven Years.

In Italy the Romans made a Truce with the Prenestines, and entered into a
League with the Samnites; and cut off the Heads of Two hundred and sixty in the
Forum, of those that sided with the Tarquins.

In Sicily Leptines and Callipus the Syracusians being furnished with a
considerable Army, besieged Rhegium, which was still held by a Garrison of
Dionysius the Younger; and having forced out the Garrison, they restored the
Rhegians to their (...)
own ancient Government.

CHAP. IX.
Evagoras beheaded in Cyprus. Artaxerxes marches against Egypt, and gains all
Egypt by the Policy of Mentor. Lost many of his Men at the Lake of Sorbon.
Mentor advanced Mentor's Stratagem to subdue Hemias, Prince of Aterne. Zena
razed by Philip. The King of Egypt Abdicates his Kingdom, and flies to
Aethiopia.

AFterward,, Apollodorus being Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Marcus Valerius
and Olymp. 107. 3. Ant. Chapter 348. An. M. 3598.
Caius Sulpitius, Roman Consuls, all the Cities of Cyprus surrendered
themselves to the Persians, excepting Salamis, which was then besieged by
Evagoras and Phocian, and which Protogoras, King of Salamis, stoutly defended.

In the mean time, Evagoras endeavored to regain the Kingdom of his Ancestors,
and contrived to be restored to his Ancient Right by the help of the Persian
King. But being Ant. Chapter 348.
afterward accused before Artaxerxes (who thereupon relieved Protogoras) he
laid aside all hopes of being restored, and having afterward cleared himself
of all that was laid to his Charge, he was entrusted with the Government of a
larger Province in Asia, which he so misgovern'd, that he was forced to fly
again into Cyprus, where being seized he had his Head struck off. But
Protogoras voluntarily submitting himself to the Persian King, Evagoras
beheaded.
kept the Kingdom of Salamis without any Rival for the time to come.

In the mean time, the King of Persia, after the Ruin of Sidon, being joined
with the Artaxerxes marches against Egypt.
Forces that came from Argos, Thebes, and the ancient Cities, marched with his
whole Army against Egypt. When he came to the Sorbon is the Lake of Sorbon.
Great Lough or Lake, through ignorance of the Places, he lost part of his Army
in the Boggs there, called Barrathra. But in regard we have before in the First
Book, spoken of the Nature of this Lake, and the strange Things there
happening, we shall now forbear to repeat them.

Having passed these Gulphs he came to Pelusium, the first Mouth of the River
Nile, where it enters into the Sea. Here the Graecians lay close to the City,
but the Persians Encamped forty Furlongs off.

In the mean while, the Egyptians (in regard the Persians had given them a
long time to prepare all things necessary for the War) had made strong Defenses
and Fortifications at all the Mouths of Nile, especially at Pelusium, because
it was the First and most conveniently situated; where Five thousand Men were
in Garrison, under the Command of Philophoron. The Thebans, above all the
Graecians, had a Desire to evidence their Valor, and to that end they first of
all valiantly attempted to force the Trench, which was both Straight and Deep,
and carried it; but as soon as they had gained it, those of the Garrison made a
Sally, upon which there was a sharp Engagement; insomuch as the Dispute was
very hot on both sides, and continued all the Day, the Night scarcely putting
an end to the Contest.

The next day the King divided the Greeks into three Brigades; every one had a
Greek The Persian Army divided into three Brigades. Ant. Chapter 348.
Commander, with whom was joined a Persian Officer, such as was most esteemed
for Valor and Loyalty.

The First Brigade was of the Baeotians, under the Command of Lacrates, a
Theban, and Rosaces, a Persian. This Rosaces was descended from some of those
seven Persians who deposed the Magi, and was Governor of Ionia and Lydia; He
led a great Body both of Horse and Foot, all of Barbarians.

The Second Brigade was of the Argives, Commanded by Nicostratus, with whom was
Aristazanes, a Persian, who was employed as an Envoy in all the King's special
Affairs, and next to Bagoas, the Trustiest and Chiefest of his Friends: He had
Five thousand Soldiers, and Fourscore Galleys under his Command.

The Third Brigade was led by Mentor, he who betrayed Sidon, who formerly
commanded the Mercenaries: His Colleague was Bagoas, a bold Fellow, and none
more ready in of executing any Villainy, in whom the King put great Confidence.
He commanded the Greeks that were the King's Subjects, and a great Body of
Barbarians, besides a considerable Navy. The King kept the rest of the Army
with himself, and was very careful in Managing and Overseeing the whole Concern
of the War.

The Army of the Persians thus divided, Nectabanus the King of Egypt, (though
he Nectabanus, King of Persia.
was far short in Number) neither valued the Multitude, nor the Division of the
Persian Troops: For he had in his Army Twenty thousand Grecian Mercenaries, as
many Africans, and Threescore thousand Egyptians, by them called Warriors; and
besides these, was furnished with an incredible Number of River-Boats, fitted
to fight in the River Nile. Moreover, he had defended that side of the River
toward Arabia, with many Castles and Garrisons, exactly fortified with Trenches
and Strong Walls; and was prepared with Plenty of all other things necessary
for the War. But through Imprudence and want of good Advice he lost all. The
chief Cause of the Miscarriage was his Ignorance how to manage Warlike Affairs,
and his security, upon the account he had before beaten the Ant. Chapter 348.
Persians; for at that time of his Success, having had most expert Commanders,
Diaphantus the Athenian, and Lanius the Spartan, who were both Valiant and
Experienced Soldiers, all things succeeded according to his Heart's desire. But
being now conceited of his own Sufficiency and Ability, to Command and Order
the Army, he would admit of no other Assistant; and therefore through want of
Skill and Experience, nothing was managed to advantage, as became an
Expert-Commander.

Having therefore strongly Garrisoned the Towns, he himself, with Thirty
thousand Egyptians, Five thousand Graecians, and half of the Lybians, kept the
Passages which lay most open and easy to Invasions.

Things thus ordered on both sides, Nicostratus, who Commanded the Argives
(having got some Egyptian Guides, (whose Wives and Children the Persians kept
as Hostages) through a certain Cut or Ditch, passed over with his Fleet to a
Place as far out of fight as he could, and having landed his Men there,
Encamped. Those who kept the Neighboring Egyptian Garrisons, as soon as they
came to know where the Enemy were thus Encamped, speedily made out against them
with no less than Seven thousand Men, under A Fight between the Egyptians and
the Graecians, on the Persians side. Cleinus killed.
the Command of Cleinius of the Isle of Coos, who drew up his Men in Battalia,
in order to fight them: On the other side, those lately Landed, likewise put
themselves into a Posture of Defense. Whereupon was a sharp Engagement, in
which the Grecians on the Persians side so gallantly behaved themselves, that
they killed Cleinius the General, and above Five thousand of the rest of his
Army.

Upon hearing of this Defeat, Nectabanus was in a terrible Fright, for that he
believed the rest of the Persian Troops would easily pass over the River. Being
therefore afraid lest the Enemy would bend all his force against Memphis the
Seat-Royal, he made his chief Care and Concern to secure this Place, and
thereupon marched away with the Army he had to Memphis, to prevent the
Besieging of it. Ant. Chapter 348.


In the mean time, Lacrates, the Theban, the Commander of the First Brigade,
pushes on the Siege of Pelusium; and having drained the Water out of the
Trench, and turned it another way, he raised a Mount, and there placed his
Engines of Battery against the City. And after a great Part of the Walls were
battered down, the Pelusians raised up others in their stead, and speedily made
high Wooden Towers.

These Conflicts upon the Walls continued for some days, during which time the
Graecians that defended the Place, stoutly opposed the Assailants. But as soon
as they heard of the King's departure to Memphis, they were so afrighted that
they sent Messengers to Treat upon Terms of Surrender. Whereupon, Lacrates
agreeing with them upon the Sacred Tie of an Oath, That upon delivery up of
Pelusium, they should return to Greece Pelusium surrendered.
with whatever they brought with them out of the Town, they surrendered the
Place. Then Artaxerxes sent Bagoas with a Garrison of Persians to take
Possession of Pelusium, whose Soldiers as soon as they entered the Town, took
away from the Grecians as they were going out, many of those things that they
brought along with them.

Being thus abused they took it hainously, and with great Complaints called
upon the Gods, as Witnesses and Revengers of Perjury and Breach of Faith.

Lacrates being stirred up to just Indignation by this base Dealing, fell upon
the Barbarians, and killed some of them, and put the rest to flight, and so
protected the Greeks thus injured, contrary to the Agreement confirmed by Oath.
And though Bagoas, who fled amongst the rest, and returned to the King, accused
Lacrates, for what he had done, yet the King adjudg'd, that Bagoas his Soldiers
were dealt with according to their desert, and punished those Persians that
were Authors of the Rapine. And in this manner came Pelusium into the Hands of
the Persians.

But Mentor, Commander of the Third Brigade, recovered Bubastus, and many other
Cities, to the Obedience of the Persian King by his own Stratagem. For whereas
all these Cities were Garrisoned by two sorts of People, Grecians and
Egyptians, Mentor caused a Ant. Chapter 348.
Report to be spread abroad, That Artaxerxes would receive all those most
graciously, and pardon them, that of their own accord should give up their
Cities into the King's Mentor gains Bubastus and other Towns by Policy.
Hands; and on the other Hand, That all those that he should take by force,
should fare no better than Sidon. He commanded also, That all the Gates of the
Camp.
Gates should be opened, and that all that would should be permitted to go
away. So that all the Egyptian Captives in the Camp being gone without any
Opposition, the Report was in a short time spread abroad through all the Cities
of Egypt. Whereupon all the Towns were presently filled with Seditions through
Quarrels, and Dissentions between the Egyptians and the Foreign Auxiliaries.
For all Parties strove who should be most Active and Forward in betraying their
several Garrisons, every one aiming at his own Advantage, by an Interest in the
favor of the Conqueror. And the first that began was Bubastus. For as soon as
Mentor and Bagoas Encamped before the City, the Egyptians, unknown to the
Graecians, promised to Bagoas (by one of their own Country sent to him) to
Surrender the City, if they might be all Pardoned. This being smelt out by the
Greeks they pursued and seized upon him that was sent, and by Threatening and
Affrighting him got out the whole from him, as the Thing in truth was. Upon
which, being highly enraged, they fell violently upon the Egyptians, killed
some, wounded others, and drove the rest into a narrow Corner of the City.

They that were thus assaulted, gave intelligence to Bagoas of what was done,
and entreated him, tha^ without delay he would take Possession of the City,
which should be by them delivered up to him upon his approach.

In the mean time, the Graecians sent an Herald to Mentor, who secretly advised
them, to set upon the Barbarians as soon as Bagoas had entered the Town. Bagoas
therefore being entered with his Persians, but without the Consent of the
Greeks, as soon as part of the Soldiers were let in, the Graecians presently
shut up the Gates, and fell on a sudden on Bagoas taken Prisoner at Bubastus,
and all his Men cut of who en^red the City.
the Barbarians, and killed 'em every Man, and took Bagcas himself Prisoner,
who coming to understand that there was no means left for his Deliverance but
by Mentor, he earnestly entreated him to interpose for his Preservation,
promising that for the Future he would never undertake any thing without his
Advice. Mentor prevailed with the Graecians to Discharge him, and to Surrender
the City, so that the whole Success and Glory of the Action was attributed to
him.

Bagoas being thus freed by his means, entered into a Solemn Covenant of
Friendship upon Oath with Mentor, and faithfully kept it to the Time of his
Death; so that these Bagoas relea^'d by Mentor's mea^s.
two always concurring and agreeing, were able to do more with the King, than
all his other Friends, or any of his Kindred. For Mentor being made
Artaxerxes's Lord Lieutenant of all the Asiatick Shore, was greatly Serviceable
to the King, by procuring Soldeers out of Greece, and by his Faithful and
Diligent Administration of the Government.

Bagoas commanding all as Viceroy in the higher Parts of Asia, grew to that
degree of Power through his Consultation with Mentor, upon all Occasions, that
he had the Kingdom at Command, neither did Artaxerxes any thing without his
Consent. And after the King's Death his Power was such, That the Successors
were ever Nominated and Appointed by him, and all Affairs of the Kingdom were
so wholly managed by him, that he wanted nothing but the Name of a King. But we
shall speak of these things in their proper Place.

After the Surrender of Bubastus, the rest of the Cities out of fear submitted
and delivered Ant. Chapter 348.
up themselves upon Articles, into the Hands of the Persians.

In the mean while, Nectabanus, who was now at Memphis, seeing the swift
Motions of the Enemy, durst not venture a Battle in defense of his Sovereignty,
but abdicating his Kingdom, packed up a great deal of Treasure, and fled into
Aethiopia. And so Artaxerxes possessed himself of all Egypt, and demolished
the Walls of all the Cities, especially those that were the Greatest and of
most account; and heaped together an infinite Mass of Gold and Silver, by
spoiling of the Temples: He carried away likewise all the Records and Writings
out of the most ancient Temples; Which Bagoas a while after suffered the
Priests to redeem for a great Sum of Money. Then he sent home the Greek
Auxiliaries with ample Rewards to every one according to their Deserts, for
their Services; and intrusting Pherendatus with the Government of Egypt, he
returned with his Army laden with Spoil, triumphing in the Glory of his
Victory to Babylon.

At the time when Callimachus was Lord-Chancellor at Athens, and Marcus Fabius
and Olymp. 107. 4. Ant. Chapter 347. Mentor advanced.
Publius Valerius were Roman Consuls, Artaxerxes advanced Mentor for the good
Services he had done him, especially in the Egyptian War, above all his
Ariends; and that he might put a Mark upon his Valor by a Reward more than
ordinary, he bestowed upon him an Hundred Talents of Silver, and rich Furniture
for his House. He made him likewise Prefact of all the Asiatick Shore, and
General of his Army, with absolute Power to suppress all Rebellions in those
Parts.

Mentor being in near Alliance and Kindred with Actabazus and Memnon (who had
not long before made War upon the Persians, and were now fled ^at of Asia to
Philip in Macedonia) by his Interest with the King procured their Pardon, and
thereupon sent for them both to come to him, with their Families: For Artabazus
had by Mentor and Memnon's Sister, Eleven Sons and Ten Daughters; with which
numerous Progeny Mentor was Ant. Chapter 347.
greatly delighted, and advanced the young Men as they grew up, to high Places
of Command in the Army.

The first Expedition which Mentor made was against Hennias, Prince or Tyrant
of Atarne in Mysia over against Lesbos.
Atarne, who had rebelled against Artaxerxes, and was possessed of many strong
Cities and Mentors stratagem to subdue Hennias.
Castles; upon promise made him to procure the King's Pardon he brought him to
a Parley; and upon that occasion having surprised him, he clapped him up, and
possessing himself of his Seal-Ring, he writ Letters in his Name to the several
Cities, signifying that through Mentor he was restored to the King's Favor;
and sent away likewise with those that carried the Letters, such as should take
Possession for the King of all the Forts and Castles. The Governors of the
Cities giving credit to the Letters, and being likewise very desirous of Peace,
delivered up all the Towns and Forts to the King in every place through the
Country.

All the Revolted Cities being gained by this Trick of Mentor, without any
Hazard or Fatigue, the King was highly pleased with him, as having acted the
Part of a Brave and Prudent General.

And with no less success, partly by Policy, and partly by force of Arms, he
reduced in a short time the other Captains that were in Rebellion. And thus
stood Affairs in Asia at this time.

In Europe, Philip, King of Macedon, made an Expedition against the * Calcidean
Cities, and took Zeira, and razed it to the Ground, and brought other Towns
(out of Fear) In Thrace. Zeira razed by Philip.
likewise to submit. He set again likewise upon Phaeca, and threw out its
Prince Pitholaus. About that time Sparticus, King of Pontus, died, having
reigned Five Years. Parysades his Brother suceeded him, and governed Eight and
Thirty years.

CHAP. X.
Philip takes Olynthus, and other Cities in the Hellespont. The Athenians
jealous of Philip, and instigated by Demosthenes. Philip's Policies. The Value
of the Riches taken out of the Temple at Delphos. Dionysius sent Presents to
Delphos, which were taken by the Athenians. His Letter to the Athenians. The
Temple burnt. The End of the Phocian War. The Punishments decreed by the
Amphictyons against the Phocians. The Miseries of the Sacrilegers. Timoleon
sent to Syracuse.

AFter the End of this Year, Theophilus ruled as Archon at Athens, and Caius
Sulpitius and Caius Quintius executed the Consular-Dignity at Rome, at which
time was celebrated Olymp. 108. 1. Ant. Chapter 346. An. M. 3600.
the Hundred and Eighth Olmypiad, in which Polycles of Cyrene bore away the
Crown of Victory. At the same time Philip made an Expedition against the Cities
of the Hellespont, of which Micaberna and Torone were betrayed into his hands.
Then he made against Olynthus (the greatest City of those Parts) with a very
numerous Army, and having first routed the Olynthians in two Battles, he laid
Siege to the Town; upon which he made many Assaults, and lost a great number of
his Men in their approaches to the Walls. At length by bribing Euthycrates and
Lasthenes, the Chief Magistrates of Olynthus, he entered the City by Treachery,
and Plundered it, and Sold all the Citizens for Slaves, and exposed Philip
takes Olynthus, and other Cities in the Hellespont
to sale all the Prey and Plunder under the Spear. Whereby he furnished himself
with abundance of Money for the carrying on of the War, and put all the rest of
the Cities into a terrible Fright.

Then he bountifully rewarded such as had behaved themselves with Courage and
Valor, and having exacted vast Sums of Money from the Richest of the Citizens
of the Cities round about, he made use of it to corrupt many to betray their
Country; so that he himself often boasted that he had enlarged his Dominion
more by his Gold than by his Sword.

In the mean time, the Athenians being jealous of the growing Greatness of
Philip, ever after sent Aid to them whom he invaded by his Arms, and dispatched
Ambassadors to all The Athenians jealous of Philip.
the Cities to look to their Liberties, and to put to death such of their
Citizens as should be discovered to go about to betray them, promising withal
to join with them upon all Occasions. At length they proclaimed open War
against Philip.

Demosthenes the Orator (at that time the most Eminent in Politics and
Eloquence of Demosthenes incites the Athenians against Philip.
all the Grecians) was the chief Instrument that incited the Athenians to take
upon them the Defense of all Greece: But the City could not cure that itch of
Treason that infected many of the Citizens; such a shoal of Traitors there was
at that time all over Greece. And therefore it is reported, that Philip having
an earnest desire to gain that once strong and eminent City, and one of the
Place telling him it could never be taken by Force; he asked him whether it
were not possible that Gold might mount the Walls; for he had learned by
Experience, That they that could not be subdued by Force, were easily overcome
by Gold. To this end he had by his Bribes procured Traitors in every City; and
Philip corrupts the Cities by Bribes.
such as would receive Money, he called his Friends and Guests: And thus with
Evil Communication he corrupted Men's Manners.

After the taking of Clynthus, he celebrated Olympic Games to the Gods, in
Commemoration of his Victory, and offered most splendid Sacrifices; and in
regard there were a vast number of People got together, he set forth specious
Sports and recreating Plays, and invited a great number of Strangers to his
Feasts: And in the midst of his Cups would talk courteously and familiarly with
them, and drink to many, and reach over the Cup to them with his own Hands. To
many he gave rich Gifts, and made large and liberal Promises to all, to the end
his Kindness and Generosity might be bruited abroad by them that had had the
Experience. During the time of his Feasting, observing Satyrus the (...).
Stage Player to look four and knit his Brows, he asked him, why heonly would
not accept of the Fruits of his Bounty and Generosity? To which he answered,
That he would very willingly receive a certain Gift from him; but he was afraid
if he should ask it openly, he would deny him. Upon which the King fell a
laughing, and bid him ask what he would, and he would freely bestow it upon
him. Upon which he desired that two young Maids, in the flower of their Age,
the Daughters of one that was his Host might be given to him from among the
Captives, whose Liberties he craved not to make any Gain or Advantage of them
himself, but really to give them Portions out of his own Estate, and procure
them Husbands, and likewise to prevent their being injured by any unworthy
Attempt. Whose Request the King so approved, as that he not only forthwith
ordered the Virgins to be delivered to Satyrus without Ransom, but bestowed
upon him likewise many other rich Gifts and Presents, as special Marks of his
Favor and Bounty; so that many, excited with the Hopes of Reward, strove which
should serve Philip most, and be the first that should betray their Country
into his Hands.

The next Year Themistocles was Archon at Athens, and Caius Cornelius and
Marcus Popilius Olymp. 108. Ant. Chapter 345. 2. An. M. 3601. Battelt between the
Boeotians and Phocians.
Roman Consuls, at which time the Boeotians overran the Country of the
Phocians with Depredations, and beat the Enemy at Hyampolis, killing about
Seventy of them. But not long after, engaging with the Phocians in another
Battle, they were routed at Coro^ea, and lost many of their Men. And whereas
the Phocians were possessed of some small Towns in Boeotia, the Boeotians made
an Inroad upon them, and shamefully spoiled and destroyed all their standing
Corn; but in their Return were beaten.

While these things were acting, Phalecus the General of the Phocians, being
convicted Phalecus deprived, and others chosen.
of Sacrilege, in converting the Sacred Treasure of the Temple to his own use,
was deprived of his Commission; and three others were created in his room, viz.
Democrates, Callias, and Sophanes, who managed the Business and Trial
concerning the Sacred Treasure, at such time as the Phocians demanded an
Account of them that had the disposing of it. The greatest part of the Money
was found to be entrusted in the hands of Philon; who not being able to give a
clear Account, was condemned; and being put upon the Rack, Ant. Chapter 345.
by order of the Generals, he named many of his Accomplices. At length, being
tortured to the utmost extremity, he died upon the Rack, and so came to an end
worthy his Impiety.

The Robbers indeed restored the rest of the Moneys that were left, but they
themselves were put to death as Sacrilegers. The first of the former Generals,
Philomelus, forbore to meddle with the Sacred Treasures; but his Brother and
Successor Onomarchus, converted much of those Treasures to the use of the War.
The third General Phayllus, Brother of Gaods taken out of the Temple.
Onomarchus, while he executed that Command, made use of many of the
consecrated Things of the Temple, for the paying off the foreign Soldiers: For
he melted down and coined into Money the Hundred and twenty Golden Tiles,
dedicated by Croesus King of Lydia. In the same manner he dealt with the 300
Golden Bowls (or Viols) every one weighing Two Minas; and likewise the Lion and
Woman of Gold, all which weighed 30 Talents of Gold, so that all the Gold
according to the value of Silver would amount to Four thousand Talents. And
besides these, there were Things in Silver dedicated by Croesus, and others,
carried away by all the Generals in their several Times, above the value of Six
thousand Talents; so that the whole Sum, both in Gold and Silver, amounted to
above Ten thousand Talents.

There are some Authors that say, that there was as much Treasure
sacrilegiously taken away, as Alexander afterward found in the Treasury of the
Persians. Phalecus likewise, with the Officers of the Army, went about to dig
up the Pavement of the Temple, because some Person told him that a vast
Treasure of Gold and Silver lay under it: For confirmation of the truth of it,
he brought in the Testimony of that most ancient and famous Poet Homer, where
he says thus: Ant. Chapter 345.


(...)
(...). Hom. Iliad. lib. 9. fol. 453.
Or all the Gold in Phoebus Marble Fane,
Which Pytho's Rocky Treasuries contain.
And just as the Soldiers began to dig near to the Tripode, a sudden Earthquake
terrified the Phocians; so that the Gods seeming by such manifest Tokens to
threaten Vengeance upon the Sacrilegers, they desisted. But the first Author of
that Impiety, Philo (of whom we spoke before) in a short time after felt the
just Vengeance of the Deity. But notwithstanding the whole Guilt of this
impious Sacrilege be imputed to the Phocians, yet both the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians who assisted the Phocians, were Partners in the Offense, for
they had more Money paid to them than was proportionable to the number of the
Soldiers which they sent: For indeed at that very time the Athenians carried it
but impiously toward the Oracle; for but a little before this Robbery at
Delphos, when Iphicrates lay with the Fleet before Corcyra, and Dionysius
Prince of Syracuse had sent some Statues of Gold and Ivory to Olympus and
Delphos, he by chance intercepting the Vessels which transported them; and
having now possession of the dedicated Goods, sent to Athens to know how he
must dispose of them; the Athenians bid him never scrupulously examine or make
enquiry after those things that were said to belong to the Gods, but to
consider how to provide for the maintaining of the Army. In Obedience to which
Decree of his Country, he exposed the Sacred Ornaments of the Gods (...).
to sale under the Spear. Upon which, the Dionysius.
Prince being highly incensed against the Athenians, wrote to them in this
manner:

Dionysius to the Senate and People of Athens.
It is not fit that I should say Health to you, since ye have been so
sacrilogious against the Gods both by Sea and Land; and having intercepted the
Images which we had sent, in order to be The Letter of Dionysius to the
Athenians. Ant. Chapter 345.
devoted to the Gods, you have converted them into Money, and so have
profanely abused the Mightiest of the Gods, Apollo at Delphos, and Jupiter at
Olympus.

This Affront against the Gods, the Athenians never stuck at, who yet were used
to boast and glory, that the God Apollo was their Ancestor. The Lacedaemonians
also, though they were famous amongst all Nations for the Oracle of Delphos,
and in the most weighty Affairs do consult there at this very day; yet they
never scrupled to join in the Sacrilege with these impious Robbers of the
Temple.

But now the Phocians, who had three Towns strongly fortified in Boeotia, made
an Inroad into Boeotia; and being joined with great numbers of Mercenaries,
wasted and spoiled the Enemy's Country; and in several Incursions and
Skirmishes got the better, and so returned. The Boeotians therefore being
overpress'd with the Burden of the War, and having lost many of their Soldiers,
and besides being in great want of Money, sent Ambassadors unto Philip to crave
his Assistance. This was very welcome News to the King to see that they were
brought low, having long desired to have their Leuctra Courage curbed and
tamed: However, he sent them a great number of Men merely upon this account,
lest he should be thought to be careless in the matter concerning the spoiling
of the Temple. Then the Phocians built a Castle at a Town called Abas, near the
Temple of Apollo; at which time being attacked by the Boeotians, some of them
presently fled scatteringly into the Neighboring Cities; others, to the number
of 500, got into the Temple, and there perished. Many other things happened to
the Phocians at that time, as by a Divine Hand; but that which is most
remarkable was this; They that fled into the Temple, thought themselves safe
under the Care and Protection of the Gods; but it fell out quite contrary; for
Divine Providence brought condign Punishment upon the Sacrilegers: There were
many Straw-Beds round about the Temple, and it happened that the Fire left in
The Temple of Apollo burnt near Abas.
the Tents of those that fled, caught hold of some of them; upon which the
Flame so mounted on a sudden, that it consumed the Temple, with all those that
fled into it: For it seems God would not spare the Sacrilegers, notwithstanding
all their Supplications.

Archias was then Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Marcus Aemilius and Titus
Quinctius Olym. 108. 3. Ant. Chapter 344. An. M. 3602. The end of the Phocian War.
were invested with the Consulship at Rome, when the Phocian War (which had
continued Ten Years) was ended in the manner following: When both the Boeotians
and Phocians were brought low with the continual Fatigues of the War, the
Phocians, by their Ambassadors, craved Aid of the Lacedaemonians, who sent them
a Thousand heavy-arm'd Men, under the Command of Archidamus the King of Sparta.
In like manner the Boeotians prayed Assistance from Philip; who thereupon being
joined with the Thessalians, entered Locris with a great Army, where finding
Phalecus (restored again to his Command) with a considerable Body of
Mercenaries, he prepared to fight him. Phalecus was then at Nicea, who finding
himself not able to engage with Philip, sent Ambassadors to him to treat.
Thereupon a Peace was concluded upon these Conditions: That Phalecus, with all
those then with him, might march away whither they thought fit. Whereupon
Phalecus (after Ratification on both sides) without any further delay, departed
with those Forces he had with him, to the number of Eight thousand, into
Peloponnesus. And the Phocians now Ant. Chapter 344.
hopeless, gave up themselves into the Power of Philip.

The King having without Fighting unexpectedly put an end to the Sacred War,
joined in a Senate with the Thessalians and Boeotians; in which it was decreed,
That the Great Council of the Amphictyons should be assembled, to whose
Decision all Matters should be wholly referred.

By them afterward it was decreed, That Philip and his Posterity should be
received as Philip decreed to have a double Voice among the Amphictyons.
Members into the Council of the Amphictyons, and should have the Privilege of
a double Voice, as the Phocians (whom he conquered) had before: That the Walls
of Three Cities in Phocis should be demolished: And, That the Phocians should
never after have any thing to do with the Temple, or be Members of the Court of
the Amphictyons: That they should never be possessed of Horse or Arms, until
they had made Restitution to the Oracle of the Moneys they had sacrilegiously
taken away. Moreover, That the Exiles of Phocis, and whoever they were that
were Partners with them in the Sacrilege, should be accounted accursed, and
driven out of every Place. Likewise, That all the Cities of the Phocians should
be rased to the Ground, and turned into Villages, every one of them not to
contain above Fifty Houses, and not to be under one Furlong distant one from
another; yet that the Phocians should keep their Lands, but should pay a
Tribute to the Oracle every Year of Sixty Talents, 'till they had paid the Sum
entered in the Registers at the time of the Sacrilege committed: That Philip,
with the Boeotians and Thessalians should set forth the Phythian Games, because
the Corinthians were Partners in the Impiety with the Phocians: That the
Amphictyons, together with Philip, should break in pieces upon the Rocks all
the Arms of the Phocians and Mercenaries, and then burn the Remains: And
lastly, Ant. Chapter 344.
That they should deliver up all the Horse.

When they had dispatched this, they made Laws and Orders for the restoring of
the Oracle to its former state, and all other matters relating to Religion and
the Public Peace, and advancing of Amity and Concord amongst the Grecians. All
these Decrees of the Amphictyons were allowed and confirmed by Philip, who
carried himself toward them with great Respect in all things, and then marched
back with his Army into Macedonia; and not only purchased Honor by his Piety
and martial Conduct, but made many Advances toward the future Enlargement of
his Dominions: For he had long coveted to gain the Sovereign Command of all
Greece, and to make War upon the Persians, which indeed at length happened. But
of these things we shall hereafter give a particular Account in their due time.

Let us now therefore return to what properly is an Appendant, and in course
annexed to the precedent History: Yet we judge it our Duty first to relate the
Judgments inflicted by the Gods upon the Sacrilegious Robbers of the Oracle;
for Vengeance overtook all of them in general, not only those who were the
chief Ringleaders, but even them that had the least hand in the Sacrilege.

Philomelus, the First and Chief Contriver of seizing the Temple, by a certain
(...). A Strait of War.
Fate of War was brought into such a strait, as that he cast himself headlong
from the top a of Rock.

His Brother Onomarchus having taken upon him the Command of the heartless and
discouraged Army, was afterward, with his Phocians and Mercenaries, totally
routed in Thessaly, and he himself taken and crucified.

Phayllus, the Third, who spoiled the Oracle of the greatest part of its Sacred
Treasures, that he might not altogether escape Punishment, A Consumption.
consumed away by a lingering Disease.

Phalecus, the last of them, having robbed the Temple of all that was left,
wandered up and down in great Terror, and in diverse Hazards and Troubles, for a
long time together; not in any Favor to him more than the rest of his
Confederates in Wickedness, Ant. Chapter 344.
but that he might be longer tormented, and that the Vengeance executed might
be more remarkable to all wherever he went. After his Flight, whereby he
escaped being a Prisoner, at the first he remained with his Mercenaries about
Peloponnesus, and maintained his Soldiers with the Money he had sacrilegiously
got into his hand from the Temple. Afterward he hired some great
Transport-Ships at Corinth, and having Four other (...) Hemiolas, of two Oars
upon a Bank.
small Vessels of his own, he prepared for a Voyage into Italy and Sicily,
hoping either to possess himself of some City in those Parts, or that he and
his Men should be employed by some or other as Mercenaries.

There was at that time a War broken out between the Lucanians and Tarrentines;
he pretended to the Soldiers that went along with him, that he was sent for by
the Sicilians and Italians: But when he came into the open Sea, some of the
Soldiers who were on board in the largest Vessel with Phalecus, discoursed
among themselves, and declared their Suspicions one to another, That it was but
a Pretense, and that none had sent for them: For they saw no Commanders go
along with him, that were sent from any that desired their Assistance; and they
perceived that the Voyage undertaken was long and tedious, and full of Hazards:
And therefore concluding that Phalecus was no longer to be credited (dreading
the Expedition beyond sea) they conspired, especially the Officers of the
Mercenaries, and with their drawn Swords so threatened both Phalecus and the
Pilot, that they compelled them to tack about, and return: The like being done
in the other Ships, they all came back, and arrived in Peloponnesus. And being
rendezvous'd at Malea, a Promontory of Laconia, they there found the Gnosian
Ambassadors, who accidently were come hither to Ant. Chapter 344.
list some foreign Soldiers. After some Discourse had past between them and
Phalecus and the other Officers, the Pay in hand was so large, that all of them
sailed away with them to Crete; and having landed at Or Cnosus, a City in
Crete. Lyctus, another City in Crete.
Gnosus, they presently took the City Lyctus at first Assault. But unexpected
Assistance came in suddenly to the expuls'd Lyctians; for the Tarrentines being
at that time engaged in a War with the Lucanians, sent Ambassadors to the
Lacedaemonians, from whom they were descended, to supply them with Auxiliaries;
upon which the Spartans, upon the account of their Kindred, were ready to
assist them; and to that end had both Naval and Land* Forces ready, under the
Command of Archidamus the King of Sparta. And being now ready to set sail for
Italy, at that very time came some from the Lyctians, earnestly desiring that
they would help them in the first place. The Lacedaemonians agreed to it, and
passed over to Crete, where they routed Phalecus and his Mercenaries, and
recovered the Country for the Lyctians.

Then Archidamus made for Italy, and there assisted the Tarrentines, and was
killed in Fight, behaving himself with great Valor and Resolution. He was an
excellent Commander, and of good Reputation in other respects; but ill spoken
of, by reason of his joining with the Phocians, as the principal Promoter and
Author of the seizing of the Temple and City of Delphos. He was King of
Lacedaemon Three and twenty Years, and his Son Agis succeeded him, and
continued Fifteen Years.

Afterward all the Mercenaries under Archidamus, and who were concerned in the
robbing of the Oracle, were killed by the Lucanians. But Phalecus being driven
out of Lyctus, besieged A City in Crete.
Sidon; and while he was preparing his Engines to batter the Walls, and making
his Approaches to the City, the Engines were set on fire, and consumed by a
Thunderbolt from Heaven, and a great number of the Soldiers who endeavored to
save Phalecus burnt to death by a Thunderbolt.
them, were consumed by Fire from Heaven, amongst whom was Phalecus himself:
Though there be some who report, That he was run through the Body by one of his
own Soldiers whom he had provoked. Those Soldiers that were left, were hired by
the Elean Exiles, and transported into Peloponnesus, who assisted them against
their own Countrymen. But the Arcadians, who assisted the Eleans, routed them,
and killed a great Number of the Mercenaries, and took Four thousand Prisoners;
which the Arcadians and Eleans divided amongst themselves, and the Arcadians
sold those under the Spear that fell to their Share: But the Eleans put all
theirs to the Sword, for their Impiety in robbing of the Oracle. And in this
manner all the Sacrilegers, and those that took part with them, met with their
due Punishment for their Wickedness. Likewise the most famous Cities that
shared with them in their Impiety, being afterward conquered by Antipater,
lost both their Authority and Liberty at once. Moreover, the Wives of the most
principal Men of Phocis, who had decked themselves with Necklaces of Gold
robbed from Delphos, met with the deserved Punishment of their Impiety. For one
that wore the Chain of Helen turning Whore, stained all the Glory of her
Beauty, by prostituting her self to every filthy Wretch. Another who adorned
her self with the Ornaments of Eriphyles, in a Fury of Madness and Rage had her
House set on fire by her eldest Son, and she and her Habitation consumed
together. In this manner (as we said before) those that dared thus to despise
and contemn the Deity, were overtaken by Divine Vengeance. On the contrary,
Philip, who appeared in defense of the Oracle, ever prospering from that time,
for his Piety, was at last declared Supreme Governor of all Greece, and gained
the largest Kingdom in Europe. And now having given an Account of the Sacred
War so far forth as we judged necessary, we shall return to Things of another
Nature.

In Sicily the Syracusians laboring under Intestine Seditions, and inslaved
under the Tyranny of many that Lorded over them, sent Ambassadors to Corinth to
desire a General to be dispatched to them, who might take Charge of the City,
and give a Check to the Ambition of such as sought to Tyrannize. Upon which, it
seemed very just and reasonable to the Corinthians to help those who were
originally descended from them; and therefore they Decreed to send them
Timoleon the Son of Timenetus, who was accounted Timoleon sent to Syracuse.
the most valiant and expert Commander among them; in short, he was a Person
every way Virtuous: But there was one Thing remarkable happened to him, which
much forwarded his being chosen General.

Timophanes his Brother, the richest and most daring Man among the Corinthians,
had some time before given evident Signs of his Ambition to aspire to the
Sovereignty. For about that time having armed and got together a Company of
lewd Fellows, and such as were in Debt, and Needy, went up and down the
Marketplace, seeming not to have the least Thoughts of the Principality, but
in truth acting in the mean time as an absolute Tyrant. But Timoleon, who
abhorred Monarchy, at the first advised his Brother to forbear, and lay aside
such Projects and Designs: But he being not only regardless of what was said to
him, but rather growing every day more Audacious and Peremptory; Timoleon,
because he could not work upon him by Words, killed him in the Marketplace.
Upon which a great Tumult was raised, and the Citizens upon the Commission of
so Ant. Chapter 344
horrid a Fact running in and flocking together, the Matter came to a Faction
and Sedition in the City. For some declared, That Timoleon, who had imbrewed
his Hands in the Blood of a Citizen, should undergo the Punishment due for his
Offense by the Law. But others were of a contrary Opinion, and that he deserved
rather to be commended, as one that had dispatched a Tyrant out of the way.

A Senate therefore was called, and the Matter brought before the Court, where
his Enemies most bitterly inveighed against him; but those who were more
moderate and favorable, consulted together to preserve him. And while the
Business remained in Debate, not yet decided, the Ambassadors from Syracuse
arrived, and imparting their Embassy to the Court, they very seasonably desired
a General to be sent them: Upon which, the Senate determined to send Timoleon,
and that he might the better behave himself, a most strange Proposal was
offered him, to choose as he pleased: For they let him know, That if he carried
himself well toward the Syracusians in his Command, then they would judge him
to be one that had killed a Tyrant; but if he were Covetous and Oppressive, he
should be condemned as a Murderer of his Brother.

Timoleon therefore, not so much out of Fear of what was threatened by the
Senate, as excited by the Principles of his own innate Virtue, managed Affairs
in Sicily with great Honor and Reputation to himself, and Advantage to the
Sicilians. For he subdued the Carthaginians, rebuilt the Grecian Cities which
were destroyed by the Barbarians, and restored all Sicily to its Liberty.
Lastly, having gained Syracuse, and the Greek desolated Cities, he filled them
all with Inhabitants, and made them very Populous. But we shall treat of these
Matters in their proper Place, and come to that part which is coherent to the
History.

CHAP. XI.
Timoleon' s Expedition into Sicily. The Carthaginians Army in Sicily.
Dionysius returns into Syracuse, is beaten by Hicetas; Hicetas gains Syracuse.
Timoleon' s Escape from Rhegium. Timoleon routs Hicetas, and gains Syracuse.
Philip invades the Illyrians. Dionysius expelled. Timoleon makes good Laws.
Philip invades Thrace.

NOW Eubulus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Marcus Fabius and Serulius
Sulpitius were Consuls at Rome; at this time Timoleon the Corinthian, advanced
by the Olymp. 108. 4. Ant. Chapter 343. An. M. 3603.
Syracusians to the Sovereign Command of all their Forces, prepared for his
Voyage into Sicily, and loosed from Corinth with Four Galleys, manned with
Seven hundred Mercenaries, and attended with Three Skiffs. In his Passage he
was joined by Three Vessels more from the Leucadians and Corcyrians, and so
with Ten Sail passed over the Ionian Sea. Timoleon looses from Corinth toward
Syracuse.
In this Voyage an unusual and remarkable Thing happened to Timoleon, the
Providence of the Gods seeming to favor his Undertaking, and thereby to point
out the future Fame and Glory of his Actions. For all the Night, a Light like a
burning Torch in the Heavens went before him, till the Fleet came to the Coasts
of Italy. For he was before told at Corinth by the Priests of Ceres and
Proserpina, that in the Night the Goddesses appeared to them, and told them,
that they would sail along with Timoleon to the Island that was peculiarly
Consecrated to them. Timoleon therefore, and all those with him, were very
cheerful, upon the Apprehension that the Gods favored their Enterprise; and
thereupon Ant. Chapter 343.
Timoleon dedicated one of the best of his Ships to the Goddesses, and ordered
that it should be called the Or called Ceres and Proserpina.
Sacred Ship of Ceres and Proserpina. And now when the Fleet came safe as far
as Metapontum in Italy, there arrived a Galley which had the Carthaginian
Ambassadors on board; who upon a Conference with Timoleon, charged him upon his
Peril not to begin any War, or so much as set his Foot upon Sicily. But he
being encouraged by them of Rhegium, who promised to join with him, loosed with
all have from Metapontum, designing by his speed to prevent the Report of his
Coming. For he was in a great Fear, left the Carthaginians, who were much
stronger at Sea, should block up his Passage into Sicily. Therefore he made
away with all speed to Rhegium.

The Carthaginians having a little before received Intelligence, that a great
War was likely to break out through all Sicily, carried themselves with all
Civility toward the The Carthaginians prepare for War in Sicily.
Confederate Cities; and putting an end to all Quarrels, entered into Leagues of
Amity and Friendship with the Princes of the Island, especially with Hicetas
General of the Syracusians, who was the most Potent. At length the
Carthaginians having raised great number of Forces both by Sea and Land,
transported them into Sicily under the Command of Hanno their General. They had
with them a Hundred and fifty Sail of Long Ships, a Land Army of Fifty thousand
Men, Three hundred Chariots, and Two thousand The Army of Carthaginians in
Sicily.
Carts or Carriages drawn by two Horses apiece; and besides these, a great
number of Arms of all sorts, and Engines of Battery, and an infinite Store of
Corn, Provision, and all other Things necessary for War. The first City they
set upon, was Entella; and having wasted and spoiled the Lands round about,
they shut up the Inhabitants Entella besieged.
by a close Siege. The Campanians possessed the City at that time, and being
terrified with the Multitude of their Enemies, sent for Aid to the other
Cities, who hated the Carthaginians; but none of them came in to them, except
them of Galeria, who sent them a Thousand Armed Men; who were intercepted by
the Carthaginians, and cut off every Man. The Campanians, who inhabited Aetna,
at first prepared to help them of Ant. Chapter 343.
Entella, upon the account of their Consanguinity; but hearing of the Slaughter
of the Galerians, they judged it more Advisable to sit still. Dionysius at
that time had regained his former Sovereignty over the Syracusians. Hicetas
therefore led a great Army thither, and encamped at Olympus, fortifying himself
with a Breast-work and a Trench, and drew Dionysius and Hicetas.
up against Dionysius, then playing the Tyrant in the City. But he protracted
the Siege for some time through want of Provision, and marched away to Leontum,
from whence he first moved. But Dionysius pursued him, and fell upon his Rear,
which occasioned the whole Army to engage. For Hircetas wheeled about, fought
and routed him, killing Three thousand of his Mercenaries upon the Spot, and
put the rest to Flight; and pursuing them so hotly, that he fell pell-mell with
him into the City, and so possessed himself Hicetas takes Syracuse.
of the whole City of Syracuse, except the Island. And thus went Matters
between Hicetas and Dionysius at that time.

But Timoleon arriving at Rhegium the third Day after the taking of Syracuse,
lay with his Fleet in the Port next to the City. At that time came into Port
Twenty Carthaginian Galleys: The Rhegians favoring Timoleon, called an
Assembly, and proposed Terms of Compounding Matters; so that the Carthaginians
supposing Timoleon would be persuaded Ant. Chapter 343.
to return home; were not careful to place sufficient Guards, Timoleon
therefore himself (not giving the least Ground to suspect his Flight) kept
close to the Court, but ordered, that Nine of his Ships should set Sail, and
make away with all the have they could. In the mean time, while the Thoughts of
the Carthaginians were intent upon the Speeches of the Rhegians, which were
lengthened out of Purpose and Design, Timoleon privately Timoleon escapes from
Rhegium by a Wile.
withdraws himself, and makes to the Ship that was left, and hoises up Sail and
away he goes. The Carthaginians thus deluded, endeavored to pursue him; but
because he was got too far off, and Night approached; Timoleon with his whole
Fleet arrived safe at Tauromenum. Andromachus the Prince of that City, (who
always was a Friend to the Syracusians,) courteously received the Refugees, and
was greatly serviceable to them in their avoiding of the Pursuers. Hicetas
afterward with an Army of Five thousand Men came against Adriana, and encamped
near the City. But Timoleon drawing some Regiments out of Tauromenum, marched
from thence, having with him at the most but a Thousand Men. And going out of
the Town in the Twilight, he reached Adriana the next Day; there he set up the
Hicetians at the very time they happened to be at Meat, and broke in upon their
Camp, and killed Three hundred, and took Six hundred Prisoners, and possessed
himself of the Camp. To this Stratagem he added another, for he made straight
away with all speed to Syracuse, and dispatching his March with all speed, he
broke into the City on a sudden, and by the swiftness of his March came there
before those that fled. And these were the Transactions of this Year.

Lycisco executed the Office of Archon at Athens, and Marcus Valerius and
Marcus Popilius Olymp. 109. 1. Ant. Chapter 342. An. M. 3604.
were created Roman Consuls when the Hundred and Ninth Olympiad was celebrated,
wherein Aristolocus the Athenian won the Course. This was likewise the first
time that the Romans entered into a League with the Carthaginians. In Caria,
Idreius Prince of the Carians died, after he had reigned Seven Years, whom Ada
(both his Wife and Sister) succeeded, and governed Four Years.

In Sicily, Timoleon being strengthened with the Confederacy of them of
Adranita and Tynderita, greatly increased his Army. In the mean time there were
great Confusions in Syracuse, by reason that Dionysius had got Possession of
the Island Hicetas, Achradina, and the new City, and Timoleon the rest of the
City; and lastly, the Carthaginians had entered the great Harbor with a Fleet
of an Hundred and fifty Sail, and lay near, encamped with an Army of Fifty
thousand Men. And now Timoleon was in great Perplexity, being environed by so
many Enemies; when on a sudden the Tables were turned. First Marcus, Prince of
Catana, with a great Army came in to the Assistance of Timoleon. Afterward
many of the Forts and Castles (out of love of Liberty) sided with him, and
presently the Corinthians sent Ten Galleys full of Soldiers, and Pay for them,
to Syracuse.

By these Supplies Timoleon took Heart, and the Carthaginians were so
discouraged and affrighted, that very imprudently they sailed out of the
Harbor, and drew off their whole Army, and marched away into their own
Territories. Hicetas being thus stripped of all Assistance, Timoleon, now
stronger than the Citizens, possessed himself of all Syracuse. Presently after
he received Messina (who had sided with the Carthaginians) into his Protection.
And this was the State of Sicily at the time.

In Macedonia, Philip, who bore an Hereditary Hatred against the Illyrians, and
had Philip invades the Illyrians.
with them an everlasting Controversy, invaded their Country with a powerful
Army, and wasted and spoiled their Lands, and after the taking of many Towns,
returned with rich, Booty into Macedonia. Afterward making an Expedition into
Thessaly, he cast all the Tyrants out of the Cities; and by this means gained
the Hearts of the Thessalians: For by gaining them to be his Allies, he hoped
easily to procure an Interest in all Greece; and by the Issue it appeared so
afterward. For the bordering Grecians presently, in imitation of the
Thessalians, very readily entered into a League with Philip.

Pythodorus was now Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Caius Plautius and Titus
Manlius Olymp. 109. 2. Ant. Chapter 341. An. M. 3605. Dionysius abdicates the
Government.
executed the Consular Dignity at Rome. At this time Dionysius being brought
into extremity of Danger, and in a terrible Fright, was wrought upon by
Timoleon to surrender the Castle, and upon Condition of Abdicating the
Government, had Liberty safely to depart to Peloponnesus, with all his Goods
and Movables.

And thus he, through Sloth and Cowardice, lost this so eminent and famous a
Principality, bound fast (as they used to term it (with an Adamant, and spent
the rest of his Days It Is said, he kept a private School at Corinth till he was
very old. Just. lib. 21.
in a poor and mean Condition. Whose change of Fortune, and course of Life,
exhibit a clear Example to those, who like Fools boast in the Times of
Prosperity, For he, who a little before had Four hundred Galleys at Command,
not long after in a small Skiff was conveyed to Corinth, and became a Spectacle
to Admiration of a wonderful Change. Timoleon having possessed himself of the
Island and Castles lately held by Dionysius, demolished all the Forts and
Palaces of the Tyrants through the Island, and freed all the Towns from the
Garrisons. And continually employed himself in framing of Laws, and instituted
such as were most proper for the Administration of the Democracy. And in his
making such as related to private Contracts, he had a special Regard to
Equality and mutual Recompense. Moreover he appointed a chief Magistrate to be
Ant. Chapter 341.
Yearly chosen, whom the Syracusians call the Servant of Jupiter Olympus.
Amphipolus of Jupiter Olympus, and the first Amphipolus was Callimenes. From
hence arose the Custom amongst the Syracusians, to note their Years with the
respective Governments of these Magistrates, which continues to this very time
of writing this History, and though the Frame of the Government be now changed.
For since the Romans imparted the Laws of their City to the Sicilians, the
Office of the Amphipolus has still continued, being now grown old, having been
executed above Three hundred Years. And thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at
that time.

In Macedonia, Philip having persuaded all the Greek Cities in Thrace to
Concord amongst themselves, made an Expedition against the Thracians. For
Cersobleptes the Thracian King was continually destroying the Greek Cities in
the Hellespont, and harrassing and spoiling the Country. Therefore Philip, to
put a Check to the Designs and Progress of the Barbarians, invaded them with a
great Army, and was so Victorious, that he forced them to pay a Tenth, as a
Tribute to the Kingdom of Macedonia. And by building of strong Towns in
convenient Places, he curbed the Insolency of the Thracians. The Greek Cities
therefore being freed from their Fears, with great Eagerness entered into a
League of Confederacy with Philip.

As to Writers, Theopompus of Chius composed an History of the Acts of Philip,
in Three Books, in which are interwoven the Affairs of Sicily. For beginning
with the Sovereignty of Dionysius the Elder, he comprehended an Account of the
Transactions of Fifty Years, and ended with the Expulsion of Dionysius the
Younger. These Three Books are from the Forty first to the Forty third Year of
the Fifty Years.

CHAP. XII.
The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The Preparations of the Carthaginians against
Timoleon. The remarkable Siege of Perinthus by Philip. Pexodorus expells his
Brother Adam from the Principality in Caria. Byzantium be^ieged by Philip.

WHEN the chief Magistracy of Athens was in the Hands of Sosigenes, and Marcus
Valerius and Marcus Publius executed the Office of Consuls at Rome, Arymbas
Olymp. 109. 3. Ant. Chapter 340. An. M. 3604.
King of the Molossians died, after he had reigned Ten Years, leaving his Son
Aeacidas the Father of Pyrrbus: But by the Help of Philip of Macedon, Alexander
the Brother of Olympias succeeded Arymbas. * Caius Petilius.


In Sicily, Timoleon marched against the Leontines, (to whom Hicetas had joined
himself with a great Army,) and in the first place besieged the new City (as it
was called). * A part of Epyrus.
But the Garrison being very strong, they easily repulsed the Assailants, and
thereupon he raised his Siege without effecting any thing. Then he made for
Engya, (at that time under The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily.
the Tyranny of Leptines,) and plied it with continual Assaults, being very
earnest and intent to set them free by the Expulsion of Leptines.

While Timoleon was thus employed, Hicetas marches away from Leontium with all
his Forces, and besieged Syracuse; but having lost there a great part of his
Army, he hasted back to Leontium. Timoleon at length so terrified Leptines,
that under the Terms of safe Conduct, he was sent away to Peloponnesus, and by
these Banishments Timoleon exposed to the Graecians the Trophies of his Victory
over the Tyrants. And forasmuch as the Apolloniates were likewise under the
Power of Leptines, he received Apollonia into his Protection, and restored
them, as well as the Engyans, to their Liberty. But being in great want of
Money, so that he knew not how to pay the Soldiers, he ordered a Thousand Armed
Men, commanded by Expert Officers, to make Incursions into the Carthaginian
Territories. These harrass'd the Country far and near, and got together
abundance of rich Plunder and Spoil, and brought it to Timoleon, who exposed
all to public Sale, and raised a vast Sum of Money, whereby they paid the
Soldiers for a long time beforehand. Presently after he possessed himself of
Entella, and put to Death Fifteen of the Citizens, who adhered to the
Carthaginians, and restored the rest to their Liberties. Timoleon growing every
Day in Reputation for his Valor and Conduct, all the Greek Cities through
Sicily readily submitted to him, and he as readily set them at Liberty to
govern by their own Laws. Many Cities likewise of the Sicani, Sicilians, and
other Countries subject to the Carthaginians, sent presently their Ambassadors
to him, in order to be received into a League, and be his Confederates.

But the Senate and People of Carthage perceiving, that their Officers were
sluggish and unactive in the Management of the War, determined to send over
others with a considerable Additional Force. And to that end, with all
Dispatch, they raised out of their own City, and from among the Africans, all
such as they judged able to bear Arms for this Expedition. And besides, they
took care to be provided with a sufficient Stock of Money, and listed
Mercenaries out of Spain, Gaul, and In Italy, now the States of Genoa.
Ligurla. They fitted out likewise a great Navy, both of Men of War. Olymp.
109. 4. Ant. Chapter 339. An. M. 3605.
Long Ships and others, for carrying Provision, and in all other Respects were
so careful and diligent, that nothing was wanting that was necessary.

At the time when Nichomachus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Caius Martius
and Titus Manlius Torquatus were Roman Consuls, Phocion the Athenian subdued
and expuls'd Clitarchus Prince of * Eretria, whom Philip had set over that City.

In Caria Pizodarus. Petinthus besieged by Philip in Thrace in Propontis.
, Pexodorus, the youngest Brother, expelled Adam out of the Principality, and
reigned Five Years, to the time of Alexander's Expedition into Asia. But the
Power of Philip still increasing, he marched with an Army against A City in
Euboea, now Negropont.
Perinthus, which favored the Athenians, and much obstructed him in his
Designs. He pushed on the Siege therefore with all Eagerness, and to that end
incessantly battered the Walls with his Engines, from time to time relieving
those that were tired with fresh Men: He made likewise Approaches with Towers
of Fourscore Cubits high, mounting much above the Walls, whereby he greatly
annoyed the Besieged, being so high above them: He so plied them likewise with
his Battering Rams, and undermined the Foundations of the Walls to that degree,
that a great part of them tumbled down. But the Perinthians defended themselves
with that Valor, that they speedily raised up a new Wall, upon which there
were such Disputes and (...).
Fighting, the one to gain, and the other to defend the Wall, that it was to be
admired.

In the mean time, while they were thus eagerly contending on both Sides,
Philip being well furnished with (...).
Shot, mightily galled them upon the Wall. But the Perinthians, though they
lost many Men every Day, were reinforced with Supplies of Men, Darts, and Shot,
from Byzantium; so that hereby becoming of equal Force with the Enemy, they
took Courage, and valiantly stood to it for the Preservation of their Country.

However the King remitted nothing of his former Heat and Diligence; and
dividing his Army into several Battalions, girt the City round, and relieving
his Men by Turns, assaulted the Walls continually Night and Day. He had an Army
of Thirty thousand Men, and a vast Multitude of Darts and Engines, both for
Battery and other Purposes; so that the Besieged were very sorely pressed. The
Siege having now continued long, and many of the Townsmen killed and wounded,
and Provision growing scanty, the Town was upon the Point of being surrendered;
when Fortune favoring the Distressed, handed to them an unexpected
Deliverance. For the growing Power of the King being noised abroad throughout
Asia, the King of Persia, who now began to suspect the Greatness of Philip,
commanded by his Letters the Lords Lieutenants of the Seacoasts to assist the
Perinthians with what Forces they could. Upon which, they all unanimously sent
to Perinthus a great Number of Mercenary Soldiers, Plenty of Coin, sufficient
Provision, Weapons, and all other Things necessary for War. The Bizantians
likewise sent thither a Commander, and the best of their Soldiers. The Forces
now equal on both sides, and the War revived, there was now again so sharp an
Encounter, both to gain and defend the City, as that none could possibly
exceed: For Philip, by the continual Batteries of the Rams, brought down part
of the Wall, and by his Shot forced the Besieged from the Bu^warks, so that he
made his way with a strong Body of Men through the Ruins of the Wall, and
scaled the Bulwarks that were before cleared of them that should have defended
them. The matter being disputed hand to hand at the Swords point, Death and
Wounds followed, inasmuch as the Rewards of Victory put Life into the Valor of
both Parties: For the Macedonians being assured they should have the Plunder of
a rich City, and likewise be honorably rewarded by Philip, were resolved
valiantly to undergo all Hardships whatsoever. The Besieged, on the other hand,
having as it were before their Eyes the Miseries attending a Place taken by
Storm, with generous and undaunted Resolutions, shunned nothing of Hazard, for
their own and the Preservation of their Country. The Situation of the Place
contributed much all along to the Besieged for the Batteling the Enemy: For
Perinthus is situated on the Seaside, upon a rising Neck of Land, in a
Peninsula stretched out a Furlong in length: The Houses are close together, and
very high; for one stands above another, according to the Ascent of the Hill;
and the Form of the City represents, as it were, a Theater. And therefore
though a large Breach was made in the Walls, yet they within were but little
prejudiced thereby; for the strait and narrow Passage being barricado'd, the
higher Houses were instead, and as advantageous as a Wall. Philip therefore
having gained the Wall, after much Toil and Hazard, found another far stronger
made by the Situation of the Houses: And besides all these Disadvantages, he
saw that every thing necessary for War was readily and in great abundance sent
to them from Byzantium; therefore he divided his Army into two Bodies; the one
half he left with the best of his Commanders to carry on the Siege, and with
the rest he marches speedily away to Byzantium, and lays close Siege to it on a
sudden. Upon whick, the Townsmen were put into great fear and perplexity,
having before sent away their Soldiers, Arms, and other things necessary for
War, to the Perinthians. These were the things done at Perinthus and Byzantium
at that time. Here Ephorus, one of the Writers, ends his History with the Siege
of Perinthus. In his Memoirs he comprehends the Affairs both of the Greeks and
Barbarians, from the return of the This Return was about the time the Ark was
taken by the Philistines, 80 Years after the Ruin of Troy, before Christ 1100
Years.
Heraclide, for the space of almost Seven hundred and fifty Years; and divides
his History into Thirty Books, to every one of which he adjoins a Preface.
Diyllus the Athenian continues this History of Ephorus, treating of the Actions
of the Grecians and Barbarians to the Death of Philip.

CHAP. XIII.
The Athenians aid Byzantium. Philip raises the Siege. The Carthaginians
transport Forces into Sicily. The remarkable Victory of Timoleon over the
Carthaginians. The Acts of Timoleon in Sicily. The Works of Hiero in Sicily.

WHen Theophrastus was Lord Cancellor at Athens, and Marcus Valerius and Aulus
Cornelius Roman Consuls, The hundred and tenth Olympiad began, in which
Anticles Olymp. 110. 1. Ant. Chapter 338. An. M. 3605. The Athenians aid Byzantium.
Philip raises his Sieges, and makes Peace.
the Athenian was Victor. Philip then besieging Byzantium, the Athenians
judging he had broken the Peace they had made with him, forthwith fitted out a
great Fleet against him in aid of the Byzantians; whose Example they of Chius,
Coos, and Rhodes, and other Gracians followed, and sent Auxiliaries to the same
Place. Whereupon Philip being startled at the Forces of the Grecians, raised
both his Sieges, and made Peace with the Athenians and the rest of the Grecians
that were in Arms against him.

In the mean time, the Carthaginians, after their great Preparations, transport
their Forces into Sicily, which with those that were before in the Island,
amounted to Seventy thousand Foot; and Horse, Chariots, and Wagons, no fewer
than Ten thousand. They had also a Navy of Two hundred Long Ships.
Men of War; and Transport-Ships for the conveying of Horses, Arms, and
Provision above a Thousand. Timoleon, though he was informed of this great
Preparation, yet was not at all afrighted with the Barbarians, though his Army
was but small. He was at this time engaged still in War with Hicetas, but at
length agreed the matter, and by the accession of his Forces greatly increased
his Army. And now he judged it most for his advantage to transfer the War with
the Carthaginians Ant. Chapter 338.
into their own Territory; by this means to preserve the Country of his
Confederates, and, on the other side, by Waste and Spoil to weaken the Enemy:
To this end he forthwith mustered his Army, consisting of Syracusians,
Mercenaries, and other Confederates; and in a General Assembly, by a pithy
Oration, advised them to be Courageous, for that all now lay at stake: Which
was received with general Acclamation, and all pressed him without delay to be
led forth against the Enemy. Whereupon he advanced, not having with him above
Twelve thousand Men: But as soon as he came into the Confines of Agrigentum,
there arose a sudden Mutiny in his Camp; for a Mercenary Soldier, called A
Mutiny raised by Thracius.
Thracius, a bold and impudent Fellow, none exceeding him in that respect
(lately a Companion of those Phocians who robbed the Temple of Delphos)
committed a Fact agreeable to his former Villainies: For whereas most of them
who had an hand in that Sacrilege were overtaken by Divine Vengeance (as before
related) this only Fellow seemed to have escaped; and at that time endeavored
to persuade the Mercenaries to a Defection: For he bawled it out that Timoleon
was crazed and distracted, and that he was leading the Soldiers to certain and
unavoidable Destruction: The Number of the Carthaginian Army (he said) was six
times more than they; and so well furnished with all things necessary for War,
that none could compare with them; and yet he assured them of Victory, playing
away the Lives of the Soldiers, as it were, at Dice, because he was not able to
pay them their Arrears, which had been advancing for a long time together: He
persuaded them therefore to return to Syracuse, and demand their Pay, and not
follow Timoleon in that desperate Expedition.

This Discourse was not unpleasant to the Mercenaries; and while they were just
ready to revolt, Timoleon, by Entreaties and large Promises, at length
prevailed, and put an end to the Mutiny. However, a Thousand Men followed
Thracius, whose Punishment was deferred Ant. Chapter 338.
for the present. And in the mean time Timoleon writ to his Friends at Syracuse
to receive the Deserters courteously, and pay the Mercenaries their Wages; and
so by this means he altogether extinguished the Fire of Sedition; but excluded
those obstinate Mutineers from the Glory of a famous Victory.

In the mean time, having with fair Words reduced the rest to their former
Obedience, he marched toward the Enemy, which lay encamped not far off. Then
he called the Army together, and encouraged them to the Battle, by setting
forth and aggravating the Sloth and Cowardice of the Carthaginians, and putting
them in mind of the Successes of Gelon. And when all with one Voice cried out
for Fighting without delay with the Barbarians, at that very time passed by
some Carriage-Horses laden with Bundles of Persley to strew in the Tents.
Timoleon thereupon declared, that it was an Omen of Victory; for (as he said)
the Crown at the Games in Honor of Neptune, celebrated every 5th Year, in the
Istmos near Corinth.
Istmian Games was made up of the same Herb. Hereupon the Soldiers, by the
Command of Timoleon, made themselves Crowns of Parsley; and with these round
their Heads, with great Joy marched against the Enemy, as if the Gods had
assured them of certain Victory; as by the Issue it appeared so to be: For
beyond all expectation they overcame their Adversaries, not only by their own
Valor, but by the special Help and Assistance of the Gods. For Timoleon, with
a well-appointed Body of Men, marched down from the Tops of certain Hills to
the River; and upon a sudden, being himself in the middle of the Battle,
attacked Ten thousand of the Barbarians that were but newly passed over. Upon
which, there was a very sharp Engagement, in which the Valor and Activity of
the Greeks so far prevailed, that a mighty Slaughter was made among Ant. Chapter
338.
the Barbarians. Whilst those that first passed over took their Heels and fled,
the whole Carthaginian Army came over the River, in order to repair their Loss.
Hereupon the The Carthaginians routed by Timoleon.
Battle was renewed; and while the Carthaginians were with their Multitude
hemming in the Grecians round, on a sudden there arose such a violent Storm of
Hail, Thunder, and Lightning, with a raging Tempest of furious Winds, which
beat upon the Backs of the Grecians, but fell foul upon the Face of the
Barbarians: So that Timoleon's Army with ease endured this tempestuous Shock;
but the Carthaginians not able to bear the pressure of so many Adversaries,
being at the same time hewn down by the Grecians, quit the Field and fled: And
the whole Body made to the River, where both Foot, Horse, and Chariots were in
that confusion mixed one amongst another, and trodden under-foot one by
another, and pierced through their Bodies by one another's Swords and Spears,
as that a miserable Slaughterwas made without all possibility of Relief. Others
being forced in heaps into the River by the Enemy's Horse, and pursued close at
their backs, after receiving many Wounds, there perished. And many, though they
were never toutch'd by the Enemy's Sword; yet through Fear, and the Throng and
Difficulties of passage over the River, being pressed, in heaps one upon
another, there breathed out their last. And that which contributed no little to
the common Destruction, the River was swollen to that excessive height, that
many (especially such as attempted to swim over the Water with their Arms) were
drowned. In conclusion, Two thousand and five hundred, who made up the Sacred
Brigade of the Carthaginians, and for Valor Ant. Chapter 338.
and the Glory of their Arms, and greatness of their Estates, excelled all the
rest, fought valiantly, and were cut off every Man. Of the rest of the common
Soldiers there were slain at least Ten thousand, and above Fifteen thousand
taken Prisoners. Many of the Chariots being broken in pieces in the Fight, only
Two hundred fell into the hands of the Grecians; but all the Bag and Baggage.
The greatest part of the Arms were lost in the River: But a Thousand Coats of
Mail.
Brigandines and Ten thousand Shields were brought into the Tent of Timoleon;
of which some were hung up in the Temples at Syracuse, and others distributed
among the Confederates; others were sent to Corinth, and ordered to be
dedicated to Neptune. And although very rich Spoils were taken (for that the
Carthaginians abounded in Gold and Silver, At Flaggens, Cups, etc.
Plate, and other Furniture of great value, according to the Grandeur and
Riches of their Country) yet he gave all to the Soldiers, as the Reward of
their Valor. The Carthaginians that escaped, with much ado got to Lilibeum, in
such Fear and Consternation, that they durst not go on board their Ships, in
order to return to Africa; as if through the Anger of the Gods, they should be
swallowed up by the Libean Sea.

As soon as the News of this Overthrow was brought to Carthage, their Spirits
were mightily broken, and they expected that Timoleon would invade them with
his Army upon the first Opportunity: Therefore they forthwith recalled Gescon,
the Brother of Hanno, from his Banishment, and being a stout Man, and an
experienced Soldier, created him General. But looking upon it not Advisable
for the future to venture the Lives of the Citizens, they resolved to hire
Soldiers out of other Nations, and especially from among the Graecians, not
doubting but that many would List themselves, by reason of the large Pay
promised by the rich Carthaginians. They sent likewise Ambassadors into Sicily,
with Orders to strike up a Peace upon any Terms whatsoever.

After the end of this Year Lysimachides was created chief Governor of Athens,
and Quintus Servilius and Marcus Rutilius bore the Office of Consuls at Rome.
Then Timoleon, Olymp. 110. 2. Ant. Chapter 337. An. M. 3606.
as soon as he returned to Syracuse, in the first place expelled those as
Traitors out of the City, who had deserted him through the Instigation of
Thracius. These being transported into Italy, they seized upon a Seaport Town
of the Brutii.
Brettians, and plundered it. Upon which the Brutians were so enraged, that
they forthwith came against them with a great Army, took the Town by Storm, and
put every Man of them to the Sword. And such was the miserable End of these
Deserters of Timoleon, as the just Punishment of their former Villainy.

Afterward he took Posthumous the Tyrant, and put him to Death, who had
infested the Seas with his Piracies, and came at that time into the Port of
Syracuse as a Friend. He received likewise with all Demonstrations of Kindness
Five thousand Persons, whom the Corinthians had sent over to plant new
Colonies. The Carthaginians now by their Ambassadors having earnestly su'd to
him for Peace, he granted it to them upon these Terms; That all the Greek
Cities should be set free; That the River Lycus should be the Bound between the
Territories of both Parties; and, That the Carthaginians should not for the
future assist any of the Tyrants against the Syracusians. Having afterward
subdued Hicetas, he ordered him an Honorable Burial; and took Aetna by Storm,
and put all the Campanians to the Sword. And he so terrified Nichodemus the
Tyrant of the Centorippians, that he fled out of the City. Then he forced
Apoilonides, who Lorded it over them of Agyra, to Abdicate Ant. Chapter 337.
the Government, and the Inhabitants thus freed, he enrolled them as Citizens
of Syracuse. To conclude, having rooted up all the Tyrants throughout the whole
Island, and freed the Cities from their Oppression, he received them all into
his Protection, and they became his Confederates. Then he caused Proclamation
to be made throughout all Greece, That the Senate and People of Syracuse
offered Houses and Lands to all who were willing to be Members of the
Commonwealth of Syracuse: Upon which, many came flocking over as to the
Possession of a new Inheritance. At length Forty Thousand new Planters had
their Shares by Lot in those Lands that yet remained undivided within the
Territories of Syracuse; and Ten thousand were allotted to Agyra, being a very
large and pleasant Country.

Not long after, he caused all the ancient Laws of Diocles for the Government
of the Syracusians, to be reviewed, and amended. Such part of them as concerned
private Commerce and Inheritances he altered not; but those that related to the
Administration of the Public Government, and the Commonwealth, he amended as
he thought most expedient. Cephalus a Corinthian, a Learned and Prudent Man,
was chiefly concerned in this Emendation and Correction of the Laws. When this
Business was finished, he translated the Leontines into Syracuse, and greatly
enlarged Camarina with Multitudes of Inhabitants. And to sum up all, he brought
Things to that pass throughout all Sicily, (now through his Care in perfect
Peace and Tranquillity,) as that the Cities in a very short time abounded in
Wealth, and all Earthly Blessings. For through the Seditions and Intestine
Wars, (which Sicily labored under for a long time together,) and the many
Tyrants that set up for themselves, it was brought to that miserable Condition,
that the Ant. Chapter 337.
Cities were depopulated, and the Lands lay wast and untilled, and no Crops to
be had for the Supply of Daily Food. But now that there were many Plantations
of Colonies blessed with a constant Peace, and the Land was every where manured
and improved by the Labor of the Husbandman, it began to yield all sorts of
Fruits, which being vented (with great Advantage) to the Merchants, the
Inhabitants grew exceeding rich in a very short time. And this abundance of
Wealth occasioned in that Age many stately Structures to be erected up and down
in Honor of the Gods. As one among the rest near to the Island of Syracuse,
called The House of Sixty Beds, built by Agathocles, for Greatness (...).
and Beauty excelling all the Works in Sicily; and because (as it were in
Contempt) it overtop'd all the Temples of the Gods, (as a manifest Indication
of their Anger,) it was beaten down by a Thunderbolt. At the lesser Haven
likewise there were Towers built of Outlandish Stone, in which were
Inscriptions cut, and the Name of Agathocles, who raised them. Besides these,
not long after were built by Hiero the King an A Temple.
Olympus in the Marketplace, and an Altar near the Theater a Furlong in
length, and in height and breadth proportionably.

In the lesser Cities likewise, as in Agyra, (which by reason of the Richness
of the Soil as aforesaid received new Colonies,) Hiero.
he built a Theater, (the most Glorious of any in Sicily next to that at
Syracuse,) and erected Temples to the Gods, built a Court, a Marketplace, and
stately Towers, and raised over the Tombs and Monuments many large Pyramids of
admirable Workmanship.

CHAP. XIV.
Elatea taken by Philip. Great Consternations in Athens for fear of Philip. The
Boeotians join with the Athenians through the Solicitation of Demosthenes.
Python, a famous Orator. The Battle at Cheronaea between Philip and the
Athenians. Lycides the Athenian General put to Death. Philip rebuked by
Demades, made General of Greece. Timoleon dies.

WHEN Charondas executed the Office of Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Lucius
Olymp. 110. 3. Ant. Chapter 336. An. M. 3607. Elatea taken by Philip. Athens in
great fear of Philip.
Aemilius and Caius Plotius were Roman Consuls, Philip King of Macedon being in
Amity with many of the Graecians, made it his chief Business to bring under the
Athenians, thereby with more ease to gain the Sovereignty of Greece. To that
end, he presently possessed himself of Elatea, and brought all his Forces
thither, with a Design to fall upon the Athenians, hoping easily to overcome
them, in regard they were not (as he conceived) prepared for War, by reason of
the Peace lately made with them; which fell out accordingly. For after the
taking of Elatea, some hasted in the Night to Athens, informing them, that
Elatea was taken by the Macedonians, and that Philip was designing to invade
Attica with all his Forces. The Athenian Commanders surpised with the
Suddenness of the Thing, sent for all the Trumpeters, and commanded an Alarm to
be sounded all Night: Upon which, the Report flew through all the Parts of the
City, and Fear roused up the Courage of the Citizens. As soon as Day appeared,
the People, without any Summons from the Magistrate, (as the Custom was) all
flocked to the Theater. To which Place, as soon as the Commanders came, with
the Messenger that brought the News, and had declared to them the Business,
Fear and Silence filled the Theater, and none who were used to influence the
People, had a Heart to give any Advice. And although a Crier called out to such
as ought to declare their Minds, what was to be done in order to their Common
Security, yet none appeared who offered any thing of Advice in the present
Exigency. The People therefore in great Terror and Amazement cast their Eyes
upon Demosthenes, who stood up and bid them be Courageous, Demosthenes.
and advised them forthwith to send Ambassadors to Thebes, to Treat with the
Boeotians to join with them in Defense of the Common Liberty; for the shortness
of Time (he Ant. Chapter 336.
said) would not admit of an Embassy of Aid from the other Confederates, for
that the King would probably invade Attica within Two Days; and being that he
must march through Boeotia, the main and only Assistance was to be expected
from them. And it was not to be doubted, but that Philip, who was in League
with the Boeotians, would in his March solicit them to make War upon the
Athenians. The People approved of his Advice, and a Decree was forthwith
Recorded, that an Embassy should be dispatched as Demosthenes had advised. But
then it was debated, who was the most Eloquent Person, and so most fit to
undertake this Affair. Whereupon Demosthenes being pitched upon to be the Man,
he readily complied; forthwith hasted away, prevails with the Boeotians, The
Boeotians join with the Athenians.
and returns to Athens. The Athenians therefore having now doubled their Forces
by the Accession of the Boeotians, began again to be in good Heart; and
presently made Charetes and Physicles Generals, with Command to march with the
whole Army into Boeotia. All the Youth readily offered themselves to be Listed,
and therefore the Army with a swift March came suddenly to Cheronaea in
Boeotia. The Boeotians wondered at the quickness of their Approach, and were
thereupon as diligent themselves, and hasting to their Arms, marched away to
meet the Athenians, and being joined, they there expected the Enemy.

Philip indeed had first sent Ambassadors to the Council of the Boeotians,
amongst whom the most famous was Python; for he was so Eminent for Eloquence,
that in the Senate he was set up to encounter Demosthenes in the Business
relating to the Confederacy, excelling Ant. Chapter 336.
indeed the rest by far, but judged inferior to Demosthenes. Demosthenes
himself, in one of his Orations, glories (as if he had done some mighty Thing)
in a Speech of his against Python, a famous Orator.
this Orator, in these Words: Then I yielded not a jot to Python, strutting in
his Confidence, as if he would have overwhelmed me with^a Torrent of Words.
However, though Philip could not prevail with the Boeotians to be his
Confederates, yet he resolved to fight with them both. To this end, (after a
stay for some time for those Forces that were to join him,) he marched into
Boeotia with an Army of at least Thirty thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse.
Both Armies were now ready to engage, for Courage and Valor neither giving
Place to the other; but as to Number of Men, and Skill in Martial Affairs, the
King was far Superior. For having fought very many Battles, and for the most
part coming off a Conqueror, he had gained much Experience in Matters of War;
on the other hand, Iphicrates, Chabrius, and Timotheus, (the Athenians best
Commanders) were now dead; and Chares, the chief of them that were left,
differed but little from a common Soldier, as to the Wisdom and Conduct of a
General. About Sunrising the Armies on both Sides drew up in Battalia. The
King ordered his The Battle of Charonea between Philip and the Athenians.
Son Alexander (who was then newly come to Man's Estate; and had even at that
time given evident Demonstrations of his Valor, and the Sprightliness of his
Spirit in managing Affairs) to Command one Wing, joining with him some of the
best of his Commanders. He himself with a choice Body of Men commanded the
other Wing, and placed and disposed the Regiments and Brigades in such Posts
and Stations as the present Occasion required. The Athenians marshalled their
Army according to the several Nations, and committed one Part to the Boeotians,
and commanded the rest themselves. At length the Armies engaged, and a fierce
and bloody Battle was fought, which continued Ant. Chapter 336.
a long time with great Slaughter on both sides, uncertain which way Victory
would incline, until Alexander earnest to give an Indication of his Valor to
his Father, charged with a more than ordinary Heat and Vigor, and being
assisted with many stout and brave Men, was the first that broke through the
main Body of the Enemy next to him, with the slaughter of many, and bore down
all before him: And when those that seconded him did the like, then the
Regiments next to the Former were broke to pieces. At length, the Earth being
strewn with heaps of Dead Carcasses, those with Alexander first put the Wing
opposed to them to flight. The King himself likewise in the Head of this
Regiment, fought with no less Courage and Resolution; and that the Glory of the
Victory might not be attributed to his Son, he forced the Enemy, opposed to
him, to give ground, and at length put them to a total Rout, and so was the
chief Instrument of the Victory. There were above a Thousand Athenians killed
in this Battle, and no fewer than Two thousand taken Prisoners. A great Number
likewise of the Boeotians were slain, and many fell into the Hands of the Enemy

After the Battle Philip set up a Trophy, and having given Liberty for the
burying of the Dead, he Sacrificed to the Gods for the Victory, and distributed
Rewards to the Soldiers, who had signalized their Valor according as every one
had deserved.

Some report, that Philip having appointed a Wanton and Luxurious Banquet with
his Friends, in Ostentation of his Victory, in his Cups passing through the
Throng of the Prisoners, most contumeliously taunted the miserable Wretches
with their Misfortune. Ant. Chapter 336.
Whereupon Demades the Orator, one of the Captives, spoke boldly to him, and
framed Demades rebukes Philip.
a Discourse in order to curb the Pride and Petulancy of the King, in Words to
this effect: Since Fortune, O King, has represented thee like Agamemnon, art
thou not ashamed to act a part of Thersites? With this sharp Reproof, they say,
Philip was so startled, that he wholly changed his former Course, and not only
laid aside the Coronets, and all other Badges of Pride and Wantonness that
attended his Festivals, but with Admiration released Philip reformed.
the Man that had reprehended him, and advanced him to Places of Honor. In
conclusion, he became so far Complaisant, and molded into the Civilities of
Athens through his Converse with Demades, that he released all the Captives
without Ransom. And remitting his Pride and Haughtiness, (the constant
Attendant upon Victory,) he sent Ambassadors to Athens, and renewed the Peace
with them: And placing a Garrison in Thebes, made Peace likewise with the
Boeotians. After this Overthrow, the Athenians put to Death Lysides, the
General of the Army, upon the Accusation of Lycurgus, who was the most highly
preferred of any of the Orators of that Age; he had executed the Office of
Lord-Treasurer of the City, (with great Commendation) for the space of Twelve
years, and all his Life long had been in great Reputation for his Virtue and
Honesty: But a most bitter Accuser. The Excellency and Sharpness of whose
Speech, if any desire to know, he may best judge by his words used against
Lycides, which follow.

O Lycides, thou wast the General of the Army; and though a Thousand Citizens are
The Speech of Lycurgus.
slain, two Thousand taken Prisoners, a Trophy erected to the Dishonor of this
City, and all Greece enslaved, and all this done thou being Captain and
General, yet dare Live and view the Light of the Sun, and blushest not to
show thy Face in the Forum, thou who art born the Monument of thy Country's
Shame and Dishonor.

A thing very remarkable happened at this time. For when this Battle was fought
at Cheronea, the same Day and Hour another was fought in Italy between the
Tarentines and Lycanians, A Battle in Italy and at Cheronea, one and the same
day.
in which Archidamus the King of Lacedaemon was slain, who had reigned Three
and twenty years. Agis his Son succeeded him, and Governed nine years. About
that time likewise died Timotheus, Prince of Heraclea in Pontus, in the
Fifteenth year of his Principality, whose Brother Dionysius succeeded, and
reigned Two and thirty years.

Phrynichus bore the Office of chief Magistrate of Athens, and Titus Manlius
Torquatus, and Olymp. 110. 4. Ant. Chapter 335. An. M. 3608.
Publius Decius were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome; when Philip
bearing his Crest high upon the account of his Victory at Cheronea, and having
struck a Terror into the most Eminent Cities of Greece, made it his great
Business to be chosen Generalissimo of all Greece. It being therefore noised
abroad, that he would make War upon the Persians, for the Advantage of the
Graecians, and that he would revenge the Impiety by them committed against the
Sacreds of the Gods, he presently wan the Hearts of the Graecians.

He was very Liberal and Courteous likewise to all, both private Men and
Communities; and published to the Cities, that he had a Desire to Consult with
them concerning Matters relating to the Public Good. Whereupon, a General
Council was called, and Ant. Chapter 335.
held at Corinth, where he declared his Design to make War upon the Persians,
and what probable grounds there were of Success, and therefore desired the
Council to join with him, as Confederates in the War.

At length he was created General of all Greece, with absolute Power, and
thereupon Philip made General of Greece.
he made mighty preparation for that Expedition, and having ordered what Quota
of Men every City should send forth, he returned into Macedonia. And thus stood
the Affairs and Concerns of Philip.

In Sicily, Timoleon, after he had settled all things in right and due Order in
Syracuse, Timoleon dies.
died, having governed Eight years. The Syracusians who highly honored him for
the many great Services done to their Country, buried him in great State and
Pomp, and when the Body was to be brought forth, great multitudes were got
together, and the Syracusians published a Decree, that Two hundred A Mina is 3
l. 2 s. 6 d.
Mina's should be expended upon the Charge of his Funeral, and that his Memory
should be honored yearly for ever with Music, Horse-Coursing, and Gymnick
Sports, for that he had subdued the Barbarians, planted Colonies in the
greatest Greek City in Sicily, and rescued the Sicilians from Slavery.

About this time King of Pontus.
Ariorarxanes died in the Twenty sixth year of his Reign, and was succeeded by
Methridates, who Reigned Five and thirty Years. At the same time, the Romans
fought with the Latins and Campanians, near the City Suessa, and routed them,
and confiscated part of their Lands. And Manlius the Consul, who gained the
Day, triumphed for the Victory.

CHAP. XV.
Philip consults the Oracle at Delphos. Marries his Daughter Cleopatra, to the
King of Epirus. Encouraged to the Persian War by Neoptolemus his Verses.
Philip's Pride. His Murder. The Cause of it, and how it was done, and by whom.

WHen Pythodorus was chief Governor of Athens, and Quintus Publius and Tiberius
Olymp. 111. 1. Ant. Chapter 334. An. M. 3609.
Aemilius Mamercus were Roman Consuls, the Hundred and Eleventh Olympiad was
celebrated, wherein Cleomentis Cletorius wan the Prize. In this Year Philip
began the War against the Persians, and forthwith sent A ta^us and Parmenio
before into Asia to free the Greek Cities there from Slavery. He himself
intending to have the Concurrence of the Gods, consulted the Oracle at Delphos,
whether or no he should be victorious over Philip consults the Oracle.
the King of Persia. The Answer was thus,

(...).
The Ox is crowned when is end is near at hand,
To offer him, a Man does ready stand.
This doubtful Answer, Philip construed to his own advantage, as if the Oracle
had expressly foretold, that he should lead away the Persian King as a Victim to
the Sacrifice. But in truth, it fell out quite otherwise, and by the effect it
appeared, that it had a contrary Signification, to wit, that Philip in a
Throng, at the time of a Sacred Festival was to be knocked on the Head like a
Bullock crowned with a Garland, for Sacrifice.

In the mean time, he was very jocund, as if he had conquered Asia already, and
concluded the Gods were engaged with him in the Expedition. Without delay
therefore he offered most costly and magnificent Sacrifices, and at the same
time, solemnized the Marriage of his Daughter, Cleopatra, by Olympias: He
Married her to Alexander, King of Epirus, Brother of Olympias. Having therefore
a desire of a considerable Appearance of Philip's pompous Festivals at the
Marriage of his Daughter Cleopatra.
the Graecians at this Nuptial Festivity, conjoined with his Religious
Sacrifices, he made most pompous Preparation for the Entertainment of his
Friends and Guests, both with Music, Dancing, and Feasting.

To this End, he Invited those that were his special Friends and Familiars, all
over Greece, and commanded his Servants and Attendants that they should invite
as many Strangers from all Places as were of their own Acquaintance. And his
main design in all this, was, that he might assure all the Graecians of his
Kindness toward them, and testify his Gratitude by these Friendly
Entertainments, for the Honors conferred upon him. A vast Concourse of People
therefore were got together from all Places, to the Solemnity of these
Nuptials, which were magnificently Solemnized at Or Aegeas.
Aeges in Macedonia, with all sorts of Sports and Plays; so that not only
Noblemen and Persons of Quality, but even many great Cities presented Philip
with Crowns of Gold. Among the Cities, Athens made one; and when the Common
Crier with a loud Voice presented the Crown sent from them to Philip, he closed
with this, That if any Plotter of Treason against Philip, should hereafter slay
to Athens for shelter, he should be forthwith delivered up. By this accidental
Publication of this Crier, it seemed to be intimated (as it were by some Divine
Providence) that some piece of Treachery was near at hand to be executed.

There were several other the like Words (as by a Divine Instigation) uttered,
which portended the King's Death. There was then at the Festival, Neoptolemus
the Tragedian, Neoptolemus the Poet.
remarkable above all others for the Loudness of his Voice, and Famous and
Eminent in other respects. He had commanded him to repeat some Verses which he
was ordered to compose, especially relating to the Persian Expedition.
Whereupon, he began to recite a Witty Poem, proper (as he thought) to Philip's
intended Passage into Asia, wherein he set forth the Glory and Greatness of the
Persian King; and though he was so Famous all the World over, yet that Fortune
would some time or other bring him down. The Poem was thus,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Y're Minds are Higher than the Sky o'er-grown,
The greatest part of Earth you wish y're own;
Houses to Houses join; Fools without end,
You would y're Lives as well as Lands extend.
But doleful Death, alas! Although ye do
Creep toward, it will gallop unto you,
Of long Hopes very shortly cut the Clue.
He added likewise other to the same Sense with these. But Philip resting
wholly upon these recited, his Thoughts were altogether, full of his Conquering
the King of Persia. And he much revolved in his Mind the Answer given him by
the Oracle, which agreed in all Points with the Words of the Tragedian.

After the Feast for that time was ended, and the Sports were to be renewed the
next Day, a great number of People in the Nightime flocked into the Theater.
And whereas twelve Images of the Gods (amongst other sumptuous Preparations)
most curiously wrought and richly adorned, were brought forth in pompous
Procession, the Image of Philip clothed like the Gods in every respect, made
the Thirteenth, hereby arrogating to Philip's Pride;
himself a Place, as if he would be enthroned among the There were 12 chief
Gods among the Greeks, they were called Olympii; their Names, Jupiter, Mars,
Mercury, Neptune, Vulcan, Apollo, Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus.
Vid. Herodotus in Terpsicore.
Gods. The Theater being now full; he himself came forth clothed in a white
Robe, his Lifeguard following him at a great Distance, designing thereby to
evidence it to all, that he judged himself secure in the Hearts and Affections
of the Grecians, and therefore stood not in need of the Guard of his
Halberteers. While he was thus with, loud and joyful Acclamations cried up (as
it were) to the Stars, and the whole Multitude resounded his Praise, upon a
sudden, and beyond all Men's expectation, he was treacherously Phi. murdered.
murdered.

But for the Clearer and more distinct Understanding of the History in this
matter, we This was about our 24th of September. The manner and occasion of
Philip's Murder.
shall first relate the Causes and Grounds of this Assassination.

There was one Pausanias, a Macedonian, of the City called Oristis, one of the
King's Esquires of the Body, and for his Beauty dearly beloved of him. This Man
taking notice how much another young Youth of the same Name was doted on by
Philip, fell upon him with very foul and opprobrious Language, telling him he
was an (...).
Hermaphradite, for that he prostituted himself to the Lust of every one that
would. He resented this Disgrace very ill, but concealed it for a while.
Afterward consulting with Attalus what was to be done for the future, he
determined presently after, in an unusual manner, to put an end to his own
Life. For within a while after, in a Battle wherein Philip was engaged against
Plurias, King of the Illyrians, Pausanias in the heat of the Fight interposed
himself between the King and the Enemy, and received all the Darts upon his own
Body that were cast at him, and so died upon the Spot. The manner of his Death
being noised abroad, Attalus one of the Courtiers, and in great esteem with the
King, invited the other Pausianas to a Feast, and after he had made him drunk,
exposed his Body, thus over-charg'd with Wine, to be By Sodomy.
abused by the Filthy Lusts of a Company of base (...), Mule-tenders or Ostlers.
Sordid Fellows. When he was Sober, he was highly enraged at the abominable
Abuse, and complained against Attalus to the King; who though he was much
offended at the Wickedness of the Fact, yet by reason of his Relation to him,
and that he had present occasion to make use of him in his Service, he would
not punish him. For he was Uncle to Cleopatra, whom the King had married as his
Second Wife, and was designed General of the Army sent before into Asia, being
a very stout and valiant Man. To pacify therefore Pausanias, whose Spirit was
highly Exasperated for the intolerable Injury offered him, he bestowed on him
many rich Gifts, and advanced him to a more Honorable Post in his Guards. But
Pausanias's Anger was implacable, and therefore determined not only to revenge
himself upon the Author of this Abuse, but upon him that waved doing him
Justice by the inflicting of Punishment. And Hermocrates, the Sophist, greatly
confirmed him in this his Resolution. For Pausanias conversing with him, and in
Discourse asking him, by what means a Man might make himself most famous? The
Philosopher answered, by killing him that has done the greatest things; for
whenever he is named, then he likewise that killed him will be sure to be
remembered. Pausanias making use of this Answer, as an incentive to his Rage,
the Restlessness of his disturbed Spirit would admit of no further delay, but
laid his Design in the time of the Festivals in this manner. He first placed
Horses at the Gates of the City, then he himself returned and stood at the
Entrance into the Theater, with a Gallick Sword hid secretly under his Coat.
Philip commanded his Friends that came along with him, to go before him into
the Theater, and his Guard were at a considerable distance from him. Whereupon,
the Traitor perceiving that the King was Justin. Lib. 8, 9
alone, ran him into the side through the Body, and laid him dead at his Feet,
and forthwith fled to the Horses that were prepared for him at the Gates.
Hereupon presently some of the Lifeguard ran in to the Body, others pursued
the Assassinate, amongst whom were Leonnatus, Perdiccas and Attalus. Pausanias
made so swiftly away, and nimbly mounted his Horse, that he had certainly
escaped, but that a Branch of a Vine caught hold of the Heel of his Shoe, and
so entangl'd him that down he fell: Upon which Perdiccas with his Fellows fell
upon him as he was endeavoring to rise, and after many Wounds given him, there
slew him. And thus Philip, (the most Potent of all the Kings in Europe in that
Age, and who for the Greatness of his Dominion associated himself for Majesty
into the number of the Twelve Gods) came to his end, after he had Reigned about
Four and twenty Years.

This King from very small Beginnings, gained the largest Dominion in Greece;
and is judged to have enlarged the Bounds of his Kingdom, not so much by Arms,
as by his fair Tongue, and his complaisant and courteous Demeanor toward all
he had to deal with: For it is reported, That Philip himself would often boast
more of his Military Art and Policy, and of the gaining of his Enemies by fair
Words, than in the Strength and Valor of his Soldiers. For he was used to say,
That the Honor of winning of Battles was common and due to the rest of the
Army with himself; but the Praise and Commendation due to Affability and a
pleasant Converse, was peculiar to himself alone.

And thus being now come to the Death of Philip, we shall end this Book, as we
at first designed. The following we shall begin with the Succession of
Alexander into his Father's Kingdom, and endeavor to comprehend all his
Actions in one Book.

BOOK XVII.
THE former Book being the Sixteenth of our History, began with the PREFACE.
Reign of Philip the Son of Amyntas, and comprehended not only the Things done
by him to the very Day of his Death, but the Actions and Affairs of other
Kings, Cities, and Countries during the space of Four and twenty Years. Being
now in this to declare what followed, we shall begin with the Reign of
Alexander; and in treating of the Actions of this Prince, from the Beginning to
the End, we shall take along with us the most remarkable Things done through
all Parts of the World.

And the Relations (we conceive) will be the better remembered, if Things be
methodically digested, as it were, into distinct Heads, so as that the
Beginning and End may, as by one Thread, be knit one to the other: For this
King did great Things in a very short time, and excelled all the Princes that
ever were before him in his wonderful Achievements, effected by his own Valor
and Policy. For he Conquered a great Part of Europe, and almost all Asia,
within the space of Twelve Years: So that his Fame was (deservedly) advanced to
that degree, that in Glory he surmounted all the Heroes and Semigods.

But we need not (we judge) in a Preface anticipate any of the worthy Actions
of this King; for the particular Relations themselves will sufficiently
evidence his Greatness, and the Fame and Glory of his Name. Alexander therefore
descended from Hercules on the Father's side, and from Achilles on the
Mother's, seemed to derive his Valo^r as well as his Person from such Famous
Ancestors.

The Time thus stated for this present Relation, we return to the Course of our
History.

CHAP. I.
Conspiracies of the Cities against Alexander. The Athenians send Ambassadors
to Alexander to beg Pardon. He Is made General by the Amphictyons. Attalus
killed by Alexander's Command. The Wickedness of Bagoas. Darius commended.
Raises Forces. A Description of Mount Ida. Alexander invades the Illyrians, and
others. Thebes besieged by Alexander, and razed. The Miseries of Thebes.
Prodigies. Alexander demands Demosthenes and others to be delivered up to him
by the Athenians: Their Answer. He returns into Macedonia; and Feasts his
Soldiers.

WHEN Evaenetus was Lord Chancellor in Athens, and Lucius Furius and Olymp.
111. 2. Ant. Chapter 333. An. M. 361.
Caius Maenius.
Manlius were Roman Consuls, Alexander ascended the Throne, and in the first
place executed Justice upon the Murderers of his Father: And when he had with
great care celebrated his Funerals, he set in order the Concerns of the Kingdom
much better than most expected: For being very young, and upon that account
despised, he sought first to win the Common People by fair Words and courteous
Addresses: Amongst others, he told them that the Name of the King was only
changed, but that the Government should not be managed a jot worse than it was
when his Father was alive. He courteously likewise gave Audience to the
Ambassadors, and desired the Grecians that they would have the same Kindness
for him that they had for his Father, which he so esteemed, as that he looked
upon it as part of his Inheritance. Then he employed himself in the frequent
Trainings of the Soldiers, and in Martial Exercises, and brought the Army
readily to submit to his Commands. Attalus, the Uncle of Cleopatra, Philip's
other Wife, conspired to gain the Kingdom; and therefore he resolved to take
him out of the way, For Cleopatra was brought to bed of a Son a few Alexander
^n rives how to kill Attalus.
Days before the Death of Philip, and Attalus was sent a little before as
General with Parmenio his Colleague, with an Army into Asia, where by his
Bribes and fair Tongue he so gained the Hearts of the Soldiers, that the Army
was wholly at his Devotion: Therefore the King conceived he had just cause to
be jealous of him, lest if he should side with the Grecians (who he knew were
his Enemies) he should by that means gain the Kingdom to himself. Therefore he
made choice of Heccateus, one of his Friends, and sent him with a considerable
Army into Asia, with Command to bring over Attalus alive if Ant. Chapter 333.
he could; and if he could not effect that, to take the first Opportunity to
kill him. When he came into Asia, he joined his Forces with Attalus and
Parmenio, and watched a fit Opportunity to execute what he was commanded.

In the mean time, Alexander being informed that many of the Greciani were
hatching some Mischief, in order to new Commotions, his Thoughts were greatly
perplexed and Conspiracies among the Grecians against Alexander.
disturbed. For the Athenians (Demosthenes stirring them up against the
Macedonians) rejoiced at the News of Philip's Death, and resolved that the
Macedonians should no longer domineer over Greece. To this end they sent over
Ambassadors to Attalus, and privately consulted with him concerning the
Management of the whole Affair, and stirred up many of the Cities to assert
their Liberties. The Etolians made a Decree to recall the Exiles of Acarnania,
whom Philip had driven out of their Country. The Ambrociots, by the Persuasion
of Aristarchus, drove outthe Garrison that was there, and restored the
Democracy. The Thebans likewise decreed to cast out the Garrison that was in the
Citadel of Cadmea, and that Alexander should never with their Consent have
Command in Greece. The Arcadians Ant. Chapter 333.
also, as they were the only People that refused to give their Consent that
Philip should be General of Greece, so they now rejected Alexander. The rest of
the Peloponnesians, as the Argives, Eleans, Lacedaemonians, and some others
were with all their might for their own Government. To conclude, many of the
Nations beyond Macedonia waited for an Opportunity to rebel, and great
Commotions there were among the Barbarians in those Parts.

Notwithstanding all which, and the Fears that were every where in the Kingdom,
and though he was but a Youth, yet in a short time (beyond all expectation) he
overcame all those Difficulties, and made all plain and clear before him,
reducing some to their Duty by fair and smooth Words, and others through fear
and dread of Punishments; and the rest he compelled by force to stoop to his
Sovereignty.

In the first place, he so far gained upon the Thessalians, both by Promises of
large Rewards, and by his smooth and courteous Language (telling them how near
of kin he was to them by his Descent from Hercules) that they by a Public
Decree declared him General of Greece, as that which descended to him from his
Father. Having gained this Point, he brought over the bordering Nations to the
same Good Opinion of him; Then he went to Pyle; and in the Senate of the
Amphictyons he so managed his Matters, that by the General Consent of all, he
was created Generalissimo of all Greece. He assured the Ambrociots, Alexander
made General of Greece.
in a kind and smooth Oration made to them, That he had that Kindness for them,
that he would presently restore them to that Liberty which they so lately
sought to recover. But to strike the greater Terror into those that regarded
not his Words, he came with a swift March with an Army of Macedonians in an
hostile manner into Baeotia, and encamping near Cadmea, struck a Terror into
the City of the Thebans.

About the same time the Athenians hearing of the King's coming into Boeotia,
slighted Ant. Chapter 333.
him no longer: For the Quickness of the Youth, and his diligent dispatch of
Business, greatly terrified the Revolters. Hereupon the Athenians ordered every
thing they had in the Country to be brought into the City, and the Walls to be
repaired and guarded as well as they could; and sent Ambassadors to Alexander
to beg pardon that they had no The Athenians send Ambassadors to Alexander.
sooner owned his Sovereignty; and ordered Demosthenes to accompany the
Ambassadors: But he came not with the other to Alexander, but returned from
Citherone to Athens; either because he was afraid upon the account of the
Speeches he had publicly made against the Macedonians, or that he was not
willing to displease the Persian King. For it is reported that he had received
great Sums of Money from the Persians, to beat down the Interest of the
Macedonians by his Orations. Which was hinted (they say) by Eschines; in one of
his Speeches; wherein he upbraids Demosthenes for taking of Bribes in these
Words: Now the King's Gold plentifully bears all his Charges: But this will not
serve his turn long; for (...), a debaucht Course.
Covetousness is never satisfied with Abundance.

But to proceed; Alexander returned a very courteous Answer to the Ambassadors,
which freed the Athenians from their Fears, and he ordered all the Ambassadors
and Of the Amphictyons.
Members of the Council to meet him at Corinth; where when those who were
usually Members of the General Council were come, the King by a gracious Speech
so prevailed with the Grecians, that they created him General of all Greece,
and decreed him Aid and Assistance against the Persians, in order to revenge
the many Injuries the Greeks had received Ant. Chapter 333.
from them. Having gained the Honor he thus sought for, he marched back with
his Army into Macedonia.

Having now given an Account of the Affairs of Greece, we shall relate next
what things were done in Asia: For Attalus presently upon the death of Philip,
began to set up for himself; and to that end made a League with the Athenians,
in order by their joint Concurrence to oppose Alexander. But afterward he
changed his Mind, and fent a Letter (written to him by Demosthenes) to
Alexander, and in many smooth and flattering Expressions, endeavored to clear
himself of all those Crimes and Miscarriages that were laid to his charge.
However, he was afterward killed by Hecateus, according to the King's Command;
upon which, the Macedonian Army in Asia laid aside all Thoughts of a Defection,
for that Attalus was now gone, and Parmenio greatly loved Alexander.

But being we are now about to write of the Kingdom of Persia, it is necessary
that we begin our Relation a little higher.

Lately in the Reign of Philip, Darius Ochus. Ochus poisoned by Bagoas.
Ochus ruled over the Persians, hated by all for his Ill Nature and Cruelty
toward his Subjects. Bagoas therefore, a Colonel in the Army, and an Eunuch,
but a wicked and beastly Fellow, poisoned the King by the help of his
Physician, and placed the King's youngest Son Arses upon the Throne. He
likewise murdered the New King's Brothers (who were yet very young) that being
thus bereft of his Relations, he might be more observant to himself.

But the Young Man abhorring the Wickedness of this Wretch, and plainly by many
Tokens discovering his Design to punish him, Bagoas smelling it out, murdered
Arses and Arses murdered by Bagoas.
all his Children, in the Third Year of his Reign.

The Royal Family being thus extinct, and none of that Race left who could make
any Title to the Crown, he advanced one of his Friends, called Darius, to the
Kingdom. He Ant. Chapter 333.
was the Son of Arsanus, the Brother of Artaxerxes King of Persia. But the Fate
of Bagoas was very remarkable; for having habituated himself to Cruelty, he
resolved likewise to poison Darius in a medicinal Potion: But this Treason
being discovered, the King sent Bagoas justly punished by Darius.
friendly to speak with him; and when he came delivered to him the Cup, and
forced him to drink it off. And indeed Darius was judged worthy to enjoy the
Kingdom, being looked upon as the most Valiant Man among the Persians: For
heretofore when Artaxerxes was engaged in a Battle against the Cadusians, one
of the Enemy, of a strong Body and courageous Spirit, challenged any of the
Persians there present to a single Combat; which when none would dare to
undertake, this Darius entered the List, and killed the Cadusian. For which he
was highly rewarded by the King, and gained the chiefest Reputation for Valor
among the Persians. And for this reason also he was accounted worthy of the
Crown of Persia, and began to Reign about the same time that Philip died, and
Alexander succeeded in the Kingdom.

The Valor therefore of Alexander meeting with such a Man as this for his
Adversary to cope with, was the occasion so many Battles were fought for the
Empire with that Resolution as they were. But these Matters will appear more
clear hereafter, when things come to be distinctly and particularly related:
For the present we shall return to the Ant. Chapter 333.
orderly course of the History.

Darius Codomannus, conquered by Alexander.
Darius being advanced to the Throne of Persia, a little before the Death of
Philip, he was contriving how to avert the War threatened, and bring it over to
Macedonia it self: But when he was dead, and so the King freed from that Fear,
he slighted and despised the Youth of Alexander: But being for his Valor, and
Activeness of Spirit in dispatch of Business, at length created General of all
Greece, the Fame and Valor of the Young Man was (...)
in every Man's mouth.

And Darius now began to look about him, and employed his chief Care to raise
Forces, and fitted out a great Fleet, and made choice of the best Officers he
could procure to Command his Army, which was now very great and numerous; among
whom Memnon the Rhodian was one, a Brave man, both for Valor and Discipline:
Him the King Commanded to march to Cyzicus, an Island in the Propontis, and a
City there.
Cyzicus with Five thousand men, and to endeavor to take in that City: Who in
order thereto, marched his Army over the Mountain Ida. Some fabulously report,
that this Mountain was so called from Ida of Meliseus. It is the highest
Mountain of any about the Hellespont. In the middle is a Cave, as if it A
Description of Mount Ida.
were made of purpose to entertain the Gods, in which it is reported, That This
was Paris the Son of P^iam, called Alexander, who decided the Controversy
between Juno, Minerva, and Venus, by giving the Golden Apple to Venus as the
fairest. Paus. l. 5. c. 19.
Alexander gave Judgment concerning the Goddesses.

Here it is said, the The Sons of Minerva and Apollo.
Idei Dactyli were born, who were the first that were taught to work in Iron
Cybele.
by the Mother of the Gods.

A thing also very Wonderful and Remarkable is ascribed to this Place: For at
the rising of the In August.
Dog Star there is such a Serenity and Calmness of the Air upon the Top of the
Mount, as if it were there above all Storms and Winds; and then even at
Midnight the Sun seems to rise, so as that its Rays appear not in a Circular
Form, but casts abroad Flames of Fire here and there at a great distance, so
that it seems as if Flakes of Fire in several Places overspread the Earth;
which within a little while after are contracted into one Body till they come
to the quantity of Three Three hundred Foot.
Plethras. At length when the Day is at hand, there appears as it were the
complete Body of the Sun inlightning the Air as it uses to do at other times.

But to proceed; Memnon having passed over this Mountain, assaults Cyzicum on a
sudden, Ant. Chapter 333. Memnon.
and was very near surprising of it. But failing in his Design, he harrass'd
the Country, and returned laden with a rich Booty.

In the mean time, Parmenio took Grynnius by Storm, and sold all the
Inhabitants for Parmenio takes Grynnius.
Slaves. Then he besieged Pitane; but Memnon approaching, the Macedonians in a
Fright quitted the Siege.

Afterward Callas, with a Body of Macedonians and other Mercenaries, fought
with the Persians in the Country of Troas, and being overpowered with Number,
was beaten, and forced to retire to Rhetium. And in this Condition was Asia at
that time.

Alexander having quieted all the Commotions in Greece, marched with his Army
into Thrace, which struck such Terror into those People that had caused Tumults
and Disorders there, that he forced them to submit to his Government. Then he
invaded Peonia and Now Dalmatia, or Sclavonia.
Illyria, and the People bordering upon them, and having subdued those that had
Revolted, he likewise brought under his Dominion the Barbarians next adjoining.
While he was engaged in these Wars, he received Intelligence, that many of the
Graecians were about to Revolt, and that a considerable Number of the Greek
Cities, particularly Thebes, had already actually rejected his Sovereignty. He
was hereupon in a great Rage, and returned into Macedonia, with a Design to
hasten into Greece to quiet the Tumults and Disturbances there.

In the mean time, the Thebans were intent upon driving the Macedonian Garrison
out of Alexander besieges Thebes.
Cadmea, and to that end besieged the Citadel; and had no sooner done so, but
Alexander was presently at the City Walls, and lay before it with his whole
Army. The Thebans, before Alexander's Approach, had so begirt Cadmea with a
deep Trench, and a strong Ant. Chapter 333.
Baracado of Timber, that neither Relief nor Provision could be brought in to
them. They had sent likewise to the Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans, for their
Assistance; and solicited the Athenians by their Ambassadors to join with
them, and had received a great Number of Arms freely given to them by
Demosthenes, with which they armed those that had none.

Among those, to whom the Thebans addressed themselves for Assistance, the
Peloponnesians had sent Forces as far as to the Isthmus, and there order's them
to make an Halt till the King came, who was then expected. The Athenians,
though they had decreed Aid to the Thebans; yet they sent no Forces thither,
minding first to observe how Matters were like to go.

The Governor likewise of the Castle Cadmea taking Notice what great
Preparation the Thebans were making for the Siege, was very diligent to
strengthen and fortify the Walls, and had furnished the Garrison with all sorts
of Weapons.

But after that Alexander was come unexpectedly, and on a sudden, with his
whole Army out of Thrace, and that it was uncertain whether any Assistance
would come in to the Thebans, the Forces of the Enemy far exceeding them of
Thebes, the Officers called a Council of War to consult what to determine, and
there it was unanimously agreed to stand it out in Defense of the Liberties of
their Country: Which Resolution being approved of by all the Citizens, all
earnestly set themselves to the carrying on of the War.

But the King forbore Force for some time, to the end they might have space to
recollect themselves, not thinking that one only City would engage with so
great an Army. Ant. Chapter 333.
For Alexander had with him above Thirty thousand Foot, and Three thousand
Horse, all old Experienced Soldiers, (Conquerors almost in every Battle under
Philip,) in whose Valor he so far confided, that he doubted not but by them to
put an End to the Persian Monarchy. However, if the Thebans had yielded to the
present Difficulty of the Time, and had sent Ambassadors to the Macedonians
with Terms of Peace, he had no doubt complied with them, and granted whatever
they would have desired. For he wished greatly to have all Quiet in Greece, and
to be Free and Undisturbed in his War against the Persians. But when he saw
that he was slighted by the Thebans, he resolved to destroy the City, and by
that means to terrify all others that for the future should dare to Rebel. And
now when the Army was drawn out in Battalia ready to engage, the King caused
Proclamation to be made, that any of the Thebans should have Liberty to come in
to him, and whosoever did, should enjoy the Common Liberty of Greece. On the
other side, the Thebans, to show themselves as forward in their Ambition as the
Enemy; by the Voice of a Crier from an high Tower made another Proclamation,
That whosoever had a Desire to join with the King of Persia.
great King and the Thebans, to defend the Liberties of the Graecians, and kill
the Tyrant of Greece, should be received by them. This touched him to the
Quick, and he was thereupon so enraged, that he vowed all sorts of Death to the
Thebans, and so commanded the Engines to be prepared in order to an Assault,
and other Things to be made ready for an Engagement.

In the mean time, the Greeks considering the utter Ruin that seemed to hang
over the Ant. Chapter 333.
Heads of the Thebans, were greatly affected with the Miseries wherewith they
were like to be overwhelmed, yet none durst appear to Relieve the City, for
that they had rashly and inconsiderately brought apparent Destruction upon
themselves: However, the Thebans were very forward and resolute to venture all
to the utmost Extremity, though they were a little startled with some
Prophecies and Prodigies from the Gods. The most Remarkable was, that in the
Temple of Ceres, a slender Spider's Web was observed to spread out it self as
broad as a Cloak, and to represent the Rainbow in an Arched Circumference.
Concerning which, the Oracle at Delphos gave them this Answer:

(...)
(...).
The God to all by this Sign gives a Call:
To the Boeotia first; and Neighbors all.
And the Oracle in their own Country returned them this other:

(...).
This Web for one works Bane,
And for another Gain.
This Prodigy happened about Three Months before the King came against Thebes.
Prodigies.
About the time of the King's Arrival, the Statues placed in the Forum seemed
to sweat to that degree, that great Drops in every part stood upon them.
Moreover the Magistrates were informed, that in the Lake of Onchestus were
heard Voices like roaring and bellowing of Oxen. And that the Waters in Dirce
were to the view as if they had been all turned into Blood. There were others
from Delphos that reported, that the Roof of the Temple, built by the Thebans
out of the Spoils of the Phocians, appeared to be besmeared over with Blood.

Those who addicted themselves to the Interpretation of Prodigies, said, That
the Web Ant. Chapter 333.
portended the Departure of the Gods from the City; by the Color of the
Rainbow, was signified various Troubles and Turmoils; by the appearance of
Sweat, extreme Miseries; and by the Blood, Slaughters and Destructions in the
City.

Therefore they advised the Thebans, that insomuch as the Gods plainly pointed
at the Ruin of the City, That they should not engage in Fight with the Enemy,
but rather seek to agree Matters some other way, which was much more safe.

But the Thebans abated nothing of their Courage, but on the contrary pushed
forward by the Heat of their Spirits, encouraged one another with the
Remembrance of their famous Victory at the Battle of Leuctra, and other
Successes gained by their former Valor. So that trusting more to the Valor of
their Arms, than making use of Prudent Councils, they ran headlong to the Ruin
of themselves and their Country.

In the mean time, the King, within the space of Three Days, put all Things in
order, both for assaulting the City, and marshalling of his Army for Battle.
His Army he divided into Three Parts: One Part he ordered to assault the Out
wall; another to fight the Thebans Army; and the third he kept for Reserves to
relieve his Men, and renew the Fight as there should be occasion. But the
Thebans placed their Horse within the Ramparts. Their Slaves that were
manumitted, the Exiles and the Strangers that were Inhabitants, were ordered to
defend the Walls: And the Thebans themselves (though they were far inferior in
Number) were resolved to fight those Macedonians commanded by the King, that
were ready to make the Assault.

And now all the Women and Children ran to the Temples, to make Supplication to
the Gods to deliver them from the Ruin that threatened them. When the
Macedonians drew near, the Trumpets sounded a Charge, upon which both Armies
set up a great Shout, and Ant. Chapter 333.
every one charged that Battalion to which he was appointed. By Daybreak the
Darts The Battle between the Thebans and Alexander.
flew one at another, and those being quickly spent, they fell to it with their
Swords Hand to Hand, so that the Fight presently was very sharp and bloody. For
the Macedonians, through their Number (far exceeding the other) and the
fierceness of their Charge, put the Enemy hard to it. On the other side, the
Thebans heing stronger body'd Men, and used to Martial Discipline by their
continual Exercises in the Schools, and more resolved than the other,
resolutely went through all Difficulties whatsoever, so that many were wounded,
and multitudes killed on both Sides. In the Heat of the Battle, a Man might
have heard Shouts for Victory and Groans of Dying Men at one and the same time,
and the Macedonians often calling out one to another, not to stain the Glory of
their former Victories by any base Act of Cowardice in the present Engagement;
and the Thebans pressing theirs not to suffer their Parents, Wives and
Children, to be miserable Captives, and all their Families exposed to the
rageful Lust of the Macedonians, but that they would remember the Battles at
Leuctra and Mantinea, and the noble Actions for which they were famous all the
World over. So that the obstinate Resolution of both Parties occasioned the
Issue of the Battle to be very doubtful a long time.

Alexander perceiving how the Love of Liberty inflamed the Courage of the
Thebans, and that the Macedonians began to faint, commanded the Reserves to
relieve them that were engaged. Upon which, the Macedonians coming with a
fierce and sudden Charge upon the Thebans, now even tired out, bore them down
and killed multitudes of them. However the Thebans would not yield the Enemy
the Day, but stood to it with that Obstinacy, that they slighted all
Misfortunes, and their Valor so strengthened their Resolution, that they cried
out, That the Macedonians must own themselves worsted by the Thebans. Ant. Chapter
333.
And this is to be observed of them, That when all others (being still pressed
upon by their Enemies with fresh Supplies one after another) are wont to flag,
they only are the more Courageous, even when their wearied Enemy is relieved by
fresh Reserves.

While the Armies were thus resolutely engaged, the King spied a Portal without
any Alexander's Army enters Thebes.
Guard, and sends away Perdiccas with some Regiments in order to possess
himself of the Place, and so to break into the City. Perdiccas having presently
executed the King's Command, the Macedonians through this little Gate forthwith
rushed into the City. And though the Thebans had a good while before worsted
the Enemy's first Battalion, and were now engaged with the second, and full of
Hopes of a perfect Victory, yet when they understood that the Enemy had
possessed themselves of part of the City, they forthwith retired within the
Walls. And then both the Horse and Foot hasted back with all speed into the
City, and trod many of their Fellow-Citizens under Foot, who there perished;
and while they made into the City in this Trepidation and Confusion, many were
killed by running upon their own Weapons in the strait and narrow Passages, and
by falling into the Trenches. And in the midst of this Distraction, the Garrison
out of the Castle of Cadmea issued forth like a rapid Torrent upon the Backs of
the Thebans, and fell upon them as they were in this Disorder and Confusion,
and cut them down in Heaps. The City being thus taken, multitudes of all sorts
of Cruelties were acted within the Walls. For the Macedonians, by reason of
that Insolency of the Common Crier, were enraged against the Thebans beyond
what the Law of Arms would allow, and with many Threats in their Mouths, flew
upon the miserable People, and without all Pity or Compassion put all to the
Sword that were in their way. However, among all these Calamities, the Ant. Chapter
333.
Courage of the Thebans and their Love to their Liberty was such, that they
were so far from minding the Preservation of their Lives, as that when they met
any of their Enemies, they would provoke them of their own accord to kill them.
For after the City was taken, not a Theban asked any Quarter from a Macedonian,
not a Man that sordidly The Cruelties in Thebes.
bowed down at the Feet of the Conqueror. Neither had the Enemy any Pitv,
notwithstanding the Valor of the miserable People; nay, the whole Day (though
it was long) was judged too short to satiate their most cruel Revenge. The
whole City was plundered, poor Children, Boys and Girls, were dragged up and
down, calling upon their Mothers by their Names with most lamentable Outcries.
And to comprehend all in a few Words, whole Families, with all their Kindred,
were hurried away, and the whole Body of the People brought under miserable
Slavery. The Bodies of some of the Thebans, as they lay wounded upon the
Ground, though they were upon the point of Expiring, yet clasping their Enemy
in their Arms, breathed out their Last with a sort of Joy and Content that
their Enemy died with them. Others, though they had but a mere Trunk of a Spear
to lean upon, yet sought with whomsoever they met; and so by that last Attempt
made it evident, how far they preferred their Liberty before their Lives. And
though there was so great a Slaughter made, that every part of the City was
filled with dead Carcasses, yet none that saw the miserable Condition of these
poor Wretches pitied them. For even the Grecians, as the Thespians, Plateans,
Orchomenians, and some others who hated the Thebans, (and who then bore Arms
under the King,) broke in with others into the City, and amongst these dreadful
Slaughters executed their Ant. Chapter 333.
Malice upon them. So that many sad Spectacles of most inhumane Cruelty might
be seen throughout the whole City. Graecians butchering Graecians without all
Compassion, and those of the same Language, Blood, and Nation, without any
Regard to any of these Obligations, knocked on the Head one by another. At
length when Night came, the Houses were pillaged, Women young and old were
dragged out of the Temples, (whither they had sled,) and most vilely and
filthily abused. There were killed of the Thebans above Six Thousand, and Three
thousand made Captives, and a vast Treasure carried away. Above Five hundred
Macedonians were slain, whom the King took care to bury. Presently after, the
King caused the General Senate of Greece to meet, and referred it to their
Determination how Thebes should be dealt with. When the Matter came to be
debated, some who hated the Thebans were for putting them all to the Sword; and
made it appear how they had joined with the Barbarians against the Greeks. For
in the time of Xerxes, they joined as Confederates with the Persians against
Greece; and were the only Graecians that were honored as Friends by the
Persian King, and their Ambassadors placed and preferred before Kings. These,
and suchlike, being remembered and enforced, they so incited the Senators
against the Thebans, that they Decreed, That the The cruel Decrce against the
Thebans.
City should be razed to the Ground, and the Captives sold for Slaves; That all
the Fugitives of Thebes should be driven out of all Parts of Greece, and no
Theban should be entertained by any Grecian. Hereupon the King according to
the Decree razed the City, which struck a Terror into all the Graecians that
had revolted. By the Sale of the Captives, he raised Four hundred and forty
Talents of Silver.

After this, he sent to Athens to demand Ten of the Orators to be delivered up
to him, (amongst whom Demosthenes and Lycurgus were the chief,) because they
had stirred up Ant. Chapter 333
the People against him. Upon which a General Assembly was called, and when the
Ambassadors were introduced, and had delivered their Message, the People were
greatly troubled and perplexed, desiring on the one hand to preserve the Honor
and Dignity of the City, and on the other hand to consult their own Safety,
considering the Destruction of Thebes, and that some eminent Mischief might
befall themselves; and thus they were made more cautious by their Neighbors
Misfortunes. At length, after many Speeches made in the Assembly upon this
Account, Phocio, that good Man, who differed from Demosthenes in his Politics,
stood up and said, That it would very well become those who were demanded to
imitate the Daughters of Leo had Three Daughters, Pasithea, Theope, and Eubule,
who were willingly Sacrificed to put an end to a Plague in Athens. Suid.
Leo and the The Hyacinthides were Six Daughters of Erictheus King of Athens,
who offered themselves to be Sacrificed to gain a Victory for their Country
against Eumolphus King of Thrace: So called from a Village called Hyacinthus,
where they were Sacrificed. Suid.
Hyacinthides, by offering up their Lives of their own accord to prevent the
Ruin of their Country. And told them, That it was Baseness and Cowardice to
refuse to dye for the Preservation of the City.

At this Motion the People were highly incensed, and in a popular Tumult threw
Phocio out of the Senate. Then the People (by a studied Speech made by
Demosthenes) being moved to Compassion, declared, That they would defend the
Men to the utmost. At length Demades, wrought upon (as is reported) by the
Friends of Demosthenes, for Five Talents of Silver, gave his Opinion for the
securing and preserving of the Orators; and read the Decree, which was drawn by
himself with great Cunning and Artifice. In which was contained an Apology for
the Orators, and a Promise, That if they were guilty, they themselves would
punish them according to the Laws.

The People approved and ratified what Demades had read, and sent him with some
others to the King with Order, That he should intercede likewise on the behalf
of the Theban Exiles, that the People of Athens might lawfully receive and
entertain them.

Demades wisely managed his Embassy, and by his Eloquence prevailed with the
King in every respect. For Alexander both pardoned the Orators, and granted all
other Things Ant. Chapter 333.
the Athenians desired.

Then the King marched back with his Army into Macedonia, and called a General
Alexander returns into Macedonia.
Council of his Officers and chief Friends, and when they were met together, he
asked their Opinion, what they thought of an Expedition into Asia? When it was
fit to begin the War? And how it was to be managed? The Counsel, indeed, of
Antipater and Parmenio was, That he should first Marry and have Issue to
succeed him, and then set upon matters that were of so great Weight and
Concernment. But the King, who was natuturally fierce, and could not endure
stops and delays in Business, rejected their Advice. For he said, it was a Mean
and Unworthy thing for him who was created General of all Greece, and had the
Command of an Army, that never knew what it was to be conquered, to stay at
home merely to Marry and beget Children. Wherefore, after he had set before
them the Advantages of the War, and had encouraged them to undertake it, he
offered most magnificent Sacrifices to the Gods at Dium in Macedonia, and
exhibited the Sports and Plays which his Ancestor Archilaus had instituted to
Jupiter and the Muses. This Solemnity continued Nine days, according to the
Number of the Muses, a Day for every Muse. He provided likewise a Pavilion
which would contain an Upon which they sat at Meat.
Hundred Beds, where he Feasted, and entertained all his Friends and Commanders
of his Army, and Ambassadors of Cities.

After these Sumptuous Feasts were over (in which he not only kindly
entertained a vast number of People, but likewise distributed parts of the
Sacrifices, and other things fuitable to the Magnificence of the Festival
amongst his Soldiers) he Rendezvous'd all his Forces from all parts.

CHAP. II.
Alexander lands his Army in Asia. The Battle at Granicum. The Forces of the
Persians and of Alexander. Alexander kills Spithrobates; near being killed by
Rosaces. Miletus besieged and taken. Ada, Queen of Caria, meets Alexander.
Halicarnassus besieged, taken, and sacked. The strange Act of the Marmarians.

CTesides was Lord-Chancellor of Athens, and Caius Sulpitius and Lucius
Papirius, Consuls at Rome, when Alexander at the Hellespont passed over his
Army out of Europe Olymp. 111. 3. Ant. Chapter 332. An. M. 3616.
into Asia. Being arrived at Troas with sixty Sail of Men of War. Alexander
lands in Asia.
Long Ships, he was the first of the Macedonians that cast a Spear out of the
Ship, which fixed in the Earth upon the Shore, and then leapt out of the Vessel,
signifying, that by the help of the Gods he had taken Possession of Asia, which
was conquered by his Spear.

Then he Sacrificed to the Ghosts of Achilles and Ajax, performing all other
Rites and Ceremonies proper to the Veneration of those Heroes. When that was
done, he took an exact account of the Number of those Forces he had
transported, which were found to amount unto It should be Twelve thousand.
Thirteen thousand Macedonian Foot, Seven thousand Confederates, and Five
thousand Mercenaries. Parmenio had the chief Command of all these. Besides
these, there were the A People of Thrace of the City Odrisa. Alexander's Forces.
Odrise, Treballians and Illyrians, to the Number of Five thousand, and a
Thousand Darters, called Agrians; so that in the whole there were Thirty
thousand Foot. For Horse there were Eighteen hundred raised out of Macedonia,
under the Command of Philotas, the Son of Parmenio. As many out of Thrace,
Commanded by Callas, the Son of Harpalus. From the rest of Greece Six hundred
led by Eurygius. Besides these, there were Nine hundred Thracians and Peonians
in the Van, whose Commander was Cassander. The whole Body of Horse was But by
the Particulars they amount to Five thousand one hundred.
Four thousand five hundred. And this is the Number of them that Landed in Asia
with Alexander.

In the mean time, he left under the Command of Antipater, in Europe, Twelve
thousand Foot and The Greck is ^o, but the Latin 15 hundred Horse.
Eleven thousand five hundred Horse.

When he departed from Troas, and came to the At Ilium.
Temple of Minerva, the Priest, called Alexander, seeing the Statue of
Ariobarzanes (that had been Lord Lieutenant of Phrygia) lie prostrate upon the
Ground before the Temple, and observing several other Ant. Chapter 332.
good Omens, came to the King, and told him, that he would be Conqueror in a
considerable Horse Engagement, especially if he fought in Phrygia, and that he
should kill a great Commander of the Enemy's with his own Hand. And these
things, he said, were foretold him by the Gods, and especially by Minerva, who
would be assistant to him in obtaining of his Victories.

Alexander much taken with this Prophecy, and relying upon it, offered to
Minerva a most Splendid Sacrifice, and dedicated his Arms to her, and took away
others (that had been laid up there) in their stead, which he made use of in
the first Fight afterward, and gained a most glorious Victory by his own
peculiar Valor. But this happened some few days after.

In the mean time, the Persian Lord-Lieutenants and Commanders (who through
their sloth were not able to put a stop to the Progress of the Macedonians)
met together to consult how to manage the War against Alexander. Memnon the
Rhodian, one there amongst them (a very skilful General) was not for fighting,
but to give a Check to the Macedonians, by destroying the Country all before
them, that so they might not be able to march forward for want of Provision:
And was for bringing over both Land and Sea Forces into Macedonia, by that
means to make that the Seat of the War. Although this was sound Advice (as the
Event made it afterward evident) yet the rest of the Commanders would not
hearken to it, looking upon it as a thing Dishonorable, and much reflecting
upon the Valor of the Persians.

All being therefore resolved upon a Battle, Forces were brought together from
all parts, Ant. Chapter 332.
and the Lord-Lieutenants being now much Superior in number, marched toward
the Hellespont in Phrygia, and Encamped close by the River Granicus, having the
River for a Defense between them and the Macedonians.

Alexander having intelligence of the Forces of the Barbarians, made a swift
march, and came up so close to the Enemy, that the River only separated both
Armies.

In the mean time, the Barbarians stood in Battallia at the Foot of the Hill,
judging it would do their business effectually, and that they should be sure of
the Victory, by falling upon them in their Passage over the River, and by that
means breaking in pieces the Macedonian Phalanx.
Battallion. But Alexander prevented the Enemy, and with great Courage passed
over his Army about break of Day, and drew up his Men in order of Battle. The
Barbarians drew up the whole Body of their Horse against the Macedonians, for
they had before resolved to begin the Fight with them. Memnon the Rhodian, and
Arsamenes the Lord Lieutenant, with their several Regiments of Horse, were in
the Left Wing, supported by Arsites, who commanded the Paphlagonian Horse; and
next to him Spithrobates, Lord Lieutenant of Ionia, with them of Hyrcania. In
the Left Wing were Two thousand Median Horse, under the Conduct of
Arrheomithres, and the like number from Bactria. In The Forces of the Persians.
the main Body was a vast Number of Horse of other Nations, of the best and
most Experienced Soldiers; the whole amounted to above Ten thousand Horse.

The Persian Foot were at least a Hundred thousand Men, who stood drawn up
behind Ant. Chapter 332.
the Horse, without moving a Foot, because they concluded, that the Horse
themselves would serve the turn to rout the Macedonians.

And now the Horse charged with great Resolution on both sides, especially the
Thessalians The Battle at Granicum.
in the Left Wing, under the Command of Parmenio, bore the brunt of a brisk
Charge with undaunted Courage.

Alexander with the choicest Body of Horse in the Left Wing, setting Spurs to
his Horse, was the first that charged, and rushing into the Thickest of his
Enemies, made great slaughter amongst 'em. The Barbarians fought valiantly
striving to outdo the Macedonians, and Fortune at this time brought together
the Persons of the greatest Quality into the Place. For Spithrobates the chief
Governor of the Province of Ionia, a Persian, and Son in Law Sipthrobates
fights with Alexander.
to Darius, a very Valiant Man, charged the Macedonians with a great Body of
Horse, seconded by Forty of his Guard, all of his Kindred, and inferior to none
for Valor and Courage; with these he put the Enemy hard to it, and lays about
him with great Resolution, killing some and wounding others. And when none were
able to deal with him, Alexander rid up to the Barbarian, and fought with him
hand to hand.

Hereupon, the Persian concluding, that the Gods of their special favor to
him, had given him the opportunity of an Happy Combat, (especially, if by his
Valor he should free all Asia from their Fears, and by his own hands give a
Check to these audacious Attempts of Alexander that rung so all the World over,
and prevent the Dishonor of the Persians) was the first that cast his Called a
Saunium.
Javelin at Alexander, and with such Force and Violence, that it pierced
through his Buckler and Breast Plate into his right Shoulder Blade. The King
plucking out the Dart with his own Hand, threw it away, and setting Spurs to
his Horse flew upon the Persian Lord Lieutenant with that Fierceness and
Violence, that he fixed his Spear in the middle of his Breast. Upon which the
Battalions of both Armies there near at hand, in admiration of such a piece of
singular Valor, set up a great shout. But the Point breaking in the
Breast Plate, so that the Spear pierced no further, Ant. Chapter 332.
the Persian made at Alexander with his drawn Sword, who having got another
Lance threw it directly into his Face, and pierced him through the Head; at
which instance, Rosaces, Brother to him that was killed, came swiftly riding
in, and reached the King such a Blow, Rosaces near killing of Alexder.
that he cut through his Helmet, and gave him a slight wound upon the Head, and
just as he was ready to second his stroke, Clitus, Sirnam'd Niger, posts up and
cuts off the Hand of the Barbarian.

The Kinsmen of the two Brothers (now both fallen) came round about them, and
at the first plied Alexander with their Darts, and then fell to it hand to
hand, and ran through all hazards, that they might kill Alexander. And though
he was environed with imminent Hazards and Dangers of his Life, yet the throng
of his Enemies did not at all daunt him. For though he had received three
strokes through his Breast plate, and one Cut upon his Helmet, and had his
Buckler, which he brought from the Temple of Minerva, thrice pierced through,
yet he stirred not a Foot, but stood his ground against all Hazards and
Difficulties with undaunted Resolution.

In the mean time, other brave Commanders fell round about him, among whom the
most remarkable were Artyaxes, and Pharnaces, the Brother of Darius, and
Mithrobarzanes the Commander of the Cappadocians; so that many great Officers
being killed, and all the Troops of the Persians routed and broken by the
Valor of the Macedonians, the first that fell in upon Alexander were forced to
take to their Heels. And after them all the rest. Ant. Chapter 332.
In this Battle, by the Confession of all, the Valor of Alexander was cried up
above all others; and he reputed the chief Instrument of the Victory. The
Thessalian Horse managed their Troops with that Dexterity, and fought with that
brave Resolution, that next to the King, they were most highly applauded, and
gained exceeding Honor and Reputation.

After the Horse was routed and fled, the Foot running one in upon another in
confusion fought a while, but amazed and dejected with the flight of their
Horse, they likewise turned their Backs and made away.

There were killed in the Persian Army above Ten thousand Foot, and at least
Two thousand Horse, and above Twenty thousand taken Prisoners.

After the Battle, the King buried those of his that were slain, with great
Solemnity, by these Honors to encourage his Soldiers to fight the more
readily. When he had refreshed his Army, he marched forward through Lydia, and
came to Sardis, which with the Citadel, and all the Provision and Treasure
therein, were voluntarily surrendered to him by Or Mithrenes:
Mithrinnes the Governor.

In the mean time, those Persians that had escaped out of the Battle, fled,
together with their General, Memnon, to Miletus, before which the King
afterward came, and assaulted it continually for several days together, still
relieving his Men from time to time with Miletus besieged.
fresh Supplies. The Besieged at first easily defended themselves from the
Walls, in regard the City was full of Soldiers, and plentifully furnished with
Weapons and all other things necessary for the enduring of a Siege. But as soon
as the King began fiercely to Ant. Chapter 332.
batter the Walls with his Engines, and violently to push on the Siege both by
Sea and Land, and the Macedonians had forced their way through a Breach of the
Walls, putting their Enemies to flight in that part; the Milesians forthwith
prostrated themselves as suppliants at the King's Feet, and gave up themselves
and the City to his Mercy. Some of the Miletus taken.
Barbarians were killed by the Macedonians, others fled out of the City, and
the rest were all taken. He dealt kindly and mercifully with the Milesians, but
for others, he sold them all for Slaves.

And now having no further use for his Navy, and being likewise chargeable to
maintain, he dismissed his Fleet, except a few Ships which he detained for the
Conveying of his Engines of Battery, and other Instruments useful for the
Besieging of Towns. Among which were Twenty Vessels from Athens.

There are some who say, that this Discharging of the Fleet was a prudent part
of a General in Alexander. For Darius being on his march, and therefore very
likely that a great Battle was to be fought, he conceived that the Macedonians
would fight with more Resolution, when they saw there was no possibility of
flight. And the very same Project he contrived at the Battle of Granicum, where
he so ordered the matter, that the River should be at his Soldiers back, to the
end, that none might have a Thought of flying, since the River threatened
certain destruction to them that attempted it.

In following times Agathocles, King of Syracuse, followed this Example of
Alexander, and so gained a glorious Victory. For having transported a small
Army into Africa, he set all his Ships on fire, to take away all hope from his
Soldiers of escaping by flight, by which means being forced of necessity to
stand to it courageously, he overcame many thousands of the Carthaginians drawn
up against him.

After the taking of Miletus, both Persians and Mercenaries with their chiefest
Commanders, came flocking to Halicarnassus. This was then the greatest City in
Caria, in which Halicarnassius
was a Palace of the Kings, adorned with most curious, Turrets and Cittadels.

About the same time, Memnon sent away his Wife and Children to Darius, as well
for Ant. Chapter 332.
their security, as to induce the King, having such considerable Hostages in
his hands to entrust him with more confidence in the Management of the War.
Which happened accordingly; for Darius presently sent Letters to all the
Inhabitants of the Sea Coasts of Asia, to be observant in every thing to all
the Commands of Memnon. Being made therefore General of the whole Army, he
provided all things necessary for the Defense of Halicarnassus against a Siege.

In the mean time the King sent away his Engines of Battery, and Corn and
Provision by Sea, to Halicarnassus, and he himself with his whole Army marched
into Caria, and where ever he came he gained upon the Cities by his smooth
Tongue, and courteous Behavior. The Greek Cities especially tasted of his
Grace and Favor, for he gave all Liberty to govern according to their own
Laws, and ordered they should be free from Tribute, declaring, that he had
undertaken a War against the Persians for the Rights and Liberties of the
Grecians.

When he was upon his March, he was met by a Noble Woman called Ada, of the
Lineage Ada meets Alexander.
of the King of Caria, who upon discourse with him, concerning the Right of her
Ancestors, entreated him to restore her to the Kingdom of her Grandfather,
which he gave up to her, and bid, her take it as her own; by which bounty to
the Woman, he gained the Hearts of the Grecians, and all the Cities sent their
Ambassadors to him, presenting him with Crowns of Gold, promised and offered to
serve him in all things to the utmost of their Power.

Alexander now Encamps near to the City, and forthwith assaults the Town in a
furious Ant. Chapter 332. Halicarnassus besieged.
and terrible Manner.: For at the very Beginning; his Soldiers by turns stormed
the Walls without any intermission, so that the Conflict continued whole days
together. Afterward he brought up all sorts of Engines to the Walls, and
filled up the Trenches, before the City, by the help of three Machines called
Snails, and then with his Rams battered down the Towers and Walls that ran
along between them. Part being thus beaten down, he engaged in the Breach with
the Enemy, and endeavored to force his way into the City over the Rubbish. But
Memnon easily repulsed the Macedonians (who first assaulted the Wall) there
being many Men within the City; and in the Night, when the Engines were brought
up he made a Sally with a great Body of Men, and fired them: Upon which there
were many sharp Conflicts before the Walls, in which the Macedonians far
excelled the other for Valor, but the Persians them for number of Men and all
Warlike Provisions. But those upon the Walls were of great advantage to the
Persians that were engaged in the Sally, by galling their Enemies with their
Darts and Arrows, attended with Death and Wounds; shouting of Men and sounding
of Trumpets, every where echoed in the Air, while the Soldiers on both sides
with loud Acclamations, applauded the noble Actions of their several Parties.

And now some endeavored to extinguish the mounting Flames of the Engines, and
others engaging with the Enemy, made grievous slaughters among their
Adversaries. Those within raised up other Walls much stronger, instead of them
that were battered down. The Commanders with Memnon being in the Front,
encouraged their Men to stand to it, offering great Rewards to such as
valiantly behaved themselves. So that it was incredible with what Heat and
Spirit every one was pushed on forward to win the Day. Then might be seen some
carried out of the Army so wounded, that they were breathing out their last;
others gathered in a round about the Bodies of the Dead, and sharply engaged
Ant. Chapter 332.
in striving to carry off the Bodies, in order to their Burial. Others but even
now tired out with Wounds, and Blows, presently (through the Encouragement of
the Officers) recovering their Spirits, fell to it briskly again.

Some of the Macedonians (among whom was Neoptolimus, an honorable Person)
were slain, even under the City Gates. And now Towers and two Flanks were
battered down; upon which, some Drunken Soldiers of Perdiccas rashly in the
Night mounted the Walls of the Citadel: But Memnon understanding in what
plight they were in, made a Sally, and being much Superior in number repulsed
the Macedonians, and killed many of them, which being noised abroad, the
Macedonians came flocking in to the aid of their Fellows; upon which there was
a brisk Encounter. At length, when those with Alexander appeared and joined
with the rest, the Persians flag'd and were beaten back into the City. Then the
King sent An Herald.
a Trumpeter to make a Truce, in order to carry off those Macedonians that were
slain before the Walls: But Ephialtes and Thrasybulus, both Athenians, and then
in Arms for the Persians, gave advice not to suffer the Dead to be buried.
However, Memnon granted what the King desired.

Afterward Ephialtes in a Council of War declared his Opinion, That it was not
advisable for them to stay till the City was taken, and so all to be made
Prisoners, but for all the Officers with the Mercenaries to venture their Lives
for the Safety and Security of the rest, and to sally upon the Enemy out of the
City. Hereupon Memnon perceiving Ephialtes to be prompted to Action by an
extraordinary Impulse of Valor, and placing Ant. Chapter 332.
great Confidence in him by reason of his Courage and the strength of his Body,
agreed to what he had advised. In order to which, he appointed Two thousand
Mercenaries, of the best Soldiers he could pick out, to sally with him, one
half of whom were commanded to carry along with them light Firebrands, and the
other to fall in upon the Enemy. About break of Day the Gates were suddenly
flung open, and the Regiments issue out, and cast their Fire brands among the
Engines, upon which a great Flame presently appeared. He himself at the Head of
others formed into a deep Phalanx charged upon the Macedonians, who were
hasting to preserve and defend the Engines. The King, quick in discerning what
was to be done, places the chief of the Macedonians in the Front, and some of
the chiefest Soldiers next, in order to support them, and to these he adds a
third Battalion, for Valor excelling all the rest; The whole Body he led up
himself, and fell upon the Enemy, who seemed (through their firm and close
Order) to be impenetrable; not to be broken by any Force whatsoever.

In the mean time, he commands others to go to defend the Engines, and quench
the Fire. Noise and Clamor filled the Camps, and the Trumpet giving the Alarm
to Battle, they fell to it, fighting with more than ordinary Valor, ambitious
to purchase Honor and Renown. The Macedonians easily quenched the Fire, but in
the Conflict, those with Ephialtes got the better. For with whomsoever he
engaged, (being of a far stronger Ephialtes, a strong and stout Man.
Body than any of them,) he certainly killed, and those that were upon the new
Wall slew many with their Darts. For upon this Wall there was a Wooden Tower
erected an Hundred Cubits high, full of Engines for shooting of Darts and
Arrows.

Many therefore of the Macedonians being killed, and the rest retreating by
reason of the multitude of Darts, and Memnon coming in to the Assistance of the
Persians with a far greater Number, the King himself knew not well what to do.
While they that issued Ant. Chapter 332.
out of the Town thus prevailed, on a sudden the Tables were turned: For the
old Macedonians (who by reason of their Age were to this time dispensed with,
and not called to Fight, though formerly Victorious in many Battles under King
Philip,) now at this very instant were stirred up to their anient Courage and
Resolution. And being both Valiant and Expert Soldiers, (far beyond all the
rest,) they upbraided the Cowardice of the Freshwater Soldiers, who turned
their Back, with most bitter Taunts and Reproaches: These presently getting
into a Body, and clapping their Bucklers one into another, fell in upon the
Enemy, (now confident of an assured Victory,) and having killed Ephialtes and
many others, forced the rest into the City; and the Macedonians being mixed
with the other in the Nightime, entered pell-mell with them within the Walls;
but the King ordered a Retreat to be sounded, and so they returned into the
Camp. After this, Memnon and the rest of the Commanders consulted together, and
determined to leave the City. In execution of which Resolve, they left the best
of the Soldiers to keep the Citadel with sufficient Provision and all other
Things necessary, and transported themselves with the rest of the Citizens, and
all their Wealth, into Coos.

Alexander about spring of Day understanding what was done, cast a Trench, and
built a Rampart upon it round about the Castle; and razed the City it self to
the Ground. Halicarnassus taken.
Then he ordered part of his Army to march further up into the Country in order
to force other Provinces to his Obedience; these Forces valiantly brought under
the Power of Alexander all the Nations as far as to the Borders of the Greater
Phrygia, and forced Ant. Chapter 332.
them to find Provision for their Army.

Alexander himself subdued all the Sea Coast of Asia to Cilicia, gaining many
Cities by Surrender, and taking several Forts and Castles by Storm; amongst
which, there was one that was taken after a wonderful manner, which by reason
of the Rarity of the Thing is not to be passed over.

In the utmost Borders of Lycia, the Marmarensians, who inhabited upon a great
Rock, and well fortified, set upon the Rear of Alexander's Amy in their March
thither, and slew many of the Macedonians, and carried away a great number of
Prisoners and Carriage-Horses. At which, the King was so enraged, that he
resolved to besiege the Place, and used his utmost Endeavor to gain it. But
the Or Marmarians.
Marmarensians trusting to their own Valor and the Strength of the Place,
manfully endured the Siege; for they were assaulted two Days together without
any intermission, and were assured, that the King would not stir thence till he
had taken the Rock. The ancient Men therefore at the first advised the Younger
to forbear standing it out with such Violence, and to make Peace with the King
upon as good Conditions as they could; which when they denied, and all resolved
to part with their Lives and the Liberties of their Country together; the
graver Men then advised them to kill all the old Men, Women, and Children, and
that those that were strong and able to defend themselves should break through
their Enemies Camp in the Night, and flee to the next Mountains. The young Men
approved of the Council, and The strange Resolution of the Marmarians.
thereupon an Edict was made, That every one should go to his own House, and
Eat and Drink plentifully with his Wife, Children and Relations, and then
expect the Execution of the Decree. But some of the young Men who were more
considerate than the rest, (who were about Six hundred in the whole,) judged it
more Advisable to forbear Ant. Chapter 332.
killing their own Kindred and Relations with their own Hands, but rather set
the Houses on fire, and then to sally out at the Gates, and make to the
Mountains for their Security. This was presently taken to, and the Thing put in
execution, and so every Man's House became his Sepulcher. And the young Men
themselves broke through the midst of their Enemies, and fled to the Hills near
at hand. And these were the chief Things done this Year.

CHAP. III.
Mytelen taken by Memnon, Darius his General. His Successes. He dies.
Charidemus the Athenian unjustly put to Death by Darius. Alexander falls sick,
recovered by Philippus. Alexander seizes Alexander of Lyncestas, upon his
Mother's Letters. Alexander takes Issus. The memorable Battle at Issus, where
the Mother, Wife, Two Daughters, and Son of Darius, were taken. Alexander's
noble Carriage toward them. Darius's Letters and Offers to Alexander. Darius
prepares another Army.

BUT in the following Year, wherein Nicocrates was chief Governor of Athens,
and Olymp. 3. 4. Ant. Chapter 331. An. M. 3617.
Cesus Valerius and Lucius Papirius succeeded in the Consular Dignity at Rome.
Darius sent a great Sum of Money to Memnon, and declared him General of all his
Forces. Hereupon he raised great Numbers of Men from all Parts, and fitting out
a Navy of Three hundred Sail, set himself with all diligence to the prosecution
of the War. To that end, he brought in Chius to join with him. Then he sailed
to Lesbos, and presently took Antissa, Mythimnus, Pyrrhus, and Erissus. But for
Mitylene besieged and taken by Memnon in the Island Lesbos.
Mitylene, and Lesbos, a City in Lesbos.
Lesbos, because it was much larger, and strongly Garrisoned and well provided,
he gained it not without many Assaults, and the Loss of many of his Men, though
he took it at length with much ado. The Fame of this Action being presently
noised abroad, many of the Cyclade Islands sent Ambassadors to him to make
Leagues with him. Then there was a Report spread abroad, that Memnon with his
whole Fleet was intending to invade Eabaea, which put all the Cities into a
great Consternation. And some of the Graecians being come into the Confederacy
of the Persians, were hearten'd in hopes of a change of their Affairs for the
better. Besides, Memnon had corrupted many of the Greeks with Money to sail in
the same Bottom with the Persians. But Fortune put a stop to the Progress of
this Man's Success; for he fell sick of a mortal Distemper, and dv'd; and by
his Death, the Memnon dies.
Affaris of Darius went backward: For the Of Persia.
King hoped to have transferred the whole Weight of the War out of Asia into
Europe.

But when he heard of the Death of Memnon, he called his Friends together, and
asked their Advice, Whether he should send a General with the Army, or go
himself in Person, and try his Fortune with the Macedonians. Some were of
Opinion for the King to go himself, for that they said, the Persians would then
with more cheerfulness venture their Lives. But Charidemus the Athenian, who
was in great Esteem for his Valor and Prudence as a General, (for under Philip
he gained a great Reputation, and was his chief and principal Adviser in all
his weighty Affairs,) advised Darius not to lay the Kingdom rashly at stake,
but still to continue Lord of Asia, and keep the Government in his own Hand,
and to appoint an Experienced General to manage the Concerns of the War. And he
told him, that an Hundred thousand Men, of which Number a Third Part to be
Mercenaries out of Greece, were sufficient for the Expedition, and engaged that
he would see the Thing accomplished. The King at the first agreed to what he
said: But his Friends peremptorily rejected this Advice; suspecting that
Charidemus sought for the chief Ant. Chapter 331.
Command, out of design to give up all into the Power of the Macedonians.
Hereupon Charidemus was in such a Rage, as that he called them all Cowards:
With which Words, the King was much more offended than before; and whereas
Anger never suffers a Man to consider wisely before hand, Darius orders him to
be bound in a Belt, (which is the manner of the Persians,) and delivers him to
his Guard to be put to Death: Who when he was leading to Execution, cried out,
That the King would in a short time repent of what he had done in this Matter,
and would be punished for that unjust Judgment against him by the loss of his
Kingdom. Thus fell Charidemus from the top of all his Hopes and Expectations
Charidemus unjustly put to Death by Darius.
through the unseasonable Liberty of his Tongue. But the King, as soon as his
Anger was over, presently repented of what he had done, and accused himself as
guilty of a most horrid Crime: But the Power of a King could not undo that
which was past Remedy. Considering therefore how valiant the Macedonians were,
and musing upon the Courage of Alexander, he inquired where he might have a fit
Person to succeed Memnon in the chief Command of the Army, and when none could
be found, he was forced to run the Hazard himself for the saving of his
Kingdom. He forthwith therefore ordered all his Forces to be called together
from all Parts, and to Rendevouz at Babylon. Then he made choice of such of his
Kindred and Friends as he thought fit, and to some Ant. Chapter 331.
he gave Commands in the Army according to their several Qualities, and others
he appointed to attend upon his Person as his Lifeguard. As soon as the time
before fixed upon for the Expedition was come, they all Rendevouz'd at Babylon,
to the Number of The Number of the Persian Army.
Four hundred thousand Foot, and an Hundred thousand Horse; Hence he marched
away with this vast Number of Men toward Cilicia, n^w Carmania, in the Turks
Dominions.
Cilicia, taking along with him his Mother, Wife and Children; that is to say,
a Son and two Daughters.

In the mean time, Alexander (while Memnon was living, hearing how Chius and
the Cities of Lesbos were surrendered into the Hands of Memnon, and that
Mitylene was taken by Storm, and that he was ready to invade Macedonia with a
Navy of Three hundred Sail, and that many of the Graecians were upon the Point
of Revolting) was very much perplexed and discontented. But as soon as he heard
of Memnon's Death, his Mind was more at rest. But within a short time after he
fell desperately sick, and growing worse and Alexander sick.
worse, sent for Physicians, who coming to him, were all afraid to administer
any thing, looking upon him as irrecoverable: Saving that there was one Philip
of Acarnania, (whose Practice it was commonly to make use of desperate
Medicines,) promised to cure him by a Potion; the King hereupon readily
complied with him, especially because he heard Darius was on his march from
Babylon. Then the Physician delivered the Potion, which through the Art and
Skill of Philip, and the Advantage of the Natural Strength of the Patient,
presently cured the King: Who being thus beyond all Hope recovered, bountifully
Ant. Chapter 331.
Rewarded the Physician, and received him into the Number of his most faithful
Friends.

About the same time Alexander received Letters from his Mother, wherein (among
other Things which she thought fit to advise him of) she wished him to have a
care of Alexander receives Letters from his Mother.
Alexander of In Macedonia.
Lyncestas, who was a very valiant Man, and of a generous Disposition, and not
inferior to any for his Faithfulness to Alexander. But many things concurring
that seemed to fortify the Accusation, he was seized and committed to Custody,
in order to his Legal Trial. But Alexander having Intelligence that Darius was
within a few Days march, sent Parmenio before with the Army to gain the Passes
and the Syriae Pilae, or the Gates of Syria.
Gates, as they were called; who marching away with all speed, possessed
himself of them, beating off the Barbarians, who were there before him. Darius,
that he might march with more ease, had left all his heavy Baggage and Rabble
behind him at Damascus, a City of Syria. Hence he marched with all the speed he
could, hearing that Alexander had preposfess'd himself of all the difficult
Passes and Places, as not daring to fight in the Plain and open Field, as he
supposed. The Inhabitants of all the Places through which Alexander came,
slighting the inconsiderable Number of the Macedonians, and frighted with the
approach of the vast Army of the Persians, without any regard to Alexander
sided with Darius, and readily supplied the Persians with Provisions and all
other Necessaries, and by the Rule of their own Opinions adjudg'd the Victory
before hand to the Barbarians.

In the mean time Alexander had possessed himself of Issus, now Laiazzo, under
the Turks.
Issus, (surpised with the Fear of his Army,) a considerable City of Cilicia.
Cilicia; and understanding by his Spies that Darius was not distant above
Betwixt 4 and 5 Miles.
Thirty Furlongs, and that he was even now approaching with his Army so
provided, and in that order, as to make them terrible to all, he judged the
Gods highly favored him in putting such an Opportunity into his Hands, as that
by the gaining of one Victory he should ruin the whole Empire of Persia.
Hereupon he stirred up the Spirits of his Soldiers, (by a Speech for the
Occasion,) encouraging them to fight Ant. Chapter 331.
Manfully, now all lay at Stake. His Regiments of Foot, and Squadrons of Horse,
he The great Battle at Issus.
posted so, as the Place and Ground would best allow: The Horse was placed
before the whole Body of the Foot, which were ordered behind to support and
relieve the Horse. Being in the Right Wing himself, he marched on toward the
Enemy with the choicest of the Horse. The Thessalian Horse were in the Left,
for Valor and Skill sar excelling all the rest. And now the Armies came within
the cast of a Dart one of another, upon which there flew such a shower of Darts
from the Barbarians against them with Alexander, that through their Multitude
they so brushed in their flight one upon another, that their Force was much
abated, and did little harm. Then presently the Trumpets on both Sides sounded
a Charge, and the Macedonians were the first that set up a great Shout, which
being answered by the Barbarians, all the Hills and Mountains there near at
hand echoed and rang again with the Noise. But the Shout of the Barbarians far
exceeded the other, being made by Five hundred thousand Men at once.

Then Alexander looked every where round about to spy out Darius, whom having
found, he made at him (with those Horse that were with him) with all the speed
imaginable, desiring not so much to conquer the Persians, as to gain the
present Victory by Ant. Chapter 331.
his own Personal Valor. In the mean time the whole Body of Horse engaged,
great Slaughters being made on both Sides; but the Valor of those engaged
caused the Victory to hang in Suspense a long time, appearing sometimes here
and sometimes there, by Changes and Turns. No Dart cast, or Stroke given by any
was in vain, but did some Execution, for in such a Multitude the Mark was sure
to be hit. So that great Numbers were wounded, and others fighting to their
last Breath, chose rather to lose their Lives, than part with their Honor, And
the Officers at the Head of their Regiment so bravely behaved themselves, that
they put Life and Courage into the Common Soldiers. There might then be seen
all sorts of Wounds, and as various and sharp Contests for Victory Oxathres a
Persian, and Brother of Darius, a very valiant Man, as soon as he saw Alexander
make so fiercely at Darius, was resolved to undergo the same Fortune with his
Brother, and therefore charges Alexander's Body with the best of the Horse he
could make choice of out of his own Troops, and knowing that his Love to his
Brother would advance his Fame and Reputation above all other things among the
Persians, he fought close by his Chariot, and with that Courage and Dexterity,
that he laid many dead at his Feet; and inasmuch as the Macedonians were as
resolute on the other Side not to move a Foot, the dead Bodies rose up in heaps
of Carcasses round about the Chariot of Darius. And being that every one strove
to lay hold on the King, both Sides fought with great Obstinacy, without any
regard of their Lives. In this Conflict many of the Persian Nobility were
slain, amongst whom were Antixyus and Rheomitus, and Tasiaces the Lord
Lieutenant of Egypt. And many of the Macedonians likewise; and Alexander
himself (compassed round by the Enemy) was wounded in the Thigh. The
Chariot-Horses of Darius receiving many Wounds, and frighted with the multitude
of Carcasses that lay round in Heaps about them, grew so unruly, that they had
hurried Darius into the Ant. Chapter 331.
midst of his Enemies, if he had not in this Extremity caught hold of the
Reins himself, being forced thus to make bold with the Laws of the Persians, in
debasing the Majesty of the Persian Kings. In the mean time his Servants
brought to him another Chariot, and a great hurly burly there was while he was
ascending this, insomuch as Darius himself (by the Enemy pressing hard upon
him) was in a great Terror and Consternation; Which when some of the Persians
discerned, they began first to fly, the Horse that were next following the
Example of their Fellows, and at length all made away as fast as they could.
The Places being narrow and strait, in their have they trod down one another,
and many perished without a Stroke of the Enemy; for they lay on Heaps, some
with their Arms, Alexander gets the Victory at Issus.
others without them; some held their naked Swords as long in their Hands, as
that their Fellow Soldiers ran themselves upon them, and so were slain. But
many got away into the open Plain, and by the swiftness of their Horses,
escaped to the several Cities of the Allies.

During this time, the Battalion about Eight thousand Feet.
Macedonian Phalanx and the Persian Foot fought a while; for the Flight of the
Horse was the Preludium to the Victory. The Barbarians therefore taking to
their Heels, and so many Thousands making away through the same Straits, all
Places thereabouts were in a short time covered with dead Carcasses: But the
Persians, by the advantage of the Night, got away here and there into several
Places of shelter.

The Macedonians therefore left off the Pursuit, and betook themselves to the
rifling of The Macedonians rifle the Persian's Tents.
the Camp, especially the King's Pavillion, because there were the richest
Booties; so that there was found and carried thence vast Sums of Gold and
Silver, and exceeding rich Garments and Furniture; an abundance likewise of
Treasure belonging to his Friends and Kindred, and the Commanders of his Army:
For the Wives not only from the Ant. Chapter 331.
King's Household, but from the Families of his Kindred and Attendants, mounted
in Chariots glittering with Gold (according to the Custom of the Persians)
accompanied the Camp in their march from place to place. And every one of these
(through their Luxury and Delicateness, to which they had commonly inured
themselves) carried with them abundance of rich Furniture, and a multitude of
beautiful Women. But the captive Ladies The miserable Condition of the Persian
Ladies.
were then in a most miserable Condition: For they who before, by reason of
their Nicety, could scarcely be placed in their stately Chariots so as to
please them, and had their Bodies so attired, as that no Air might touch them,
now rent their Garments in pieces, and scarce with one simple Veil to cover
their Nakedness, threw themselves shrieking out of their Chariots, and with
their Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven, cast themselves down at the Feet of
the Conquerors. Some with their trembling Hands pulled off all their Jewels and
Ornaments from their own Bodies, and ran up steep Rocks and craggy Places, with
their Hair flying about their Ears; and thus meeting in Throngs together, some
called for Help from those who wanted the Relief of others as much as
themselves: Some were dragged along by the Hair of their Heads, others were
stripped Ant. Chapter 331.
naked, and then killed, and sometimes cudgelled to death with the heavy end of
the Soldiers Lances. Nay, even all manner of Disgrace and Contempt was poured
upon the Glory of the Persians, so famous and honorable heretofore all the
World over.

But the more sober and moderate of the Macedonians seeing that strange Turn of
Fortune, much pitied the Condition of those miserable Creatures, who had lost
every thing that was near and dear to them in this World, and were now
environed with nothing but Strangers and Enemies, and fallen into miserable and
dishonorable Captivity. But the Mother of Darius, and his Wife, and two
Daughters, now Marriageable (and his little Darius his Mother, Wife, two
Daughters and Son, taken.
Son especially) drew Tears from the Eyes of the Beholders: For their sad
change of Fortune, and the greatness of their sudden and unexpected Calamity
(presented thus to their view) could not but move them to a compassionate
Resentment of their present Condition: For as yet it was not known whether
Darius was alive or dead. And in the mean time The Women-Captives, Darius his
Wife, Children, Mother
they perceived his Tent pillaged and rifled by armed Men, who knew no
difference of Persons, and therefore committed many indecent and unworthy
Actions, and saw likewise all Asia brought under the Power of a Conquering
Sword as well as themselves. The Wives of the Governors of the Provinces that
fell at of the Queen, and Queen Mother of Persia.
their Feet to beg Protection, were so far from finding Relief, that they
themselves earnestly prayed them to rescue them out of their present Calamity.

Alexander's Servants having possessed themselves of Darius his Tents, prepared
the Tables and Baths which were used by Darius himself, and lighted up many
Lamps in expectation of the King, that in his return from the pursuit he might
take possession of all the Furniture of Darius, as an earnest of the Empire and
Government of all Asia. Of the Barbarians there fell in this Battle above an
Hundred and twenty thousand Foot, and no fewer Ant. Chapter 331.
than Ten thousand Horse. Of the Macedonians, Three hunded Foot, and an Hundred
and fifty Horse. And this was the Issue of the Battle at Issus.

But to return to the Kings themselves: Darius with all his Army being thus
routed, fled, and by changing from time to time one Horse after another the
best he had, he made away with all speed to escape out of the Hands of
Alexander, and to get to the Governors of the Upper Provinces. But Alexander,
with the best of his Horse and chiefest of his Friends, pursued him close at
the very Heels, earnestly longing to be (...).
Lord of Darius. But after he had rid Two hundred Furlongs, he returned at
midnight into the Camp; and having refreshed his weary Body in the Baths, went
to Supper, and then to his rest.

In the mean time, one came to the Mother of Darius, and told her that
Alexander was returned from the pursuit of Darius, and had possessed himself of
all the rich Spoils of his Tent. Upon which, there was given up a great Shriek
and Lamentation amongst the Women, and from the multitude of the Captives
lamenting with the Queen at the sad News, all places were filled with Cries and
Lamentations. The King understanding what Sorrow there was among the Women,
sent Leonatus, one his of Courtiers to them, to put an end to their Fears; and
to let Sisygambres, the Mother of Darius, know, that her Son was alive, and
that Alexander would have respect to their former Dignity; and that to confirm
the Promise of his Generosity by his Actions, he would come and discourse with
them the Day following. Whereupon the Captives were so surpised with the
sudden and happy Turn of their Fortunes, that they honored Alexander as a God;
and their Ant. Chapter 331.
Fears were turned into Exultations of Joy.

The King, as soon as it was light (with Hephestion, one of the trustiest of
his Friends) Alexander's great Humanity toward the Persian Captives.
went to visit the Queens. When they entered, in regard they were both habited
alike, Sisygambres taking Hephestion for the King (because he was the more
comely and taller Man) fell prostrate at his Feet; but the Attendants, by the
Nods of their Heads, and Pointing of their Fingers, directed her to Alexander;
whereupon being much ashamed, and out of Countenance by reason of Mistake, she
salutes Alexander in the same manner she had done before the other. Upon which,
he lift her up, and said, Mother, trouble not, nor perplex your self; for that
Man also is Alexander. By which courteous and obliging Title of Mother, to a
grave and honorable Matron, he gave a clear Demonstration of the Respects and
Civilities he intended toward them all.

Having therefore owned her for a Second Mother, he presently confirmed his
Words by his Actions: For he ordered her to be clothed in her Royal Robes, and
restored her to all the Honors becoming her former State and Dignity. For he
gave her all her Attendants and Household Servants and Furniture allowed her by
Darius, and added also as much more of his own Bounty. He promised likewise to
dispose of the young Ladies in Marriage far better than if their Father had
provided Husbands for them; and that he would educate the King's little Son as
carefully and honorably as if he were his own. Then he called him to him, and
kissed him; and taking notice that he was not at all dashed, nor seemed to be
in the least afrighted, turning to Hephestion and those about him, This Youth,
but Six Years of Age (says he) carries in his Countenance Marks of a stcut and
brave Spirit above his Age, and is better than his Father. He further declared,
That he would take care of the Wife of Darius; that nothing should be wanting
to her; in order to the support and maintenance of her Royal State and former
Prosperity. Many other kind and gaining Expressions he used, insomuch as the
Ladies fell a weeping in Showers of Tears, Ant. Chapter 331.
out of Transports of Joy, upon account of the Greatness of their unexpected
Felicity. After all, he at length put forth to them his Right Hand to kiss,
upon which not only they who were immediately honored with those Kindnesses,
set forth his Prai^e, but even the whole Army cried up his incomparable Grace
and Clemency. And indeed, I conceive, that amongst the many Brave and Noble
Acts of Alexander, none of them were greater than this, nor more worthy by
History, to be handed down to Posterity. For storming and taking of Cities,
gaining of Battles, and other Successes in War, are many times the Events of
Fortune, more than the Effects of Valor and Virtue; but to be compassionate to
the miserable, and those that lie at the Feet of the Conqueror, must be the
Fruit only of Wisdom and Prudence. For many by Prosperity grow high-crested,
and are so far swelled with Pride, by the favorable Blasts of Fortune, that
they are careless and forgetful of the Common Miseries of Mankind; so that it is
common to see many to sink under the weight of their prosperous Successes, as
an heavy Burden they are not able to bear.

Therefore though Alexander was many Ages before us who are now living, yet the
remembrance of his Virtue, justly challenges Honor and Praise from all those
that succeed him in future Generations.

As for Darius, being now got to Babylon, he musters up his broken Troops that
were escaped from the Battle of Issus; and though he had received so great an
Overthrow, yet he was not at all discouraged, but writ Letters to Alexander,
whereby he advised him to use his Good Fortune and Success moderately, and
offered him a great Sum of Money Ant. Chapter 33^.
for the Ransom of the Captives: He promised likewise to give up to him all
that part of Asia, with the Cities which lay on that side, within the This was
all Narolia.
Course of the River Now Casilimer in Paphligonia.
Halys, if he were willing to be his Friend.

Whereupon Alexander called a Council of War, and laid before them such Letters
as he judged most for his own Advantage, but concealed the true ones: By which
Contrivance the Ambassadors were dismissed, without any effect of their
Embassy.

Darius therefore concluding that Things were not to be composed by Letters,
sets himself wholly to make preparation for War. To which end, he armed those
Soldiers that had loft their Arms in the late unfortunate Battle, and raised
others, and formed them into Regiments. He sent likewise for those Forces he
had through Haste left behind him in the Upper Provinces, when he first began
his Expedition. To conclude, he was so earnest and diligent in recruiting his
Army, that they were now twice as many as they were at Issus; for they made up
a Body of Eight hundred thousand Foot, and Two hundred thousand Horse, besides
a vast multitude of hooked Chariots. These considerable Actions were the Events
of this Year.

CHAP. IV.
Alexander marches toward Egypt: Besieges Tire. Prodigies of Tire. The Tyrians
bind Apollo with Golden Chains. The Inventions of the Tyrians to defend
themselves. The Advancement of Ballominus, a poor Man, to be King of Tire. The
Acts of Agis and Amyntas: Amyntas killed, and all his Soldiers. Alexander takes
Gaza by Storm: Is presented by the Grecians.

NIceratus was Chief Governor of Athens, and Marcus Atilius and Marcus Valerius
were Consuls at Rome, when the Hundred and Twelfth Olympiad was celebrated,
wherein Olymp. 112. 1. Ant. Chapter 330. An. M. 3618.
Grylus of Chalcidon was Victor.

Alexander, after the Battle of Issus, caused both his own, and those likewise
of the Enemies that were of greatest Repute for Valor, to be buried. After he
had sacrificed and given Thanks to the Gods, he bountifully rewarded all such
as had valiantly behaved themselves, every one according to his Merit. After
which, he gave liberty to his Soldiers for some days to recreate and refresh
themselves. Thence marching with his Army toward Egypt, as he came into
Phoenicia, other Cities readily submitted to him, and were received into his
Protection. But Tire was the only City that obstinately denied him entrance,
when he desired it, in order to Sacrifice to Hercules Tyrius; at which
Alexander Alexander demands entrance into Tire.
was so enraged, that he threatened to storm and take it by force of Arms. But
the Tyrians resolved to stand it out, because they thought thereby to
ingratiate themselves with Darius; and that for their Faithfulness and Loyalty
to him, they concluded he would bountifully reward them; who by that means
gained him more time to recruit his Army, while Alexander was detained in a
troublesome and dangerous Siege. And besides, they placed their Confidence in
the Strength of the Island, and their plentiful Provision of all Things
necessary, and in the Carthaginians, from whom they were descended.

The King therefore, though he foresaw that it would be a very difficult matter
to carry on the Siege by reason of the Sea, and that they were so well provided
with all Things for the defense of the Walls, and had a strong Navy, and that
the City was separated from the Continent; so that nothing could be effectually
put in execution: Yet he judged Tire but four Furlongs from the Continent. Tire
besieged.
it more for his Honor to undergo all sorts of Hazards, than for the
Macedonians to be baffled with one City, and that too not altogether so
difficult to be gained.

He forthwith therefore demolished Old Tire, as it was then called, and by the
Stones carried by many Thousands of Men, raised a Mole Two hundred Foot in
breadth, which by the Help of the Inhabitants of the Neighboring Cities (who
were all called in for that purpose) was presently dispatched. The Tyrians, in
the mean time, from their Ant. Chapter 330.
Ships laughed and jeered at the King, and asked him whether he supposed
himself stronger than Neptune. Afterward, when they perceived (beyond whatever
they thought could be done) that the Mole still increased, and was in
likelihood to be finished, they decreed to transport their Wives, Children, and
Old People to Carthage; and those that were Young Men were kept some of them to
guard the Walls, and others for Sea-Service; for they had a Fleet of Fourscore
Sail. At length they sent away part of their Wives and Children, in order to
sail by the Enemy for Carthage; but being prevented by the multitude of them
that were at work, and not in a fit posture to fight at Sea, they were all
forced to return, and abide the Siege. And though they were plentifully supplied
with Engines to shoot Arrows, Darts, and Stones, and all other Machines and
Instruments, fit and necessary for the defense of the Walls against any
Assault; yet they readily furnished themselves as they had occasion with many
more, for that Tire was full of Gunsmiths, and Artificers of all sorts. So that
being supplied by these Workmen, with many new invented Engines, every place
round the Walls was filled with them, especially toward that side where the
Mole was raised.

And now the Work was brought by the Macedonians within the Cast of a Dart,
when presently a Prodigy from the Gods appeared to them who were thus
threatened; for the working Prodigy of a Whale.
of the Sea cast a Whale of an incredible bigness to the side of the Mole; and
there it lay without doing any Harm, but remained there a good while, leaning
one side of its Body to the Work, which struck the Beholders with much Terror
and Amazement. After it was gone, and returned into the Sea, both Parties went
to their Divinations, and each (severally concluding as they would desire to
have it) made this Construction, That by this Sign was portended, that Neptune
would aid and assist them.

There was another Prodigy likewise happened, which greatly amazed the Common
Prodigies at Tire.
People: For when the Macedonians were at Meat, the Faces of those that broke
the Bread seemed to be all over bloody; and one of Tire affirmed, that he saw a
Vision, by which Apollo told him that he would forsake the City. And because
the Common People suspected that he spoke this in favor of Alexander's Party,
the Young Men had stoned him to death, but that he was rescued by the
Magistrates, and fled into Hercules his Temple; and so through his pious
Supplication he escaped so imminent a Danger.

Upon this, the Tyrians, to prevent Apollo's leaving the City, fastened his
Image to the The Tyrians fasten Apollo with Chains.
Pedestal with golden Chains. But the Citizens being put into a great Fright
through the increase of the Mole, loaded many little Boats with Engines to
shoot Arrows and Darts, and with Slingers and Archers; who setting upon them
that were at work, wounded and killed many of them: For Showers of Arrows and
Darts being discharged upon Throngs of naked Men, none missed their Mark, in
regard all lay open and exposed to every Shot without any defense; for they
were not only wounded with Darts before, but (through the narrowness of the
Mole) likewise galled at their Backs, being not possible for any one to guard
both sides at once.

Alexander therefore, that he might repair the sudden and unexpected Loss, with
all the speed he could manned as many Ships as he had, and went on board as
Admiral himself, and made it his Business to get into the Haven of Tire, in
order to intercept the Phoenicians in their return. Hereupon the Barbarians
fearing if he gained the Haven he would take the City it self (those who should
defend it being now out) made all the haste they could to return to the City.
And indeed both sides plied their Oars with all their might to prevent one
another. But the Macedonians just entering the Port before the other, all the
Phoenicians were every Man upon the point like to be cut off; but forcing their
way through their Enemies, they returned into the City, with the loss of some
of those Vessels that lagg'd behind. However, though the King mist of his
Design, yet he eagerly set to his Work again for the finishing of the Mole, and
by a considerable number of Vessels guarded the Work for the future.

The Work being brought near to the City, and the Town now in a probability of
being taken, on a sudden a violent Storm of Wind arose, and tore away part of
the Mole; which so perplexed Alexander, that he repented that he ever began the
Siege. But however, being pricked forward with an unquenchable Thirst after
Glory, he caused Trees of an incredible magnitude to be cut down in the
Mountains, and brought thither, and with them Booths, Branches, and Earth pil'd
together, gave a check to the Violence of the Stream.

Having therefore presently repaired the Breach that was made, the Mole by the
help of many Hands was brought again within the Cast of a Dart, and by Engines
mounted upon it, he battered down the Walls, and by shot with Darts and Arrows
out of Engines, beat off the Enemy from the Bulwarks: With these likewise both
Archers and Slingers plied the Besieged, and grievously wounded and galled many
of the Townsmen upon the Walls. But the Tyrians being accustomed to the Sea,
and having many Artificers and Contrivers of Engines, used many Arts and
ingenious Contrivances to preserve themselves: For against the Shot they
contrived Wheels with many Spoaks, which being whirled about with an Engine,
shattered in pieces some of the Darts and Arrows, and turned off others, and
broke the Force of all the rest. And to give a check to the Violence of the
Stones that were shot out of the Ballasts, they prepared Wooll-packs and other
things that were soft and pliant to receive them.

But the King not contented to assault the City only from the Mole, girt the
Town round with his whole Fleet, and diligently viewed all parts of the Walls,
as if he resolved to besiege the Place both by Sea and Land. The Tyrians not
daring to engage him at Sea, he destroyed three Ships, that were then by chance
in the Mouth of the Harbor, and then returned to his Camp. But the Tyrians,
that they might make their Walls as strong again as they were before, raised
another Wall ten Cubits broad, and five Cubits distant from the former, and
filled the empty space between the two Walls with Earth and Stones.

Alexander likewise made a Battery, by joining many of his Ships together, and
planted upon them all sorts of Rams and Battering Engines, whereby he beat down
an hundred Foot of the Wall, and attempted to break into the City over the
Ruins: Upon which, the Tyrians discharged a shower of Darts and Arrows, and
with much ado repulsed the Enemy, and the Night following repaired that part of
the Wall that had been battered down.

But after that the Passage to the City, by the joining of the Mole close to
the Walls, was made, as if it had been a Peninsula, there were many and sharp
Contests both to get and defend the Walls. For though they had imminent
Destruction before their Eyes, and the Miseries that attend upon a Town's being
taken by Storm, yet they so resolved to go through all Dangers, that they
despised Death it self. For when the Macedonians approached with Towers of that
height that they equaled the Battlements, and cast out Planks, whereof one of
the ends lay upon the Top of the Ramparts, and so by a Bridge mounted the
Walls; the Tyrians by the ingenuity of the Artificers, were supplied with many
sorts of Engines and Weapons for their effectual Defense. As amongst others
they had very great Tridents, the Inventions of the Tyrians.
three Fork'd Hooks, which they cast close at hand, and therewith wounded them
in the Towers (to which were fastened Cords, one end whereof they held
themselves) and by these fixing in their Enemies Targets they plucked them out
of their hands: For to this Necessity and Straight the Macedonians were
brought, that they must either stand naked, and exposed (without defensive
Arms) to a multitude of Darts and Arrows, and so be wounded to Death, or else
out of a point of Honor stick to their Arms, and so perish, by being plucked
headlong out of the Towers. Others threw Fishing Nets upon them that were
engaged upon the Bridges laid to the Walls, and so entangled their Hands, that
they drew them off and tumbled them headlong to the Ground.

Another wonderful invention they found out against the Macedonians, whereby
they grievously plagued the chiefest of their Enemies, which was this, they
filled their Iron and Brazen Shields with Sand, and heated them so long in the
Fire till the Sand was scorching hot, which by an Engine they threw upon them
that were chiefly engaged, whereby they were cruelly tormented; for the Sand
getting within their Breast-plates and Coats of Mail, and grievously scorching
their Flesh, no Remedy could be applied for the curing of the Malady. So that
(though they made most bitter Complaints as Men upon the Rack) yet none there
were who were able to help them, insomuch, as they grew mad in the Extremity of
the Torture, and died in the height of unexpressible Torments.

In the mean time, the Phaenicians never ceased casting Fire-darts and Stones
at their Enemies, so that they were scarce able to endure, the Multitude was so
excessive. Moreover, Ant. Chapter 330.
with long Poles with sharp Hooks at the end, they cut the Cords of the
Battering-Rams in pieces, (which forced them forwards) whereby the Force of the
Engine was lost; and shot out of Machines for the Purpose, great massy pieces
of red hot Iron into the midst of great multitudes of the Assailants, which by
reason of the number of them, against whom they were discharged, were sure to
do Execution. They plucked likewise Men in Armor from off the Rampires with
Iron Instruments, called Crows, and others shaped like Men's Hands. And having
(...).
many Hands at work, they eluded all the Enemies Engines, and killed multitudes
of them. And although the Service was so amazing, and the Conflict so sharp,
that it was scarce to be endured, yet the Macedonians remitted nothing of their
ancient Valor, but made their way over the Bodies of those that were slain,
not at all discouraged by the Misfortunes of others. In the mean time,
Alexander battered the Walls with massy Stones shot out of his Engines, and
grievously galled the Defendants with Arrows and Darts, and all sorts of shot
from the Wooden Towers. To prevent which mischief, the Tyrians placed Marble
Wheels before the Walls, which were turned round by certain Engines, and with
these they either broke the Darts in pieces, or so threw them off that they
were ineffectual. And to allay the Force of the Stones shot against the Wall,
they sowed together Hides and Skins oil'd over to receive them, which meeting
with what was soft and pliant, their Force was thereby much abated.

To conclude, the Tyrians were not short in any thing, whereby their Valor
might be made to appear for the Defense of the Place. And being sufficiently
supported with fresh Ant. Chapter 330;
aid, they were the more Courageous, and to that degree, that they left the
Walls and Towers, and leaped out upon the Bridges to oppose the Assailants, and
Hand to Hand fought it out smartly in the Defense of their Country. There were
some, that with Axes cut off whole Limbs at once of all that were in their way.
For among the rest, there was one Admetus, a Macedonian Captain, a strong and
valiant Man, in the heat of his Contest with the Tyrians, had his Head cloven
in the midst with an Ax, and so Perished.

Alexander seeing that the Tyrians had the better on it, and Night approaching,
sounded a Retreat. And indeed, at first he had thoughts to raise his Siege, and
to go on with his Expedition into Egypt, But he presently changed his Mind,
looking upon it as Base and Dishonorable to give up all the Glory to the
Tyrians. And therefore set himself again to carry on the Siege, though he had
only one of his Friends called Amyntas, the Brother of Andromenes, who approved
of his Resolution.

Having therefore encouraged the Macedonians to stick to him, and furnished his
Fleet with all things necessary, he besieged the City both by Sea and Land. And
observing that part of the Wall near the Arsenal, was weaker than the rest, he
brought all his Galleys, (which carried his best Engines) chained fast
together, to that Place. There he attempted an Act which the Beholders scarcely
believed, though they saw it with their Eyes. For he cast a Plank from a Wooden
Tower, with one end upon the Battlements of the Walls, as a Bridge, and by this
himself alone mounted the Rampire, not regarding any Danger, nor in the least
affrighted with the violent Assaults of the Tyrians; but in the View of that
Army which had conquered the Persians, he showed his own Personal Ant. Chapter 33^.
Valor, and called to the Macedonians to follow him, and was the first that
came to handy strokes with the Enemy; and killing some with his Spear, others
with his Sword, and tumbling down many with the Bosies of his Buckler, he thus
allayed the Courage of his Adversaries.

In the mean time, the Rams battered down a great Part of the Wall in another
Place. Tire taken.
And now the Macedonians entered through the Breach on one side, and Alexander
with his Party passed over the Wall in another, so that the City was now taken;
yet the Tyrians valiantly bestirred themselves, and encouraging one another,
Guarded and blocked up all the Narrow Passes, and fought it out to the last
Man, insomuch as above Seven thousand were cut in pieces upon the Place; the
King made all the Women and Children Slaves, and hung up all the young Men that
were left, to the number of Two thousand. And there were found so great a
Number of Captives, that though the greatest Part of the Inhabitants were
transported to Carthage, yet the remainder amounted to Thirteen thousand. Into
so great Miseries fell the Tyrians, after they had endured a Siege of seven
Months with more Obstinacy than Prudence.

Then the King took away the Golden Chains from the Image of Apollo, and caused
this God to be called That is, a Lover of Alexder.
Apollo Philaxandrus. When he had offered splendid Sacrifices to Hercules, and
rewarded those who had signalized their Valor, he honorably buried the Dead,
and made one Ballonymus King of Tire. But it would be a thing justly to be
condemned to neglect to give a further and larger Account of this Man, whose
Advancement and wonderful change of Condition, was so extraordinary.

After Alexander had gained the City, Strato the former Prince, by reason of
his Faithfulness Ballonymus his wonderful Advancement. Curtius calls him
Abdolonymus. Lib. 4. C. 1. Vid. Just. Lib. 11. Ant. Chapter 330,
to Dari^s, was deprived of the Command; upon which the King gave Power and
Liberty to Hephestion, to bestow the Kingdom of Tire upon which of his Friends
he pleased. Hephestion hereupon, minding to gratify one where he had been
courteously entertained, resolved to Invest him with the Principality of Tire;
but he though he was very Rich and Honorable above the rest of his Fellow
Citizens, yet (because he was not of the Lineage of the Kings) refused it. Then
Hephestion wished him to name some one that was of the Royal Blood; He
thereupon told him of one who was a very prudent and good Man, but extreme
Poor. Hephestion hereupon, forthwith grants the Principality to him, and the
Officer assigned for this Purpose hastens away with the Royal Robes, and finds
him in an Orchard in Rags, drawing of Water for his Hire. Having informed him
of the Change and Alteration of his Condition, he clothed him with the Robe
and other Ornaments becoming his State and Dignity, and then introduced him
into the Forum, and there declared him King of Tire. Which unexpected and
wonderful Occurrence, was very grateful and acceptable to the People.

Thus he obtained the Kingdom, and was ever after a most faithful Friend to
Alexander, and an Example to all that are unacquainted with the sudden and
various Turns of Fortune in this World. Having now related the Acts of
Alexander, we shall turn to affairs elsewhere.

In Europe, Agis King of Lacedaemon, having listed Eight thousand Mercenaries,
who The A^^s of Agis.
escaped from the Battle at Issus, began some new disturbances in favor of
Darius. For having received from him a great Sum of Money and a Fleet, he
sailed into Creet, and reducing many Towns there, he forced them to side with
the Persians. Amyntas likewise, an Exile of Macedonia, who had fled to Darius,
and sided with the Persians in Cilicia, escaping with Four thousand Mercenaries
out of the Battle of Issus, passed over to Tripolis The Acts of Amyntas. Ant.
Chapter 330.
in Phenicia before Alexander's arrival; and there made choice only of so many
of the Navy as would transport his Soldiers, and burnt the rest. With these he
sailed to Cyprus, and from thence, being well furnished with Soldiers and
Shipping, he passed over to Pelusium, and having entered the City, he pretended
that Darius sent him to be their General, because the late Governor of Egypt
was killed in the Battle in Cilicia. Thence he sailed to Memphis, and routed
the Inhabitants in a Field-fight near to the City; who not long after set upon
the Soldiers, straggling out of the Town, and plundering the Country, as they
were in that disorder, carrying away what they could get, cut off Amyntas and
every Man with him. Amyntas killed


In this manner, Amyntas, as he was projecting great Matters, was suddenly
disappointed, and lost his Life. So likewise, other Officers and Captains of
the Army that survived the Battle of Issus, still cleav'd to the Persian
Interest. For some secured convenient Cities and Garrisons for Darius, and
others procured several Provinces to raise Soldiers for him, and provide other
things necessary, as the present Exigency of affairs required.

In the mean time, the General Senate of Greece made a Decree, to send Fifteen
Ambassadors Alexander presented by the Graecians with a Golden Crown
to present a Golden Crown to Alexander, in Congratulation of his Victory at
Issus, who was at that time besieging Gaza, a Garrison of the Persians, which he
took by Assault, after a two Months siege.

CHAP. V.
Alexander makes a Journey to the Temple of Jupiter-Hammon. He Is presented by
the Cyreneans. The Description of the Place about the Temple. The wonderful
Properties of the Fountain Solis. The Building of Alexandria. Alexander's
Answer to Darius his Ambassadors. Alexander passes over the River Tygris with
great hazard. The Preparations on both sides for Battle. The Persians routed at
that Famous Battle at Arbela.

ARistophanes was now chief Governor of Athens, and Spurius Posthumous, and
Titus Olymp. 112. 2. Ant. Chapter 329. An. M. 3619.
Viturius, were invested with the Dignity of Consuls at Rome, when Alexander,
after the taking of Gaza, sent Amyntas with Ten Sail into Macedonia, with
Orders to List the Stoutest of the young Men for Soldiers. And in the mean
time, he himself marched forward with the whole Army toward Egypt, and coming
there, all the Cities submitted to him without fighting. For because the
Persians had wickedly violated their Holy Rites, and domineered imperiously
over them, they most willingly received the Macedonians.

Having settled his Affairs in Egypt, he undertook a Journey to the Temple of
Hammon, to consult with the Oracle there. When he was in the midst of his
Journey, he was met He journeys to Jupiter Hammon. Alexander presented.
by the Ambassadors of Cyrene, presenting him with a Crown and other rich
Gifts, among which were Three hundred War-Horses, and Five of the best
Chariots, drawn with four Horses a piece. These he accepted, and made a League
of Peace and Amity with them; and then with those that attended him went on
forward in his Journey to the Temple. When they came to the parched and dry
Deserts, (for they had taken Water along with them) they passed through a
Region which was nothing but heaps of Sand. After the fourth Day their Water
was spent, so that they were in extremity of Distress; while they were in this
great perplexity, and knew not what to resolve, a sudden and unexpected shower
of Rain then falling, supplied all their present Necessities; which unexpected
Preservation Ant. Chapter 329.
they imputed to the Kindness and Providence of the Gods.

Having furnished themselves out of a Valley with so much Water as was
sufficient for four days; in that time they passed over this Dire and scorching
Desert; But in regard there was no visible Path, by reason of the great Heaps
of Sand, those who led the way, told the King, that there were Crows, which by
their Croking at the Right Hand, directed them the way to the Temple; which the
King taking as an happy Omen, and thereupon concluded, that his coming was
grateful and acceptable to the Gods, he went forward on his Journey with more
cheerfulness. The next Place he came to, was called the Bitter Or Lake.
Pond; Having traveled thence a About 15 Miles.
Hundred Furlongs, he passed by the Cities of Hammon, and in one days Journey
more came to the Grove of the God.

The Site of the Temple is surrounded with a vast Dry and Sandy Desert, Wast
and Untilled; but it self is Six Miles and something more.
Fifty furlongs Broad, and as many Long, full of pleasant Fountains, and
watered with running Streams, richly planted with all sorts of Trees, most of
them bearing Fruit.

The Temperature of the Air is a constant Spring. And though all the Places
round it are Dry and Scorching, yet to all that live there, the Heavens afford
a most healthful Climate. It Is reported, that this Temple was built by Danaus
the Egyptian.

Toward the East and West part of this Sacred Ground the Aethiopians inhabit;
toward The Description of the Places.
the North the Numinidians, a People of Africa; and toward the South the
Nasomeneans. The Hammonians, the Inhabitants of the Sacred Grove, live in
Villages. In the middle of the Grove is a Castle fortified with a Treble Wall;
within the first stands the Ant. Chapter 329.
Palace of the ancient Kings; within the other was the Gynecaeum, where were
the Apartments for the Wives, Children, and Kindred of the Prince, and stood as
a common Fortress and Guard to the whole Place; and lastly, the Temple it self,
and the Sacred Laver, wherein they washed the Sacrifices. Within the Third,
were the Lodgings of the Archers and Darters, and Guard-houses of those who
attend as Guards upon the Prince when he walks abroad. Not far from the Castle,
out of the Walls, stands another Temple of Hammon, shaded round with many Fruit
Trees, next to which is a Fountain, called Solis, from the Natural Effects of
it. For the Water differs in its temper, according The Fountain Solis.
to the several Hours of the Day. For about Sun rising it is Lukewarm;
afterward as the Day comes on, it grows colder and colder, every Hour till
Noon, at which time it is at the Coldest. And thenceforward till Evening the
Cold abates by degrees; and when Night approaches it waxes hot again, and
increases by little and little till Midnight, at which time it boils through
intensiveness of Heat. From that time it cools by degrees, till Sunrising, and
then is Lukewarm again, as it was before.

The Image of the Idol.
God is adorned in every part with Emeralds and other precious Stones, and
delivers his Oracles in a singular and unusual Way: For he is carried about in a
Golden Ship by fourscore Priests, who make to that Place, whither the God with
a Nod of his Head directs them.

There follows a great Multitude of Matrons and young Virgins, singing Paeans
all the way as they go, and setting forth the Praises of the Idol, in Songs
composed after the Custom of their own Country.

When Alexander was introduced by the Priests into the Temple, and saw the God,
Ant. Chapter 329:
one of the Old Prophets addressed himself to him, and said, God save thee my
Son, and this Title take along with thee from the God himself. To whom he made
Answer, I accept it, my Father, and if you will make me Lord of the whole World,
your Son I Will ever be called. Upon which, the Priest approached near the Altar;
and when the Men (who according to Custom lift up the Image) at the uttering
some Words as Signs for that Purpose, moved forward, the Priest answered, That
the God would certainly bestow upon him what he had desired. This was very
acceptable to Alexander.

But then he further said, I entreat thee, O God, that thou would let me know
what I have yet to enquire, and that is, Whether I have executed Justice upon
all my Father's Murderers? Or whether any have escaped? At which the Oracle
cried out, Express thy self better, for no Mortal can kill thy Father, but all
the Murderers of Philip have suffered just Punishment.

He added further, That his wonderful Successes and Prosperous Achievements,
were Evidences of his Divine Birth: For as he was never yet overcome by any, so
he should be ever Victorious for the time to come.

Alexander being greatly pleased with these Answers, after he had bestowed many
rich Alexandria built. Ant. Chapter 329.
and stately Gifts upon the Oracle, returned back on his way for Egypt, where
he intended to build a great City. In order whereunto, when he came there, he
directed the Overseers of this Work to build it between the Marshes and the
Sea, and measured out the Ground himself, and marked out the Streets, and
called it Alexandria, after his own Name. It had a very commodious Situation,
being near unto the Haven of An Island near Egypt, now joined to Alexandria by
a Bridge, tho^ formerly a days sail, as ^omer says.
Pharos. He ordered and contrived the Streets with that Prudence, as that the
Etesean Winds should, with their comfortable Gales, refresh all parts of the
City: For these so cool the Air by their Breezes from the The Medi erranean.
Great Sea, as that the Inhabitants, by so welcome and delightful Temperature
of the Heat, are very healthful. He likewise drew a large and wonderful strong
Wall round the City; and inasmuch as it lay between a large Pond on the one
side, and the Sea on the other, there were but two narrow Ways and Passes by
Land to it; so that it was easy to be defended by a small Guard. The City was
in form like unto a Soldier's Coat, one large and beautifully built Street
running almost through the middle of the Town; in length from Gate to Gate Five
Miles.
forty Furlongs, in breadth an hundred Foot, adorned with most stately
Structures, both of Temples and private Houses. Alexander likewise built a
large and stately Palace of most admirable Workmanship: And not only Alexander,
but all the succeeding Kings of Egypt from time to time, to our present Age,
have enlarged this Palace with most costly and sumptuous Buildings. The City
likewise it self has been enlarged in aftertimes; so that by many it is
reputed to be one of the Greatest and most Noble Cities in the World; for
Beauty, rich Revenues, and plentiful Provision of all things for the
comfortable Support of Man's Life, far excelling all others; and far more
populous than any other: For when I was in Egypt, I was informed Ant. Chapter 329.
by them that kept the Rolls of the Inhabitants, That there were above Three
hundred thousand Freemen that inhabited there, and that the King received above
Six thousand Talents out of the yearly Revenues of Egypt. But when the King had
appointed some of his Friends to oversee and take care of the Building of
Alexandria, and had settled all the Affairs of Egypt, he returned with his Army
into Syria.

As soon as Darius had intelligence of his coming, he got all his Forces
together, and prepared all things necessary in order to fight him: For he
ordered the Swords and Lances Darius his Preparations.
to be made much longer, thinking by that advantage Alexander gained the
Victory in Cilicia. He provided likewise two hundred hooked Chariots, drawn
with four Horses a piece, so contrived as to strike Terror into the Hearts of
his Enemies. For in every one of them on both sides, the Horses which drew the
Chariot by Iron Chains, were fixed in the Yoak-Darts of three Spans long, with
their Points full in the Faces of the Enemy. Upon the lower Parts of the
Axle-trees, were two others fastened directly as those before, pointing into the
Enemies Faces, but longer and broader; and at the top of them were fixed sharp
Hooks. Having completely furnished and set forth his Army with glittering Arms
and stout Commanders, he marched from Babylon with Eight hundred thousand Foot,
and no less than Two hundred thousand Horse. In his march, Tygris was on his
right, and Euphrates on his left Hand; where he past through a very rich
Country, abounding in Forage for his Horse, and supplying sufficient Provision
of all Things for his Soldiers. Ant. Chapter 329.


He made all the haste he could to reach Niniveh, there to fight the Enemy,
because it was a large and Champain Country, convenient for the drawing up of
so great an Army. When he came to a Village called Arbela, he there encamped,
and every day drew up his Army in Battalia, and trained and exercised them; for
he was much afraid lest amongst so many Nations differing in Language one from
another, there should be nothing but Tumult and Confusion in the heat of the
Fight. He had indeed but lately before sent Ambassadors to Alexander to treat
upon Terms of Peace, and had offered to him all the Countries lying within the
Liver Halys, and Two thousand Talents of Silver; and now sent others to him,
much commending him for his generous and honorable Usage of his Mother and the
rest of the Captives, and desired to make Peace with him, and offered all the
Lands lying within the River Euphrates, with Three thousand Talents of Silver,
and one of his Daughters in Marriage: And further promised, That if he would be
content to be his Son-in-Law, he should be joint Partner with him in the
Kingdom.

Alexander imparted all these Proposals, offered to him by Darius, to his
Friends, whom he called together for that purpose, and wished them freely to
deliver their Opinions in this matter. When none durst speak their Minds in a
Business of so high a Concernment, Parmenio stood up and said, If I were
Alexander, I would accept of the Terms offered, and make Peace. To whom
Alexander replied, And if I were Parmenio, I would do the same. And so uttering
several other Words manifesting a Greatness and Nobleness of Mind, he Ant. Chapter
329.
rejected the Conditions offered by the Persians; and preferring Honor before
Profit or other Advantage, he spoke to the Ambassadors in this manner: As two
Suns in the Heaven would disorder the Course of the Universe, so two Kings
Reigning together upon Earth, would turn all into Tumult and Confusion.
Therefore he commanded them to tell Alexander's Answer to Darius's Ambas(...)s.
Darius, That if he affected the Superiority, then to come and try it out with
him for the whole Empire by the Sword; but if he preferred Wealth and Ease
before Honor, that then he should submit to Alexander, and so he might Reign
over others as a King; but yet receive his Kingdom at the hands of Alexander as
a Fruit of his Bounty.

Having said this, he presently after broke up the Assembly, and marched with
his Army toward the Enemy's Camp. In the mean time, the Wife of Darius died,
and Alexander buried her honorably according to her Quality. When Darius
received Alexander's Answer, he was out of all hopes of putting an end to the
War by Letters and Messages, and therefore he trained his Soldiers every day,
thereby making them more ready and willing to observe all Words of Command
whenever they should engage.

In the mean while he sent Mazeus, one of his Faithful Friends, with a
Battalion of stout Men to guard the Passage over the River Tygris, and secure
the Ford. Others he commanded to burn up all the Country through which the
Enemy was to pass: For he reresolv'd to make use of the River as a Defense and
Bulwark against the Enemy's approach.

But Mazeus observing that the River was not passable, both by reason of its
depth, and Ant. Chapter 329.
swiftness of its Stream, waved the guarding of it, and employed himself in
wasting and destroying of the Country; concluding, that when that was done, the
Enemy could not pass that way through want of Provision.

Alexander, when he came to the River Tygris (being informed by the Inhabitants
where Alexander passes over Tygris.
the Ford lay) passed his Army over, but with very great Toil and extreme
Hazard; for the Water came up above their Breasts, and several were taken off
their Feet, and hurried away by the violence of the Stream; many others
likewise were born away, and perished through the rapid Course of the Water,
involving it self within their Arms. Alexander, to withstand the Violence of
the Water, ordered his Men to stand close in a Body together, like a Rampire
against the Stream: By this means they got safe over; and after so much danger
and difficulty, he permitted them to refresh themselves for one day. The next
day he marched in Battalia against the Enemy, and at length encamped near to
them. But while he revolved in his Mind the vast number of the Persian Army,
and what great Difficulties he was to cope with, and that now all lay at stake,
he spent all that Night in anxious Thoughts concerning the Event. But he fell
into so deep a Sleep about the Morning-Watch, that though the Sun was now up,
yet he could not be awaked. His Friends at the first were very glad of it, as
judging the longer he rested the more lively he would be, and so more able to
bear the Fatigues of the Day. But Time drawing far on, and the King still fast
asleep, Parmenio, the Oldest of the Commanders, gave Command through the Army
to prepare for an Engagement. The King sleeping still, some Ant. Chapter 329.
of his Friends stepped in to him, and had much ado to awake him. While all
wondered at a thing so unusual, and expected to hear the Cause from himself,
Now, says Alexander, I am free from all Fear and Care as concerning Darius, who
has brought his whole Strength together into one Place; for by one Day's Battle
for the Trial of all, I shall be quit and discharged of all my Hazards and
Toils for the time to come. Upon which, without any delay he made a Speech to
encourage his Officers to pluck up their Spirits, and with Courageous Hearts
to* (...) all the Dangers that were before them. Upon which he marched in
Battalia against the Barbarians, with the Horse in the Front of his Army. The
Right Wing was Commanded by Clitus, surnamed Niger, wherein were other special
Friends under the Command of Philotas the Son of Parmenio, supported by seven
other Regiments of Horse under the same Commander. After them were placed the
Battalion of Foot called Silver Shields.
Argyraspides, glittering in their Arms (most excellent Soldiers) led by
Nicanor the Son of Parmenio; to support them, he placed next the Squadrons of
Elimia, a City of Macedonia.
Elimia, whose Leader was Cenus. In the next Squadron stood the Oresteans and
Lyncestians, whose Captain was Perdiccas; next to these was Meleager with his
Squadron; and after him Polysphercon commanded the Stympheans; and next to him
Philip the Son of Balacrus commanded another Squadron; and after him Craterus.
To the Squadrons of Horse beforementioned were ^oin'd, as Auxiliaries, those
from Peloponnesus and Achaia, together with the Phthiots, Malieans, Locrians,
and Phocians, commanded by Erigyrus of Mitylene. After these were placed Ant.
Chapter 329.
the Thessalians (for Valor and Horsemanship far beyond all the rest) whose
Commander was Philip. Next to these he drew up the Archers from Crete, and the
Mercenaries from Achaia.

Both Wings were drawn up into the Form of an half moon, that the Macedonians
might not be hemmed in by the multitude of the Persians. The King provided
against the hooked Chariots, that they might not break in upon them, by this
Contrivance: he commanded the Foot, that when the Chariots advanced near in
their Career, they should strike with their Javelins upon their Shields locked
one into another, that the horses, frighted with the noise, might start back;
but that if they still pressed forward, in order to force their way, that then
they should open, that so they might shun them without any prejudice. He
himself took upon him the Command of the Right Wing, and drawing up in an
oblique Line, resolved to venture himself wherever there was any Danger.

Darius drew up his Army according to the distinction of the several Nations,
and advanced against the Enemy in that Wing opposite to Alexander. And now both
Armies The Battle at A(...).
drew near one to another, and the Trumpets on both Sides gave the Signal to
Battle, and the Soldiers made at one another with a great shout, and forthwith
the hooked Chariots rushing forward with a mighty force, greatly amazed and
terrified the Macedonians. For Mazeus the General of the Horse charging with a
great Body close after the Chariots, caused them to be more terrible. In the
midst of the Action, a mighty Crash and dreadful Noise was made on a sudden by
the Foot's striking with their Jav^lins upon their Ant. Chapter 329.
Bucklers, as the King had commanded; upon which many of the Chariots (through
the fright of the Horses) were turned aside, and the Horses being altogether
ungovernable, made away back again into the Persian Army; Most of the rest of
the Chariots breaking in among the Foot, by opening to make way, were either
quite destroyed by Darts and Arrows, or diverted. Some indeed forced their way
with that Violence, that with their Hooks they bore down all before them, and
many perished by several sorts of deadly Wounds. For such was the Force and
Violence, together with the Sharpness of the (...) ^ an(...) B(...) Destruction.
hooked Sithes contrived for Destruction, that many had their Arms with their
Shields in their Hands cut off; and not a few had their Heads so suddenly
shear'd off, that they tumbled to the Ground with their Eyes open, and their
Countenance in the same Posture as they were when alive. Some were so mortally
gash'd, and cut through their Sides, that they forthwith fell down dead.

When the Armies came closer together, and all their Darts and Arrows both from
their Bows and Slings, and those cast by the Hand, were spent, they fell to it
hand to hand. The first Charge was by the Horse, the Macedonians being in the
Right Wing opposite to Darius, who commanded the Left of the Persians, in which
were his Kindred and near Relations. For there was a Regiment of a Thousand
Horse, composed only of such as were in greatest Reputation and Account for
their Valor and special Love to the King. These having him a Spectator of
their Valor, readily and cheerfully received all the Darts that were cast at
the King. They were seconded by the Melephorians, who were numerous and stout
Men, and with them were joined the Mardians and Cisseans, Men admired for their
Courage, and the Bulk of their Bodies. Besides these, there were Ant. Chapter 329.
those of the King's Household, and some of the stoutest of the Indians. All
these made a fierce Charge with a great Shout upon the Macedonians, who were
put very hard to it by reason of their Multitude. Mazeus.
Mazeus likewise in the Right Wing, with a brave Body of Horse charged with
that briskness, that he laid many at his Feet at the first onset. Then he
ordered Two thousand Cadusian Horse, and a Thousand more of the Scythians, to
take a compass round the Enemies Wings, and to break in upon the Trenches that
defended their Carriages; who presently thereupon put in execution what they
were commanded. Thus having forced into the Macedonians Camp, some of the
Prisoners caught up Arms and joined with the Scythians, and rifled the
Carriages. Upon which, through the suddenness of the Surprise, a great Noise
and Clamor arose throughout the whole Camp. Then other Prisoners ran in to the
Barbarians. But Sisygambris the Mother of Darius would not stir, though she was
moved to it, but with a kind of an affectionate Regard to her Condition,
continued in the same place, not trusting to the uncertain Turns of Fortune,
nor judging it fit and honorable to manifest so much Ingratitude toward
Alexander. The Scythians having at length rifled most of the Carriages,
returned to Mazeus, and gave him an Account of the happy Success. With the like
good Fortune that Body of Horse with Darius put the Macedonians (overpowered
with Number) to flight. While Ant. Chapter 329.
the Victory seemed thus to incline to the Persians by this second Success,
Alexander making it his only Business with all the speed possible to rally his
broken Forces, and to repair his Losses, charged Darius with his own Brigade,
and some others of the bravest Horse in the Army; The Persian King received the
Enemy's Charge with great Resolution, and fighting mounted upon his Chariot,
dispatched many with Darts that assaulted him; neither were they few that
defended him. And while both Kings were eager to destroy one another, Alexander
in throwing a Dart at Darius missed him, but killed his Chariot-driver. Upon
which, those about the King that were at some distance set up a great Cry,
believing that the King was killed; and forthwith betook themselves to their
Heels, and then the next to them followed. Presently the Troops next to Darius
himself gave ground by degrees, till such time as he was left naked on one
side; and then he himself in a great Consternation made away with all speed.
The Persians being thus dispersed, the Horse in their flight raised so great a
Cloud of Dust, that Alexander and his Men, who pursued close at the Heels of
the Enemy, could not see which way Darius fled: Nothing was heard but the
Groans of dying Men, the trampling of Horses, and continual Noise and Lashing
of Whips. In the mean time, Mazeus in the Right Wing having the bravest and
stoutest Horse of any of the Persians, pressed grievously upon those Troops
with whom he was Ant. Chapter 319.
engaged. So that though Parmenio with the Thessalian Horse, and others joined
with them, were greatly distressed, yet he bore the Brunt for some time, and at
first through his own Valor, and the Bravery of the Thessalian Horse, worsted
the Persians; but the Horse with Mazeus by their Number bearing down the other,
that Wing of the Macedonians was quite routed, so that a great Slaughter was
made, and there was now no standing before the Barbarians. Parmenio therefore
sent Horsemen after Alexander to entreat his Assistance with all speed, who
hasted away to execute the Orders and Command given: But when they heard that a
great part of the Army was fled, they returned without going further. However
Parmenio bestirring himself, and rallying his Troops as well as he could, with
the help of the Thessalian Horse hewed down many of his Enemies, and at length
with The Persians routed at Arbela.
much ado put the Barbarians to flight, who were in Amaze and Consternation
upon hearing that Darius was fled.

Darius in the mean time being an expert General, and helped by the thick Cloud
of Dust, took not his Course strait forward like the rest, but turned a
different way; and so being not discerned, (by reason the Dust rose so high,)
escaped clear away, and brought all those that went along with him safe into
the Towns and Villages that lay at the Backs of the Macedonians.

At length all the Barbarians taking to their Heels, and the Macedonians
killing all that Ant. Chapter 329
were in the Rear, in a short time all that large Plain was covered over with
dead Carcasses. There were killed in this Battle, of the Barbarians, Horse and
Foot, above Ninety thousand; of the Macedonians, Five hundred only, but great
Multitudes wounded. Amongst whom, Hephestion, one of the bravest of Alexander's
Commanders, and Captain of his Guard, was shot through the Arm with a Dart.
Perdiccas, Cenas, Menidas, and some others likewise were wounded. And this was
the Issue of the Battle at Arbela.

CHAP. VI.
The Graecians conspire to Revolt. Memnon rebels in Thrace. Antipater marches
against him. The Lacedaemonians raise an Army; are routed by Antipater, and
Agis their King killed.

ARistophon was at that time Lord Chancellor of Athens, and Cneius Domitius and
Aulus Olymp. 112. 3. Ant. Chapter 328. An. M. 3620.
Cornelius were created Roman Consuls, when many of the Cities of Greece, upon
the News of the Victory at Arbela, began to bestir themselves to defend their
ancient Liberties, whilst the Persians had any Power left to assist them; and
therefore resolved to assist Darius with Moneys to raise Foreign Soldiers from
all Parts. For they concluded, that Alexander durst not divide his Army lest he
should disturb them; but if they should suffer the Persians to be destroyed,
they were not able of themselves to defend their Liberties. And an Insurrection
in Thrace encouraged them the more to Revolt: For Memnon being sent General
into Thrace, having both Courage and Force sufficient, at the Instigation of
the Barbarians rebelled, and with a great Army now appeared in open War. Upon
which, Antipater gathered all his Forces together, and marched through
Macedonia into Thrace against Memnon. Things thus falling out, the
Lacedaemonians judging that now a fair Opportunity was offered them to prepare
for War, solicited the Graecians to Confederate together for their remaining
Liberties. But the Athenians, in regard they had received many Kindnesses and
Marks of Honor from Alexander beyond all the rest of the Cities, continued
quiet and firm in their Duty. But many of the Peloponnesians, and some others,
entered into the League, and enrolled their Names as Soldiers for the Army; so
as according as every City was able, they sent forth the choicest of their
Youth, and raised an Army of Twenty thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse. The
Management of the whole War was left to the Lacedaemonians, who were resolved
to lay all at Stake, and made Agis General. Antipater hearing of the Defection
of the Greeks, composed all Matters relating to the War in Thrace as well as he
could, and marched with all his Forces into Greece, having no less than Forty
thousand Greek Auxiliaries as Confederates. Hereupon a great Battle was fought,
wherein Agis (though he behaved himself with great Valor and Resolution) was
killed, and at length the Lacedaemonians (having stood to it stoutly for a long
time) upon their Confederates giving Ground, likewise retreated toward Sparta.
There fell of the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates in this Battle above
Five thousand and Three hundred: Of those with Antipater, Three thousand and
Five hundred.

There was one Thing very Remarkable concerning the Death of Agis. Having
fought with great Gallantry and Resolution, and received many Wounds, he was
carried off by the Soldiers in order to be brought back to his own Country, but
being surrounded by the Enemy, and finding no likelihood to escape, he charged
his Soldiers forthwith to be gone, and preserve themselves for the further
Service of their Country. He himself remained, and with his Sword in his Hand
fought it out upon his Knees, and killed several of the Assailants, till at
length being shot through the Body with a Dart, he there died, after he had
reigned Nine Years. Thus far for Europe, we shall now return again to the
Affairs of Asia.

CHAP. VII.
Alexander comes to Babylon. The Wealth found there. Views his Troops at
Sitacana. The Riches there. Thence goes into the Country of the Uxians. Marches
toward Persepolis. A Company of maimed Greeks met Alexander: His Bounty to
them. He takes Persepolis; gives it up to the Plunder of the Soldiers. The
Riches of the Citadel of Persepolis. Alexander's Feast at Persepolis.
Persepolis burnt at the Instigation of Thais. Darius murdered.

Darius being routed at Arabela, fled toward the higher Provinces, to the end
that he might both by the distance of the Place recruit himself, and likewise
have more time to raise a new Army. He came first to Ecbatane, where he stayed
for some time, and there received his broken Troops that came in to him, and
armed again such as had lost their Arms. He sent likewise for the Militia out
of the Neighboring Provinces, and dispatched Messengers to the
Lord-Lieutenants and Commanders in Bactria and the upper Praefectures, wishing
them to abide firm to him in their Faith and Loyalty. Ant. Chapter 328.


In the mean time, Alexander (after he had buried those that were killed in the
Battle) entered Arbela, where he found abundance of rich Furniture of the
Kings, and vast Treasures of the Barbarians, amounting to Three thousand
Talents of Silver. But because he judged that the Air thereabouts must needs be
infected through the Stench of the Bodies that lay there slain, he presently
removed his Camp, and came with all his Alexander comes to Babylon.
Forces to Babylon, where he was cheerfully received by the Inhabitants, and
splendid Entertainment afforded to the Macedonians. And there his Army was
refreshed after the many Toils and Difficulties they had undergone. And thus in
the Confluence of all Things desirable, and free and noble Entertainment of the
Citizens, he continued in the City above Thirty Days. Then he made Agatho of
Pydna Governor of the Castle, with a Garrison of Seven Hundred Macedonians. To
Apollodorus of Amphipolis, and Menetes of Pelea, he gave the Government of
Babylon, and of all the Prefectures as far as to Cilicia, and ordered them to
raise what Forces they could; and gave them a Thousand Talents for that
purpose. He made Mithrinas, who betrayed the Castle of Sardis, Lord Lieutenant
of Armenia. Of the Moneys that he found in Babylon, he gave to every Horseman
About 19 l.
Six Minas; to every Auxiliary, Five; to each of the Macedonian Phalanx, Two;
and to every Foreign Mercenary, Two Months Pay.

The King removing from Babylon, as he was in his March there came to him
Recruits from Antipater, Five hundred Macedonian Horse, and Six thousand Foot;
Six hundred Recruits come to him.
Thracian Horse, and Three thousand Five hundred Trallians: From Peloponnesus
Four thousand Ant. Chapter 328.
Foot, and almost a Thousand Horse. Among these were sent Fifty of the Sons of
the King's special Friends from Macedonia, designed by their Fathers to be of
the King's Lifeguard. Having received these, he marched forward, and came,
after Six Decampments, into the Province of Sitacina. And here he stayed
several Days, in regard the Country abounded in all Things necessary for the
Life of Man, and for that he had a mind his Soldiers should refresh themselves
after their tedious March. And had a Purpose likewise to take a more exact View
and Account of his Troops, and to enlarge the Commands and Governments of his
Captains and Commanders, and so to strengthen his Army, both by the Number of
Soldiers, and Valor of their Officers. All which he forthwith put in
Execution; and making choice of the most Deserving with the utmost Care
possible, he advanced many from very considerable Places of Trust and Authority
to much higher Preferments, by which means he both promoted his Officers, and
gained their Hearts and Affections at the same time. He took care also for the
better Government of the Common Soldiers, and by many new Inventions put every
thing into a better Order and Posture than they were before. To conclude, when
he had so managed every thing as that he had gained the Love of the whole Army,
and made them in all Points observant to his Commands, and was assured for
Valor they would give Ground to none, he marched forward, in order to finish
by fighting what further remained. When he came to the Province of Susiana, he
presently without any difficulty gained the Possession Ant. Chapter 328.
of Susa, the Royal City, the most beautiful Palace of the Universe, which was
voluntarily surrendered to him by Abuletes the Lord Lieutenant of the Province.
But some Writers Enters Susa.
have said, That this was done by order from Darius himself, to them that
otherwise would have been both Loyal and Faithful to his Interest; and that
this was done by the Persian King for this end, that Alexander being taken up
with Matters of such great Moment, as taking Possession of famous and noble
Cities, and loading himself with vast Treasures, Darius might gain more time
for the raising of fresh Forces for the carrying on of the War.

Alexander therefore having possessed himself of the City and the King's
Treasures, found there above Forty thousand Talents of uncoin'd Gold and
Silver. The Kings had preserved this Treasure untouched for many Ages, that it
might be ready to resort to in case of some sudden and unexpected Turn of
Fortune. Besides this, there was likewise Nine thousand Talents in coined Money
called Daricks. While Alexander was taking an Account of this Wealth, there
happened something that was very Remarkable. The Throne whereon he sat being
too high for him, so that his Feet could not touch the Footstool, one of the
King's Boys observing it, brought Darius his Table and placed it under his
Feet, with which the King was very well pleased, and commended his Care. But
one of the Eunuchs standing at the side of the Throne, much concerned and
grieved at such a change of Fortune, burst out into Tears: Which Alexander
perceiving; What Ill do thou see (says he) that thou weepest so? To whom he
answered, I was once Darius his Servant, Ant. Chapter 328.
now I am yours; but because I cannot but love my natural Lord and Master, I am
not able without extreme Sorrow to see that Table put to so base and mean a
Use, which by him was so lately grao'd and honored. The King, upon this
Answer, reflecting upon the strange Change of the Persian Monarchy, began to
consider that he had acted the part of a Proud and Insulting Enemy, not
becoming that Humanity and Clemency which ought to be shown toward Captives;
and therefore he commanded him who placed the Table there, to take it away: But
Philotas standing near to him, said, It is not Pride or Insolency, O King!
being done without your Command, but it falls out to be so through the
Providence and Pleasure of some good Genius. Upon which, the King ordered the
Table to remain where it was, looking upon it as some happy Omen.

After this, he ordered some Masters to attend upon Darius his Mother, his
Daughters and Son, to instruct them in the Greek Tongue, and left them at Susa.
And he himself marched away with the whole Army, and after four Decampments
came to the River Tigris, which rising out of the Uxian Mountains, runs first
through a rough and craggy Country, full of large and wide Channels for the
space of a Thousand Furlongs; thence it passes through a Champion Country with
a more gentle Current, and having made its way for the space of Six hundred
Furlongs, it empties it self into the Persian Sea.

Alexander having passed the River, marched toward the most fruitful Country
of the Uxians: For being watered in every part, it plentifully produces Fruits
of all sorts and kinds; of which, being in their proper Season dried in the
Time of Autumn, they make Ant. Chapter 328.
all sorts of Sweetmeats, Sauces, and other Compositions, both for necessary
Use and Pleasure, and the Merchants convey them down the River Tygris to
Babylon. He found all the Passes strongly guarded by Madates, who was near
related in Kindred to Darius, and had with him a strong and well-disciplin'd
Army. Whilst Alexander was viewing the Strength of the Places, and could find
out no Passage through those steep Rocks; an Inhabitant of the Country, who was
well acquainted with those Ways, promised Alexander, that he would lead his
Soldiers through such a strait and difficult Pathway, as that they should
stand at length over the Heads of their Enemies: Hereupon the King ordered a
small Party to go along with him. He himself in the mean time used his utmost
Endeavor to force his Way, and for that purpose set upon the Guards, and while
they were hotly engaged. (fresh Men still supplying the Room of them that were
weary,) and the Barbarians disorderd, and running here annothere in the
Engagement, on a sudden the Soldiers that were sent away appeared over the
Heads of the Guards that kept the Passages; upon which they were so amazed,
that they forthwith fled, and so the King gained the Pass; and presently all
the Cities throughout all Uxiana were brought into Subjection. Thence he
decamped and marched toward Persia, and the Fifth Day came to a Place called:
he Susian R^cks, which were before possessed by Ariobarzanes, with Five and
twenty thousand Foot, and Three hundred Horse. The King concluding, that he
must gain the Pass by force, led his Troops through some of the strait and
craggy Places without any Resistance; the Barbarians never offered to disturb
him till he came the midway, and then on a sudden they bestirred themselves,
and threw down great Numbers of massy Stones upon the Heads of the Macedonians,
and destroyed Multitudes of them. Many cast their Darts from the Rocks above
upon them, which failed not to do Execution, falling among Ant. Chapter 328.
such a Throng of Men together: Others with Hand-stones repulsed the
Macedonians that were forcing to break in upon them; so that by reason of the
Difficulty of the Places, the Barbarians so far prevailed, as to kill
Multitudes, and wound as many. Alexander not being able to prevent this sad and
miserable Slaughter, and perceiving that not one of the Enemy fell, or was so
much as hurt, and that many of his own Men were slain, and almost all that led
the Van were wounded, he sounded a Retreat; and marched back Three hundred
Furlongs, and then encamped. Then he inquired of the Inhabitants, whether there
was any other Way to pass, who all answered, That there was none, but that he
must go round many Days Journey. But the King looking upon it as a
Dishonorable Thing to leave the Bodies of them that were slain unbury'd; and
as disgraceful, and even owning himself to be conquered by treating for Liberty
to bury the Dead, he commanded the Captives, as many as were there at hand, to
be brought to him. Among these, there was one that understood both the Persian
and Greek Tongue, who declared, that he was a Lycian and sometime ago made a B^
the Persians.
Prisoner at War, and that for several Years last past he had exercised the
calling of a Shepherd in those Neighboring Mountains, and by that means had
perfect knowledge of the Country, and told the King, that he could lead the
Army through the Woods, and bring them directly upon the Backs of them that
guarded the Passes; Hearing this, the King promised the Man a large Reward, who
thereupon so conducted him, that in the Night with great Labor and Toil he got
to the top of the Mountains, for he drail'd through abundance of Snow, and past
through a Country full of steep Rocks, deep Gulphs, and many Valleys. Having
marched through this Tract, as soon as he came in sight of the Guards, he
presently killed the first, and took those Prisoners that were placed in the
next Pass. The third Guard presently fled, and so he gained all into his own
Power, and cut off the greatest part of Ariobarzanes his Army. Thence he
marched toward Persepolis, and in his way received Letters from Teridates
Governor of the City, whereby he signified to him, That if he hasted away, and
prevented those that were coming to relieve Persepolis, he would deliver the
City into his Hand. Upon which he made a swift March, and passed his Army over
the River Araxis, by a Bridge then laid for that purpose. As the King was on
his March, a most sad Spectacle presented it self, which stirred up just Hatred
against the Author, Pity and Compassion for the irreparable Loss of those that
suffered; and Grief and Sorrow in all the Beholders. For there met him certain
Greeks, whom the former Kings of Persia had made Captives and Slaves, and fell
down at his Feet; they were near Eight hundred, most of them then old Men, and
all A Company of Greeks in a sad Condition m^t Alexander.
maimed, some having their Hands, others their Hands, others their Feet, some
their Ears, and others their Noses, cut off. If any were expert in any Art, and
had made a considerable Progress therein, all his outward Members were cut off,
but such only as were necessary for the Management of his Art. So that all that
beheld their Venerable old Age, and the sad mangling of their Bodies, greatly
pitied the miserable Condition of these poor Creatures: Especially Alexander so
piti'd their sad Condition, that he could not re^rain from Weeping. These all
with one Voice cried out, and entreated him, That he would Succor and Relieve
them in these their Calamities. Upon which, the King called the chiefest of
them to him, and told them, that he would take special Care of him, and
promised he would see them sent honorably to their own Country, as became the
Dignity of his Person. Upon which they consulted together, and at length
concluded, That it was better for them to remain where they were, than to
return into their own Country: For when they were returned, they should be
scattered here and there, and all the Days of their Lives be Mocked and
Despised by reason of their sad Misfortunes. But if they continued together as
Fellows in their Misery, the Calamity of their Fellow Sufferers would be an
Allay, and some Comfort to every one of them in their own Adversities. Upon
this, they made a second Address to the King, and declared to him what they had
resolved upon, and desired him he would afford such Relief to them as was most
agreeable to their present Circumstances. The King consented to what they had
determined, and ordered to each of them Three thousand N^ar 100 l.
Drachmas, Five Suits of Raiment to every Man, and as many to each Woman; and
to every one of them Two Yoke of Oxen, Fifty Sheep, and as many Every Medimna
by some conta^^ Eighteen (...) Fifty Bush^ls.
Medimnas of Wheat. And commanded they should be free from all Taxes and
Tribute, and gave strict Charge to the Officers employed, that none should
offer them any Injury. And thus Alexander, according to his natural Goodness
and innate Generosity, comforted these poor miserable People. He then called
the Macedonians together, and told them, That Persepolis, the Metropolis of the
Kingdom of Persia, of all the Cities of Asia had done most Mischief to the
Graecians, and therefore he gave it up to the Plunder and Spoil of the
Soldiers, except the King's Palace. This was the richest City of any under the
Sun, and for many Ages all the private Houses were full of all sorts of Wealth,
and what ever was desirable.

The Macedonians therefore forcing into the City, put all the Men to the Sword,
and rifl'd and carried away every Man's Goods and Estate, amongst which was
abundance of rich and costly Furniture and Ornaments of all sorts. In this
Place was hurried away here and there vast Quantities of Silver, and no less of
Gold, great Numbers of rich Garments, some of Purple, others embroidered with
Gold, all which became a plentiful Prey to the ravenous Soldiers: And thus the
great Seat Royal of the Persians, once famous all the World over, was now
exposed to Scorn and Contempt, and rifl'd from top to bottom. For though every
Place was full of rich Spoil, yet the Covetousness of the Macedonians was
insatiable, still thirsting after more. And they were so eager in Plundering,
that they fought one with another with drawn Swords, and many who were
conceived to have got a greater Share than the rest, were killed in the
Quarrel. Some Things that were of extraordinary Value they divided with their
Swords, and each took a Share; Others in Rage cut off the Hands of such as laid
hold upon a Thing that was in Dispute. They first ravished the Women as they
were in their Jewels and rich Attire, and then sold them for Slaves. So that by
how much Persepolis excelled all the other Cities in Glory and Worldly
Felicity, by so much more was the Measure of their Misery and Calamity. Then
Alexander seized upon all the Treasures in the Citadel, which was a vast
Quantity of The Treasures of Persepolis Ant. Chapter 328.
Gold and Silver of the Public Revenues that had been heaping up, and laid
there, from the time of Cyrus the first King of Persia, to that Day. For there
was there found an Hundred and twenty thousand Talents, reckoning the Gold
after the Rate of the Curtius, l. 5. c. 13.
Silver.

Part of this Treasure he took for the Use of the War, and ordered another Part
of it to be treasured up at Susa. To this purpose, he ordered that a multitude
of Mules both for Draught and Carriage, and Three thousand Camels with
Pack-saddles, should be brought out of Babylon, Mesopotamia, and Susa; and with
these he conveyed all the Treasure to the several Places he had appointed. For
because he extremely hated the Inhabitants, he was resolved not to trust them
with any Thing, but utterly to ruin and destroy Persepolis: Of whose Palace, in
regard of its stately Structure, we conceive it will not be impertinent if we
say something. This stately Fabric, or Citadel, was surrounded with The
D^scription of Persepolis
a treble Wall: The first was Sixteen Cubits high, adorned with many sumptuous
Buildings and aspiring Turrets. The second was like to the first, but as high
again as the other. The third was drawn like a Quadrant foursquare, Sixty
Cubits high, all of the hardest Marble, and so cemented, as to continue for
ever. On the four Sides are brazen Gates, near to which are Gallowes's of Brass
twenty Cubits high, these raised to terrify the Beholders, (...) Or Crosses of
Brass. Ant. Chapter 328.
and the other for the better strengthening and fortifying of the Place. On the
East Side of the Citadel, about Four hundred Foot distant, stood a Mount
called the Royal Mount, for here are all the Sepulchers of the Kings, many
Apartments and little Cells, being cut into the midst of the Rock; into which
Cells there is made no direct Passage, but the Coffins with the dead Bodies are
by Instruments hoist up, and so let down into these Vaults. In this Citadel
were many stately Lodgings, both for the King and his Soldiers, of excellent
Workmanship, and Treasury Chambers most commodiously contrived for the laying
up of Money.

Here Alexander made a sumptuous Feast for the Entertainment of his Friends in
Commemoration Alexander Feasts at Persepolis.
of his Victory, and offered magnificent Sacrifices to the Gods. At this Feast
were entertained Whores, who prostituted their Bodies for Hire, where the Cups
went so high, and the Reins so let loose to Drunkenness and Debauchery, that
many were both drunk and mad. Among the rest, at that time there was a Curtesan
called Thais, an Athenian, that said, Alexander would perform the most glorious
Act of any that ever he did, if while he was Feasting with them, he would burn
the Palace, and so the Glory and Renown of Persia might be said to be brought
to nothing in a moment, by the Hands of Women. This spreading abroad and coming
to the Ears of the young Men (who commonly make little use of Reason when Drink
is in their Heads) presently one cries Ant. Chapter 328.
out, Come on, bring us Firebrarnds, and so incites the rest to Fire the
Citadel to revenge that Impiety the Persians had committed, in destroying the
Temples of the Grecians. At this, others with joy set up a shout, but said,
That so brave an Exploit belonged only to Alexander to perform.

The King stirred up at these Words, embraced the Motion, upon which, as many
as were present left their Cups and leaped from the Table, and said, That they
would now celebrate a victorious Festival to Bacchus. Hereupon, multitudes of
Firebrands were presently got together, and all the Women that played on
Musical Instruments, which were at the Feast, were called for, and then the
King, with Songs, Pipes, and Flutes bravely led the way to this noble
Expedition, contrived and managed by this Whore, Thais, who next after the
King, threw the first Firebrand into the Palace. This President was presently
followed by the rest, so that in a very short time, the whole Fabric by the
Violence of the Fire, was consumed to Ashes. Persepolis burnt.


It Is very observable, and not without just admiration, that the Sacrilege and
Impiety of Xerxes, King of Persia, (exercised in his destroying the Citadel of
Athens) should so many years after be revenged in the same kind, by one
Curtesan only of that City that was so injured.

After these things thus done, Alexander marches against the rest of the
Persian Cities, and having taken in some by Force, and others surrendered upon
the Fame and Report of his L^nity and Moderation, he made after Darius, who had
begun to raise Forces out Ant. Chapter 328.
of Bactria, and other Provinces; but being prevented by the March of the
Enemy, he made away with all speed out of Bactria with Thirty thousand Persians
and Mercenary Greeks, and in his return was treacherously Murdered by Bessus,
the Lord Lieutenant of Bactria. He was scarce dead, when Alexander with a Party
of Light Horse, came up to Darius murdered.
the Place where he lay, and there finding him, caused him to be honorably
interred.

But some do report, that Alexander finding him yet alive, Darius complained of
his sad Misfortune, and desired him that he would see his Death revenged, which
Alexander faithfully promised. He forthwith indeed, pursued Bessus, but he
being a long way before him, escaped into Bactria, so that considering it was
not possible to overtake him he marched back. This was the State of Affairs in
Asia.

In Europe, the Lacedaemonians being routed in a great Battle by Antipater,
were forced to send Ambassadors to him; who put them off till the meeting of
the General Assembly of Greece; which afterward met at Corinth, where, after
many things were Banded and Disputed on both sides, the Matter was at length
left to the Decision of Alexander. Hereupon, Antipater received the chiefest of
the Nobility of Sparta as Hostages; and the Lacedaemonians sent Ambassadors
into Asia, to beg Pardon for their late Revolt.

CHAP. VIII.
Bessus stirs up the Bactrians. Alexander discharges the Greek Auxiliaries with
Rewards. The River Stiboetes. He enters Hircania; Its Richness. Enters the
Mardis Country. Loses his brave Horse, but is restored. Thalestris the Amazon
Queen meets him. He falls into the Effeminacy of the Persians. Enters Drangina.
A Plot against Alexander. Philotas and others put to Death. Marches against the
Arimispi. Subdues Arachosia.

WHen this Year ended, Cephisophon executed the Office of Chief Magistrate at
Olymp p. 112. 4. Ant. Chapter 327. An. M. 3621.
Athens, and Caius Valerius, and Marcus Claudius were created Roman Consuls. At
that time, Bessus, with Na^arzanes and Barxaentes, and many others, after the
Death of Darius, having escaped the hands of Alexander, came into Bactria. And
in regard he was appointed Lord Lieutenant of this Country by Darius, and upon
that account was Bessus stirs up the Bactrians, (...) is owned as King
well known by the Inhabitants, he persuaded the People to stand up for their
Liberty, and told them, That the Situation and Condition of their Country was
such, being full of difficult Passes, and very Populous, that they had an
extraordinary advantage to succeed in the Attempt, and promised that he himself
would take upon him the whole Management of the War.

Hereupon, he so far prevailed, that he got a considerable Number to join with
him, and to own him for King. Then he Listed Men, prepared Arms, and procured
whatever was necessary for the present State of his Affairs.

In the mean time, Alexander perceiving that the Macedonians had a design to
end the War with the Death of Darius, and to return to their own Country, he
called them together; and so courted them by an Oration fitted for the purpose,
that he prevailed with them readily to go on with the Expeditions that then yet
remained. Then he called together all the Greek Auxiliaries, and having highly
commended them for their Valor, bestowed upon every Horseman as a Reward a
Talent, and every Footman Ten Ten Minas, 31 l. 5 s. Alexander discharges the
Greek Auxiliaries, and rewards them. Ant. Chapter 327.
Minas, and discharged them from further Service in the Army. And over and
besides he paid to every one of them what was due to them for their common Pay,
and gave them likewise sufficient Provision to carry them into their own
Country; and to every one that was willing still to continue in the Army, he
gave Three Talents. He gave indeed large Rewards to the Soldiers, being
naturally of a generous Disposition, and besides, in pursuing Darius had
possessed himself of a vast Treasure: For he had received Eight thousand
Talents out of the Treasures; and besides what he gave to the Soldiers, he
raised Thirteen thousand Talents by sale of the Cups, Flaggons, and Furniture.
And it was believed, that what was stolen and taken away by force was much
more.

Having done this, he marched with his Army toward Hircania, and the third day
came near the City From its 100 Gates.
Hecatompylon, and there encamped. Here he continued some Days to refresh his
Army, because the Country was exceeding Rich, and abounded with every thing for
Man's Use. Thence he moved forward an Hundred and fifty Furlongs, and encamped
near a very high Rock, at the foot of which is a Cave not unbecoming the Gods,
from whence (as the Springhead) issues the great River Stiboetes. Thence it
runs with a fierce and violent Stream for the space of Three Furlongs, 'till it
dash it self upon a great Rock in shape like a Woman's Pap, under which is a
vast Gulf, or opening of the Earth, into which, being now divided into two
Channels, it falls down with a mighty Noise, turned all into Froth and Spume,
and there runs underground About 43 Miles.
Three hundred Furlongs; and then appears again, as if that we e its
Springhead. Having entered Hircania with his Army, he gained all the Town, and
Cities as far as the Caspian Sea, which some call likewise the Hircanian Sea.
It Is reported, that in that Sea are many Serpents of Ant. Chapter 327.
an extraordinary Bigness, and Fish of all sorts, much differing in Color from
those in our Parts. When he entered further into Hircania, he came to Towns
called the Fortunate Towns, The Fertility of Hircania.
which are so in Deed, as well as in Name For this Country excels all the rest
in fertility of Soil; for every Vine, they say, affords a (...), about 49
Quarts.
Metrete of Wine: And that some Fig Trees are so very fruitful, that they will
bear Ten Every Medimna is about 18 Gallons.
Medimnas of dried Figs; and that what are left upon the Tree after Harvest,
fall upon the Ground, and spring up again of themselves, and bring forth
abundance of Fruit to perfection. There Is a Tree in that Country much like to
an Oak, which distills Honey from its Leaves; and this the Inhabitants gather
in great plenty for their own use. There Is likewise a little Insect in this
Tract called an Anthredon, less than a Be, but very remarkable; it gets its
living in the Mountains, sucking the Flowers that grow here and there in those
places. It works its Combs within hollow Rocks, or Trees shattered or made
hollow by the Thunderbolts, and there makes a Liquor not inferior to any for
sweetness.

In the mean time, Alexander, while he was on his March through Hircania, and
the bordering Countries, gained great Reputation, and was highly honored for
his Clemency, in carrying himself with so much Humanity toward all those
Commanders who fled away with Darius, and afterward submitted themselves to
him: So that Fifteen hundred brave and valiant Grecians (who sided with Darius)
forthwith came unto him, and laid themselves at his Feet, whom he readily
pardoned, and placed them in several of his Ant. Chapter 327.
Regiments, and allowed them the same Pay with the rest.

Having run through the Seacoasts of Hircania, he entered the Country of the
Mardi; who being a Warlike Nation, slighted the growing Power of the King, and
showed him not the least Respect, either by sending Ambassadors, or otherwise;
but having possessed themselves of the strait Passes of the Mountains with
Eight thousand Men, stood there, waiting for the coming of the Macedonians.
Hereupon the King sets upon them, kills many, and drives the rest within the
Straits. But while he was burning up the Country all before him, it fell out
that (some of the King's Boys who led his Horses, being at some distance from
the rest of the Army) his best Horse, by a sudden Incursion of the Alexander's
Horse.
Barbarians, was carried away. This Horse was given him by Damarotus the
Corinthian, and the King had made use of him in all his Battles in Asia. When
he was bare-back'd, he would admit only his Tender to mount him; but when he
had the King's War-Saddle, and the rest of his brave Trappings upon him, he
would not suffer his former Rider to get upon his Back, nor any other Person
but Alexander; and to him he would down upon his Knees for the King to get into
the Saddle. Because of these excellent Properties of the Horse, the King was
the more grieved and troubled; and therefore he ordered all the Trees in all
parts of the Country as he went to be hewn down, and caused a Proclamation to
be made in their own natural Tongue, That unless his Horse were restored, he
would waste and destroy all before him with Fire and Sword; which he began
presently to put in execution. Upon which, the Barbarians were so terrified,
that they Ant. Chapter 327.
not only restored the Horse, but brought along with them many rich Presents
for the King, and by Fifty Ambassadors begged his Pardon. Upon which, the King
accepted some of the most Honorable among them for Hostages.

When he came back into Hircania, Thalestris Queen of the Amazons met him,
whose Dominions lay between Phasis and Taermodon; of an admirable Beauty, and
strong Body, Thalest^is.
greatly honored in her own Country for here Brave and Manly Spirit. She
presented herself to the King, with Three hundred Amazons in their Warlike
Habit, having left the rest of her Forces on the Borders of Hircania. The King
being struck with admiration at the sudden and unexpected approach of the
Queen, and the graceful appearance of the Women, asked Thalestris, what was the
Reason of her Journey thither? Who answered him, That she came there to have
Issue by him; for she looked upon him to transcend all other Men for Great and
Noble Actions; and she her self to exceed all other Women both in Body and
Mind, as to the Strength of the one, and Courage of the other: And therefore
there was good ground to hope that the Issue of such Parents, would excel all
other Men in Valor. The King was greatly pleased with what she said, and
gratisy'd her Request; and after he had conversed with her for the space of
Thirteen Days, he presented her with honorable Gifts, and suffered her to
return to her own Kingdom.

Alexander conceiving that he had now effected all that he designed, and that
there was no Competitor with him for the Empire, began to indulge the soft and
effeminate Manners Alexander i(...) the Persians.
of the Persians, and to imitate the Luxury of the Asian Kings: And therefore
in the first place he ordered all the The Lictors, who carried Rods before the
Magistrates.
Officers of the Court to be Asiaticks, and the Nobility of Asia to be *
'Squires of the Body, amongst whom Oxathres, the Brother of Darius, was one. He
put likewise the Persian Diadem upon his Head, and wore the White Cassock and
Belt, after the manner of the Persian Kings, and all the rest, except the
Persian Hose (...), such carried Lances. Ant. Chapter 327.
and Vestment, called the Candys. He bestowed likewise Purple Gowns upon his
Friends, and clothed all his Horsemen in the Persian Habit. He began likewise
to carry his Concubines along with him from place to place as Darius used to
do, who had almost as many as the Days in the Year, and were the greatest
Beauties that could be found throughout all Asia. These stood round the King's
Bed every Night, that he might take his choice of whom he pleased to lie with
him. However, for the most part he followed the ancient Customs of his
Ancestors, and used the other but seldom, lest he should offend the
Macedonians; and when some notwithstanding complained of the King, he stopped
their Mouths with Gifts and Bribes.

About this time, Intelligence was brought him that Satibarzanes, one of Darius
his Lord Lieutenants, had killed all the Soldiers he had committed to his
Charge, and was joined in Conspiracy with Bessus to make War upon the
Macedonians; whereupon he marched out against him.

Satibarzanes had got all his Forces together into Chrotacana, a most Noble
City in those Parts, and naturally fortified; but as soon as the King came in
sight, being terrified with the Greatness of the King's Army, and the Valor of
the Macedonians, (which was now cried up all the World over) he hasted away
with Two thousand Horse to Bessus, to procure help from him with all speed. The
rest of his Forces he ordered to make to a Ant. Chapter 327.
Mountain near at hand, which was full of straight Passes; and where they might
lie close and secure when they durst not Engage with the Enemy in the open
Field. Upon this, the King was so intent and diligent (as he always was) that
though they had sheltered themselves in a large Rock, and naturally strong, yet
he reduced the Besieged to those streights, as that he forced them to Surrender
themselves.

Afterward, having reduced all the Cities in this Province, in the space of
Thirty days, he left Hircania, and came to the Royal City of * Drangina, where
he Encamped and refreshed In the Province of Drangiana ^n Persia.
his Army.

About t^is time a most wicked Plot was laid against Alexander, very unworthy
the A Plot against Alexander.
Goodness of his Disposition. For one of the King's Friends, called Dimnus,
blaming the King for something he had done, and thereupon become Enraged at
him, contrived to Assassinate him. This Man had a Catamite, called Nicomachus,
whom he dearly loved; him he went about to persuade to join with him in this
Wicked Design: But being a very young Youth, he discovered the whole Business
to his Brother Cebalinus, who (fearing lest some other should be before him in
the Discovery) resolved to make the first Discovery to the King.

Thereupon he goes to the Court, and first meets Philotas, and acquaints him
with what he had heard, and entreats him to inform the King what was hatching
out of hand.

Philocas, whether through Covetousness, or that he was one of the
Conspirators, (it is not certain) minded not to make the Discovery of what had
been imparted to him: For though he went in to the King, and had a long
Discourse with him of diverse matters, Ant. Ch 327.
yet he told him nothing of what Cebalinus had related to him. But when he came
out, told Cebalinus, that he had not had as yet a fit Opportunity for opening
of the Matter to the King; but that the next Day he would take him aside by
himself, and discover all that Cebalinus had made known to him. Philotas
neglecting the Business the next Day also; Cebalinus was afraid, lest if it
should be discovered by some other Person, and so he himself should be in great
danger; Therefore he waved Philotas, and goes to one of the King's Pages, and
tells him the whole Plot, wishing him forthwith to acquaint the King; and then
withdraws himself into the Armory, and there lay private. The Page took the
Opportunity when the King was in the Bath, and related to him the whole Matter
told him by Cebalinus, and that he then lay hid and secret in the Armory. At
this the King was greatly sta^tled, and forthwith ordered Dimnus to be seized;
and now fully informed of the Conspiracy, sent for Cebalinus and Philotas. When
every thing after strict Examination was fully discovered, Dimnus stabbed
himself. Philotas confessed his Neglect in not making the Discovery, but
utterly denied that he had any hand in the Conspiracy. The King hereupon
committed the Examination of the Business to the Judgment of the Macedonians,
who after many Arguments and Debates, Pro and Con, condemned Philotas and the
rest of the Conspirators to die, amongst whom was Parmenio; who was ever
thought to have been one of the King's most faithful Friends. And though he was
not Ant. Chapter 327.
then present himself, yet it was suspected that he managed the Business by his
Son Philotas.

Philotas therefore being put upon the Rack, confessed the whole Plot; and so
he and the other Conspirators were put to Death, according to the manner of
their Philotas put to Death.
own Country. Alexander Lyncestes also (who was before accused of a Conspiracy
against the King) suffered in the same manner. He had been now three years in
custody, but his Trial was deferred to that time for the sake of Antigonus, who
had a great kindness for him, and between whom there was a particular
Friendship and Familiarity. But being then brought before the Macedonian
Senate, and having nothing by way of Plea to say for himself, he was Executed
with the rest.

Then Alexander dispatched some away upon Dromadary Camels, to prevent the
Report of Philotas his Punishment, and by that means caused Parmenio, the
Father of Philotas, to be seized unawares, and put to Death; he was then
Governor of Media, and was entrusted with the King's Treasures in Ecbatana,
which amounted to an Hundred and Fourscore thousand Talents. About the same
time he severed from the rest of his Army all such as had given out harsh
Expressions against him, and grumbl'd at the Death of Parmenio, and all those
who had written false and scandalous Letters to their Friends in Macedonia,
relating to the King's Affairs: All these he cast into one Company or Regiment
which he called the (...).
Unruly Company, lest by their unseasonable Jangling and Prating, they should
corrupt the rest of the Macedonians.

After these things thus done, and that he had settled his Affairs in Drangina,
he marched against the Arimaspi, (as they were anciently called) but now
Benefactors.
Evergetae, which Name was given them upon the following account; Cyrus (who
was the first that translated the Empire from the Medes to the Persians) in a
certain Expedition he had undertaken, being brought into great Extremity in a
barren Country for want of Provision, insomuch as the Ant Chapter 327.
Soldiers to satisfy their Hunger, were forced to eat the Flesh one of another;
the Arimispi at that time brought to his Army Thirty thousand Carts and Wagons,
laden with Provision. And therefore the King being thus unexpectedly Relieved
and Preserved, not only quitted the People from paying of Tribute for the
future; but bestowed upon them many other Privileges and bountiful Rewards, and
changed their old Name into Everget^.

And now when Alexander came into their Country, they received him with all the
Demonstrations of Love and Kindness, and he rewarded them with marks of his
Grace and Favor, suitable to his State and Dignity. And returned the like
Favor to the Gedrosians their Neighbors, who had entertained him likewise
with the same Respect: And over these two Nations he made Teridates Governor.

In the mean time while he staid in these Parts, some brought him Intelligence
that Satibarzmes with a great Body of Horse out of Bactria, had entered the
Country of the Arians, and had withdrawn the Inhabitants from their Allegiance.
Upon which the King sent him part of the Army, under the Command of Erigyus and
Stasanor. He himself in the mean time, in a few days subdued Arachosia, and
caused them to submit to his Government.

CHAP. IX.
Alexander marches against the Paromisades. His troublesome March. Comes to
Mount Caucasus. A Battle in Area by Alexander's Officers against Satibarzanes,
who is killed in a single Combat by Erigius. Bessus brought to Alexander; His
Punishment. Alexander kills some Barbarians unexpectedly, after they had
surrendered their City. He marches to the River Indus. Mophis his remarkable
delivery up of himself and his Army.

AT the End of this Year Euthycritus was created Chief Governor of Athens,
Lucius Olymp. 113. 1. Ant. Chapter 326. An. M. 3622. The Cold Country of the
Paropamisades.
Plotius, and Lucius Papyrius executing the Office of Roman Consuls; At this
time was celebrated the Hundred and thirteenth Olympiad. Then Alexander led his
Army against the Paropamisades. This Country lies very far North, and is
covered over with Snow, and by reason of the Sharpness of the Cold, People
cannot endure to come into their Country. The greatest Part of it is open and
plain, without any Trees, and has in it many Towns scattered here and there.
The Roofs of their Houses are covered with Tyles, running up in shape like a
Spire, in the Middle is a Hole to let in Light, and to evaporate the Smoke: And
the Walls of their Houses are so close jointed and cemented, that the
Inhabitants are sufficiently guarded against the Cold. By reason of the great
The Descript. of the Paropamisades Country.
Driffs of Snow, they keep within their Houses most part of the Year, where
they have every thing necessary for their Provision laid up in store. They
cover their Vines and Fruit Trees all the Winter with Earth, and uncover them
again when the Spring approaches. The Nature of all this Tract is such, that
nothing that is Green or Pleasant is seen in any Part of it. But Snow
glittering with Ice covers all Places. No sorts of Fowl or Birds breed here; no
Wild Beasts feed in the Woods or Forests; Insomuch, as that there is neither
Entertainment for any Stranger, nor Hospitality one with another throughout the
whole Country. Notwithstanding all these Difficulties, yet the King, encouraged
by Ant. Chapter 326.
the Hardness of the Macedonians, and put on forward by his own daring
Resolution, overcame all the Disadvantages of the Place. But yet some of the
Soldiers, and others that straggl'd and kept not up to the rest, were so tired,
that they were left behind. Others by the Brightness and Sharpness of the Snow,
and reflection thereof upon their Eyes, were destroyed. Nothing could be seen
at a distance, save only the smoke that discovered the Villages; which was a
sign to the Macedonians that there were Inhabitants not far off. The Towns
being thus discovered and gained, the Soldiers after their great hardships,
refreshed themselves with the Plentiful store of Provision they found in the
Houses, and in a short time all the Inhabitants submitted.

After this, he marched forward, and came near to Caucasus, where he Encamped.
That Caucasus.
Mountain by some is called Paropamisus: Having passed over the Breadth of the
Mountain in sixteen days march, he built a City, called Alexandria, near the
Foot of the Mount, at a Pass which opens a Way into Media. In the middle of
Caucasus is a Rock ten Furlongs in Compass, and four in Height, wherein the
Inhabitants pretend to show. * Promotheus See this Story in Ovid', Mesam. Lib.
1. and other P^^ts.
his Cave, the Fabulous Vulture's Nest, and the Chains and Fetters. He built
likewise other Cities, each distant a days Journey from Alexandria. In these he
planted Seven thousand of the Barbarians, Three thousand of those that followed
the Camp, and as many of the Mercenary Soldiers as would.

Hence he marched into Bactria; for he heard that Bessus had Usurped the Crown,
and Ant. Chapter 326.
had raised a Numerous Army These were the things then done by Alexander.

In the mean time, the Commanders that were sent into Area, there found the
Ringleaders of the Rebellion, with a strong Army under the Command of
Satibarzanes, an Experienced and Valiant General. The Armies Encamped near to
one another, and sometimes would engage in considerable Bodies, and at others
in light Skirmishes, by a few on either side. At length it came to a General
Battle, and in the midst of the Fight, (wherein the Valor of the Barbarians
was such, that the Issue was very doubtful) Satibarzanes himself (to discover
who he was) plucked off his Helmet with his own Hand, and challenges any of his
Enemies Commanders, to fight with him Hand to Hand. Upon Satibarzanes killed by
Erigyus in a single Combat in Area.
which, Erigyus makes up to him, and a stout Combat there was, in which Erigyus
was the Victor. The Barbarians upon the Death of their General were so
disheartened, that upon Quarter, they gave up themselves to the King.

In the mean while, Bessus had taken upon him the Name of King, and having
Sacrificed to the Gods, invited his Friends to Feast with him. In the midst of
his Cups, he began to Quarrel with one of his Companions, called Bagodoras, and
the Contest growing higher, he fell at length into such a Rage, as that he
resolved to kill him, but changed his Mind through the Persuasion of his
Friends. Bagodoras thus narrowly escaping with his Life, fled in the Night to
Alexander. The Chief of the Commanders (moved by the Consideration of his
Escape, and stirred up by hopes of Rewards) conspired together and Ant. Chapter
326. Bessus brought to Alexander.
seized upon Bessus, and brought him to Alexander, for which the King
bountifully rewarded them. As for Bessus, he gave him up into the Hands of
Darius his Brother, and the rest of his Kindred, to punish him in such manner
as they thought fit, who after they had put him to all manner of Torments, and
used him with all the Despite and Disgrace imaginable, they cut his Body into
small pieces, and hurled every part here and there away out of their Slings. --
[Here the History is broken off and lost, viz. 1. Alexander's March through a
dry Country. 2. The Defection of the Sogdians, Bactrians. 3. The Hunting in
Bahastis.



Peace being made upon these Conditions, and ratified by mutual Oaths, the
Queen of Massaca in India.
Queen mightily admired the Brave and Noble Spirit of Alexander, and sent to
him most rich Presents, promising to do whatever he was pleased to Command. --
[Here the History is likewise lost. 4. The Impiety against Bacchus. 5. The
Death of Clitus and Calisthenes. 6. Wars with the Nauticae. 7. His Marriage
with Roxana. 8. of Nysia. These are wanting may be supplied out of Archian.
Lib. 4. and Q. Curtius, Lib. 7, 8.



Then the Mercenaries, as they had agreed, forthwith left the City, and having
marched Eight hundred Furlongs Encamped without any Disturbance, not in the
least suspecting any thing of that which afterward happened: For Alexander
hating them implacably pursued them with a considerable Body of Men, and fell
upon the Barbarians on the sudden, Barbarians killed after surrender of their
City.
and cut off Multitudes of them. Upon which the Mercenaries first cried out,
that he had violated his Oath, in falling upon them in that Hostile manner, and
called upon the Gods to revenge that Impious Cruelty executed upon them. But
the King, with a loud Voice answered, That he indeed did agree, that they
should quit the City, but not Ant. Chapter 326.
that they should ever be accounted as Friends to the Macedonians. Hereupon,
the Barbarians not at all terrified with the desperate Condition they were in,
These Mercenaries were the Massasenians. Their stout Defense.
drew up in a Body in a round Ring; placing their Wives, Children, and Women in
the middle, that they might receive the Enemy on every side with less Hazard
and Prejudice. Being therefore Desperate and of daring Spirits, encouraged by
their Successes in former Conflicts, they bravely received the Enemy. The
Macedonians on the other hand resolving to be in nothing inferior to them, the
Engagement was very sharp and terrible. For fighting close hand to Hand, Man to
Man, various kinds of Death and Wounds appeared every where: For the
Macedonians by their Sarissa, a Macedonian Spear or Lan^^.
Sarissas pierced through the short Shields of the Barbarians with that
violence, that the Points ran into their very Bodies The Mercenaries likewise
on their part threw their Lances amongst the Thickest of their Enemies, upon
whom (being so near) they were sure not to fail in doing Execution. When a
great Number of them were wounded and as many killed, the Women took up the
Arms of those that were slain, and joined with the Men in the Engagement. For
the Desperateness of their Condition, and the Greatness of the Work in hand,
forced them to the most resolute Resistance for the Defense of themselves. Some
of them therefore getting Arms, defended their Husbands with Shields; others
that had no Arms rushed in upon the Enemy, and caught hold of their Bucklers,
so as they could scarce do any thing. At length all the Men, together Ant. Chapter
326.
with their Wives (who valiantly fought to the last) being overpowered by
Multitude, died upon the place, preferring an honorable Death, before a Life
with Slavery and Disgrace. The useless and unarmed Rabble, together with the
Women that were left, he gave to his Horsemen. He took likewise several other
Cities, putting them to the Sword that opposed him.

Here it falls in with the Index placed before the 17th Book, in the Greek
Edition of Rhodomanus. Alexander at the Rock Ao^non.
Hence he moved forward to the Rock called Aornon; for here those Inhabitants
that survived sheltered themselves, being a very strong Place. It is reported,
that the ancient Hercules attempted the taking this Place, but was forced to
quit the Siege, by reason of terrible Earthquakes, and other Prodigies of the
Gods, that happened there at that time; which coming to the Ears of Alexander,
it made him far more eager to assault the Place, as if he gloried to be the
Gods Corival both in Might and Power. The Rock was an hundred Furlongs round,
and sixteen high, and seemed to be even and steep, and every where round. At
the foot of the Rock toward the South runs Indus, the greatest River of India;
other Parts are environed with unaccessible Rocks and dreadful Precipices.
Alexander upon view of the Place, concluding that it was not possible for him
to take it by force; at that instant there came to him an Old Man with his two
Sons, who had a long time lived in those Places, in a very poor and low
Condition: He had there a little Cell cut into the Rock, wherein were three
Beds: He and his Sons lodging together in this place, he was very well
acquainted with all the Avenues and Passages round about. When he came
therefore to the King, he told him his Condition, and promised to lead the King
through the Straits and craggy By-ways, to such a Post where he might assault
the Barbarians upon the Rock. Hereupon Alexander promised him a large Reward,
made use of his Conduct, and in the first place possessed himself of the only
Passage Ant. Chapter 326.
that led up to the top of the Rock: And because there was no other way to
pass, he so blocked up the Besieged, that there was no Relief to be expected.
Then by the help of many hands, he raised up a Mount from the bottom and foot
of the Rock; and advanced so close up to the Enemy, that by that means he made
a very sharp and vigorous Assault, which continued without any interruption
Night and Day, for the space of seven Days and Nights. At the beginning the
Barbarians, by advantage of the height of the Fort, prevailed, and cut off
many that too rashly forced in upon them: But when the Battery was raised up to
its due height, and the Engines for shooting of Darts and other Warlike
Instruments were brought up, and that the Resolution of the King not to leave
the Assault was discerned, the Besieged were in a great Consternation. But
Alexander wisely foreseeing what would be the Issue, commanded the Guard that
he had left at the Passage to withdraw, that so the Enemy might have free
liberty to be gone, if they had a mind to it.

Upon which, the Barbarians, affrighted by the Valor of the Macedonians, and
the King's brave Resolution, in the Night left the Fort. The Indians being thus
frighted with a Scarecrow, the King gained the Rock without any considerable
loss: And then having rewarded his Guide, marched away with his Forces to other
places.

About that time there was one Aphrices, an Indian, that lay in those parts
with an Army Aphrices an Indian his Head brought to Alexander.
of Twenty thousand Men, and Fifteen Elephants: Him the Indians killed, and
brought his Head to Alexander, and by that means gained his Favor. He
possessed himself likewise of all the Elephants in that Tract, and received the
Indians into his Protection. Thence he moved to the River Indus, where being
furnished with some Ships of Thirty Oars a piece, with them he made a Bridge
over the River, and continued in that place Ant. Chapter 326.
for thirty days space to refresh his Army, and there offered magnificent
Sacrifices to the Gods.

After he had passed over his Forces, there happened something unusual and
remarkable: One Taxilis, who formerly reigned in that Country, being lately
dead, his Son Mophis succeeded him; this Mophis some time before had sent an
Ambassador to Alexander, when he was in Sogdiana, to offer him his Assistance
against the Indians that were then preparing to oppose him; and likewise
promised to deliver up his Kingdom into the King's hands. When the King was
Thirty Furlongs distant, Mophis and his Friends marched toward him with a
well-appointed Army, and Elephants adorned and fitted for Battle. When
Alexander saw so numerous an Army advance, he believed the Indian had made a
Cloak of his Promises to cover his Fraud, by that means to surprise the
Macedonians at unawares; therefore he commanded the Trumpets to give the Sign
of Battle, and drew up his Army in Battalia, and advanced toward the Indians.
But Mophis being informed of the sudden Commotion that was amongst the
Macedonians, easily judging what was the occasion, commanded his Army to make
an halt, and he himself with a few in his Company, posts away, and presently
undeceives the Macedonians, by delivering up himself and his Army (which was
the Strength of the Kingdom) into the Power of the King; who was so well
pleased with what the Barbarian had done, that he restored him to his Kingdom,
and ever after found Taxiles (for so he was called) his constant and faithful
Friend and Associate. And these were the Transactions of this Year.

CHAP. X.
Alexander overcomes Porus. How Apes are taken, Strange Serpents for Venem.
Large Trees. Marches against the Andrastians, Catheri, and against Sophithes.
The Custom of them under Sophithes. Indian Dogs. Entertained by Phigeus. The
Macedonians refuse to march against the Gandarides. Alexander leaves Monuments
behind him at the River Hyphasis. Nicea built, and Bucephalis. The Ibori
present Alexander. Routs the Agalassians. In danger in the River Indas by
Whirlpools. Marches against the Oxidracans and Mallians. The King leaps off the
Wall into the Town. A Duel between Coragus and Dioxippus. The Sambestae submit
to Alexander; and the Sodrans and Massanians. Subdues Musicanus, Porticanus,
and Sambus. Poisoned Weapons. The King's Dream. Comes into the main Ocean.
Comes into Gedrosia. The Savageness of the People. His Army near perishing in
Gedrosia. Comes into Carmania. Punishes the Bormcial Goremours, Nearchus
returns. Islands covered at high Tides. The strange Death of Calanus. Alexander
marries Statira. Harpalus his Luxury. He seizes with his own Hand them that
mutiny'd.

AT the time when Chremes was Lord Chancellor at Athens, and Publius Cornelius
and Olymp. 113. 2. Ant. Chapter 325. An. M. 3623.
Aulus Posthumous executed the Consulship at Rome; Alexander, after he had
refreshed his Army in the Province of Taxilis, marched against Porus Prince of
the Neighboring Indians, who had in his Army above Fifty thousand Foot, Three
thousand Horse, above a Thousand Chariots, and an Hundred and thirty Elephants,
and was confederated with another Neighboring King, called Embisarus, not
inferior in Power to Porus. Alexander's Battle with Porus.
Alexander understanding that he was not above 400 Furlongs distant from Porus,
advanced with a Resolution to fight him, before the other joined him. Porus
perceiving him to approach, drew up his Horse in two Wings: His Elephants, so
accountred as to terrify his Enemies, he placed at equal distances one from
another in the Front, and lined them with his armed Men, who were commanded to
guard and defend them from Darts and Arrows in the Flank. The whole Army drawn
up thus in Battalia, seemed like a City: For the Elephants stood like so many
Towers, and the Soldiers placed among them resembled the Walls. Alexander, on
the other hand (observing how his Enemies were drawn up) so disposed and
ordered his own Men, as the present Circumstances of his Affairs then required.

The Horse engaged in the first place, and thereupon almost all the Indians
Chariots were presently broken in pieces: Afterward the Elephants being made
use of (by the mighty Bulk of their Bodies and their great Strength) bore down
and trod underfoot Ant. Chapter 325.
many of the Macedonians; others were caught up in their Trunks, and tossed
into the Air, and then fell down again with great violence upon the Earth, and
so miserably perished: Many likewise were so rent and torn by their Teeth, that
they died forthwith. However, the Macedonians with invincible Courage endured
all the Hardships wherewith they were pressed, and with their The Macedonian
Pikes.
Sarissas killed the Soldiers that guarded the Elephants: So that now they
fought upon equal Terms; and not long after, the Beasts being plied with Darts
on every side, and not being able longer to endure the many Wounds they
received, their Riders were not able to rule them, insomuch as they furiously
rushed backwards, and broke in upon their own Regiments, and trod many of them
underfoot, which caused great disturbance and consusion. Upon which, Porus
mounted upon the Bravest Elephant (seeing how things were like to be) commanded
Forty of those that were not as yet startled and affrighted, to be placed round
about him. And with these he made so desperate and sierce a Charge, that he
made a sad Slaughter amongst the Macedonians; especially being a Man of the
strongest Body of all those that were with him; for he was five Cubits high,
and in bulk proportionable; so that his Breast Plate was twice as big as any of
the rest of the most strongest Men amongst them; and he threw a Dart with as
great force as if it had been shot out of an Engine. But this extraordinary
Strength of Porus did not at all terrify the Macedonians, that were placed in
the front against him: Alexander therefore commanded the Archers and
light-armed Men, with all their Darts and Arrows to make at Porus himself; who
did as they were commanded. So that such a multitude of Archers were got in one
Body together, and such Showers of Darts and Arrows poured out upon him, that
they could not possibly miss their Mark. Porus overcome.
Porus at length (having fought with great Valor and Resolution) by multitude
of Wounds lost so much Blood, as that his Spirits failed him, and he fell down
from his Beast to the Ground. Upon which it being presently spread abroad that
the King was dead, the rest of the Indians fled, and thereupon a great
Slaughter was made amongst 'em.

Thus Alexander having gained this glorious Victory, at length commanded his
Trumpets Ant. Chapter 325.
to sound a Retreat. But there were killed in this Battle above Twelve thousand
Indians; amongst whom were Two Sons of Porus, the Generals of his Army, and the
Chiefest of his Commanders. There were taken above Nine thousand Prisoners, and
Fourscore Elephants. As for Porus, he was not yet quite dead, and therefore
Alexander recommended him to the Care of the Indians themselves for the
dressing of his Wounds. There fell of the Macedonians, Two hundred and
fourscore Horse, and above Seven hundred Foot, whom the King took care to be
decently buried, and rewarded those that survived who had merited by their
Valor. He sacrificed likewise to the Sun, through whose Favor and Assistance
he had conquered the East. The neighboring Mountains being clothed with great
Numbers of Firr-Trees, Cedars, and the Pitch-Tree, the Place affords plentiful
Materials for the Building of Ships; and therefore he built as many here as he
had occasion for. For he designed when he came to the utmost Bounds of India,
after he had subdued those Nations that lay in his way, to pass along through
the River into the Ocean.

In the mean time, he built Two Cities in those Parts, one upon the further
side of the River Hydaspis.
River where he passed over; the other where he overcame Porus; and both were
presently Ant. Chapter 325.
perfected, having many hands at work.

Porus being recovered, he restored him to the Possession of his Kingdom; and
being there was plenty of all sorts of Provision, he suffered his Army to lie
still and refresh themselves Porus restored.
for the space of thirty Days.

There are some things very remarkable, and worth observing, in the Mountains
near where they encamped: For besides the Materials for Shipping, this Tract
abounds with Serpents of a vast Bigness, 16 Cubits in length, and breeds a sort
of Apes, to be admired both for their number and greatness of their Bodies. The
nature of the Beast has instructed the Hunter how to take her; for she is apt to
imitate every Action she sees; but because of her Strength and natural
Sagacity, it is very difficult to take her by force. Therefore some of the
Hunters anoint their Eyes with Honey, and others put on Shoes in the sight of
the Apes; and some there are that clap upon their Heads Glasses made hallow
like Caps.
Looking-glasses: Then they leave some Shoes behind them, with Bands fixed to
them, and instead of Honey lay Birdlime, and within the Glasses are Ropes to
run on Nooses: When they are gone, the poor Beasts begin presently to imitate
what they saw done, and so are deluded; for their Eyelids are glew'd together,
their Feet are fast bound, and their whole Bodies held by the Snares; and so
they become an easy Prey to the Hunter.

Afterward Alexander forces Embisarus (who had been so slow in assisting
Porus, and now in a Consternation) to a Submission; and then passes the River
with his Forces, and makes his way through a most fruitful Country: For here
are strange sorts of Trees Ant. Chapter 325.
seventy Cubits high, and of that thickness that four Men can scarcely fathom
'em, and cast Trees.
a Shade 300 foot distance.

There are likewise in this Tract multitudes of Serpents of small Bodies; but
for their various Color most remarkable: For some lie like Rods yellow as
Brass; others have very ^
rough and hairy Breasts, and whoever is bitten by them, falls down dead
immediately. If any be stung by them, he is most horridly tormented, and a
bloody Sweat issues out at all the Pores of his Body. The Macedonians, to
secure themselves from these Mischiefs, hung up their Beds on the Limbs of
these Trees, watching the greatest part of the Night: But at length, by some of
the Inhabitants, they were directed to a Root, which was an Antidote against
the Poison.

After the King had moved from thence, he was informed that Porus, a
neighboring Prince, Nephew of Porus lately vanquished, was fled out of his
Kingdom, and run to the Gangarides. At which Alexander was not a little
troubled, and thereupon sent Hephestion with a considerable Body of Men into
his Dominion, and ordered him to reduce it into the nature of a Province, and
to deliver it into the hands of his Friend Porus. He himself marched into the
Country of the Andrastians, and gained some of their Cities by assault, Marches
against the Andrastians. Catheri.
and others by surrender.

Thence he came into the Country of the Catheri, where by the Law the living
Wives are burnt together with their dead Husbands; and the Wickedness and
Treachery of one Woman, who poisoned her Husband, was the occasion of this Law.
There the King burnt down to the Ground the greatest and strongest Town of all
others in those Parts after he had with great difficulty and hazard taken it by
assault. The Inhabitants of another Ant. Chapter (...).
Town, which he was ready to assault, came forth, and humbly submitted
themselves to him, upon which he spared them.

Thence he led his Army to the Cities belonging to Sophithes, which were
governed by most excellent Laws; amongst the rest they strictly observe this,
To value their Beauty and The Custom of Sophithes his Cities.
and comely Proportion above all other Things; and therefore they carefully
examine every part of the Child when it is in the Cradle, and such as are sound
and perfect in every Limb and Member, and likely to be strong and comely, they
nurse and bring up; but such as are lame and deficient, and of a weak Habit of
Body, they kill, as not worth the rearing. They have the same regard to their
Marriages; for without any respect to Portion, or any other Advantages, they
only mind the Beauty of the Person, and the Health and Strength of their
Bodies. Hence it is, that those who live in those Cities, are for the most part
more Beautiful and Comely than others. But Sophithes the King surpassed all the
rest of his Subjects for admirable Beauty and stately Proportion; for he was
above four Cubits high: He came forth of his Royal City, and gave up himself
and Kingdom into the hands of Alexander; and from the Bounty of the Victor
forthwith received it back again; and thereupon he nobly feasted Alexander and
all his Army for several Days together. And after many rich Presents made to
him, he presented him with an hundred and fifty Dogs of a wonderful Strength
and Bigness, and of other most remarkable Properties. It was said Indian Dogs.
they were brought forth by Tygars, who had coupled with Dogs. Alexander
minding by an Experiment to try their Strength and Courage, caused an exceeding
great Lion to be brought into the Circus, and then loosed at him two of the
weakest of the Dogs; which Ant. Chapter 325.
proving too weak, he let go other two. The Lion being now surrounded by four,
and overpowered, Sophithes sent one with a Sword, who began to cut off the
right Thigh of one of the Dogs: Upon which, the King called out, and thereupon
the Squires of his Body ran to the Indian, and held his Hand: But Sophithes
wished 'em to let him alone, and promised to give three for that one. The
Huntsman theresore laid hold again on the Dog's Thigh, and cut it off by little
and little; and all that while the Dog neither how^'d nor made the least noise;
but held fast his Hold till he fell down dead upon the Lion.

In the mean time Hephestion From his following Porus the Nephew of Porus.
returned with those Troops before sent along with him, having subdued a great
part of India wherever he came, and was hereupon honored by the King with
all deserved Praises.

Next Alexander marched into the Kingdom of Phigeus, where all the Macedonians
were welcomed by the Inhabitants, and Phigeus himself meeting him with Gifts
and Presents, Phigeus.
willing to receive from him his Kingdom as a Gift of his Bounty; which
Alexander accordingly restored to him: And both he and his Army being
entertained by Phigeus for two days, he then moved forward to the River
Hyphasis, which is seven Furlongs over, and six Hyphasis River. Ant. Chapter 325.
Fathoms deep, of a very fierce Stream, and difficult to pass. He had learned
from Phigeus, that beyond Indus there was a vast Desert of twelve Days Journey;
and at the farthest Borders thereof ran the Ganges Two and twenty Furlongs
broad, and the deepest of all the Rivers in India: And that beyond this River,
there dwelt the Tabresians, the Gandarides, Xandrames his Force, King of the
Gandarides.
whose King's Name was Xandrames, who had an Army of Twenty thousand Horse, and
Two hundred thousand Foot, Two thousand Chariots, and Foursand Elephants. The
King could not believe this to be true, and therefore sent for Porus, and
inquired of him whether it were so or not. He told him all was certainly true;
but that the present King of the Gandarides was but of a mean and obscure
Extract, accounted to be a Barber's Son. For his Father being a very beautiful
and handsome Man, the Queen fell in love with him, and then murdered her
Husband; and so the Kingdom devolved upon the present King.

Alexander however, though he perceived that the Expedition against the
Gandarides would be very difficult; yet through a desire he still had to gain
further Glory, would not wave it; but confiding in the Valor of the
Macedonians, and the Answers he had received from the Oracles, hoped to conquer
all the Barbarians wherever he went: For he remembered that at Delphos he was
called by the Oracle Invincible, and that the Empire of the whole World was
promised to him by Jupiter Hammon. But discerning that his Soldiers were even
tired out with continual Marches (for they had now toiled themselves with
extreme Hazards for Eight Years together) he judged it necessary to make a
Speech to his Army, to persuade them to undertake with him this Expedition
against the Gandarides. For now he had lost many Soldiers, and no hopes or
prospect remained of ending the War: Nay, their very Horse-Hoofs were worn away
by their continual Marches, and many of their Arms wasted and become useless.
And besides, all their Grecian Habits and Ant. Chapter 325.
Clothes were worn out, and they were forced to make use of the Barbarians
Stuff, and cut the Indian Plads in pieces to make themselves Clothes. And it
happened likewise about that time, that there poured down from Heaven fearful
Storms The Rains call d the Messoones in India.
of Rain, with terrible Thunder and Lightning, which continued for seventy Days
together. All which, though they happened cross to his Designs, as he
conceived, yet he judged there was one way still left for him to accomplish
what he so much desired, and that was by Bounty and Liberality to gain the
Hearts of his Soldiers. To that end he gave free liberty to the Soldiers to
ravage and plunder all over the Enemies Country, which was rich and abounding
in all good Things.

While the Army was thus employed in spoiling and plundering, he called
together the Soldiers Wives and all their Children; and among the Wives he
ordered Corn to be distributed every Month; and commanded so much Money to be
paid to the Children, as their Fathers Pay amounted unto. When the Soldiers
returned to the Camp, loaded with abundance of rich Prey, he called them all
together, and there made a handsome studied Speech to them, to persuade them to
march along with him against the Gandarides; but being not able upon any Terms
to prevail with the Macedonians, he left off that Design. And now determining
there to put an end to all his Expeditions, in the first The Macedonians refuse
to march against the Gandarides.
place he erected Twelve Altars to the Twelve Gods, every one fifty Cubits
high. Then he drew a Trench round his Camp thrice as large as the former, and
made it fifty Foot broad, and forty deep; and by the Earth out of the Trench,
cast up a strong Mud-wall on the inner side. He commanded likewise every
Foot-Soldier to provide two Beds in his Tent of five Cubits high; and every
Horseman (besides two Beds of the same quantity) to make Mangers twice as big
as any other; and that every thing they left behind them should be enlarged to
the same proportion. And this he did partly to leave behind him Monuments of
his Heroic Actions, and partly to make the World believe, that those with him
were Men of mighty Stature, and stronger than any other. When this was done, he
marched back with all the Army the same way he came to the River Acisines,
where he found some Ships in building, which he ordered to be perfected, and
River Acisines.
built several others.

About that time came to him Supplies out of Greece, both of Auxiliaries and
Mercenaries, to the number of about Thirty thousand Foot, and almost Six
thousand Horse. There were likewise brought to him at the same time Arms for
Five and twenty thousand Men most curiously wrought, and an hundred Talents
weight of all sorts of Medicines and Physical Preparations; and all these he
distributed amongst the Soldiers. His Ships now with all their Tackle and
Furniture were completely Rigged, of which there were Ant. Chapter 325.
Two hundred open Vessels, and Eight hundred Transport-Ships for all manner of
Service. The two Cities he had built near the River, the one he called Nicea,
from a Victory The Cities built at the River Ascisines, Nicea, Bucephalis.
there gained, and the other Bucephalis, from his Horse that was there killed
in the Battle against Porus.

Then he, together with his Friends, went aboard, and sailed down the River,
with an intent to fall down to the Southern Ocean; but a great part of the Army
marched along the River's Bank, under the Command of Craterus and Hephestion.
He came now to that Hydaspes and Acisines Rivers meet. Ibori.
place where the River Hydaspes and Ascisines meet together. Here he landed his
Soldiers, and marched to the Borders of the Ibori; these are said to be
descended from them who besieged the Rock Aornon with Hercules; and after that
they were defeated in that Design, were planted in this Country by that Hero.
Here he encamped near an eminent City of greatest Command in those parts: The
Citizens went out to the King, and were admitted to converse with him; and
there they renewed the Memory of their ancient Kindred, and promised to perform
all Offices of Respect and Kindness, as became so near Relations; and sealed
and confirmed what they said with extraordinary rich Presents. The King
received them very graciously, and in return freed all their Cities to govern
according to their own Laws.

Thence he moved toward the bordering Nations, amongst whom he found the
Agalassians had raised an Army of Forty thousand Foot, and Three thousand
Horse: Alexander (...) Agalassians.
fought 'em, and routed 'em; many were killed upon the spot, and the rest fled
into Holes and Dens, and the neighboring Towns and Villages; which being
afterward taken, they were all sold for Slaves. There were 20000 of the rest
of the Inhabitants that got together for shelter into a great City, which he
took by Storm; though the Indians blocking up all the strait Passages, fought
resolutely from the Tops of their Houses, and killed multitudes of the
Macedonians, which put him into such a Rage, as that he set the Town on fire,
and burnt most of them in it; so that only Three thousand remained, who Ant.
Chapter 325.
fled into the Castle, and su'd for Pardon, and had it.

Then he with his Friends went on board again, and sailed down the River to the
place where the two Hydaspes and Acisines.
Rivers (as was said before) and likewise Indus, now met together. But these
great Rivers rushing in one upon another in one and the same place, there were
most terrible Whirlpools, where the Ships that fell into them were so whirled
about, that there they perished. And the Stream was so fierce and violent, that
no Pilot could govern their Ships; so that two long Ships were sunk, and many
of the rest driven upon the Shore. The King's Ship was likewise caught in a
Whirlpool, and he himself now Alexander in danger by Whirlpools.
in the utmost Extremity and Danger of losing his Life; which he perceiving,
stripped himself naked, and prepared for the last Remedy. Whereupon his Friends
came round the Ship, endeavoring with all their Might to take in the King, in
case his Ship perished. A great Hurry and Confusion there was, while the Men
strove with the Violence of the Waves, but the River overmatch'd both their
Strength and Skill. Yet the King with great difficulty by the help of the Ships
was at length brought to land. Being thus unexpectedly preserved, he sacrificed
to the Gods for his Deliverance, and that he had, like another Achilles,
conquered the River it self. Thence he marched against the Oxydracons and
Mallians. Syracusians in the Greek, mistaken for Oxydracans. Ant. Chapter 325.
Oxydracans and Mallians, populous and warlike Nations of India, whom he found
ready prepared with an Army of above Fourscore thousand Foot, and Ten thousand
Horse, and Seven hundred Chariots. These People were at War amongst themselves,
before the King came amongst them; but being terrified at his approach, they
were forced to agree and confederate against him. And in Confirmation of their
League, they mutually disposed of Ten thousand Virgins in Marriage, and thereby
entered into Affinity one with another. However, they came not against him with
their Armies into the Field, but afterward fell at variance one with another
concerning the Chief Command, and slipped away here and there into the
Neighboring Cities. Alexander approaching to the Capital Of the Oxydracans.
Vid. Appian. lib. 2. Bell. Civil. latter end: And Curtius, (...) 9 sect. 5
City, designed without any further delay to assault it: But one Demophoon a
Soothsayer, dissuaded the King from his Purpose, alleging, That by certain
Signs and Prodigies (by him observed) were portended, that the King would be in
extreme danger by a Wound received in this Siege; and therefore entreated him
that he would wave this Town, and apply himself to some other Affair. Upon
this, the King was very angry, because he discouraged the Soldiers; therefore
preparing all things necessary for an Assault, he himself led up his Men to the
Walls, with an undaunted Spirit, eager to gain the Place by force. His Men
being slow in fixing the Engines (as he thought) he was the first that broke
through the Gate into the City, upon which many were hewn down, and the rest
fled, whom he pursued to the very Castle. And because the Macedonians came not
on so roundly to make the Assault as he expected, he took a Scaling-Ladder
himself, and set it to the Castle-Wall, and holding his Buckler over his Head,
mounted the Ladder; and was so quick, that before they within could force him
back, he had gained the Top of the Ant. Chapter 325.
Wall. None of the Indians durst engage him hand to hand; but they so plied him
with Darts and Arrows at a distance that he was overprest.

In the mean time, the Macedonians had applied two Scaling-Ladders; but two
many thronging up at once, the Ladders broke, and down they all fell to the
Ground. The King being then left without all hope of Relief, was so desperate,
as that he did that which is worth special remark, and almost incredible: For
looking upon it as a diminution of his Glory to make back down amongst his own
Soldiers, he leapt off the Wall with his Arms in his hand into the Castle-Yard
rather. The King leaps into a (...) himself.
Town. Then the Indians came rushing upon him in droves, and he received their
Assault with great Resolution: For having a Tree which grew near to the Wall on
his right hand, and the Wall on his left, he more easily defended himself,
standing his ground with that Courage and Resolution as became a King that had
performed such Noble Acts, coveting to end his Days by a glorious and
honorable Death. Having now received many Cuts upon his Helmet, and as many on
his Sh^eld: At length he received so grievous a Wound under one of his Paps,
that it brought him down upon his Knees. Upon which, the Indian that wounded
him ran (heedlesly) upon him to give him another Blow; but the King thrust his
Sword through his Body, and there he fell down dead. Then raising himself up by
the help of a Bough of the Tree, he challenged any of the Indians that had a
mind to fight with him.

And now came in to his relief Peucestes, one of his Guard, being one of the
first that by other Ladders had scaled the Wall, and after him came several
others; so Ant. Chapter 325.
that the Barbarians being now in a fright, Alexander was at length preserved
and rescued.

The City being thus taken, the Macedonians (being enraged upon the account of
the King) put all the Men they sound to the Sword, and filled every place with
dead Carcasses.

In the mean time, while the King lay ill of his Wound, the Grecians that were
distributed into several Colonies throughout Bactria and Sogdiana (having for a
considerable Grecians in Bactria rebel.
time before grudged their Plantations amongst the Barbarians, and now
encouraged upon the Report that Alexander was dead of his Wound) rebelled
against the Macedonians, and got together to the number of about Three
thousand, and endeavored with all their Might to return into their own
Country; but were every Man cut off, after the Death of Alexander.

The King, after he was recovered of his Wound, appointed a solemn Sacrifice to
the Gods, in order to give Thanks for his Recovery, and sumptuously feasted all
his Friends. In his Feasting and Drinking there happened a Passage very
remarkable, and fit to be taken notice of: Amongst other Friends, there was one
Coragus a Macedonian invited, a strong body'd Man, and one that had often
behaved himself with great Gallantry in several Encounters. This Man in his
Cups challenged one Dioxippus an Athenian to fight a Duel between Coragus and
Dioxippus. See Plin. Not. Hist. l. 35. c. 11. Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 10. c. 22.
l. 12. c. 58. Ant. Chapter 325.
Duel; who was a Champion, and had won many Noble Prizes and Victories. The
matter was pushed on forward by the Guests, as is usual at such times.
Dioxippus accepted the Challenge, and the King appointed the Day.

As soon as it was day, many thousands of People slock'd together to see the
Combat. The King, with his Macedonians, favored Coragus; the Grecians. wished
well to Dioxippus. The Macedonian came into the List neatly accoutred,
glittering in his Arms. The Athenian presented himself stark naked all over
anointed with Oil, with a Cap upon his Head. Their Persons were both so
admirable for Strength of Body, and Presence of Mind, that it seemed as if two
of the Gods were to fight a Duel: For the Macedonian for his Stature and
Brightness of his Arms, looked like Mars. Dioxippus (besides his being the
stronger Man) in his carrying of a great Club, and Activity in Feats of Arms,
resembled Hercules. And now both advanced one toward another: The Macedonian,
when he came near, cast his Javelin at Dioxippus, which he declined by a little
motion of his Body. Then Coragus presently made at him with his Macedonian Pike.
Sarissa, which the other (advancing forward) broke in pieces with his
Truncheon. The Macedonian thus twice defeated, betook to his Sword; but while
he was drawing it, his Adversary made a Sally up to him, and prevented him;
catching hold on his Arm with his left hand, and gave him such a Blow with the
other, as that he laid him at his feet. When he had him upon the Ground, he set
his Foot upon his Neck, and lifting up himself, he turned about to the
Spectators: Upon which, all the People set up a great Shout, in admiration of
what was done, and at the Strength and Valor of the Man. But the King ordered
him that was foiled to be let go, and then Broke up the Assembly; and departed,
not very well pleased at the Misfortune of his Countryman.

But Doxippus having now discharged his Adversary, went off the Ground, and for
his famous and remarkable Victory, his Countrymen set a Coronet upon his Head,
as One that had advanced the Honor and Reputation of the Grecians. But Fortune
suffered not the Man to rejoice long in his Victory; for the King ever after
bore a Grudge to him, and the King's Friends and all the Courtiers envied him:
Therefore they persuaded one that waited at the Table, to put a golden Cup
under his Cushion; and in the middle of the Feast a Complaint was made that the
Cup was stolen; whereupon search was made, and the Cup pretended to be found
with Dioxippus: By which he was greatly disgraced, and put out of Countenance:
And seeing the Macedonians came ^locking about him, he Ant. Chapter 325.
arose from the Table, and left the place, and went to his Lodging. But shortly
after, he wrote a Letter to Alexander, complaining of the foul Contrivances of
his Enemies against him; and after he had delivered it to his Servants, to be
handed carefully to the King, he Dioxippus murders himself.
murdered himself.

It was certainly an imprudent Act in him to fight with a Macedonian, but far
more Folly in him to destroy himself: Therefore many who blamed him for this
piece of Madness, added this to his further Disgrace: That a great Body and a
great Wit seldom meet together. When the King read the Letter, he was
exceedingly troubled at his Death, and would often commend him for his Valor:
And he who undervalu'd him when he was alive, now in vain wished for him when
he was dead; and came perfectly to understand the Honesty of the Man, by the
Knavery of his Accusers and Slanderers.

And now the King ordered his Army to march along the Bank of the Indus.
River, over against his Fleet, and began again to sail down into the Ocean,
and in his Passage arrived at the Country of the Sambestans. These People for
Number and Courage are nothing Sambestan^. Curtius, lib. 9. c. 15.
inferior to any of the Indians, and their Cities are Democratical in their
Government.

Having intelligence of the approach of the Macedonians, they brought into the
Field Threescore thousand Foot, Six thousand Horse, and Five hundred Chariots.
But when the Fleet drew near, they were so terrified with the strangeness of
the Sight, and the Fame and Glory of the Macedonians which was noised abroad in
all Places, that the Old Ant. Chapter 325.
Men among them dissuaded them from vent'ring a Battle; whereupon they sent
Fifty of the best Qua^ity, as Ambassadors to Alexander to pray his Favor. The
King (upon the Address made to him) granted them Peace as they desired, and
received large and honorable Presents (becoming a Demy-god) from the
Inhabitants. Then he received the Submission of the Sodrans and Massanians, who
bordered on both sides the River. Here Sodians, Massanians.
Alexander built another City called Alexandria, near the On the Bank of the
River Indus.
River, and furnished it with a Thousand Inhabitants. Afterward he arrived at
the Kingdom of Musicanus Strabo lib. 15. p. 694. 701. says he submitted, where
see much more, but after revolted and Crucified.
Musicanus, whom he took and killed, and subdued his Country. Then he came to
the This Territory belongs to the Bastans. See Strabo, b. Sambus.
Territory of Porticanus, and took two Cities upon the first Assault, and gave
the Spoil of them to his Soldiers, and then burnt them. Porticanus who had fled
for shelter into the Castle, was killed fighting in his own Defense. Then he
took all the Cities within his Dominion by Assault; and razed them to the
Ground, which struck a great Terror into the Neighboring Inhabitants. Next he
wasted the The Country of the Brachmans who had revolted after Submission. S^e
Curtius, Lib. 9
Territories of Sambus, razing many of the Cities, and selling the Citizens for
Slaves, and put to the Sword above Fourscore thousand Barbarians. These were
the Plagues the Brachmans suffered. All the rest who submitted (except such as
were the Authors and Ringleaders of the Defection) he Pardoned. In the mean
time, King Sambus got away with Thirty Elephants, into the furthest Parts
beyond the River Indus, and so escaped.

Amongst the Brachmans the last City attempted was Harmatelia. See Strabo. Lib.
15. p. 723. Ant. Chapter 325.
Harmatelia, which greatly confided in the Valor of its Inhabitants, and the
Strength of its Situation. Here the King commanded some few of his Party to go
up near to the Place, and provoke the Citizens to fall upon them, and then to
make as if they fled; thereupon Five hundred approached to the very Walls, who
for their inconsiderable Number were contemned by the Enemy: Three thousand
therefore made a Sally out of the Town upon them; whhreupon they took to their
Heels as if they had been in a great Fright. But the King with some few of his
Troops, fell upon the Backs of the Pursuers, upon which there was a smart
Engagement, and many of the Barbarians were killed and taken. But a great
number of those that were killed and wounded on the King's side, were in a
desperate Condition; for the Barbarians had poisoned the Heads of their Weapons
with a deadly Poison, which made Poisoned Weapons.
them more Courageous and forward to Engage with the King. This strong Poison
is made of certain Serpents taken by Hunting, which after they are killed, they
lay out and expose to the Heat of the Sun; where the Heat does so fry their
Flesh as if it were melting away, from which distills a sweaty Moisture,
wherein the Poison of the Beast is conveyed, and may be discerned. The Working
of this Poison is such, that a Benumm'dness and Stupidity presently seizes upon
the Body of him that is wounded; and in a short time after follows most
tormenting Pains, Convulsions and Trembling, wrecking every Member of the Body.
The Skin grows excessive Cold and Black, and the Party vomits black Choler:
Moreover, a black frothy Matter flows from the Wound, which causes
Putrefaction, and presently spreads all over the principal Parts of the Body,
and so the Party dies in a most Miserable manner. And hence it was, that he
that was never so Ant. Ch 32^.
slightly touched, was as much tormented, as he that had the greatest Wounds.
After all that were thus wounded were dead, the King grieved for none so much,
as he did for the Misfortune of Ptolemy (who Reigned afterward) and whom at
that time he dearly loved. There happened at this time something extraordinary
remarkable in reference to Ptolemy, which some ascribe to the special
Providence of God. He was a Man that was beloved of all, both for his Valor
and his wonderful obliging Carriage to every one, and therefore met with a
Cureworthy (...).
his kind and gracious Disposition. The King dreamt that he saw a Serpent with
an Herb in his Mouth, which told him the Nature and Efficacy The King's Dream.
of the Plant, and where it grew: When he awoke, he presently searched for the
Herb and found it, and when he had bruised it made a Pultice of it, and applied
it to Ptolemy's Body, and gave him a Potion of the Juice of the Plant, and so
restored him to perfect Health. Others also, when they came to know the
Sovereign Use of the Herb, were cured by the same means. But when Alexander now
began to apply himself to the Siege of Harmotelia, a strong and well fenced
City, the Inhabitants came all forth to him and begged his Pardon, and
delivered up themselves and their City into his Hands, and so escaped
Punishment.

Then sailing with his familiar Friends into the Main Ocean, he found two
Islands, where he offered most magnificent Sacrifices, and threw many Golden
Cups of a great Value, together with the Drink Offerings into the Sea. At
length, having reared up Altars to the Honor of Tethys and Oceanus, (supposing
now he had finished the Voyage he intended) he returned with the Fleet up his
Indus.
River, and arrived at the famous City City Hyala, at the Mouth of the River
Indus. Ant. Chapter 325.
Hyala. This City is under the same form of Government with that of Lacedaemon:
For there were two Kings of two several Families, succeeding in a time, who had
the Management and Administration of their Wars. But the chief Authority in
Civil Affairs resided in the Senate. Here Alexander burnt all the Ships that
were Leaky and Defective, and delivered the rest of his Fleet into the Hands of
This Navigation described by Arrian, lib. 6 p. 143. and Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 6
c 23 They set forth from the Island Patalene, and City Xunilopolis, as by
Arrian. Lib. 6. cap. 23. Vid. Ush. Ann. 266. and 269.
Nearchus and some other of his Friends, with a Command to sail all along the
Seacoast, and diligently observe every Place, till they came to the Entrance
into the River Euphrates. He himself raised his Camp, and marched a long way
into the Country, subduing all that opposed him, and using them kindly that
submitted to him: For the Inhabitants of Abitra and Gedrosia he brought to
Submission, without any Hazard or Difficulty.

Afterward, marching through many Tracts of Land destitute of Water, and as
many Deserts, he came to the Borders of Neoridis. There he divided his Army
into three Brigades; the one he gave to Ptolemy, the other to Leonatus; the
former he commanded to harrass the Sea Coasts, and the other the Midland and
Champian part of the Country. He himself wasted and spoiled the Hill Country
and Mountanous Parts, and the Places thereunto adjoining: So that many
Countries being Invaded all at one and the same time all Places were filled
with Rapine, Fire, and Sword; whence the Soldiers were loaded with rich Booty,
and many Thousands perished by the Sword.

The bordering Nations being terrified by this Destruction of People, all
delivered themselves up into the Power of the King In Rambacia.
. Here the King having a desire to build a City near to the Sea, and having
found a safe Harbor, and a convenient Place near to it, built one accordingly,
and called it Alexandria. Then he entered through ways made Alexandria in India
built.
by his Pioneers, into the Country of the Oritans.
Neoritans, and presently forced them all to submit.

These People are like all the rest of the Indians, both for Laws and Manners,
except in one thing, which is almost Incredible: For the Kindred and Relations
of those that Ant. Chapter 325.
are Dead (all stark Naked with their Lances in their Hands) carry forth the
Dead Bodies Burials of the Neoritans.
into some Wood or other belonging to the Country, and there strip the Dead of
all his burying Clothes and other Ornaments, and leave the Body to be Food for
the Wild Beasts: Then they divide his Garments, and Sacrifice to the
Subterraneous Heroes, and Feast all their Friends.

Alexander afterward marched into Gedrosia, all along the Sea Coast, and came
at length among a most rude and savage People. From their very Birth to their
old Age they never Marches into Gedrosia.
cut their Nails, but suffer them still to grow; and the Hair of their Heads
all grow in Locks, never combed out. They Are of a swarthy Complexion, (through
the parching Heat of the Sun) and cloth themselves with the Skins of Wild
Beasts. They feed upon the Flesh of Whales cast up by the Sea. In building of
their Houses and Cottages, they raise up their Walls as is usual, but the Roofs
are laid with the Rib-bones of Whales, of which they have Summers and Beams
eighteen Cubits in length, and for Tiles they use the Whales Scales.

When Alexander with great Toil had marched through this Country, he came into
a Alexander's Army near Perishing in Gedrosia.
desolate Wilderness, where nothing at all was to be had for the support of
Man's Life. So that many dying for want of Food, the whole Army was not only
altogether discouraged, but the King himself was then overwhelmed with unusual
Sorrow and Anxiety of Mind: For he looked upon it as a most Miserable thing
that those who by the Valor of their Arms, had conquered all where ever they
came, should now ingloriously Perish for want Ant. Chapter 325.
of Bread in a Barren Wilderness. Therefore he sent away the swiftest Courriers
he could find into Parthia, Drangina, Aria, and other bordering Countries, with
order, that with all speed they should meet him upon the Border of Carmania,
with Dromedary Camels, and other Beasts of Burden, laden with Bread, and all
other necessary Provisions; who hasted away as they were commanded, and
procured the Governors of the Provinces to dispatch abundance of Provision to
the Place appointed. By this extreme Scarcity Alexander lost many of his Men,
and this was the first Mischief he met with in this Expedition. Afterward, as
they were marching, some of the Mountaineers fell upon Leonatus his Squadron
and cut off many of them, and then made back to their Countrymen, and this was
another Loss.

When they had at length, with very great Difficulties and Hardships past
through this Desert, they came into a Rich and Populous Country In Carmania
Vid. Curtius, Lib. 9. ad fin^m.
; Here he randezvous'd his whole Army, and after they had refreshed themselves
celebrated a Feast to Bacchus, and dressed up to make a show like a Pageant, he
led the Darice before his Army (who marched likewise in great Pomp and State)
for the space of Seven days together, spending all that time in Revelling and
Drunkenness all along the way as he went.

When this was over, hearing that many of his Officers and Governors of
Provinces had The King punishes the Governors of Provinces. Ant. Chapter 325.
abused their Power, to the Oppression and Injury of many, he punished them
according to their Demerits. Which Severity of the King's being spread abroad,
many who were conscious of being guilty of the same Crimes, began to fear the
same Punishment, and therefore some who commanded the Mercenaries, made a
Defection; others picked up what Moneys they could, and fled: Of which the King
receiving intelligence, he writ to all the Governors and Lord-Lieutenants of
Asia, that as soon as they had read his Letters they should without further
delay disband all the Mercenaries.

About the same time, while the King was at Salmuntes in Harmozia, now Ormus in
the Gulf of Persia. Nearchus returns.
Salmuntes, a Sea port Town, busy in making Stage Plays: Those who were sent
to examine all the Sea Coasts, arrived with the Fleet, who forthwith went into
the Theater and addressed themselves to the King; and after they had made their
Obeisance, they acquainted him with what they had done. The Macedonians so
rejoiced at their Return, that as a Testimony of their joy they set up a great
Acclamation, and filled the whole Theater with Exultations. Those that returned
from the Voyage, told him, There were wonderful Tides of Ebbing and Flowing in
the Ocean, and that at low Water in the furthest Parts of the Sea Coasts there
appeared very Islands over-flow'd.
many great Islands, which at the return of the Tide are all again laid under
Water, while a most Fierce and violent Wind comes off from them to the
Continent, and causes the Water to be all over on a Foam: And as the greatest
Wonder of all, they declared they met with Whales of an incredible Magnitude;
which at the first so terrified them, that Whales.
they looked upon themselves as lost, and that they and all their Ships must in
a Moment perish together: But all of them at once setting up a great shout, and
making a Noise by striking upon their Arms, and sounding of Trumpets, the
monstrous Creatures were so terrified with a thing so unusual, that they made
to the Bottom of the Deep.

After the King had heard the Relation, he ordered the Sea Officers to sail
with the Ant. Chapter 325.
Fleet to Euphrates, And he himself in the mean time, marching through many
Countries with his Army, came at last to the Borders of Susiana. At which time
Calanus, an Indian, a great Philosopher, and much honored by the King, ended
his days in a wonderful manner. Having now lived to be Seventy three years old;
and during all that The strange Death of Calanus. Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 5. c.
6. Plut. in Alexander.
time never knew what Sickness or the least Distemper meant, he purposed to put
an end to his own Life; supposing that now both Nature and Fortune had brought
him to the utmost Bounds of his Felicity and well-being in the World. Being
seized upon therefore with Sickness, which grew upon him more and more every
day, he desired the King that he would order a great Funeral Pile to be made,
and that when he had placed himself upon it, some of his Servants should set it
on fire. The King at first endeavored to dissuade him from this Purpose; but
when he saw he would not be moved, he promised it should be done as he had
desired.

The thing presently spread abroad, and when the Pile was finished, multitudes
of People flocked to see this strange Sight: And there Calanus (according to
the Rules and Dictates of his own Opinion) with great Courage ascended the
Pile, and both he and it were consumed together. Some that were present judged
this Act to be an effect of Madness, others nothing else but a piece of
Vainglory: Though some there were that admired his Noble Spirit, and Contempt
of Death; And the King caused him to be honorably buried.

When Alexander came to Susa, he married Statira, Darius his Eldest Daughter.
Drypetis, the Younger, he married to Hephestion: He gave also Wives to the
Chiefest of his Friends, and married them to the Noblest Ladies of Persia.

About this time Thirty thousand Persians (very Proper and handsome young Men,
and Thirty thousand Persians brought to Alexander.
of strong Bodies) came to Susa. These, according to the King's Command, had
for some considerable time been getting together, and had been trained up by
their Tutors and Governors in Martial Discipline; and all of them completely
furnished with Macedonian Arms encamped before the City; where they Trained and
Exercised before the King, and approved themselves so expert in the Management
and Handling of their Arms, that they were honored by him with large and rich
Gifts. For because the Macedonians refused to pass over the River Ganges, and
in the common Assembly would many times with a great Bawling and Noise oppose
the King, and mock at his Descent from Hammon, he got this Body of Persians
(who were all about the same Age) to be as a Curb upon the Macedonian Phalanx.
Brigade. And these were the things wherein Alexander employed himself at that
time.

During this Indian Expedition, Harpalus, who was made by Alexander Lord
High-Treasurer of Babylon, almost as soon as the King, had begun his march
(hoping he would never return) gave up himself to all manner of Luxury and
Excess: For he was Governor Harpalus his Luxury.
of a very large Province. In the first place, he followed a lewd Course of
Forcing and Ravishing of Women, and committing all sorts of abominable Acts of
Uncleanness with the Barbarians, by which Luxurious pranks of Wickedness he
wasted the Treasure committed to his Charge. He ordered great multitudes of
Fish to be brought to him from far Countries, as far as from the * Red Sea: And
was so profuse in his daily Provisions for his The Red Sea.
Table, that all cried shame of him, and none gave him a good Word. He sent
likewise for a famous Strumpet from Athens, called Pythonices, to whom he gave
most Princely Gifts whilst she lived, and buried her with as much state when
she was dead, and built for her a most magnificent Monument in Athens.

After her death he sent for another Curtesan out of Attica, called Glycera,
with whom he lived at such a height of Voluptuousness and Expense, as exceeded
all bounds: But that he might have a Refuge to fly unto, in case of the cross
and destructive Blasts of Fortune, he made it his business chiefly to oblige
the Athenians. And therefore when Alexander returned from his Indian
Expedition, and had cut off the Heads of many of the Provincial Governors for
their Male-administrations; Harpalus fearing the same Punishment, bagg'd up
Five thousand Talents of Silver, and raised Six thousand Mercenary Soldiers,
and so left Asia and sailed for Attica. But when he perceived none were forward
to come in to him, he left his Soldiers at Tenarus in Laconia, and taking part
of the Money with him fled to the Athenians for Protection: But being demanded
to be be delivered up by Letters from Antipater and Olympias, (having first
distributed large Rewards amongst the Orators that had pleaded for him, and
managed his concern with the Athenians) he withdrew himself and fled to his
Soldiers at Tenarus. Thence he sailed to Creet, and there was Murdered by
Thimbro, one of his Friends.

The Athenians likewise (examining the matter concerning the Money given by
Harpalus) condemned Demosthenes, and several other Orators, for being corrupted
by him with Bribes.

About this time, Alexander, at the Celebration of the Olympic Games, caused
public Proclamation to be made by an Herald, That all Exiles (except Robbers
of Temples and Murderers) should return to their several Countries: And he
himself picked out Ten thousand of the Oldest Soldiers in his Army, and
discharged them from further Service; and being informed that many of them were
in debt, he paid the whole in one Day, to the value of no less then Ten
thousand Talents. The rest of the Macedonians carrying themselves with great
Malepartness toward him, and in a General Assembly with Bawling and Noise
contradicting him, he was so enraged and sharp in his returns upon them, that
they were all put into a great Fright; and in that Rage was so daring, that he
leaped down from the Tribunal, and seized upon some of the Ring leaders of the
Mutiny with his own hands, and delivered them to the Our Sheriffs.
Lictors to be Executed. At length, when he saw that the Disorders and Mutiny
still increased, he made such of the Persians Officers as he thought fit, and
preferred them to the chiefest Commands. Upon which, the Macedonians
recollected themselves, and had much ado to regain Alexander's favor, though
they addressed themselves to him both with Petitions and Tears.

CHAP. XI.
Alexander mixes Twenty thousand Persian Darters with his Army. Marches from
Susa. Bagistames breeds abundance of Horses. Hephestion dies at Ecbatane. The
Lamian War. He invades the Cosseans. Marches toward Babylon. The Caldean
Astrologers dissuade him from coming thither. He enters Babylon.

Afterward when Anticles was chief Magistrate of Athens, and Lucius Cornelius
and Olym. 113. 3. Ant. Chapter 324. An. M. 3624
Quintius Publius were Consuls at Rome, Alexander supplied the Room of those he
had discharged with Persians, and chose a Thousand of them to be Squires of the
Body, conceiving he might altogether as safely trust them as the Macedonians.

About this time Peucestes came with Twenty thousand Persian Darters and
Slingers, these Alexander intermixed amongst his other Soldiers, by which means
the whole Army was brought into that due Constitution, as that they were
readily obedient to his Command. There were some of the Macedonians that had
Sons by the Captives, whom upon diligent Enquiry he found to be Ten thousand,
and appointed them Masters to instruct them in all sorts of Learning, and
allowed sufficient Stipends for their Liberal Education.

Then he Rendevouz'd his Army, and marched away from Susa, and passing the
River Marches from Susa.
Tigris, came to the Villages called Carrae, and there encamped. Thence in Four
Days March he passed through Sitta, and came to Sambea. Here he rested Seven
Days, and refreshed his Army. Thence in Three Days he marched to the Towns
called Celonae: In which Place the Posterity of the Boeotians settled
themselves in the time of Xerxes his Expedition, and there remain unto this
Day, having not altogether forgot the Laws of their Country: For they use a
double Language, one learnt from the Natural Inhabitants, and in the other they
preserve much of the Greek Tongue; and observe some of their Laws and Customs.
Thence, when it grew toward Evening, he decamped, and turned aside and marched
to Bagistames to view the Country. This Country abounds in all Ant. Chapter 324.
manner of Fruit Trees, and whatever else conduces either to the Profit or
Pleasure of Mankind; so as that it seems to be a Place of Delight both for Gods
and Men. Afterward he came into a Country that breeds and pastures an
innumerable Company of Horses; for they say, That there had been here an
Hundred and sixty thousand Horses that ran at Pasture up and down in the
Country; but at the coming of Alexander there were only Sixty thousand. He
encamped herefor the space of Thirty Days: Thence in seven Encampments he came
to Echatana in Media. This City is About 30 Mile. Hephestion dies. Aelian. Var.
Hist. l. 7. c. 8.
Two hundred and Ecbatana.
fifty Furlongs in compass, and is the Metropolis of all Media, where abundance
of Treasure was laid up. Here he staid some time, and refreshed his Army, and
spent his time in Feasting, Drinking, and Stage Plays; at which time Hephestion
(one that he loved above all others) fell sick of a Surfeit, and died: Whose
death the King bore very grievously, and committed his Body to Perdiccas to be
carried to Babylon, because he intended to bury him with great Pomp and State.

While these things were acting in Asia, Greece was full of Tumults and
Seditions, whence broke out the War called the Lamian War, upon this occasion:
After the King's Order The Lamian War.
to the Lords Lieutenants of the Provinces to disband all Mercenary Soldiers,
and the execution of those Commands, many Foreiguers that were cashiered, went
straggling over all Asia, and for want of Subsistence, robbed and spoiled the
Country till they all came into one Body, at Tenarus in Laconia: So likewise
all the Governors and Commanders of the Persians that were left, got together
what Men and Money they could, and came all to Tenarus, and there joined their
Forces together: There they created Leostenes an Athenian Ant. Chapter 324.
(a brave Spirited Man) General of the Army; who then called a Council of War;
and after Consultation had concerning the Management of the War, disposed of
Fifty Talents to pay the Mercenaries, and provided Arms sufficient for the
present occasion. He sent likewise Ambassadors to the Aetolians (who were
disaffected to the King) to join with them in Arms. And thus Leostenes was
altogether taken up in necessary Preparations for a War, of the greatness of
which, he had then a clear and evident Prospect.

Alexander now marched against the Cosseans, who refused to submit to his
Government. This People are a very Warlike Nation, and inhabit the hilly and
mountainous Parts of The Cosseans invaded.
Media; and therefore confiding in their own Valor, and the Fastnesses of
their Coun-Country, never would be brought of admit to any foreign Prince to
reign over them; and were never subdued, during all the time of the Persian
Empire. And at that time they were so very high, that they slighted the Valor
of the Macedonians.

The King first gained the Passes, and then wasted a great part of the Country
of Cosea; and getting the better in every Engagement, killed many of the
Barbarians, and took many more Prisoners. At length, the Cosseans being worsted
and beaten in every place, and greatly concerned at the multitude of the
Captives, were forced to redeem their Country by the loss of their own Liberty;
and so giving up themselves to the Will of the Conqueror, they obtained Peace,
upon condition they should be Loyal and Obedient for the time to come. Thus
Alexander conquered this Nation in the space of forty Days; and after he
hadbuilt some Cities atthe most difficult Passes in the Country, he marched
away.

Socicles was now Archon at Athens, and Cornelius Lentulus and Quintus Publius.
Popilius Roman Consuls, when Alexander, after the Conquest of the Cosseans,
marched thence toward Babylon: Olymp. 113. 4. Ant. Chapter 233. An. M. 3625.
He always rested a while between every Decampment; and to ease his Army, moved
very slowly. When he was about Three hundred Furlongs from Babylon, the Caldean
Priests. Marches toward Babylon. Caldean Astrologers.
Caldeans (as they are called) who were famous for Astrology, and used to
prognosticate future Events by the Observation of the Stars (and by that means
knew that the King would die presently after he entered into Babylon) picked
out some of the most ancient and expert of those of their Profession, and
ordered them to signify the Danger to the King, and with all the Arguments
they could use to dissuade him from entering into the City; and to let him know
that he might avoid the Danger, if he would rebuild the Sepulcher of Belus,
which the Persians had destroyed, and alter his Purpose, and pass by the City.

Belephentes was the leading Man of the Caldeans that were sent away; but he
was afraid to address himself to the King, and therefore privately imparted all
to Nearchus (one of the King's familiar Friends) and desired him that with all
speed he would acquaint the King with the whole Business. Alexander was much
concerned when Nearchus told him what the Caldeans had prognosticated; and more
and more considering and pondering in his Thoughts the Skill and Reputation of
the Man, was in no small Consternation. At length he sent away many of his
Friends to the City, but he himself turned aside another way, and passed by
Babylon; and encamping Two hundred Furlongs distant from the place, he there
rested. At this all were in admiration; whereupon many Philosophers came to
him, Ant. Chapter 323
as well those that were Followers of Anaxagoras as other Grecians. When they
came to understand the cause of his Fear, they earnestly opposed what was said,
with many Philosophical Arguments; by which he was so convinced and changed,
that he contemned all sorts of Divination whatsoever, and especially that of
the Caldeans, that was every where so famous. Therefore now, as if his Spirit
before wounded had been cured by the Arguments of Philosophers, he entered
Babylon with his Army, where (as before) the Soldiers were kindly entertained
by the Citizens; and the Plenty of Provision was such, that all Enters Babylon.
gave up themselves to Ease and Voluptuousness. And these were the things acted
this Year.

CHAP. XII.
Ambassadors come to Alexander from all Parts. He buries Hephestion with great
State. The Prodigies before Alexander's Death. His Death. Darius's Mother
starves her self.

AGesias was now Chief Magistrate of Athens, and Caius Poetelius and Lucius
Papirius Olymp. 114. 1. Ant. Chapter 322. An. M. 3625. Ambassadors com^ to
Alexander from all parts. The African ^^^ar at far as Cadi^.
Consuls at Rome, when the Hundred and fourteenth Olympiad was celebrated, in
which Micinas of Rhodes was Victor. At this time Ambassadors came to Alexander
almost from all Parts of the World; some to congratulate his Victories; others
to tender him Crowns; others to make Leagues and Alliances with him; and many
brought him very Rich and Noble Presents. And some there were that came to
clear themselves from false Accusations: For besides those sent from the
Cities, States, and Princes of Asia, many Ambassadors addressed themselves to the
King from Europe and Africa. Out of Africa the Carthaginians and the
Phoenicians of Lybia, and all bordering upon the Sea Coasts as far as
Hercules-Pillars. Out of Europe, the Grecian Cities: The Macedonians: The
Illyrians; many inhabiting Adria: The Thracians; and the Galatians, a People
that then first began to be known to the Grecians. These all sent their
Ambassadors; of whom the King having a Catalogue in writing, he appointed in
what Order they should be severally admitted to their Audience. And in the
first place those were introduced that came about Matters of Religion; then
those who brought Presents; next, they that were at variance with the People
bordering upon them: Then those were admitted, in the fourth place, who came to
treat upon Concerns relating to their own Country: And lastly, those whose
Instructions were to oppose the Restoration of the Exiles. And among the
Religious, he first The Banditti, or Oat-Laws.
heard them of Elis; after them the Hammonians, Delphians, and Corinthians; the
Epidaurians likewise, and others; giving to them the Pre-eminence out of
Reverence and Veneration to the Temples. He made it his great Business to
return such grateful Answers to all the Ambassadors, as that he might gain the
Good Will and Affection of every one of them.

When all this was over, he applied himself to the celebrating the Funerals of
Hephestion; Alexander prepares to bury Hephestion.
and contrived (all that possibly he could) so far to grace it with Funeral
Pomp, as that it should not only exceed all that were before it, but likewise
that it should never be exceeded by any that was to come: For he most dearly
loved him (as much as the dearest Friends that we have heard of ever loved one
another) when he was alive, and honored him beyond compare when he was dead.
He honored him more than any of his Friends Ant. Chapter 322.
while he lived, although Craterus seemed to vie with him for Alexander's
Affection: For when one of the Servants said, that Craterus loved Alexander as
well as Hephestion did; Alexander answered, That Craterus was the Or, the King
was loved by Craterus, and Alexander by Hephestion.
King's Friend, and Hephestion Alexander's. And at that time, when the Mother
of Darius (through a mistake upon the first view of the King) prostrated her
self at the Feet of Hephestion, and coming to discern her Error, was much out
of Countenance: Be not troubled, Mother (says Alexander) for even he is another
Alexander. To conclude, Hephestion had such Interest in Alexander, and such
free access and liberty of Converse, that when Olympias (who envied him)
accused him and threatened him by her Letters, he writ to her back again with
severe Checks; and added these Expressions: Forbear your Slanders against me,
and bridle your Anger, and surcease your Threats: But if you will not, I value
them not of a pin; for you are not ignorant that Alexander must be Judge of all.

The King therefore taken up with the Preparations for the Funeral, commanded
the Hephestion's Funeral. Athenaeus, lib 10. c. 11.
neighboring Cities to assist as much as possibly they could toward its Pomp
and Splendour; and commanded all the People of Asia, that the Fire which the
Persians call the Holy Fire should be put out, till the Exequies of this
Funeral were fully finished, as was used to be done in the Funerals of the
King's of Persia; which was taken to be an ill Omen to the King himself, and
that the Gods did thereby portend his Death. There were likewise Ant. Chapter 322.
other Prodigies happened that did clearly point out that Alexander's Life was
near at an end; which we shall presently give an account of, when we have
finished our Relation of the Funeral. In order to this Funeral, all his Chief
Commanders and Noblemen (in compliance to the King's Pleasure) made Medals of
Hephestion graven in Ivory, and cast in Gold and other rich Metals. Alexander
himself called together a great number of the most exquisit Workmen that could
be had, and brake down the Wall of Babylon ten Furlongs in length, and took
away the Brick of it; and then levelling the place where the Funeral Pile was
to be raised, built thereon a Foursquare Pile, each Square taking a Furlong in
length: The Platform he divided into Thirty Apartments, and covered the Rooss
with the Trunks of Palm Trees. The whole Structure represented a Quadrangle:
Afterward he beautified it round with curious Adornments: The lower part was
filled up with Two hundred and forty Prowes of Galleys of five Tire of Oars
burnished with Gold; upon whose Rafters stood two Darters, one on each side the
Beaks, of four Cubits high, kneeling upon one Knee; and Statues of Men in Arms
five Cubits high: All the Divisions and open Parts were veiled with Hangings of
Purple. That part next above this was set with Torches, of fifteen Cubits high,
in the middle part of every one of which (where they were used to be held) were
placed Crowns of Gold; at the top whence the Flame ascended, were fixed Eagles
with their Wings displayed, and their Heads stooping downwards. At the bottom
of the Torches were Serpents, facing and looking up at the Eagles. In the third
Range were exposed all sorts of wild Beasts hunted: In the fourth Centaurs all
in Gold combating one with another: The fifth presented alternately to the view
Lions and Bulls in massy Gold. In that part above these were placed the Arms
both of the Macedonians and Barbarians; the one signifying the Victories over
the Conquered Nations, and the other the Valor of the Conqueror. In the
highest and last part of all, stood Sirenes, contrived hollow, wherein secretly
were placed those who sang the Mourning Song to the Dead. The height of the
whole Structure mounted up above a hundred and thirty Cubits. To conclude, both
Commanders and Common Soldiers; Ambassadors and the natural Inhabitants, so
strove to outvy one another in contributing to this stately Funeral, that the
Charge and Cost amounted to above Twelve thousand Talents. And to grace it
more, and make it more splendid, he con^err'd several other Honors upon these
Exequies. At length he commanded all to sacrifice to him as a Tutelar God: For
it happened that Philip, one of his Nobility, at that time returned from the
Temple of Haminon, and brought word from the Oracle there, That Hephestion
might be sacrificed unto as a Demi-God: Whereat Alexander was wonderfully glad,
hearing that the Oracle it self was an Approver of his Opinion; and thereupon
he himself was the first that offered, sacrificing Ten thousand Beasts of all
kinds, and making a magnificent Feast Ant. Chapter 322.
for all the Multitude.

When all the Solemnity was over, Alexander gave up himself to Ease and a
Revelling Course of Life: And now when he seemed to be at the Height of
Worldly Greatness and Prosperity; that Time and Space of Life which he might
have run through by the Course of Nature, was cut short by the Determination of
Fate; and God himself, by many Signs and Prodigies shown in several Places,
foreshew'd his Death. For when he Prodigies before Alexander's Death.
was anointing himself, and his Royal Robes and Crown that while laid upon the
Throne, the Fetters of one of the Natural Inhabitants, that was then in Chains,
fell off, and unloos'd of their own accord, and the Person not being discerned
by any of the Watch, passed through the Court-Gates without any Opposition, and
made straight to the Throne, and put on the Royal Robes and Crown upon his
Head, and sat upon the Throne without any disturbance. Which Fact being noised
abroad, the King was amazed at the strangeness of the Thing, and went to the
place, and without any Rebuke, calmly asked the Man, Who he was, and who
advised him to do so? Who plainly and simply answered, He knew nothing at all.
This strange Accident was referred to the Consideration of the Augurs; by whose
Advice the poor Wretch was put to death, that the Evil portended (if any were)
might fall upon his own Head.

The King having now got his Robes again, sacrificed to the Gods his
Protectors: But however he continued much disturbed and perplexed in his Mind;
and then began to reflect upon what the Caldeans had foretold; and fretted
against those Philosophers that persuaded him to enter into Babylon; but
admired the Art and profound Wisdom of the Ant. Chapter 322.
Caldeans. To conclude, he cursed those, who by subtle Arguments, had disputed
against the Necessity of Fate.

Not long after, God showed another Prodigy concerning the Change of the
Kingdom: The King had a desire to see the This he had newly made.
Haven at Babylon; and being come there, they went on board with some of his
Nobles that attended him; and while they were sailing, the King's Ship was
separated from the rest, and tossed to and fro for several Days together, so as
that he wholly despaired of his Life; and being at length carried through a
narrow Creek, where Bushes and Trees grew thick upon both sides, his Turbant or
Diadem, by one of the Boughs was plucked off from his Head, and hurled into the
Water; which one of the Mariners spying, swam to it; and for the better
securing of it, clapped it upon his own Head, and swam back to the Ship. After he
had wandered up and down three Days and three Nights, he returned at length
safe with his Diadem to his Friends, and again consulted the Soothsayers
concerning this Prodigy; who advised him immediately, with all diligence, to
offer splendid Sacrifices to the Gods.

But at the time of these Sacrifices, he was invited by one Medius a
Thessalian, one of his Friends, to a Banquet; where when he was in his Cups,
and even drunk with Wine, he quaft off the Great Bowl called Hercules his Cup:
Whereupon, as if he had been struck with a Thunderbolt, he fetched a deep
Sigh, and was then presently led out by his Ant. Chapter 322.
Nobles, and so left the place. Those who had him in their Charge forthwith
laid him upon his Bed, and there diligently attended him. His Distemper
increasing, his Physicians were called in; but they were not able to administer
any thing for his Relief.

At length, his Sickness was so violent, and his Pains so great, that he
himself despaired of Life, and in that Condition drew off his Ring from his
Finger, and delivered it to Perdiccas. His Commanders then asked him, To whom,
Sir, do you leave the Kingdom? He answered, To the most Deserving. And when he
uttered his last Words, he told them, That the Chiefest of his Friends and
Commanders would solemnize his Funeral, when he was gone, with Blood and
Contention. And thus died Alexander, when he had reigned Twelve Years and Seven
Months, having performed such Mighty Acts, as no King ever did before him,
Alexander's Death.
nor any since to this day.

But because some Writers differ as to the Cause and Manner of his Death,
affirming that he was poisoned by a deadly Potion given him; it is necessary to
relate what they have reported concerning this matter. They say that Antipater,
whom Alexander had made his Viceroy in Europe, fell out with Olympias the
King's Mother, of which at first no great matter was made, because the King
would not hear any of the Accusations against him. But afterward the Quarrels
and Heart-burnings growing higher and higher, the King, out of his Piety and
Awe to the Gods, conceived it his Duty to gratify his Mother; whereupon he
gave many apparent Signs and Tokens of the Alienation of his Affections from
Antipater. And as further Fuel to the Flame, the putting to death Parmenio and
Philotas, Ant. Chapter 322.
did not a little terrify and afright the Nobility. And therefore it is said he
ordered his Son, who was Alexander's Cupbearer, to put Poison into his Wine:
But because he was a Man of great Power in Europe after the Death of Alexander,
and that Cassander his Son succeeded him in the Kingdom, many Historians durst
not say any thing in their Writings of Poison. However, it is very apparent that
Cassander was a great Enemy to the Concerns of Alexander: For he suffered the
Body of Olympias, after she was murdered, to lie with Disdain unbury'd; and he
made it his great Business to re-edifie Thebes, which Alexander had razed to
the Ground.

When the King was dead, Sisigambris, the Mother of Darius, with abundance of
Tears bewailed the Death of Alexander, and her own desolate Condition upon that
account; insomuch, as to the last Minute, she would neither eat, nor see the
Light; and so the Fifth Day after died of Hunger in extreme Sorrow, but with as
much Glory and Reputation.

Having now brought down our History to the Death of Alexander, as we designed
in the Beginning of this, we shall proceed to give an Account of the Acts of
his Successors in the following Books.

BOOK XVIII.
PYthagoras the Samian, and some others of the ancient Natural Philosophers,
PREFACE.
held that the Souls of Men were immortal; and that to foretell future Events
at the very point of Death, when the Soul is even parting with the Body, is the
Effect and Consequent of this Truth. To which Homer witnesses, when he brings
in Hector, when he was even breathing his last, telling Achilles that he should
die within a very short time afterward. The same is attested of many others of
later Times, and confirmed especially by the Death of Alexander the Macedonian,
who dying at Babylon, and being asked by his Commanders and those about him, at
the time he was giving up his last Breath, Who should succeed him? he answered
The most Worthy Or, The Best.
; For I foresee, says he, that great and grievous Quarrels amongst my Friends,
will be the Sacrifices to me after my Funeral. Which hapend accordingly; for
the Chiefest of his Commanders fell together by the Ears about the
Principality; and great Wars, after the Death of Alexander, broke forth amongst
them: Whose Actions are contained in this Book; which will clearly evidence, to
the studious Reader, the Truth of what is now said:

The former comprehended all the things done by Alexander, to the time of his
Death. This present Book, relating the Actions of those who succeeded, ends
with the Year next before the Reign of Agathocles, which makes an History of
Seven Years.

CHAP. I.
Quarrels about a Successor to Alexander. Arideus made King. The Provinces
divided amongst the Chief Commanders. Matters contained in Alexander's
Note-Books. Meleager executed by Perdiccas. The Grecians revolt. A Description
of Asia. Pithon sent against the revolting Grecians, who were all cut off. The
Lamian War; The cause of it. Alexander's Epistle to the Exiles. Leosthenes the
Athenian General. Lamia besieged. Leosthenes killed: Antiphilus placed in his
room.

WHen Cephisodorus was Chief Magistrate of Athens, the Romans created Olymp.
114. 2. Ant. Chapter 321.
Lucius Furius and Decius Jovius Consuls: About which time, Alexander being now
dead without Issue, and so the Government without a Head, there arose great
Dissentions and Differences about the Empire. For the The Macedonian Phalanx.
Foot were for setting up of Arideus the Son of Philip, by one Philima of
Larissa a Strumpet. Justin. l. 13. c. 2. Plut.
Arideus the Son of Philip, a weak-spirited Man, laboring under many natural
Infirmities: But the Chiefest of the Nobility and Esquires of the Body met
together in Council; and being joined with the Squadron of Horse called the
Social, they resolved to try it out with the Macedonian Phalanx.

Therefore they sent the most eminent Commanders (among whom Meleager was the
Chief, to the Foot, to require them to observe Commands. But Meleager (who was
the most Eminent Man of the Phalanx) as soon as he came to the Battalion which
was of the greatest Account and Esteem in the Army, he said nothing at all of
the Business for which they were sent; but, on the contrary, highly commended
them for their Choice, and stirred them up against the Opposers. Whereupon the
Macedonians created Meleager their Captain, and with their Arms made out
against the contrary Party. Ant. Chapter 321.
Those of the King's Lifeguard and Esquires of the Body, marched likewise out
of Babylon in order to fight; but the most Interested and Popular Men amongst
them, endeavored all they could to make Peace on both sides. Upon which it was
presently agreed, Arideus made King.
that Arideus the Son of Philip should be made King, and called Philip, and
that Perdiccas, to whom the late King, when he was upon the point of death,
delivered his Ring, should be invested with the Lord Protecter.
Executive Power of the Kingdom; and ordered that the Esquires of the Body and
the Chief Commanders should govern the Provinces, and all be observant to the
Commands of the King and Perdiccas.

Arideus being thus made King, he called together a General Council of the
chief Commanders; The Provinces divided.
and to Ptolomeus Lagus he committed the Government of Egypt; to Laomedon of
Mitylene, Syria; to Philotas, Cilicia; to Python, Media; to Eumenes, Cappadocia
and Paphlagonia, and the bordering Countries which were never entered by
Alexander all the time of his Wars with Darius, through want of convenient
Opportunity. To Antigonus he assigned the Command of Lycia, and the greater
Phrygia; to Cassander, Caria; to Meleager for Menander, Ush. Ann 290 Arrian.
lib. 3. p. 56.
Meleager, Lydia; to Leonatus, Phrygia all along the Coast of the Hellespont:
And in this manner were the Provinces divided. In Europe, Thrace, with the
Nations bordering upon the Sea of Pontus, were committed to Lysimachus; and
Macedonia with those bordering upon it to Antipater: As for the rest of the
Asian Provinces, it was thought most advisable not to alter but to leave them
under the Government of the former Lord Lieutenants. The Province next
adjoining was entrusted with Taxilis, and the Kings bordering upon him: But the
Province adjoining to Mount Caucasus (called Parapamisus) was assigned to
Oxiertes, Ant. Chapter 321.
King of the Bactrians, whose Daughter Rhoxana, Alexander had married.
Arachesia and Gedrosia to Sybirtius: Ariana and Drangina to Stasanoris of
Solos: Bactriana and Sardiana for Sogdiana.
Sardiana were allotted to Philip; Parthia and Hyrcania to Phrataphernes;
Persia to Peucestes; Carmania to Tlepolemus; Media to Atrapas. The Province of
Babylon to Archon; and Mesopotamia to Arcesilaus. Seleucus he created General
of the brave Brigade of the Social Horse. Hephestion was the first Commander of
that Brigade, then Perdiccas, and the third was this Seleucus. He ordered that
Taxiles and Porus should enjoy the absolute Authority within their own
Kingdoms, as Alexander himself had before appointed. The care of the The laying
of the Body to sleep at rest.
Funeral, and of preparing a Chariot to convey the King's Body to Hammon, was
committed to Arideus.

But as for Craterus, the most Noble of Alexander's Captains, he was some time
before sent by Alexander with Ten thousand of the old Soldiers that were
discharged from further Service in the Persian War, into Cilicia, to put in
Execution some Instructions in writing given him by the King; which after the
King's Death, his Successors determined should be no further proceeded in: For
Perdiccas finding in the King's Commentaries not only the vast Sums of Money
intended to be expended in the Funeral of Hephestion, but likewise many other
things of extraordinary Cost and Charge designed by the King, he judged it far
more advisable to let them alone: But lest he should seem to take too much upon
him, Ant. Chapter 321.
and by his private Judgment to detract from Alexander's Wisdom and Discretion,
he referred all these Matters to the determination of a General Council of the
Macedonians. The Chief and the most considerable Heads of the King's purposes
contained in his Commentaries.
Books of Remembrance were these, That a Thousand long Ships, larger than those
of three Tire of Oars, should be built in Phaenicia, Syria, Cilicia, and
Cyprus, in order to an Invasion Things set down in Alexander's Commentaries.
upon the Carthaginians, and others inhabiting the Sea Coasts of Africa and
Spain, with all Islands adjoining as far as Sicily. 2. That a Plain and Easy
way should be made straight along through the Sea Coasts of Africa to Hercules
his Pillars. 3. That Six magnificent Temples should be built, and that Fifteen
hundred Talents should be expended in the Cost of each of them. 4. That
Arsenals and Ports should be made in Places convenient and fit for the
Reception of so great a Navy. 5. That the new Cities should be planted with
Colonies, and that People should be transplanted out of Asia into Europe, and
others out of Europe into Asia, to the end, that by Intermarriages and mutual
Affinities he might establish Peace and Concord between the two main Continents
of the World.

Some of the Temples beforementioned were to be built in Delos, Delphos, and
Dodona; Some in Macedonia, as the Temple of Jupiter in Dio; Diana's Temple in
Amphipolis; another to Minerva in Corsica. Ant. Chapter 321.
Cyrnus: To which Goddess he designed likewise to build a Temple in Ilium,
inferior to none, for Splendour and Magnificence. Lastly, To adorn his Father
Philip's Sepulcher, he designed to erect a Monument equal to the biggest
Pyramid in Egypt, seven of which were by some accounted the most stately and
greatest Works in the World.

These things being laid before them, the Macedonians, though they highly
commended and approved of Alexander's designs, yet because they seemed things
beyond all measure impracticable, they decreed all to be laid aside. Then
Perdiccas caused those Soldiers that were Turbulent, and exceeding Inveterate
against him, to the number of Thirty, to be put to Death: Afterward, out of a
private Grudge he executed Meleager, (who betrayed Meleager executed.
his Embassy, and carried on the Mutiny) as one that sought to undermine him.

About this time the Grecians in the upper Provinces revolted, and got together
a great The Grecians revolt.
Army: Against whom he sent Pithon one of the chiefest Commanders. But we
conceive it much conducing to the better Understanding of the History of things
that were afterward done, if in the first Place we declare the Cause of the
Revolt, and the Situation of Asia, and the Nature and Extent of the Provinces:
For by this means laying before the Eyes of the Readers a Map of the Countries,
and the Distances of Places one from another, the Relation will be more Plain
and Easy.

From Taurus therefore in Cilicia, to Caucasus and the Eastern Ocean, a ridge
of Mountains A Description of Asia.
stretch forth in a straight and continued Line throughout all Asia: As
distinguished by several Peaks and Risings of the Hills from them; Mount Taurus
has gained particular Names. By this means, Asia being divided into two parts,
one rises toward the North, Ant. Chapter 321.
the other descends toward the South; and according to these several Climates
the Rivers run contrary ways; some take their Course into the Caspian Sea,
others into the Euxine, and some into the Northern Ocean. These Rivers lying
thus opposite one to another, part empty themselves into the Indian Sea, and
another Part into the Ocean adjoining to this Continent; some likewise fall
into the Red Sea. In this manner likewise are the Provinces divided. For some
lie toward the North, and others bend to the South. The first toward the
North borders upon the River Tanais, that is to say, Sogdiana with Bactria,
Caspian Sea.
and next to them Area and Parthea. This Province surrounds the Or rather
adjoins to the Hyrcanian Sea.
Hyrcanian Sea, Not running into other Seas.
which lies within its Limits and Bounds. The next is Media, called by many
Names from the Places included in it, and is the greatest of all the Provinces.
Then follows Armenia, Lycaonia, and Cappadocia, all of a very sharp and cold
Air. Bordering upon these in a direct Line are Phrygia, both the Greater, and
that lying to the Hellespont: In an oblique Line lie Lydia and Caria. Pisidia
stretches sorth it self in length; and in a Parrallel Line equal with Phrygia
on the right Hand; and to the side of Pisidia lies Lycia. The Greek Cities are
situated upon the Sea Coasts of these Provinces; whose Names it is Ant. Chapter 321.
not necessary for our purpose here to recite.

Thus situated (as we have related) are the Northern Provinces. As to the
Southern, the first is India, under Mount Caucosus, a very large and (...).
populous Kingdom; for it is inhabited by many Indian Nations; the greatest of
which is that of the Gandarides, against whom Alexander made no attempt by
reason of the Multitude of their Elephants. This Territory is divided from the
further India, by the greatest River in those parts, being About four Miles.
thirty Furlongs broad. The rest of India (conquered by Alexander) a rich and
fruitful Country, and watered with many Rivers, borders upon this of the
Gandarides: Within this Part, besides many other Kingdoms, were the Dominions
of Porus and Taxilis. The River Indus (from which the Country takes its Name)
runs through it. Separated from the Province of India next to it was Arachosia,
Gedrosia, and Carmania, and with these was joined Persia, wherein are situated
the Provinces of Susiana and Sittacina. Next follows the Province of Babylon,
extending it self as far as to Arabia the Desert. On the other side, where
begins the At the Foot of Mount Taurus Southward.
Descent, you have Mesopotamia signifies in the Greek Tongue a Place between
two Rivers.
Mesopotamia lying between two Rivers, Euphrates and Tigris, from whence it had
its Name.

The higher Syria, and the Countries upon the The Mediterranean Sea.
Sea Coasts adjoining to it, as Cilicia, Pamphilia, Or Caelo Syria. Ant. Chapter
321.
Syria Cava, within which is Phaenicia, lie close to the Province of Babylon.
Upon the Borders of Syria Cava, and the Desert next adjoining to it, (through
which runs the River Nile, and so divides between Syria and Egypt) appears
Egypt it self, the Best and Richest of all the Provinces. All these Countries
are scorching hot; for the Southern Climate is contrary in its nature to the
Northern. These Provinces (conquered by Alexander) which we have thus
described, were divided amongst the Chiefest of his Commanders.

But the Grecians that inhabited the Upper Provinces, who (through fear while
Alexander was alive) endured their being cast forth into the utmost Corner of
the Kingdom; Grecians revolt.
now when he was dead, being touched with a Desire to return into their own
Country, Revolted, and to that end unanimously chose Philo, an Enean born, to
be their Captain, and had got together a considerable Army of above Twenty
thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, all old expert Soldiers, and Brave and
Valiant Men.

Intelligence being brought of this Revolt, Perdiccas chose by lot out of the
Macedonian Squadrons, Three thousand Foot and Eight hundred Horse. Pitho, one
of the Squires of the Body to Alexander, a Man of a high Spirit, and a skiiful
Commander, was chose General by the Army, and to him Perdiccas delivered the
Soldiers chosen, as is before declared, and Letters likewise to the
Lord-Lieutenants, whereby they were ordered to furnish him with Ten thousand
Foot and Eight thousand Horse, against the Rebels. Pitho being a Man of am
ambitious Spirit, was very ready to undertake this Expedition: For he purposed
to gain by all fair means possible these revolting Greeks, and by joining their
Forces to his own to set up for himself, and reduce all those upper Provinces
under his Ant. Chapter 321.
own Subjection. But Perdiccas smelling out his Design, gave him express Order,
That having overcome those Rebels he should put them all to the Sword, and
divide the Spoil amongst the Soldiers. Pithon therefore marched away with these
Men thus delivered, and when he had received those that were to join him from
the Lord Lieutenants, he made toward the Rebels with the whole Army. And
having by a certain Enean corrupted Lipodorus, who commanded a Brigade of Three
thousand Men among the Rebels, he routed them all. For in the height of the
Engagement when the Victory was doubtful, the Traitor withdrew from the rest of
his fellow Soldiers, and with his Three thousand Men marched up to the top of a
rising Ground, whereupon the rest (thinking that he had fled) broke all their
Ranks, and took to their Heels. Pithon being thus Victor, sent a Trumpet to the
Rebels, ordering them to lay down their Arms, and upon Capitulation licensed
them to repair every Man to his own home. It was no small joy to Pithon to see
things brought to such a pass as suited directly to his designs; for he had now
all confirmed by Oath, and the Grecians intermixed among the Macedonians. But
the Macedonians remembering the Orders Perdiccas had given, making nothing of
their Oaths, broke Faith with the Grecians. For on a sudden, they fell
unexpectedly upon them, and put every Man of The Revolters all cut off.
them to the Sword, and seized upon all they had: And so Pithon being defeated
in his design, returned with the Macedonians to Perdiccas. And this was the
state of Affairs in Asia at that time.

In the mean time, in Europe the Rhodians cast out the Garrison of the
Macedonians, and freed their City. And the Athenians began a War against
Antipater, which was called the The Lamian War. Ant. Chapter 321.
Lamian War. It Is in the first place necessary to declare the Causes of this
War, that the Progress of it may be the better understood.

Alexander, a little before his Death, had ordered all the Exiles and Out-lawed
Persons of the Greek Cities to be recalled, as well to advance his own Honor
and Esteem, as to gain the Hearts of many in every City by his Clemency, who
might stand up for his Interest against the Innovations and Defections of the
Grecians. At the approach therefore of the time of Celebrating the Olympiads,
he sent away Nicanor, a Native of the City Stagira, with a Letter concerning
the Restitution of the Bandities of Greece, and commanded it to be proclaimed
by the Common Crier, who declared him that was Victor, who executed the
Command, and read the Letter in these Words, --

King Alexander to the Banditties of the Grecian Cities.
WE were not the Cause of your Banishment, but will be of the Return of you all
Alexander's Epistle.
into your own Country, excepting such as are Banished for outrageous Crimes:
of which things we have written to Antipater, requiring him to proceed by
Force, against all such as shall oppose your Restitution.


When these Orders were proclaimed, the People set up a great Shout, testifying
their approbation: For those of them that were present at the Solemnity,
readily laid hold on the King's Mercy, and returned their Thanks with
Expressions of their Joy, and applauses of his Grace and Favor: For all the
Banished Men were then got together at the Olympiads, above the Number of
Twenty thousand. Many there were who approved Ant. Chapter 321.
of their Restitution as a prudent Act; but the Aeolians and Athenians were
much offended at it, for the Aeolians expected that the Oenians who were
banished out from among them, should have undergone due punishment for their
Crimes. For the King had made a great Noise with his Threats, that he would not
only punish the Children of the Oenians, but that he himself would execute
Justice upon the Authors themselves. Whereupon, the Athenians would not yield
by any means to part with Samos, which they had divided by lot. But because
they were not at present able to cope with Alexander, they judged it more
advisable to sit still, and watch till they found a convenient Opportunity,
which Fortune presently offered them: For Alexander dying in a short time
afterward, and leaving no Children to succeed him, they grew confident that
they should be able not only to regain their Liberty, but likewise the
Sovereignty of all Greece.

The vast Treasure left by Harpalus, (of which we have particularly spoken in
the preceding Book) and the Soldiers that were disbanded by the
Lord-Lieutenants of Asia, were great Supports and Encouragements for the
carrying on of this War; for there were Eight thousand of them then about
Tenarus in Peloponensus: They sent therefore privately to Leosthenes. Ant. Chapter
321.
the Athenian, wishing him that without taking notice of any Order by them, of
his own accord so to dispose of matters, as to have those Soldiers in readiness
when occasion served. Antipater likewise so contemned Leosthenes, that he was
Careless and Negligent in preparing for the War, and so gave time to the
Athenians to provide all things necessary for that Affair.

Hereupon, Leosthenes very privately Listed these Soldiers, and (beyond all
expectation) had ready a brave Army: For having been a long time in the Wars in
Asia, and often engaged in many great Battles, they were become very expert
Soldiers. These things were contrived when the Death of Alexander was not
generally known: But when a Messenger came from Babylon, who was an Eye witness
of his Death, the People of Athens declared open War, and sent part of the
Money left by Harpalus, with a great number of Arms to Leosthenes, charging him
no longer to conceal or palliate the Matrer, but to do what was most conducible
to the Service of the Commonwealth. Whereupon, having distributed the Money
among the Soldiers as he was commanded, and armed those that wanted, he went
into Aetolia, in order to carry on the War with the joint Assistance of both
Nations. The Aetolians joined very readily, and delivered to him for the
service Seven thousand Soldiers. Then he stirred up his Messengers, the
Locrians and Phocians, and other neighboring Nations, to stand up for their
Liberties, and to free Greece from the Macedonian Yoke. But in the mean time,
the Wealthy Men among the Athenians Ant. Chapter 321.
dissuaded them from the War, but the Rabble were for carrying it on with all
the Vigor imaginable: Whence it came to pass, that they who were for War, and
had nothing to live upon but their Pay, were far the greater Number: To which
sort of Men Philip was used to say, War was as Peace, and Peace as War.
Forthwith therefore, the Orators (who were in a Body together, and closed with
the Humors of the People) wrote down the Decree, That the Athenians should
take upon them the Care and Defense of the Common Liberty of Greece, and should
free all the Greek Cities from their several Garrisons; and that they should rig
out a Fleet of Forty Galleys of Three Tire of Oars, and Two hundred of Four
Tire of Oars; and that all Athenians under Forty years of Age should take up
Arms; That Three of the Tribes should keep Watch and Ward in Athens, and the
other Seven should be always ready to march abroad: Moreover, Ambassadors were
sent to all the Cities of Greece to inform them, That the People of Athens in
the first place looked upon all Greece to be the common Country of every
Grecian, and that they had heretofore repulsed the Barbarians at Sea, who
invaded them with a Design to Inslave Greece, and that now they had determined
to oppose the Macedonians for the common Good, with their Navies, Lives and
Fortunes.

The Wiser sort of the Grecians judged the Athenians more forward than prudent
in passing this Decree, and what they had designed seemed to carry an
honorable Aspect, but Ant. Chapter 321.
nothing of Profit and Advantage to the State: For that they made a stir and
bustle unseasonably, and began a War against mighty and victorious Armies when
there was no necessity for it; and though they had the repute of a prudent
People, yet they considered not the notorious Ruin and Destruction of Thebes.

However, notwithstanding the Ambassadors came to the Cities, and by their
usual florid way of address had heated and egged them on to the War, yet many
confederated in the League; some in the Names of their several Cities; and
others in the Names of whole Countries. As for the rest of the Grecians, some
sided with the Macedonians, and others stood Neuter. But all the Aetolians
generally (as is before said) entered into the Confederacy; and after them all
the Thessalians, except them of Pellena. Likewise the Oetaeans, except the
Heracleans. The Phthiotians amongst the Acheans, except the Thebans. The
Elians, except the Maleans. Then generally all the Doreans, Locrians, and
Phocians joined in the League: Also the Enians, Clyzeans, and Dolopeans. To
these joined likewise the Athamanes, Leucadians, and Molossians, under the
Command of Arypteus: But this Man played the Impostor in the Confederacy, and
afterward underhand treacherously aided the Macedonians.

A small Part likewise of the Illyrians and Thracians (out of hatred to the
Macedonians) came into the League together, with the Carystines out of Euboea;
and at length out of Ant. Chapter 321.
Peloponnesus the Argives, Sicyonians, Eleans, Messenians, and those that
Inhabited The Sea Coasts
Acta. All these before named, confederated with the Grecians.

The People of Athens also sent Auxiliaries to Leosthenes, out of the Cities
Five thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse, and Two thousand Mercenaries; who
were opposed by the Boetians in their march through Boetia, for the Reasons
following.

Alexander, when he razed Thebes, granted the Territories of the City to the
neighboring Boetians; who divided the Lands of those miserable People amongst
themselves by Lot, and thereby gained large Possessions; who understanding that
the Athenians (if they prevailed) designed to restore the Country and Lands to
the Thebans, sided with the Macedonians; and while the Boetians were Encamped
at Platea, Leosthenes came with part of his Forces into Boetia, and drawing up
the Athenians into Battalia, fell upon the Inhabitants, routed them, and set up
a Trophy, and then returned to Pylas. Here (after he had blocked up all the
Passages) he Encamped for some time, expecting the Macedonian Army.

But Antipater, who was left Viceroy of Europe by Alexander, as soon as he
heard of his Death at Babylon, and of the Divisions of the Provinces sent to
Craterus in Cilicia, to come to him with all the Force he had for his
Assistance. For he being sent away some time before into Cilicia, had ready
Thirty thousand Macedonians, who were dismissed from the Service in Asia, with
which he was returning into Macedonia. He likewise solicited Philotas Ant. Chapter
321.
(who had the Province of Phrygia near the Hellespont under his Command) to
assist him, and promised to him one of his Daughters in Marriage. For as soon
as he heard of the Insurrection of the Grecians against him, he left Sippas
with a considerable Body of Men, General in Macedonia, with Orders to raise
many more; and he himself marched out of Macedonia into Thessaly with Thirteen
thousand Foot and Six hundred Horse: (For at that time there was great scarcity
of Soldiers in Macedonia, by reason of the Recruits sent into Asia;) With these
Forces sailed along the whole Fleet near at hand, which Alexander had sent into
Macedonia with a vast Treasure out of the King's Treasuries.

The Navy consisted of an Hundred and ten Galleys of three Tire of Oars. The
Thessalians indeed at the beginning joining with Antipater, had sent to him
many brave Horses; but afterward, being brought over by the Athenians into the
contrary Interest, they turned off with their Horse to Leosthenes, and joined
with the Athenians for the recovery of the Liberty of Greece.

The Athenians therefore growing very strong by many flocking thus in to them,
the Grecians Antipater routed. Ant. Chapter 321. Lamia, a City in Thessaly.
over power'd the Macedonians and overcame them in a Battle. Antipater being
routed, not daring to abide in the Field, nor judging it safe to return into
Macedonia, fled to Lamia, where he drew in his Army into the City, repaired the
Walls, furnished himself with Arms Offensive and Defensive, and with Corn and
Provision, waiting for supplies out of Asia.

Leosthenes with all his Forces coming up close to Lamia, fortified his Camp
with a Lamia besieged.
deep Trench and Rampire: And first he drew up his Army in the face of the
City, to provoke the Macedonians to fight; But they not daring to Engage, he
daily assaulted the Walls with fresh Men succeeding one another. But the
Macedonians made a stout Defense, and many of the Grecians through their
Rashness and Imprudence were cut off: For having a strong Body of Men in the
City, and well furnished with all sorts of Weapons, and the Walls of the City
with great Expense being strong and well built, the Besieged easily repulsed
the Enemy.

Leosthenes therefore perceiving he could not gain the Town by force of Arms,
blocked it up, to hinder all supplies of Provision, supposing the Besieged
would be presently subdued by Famine, and want of Bread. To this end he raised
a Wall, and drew a deep Trench round about it, and so penned them up.
Afterward, the Aetolians (being called away upon the occasion of some Public
concerns) got leave of Leosthenes to return home, and so all of them marched
back into Aetolia.

But while Antipater with his Army was in these desperate Straights, and the
City near Ant. Chapter 321.
lost for want of Provision, Fortune on a sudden turned the Scale to the
Advantage of the Macedonians. For Antipater made a Sally upon them that were
busied in opening the Trenches; where Leosthenes coming in to their Relief,
received a Blow upon the Head with a Stone, which felled him to the Ground, and
so was carried off half dead into the Camp, and died the Third day after; and
was honorably Buried upon the account of Leosthenes killed.
the Noble Service he had performed in the War. The Athenians commanded
Hyperides to set forth his Praise in a Funeral Oration, who was esteemed the
Chiefest of the Orators at that time, both for his Eloquence, and particular
hatred of the Macedonians: For Demosthenes the most famous Orator was then
fled, being condemned as if he had received Bribes from Harpalus. Antiphilus, a
Prudent and Valiant Commander, was created General Antiphilus made the Athenian
General.
in the room of Leosthenes. And this was the State of Europe at that time.

CHAP. II.
Ptolemy gains Egypt. Leagues with Antipater. Lysimachus enters Thrace.
Leonatus comes to relieve Antipater, and is routed. The Grecians beaten at Sea.
Perdiccas conquers Ariarathes Prince of Cappadocia; Crucifies him; Delivers the
Province to Eumenes. The Grecians quite routed by Craterus and Antipater The
Athenians at length submit after all the rest but the Aetolians. The End of the
Lamian War. The War in Cyrene by Thimbro. Ophellas routs Thimbro. Cyrene gained
by Ptolemy. Larinda Sacked. The Destruction of the Isaurians by themselves.
Perdiccas affects the Kingdom of Macedon; is opposed by Antigonus. The
Aetolians blocked up by Craterus and Antipater. Antigonus discovers Perdiccas
his Design. Peace made with the Aetolians. Perdiccas marches against Ptolemy
into Egypt.

IN Asia, Ptolemy, one of them that had a share in the Division of the
Provinces, without Olymp. 114. 2. Ant. Chapter 321. Ptolemy gains Egypt.
any difficulty possessed himself of Egypt, and carried himself with great
Mildness and winning Behavior toward the People; and having a Treasure of
Eight thousand Talents, raised an Army of Mercenaries: And many out of love
flocked to him upon the account of the Goodness of his Disposition.

He entered into League with Antipater, when he was assured that Perdiccas
designed to dispossess him of Egypt.

At that time Lysmachus broke into some parts of Thrace, and found Seuthas, the
King, Lysimachus fights with Seutha in Thrace.
Encamped with Twenty thousand Foot, and Eight thousand Horse. But Lysimachus
(though he had not above Four thousand Foot, and only Two thousand Horse) was
not affrighted with the Multitude of the Enemy: And though he was so much
inferior in number, yet his Valor was such, that he entered into a hot and
sharp Engagement, and after the loss of a great number of his Men (but many
more of the Enemy's) he returned to his Camp almost Victorious. Upon which,
both Armies drew off the Field, and each made greater Preparations, in order to
decide the Controversy by the Sword.

As for Leonatus, he promised speedy Aid to Antipater and the Macedonians,
being solicited by Hecateus, who was sent to him for that purpose. Landing
therefore in Europe, as soon as he came into Macedonia, he raised a great
number of Soldiers there, and having got together an Army of above Twenty
thousand Foot, and Two thousand and Five hundred Horse, he marched through
Thessaly against the Enemy.

Hereupon, the Grecians drew off from the Of Lamia.
Siege and burnt their Tents, and sent away all their sick Men and heavy
Baggage to Melitea, a City in Phthotes. Ant. Chapter 321.
Melitea: And with the rest of the Army (ready and prepared for Battle) marched
straight away, and met Leonatus his forces before Antipater had joined him, and
their two Armies were come up together. The Grecians in the whole were Two and
twenty thousand Foot, (for the Aeolians were returned home some time before,
and many other of the Grecians were gone into their own Country) and as to
their Horse (which were above Three thousand Five hundred) they fought together
in one Body; amongst whom were Two thousand Thessalians, (Brave and Valiant
Men) upon whom they most relied for the obtaining of the Victory. The Horse on
both sides fought stoutly a long time, where the Thessalians by their
extraordinary Leonatus routed by the Grecians.
Valor at length prevailing, Leonatus, (though he fought with great Courage
and Resolution) was driven and penned up within a Morass, and over-loaden with
his Arms (after he had received many wounds) was there slain, and carried off
dead by his own Men to the Carriages. The Greeks having now gained so famous a
Victory (in which Menon the Thessalian commanded the Horse) the Macedonian
Phalanx to avoid the Horse, withdrew out of the plain and open Field, and
betook themselves to the steep and rocky Hills, and by the strength of the
Places there, defended themselves.

However, the Thessalian Horse attempted to break in upon them, but through the
Disadvantage of the Places, were not able to do any thing. The Grecians
therefore being Masters of the Field, set up a Trophy, and left off all further
pursuit. The next day, as Ant. Chapter 321.
soon as Antipater came up with his Troops, he joined himself to the broken
Army, and so all the Macedonians making one Camp, he took upon him the
Management of the whole.

But perceiving that the Thessalians were too strong for him in Horse, he
judged it most advisable to be quiet for the present, hot daring to attempt to
force his Way by the Sword. And therefore he marched off over Hills, and other
craggy Places, not easy to be pursued. Antiphilus the Grecian General (who
gained this glorious Victory over the Macedonians) continued with his Army in
Thessaly, observing the Motions of the Enemy: And this was the happy Success at
that time of the Graecians.

But because the Macedonians were Masters at Sea, the Athenians built so many
Ships The Graecians beatan at Sea at the Echinade Islands.
more as to make up their Fleet an Hundred and seventy Sail: But the Macedonian
Fleet consisted of Two hundred and forty, under the Command of Clitus their
Admiral, who engaged in two Sea Fights at the Echinade Islands with Eeton the
Athenian Admiral, and beat him in both, sinking many of his Enemies Ships.

About this time Perdiccas (having with him King Philip and the King's Army)
undertook Perdiccas enters Cappadocia.
an Expedition against Ariarathes Prince of Cappadocia, who though he submitted
not to the Empire of the Macedonians, yet Alexander being busi'd in his Wars
with Darius, passed him by, so that he enjoyed the Principality of Cappadocia a
long time without any Disturbance; and in the mean time he laid up a vast Sum
of Money out of the Public Revenues, and raised an Army both from Foreigners,
and from among his own People: And claiming the Kingdom as his own just Right,
he prepared to try it out with Perdiccas, Ant. Chapter 321.
having an Army of Thirty thousand Foot, and Fifteen thousand Horse: At length
it came to a Battle, in which Perdiccas was Victor, who killed Four thousand
upon the spot, Ariarathes routed, scourged and crucified.
and took Six thousand Prisoners, amongst whom was Ariarathes himself, whom
together with all his Kindred he first scourged, and then crucified. Then he
pardoned all the rest, and after he had settled Affairs in Cappadocia,
delivered up the Province to Eumenes of Cardia, to be governed by him as his
Share, according to the Allotment in the first Agreement. Cappadocia given to
Eumenes.


About the same time Craterus arrived in Macedonia out of Cilicia in order to
assist Antipater, Craterus assists Antipater.
and to repair the Losses of the Macedonians. He brought along with him Six
thousand Foot which Alexander had taken over with him at first into Asia, and
Four thousand of those that he had listed in the way as he marched, besides a
Thousand Persian Darters and Slingers, and Fifteen hundred Horse. As soon as he
came into Thessaly, he joined his Forces at the River Peneius to Antipater's,
yielding the chief Command of the Army to him. The whole Army, together with
those that came with Leonnatus, amounted to above Forty thousand Foot, Three
thousand Darters and Slingers, and Five thousand Horse. The Graecians at that
time encamped over against them, being much inferior in Number to the Enemy:
For many, by reason of the late Victory, slighted the Macedonians, Ant. Chapter 321.
and were returned to their several Countries to look after their own private
Affairs. For which cause, there were many left in the Camp that observed no due
Order or Discipline: They were in the whole Five and twenty thousand Foot, and
Three thousand five hundred Horse, in whom they placed great Confidence of
Victory, by reason of the Valor of the Men, and the plain Champain Country
that lay before them. At length Antipater drew out his Forces every day into
the Field to provoke the Graecians to fight; who after they had waited some
considerable time for the return of their Soldiers out of the Cities through
the urgency of their present Circumstances, were forced to venture all and
engage the Enemy.

Drawing up therefore into Battalia, and designing to decide the Matter by the
Horse, they placed them in the Van before the Foot; whereupon the Horse on both
Sides presently fell to it: And while they were thus hotly engaged, (and the
Thessalian Horse had the better of the Day,) Antipater broke in with his
Battalion upon the Foot, and made a great Slaughter among them; so that the
Graecians not being able to stand the Enemy's Shock, (who bore them down with
their Multitudes pouring in upon them,) they retreated in all have (but in good
order) to the Fastnesses and difficult Passes near at hand. And so having
gained the higher Ground by that Advantage they easily repulsed the
Macedonians. In the mean time the Grecian Horse (though they had the better)
yet perceiving that their Foot was gone, forthwith made after them. And by this
means the Horse (leaving off the Fight) were so broken and dispersed, that the
Macedonians got the Day. The Graecians routed.
There were slain of the Graecians in this Battle above Five hundred, of the
Macedonians an Hundred and thirty.

The next day Memnon and Antiphalus called a Council of War, where it was
debated, Ant. Chapter 321.
whether they should expect Aid from the Cities, and wait to see if soldiers
sufficient could be raised, and so try it out to the last; or yielding to the
Time, and bearing their present Disasters, they should send away Agents to
treat upon Terms of Peace. At length they concluded to send (...), Cryers.
Heralds to treat accordingly; who executing their Orders, Or rather those
about Antipater.
Antipater answered them, That he expected that every City should treat
severally by its own Ambassadors; and that he would not upon any Terms make a
General Peace. But the Graecians would not admit of any Treaty with the several
Cities apart, therefore Antipater and Craterus besieged the Cities of Thessaly,
and took them by Storm, the Graecians not being able to relieve them. This so
terrified all the rest, that they transacted the Affairs of their several
Cities by their own Ambassadors; toward whom he carried himself with all
Demonstrations of Courtesy and gaining Behavior, and made Peace with every one
of them. Every City therefore being desirous to provide for its own safety, all
The Cities make Peace, except the Aetolians and Athenians.
of them by that means obtained Peace. But the Aetolians and Athenians, (the
implacable Enemies of the Macedonians,) though they were thus deserted by their
Confederates, consulted with their Commanders about carrying on of the War. But
Antipater having by this Artifice thus broken the Confederacy, led his whole
Army against the Athenians; upon which the People (being forsaken of their
Confederates) were greatly terrified, and Ant. Chapter 321.
knew not which way to turn themselves; and all having their Eyes upon Demades,
cried out, That he should be sent Ambassador to Antipater to treat for Peace in
their behalf. But he refused to come into the Senate: For he had been thrice
condemned for violating the Laws, and so become infamous, and disabled by the
Law to sit in Council: But being restored by the People to his former Credit
and Reputation, he forthwith (together with Phocion, and others joined with him
in Commission) undertook the Embassy. When Antipater had heard what they had to
say, he told them, That he would make Peace with the Athenians upon no other
Terms, but upon giving up all they had into his Hands: For the same Answer the
Athenians gave to Antipater when he sent Ambassadors to them at the time he was
shut up in Lamia. Hereupon the People being not able to resist, were The
Athenians submit.
brought to a necessity to give up all the Power and Government of the City
into the dispose of Antipater; who with great Humanity and Generosity granted
their City their Estates and all other Things to them back again. But he
dissolved the Government by a Democracy, and ordered that the Value of every
Person's Estate should be the Rule for the choosing of Magistrates; as that
those who were worth above Two thousand Drams might be capable of being
Magistrates, and giving of Votes for choosing of them. As for those that were
not of such Estates, he removed them as Turbulent and Factious, not suffering
Ant. Chapter 321.
them to have any thing to do in any public Business; and granted new Seats
and Estates in Thessaly to any that would remove thither. Upon which, above Two
and twenty thousand of that sort of Citizens were transplanted out of their own
Country. The Government of the City, and Country belonging to it, was given to
the rest who had the Estates before limited and appointed, of whom there were
about Nine thousand. And these governed the State for the future according to
the Laws of Solon. And all their Estates were left to them entire, and
untouched. But they were forced to receive a Garrison under Menyllus the
Governor to keep them in aw, and prevent new Stirs and Disturbances. As for the
Matter of Samos, it was referred to the Decision of the Arrideus and Alexander.
Kings. And thus the Athenians (beyond their Expectation) were kindly used, and
were at Peace. And for the future, (Governing the Commonwealth without Tumults
and Seditions, and quietly following their Husbandry,) they grew very rich in a
short time.

Antipater being returned into Macedonia, honorably and bountifully rewarded
Craterus according to his Desert, and gave him Phila his eldest Daughter in
Marriage, and then Antipater returns into Macedonia.
Craterus returned into Asia. Antipater carried himself with the same
Moderation and winning Behavior toward all the Cities of Greece, well
ordering and reforming their Ant. Chapter 321.
Governments, whereby he wan Praise and Renown in every Place.

As for Perdiccas, he restored the City and Territory of Samos to the Samians,
and Perdiccas restores the Samians.
caused all those that had been Exiles above Three and forty Years, to return
into their Country. Having now gone through the Occurrents in the Lamian War,
we shall pass to the War in Cyrene, lest we should straggle too far into Times
far distant from the continued The end of the Lamian War.
Course and Connection of the History. But to make Things more clear and
evident, we must have recourse to Matters done a little before.

After Harpalus had left Asia, and at length arrived with his Mercenaries in
Creet, as in The War in Cyrene.
the Book next before this is related; Thimbro, one of his special Friends, (as
he thought him to be) having assassinated Harpalus, possessed himself both of
the Moneys, and Soldiers, to the Number of Seven thousand Men. He got likewise
the Navy into his Hands, Thimbro.
and putting the Soldiers aboard, sailed to the Country of the Cyrenians; where
joining with the Cyrenian Exiles, he made use of their Conduct for the
prosecuting of his Designs, because they were well acquainted with the Ways,
and Passes in the Country. Upon the approach of the Cyrenians, Thimbro fought
them, and routed them, killing many upon the spot, and taking many Prisoners.
Then he possessed himself of the Port, and forced the conquered Cyreneans (now
in a great Fright) into a Composition, and to Ant. Chapter 321.
buy their Peace at the Price of Five thousand Talents of Silver, and that they
should deliver to him one half of all their Chariots ready and fitted for any
warlike Expedition. He sent likewise Ambassadors to other Cities, soliciting
them to join with him, as if he purposed to conquer all the Lower Africa. He
seized likewise upon all the Merchants Goods in the Haven, and gave them for
Plunder to his Soldiers, the more to encourage them to stick to him in the War.

But in the height of his Prosperity, a sudden Blast of Fortune brought him
very low upon the following occasion. Mnasiclus, one of his Captains, a Cretian
born, an expert Commander, began to quarrel with him about the Division of the
Spoil; and being of a bold and turbulent Spirit, he thereupon Deserted, and
went over to the Cyrenians; where making great Complaints of Thimbro's Cruelty
and Breach of Faith, he persuaded them to dissolve the League and assert their
Liberty. Thereupon they stopped their hands, and would pay no more of the Talents
of Silver agreed upon, having only paid Sixty.

Thimbro hereupon accused them of Treachery and breach of Faith, and seized
upon Eight hundred of the Cyrenians that were in the Port, and laid close Siege
to Cyrene; but not being able to prevail he drew off, and returned to the Port.
The Barceans and Hesperitans sided with Thimbro: Whereupon the Cyrenians drew
out part of their Forces out of the City, and with them wasted and spoiled the
neighboring Territories; to whose assistance Thimbro (whose aid was desired)
marched out with what Soldiers he had then ready at hand. The Cretian taking
advantage of that opportunity when he conceived Ant. Chapter 321.
few were left in the Port, advised them that were left in Cyrene to set upon
the Port, who readily complied with him, and he himself was the Principal Actor
in the Attempt, which was easily accomplished by reason of Thimbro's absence,
so that whatever Merchandise was left in the Port he restored to the Merchants,
and fortified the Haven with all the Care and Diligence imaginable.

This first Disaster greatly discouraged Thimbro, having both lost so
convenient a Post, and likewise his Carriages. But afterward plucking up his
Spirits, and taking of Taricha by Assault, his Hopes revived. However, not long
after he again sustained a mighty Loss: For the Soldiers belonging to the Fleet
by being excluded the Harbor, were in great want of Provision, and therefore
every day roved up and down the Fields to get what they could for the supply of
their Necessities. Thereupon, the Africans lying in Ambush, fell upon them as
they were roving all over the Country, and killed multitudes of them, and took
many Prisoners: The rest escaped to their Ships, and sailed away toward the
Confederate Cities; but were overtaken with so violent a Storm, that many of
their Ships were swallowed up by the Sea, and of the rest, some were driven to
Cyprus, and others to the Coasts of Egypt. Notwithstanding which distresses,
Thimbro went on still with the War: For he sent some of his Friends into
Peloponnesus, to list Soldiers of those Strangers Ant. Chapter 321.
that were then still at Tenarus: For there were then many Disbanded, wandering
up and down, seeking to be Listed by any that would employ them, to the number
of Two thousand and Five hundred and upwards. Those that were sent took these
into Pay, and set sail with them straight toward Cyrene: Before whose arrival
the Cyrenians hearten'd by their Successes, had fought with Thimbro, and had
cut off great numbers of his Men; By reason of which losses Thimbro gave up all
for gone, as to the War against Cyrene; but the unexpected arrival of the
Soldiers from Tenarus, so strengthened his Army that he took fresh Courage, and
resumed his former Hopes of Victory.

The Cyrenians perceiving that the War was renewed, craved supplies from the
neighboring Africans and Carthaginians; and having raised an Army composed of
their own Citizens and others, to the number of Thirty thousand men, they
resolved to lay all at stake, and try it out in a Battle. A very sharp Battle
therefore was fought, in which Thimbro was Victor, with the slaughter of a
Multitude of his Enemies; which cheered up his Spirits to that degree, as if he
should be presently be Master of all the neighboring Cities. The Cyrenians
after this Fight, having lost all their Commanders, joined Mnasiclus the
Cretian, with some others, in the chief Command of the Army. But Thimbro lifted
Ant. Chapter 321.
up with his Victory, besieged the Haven of Cyrene, and assaulted the City
every day: The Siege continuing long, the Cyrenians for lack of Bread sell out
one with another; and the Rabble (being the greatest in number) thrust sorth
the Rich out of the City; some of whom fled to Thimbro, others into Egypt.
Those in Egypt addressed themselves to Ptolemy for assistance, to help them in
their return, and prevailed so far as that they went back with great Forces
both for Sea and Land, under the Command of Ophellas their Governor. When their
Return was noised abroad, those Exiles who were with Thimbro contrived to steal
away in the Night, and joined with those that were arrived; but being detected
they were all knocked on the Head.

The Ringleaders of the Sedition in Cyrene being terrified with the return of
the Exiles, Ophellas routs Thimbro.
made Peace with Thimbro, and resolved to join with him against Ophellas. But
Ophellas routed Thimbro, and took him Prisoner, and recovered all the Towns,
and delivered the Cities with their Territories into the Hands of Ptolemy. And
thus the Cyrenians and the Cyrene possessed by Ptolemy.
neighboring Cities lost their former Liberty, and became subject to Ptolemy.

Perdiccas and King Philip having overcome Ariarathes, and delivered the
Province to Eumenes, and so departed out of Cappadocia. When they came into
Pisidia, they determined to raze those two Cities, one of the Larandians, the
other of the Isaurians: For in the Laranda s(...) by Perdiccas.
life time of Alexander they had killed Balacrus the Son of Nicanor, who was
appointed to be their General, and Governor of the Province. Laranda therefore
they took upon the first Assault, and put all that were able to bear Arms to
the Sword, and sold all the rest Ant. Chapter 321.
for Slaves, and laid the City equal with the Ground. As for the City of the
Isaurians, it was large and well fortified, and manned with resolute and stout
Men, and therefore P. 640.
after they had assaulted it two Days together, and had lost a great number of
Men, they were forced to draw off. For the Inhabitants, being plentifully
furnished with Weapons, and all other Things necessary for the enduring of a
Siege, were resolute to undergo all Hazards, and readily sold their Lives for
the Defense of their Liberty. But upon the third Day having lost many of their
Citizens, insomuch as they were not able sufficiently to man their Walls for
lack of Men, they put in execution a most Heroical Piece of Resolution, worthy
for ever to be remembered. For perceiving that they were destined to inevitable
Destruction, and had not Force sufficient for their Defense, they judged it not
advisable to deliver up the City, and all that they had, to the Will of the
Enemy, insomuch as their certain Ruin with the most barbarous Usage was obvious
before their Eyes. Therefore they all unanimously resolved to die honorably
together; to that end in the Night they shut up their Wives, Children and
Parents in their Houses, and set them on The sad Destruction of the City of the
Isaurians. Justin. l. 3. c. 6. says, This was done by the Cappadocians. And
Orosus says the same. lib. 3. c. the last.
fire, making Choice by that means to perish and be buried together. When the
Flame mounted up into the Air, the Isamians threw all their Wealth, and every
thing that was Valuable, or that might be of any advantage to the Enemy, into
the Fire. The Besiegers were stricken with Admiration at the Sight, and ran
here and there, seeking where to break into the City; but those that remained
upon the Walls for their Defense, threw many of the Macedonians down headlong
from the Battlements. At which Perdiccas much more admired, and inquired what
was the Reason, that having set all their Houses and every thing besides on
fire, they were so diligent and careful to defend the Walls. At length when
Perdiccas with his Macedonians were drawn off from the City, the rest of the
Isaurians cast themselves headlong into the Fire, and so every one's House
became a common Sepulcher for himself and all his Relations. Perdiccas the next
day gave the Ransacking Ant. Chapter 321.
of the City to the Soldiers, who (when the Fire was extinguished) found much
Silver and Gold in the Rubbish; the City having been Rich and Prosperous a long
time together.

After this Destruction, Perdiccas married two Wives, Nicea the Daughter of
Antipater, to whom he was contracted; and Cleopatra, Alexander's half Sister,
the Daughter of Philip Perdiccas marries two Wives.
by Amyntas. Perdiccas indeed had entered into League with Antipater before he
was established in his Government, and upon that account the Marriage was
consummate: But after he had gained the King's Forces, and was possessed of the
Superintendency and Administration of the Affairs of the Kingdom, he changed
his mind: For affecting the Affects the Kingdom of Macedon.
Kingdom, his Design was to marry Cleopatra, concluding that for her sake, and
by her Authority, the Sovereign Power would be yielded up to him by the
Macedonians. But because he had no mind as yet to discover his Intentions, (to
comply with the present Circumstances of Affairs) he married Nicea, lest
Antipater should oppose him in his Projects. Ant. Chapter 321.
But Antigonus smelling out what he was contriving, (and being one that had a
great kindness for Antipater, and the most active Man of all the Commanders,)
Perdiccas resolved to dispatch him, and take him out of the way.

Loading him therefore with false Accusations, and unjust Aspersions, his
Design appeared plainly to take away his Life. But Antigonus being a crafty
Man, and of a bold Spirit, made as if he would defend himself against those
Things that were laid to his Charge: But in the mean time he secretly prepared
for his flight, and in the Night with Antigonus secretly opposes him.
his Servants and his Son Demetrius went aboard some Ships that belonged to
Athens, and sailed into Europe, on purpose to confederate with Antipater. About
that time Antipater and Craterus were in the Field against the Aetolians with
Thirty thousand Foot, and Two thousand five hundred Horse: For they only
remained unconquered of those that were P. 641.
engaged in the Lamian War. But the Aetolians, though they were pressed upon by
such mighty Forces, yet were not at all discouraged; but having got together
Ten thousand brave, sprightly Men, betook themselves to the difficult Passes in
the Mountains, where they had before disposed and lodged much of their Wealth,
and all their Wives, Ant. Chapter 321.
Children, and Old People. And though they had quitted the Cities that was not
Tenable, yet they placed strong Garrisons in those that were fortisied; and so
undauntedly waited for the approach of the Enemy.

Antipater and Craterus therefore having entered Aetolia, when they saw all the
Cities that were weak and untenable forsaken of their Inhabitants, made toward
them that were posted in the Fastnesses of the Mountains. At the first Assault
they made upon those dreadful and unaccessable Precipices, they lost Multitudes
of their Men; for the Valor of the Aetolians being supported and confirmed by
the Strength of the Places, easily repulsed the Enemy that ran themselves, upon
Difficulties that were insuperable. But afterward, when Craterus his Soldiers
in the Winter had secured themselves, by Huts and warm Tents, the Aetolians
were forced to abide (in the depth of Winter) in Places covered over with Snow,
where they remained in great lack of Provision; so that they were reduced to a
most desperate Condition: For they were The great strait of the Etolians.
brought to that strait, that they must of necessity either leave the
Mountains, and fight with an Army far superior in number to themselves, and
with Commanders who were everywhere famous for their Conduct, or if they staid
longer, certainly to perish with Hunger and Cold.

And now all hopes of Deliverance being despaired of, suddenly and unexpectedly
appeared a Release at hand from all their Miseries, as if some God in a special
manner had Ant. Chapter 321.
had Compassion of such Brave and Noble Souls: For Antigonus, who fled out of
Asia, and was now come into the Camp, informed them what Perdiccas was
inhatching and contriving; and that having married Cleopatra, he was ready as
King to come over with his Army into Macedonia, to wrest the Kingdom out of
their hands. At which strange and unexpected News, Antipater and Craterus, and
all those with them were so affrighted, that they called a Council of War,
where, upon Consultation, it was resolved, that Matters should be ended and
compounded with the Aetolians as well as they could; and that Peace made with
the Etollans.
Forces should be forthwith transported into Asia; and that Craterus should be
General in Asia, and Antipater have the Chief Command in Europe; that
Ambassadors should likewise be dispatched to Ptolemy (who was Perdiccas's
Enemy, and their Friend, and designed to be cut off as well as they) to move
him to join with them as a Confederate. Hereupon they forthwith struck up a
Peace with the Aetolians, intending notwithstanding in due time afterward, to
root them up and all their Families, and to send them into some remote and
desert Corner of the World far from Asia. The Pacification according to the
Terms before agreed upon, being put into writing, and signed, they prepared
themselves for the Expedition.

Perdiccas, on the other side, calling together his Friends and General
Officers, consulted Perdicas marches against Ptolemy.
with them whether he should transport his Army into Macedonia, or march first
against Ptolemy. All agreeing that Ptolemy was first to be conquered, lest he
should obstruct his Expedition into Macedonia, he sent away Eumenes before with
a considerable Army, to secure the Passes at the Hellespont, to prevent all
passage that way: And he himself marched out of Pisiclia with all his Forces
toward Egypt. And these were the things done this Year.

CHAP. III.
The Description of Alexander's Funeral Chariot. Ptolemy honored in Egypt.
Perdiccas prepares for Egypt against Ptolemy. Eumenes beats Neoptolemus, who
deserted. The Battle between Eumenes and Craterus, who was killed with
Neoptolemus. Combat between Neoptolemus and Eumenes. Perdiccas comes into
Egypt: Assaults the Fort called the Camel's Wall; His miserable Loss in the
River Nile; is killed. Ptolemy makes Arrideus and Pytho Protectors of the
Kings. Eumenes condemned to die. The Etolians invade Thessaly. Polyspherchon
routs the Etolians. The Provinces again divided by Arrideus. Antigonus routs
Eumenes, who flies to Nora. Antigonus besieges Nora. Eumenes his Invention to
exercise the Horse. Ptolemy gains Syria and Phoenicia by Nicanor.

WHen Philocles was Chief Magistrate at Athens, and Caius Sulpitius and Quintus
Aulius were created Roman Consuls, Arrideus (to whom was committed the Care
Olymp. 114. 3. Ant. Chapter 320.
of conveying away Alexander's Body to his Sepulcher, having now the Chariot
ready upon which he was to be carried) prepared himself for the Journey. But
forasmuch as the whole Business and Concern was managed as became the Majesty
of Alexander, and upon The Description of Alexander's Funeral Chariot.
that account did not only exceed all others in respect of Expense, State, and
Pomp, (for the Charges amounted to many Talents) but also in respect of
Curiosity of Workmanship, we conceive it fit to recommend something to
Posterity in writing concerning it. And first was provided a Coffin of beaten
Gold, so wrought by the Hammer as to answer to the Proportion of the Body; it
was half filled with Aromatic Spices, which served as well to delight the
Sense as to preserve the Body from Putrefaction. Over the Coffin was a Cover of
Gold, so exactly fitted, as to answer the higher part every way: Over this was
thrown P. 642. Ant. Chapter 320.
a curious Or Crimsen Soldiers Coat. Ant. Chapter 320.
Purple Coat embroidered with Gold, near to which were placed the Arms of the
Deceased, that the whole might represent the Acts of his Life. Then was
provided the Chariot, in which the Body was to be conveyed, upon the top of
which was raised a Triumphant Arch of Gold, (...). As thick as (...) Scales.
set thick and studded over with precious Stones eight Cubits in breadth, and
twelve in length: Under this Roof was placed a Throne of Gold, joined to the
whole Work, foursquare, on which were carved the Heads of Tragelaphi
Goat-Harts, bred near the River Phasis in Colchis. Plin lib. 8. c. 33
Goat-Harts, and to these were fastened Golden Rings of two Hands breadth in the
diameter; at which hung, for Show and Pomp, little Coronets of various
beautiful Colors, which, like so many Flowers, gave a pleasant Prospect to the
Eye. Upon the top of the Arch was a Fringe of Network, where hung large Bells,
to the end the Sound of them might be heard at a great distance. On both sides
the Arch at the Corners stood an Image of Victory in Gold, bearing a Trophy: A
Like a Plazza.
Peristthylium of Gold supported the Archwork, the Chapiters of whose Pillars
were of Ionian Workmanship: Within the Peristthylium, by a Network of Gold of a
finger's thickness in the Workmanship, hung four Writing-Tables, whether of
Brass, Stone, or Wood. Ant. Chapter 320.
Tables one by another equal to the Dimensions of the Wall, whereupon were
portray'd all sorts of living Creatures: The first Table represented a Chariot
curiously wrought, wherein Alexander sat with a Royal Scepter in his Hand:
About the King stood his Lifeguard complete in their Arms; the Macedonians on
one side, and the Persians that bore Battle-Axes on the other; and before them
stood the Armor-Bearers: In the second, Elephants adorned in their Warlike
Habiliaments followed them of the Guard, on which sat Indians before, and
Macedonians behind, armed according to the Customs of their several Countries.
In the third might be seen Squadrons of Horse drawn up in Battalia: In the
fourth appeared a Fleet ordered in a Line of Battle. At the entrance into the
Arch stood Lions in Gold, with their Faces toward them that approached to
enter. From the middle of every Pillar an A Tree so called
Achanthus in Gold, sprouted up in Branches spiring in slender Threads to the
very Chapiters: Over the Arch about the middle of the Roof on the outside was
spread Or Crimson Carpet.
Purple Carpet in the open Air, on which was placed a vast Golden Crown, in
form of an Olive Coronets, used to be worn by Conquerors.
Olive Coronet, which by the reflection of the Sunbeams darted such an amazing
Splendour and Brightness, that at a distance it appeared as a Flash of
Lightning. Under the Seats or Bottom of the whole Work ran two Axle-trees,
about which moved four Persian Wheels, whose Spokes and Nathes were over-laid
with Gold, but the Felloes were shod with Iron: The Ends and Out-parts of the
Axes were of Gold, representing the Heads of Lions, every one holding a Dart in
in his Mouth. In the very Center of Ant. Chapter 320.
the Arch, about the midway in the length, was artificially fixed a Upon which
the whole might turn, as a hinge.
Pole, by the help whereof the Arch might (in rough places, and where it was
apt to be shaken) be preserved from being over-turn'd. There were four
Draught-Trees, to every of which were fixed four Courses of Yoaks, and to every
Course were bound four Mules, so that the Mules were sixty four in number, the
choicest for Strength and Largeness that could be P. 643.
got: Every Mule was adorned with a Crown of Gold, and Bells of Gold on either
side their Heads; and on their Necks were fitted Rich Collars set and
beautified with precious Stones.

And in this manner was the Chariot set forth, the Sight of which was more
stately and pompous than the Report; so that the Fame of it brought together
Multitudes of Spectators: For the People out of every City wherever it was
coming met it, and ran back again before it, never satisfied with the Delight
they took in viewing and gazing. And suitable to so stately a Show, a vast
Company of Workmen and Pioneers (that plained the Ways for its passage)
attended it.

And thus Arrideus (who had spent two Years in Preparations) brought the King's
Body from Babylon to Egypt. Ptolemy, in Honor of the King met the Corpse with
his Army as far as Syria, where he received it, and accompanyd it with great
Care and Alexander was first buried at Memphis. Pausan. Attic. c. 6.
Observance: For he had resolved not as yet to conduct it to the Temple of
Hammon, but to keep the Body in the Alexandria. See Curtius, l. 10. c. ult. The
Body embalmed was 300 years after viewed by Augustus in Alexandria. Suet. Ant.
Chapter 320.
City which Alexander himself had built, the most Famous almost of any City in
the World. To this end he built a Temple in Honor of Alexander, in Greatness
and Stateliness of Structure becoming the Glory and Majesty of that King; and
in this Repository he laid the Body, and honored the Exequies of the Dead with
Sacrifices and magnificent Shows, agreeable to the State of a Demi God. Upon
which account he was deservedly Honored, not only by Men, but by the Gods
Themselves: For by his Bounty and Generosity he so gained upon Men, as they
flocked from all Parts to Alexandria, and cheerfully listed themselves into his
Service, notwithstanding the King's Army was then preparing War against him:
And though he was then in imminent Danger, yet all readily ventured their Lives
to preserve him. And the Gods Themselves, for his Virtue, and kind and obliging
Temper toward all, rescued him out of all his Hazards and Difficulties that
seemed insuperable: For Perdiccas, who before suspected the increase of his
Power, had resolved (bringing the These Kings were Arrideus and Alexander,
Alexander's Children. Perdiccas prepares for Egypt against Ptolemy.
Kings along with him) of an Exepedition into Egypt with the Strength of his
Army: To that end he had delivered to Eumenes a considerable Body of Men, with
sufficient number of brave Officers, with Command to march to the Hellespont,
to stop the Passage of Antipater and Craterus over into Asia. Amongst the
Commanders the most Illustrious were Alcetas his Brother, and Neoptolemus: But
these he ordered in all things to be observant to Eumenes, because he was both
a skilful and prudent General, and a constant and faithful Friend. Eumenes
therefore, with the Forces delivered him, came to the Hellespont, and
completed his Army with Horse (raised out of his own Province lately gained)
in which his Troops were before only deficient.

But after that Antipater and Craterus had transported their Army out of
Europe, Neoptolemus, Eumenes beats Neoptolemus. Ant. Chapter 320.
out of Envy to Eumenes (having a considerable Army of Macedonians under his
Command) secretly sent Messengers to Antipater, and colleaguing with him,
contrived how to entrap Eumenes; but his Treachery being discovered, he was
forced to fight, and in the Battle lost almost all his Men, and was very near
being cut off himself. Eumenes being thus Conqueror (after this great
Slaughter) joined the rest of those that were left, to his own Army; and so did
not only by this Victory increase his Forces, but strengthened himself with a
great number of Macedonians that were excellent Soldiers. Neoptolemus fled off
the Field with three hundred Horse, and went over to Antipater. Whereupon a
Consultation was had between them, in reference to the Concerns of the War; in
which it was determined to divide the Army into two Bodies; one to march under
Antipater into Cilicia to fight with Perdiccas, and the other with Craterus to
fall upon Eumenes; and P. 644.
when he was routed, then Craterus to return to Antipater; that so the whole
Army being joined together in one Body, and having Ptolemy their Confederate,
they might be better able to deal with the King's Army.

Eumenes having Intelligence of the Enemy's march, gathered Forces together
from all Parts, especially Horse; for because he had not Foot able to cope with
the Macedonian Phalanx, he raised a great Body of Horse, by whose assistance he
hoped to be in a Condition to overcome the Enemy.

And now at length the Armies drew near one to another; whereupon Craterus drew
Battle between Eumenes and Craterus.
up his Men together, in order, by a set Speech to encourage them to fight; in
which Harangue he promised, That if they were Conquerors, they should have all
the Pillage of the Field, and all the Bag and Baggage as a Prey to their own
use: All being thus encouraged, he drew up his Army in Battalia; the Right Wing
he commanded himself, Ant. Chapter 320.
the Left he gave to Neoptolemus: His Army in the whole consisted of Twenty
thousand Foot, most of them Macedonians, Men famous for their Valor, in whom
he placed the Confidence of his Victory; with these, there marched along with
him above Two thousand Horse. Eumenes likewise had Twenty thousand Foot of
diverse Nations, and Five thousand Horse, on whole Valor chiefly he had
resolved to venture, and lay all the Stake in this Battle.

The Horse on both sides moving forward in two Wings a great distance before
the Foot, Craterus with a Body of choice Men made a brave Charge upon the
Enemy, but his Horse stumbling, he was thrown out of the Saddle to the Ground,
and not being known, was by the confused throng of Horse trampled under Foot,
and so unfortunately lost his Life; upon whose Fall the Enemy was so
encouraged, that dispersing themselves up and down, they made a terrible
Slaughter. The Right Wing being thus distressed, and at length totally routed,
was forced to retreat to the Foot. But in the left Wing commanded by
Neoptolemus, opposed to Eumenes, there was a very sharp Engagement, the two
Generals singling out one another: For being known to each other by their
Horses, and other Combat between Neoptolimus and Eumenes.
special Marks, they fought hand to hand, and by combating thus singly, they
put a Remark upon the Victory; for after they had tried it out by their Swords,
they presently began an admirable and new sort of Encounter, Anger and Revenge
mutually stirring up each other: For letting their Bridles fall upon their
Horses Necks, they caught hold Ant. Chapter 320.
with their left hands one upon another, and so grappling together, their
Horses (violently pressing forward) ran from under them, leaving them both
tumbling on the Ground together. And though it was a difficult matter for
either of them, after so violent a Fall, to rise again, and besides being
pressed down by the weight of their Arms, yet Eumenes (rising first) wounded
Neoptolemus in the Ham (with so great a Gash and Cut), that he lay Hamstrung
grovelling upon the Ground, and by reason of the grievousness of the Wound, was
not able to raise himself upon his Feet: But the Stoutness and Courage of his
Mind overcoming the Weakness of his Body, he got upon his Knees, and gave his
Adversary three Wounds upon his Arm and Thigh; but none of them being mortal,
(while they were yet warm) Eumenes gave Neoptolemus a second Blow upon his
Neck, and killed him outright.

In the mean time great Slaughter was made among the rest of the Horse on both
sides; so that while some were killed and others wounded, the Fortune of the
Day at the first was very uncertain: But as soon as it was noised abroad that
Neoptolemus was slain, and both Wings broken, the whole Body fled, and made
away to the The Battalion of the Macedonian Foot. P. 645. Ant. Chapter 320.
Phalanx as to a strong Wall of Defense. But Eumenes (content with keeping of
his Ground, and the Possession of the Bodies of both the Generals) sounded a
Retreat to his Soldiers. Then he set up a Trophy, and after he had buried the
Slain, he sent to the Phalanx, and to them that were thus routed, to let them
know, That whoever would, should have liberty to take up Arms with him, or to
go their way wherever they pleased. The Macedonians accepted of these Terms of
Peace, and upon Oath of Fidelity given, they had liberty to march away to the
next Towns to supply themselves with Provision. But they dealt treacherously
with Eumenes; for recollecting their Forces, and furnishing themselves with
Provision, in the Night they stole away and went to Antipater. Eumenes indeed
did all he could to revenge this Breach of their Oaths, and to that end
forthwith endeavored to pursue the Phalanx; but by reason of the Strength of
the Enemy, and his own Indisposition, (through the Wounds he had received,) he
was not able to do any thing effectually, and therefore he judged it better to
forbear from further Pursuit. Having therefore gained so glorious a Victory,
and cut off two eminent Commanders, his Name grew very famous. Antipater having
received those that had escaped, after they were refreshed hasted away to
Cilicia, and to aid Ptolemy. But Perdiccas comes into Egypt.
Perdiccas hearing of the His first Victory over Neoptolemus, for Perdiccas was
killed before the News of this last arrived, as appears afterward.
Victory gained by Eumenes, prosecuted his Expedition into Egypt with much
more Assurance. When he came near to the River Nile, he encamped not far off
Pelusium; and while he was cleansing an old Sluice, Nile so overflowed, that it
defeated all his Design, and spoiled his Works, and many of his Friends
deserted the Camp, and went over to Ptolomy. For he inclined to Cruelty, and
having removed the rest of the Captains from the Sovereign Command, he made it
his only Business to be sole Monarch, and absolute Tyrant.

Ptolemy on the contrary was courteous and mild, and gave free Liberty to the
rest of the Captains to advise him in all his Enterprises. Besides, he had put
strong Garrisons Ant. Chapter 320.
into all the convenient Places of Egypt, and had furnished them with all
sorts of Weapons, and other Things that were necessary. By which means he
succeeded in every thing for the most part that he undertook, while many that
loved the Man cheerfully exposed themselves to undergo all Hazards for his
sake. But Perdiccas, to repair his Losses, called together the Commanders, and
having regained some by Gifts, and others by large Promises, and all by smooth
Words, he hearten'd himself so as to bear up against the Hazards and
Difficulties that were coming apace upon him. And when he had ordered them all
to be ready for a March, about Evening he moved from thence with his whole
Army. Not acquainting any whither he would lead them, he marched all Night with
a swift March, and at length encamped upon the Banks of the Nile, not far from
a Castle called the Camel's Wall.

When it was Day he passed his Army over, the Elephants leading the Way, and
next to them the Targateers, with those that carried the Sealing Ladders, and
other things he had occasion to use in a Siege: His best Horse at length
brought up the Rear, with Ant. Chapter 320.
whom he intended to attack the Ptolemeans, if it happened that they appeared.
In the middle of their March Ptolemy's Horse showed themselves, making forward
in a swift Career for the Defense of the Town; who though they hasted away to
enter the Fort, and by sounding of Trumpets and shouts of Men gave sufficient
notice to all of their Approach, yet Perdiccas was not at all amused, but
boldly led up his Army close to the Fort; and forthwith the Targateers with
their Ladders mounted the Wall; and those that rid the Perdiccas assaults the
Fore called the Camel^-wall, but is re(...)d.
Elephants threw down the Fortifications, and demolished the Bulwarks.
Whereupon Ptolemy, with those of his own Guard about him, to encourage the rest
of his Officers and Friends manfully to behave themselves, caught hold of a
Sarissa and mounted the Bulwark, and so being on the higher Ground, struck out
the Eyes of the foremost Elephant, and wounded the Indian that sat upon him.
And as for those that sealed the Walls. he hurled them down shamefully cut and
wounded (together with their Arms) into the River. After his Example Ptolemy's
Friends valiantly bestirred themselves, and by killing the Indian that governed
the next Elephant, the Beast became unserviceable. The Assault P. 646.
continuing long, Perdiccas his Soldiers assaulted the Wall by turns, striving
with all the Vigor imaginable to gain the Fort by Storm. On the other hand
Ptolemy calling to his Friends now to approve their Faithfulness and Loyalty to
him by their Courage, Ant. Chapter 320.
fought like a Hero, and gave an Example of Valor to all the rest. In this
sharp Dispute, many fell on both Sides. The Ptolemeans had the advantage in the
Height of the Place, and the Perdicceans in Greatness of their Number, which
far exceeded the other. At length the whole Day being spent in the Assault,
Perdiccas raised his Siege, and marched back to his Camp, and in the Night
decamped, and with a quiet and silent March came into a part of the Country
over against Memphis, where Nile (dividing it self into two Parts) made an
Island sufficient to receive and encamp the greatest Army. Into this Place
therefore he passed over part of his Army, though the Passage was very
difficult through the depth of the River; for the Water reaching up to the
Chin, the Soldiers could not stand upon their Legs, and were likewise cumber'd
with their Arms. Perdicca, therefore discerning the Unruliness of the River,
placed the Elephants on the Left, to break the force of the Stream. The Horse
went on the Right, by whose Help he took up them that were hurried down by the
Current, and set them safe on the Shore on the other side. But there happened
in this Passage that which was strange and unusual: For when the first were
gotten over, those that followed were in very great Hazard. For the River rose
Perdiccas (...) of his Men in the River Nile. Ant. Chapter 320.
on a sudden, without any apparent Cause, and swept away whole Sholes of Bodies
at a time, which put all into a Consternation. The Cause of this Inundation
could not be found out, though it was inquired into. Some imputed it to a Dyke
or Sluice in the higher Grounds, whose Banks might be broken down, and so all
its Water ran into Nile, by which means the Ford was so much the higher. Others
conceived it was great Rains that fell in the Lands above that increased the
Waters of the River. But it was neither of these. But the true Cause why the
Passage at first was without danger, was because the Sand then was firm and
unmoved; but afterward when by the treading of the Horses and Elephants, and
the Passage of the Army, the Sand was stirred and carried away by the Force of
the River, the Ford by this means was, as it were, dug into, and made into
Holes, and so the Passage was deeper in the middle of the River. Perdiccas
therefore not being able to pass the rest of his Army over, fell into a great
strait, being those that were got to the other side were very unequal to the
force of the Enemy, and those on this side the River were not able to succor
them. Hereupon he commanded all those that were landed in the Island, to
return. The Army thus forced to repass the River, those that could swim, and
were strong-bodied Men, with great difficulty recovered the other side of the
Nile; but most of them lost their Arms. The rest who were not so skilful, some
of them were drowned, and others were carried down the Stream, and Ant. Chapter 320.
fell into the Hands of the Enemy. Very many for a long time tossed and tumbled
hither and thither, were at length devoured by Crocodiles. Above Two thousand
having perished P 647.
in this manner, (among whom were some eminent Commanders,) the Hearts of the
Soldiers were much turned against Perdiccas. But Ptolemy caused all those
Bodies to be burnt that were brought dead down the River to him, and having
performed all Funeral Obsequies and Observances due to the Dead, he sent their
Ashes and Bones to their Kindred and Friends.

This far more enraged the Spirits of the Macedonians against Perdiccas, and
knit their Hearts in affection to Ptolemy. When the Night came on, the Camp was
full of Cries and Lamentations, that so many Men should miserably perish
without a Stroke stricken, amongst whom there were no fewer than a Thousand,
who were swallowed by the monstrous Crocodiles.

Hereupon many of the Commanders railed against Perdiccas; and the whole
Phalanx of Foot being totally disaffected, discovered their Hatred by their
Murmurings and Threats: And a Hundred of the chief Commanders deserted him; of
whom, the chiefest of them was Pithon, who had conquered the Rebellious Greeks,
not inferior in Valor and Reputation to any of Alexander's Commanders.
Afterward some of the Horse entered into a Conspiracy, and made to his Tent,
and in a Body fell upon him, and killed Perdiccas killed.
him.

The next day, when the Soldiers were in a Consult, Ptolemy came to them, and
saluted the Macedonians, and made an Apology for what he had done. And seeing
that they wanted Provision, he furnished the Army with abundance of Bread, and
supplied the Ant. Chapter 320.
Camp with all other Things that were necessary. But though he was upon this
account in great Grace and Favor with the Soldiers, and so able easily to gain
the Protectorship of the Kings, yet he demanded it not, but bestowed the chief
Command upon Python and Arrhideus, to whom in Gratitude he was much obliged.
For when the Macedonians appointed a Consult concerning that honorable Trust
and high Command, by the Advice Ptolemy makes Arrhideus and Pytho Protectors of
the Kings.
of Ptolemy they all unanimously created Python and Arrhideus (who conveyed the
the King's Body) to be Protectors of the Kings, investing them with Sovereign
Authority. And in this manner Perdiccas, after he had enjoyed the Sovereign
Command for the space of Three Years, lost both it and his Life together. After
his Death, News was The two Kings were Arrihidaeus, and Alexander, a young
Child.
brought, that Eumenes had won the Day in Cappadocia, and that Craeterus and
Neoptolemus were both slain. Which News, if it had arrived the Day before
Perdiccas his Death, that prosperous Success would have been a Protection to
his Person, so as none durst have lifted up their Hands against him.

But the Macedonians now hearing how Eumenes had succeeded, condemned him and
all his Adherents (to the number of Fifty Noble Lords, amongst whom was Alcetas
the Eumenes condemned to die.
Brother of Perdiccas,) to die. And at that very time they put to Death those
that were Perdiccas his chiefest Friends, then in their Hands, with his Sister
Atalanta, the Wife of Attalus the Admiral of the Fleet. For at and after the
Death of Perdiccas, Attalus the Ant. Chapter 320.
Admiral lay with the Fleet before Pelusium; and when News was brought him of
the Death of Perdiccas and his Wife, he loosed from thence, and arrived at
Tire; where Archelaus, a Macedonian Governor of the City, kindly received him,
and delivered up to him the City, and faithfully restored to him the Money
entrusted in his Hands by Perdiccas, to the Value of Eight hundred Talents. And
thus Attalus abiding at Tire, received all Perdiccas's Friends that fled to him
from the Camp at Memphis.

After Antipater was gone over into Asia, the Aetolians, in pursuance of their
League made with Perdiccas, mach'd into Thessaly with a Design to divide
Antipater's Army. P. 648. The Aetolians invade Thessaly.
They had Twelve thousand Foot, and Four hundred rather.
Four thousand Horse, commanded as General by Alexander an Aetolian.

In their March they besieged the Locrians in Amphissa, and harrass'd their
Country, and took some of the neighboring Towns and Villages. They routed
likewise Polycles, Antipater's General, and killed him, with a great number of
his Men. Of the Prisoners they took, some were sold for Slaves, and others were
ransomed. Afterward they broke into Thessaly, and brought over many there to
join with them in the War against Antipater, insomuch as they made up in the
whole a Body of Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Fifteen hundred Horse; while
they were taking in the Cities, the Acarnanians bearing a Grudge to the
Aetolians, invaded Aetolia, wasted and spoiled the Country, and besieged Ant.
Chapter 320.
the Cities. When the Aetolians heard what Danger their Country was in, they
left the rest of their Forces in Thessaly under the Command of Menon of
Pharsalis, and they themselves speedily marched back with their own Soldiers
into Aetolia, and struck such a Terror into the Acarnanians, that they present
relieved their Country. While they were thus employed, Polyspherchon, who was
left General in Macedonia, came into Polyspherchon routs the Aetolians.
Thessaly with a brave Army, and fought and routed the Enemy, killing Menon the
General, and cutting off most of his Army, and so recovered Thessaly.

As for the Affairs of Asia, Arrhideus and Pytho, Protectors of the Kings,
leaving the River Nile, came with the Kings, and the whole Army to
Triparadisus, called by Pliny, Not. Hist. Paradisus. l. 1. c. 23. The Triple
Garden.
Triparadisus in Higher Syria, or Caelo Syria.
Higher Syria. There Wife of Arrhideus, one of the Kings of Macedon. Ant. Chapter
320.
Euridice the Queen taking upon her to intermeddle and pry too curiously into
Matters that concerned her not, and to control the Protectors; Pytho and his
Friends hereby became much disgusted, and perceiving that the Macedonians were
more observant to her Commands than to theirs, they called a Council, and gave
up the Protectorship Whereupon the Macedonians chose Antipater Protector, with
absolute Authority. A few days after Antipater going to Triparadisus, found
Eurydice stiring up the Macedonians to a Sedition against him; whereupon there
arose no small Mutiny in the Army. Antipater hereupon called a General Council,
and so argued and canvass'd the Business with them, that he allayed the Spirit
of the People, and brought Eurydice (through fear of him) into a better Temper.

After these Things were over, Antipater made a second Division of the
Provinces, and allotted to Ptolemy that whereof he was then in Possession. For
it was not Practicable to remove him, because it appeared Ptolemy had gained
Egypt as a Conqueror. Syria he gave to Laomedon of Mitylene; and Cilicia to
Philoxenus. Of the other Provinces, he The Provinces again divided by Antipater.
assigned Mesopotamia and Arbelitis to Amphimachus; the Province of Babylon to
Seleucus, and Susiana to For Antigines, Captain of the Silver Targateers.
Antigonus, because he was the first that set the Wheel a going in order to
overthrow Perdiccas. To Peucestas he granted Persia; to Tlepolemus, Carmania;
to Pithon, Media; and to Philip, Parthia. Aria and Drangana he allotted to
Stasandrus the Cyprian; Bactriana and Sogdiana to Stasanorus of Solium, born in
the same Island; Parapamisada, to Oxyartas the Father of Rhoxana, whom
Alexander married; and India, bordering upon Parapamisada, to Pithon the Son of
Agenor. Of the Kingdoms next adjoining, that which bordered upon the River
Indus, continued under the Power of Porus; that which lay to Hydaspes, remained
with Taxilis. For these Kings were not to be Dispossessed, but with the Royal
Army, and a skilful and expert General. As to the The Lesser Asia. P. 649.
Northern Provinces, he gave the Government of Cappadocia to Nicanor, and the
Greater Phrygia and Cilicia for Lycia.
Cilicia to Antigonus, to hold them as he did before. Lastly, to Cassander he
assigned Caria; to Clitus, For Lydia.
Lycia; and to Arrhideus, Phrygia at the Hellespont. Antigonus he appointed
General of the Royal Army, and commanded him to pursue and destroy Eumenes. To
Antigonus he also joined Cassander and Clearchus, that if he secretly projected
any thing, he Ant. Chapter 320.
might be discovered. He himself marched with the Kings and his Troops toward
Macedonia, that he might conduct the Kings back into their own Country.

Antigonus therefore being declared absolute Commander of Asia, drew out the
Forces out of their Winter Quarters to fight with Eumenes, and to that end
furnishing himself with Antigonus routs Eumenes.
all necessary Preparations for the War, he marched toward Eumenes, who then
lay in Cappadocia; where one called Perdiccas, one of his chief Commanders, had
deserted him, and lay encamped with Three thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse
(that followed him) about three days March distant. But Eumenes sent out
Phenices of Tenedos with Four thousand good Foot and a Thousand Horse against
him; who, with a swift March, fell upon the Rebels on a sudden in the Night
when they were asleep, and took Perdiccas and all his Army Prisoners, about the
second Watch of the Night. Eumenes put to Death the chief Ringleaders of the
Defection, and spared the rest of the Soldiers, and mixed them amongst his own,
and by this means gained all their Affections. After this, Antigonus, by a
Correspondence with one Apollonides, General of the Horse on Eumenes his side,
by large Promises so effected the Business, that he prevailed with him to
betray Eumenes, and come over to him in the heat of the Fight. Eumenes was then
encamped in Cappadocia, Ant. Chapter 320.
in In the Country of Orcynia on Cappadocia. Ush. Ann. 300.
Places very convenient for Engagement with Horse. Antigonus therefore made
thither with his whole Army, and possessed himself of the higher Ground under
the Foot of the Mountains: He had at that time above Ten thousand Foot, (of
whom most were Macedonians, brave and valiant Men,) and Two thousand Horse, and
Thirty Elephants. Eumenes had no less than Twenty thousand Foot, and Five
thousand Horse. Presently a sharp and bloody Battle was fought, in which
Antigonus (through the sudden and unexpected Desertion of Apollonides with his
Horse, and going over to the other side,) got the Day, killing Eight thousand
Men of the Enemy upon the place, and possessing himself of all their Bag and
Baggage, so that the Eumeneans (through the Slaughter that was made) were in a
Consternation, and by the loss of all their Carriages, were brought to an utter
Desperation. Hereupon Eumenes designed to fly into Armenia, to persuade some
Eumenes flies to Nora.
of the Inhabitants to join with him in Arms; but being prevented by a swift
Pursuit, and perceiving his Men to run away from him to Antigonus, he possessed
himself of a strong Fort called Nora. It was indeed very small, not above Two
Furlongs in compass, but in Strength impregnable. For the Houses were built
upon a very high Rock, and it was wonderfully fortisy'd both by Nature and Art.
Besides, there was there laid up great store of Corn, Fuel, and other Things of
that kind, so that all that fled for shelter thither, might be abundantly
supplied with all Things necessary for many Years together. Those that were his
fast Friends, accompanied him in his Flight, and resolved at the last and
utmost Extremity to die with him. They were in Number, both Horse and Foot,
about Six hundred.

Antigonus being now strengthened with the Forces of Eumenes, and the Revenues
of his Provinces, and having gotten together a great Mass of Treasure, began to
aspire to P. 6, 0.
Matters of higher Concern; for none of the Asian Commanders were as yet so
Potent, Ant. Chapter 320.
as to dare to contend with him for the Sovereign Command. For the present,
indeed he bore a fair outside toward Antipater, but secretly had resolved,
that when he had firmly settled his Affairs, he would neither regard him nor
the Kings. And in the first place, he blocked up them in the Fort with a double
Wall, and with deep Trenches and Antigonus besieges Nora.
Works of Earth of a wonderful height. Then he entered into Parley with
Eumenes, willing him to renew their ancient Friendship, and endeavored to
persuade him to join with him as an Associate in all his Affairs. But Eumenes
foreseeing a change of Fortune at hand, insisted upon Terms, and that degree of
Favor that seemed very unequal and unfit to be granted to one in his present
Circumstances: For he required, as of Right, to be restored to all his
Provinces, and to be fully acquitted and discharged of all pretended Offenses
whatsoever. Antigonus promised to acquaint Antipater with his Demands, and
leaving sufficient Strength for continuing the Siege, he marched against the
Generals, (that were moving toward him with all their Forces,) viz. Alcetas
the Brother of Perdiccas, and Attalus the Admiral of the Fleet. Some time
after, Eumenes sent Ambassadors to Antipater to treat upon Terms of Peace,
(amongst whom was Hieronymus a Colonel, who wrote the History of the
Successors.) In the mean time he himself having experienced many Changes and
Turns of Fortune, was not at all discouraged, knowing very well what quick and
sudden Alterations had happened on both Sides. For he saw that the Macedonian
Kings were but only vain and insignificant Shadows of Princes, and those many
valiant Commanders that were with them, so managed their Commands one after
another, as to seek only the Advancement of their own private Interests.
Therefore he hoped, (as the Truth fell out afterward to be,) that many would
desire his Help Ant. Chapter 320.
and Assistance, both upon the account of his Skill im Martial Affairs, as of
his Constancy and Faithfulness.

But when he saw that the Horse could not be Exercised in a Place so strait and
craggy, and so were unserviceable for Horse-Engagements, he ingeniously found
out a new and Eumenes invents a way to Exercise the Horse in Nora. Plutarch's
Life of Eumenes.
unusual way for the Exercise of them: For he tied up their Heads by Chains to
a Post or strong Stake, and drew them up so high, as that they should stand
upon their hinder Feet, and but just touch the Ground with the Ends of their
fore Feet. Whereupon the Horse presently striving to get his fore Feet to the
Ground, did so curvet and caper, that Legs, Thighs, and every Member was in
action, and by this Motion the Horse was all on a Foam; and thus they were all
Exercised to the highest degree. He himself fed of the meanest Food with the
rest of the Soldiers, and by this eating with them in common, not only gained
to himself the Love of all his Fellow Soldiers, but caused them to be at
perfect Peace and Concord one with another. In the mean time Ptolemy in Egypt
(Perdiccas with all the King's Army being broken in pieces) enjoyed that
Country as a Conqueror: And casting his Eye upon Phoenicia and Celo-Syria, (as
lying very commodiously to Egypt,) he used his utmost Endeavor to possess
himself of the Cities of those Countries. Ant. Chapter 320.
To that end he created Nicanor, one of his Friends, General, and sent him into
those Parts with a considerable Army, who coming into Syria, took Laomedon, the
Governor of that Province, Prisoner, and brought all Syria under his own Power.
He gained Ptolemy gains Syria and Phoenicia by Nicanor. At this time he entered
Jerusalem. Joseph. Appian. l. 1. Ant. l. 12. c. 1.
also all the Cities of Phoenicia, and put Garrisons into them, and having in a
short time finished a troublesome Expedition, returned into Egypt.

CHAP. IV.
Antigonus routs Alcetas in Pisidia, and takes Attalus. Alcetas received into
Termessus, and there protected. He Is murdered there treacherously, his Body
inhumanly used by Antigonus. Antipater's Death. Antipater put Demeas, one of
the Athenian Ambassadors, to Death. Polysperchon made Chief in Macedonia.
Cassander conspires to out him. Antigonus his Plots to be Sovereign of all.
Arrideus secures himself in Phrygia, besieges Cyzicum. Antigonus goes to raise
it. Eumenes got out of Nora by Antigonus his Order. Antigonus his further Acts.
The various Fortunes of Eumenes. A Council in Macedonia called by Polysperchon
against Cassander. The Decree of the Council. Polysperchon invites Olpmpias out
of Epyrus into Macedonia. Writes to Eumenes to join with the Kings.

Afterward when Apollodorus executed the Office of Lord-Chancellor at Athens,
and P. 651. Olymp. 114. 4. Ant. Chapter 319.
Quintus Publius and Lucius Papirius. Antigonus beats Alcitas and Attalus.
Quintus Poplias Consuls at Rome, Antigonus, after the Defeat of Eumenes,
determined to march against Alcetas and Attalus. For those only remained of all
Perdiccas his Friends and Kindred who were skilful Commanders, and had Forces
sufficient to cope with him for the Sovereign Power. To this end he marched
away with his whole Army out of Cappadocia, and made for Pisidia, where Alcetas
then lay, and came with a swist March suddenly and unexpectedly to Critopolis,
(as it was called,) having marched Above 350 Miles.
Two thousand five hundred Furlongs in 7 Days and 7 Nights time, and by that
means was upon them before they were aware; and there he first possessed
himself of certain Hills, and other difficult Passes in the Country. When
Alcetas his Party had intelligence of the Enemy's approach, they presently drew
up a Of Horse.
Phalanx in order of Battle, and by a fierce Charge endeavored to drive the
Horse down the Hills, who had now gained the Tops of the Mountains. Hereupon
began a sharp Engagement, in which many falling on both sides, Antigonus with a
Body of Six The Greek is so, but the Latin is 600.
thousand Horse bore down with all his Might upon the Enemy, endeavoring to
cut off all ways and means of Retreat to Alcetas; this done, those upon the
Tops of the Mountains, by the Advantage of the steepness and difficulty of the
Places, easily put the Phalanx to flight. Hereupon Alcetas his Men being
surrounded with the Multitude of their Enemies, and all Passes blocked up
between them and their Foot, they looked upon themselves all as dead Men.
Therefore seeing no other Remedy or Means left to escape, Alcetas (with the
Loss of Multitudes of his Men) at length with much ado broke through his
Enemies, and got to the Foot. Hereupon Antigonus marching down from the Hills
with his whole Army, and his Elephants, the Enemy (who were far inferior in
Number) were mightily terrified: For all the Confederates were not above
Sixteen thousand Foot, and Nine hundred Horse; whereas the Forces of Antigonus
(besides Elephants) were above Forty thousand Foot, Ant. Chapter 319.
and Seven thousand Horse. Those therefore, with Alcetas, (considering that
they should meet with Elephants in the Front, and be surrounded with Multitudes
of Horse, and forced to engage with Foot far exceeding them, both in Number of
Men, and in the Skilfulness of their Arms, and besides had the Advantage of the
higher Ground,) fell into Confusion and Amazement; nay, the Enemy hasted and
came upon them so fast, that they were not able to draw up their Men in due
order of Battle; so that the whole Army was presently broken in pieces, and
Attalus Docimus and Polemo, and many other Commanders, were taken Prisoners.
But Alcetas, with his Lifeguard, his Children, Alcetas received into Termessus.
and those Pisidians that sided with him, got into Termessus, a City of
Pisidia. Then Antigonus came to an Agreement with the Captains, his Prisoners,
and the rest he disposed of among his own Troops, using them with all Humanity,
and by this means greatly increased his Army. But about Six thousand Pisidians
(valiant Men) resolved to stick to Alcetas, and promised they would never
desert him upon any Terms whatsoever: For they loved him entirely for the
Reasons following. For,

When Alcetas, after the Death of Perdiccas, had no Confederates in Asia, he
determined by some acts of Kindness or other to engage the Pisidians; because
he knew he should thereby gain a Warlike People, that had a Country very
difficult to enter, and full of strong Forts, to be his Confederates. Therefore
in every Expedition he always bestowed special P. 652 Ant. Chapter 319.
Marks of Honor upon them above all the rest of his Confederates. For he so
divided the Spoil of his Enemies, that the Half was ever allotted to them.
Moreover, by his Familiarity and Freedom in Converse, daily Invitations of the
most eminent Persons amongst them to his Table, and by his Bounty and
Liberality in bestowing upon them many large Gifts and Rewards, he engrossed to
himself the Love of all: So that now (having anchored all his Hopes, and placed
his chiefest Confidence in them,) he was not frustrated in his Expectation. For
when Antigonus encamped with his whole Army before Termessus, and demanded
Alcetas to be delivered up to him, (and the Elders of the City had determined
to give him up,) all the young Men got together, and resolved to run all
Hazards, and the utmost Extremity, for his Preservation. The Elders indeed at
first endeavored to dissuade the young Men, and draw them off from their
former Resolve, wishing them not to involve their Country in War for the sake
of one Macedonian. But when they saw that they could not allay the Heat of the
young Men, they secretly consulted together, and in the Night sent away a
Messenger to Antigonus, and by him faithfully promised, That they would deliver
Alcetas up to him, either dead or alive. To this end they desired him, That by
assaulting the City for some Days, he would decoy the young Men to sally out,
and while he was skirmishing with them, to feign a Flight; by this means, when
the young Men were out of the City, and busy in Pursuit, they should have an
Opportunity to accomplish their Design. Antigonus assented hereunto, and drew
Ant. Chapter 319.
off from the City at a further Distance, and so egged on the young Men to
Skirmishes, and light Pickeerings. The Or Aldermen.
Elders now discerning Alcetas left alone, they employed the faithfullest of
their Servants, and the most active Men of the City, (that were not engaged
with him,) and with them (in the Absence of the young Men) set upon him; but
could not take him, for he killed himself with his own Hand, lest he should
fall alive Alcetas murdered.
into the Power of the Enemy: But they laid his Body upon a Bier, casting over
it a course Cloth, and carried it out of the Gates, and, unknown to them that
were skirmishing, delivered it to Antigonus. By this Device they freed their
Country, and prevented a War; but they could not avoid the Fury of the young
Men. For when they returned, and understood what was done, (through that ardent
Love and Affection they bore Alcetas,) they were so enraged at their Governors,
that they first possessed themselves of a part of the City, and resolved to set
the Houses on fire, and after to issue out with their Arms, and betake
themselves to the Mountains, and wast and destroy all the Country round
belonging to Antigonus. But afterward they altered their Purpose as to the
burning of the City, and began, by robbing and spoiling miserably, to lay waste
a great part of the Enemy's Country. In the mean time, Antigonus having
received the Body of Alcetas, used it with all the Disgrace and Contumely
imaginable for the space of three Days together, and then beginning to putrify,
contemptuously cast it out without any Burial, and so marched out of Pisidia.

But the young Men of Termessus bearing still a Love and Respect to the abused
Body of the Dead, took it up, and decently buried it. He was of so kind and
obliging a Nature, Ant. Chapter 319.
that there was something singular in him of Love and Respect to all those that
deserved well, and therefore he was ever toward such unchangeable in his Love
and Affection.

Antigonus having left Pisidia, made toward Phrygia with his whole Army. When
he came to the City of the Cretiens, Aristodemus the Milesian brought him the
News of Antipater's Death, and that the chief Command, together with the
Protectorship of the Antipater's Death.
Kings, was devolved upon Polysperchon the Macedonian. He was pleased with the
News, and now his Hopes were exalted, for he made it his Business to Rule and
Govern all the Affairs of Asia, and to gain the Absolute and Sovereign Command
there without stooping to any. And thus stood the Affairs of Antigonus at this
time.

In Macedonia, while Antipater was seized with a grievous Sickness, (and old
Age making way for his Dissolution,) the Athenians sent Demades (who was looked
upon as one P. 653.
that had managed Things with the Macedonians with a great deal of Honesty and
Integrity) Ambassador to Antipater, to desire him to draw out the Garrison from
Munichia, as it was at first Articl'd and Agreed. Antipater at the first was
very kind to Demades; but after the Death of Perdiccas, when some Letters of
Demades (amongst others) were found amongst the King's Papers, wherein he
pressed Perdiccas to hasten with all speed into Europe against Antipater;
though he suppressed his Resentment for a time, yet in Ant. Chapter 319.
truth he bore him a Grudge. Therefore when Demades had delivered his Message,
(as he was Commanded,) and had something sharply debated the Matter concerning
the Garrison; Antipater, without giving any Answer, committed his Son Demeas
(who was joint Ambassador with his Father) to the Our Sheriffs.
Executioners, who presently carried him away to the Prison, and for the
Reasons beforementioned Antipater put one of the Athenian Ambassadors to Death.
cut off his Head.

Afterward, Antipater, when he was very near his End, appointed Polysperchon,
the Eldest almost of all Alexander's Captains, and one in great Honor and
Reputation with the Macedonians, to be Protector of the Kings, with chief and
absolute Authority. And his Son Cassander he created (...) (...) (...)
Polysperchon ma^^ (...) Comm(...)
Chiliarch, next in Power and Authority to Polysperchon. This Office was first
made a Place of Honor and Credit by the Persian Kings, and afterward by
Alexander, when he grew great, and began to imitate this and other the Customs
of the Persians. But Cassander relished not his Father's ordering of Matters,
and judged it very dishonorable to his Family to have one that was nothing
related, either in Blood or Affinity, to succeed in the Sovereign Command, when
there was a Son who in Macedonia gave apparent and pregnant Evidences, both of
Valor and Parts, sufficient to Govern the Affairs of the State in the room of
his Father.

In the first place therefore he took a Journey into the Country with some of
his Friends, Cassander c(...) to gain the S^verign Command in Macedonia.
where having both leisure and opportunity, he discoursed with them about the
Chief Command, and dealt with every one of them privately apart by themselves,
to contrive Ways and Means for him to gain the Principality, and by large
Promises prevailed with them to join together in their Assistance, for the
accomplishment of what he desired. He likewise privately sent Ambassadors to
Ptolemy, to renew the League, and pray his Assistance; and that he would to
that purpose help him with Shipping out of Phaenicia, and Ant. Chapter 319.
send them with all speed to the Hellespont. In like manner he sent Ambassadors
to the rest of the Cities and Captains, to solicit them to join with them in
Arms. But the better to conceal his Design, and that he might not be suspected,
he spent his time for many days together in Hunting.

But Polyspherchon having gained the Guardianship of the Kings, called together
a General Council of his Friends, and by their advice sent for Olympias,
wishing that she would take into her Care Alexander's Alexander, one of the
King*
Son, who was then but a Child, and reside for the future as Queen Regent in
Macedonia: For by reason of the Quarrels and Heart-burnings between her and
Antipater, she had withdrawn herself into Epirus.

When the Death of Antipater was noised abroad in Asia, Stirs and Commotions
began to change the face of Affairs there, while they that were in Power and
Authority made it their Business, and sought every one how to advance his own
particular Interest. The Antigonus piets to be Sovereign. P. 654.
chief of whom was Antigonus, who (upon the account of his having conquered
Eumenes in Cappadocia, and was joined with his Forces, and Alcetas and Attalus
in Pisidia, and besides was appointed by Antipater Viceroy of Asia, and had the
Command of a great Army) bore himself very high, and swelled with Pride in the
Imagination of his own Greatness. Ant. Chapter 319.
And being now possessed already (in his own Conceit) of the Sovereignty, he
resolved neither to regard the Kings nor their Guardians: For in regard he had
a greater Army, he was confident he could possess himself of all the Treasures
laid up in Asia, being there was none able to oppose him. He had then in his
Army Threescore thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse, and Thirty Elephants.
And besides these, he doubted not but to raise more, whenever he had occasion;
for that there was Money enough in Asia for the listing of Soldiers abroad in
any place where he pleased.

Pondering these things in his Head, he sent for Hieronymus the Historian,
Eumenes the Cardian's special Friend and Fellow-Citizen (he who fled to Nora)
and having brought him to him by many rich Gifts and Presents, he sent him as
an Agent to Eumenes, with Instructions to desire him to forget the Battle in
Cappadocia, and to be his Friend and Confederate in the War; and that he should
have a far larger Province, and much more Wealth than ever he enjoyed before:
And to let him know, That he should be Chiefest of his Friends, and share with
him in the Advantages and Successes of all his Designs.

Then without any further delay he called his Friends together, and imparted to
them his whole Design; and to those who were of greatest account among them, to
some he allotted Provinces, to others Commands in the Army; and by raising the
Hopes and Expectations of every one of them, he made them all very forward to
assist him in carrying on his Intrigues: For he determined to pass through all
Asia, and to remove all the Governors Ant. Chapter 319.
of the Provinces, and bestow them upon his Friends.

While he was in execution of these Projects, Arrideus the Governor of Phrygia
(...) the Hellespont, understanding what he was contriving, resolved to secure
his own Province, Arrideus secures himself in Phrygia against Antigonus.
and to that end put sufficient Garrisons into the principal Cities, and marched
against Cyzicum, being the greatest and most important City of all others for
his purpose. He had with him above Ten thousand Foot of Mercenaries, a Thousand
Macedonians. Five hundred Persian Darters and Slingers, and Eight hundred
Horse, together with all sorts of Engines for Battery, both for shooting of
Darts and casting of Stones, and all other things necessary for the carrying on
of a Siege. He came upon the City on a sudden, and having surpised most of the
People when they were abroad in the open fields, he pressed on the Siege, and
endeavored to force the Inhabitants (who were in a very great fright) to
Cyzicum be(...) by Arrideus.
receive a Garrison. The Cyzians, though they were thus surpised, and that many
were shut out that were in the Fields, and those that remained were altogether
unable to defend the Place, looking upon it as their Duty to assert their
Liberty, cowardly sent forth Ambassadors to treat concerning the raising of the
Siege; and to let Arrideus know, That the City was ready to submit to any thing
he thought fit, except the receiving of a Garrison: But in the mean time they
secretly armed all their young Men, and Slaves, that were fit for Service, and
so lined the Walls round with Men for the Defense of the Town. But Arrideus
still pressing the matter for the receiving of a Garrison, the Ambassadors
answered, Ant. Ch 319.
That they would acquaint the Citizens with his Demands; which he consented
unto, and so discharged them: and being thus freed, they spent all that Day,
and the Night next following, in Preparations for the holding out of the Siege.
Being thus deluded, he lost the Opportunity of accomplishing what he designed:
For the Cyzians, in regard the City was very strong, and well guarded on the
Land side (for it was a Peninsula) and being P. 655.
Masters likewise at Sea, they easily repulsed the Enemy. Moreover, they sent
to them of Byzantium for Soldiers, and Darts, and all other Things that were
necessary and useful against an Assault. All which were speedily and readily
sent to them; whereby their Hopes were so revived, that they were the more
encouraged to stand it out to the utmost. They presently likewise put forth
their Long Ships to Sea, and failed along the Coast, and took in those that
were in the Fields, and brought them back to the City. Having therefore thus
increased the number of their Soldiers (after the killing a great many of the
Besiegers) they forced the Enemy to raise the Siege; whereupon Arrideus
(cheated by this Stratagem of the Cyzians) after a fruitless attempt, returned
into his own Province.

In the mean time, Antigonus lying at Celena, was informed of the Siege at
Cyzicum, and therefore resolved to lay an Obligation upon that City (then in
danger to be ruined) to Antigonus goes to vaise the Siege at Cyzicum. Ant. Chapter
319.
favor him in his future Designs. To that end he detached out of his whole
Army Twenty thousand of his best Foot, and Three thousand Horse, and with these
marched away with all speed to the Aid of the Cyzians; but came thither a
little too late: And so though he made a show of a great Kindness to the City,
yet he was wholly frustrated in his Design. But he sent Ambassadors to
Arrideus, to expostulate Matters with him; first, Why he dared to besiege a
Greek Confederate City without any Provocation: Then, to charge him with open
Rebellion, and with a Purpose to make himself absolute Lord and Sovereign of
the Province. Lastly, To command him to depart out of the Province, and
thence-forward to live a private Life, and content himself with one only City
for his Subsistence.

Arrideus hearing these Demands of the Ambassadors (and charging them with
Insolency) told them he would not leave the Province; but that he would
Garrison all his Cities, and was resolved to decide the matter with him by the
Sword.

In pursuance of what he had said (having every where fortified his Towns and
Cities) he sent away a General with part of his Army, commanding him to join
with Eumenes, and to free the Fort from the Siege, and Eumenes from the Straits
and Difficulties wherein Eumenes got out of Nora, by Antigonus his Order. The
Acts of Antigonus. Ant. Chapter 319.
he then was, and to persuade him to be his Confederate in the War.

Antigonus, in the mean time, eager to be revenged on Arrideus, sent away some
of his Forces against him; and he himself marched with a numerous Army toward
Lydia, with a Purpose to depose Clitus the Lord Lieutenant of that Province;
who having before intelligence of his march, Garrisoned all his principal
Cities, and he himself sailed over into Macedonia, to inform the Kings and
Polysperchon of the Revolt and Impudence of Antigonus, and to crave their Aid
and Assistance.

Antigonus at his first approach had Ephesus delivered up to him by the
Assistance of some in the City: Afterward, when Aesculus the Rhodian arrived
at Ephesus with four Ships, wherein were Six hundred Talents of Silver sent out
of Cilicia to the Kings in Macedonia, he seized upon the Money, alleging he
had occasion to use it for the raising and listing Soldiers: By which Act he
sufficiently declared to the World, That he was altogether designing his own
Interest, and was an apparent Enemy to the Kings. After this, he besieged those
Cities that stood out, some of which he took by Assault, and others he gained
by fair Words and Promises.

Having now related the Acts of Antigonus, we shall pass over to those Things
that happened to Eumenes. This Man had the frequent Experience of sudden Turns
and Eumenes his various Fortunes.
Changes of Fortune, being sometimes in low, and other times again (beyond all
Expectation) in very prosperous Circumstances.

In former times, when he assisted Perdiccas and the Kings, he gained the
Province of Cappadocia, and those Places that as Members belonged to it, where
he lived in the height of Prosperity, commanding both Men and Money at his
Pleasure: For he conquered P. 656. Ant. Chapter 317.
Craterus and Neoptolemus, two famous Captains, who then Commanded the
before-unconquer'd Troops of the Macedonians, and killed them both in the
Fight: So that now he seemed to be invincible, when on a sudden his Fortune was
so changed, that he was routed by Antigonus in a great Battle, and forced to
fly with a few Friends to a very little Fort for shelter. Being then shut up,
and hemmed in with a double Wall, he had no Friend left that could help him in
his Distress; but after he had been cooped up a Year together, now utterly
despairing of Deliverance, unexpectedly and on a sudden appeared an opportunity
of Freedom from all his Troubles: For Antigonus, who a little before had
straightly besieged him, and earnestly sought to take away his Life (the Scene
being changed) now seeks to him to be a Partner with him in his Concerns; and
so (upon a mutual Stipulation upon Oath between them) he was freed from the
Pressures and Hardships of the Siege. And thus after a long time being
unexpectedly delivered, he continued a while in Cappadocia, where he again got
together his old Friends, and his former Fellow Soldiers that were dispersed
and scattered up and down in the Country; and was so wonderfully beloved, that
many of his Associates and Companions in the same Hopes and Expectations,
presently flocked to him, ready to join in Arms, and be observent to all his
Commands. To conclude, within a very few days he had got together above Two
thousand Soldiers, who cheerfully listed themselves, besides those five hundred
Friends, who endured the Siege with him in the Fort: And, by the Assistance of
Fortune, he was at length raised to that height, that he gained the Kings
Forces, and defended the Interest of the Kings against all that dared to
deprive them of their Sovereign Authority. But we shall give a more exact
account of these Matters shortly hereafter, in their proper time and place. And
so having now in short related the Affairs of Asia, we shall pass to Things
done in Europe.

Cassander, though he was excluded from the Chief Command of Macedonia, yet was
Cassander projects.
not at all discouraged, but resolved to gain it; for he looked upon it as a
base and dishonorable thing, that the Sovereign Authority enjoyed by his
Father, should now be managed by others. But discerning that the Macedonians
favored Polysphercon, he privately discoursed with some of his Friends, and
then sent them (that nothing might be suspected) to the Hellespont: He himself
in the mean time continuing for some days together in the Country, and spending
his time in Hunting, made every one believe that he had no Thoughts or Designs
of aspiring to the Sovereign Command. But when he got all things ready for his
Journey, he secretly slipped out of Macedonia, and made to the Chersonesus, and
thence forward to the Hellespont; where passing over, he went to Antigonus in
Asia, craving his Assistance, and told him that Ptolemy would join with him.
Antigonus readily embraced the Offer, and made him large Promises of
Assistance, and engaged forthwith to supply him with Forces both for Land and
Sea-Service. But all this was nothing but Dissimulation, pretending as if he
joined with him upon the account of the Love and Kindness he always bore
toward Antipater; whereas in truth he designed to divert Polysperchon with
fierce and bloody Wars, to the end he might with more ease subdue Asia in the
mean time; and so without any hazard, gain the Sovereign Command of all at last.

While these things were in acting, Polysperchon, the Kings Protector, having a
prospect A Council called by Polysperchon.
of a great War he was like to have with Cassander (and conceiving that it was
not fit to undertake any thing, without consulting first with his Friends)
assembled all his Captains, and all those that were of Chief Authority among
the Macedonians. And forasmuch as it was apparent, that Cassander was
strengthened with the Forces of Antigonus, to gain all the Cities of Greece;
and that some of them were Garrisoned with his Father's Forces, and others were
governed by an Oligarchy, influenced chiefly by the Friends and Favorites P.
657.
of Antipater: And besides all this, that Ptolemy, who had the Power in Egypt,
and Antigonus, who had openly and apparently deserted the Kings, were
Confederates with Cassander; and that both were richly stored with Men and
Money, and had the Command of many Potent Cities and Provinces: For these
Reasons he appointed a Consultation to consider how the War should be managed
against them. After the matter was banded to and fro with variety of Opinions,
it was at length resolved that the Cities of Greece should be restored to their
Liberties, and the Oligarchy every where abolished: For by this means they
conceived they should weaken the Interest of Cassander; and much advance their
own Reputation, and gain strong and powerful Confederates. Hereupon they that
were present, forthwith sent to the Ambassadors of the Cities; and wishing them
to be Courageous, promised to restore them to their several Democracies; and
delivered to the Ambassadors the Decree in Writing, that every one of them
(when they returned into their Countries) might the better inform the People of
the Kindness of the Kings and Captains to the Grecians. The Decree was in this
form:

SInce it has ever been the Practice of our Ancestors, to express their Acts of
Grace in the many The Decree made in the Council in Macedonia on the (...) of
the Grecian C(...).
Instances of their Bounty toward the Grecians, Our selves are likewise
desirous to preserve and keep on foot what they determined; and are willing to
evidence to the World the Kindness and Good Will we shall ever be careful to
preserve toward the Greeks: And whereas it is well known that even in the
Lifetime of Alexander, and before the Kingdom devolved upon Us, we were of
Opinion, That all ought to be restored to that Peace and Form of Government
which was ordered and appointed by our Father Philip, and writ to all the
Cities at that time concerning that Affair: Yet afterward it so fell out, that
some unadvisedly, when we were far remote from Greece, made War upon the
Macedonians; which unruly Persons being suppressed and subdued, by the Help and
Conduct of our Captains, many Cities were thereby involved in great Troubles,
and brought under the Smart and Sense of many Inconveniences: Impute therefore
the Cause of all those Sufferings (as justly you may) to those Commanders. But
now in Reverence and due Regard to that ancient Constitution, we grant to you
our Peace, and the same Kinds of Government which you enjoyed under Philip and
Alexander, and full Power and Authority to manage all other things, according
to the several Rules and Orders by them prescribed. We likewise recall all them
who have either voluntarily withdrawn themselves, or have been forced away by
the Command of our Captains, from the time that Alexander first landed in Asia.
It is likewise our Pleasure, That all those thus re-call'd by us, enjoy their
Estates without quarrelling or remembrance of former Injuries, and that they be
restored to the Franchises and Liberties of their several Cities; and whatever
Decree is made against them, let it be abrogated, except such as are banished,
by due course of Law, for Murder or Sacrilege. But we do not hereby intend to
re-call the Exiles of Megalopolis, nor Polyenerus, who are condemned for
Treason; nor the Amphisseans, nor the Tricceans, nor the Pharcadonians, nor the
Heracleots. But as for all others, let them return before the 30th Day of the
Month April.
Xanthicus. But if there be any Laws or Orders made by Philip or Alexander
against them, let them be brought to us, that such course may be taken therein,
as may be most for the Service and Advnatage of us and of the Cities. Let the
Athenians enjoy all other things as they did in the time of Philip and
Alexander; and the Oropians hold Oropus as now they do. Yet we restore Samos to
the Athenians, because our Father Philip before gave it to them. Let all the
Grecians make a Law, That none take up Arms or act any thing against us;
otherwise, That such be banished, and forfeit all their Goods. And we have
ordered that Polysperchon shall manage these and all other Matters: And let all
be observant to him, in what we have before written to you; for those that do
contrary to what we have prescribed, we shall not in the least pardon. P. 658.


This Decree being transmitted to all the Cities, Polysperchon writ to Argos,
and the rest of their Cities, commanding them, That all that were in any
Command in the Commonwealth under Antipater, should be forthwith banished; and
that some should be put to death, and their Estates confiscated; that being
reduced to extremity, they might be in no capacity to assist Cassander. He sent
Letters likewise to Olympias, Alexander's Mother, who was then in Epirus for
fear of Cassander, to entreat her to return with all speed into Polysperchon
invites Olympias into Macedonia. Writes to Eumenes to join with the Kings.
Macedonia, and take care and charge of Alexander's little Son, till he was of
age, and capable to take upon him the sole Management of Affairs. He writ
moreover to Eumenes, that he would stick to the Interest of the Kings, and not
League by any means with Antigonus; but make his choice, either to come over
into Macedonia, in order to join with him in the Protectorship of the Kings, or
abide in Asia, and to receive both Men and Money from them to make War upon
Antigonus, who had now openly declared himself a Rebel against the Kings, who
would be sure to restore him the Province which Antigonus had forced from him,
and likewise all other Privileges and Advantages which he ever at any time
before enjoyed in Asia. And besides, he alleged, that it became Eumenes above
all other Men to protect the Royal Family, as consonant to all those
Demonstrations of his Loyalty, in his late appearances on the behalf of the
Kings; and if he stood in need of Forces, he himself, together with the Kings,
would come over into Asia with the whole Army. These were the Transactions of
this Year.

CHAP. V.
Polysperchon courts Eumenes to assist the Kings. Eumenes his Prudence amongst
the Macedonian Captains. Ptolemy sends to the Captains and others not to assist
Eumenes. Antigonus contrives to kill Eumenes; who marches into Phoenicia.
Nicanor deceives the Athenians, and still keeps Munychia, and subtly gets the
Pyreum. Ordered by Olympias to deliver the Pyreum and Munychia to the
Athenians; but he shifts it off. Alexander, Son of Polysperchon, enters Attica;
secretly corresponds with Nicanor, and displeases the Athenians. Phocion' s
hard Usage at his Trial in Athens, is condemned, and executed. Cassander
arrives at the Pyreum. Polysperchon comes against him, but returns. Besieges
Megalopolis, but is there much damnify'd, his Elephants spoiled by a Stratagem.
A Sea Fight between Clitus and Nicanor. Nicanor beaten. Clitus afterward
routed by Nicanor, is killed in his Flight to Macedonia. Antigonus goes after
Eumenes. Eumenes near losing his Army by the Breach of a Dyke in Babylonia. The
Greek Cities revolt to Cassander. The Athenians make Peace with him. He kills
Nicanor.

ARchippus being chief Magistrate of Athens, and Quintus Aelius and Lucius.
Papirius Olymp. 115. 1. Ant. Chapter 318.
Roman Consuls, the Letters from Polysperchon were delivered to Eumenes
presently after his Release out of the Fort; in which were contained, besides
what was before declared, That the Kings had bestowed of their Bounty upon him,
Five hundred Talents to repair his Losses he had lately sustained, and had sent
Letters to the Governors and Treasurers of Cilicia to pay to him the said Five
hundred Talents, and what other Moneys he Polysperchon sends to Eumenes to join
with the Kings.
should have occasion for, either for raising of Soldiers, or any other
necessary Uses. And that they had ordered a Thousand Macedonian Soldiers so
called from their Silver Shields.
Argyraspides, with their Officers, to be observant to him, and readily and
cheerfully to serve him upon all Occasions, as he that was appointed General
with full and absolute Power and Authority over all Asia. There came likewise
Letters to him from Olympias, by which she earnestly entreated him to be
Assistant both to her and the Kings; for that he only remained the most
Faithful of all the Friends they had, who was able to relieve the desolate
State and Condition of the King's Family. She likewise desired him to advise
her, Whether it was better for her to remain still in Epirus, (and not trust
him who claimed the Guardianship of the Kings, but in truth sought the
Kingdom,) or to return? Hereupon Eumenes forthwith writ to her back again, That
he conceived it most Advisable for her at the present to continue in Epirus
till the War was ended: That he himself was resolved to be ever Faithful and
Constant in his Love and Duty toward the Kings, and not in the least to adhere
to Antigonus, who was aspiring to gain the Kingdom: And because Alexander' s
Son, by reason of the Tenderness of his Age, and the Covetousness of the
Captains, stood in need of Help, he looked upon it as his Duty to expose
himself to the utmost Hazards for the Preservation of the Kings. Hereupon he
forthwith Ant. Ch 318.
commanded all his Soldiers to decamp, and so marched out of Cappadocia, having
with him about Five hundred Horse, and above Two Thousand Foot: For he had no
Time to P. 659.
wait upon the slow March of them, who had promised to join with him; because a
great Army of Antigonus (under the Command of Leander.
Menander) was near at hand, and it was now no staying for him in Cappadocia,
being a declared Enemy of Antigonus: But though this Army came three Days too
late, (and so lost their Opportunity,) yet they resolved to pursue the Troops
with Eumenes; but not being able to reach him, they returned into Cappadocia.
For Eumenes making long Marches, presently recovered Mount Taurus, and so got
into Cilicia: Here Antigenes and Tautamus, the Captains of the Argyraspides.
Silver Shields, or Silver Targateers.
Argyraspides, with their Friends, (in Obedience to the Kings Letters,) met
Eumenes, after a long and tedious March, and joyfully Congratulated him for his
unexpected Deliverance out of his great Troubles, promising to be ready on all
Occasions at his Command. There met him likewise about Three thousand
Argyraspides out of Macedonia, with great Demonstrations of Love and Affection.
This sudden and almost incredible Change was the Subject of every Body's
Admiration; when they considered how the Kings and Macedonians (a little
before) had condemned Eumenes and all his Fellows to Die, and now having forgot
that Sentence denounced against him, not only pardoned him, but promoted him to
the highest Place of Command in the whole Kingdom. And it was not without just
Cause, that they who considered the wonderful Changes that attended Eumenes
should be Ant. Chapter 318.
taus affected: For who that does but observe the different Accidents in the
course of Man's Life, would not be amazed at the various Turns and Changes of
Fortune to and fro, first on one side, then on another? Or who, trusting in the
present Supports of a prosperous Fortune, would upon that account be so far
transported, as to forget the Infirmity of Human Nature? For every Man's Life
(as dispes'd and ordered by the Providence of some one of the Gods) has been
checkered (as it were) with the reciprocal Turns of Good and Evil in all Ages
of the World. So that it is a Wonder, that not only what is strange and
unaccountable, but that even every thing that falls out should be surprising
and unexpected. Therefore who can sufficiently value History? For by the
variety and change of Affairs, (there represented,) a Check is given to the
Pride of the Fortunate, and allays the Grief and Misery of the Unprosperous.
Which Things Eumenes then wisely considering, and weighing beforehand the
Instability of Fortune, he managed his Affairs with the more Caution and
Prudence. For thinking with himself that he was but a Of Cardia in the
Chersonese of Thrace. Eumenes his prudent Deportment. Ant. Chapter 318.
Stranger, and had no Right to Kingly Power and Authority, and that the
Macedonians (who were now under his Command) not long before judged him to Die;
and that the Commanders and Captains were all inflamed with the Heat of
ambitious Designs, he conceived that in a short time he should be despised and
envied, and at length be brought into danger of his Life. For none are willing
to submit to the Commands of those that they look upon to be their Inferiors,
nor be Lorded over by them, who ought rather to be under the Commands of others
themselves. Seriously therefore pondering these Things with himself, in the
first place he refused to accept of his Five hundred Talents ordered him by the
King's Letters for the Repair of his former Losses, and Refitting of himself
with Necessaries: For he said, He needed not so large a Sum, seeing he
pretended to no Principality there; and that which he now enjoyed was not of
his own Choice, but was forced by the Kings to undertake the present Service.
To conclude, he said, That by reason of the continual Fatigues of War he was so
worn out, that he was not able to endure those Hardships, and runnings from
Place to Place, any longer, especially being that a Stranger had no Right to
Command; and by Law was excluded from the Authority due to be executed by such
as were of the same Nation with the Macedonians: For he said, There was
represented to him a wonderful Apparition in his Dream, which he judged very
necessary to discover to them all, for that it might (as he conceived) conduce
much to the promoting of Peace and Concord, and the Public Good. He declared,
That in his Sleep Alexander, the late King, seemed to appear to P. 660.
him (as he was when living) adorned in his Royal Robes, and sitting on his
Throne giving out Orders to his Captains, and (as in his Health) disposing and
managing all the Affairs and Concerns of the Kingdom. Therefore (says he) I am
of Opinion, That a Throne of Gold should be made at the Charge of the King's
Treasury, in which should be placed the Diadem, Scepter and Crown, and all the
other Ensigns of Royalty; and that at spring of Day all his Captains should
offer to him Sacrifices; and standing together Ant. Chapter 318.
near the Throne, should receive Commands in the King's Name, as if he were
alive at the Helm of the Government. All were very well pleased with what he
said; and thereupon every thing was presently prepared for the purpose, for the
King's Treasury was very rich; and that stately Work was forthwith finished,
and the Throne was set up; whereon were placed the Diadem, Scepter, and the
Arms he used to wear. Then was placed an Altar with Fire upon it, upon which
all the Captains one after another cast Frankincense, (taken out of a Golden
Casket,) and other costly sweet Odours, and adored Alexander as a God. After
this were ordered a great number of Seats, upon which the Captains and great
Commanders sat together, and there consulted and debated all the weighty and
important Affairs. Eumenes in the mean time carrying himself with an equal
Respect and Deference in all public Meetings toward all the Captains, and
suppling them with fair and courteous Language, not only avoided the Strokes of
Envy, but thereby gained all their Hearts. By the same Artifice (through the
Prevalency of Superstition relating to the King) he so elevated the Hopes and
Expectations of the whole Army, as if some God were to be their General. In
like manner he behaved himself toward the Argyraspides, and thereby so gained
their Favor, that they counted him highly worthy to be the Protector of the
Kings.

Then he picked out the fittest Persons from among his Friends, and furnished
them Ant. Chapter 318.
with great Sums of Money, and employed them to hire Soldiers up and down upon
large Pay. Whereupon some of them forthwith went into Pisidia and Lycia, and
the bordering Countries, and diligently put in execution what they were
commanded. Others went into Cilicia, and some into Coelo-Syria and Phoenicia,
and others sailed to the Cities in Cyprus. This Listing of Soldiers being
noised abroad, and reported what large Pay was offered, many came flocking in
from the Cities of Greece, and enrolled their Names for this Service; so that
in a short time they had raised above Ten thousand Foot, and Two thousand
Horse, besides the Argyraspides, and those who came along with him.

The Forces of Eumenes being thus on a sudden increased to an incredible
Number, Ptolemy sends to the Captains not to assist Eumenes.
Ptolemy arrived with the Fleet at Zaphyrium in Cilicia, and sent away some
Commanders to solicit the Argyraspides not to side with Eumenes, whom all the
Macedonians had condemned to die. He sent likewise to the Governors of the
Garrison in Where the King's Exchequer for Asia was kept. Strabo, l. 14. 72.
Quindi, desiring them not to help Eumenes with any Money, and he would bear
them out: But no Man regarded what he said, because the Kings and their
Protector Polysperchon, and Olympias the Mother of Alexander, had written to
them to be obedient in all things to Eumenes as to the Commander in Chief, and
General of the Kingdom.

But of all others, Antigonus was most displeased and uneasy at the Growth and
Advancement of Eumenes; for he looked upon him as the most powerful Enemy he
had set up Antigonus contrives to kill Eumenes.
against him by Polysperchon, because he had deserted the Kings: Therefore he
resolved by some Stratagem to cut him off; to which end he employed one of his
Friends, Philotas, and delivered to him Letters to the Argyraspides, and the
rest of the Macedonians, (that P. 661.
sided with Eumenes,) and sent along with him Thirty Macedonians (who were
crafty and fair-spoken Men) with Orders to deal with Antigenes and Tautamus,
the Captains of the Argyraspides, privately and apart by themselves, to destroy
Eumenes, promising them great Rewards, and larger Provinces; and that they
should likewise apply themselves to their Fellow-Citizens and Acquaintance
amongst the Argyraspides, and by Bribes draw them to cut off Eumenes: But they
were not able to prevail with any, except Tautamus, one of the Captains of the
Argyraspides, who being corrupted by Bribes, promised not only for himself, but
undertook to draw over his Colleague Antigenes to this foul Design: But
Antigenes being a prudent and faithful Man, not only refused, but prevailed
with him that was before corrupted to alter his Purpose: For he told him, That
it was more expedient that Eumenes should live than Antigonus; for he being
already grown Great, when he became more Powerful would thrust them all out of
their Governments, and give to them which of his Friends he pleased: But as for
Eumenes, being but a Stranger, he durst not attempt to gain the Sovereign
Authority, but would be content with his present Command, and to gain their
Favor, would secure to them their Provinces, and perhaps add more to them. And
in this manner were all the Projects against Eumenes frustrated and brought to
naught. In the mean time Philotas delivering a Letter of Antigonus to the
Commanders, writ to all the Captains and Soldiers in general; the Argyraspides
and other Macedonians got together by themselves unknown to Eumenes, and
commanded it to be read openly to them: In which were Accusations against
Eumenes, and Advice to the Macedonians forthwith to seize upon him and put him
to Death, and if they did not, that he would come presently and fall upon them
with his whole Army, and do exemplary Justice on them for their Disobedience.
Upon the hearing the Contents of these Letters, the Macedonians and their
Captains were greatly terrified: For one of these two was unavoidable, either
to fall under the revengeful Displeasure of Antigonus by adhering to the Kings,
or to be punished by Polysperchon and the Kings for observing the Commands of
Antigonus. While all the Soldiers were in these distracted Thoughts, Eumenes
comes in amongst them, and hearing the Letters read, advised them to obey the
Orders of the Kings, and not to give any regard to an open declared Rebel; and
having spoken many things pertinent to the present Occasion, he not only
avoided the present imminent Danger, but inclined all the Soldiers to him in a
firmer Bond of Duty and Affection than ever they were before. And thus this
Man, who was again on a sudden even involved in insuperable Dangers, yet was so
wonderfully Fortunate, as thereby to strengthen himself the more. Ordering
therefore his Army to march, he made for Phoenicia, and endeavored Eumenes
marches into Phoenicia.
to get Shipping from all Sea-Towns along as he went, in order to make up a
strong Navy, that by having a Fleet in Phoenicia, he might be Master of the
Sea, and have what Forces he pleased, and be able to transport Polysperchon at
any time with safety out of Macedonia into Asia against Antigonus. To this
purpose there he continued in Phoenicia.

While these Things were acting, Nicanor (who held Munychia) hearing that
Cassander Nicanor deceives the Athenians, still keeps Munychia.
had left Macedonia, and was gone to Antigonus, and that Polysperchon was
suddenly expected with an Army in Attica, earnestly solicited the Athenians to
stand firm in their Affections to Cassander. But when none would consent to
what was desired, but all were rather for the Garrison to march away with all
speed; at first he over-perswaded the People with fair Words to forbear a few
days, and that he would afterward do what should be most for the Good of the
City. But after the Athenians had been quiet for some days, P. 662.
secretly in the Night he brought Soldiers by little and little into Munychia,
so that now he had got in strength sufficient to defend the place, and to
oppose those that designed a Siege.

Hereupon the Athenians perceiving Nicanor meant nothing in what he did, for
the advantage Ant. Chapter 318.
and safety of the City, they sent a Messenger to the King and Polysperchon,
desiring their assistance according to the Purport of their Letters, whereby
they restored the Grecians to their Liberties: Then they had frequent
Assemblies and Consultations among themselves, how to manage the War against
Nicanor: And while they were busying their Heads about these Affairs, he drew
out many of his Mercenaries secretly in the Nicanor gets Possession of the
Pyreum by Subtilty.
Night, possessed himself of the Walls of the Pireum, and the Mouth of the
Harbor. The Athenians hereupon, were vexed to the Heart, to see how they were
gulled and cheated as to Munychia, and had carelessly lost the Pireum. They sent
therefore some of the greatest Persons of Quality, and such who were Nicanor's
special Friends (that is to say) Phocion the Son of Phocus, Conon the Son of
Timotheus, and Clearchus the Son of Nausicles, as Agents to Nicanor, to debate
the late transactions they had with him, and requiring him to permit them to
enjoy their Laws and Liberties, according to the late Edict in that behalf. To
whom he answered, That they must go to Cassander, for he had his Commission to
be Governor of the Garrison from him, and had no power to treat of himself.

About this time came a Letter from Olympias to Nicanor, commanding him to
deliver Olympias by Letters orders Nicanor to re-deliver the Pyreum to the
Athenians, and Munychia, but he puts it off. Ant. Chapter 318
Munychia and the Pyreum to the Athenians: He understanding that the Kings and
Polysperchon had recalled Olympias into Macedonia, and committed the young Son
of Alexander to her Care and Tuition; and had restored her to her former Royal
State and Dignity, (the same that she enjoyed when Alexander was living) merely
out of fear promised to re-deliver them, but always contrived some colorable
excuse or another, and so protracted the Business. The Athenians in former
times had ever a great esteem for Olympias, and now purposing (in the Reality
of their Affections) to celebrate those public Honors which were decreed to
her, (and hoping that the Liberties of the City would be by her perfectly
restored to them, and put out of the reach of all future danger) were very
jocund and exceedingly pleased.

In the mean time the Promises of Nicanor not being performed, Alexander, the
Son of Polysperchon, came with an Army into Attica: The Athenians indeed
thought that he came Alexander, the Son of Polysperchon, comes with an Army
into Attica.
to restore to them Munychia and the Pyreum; but the Event proved the contrary,
for he seized upon both for the Service of the War: For some who had been
Antipater's Friends, (and among them Phocius) fearing some Punishment from the
Laws, met Alexander, and advising him what to do, persuaded him to retain the
Forts in his own Hands, and not restore them to the Athenians till the War was
ended with Cassander: Hereupon, Alexander Encamped at the Pyreum, and would not
permit the Athenians to treat with Nicanor; but by his separate Treatise with
him, and secret and private Transactions of Affairs between Consults privately
with Nicanor, and displeases the Athenians.
them, he gave manifest Indications of the Injury designed the Athenians. The
People therefore met together in a Common Assembly, and Deposed the present
Magistrates; and set up such as most favored the Democracy, and condemned them
that were of the Oligarchy; Some to Death, and others to Banishment and
Confiscation of Goods: Amongst whom Phocton was one who had the Chief Command
in the time of Antipater.

These being all forced out of the City, fled to Alexander the Son of
Polysperchon, and endeavored to engage his help for their Preservation:
Alexander kindly received them, Ant. Chapter 318. Phocion condemned at Athens. P.
663.
and writ on their behalf to his Father, to protect Phocion and his Friends, as
those that favored his Interest, and engaged readily to afford their
assistance in all his Concerns: The Athenians likewise sent an Embassy to
Polysperchon to accuse Phocion, and to solicit for the restitution of
Munychia, and restoring them to their ancient Laws and Liberties. Polysperchon
indeed had a very great desire to retain the Pircum, because that Port might be
of weighty concern and importance in the carrying of the War, but was ashamed
to act contrary to the Edict divulged by himself; and fearing lest the Grecians
should desert him, if he dealt so basely with that City, which was the
Metropolis, he changed his Mind: Having therefore heard the Ambassadors, he
courteously dismissed those from the Athenians with a Gracious Answer; but seized
upon Phocion and all his Followers, and sent Ant. Chapter 3^8.
them bound to Athens, granting Power to the People, either to Pardon them, or
put them to death: Whereupon a General Assembly being called in Athens,
Judgment of Death was resolved upon Phocion and the rest that were accused:
This was carried on by those who had been banished under Antipater, and others
that favored not that Government, both these strongly urged to have them put
to death.

The sum of the Accusation was this; That after the Lamian War they endeavored
for Phocion's hard usage at his Trial in Athens.
the most part to Inslave their Country, and to abolish the Democracy, and the
Ancient Laws: Time being allotted to the Accused to plead their Cause, Phocion
began to speak for himself; but the People tumultuously cried out against all
that he said, and rejected his Defense, so that the Accused knew not what
Course to take: When the Tumult ceased, Phocion began again to speak, whereupon
the whole Multitude set up a shout on purpose, that what he said should not be
heard: For the Common People (being not long before excluded from having any
share in the Administration of the Government, and now newly restored beyond
all expectation to their Right) bore an inveterate Hatred against those who
deprived the Citizens of their Laws and Liberties.

While Phocion was thus overborn, and even in a desperate Condition struggling
to preserve his Life; those that were next to him, understood the Justice and
Equity of his Cause; but those at a distance could hear nothing for the Noise
and Clamor that was made by the tumultuous Rabble, but only discerned the
various trembling motions of his Body, through the inevitable danger that
seemed to threaten him. At length Phocion in despair of his own Life, cried out
aloud, desiring them to condemn him to Die, but to spare the rest.

But the Common People being Fierce and Inexorable; some of Phocion's Friends
stood Ant. Chapter 318.
up to make his Defense. Hereupon the People were quiet for a while, and heard
what they said at first; but when they proceeded so far as to press Arguments
for the clearing of his Innocence, they were cast out with tumultuous and
contradicting Clamours: At length being all condemned by the unanimous Voice of
the People: they were carried away to the Gaol there to be executed, and were
followed by many Honest and Sober Men, who bewailed their Condition, and the
greatness of their Misery: For upon serious Consideration of the inconstancy of
every Man's Fortune, it affrighted many to see that Magistrates and Persons of
eminent Quality, and Men that had showed many acts of kindness in the course of
their Lives, should neither have Liberty to plead for themselves, nor otherways
enjoy the Benefit of Law. But many of the Rabble being incensed against Phocion
unmercifully, even rent his Heart in pieces with Scoffs and Scorns, and
bitterly upbraided him with the Misery of his present Condition. For Hatred
smothered toward Men while in Prosperity, when it breaks forth with Anger
against them in time of their Adversity, becomes altogether Savage and
Implacable. Being therefore all put to Phocion and others put to Death. Ant.
Chapter 318.
Death (according to the Custom of the Country) by drinking a Potion of
Hemlock, all their Bodies were cast forth unburied, out of the Bounds and
Limits of Attica: And this was the end of Phocion, with others that suffered
with him in the same Calamity.

After this, Cassander having got Five and thirty long Ships, and Four thousand
Men, P. 664. Cassander arrives at Athens. Polysperchon comes against him.
Sailed into the Pireum, and being received by Nicanor, Governor of the Fort,
possessed himself of the Pireum and the Harbor: But Munychia Nicanor kept
himself, with a Force sufficient to defend the Place. At this time Polysperchon
and the Kings lay in Phocis; where being informed of Cassander's being landed
at the Pireum, Polysperchon marched into Attica, and Encamped near the Pireum:
He had with him Twenty thousand Macedonian Foot, and Four thousand
Confederates, a Thousand Horse, and Sixty five Elephants; he resolved therefore
to besiege Cassander: But because Provision was scant, and the Siege was likely
to be long and tedious, he was forced to leave so many of the Soldiers in
Attica as the Country was able to maintain, under the Command of Alexander, and
he himself marched into Peloponnesus with the greater part of the Army, to
reduce the Megalopolitans to the Obedience of the Kings; for they being for an
Oligarchy sided with Cassander. While Polysperchon was busied in these Affairs,
Cassander sailed with his Fleet to the Aegeans, and brought them in to join
with him; but the Salaminians (who were disaffected) he closely besieged, and
being well furnished both with Men and Arms, he assaulted them several days
together, and reduced them to very great Extremities: But when the City was
near being taken by Storm, Polysperchon sent a considerable Force both by Sea
and Land to attack the Besiegers; at whose approach Cassander being affrighted,
he raised the Siege, and sailed back to Pireum. Then Polysperchon passed over
to Peloponnesus, to settle Matters there for the Service and Advantage of the
Kings. Coming there he Ant. Chapter 318.
called a Senate, and spoke to them concerning their joining with him as
Confederates in the War; he sent likewise Commissioners to the Cities, with
Orders to put to Death them that were created Magistrates in the Oligarchy by
Antipater, and to restore the People to their ancient Laws.

Many obeyed the Order, so that while Slaughters and Banishments filled the
Cities, they that favored Antipater's Party were ruined and destroyed; and the
Democratital Governments being restored to their ancient Laws, all joined with
Polysperchon: The Megalopolitans only kept close to Cassander, therefore he
determined to besiege their City. The Megalopolitans hearing what was designed
by Polysperchon, ordered by a public Decree tobring Polysperchon besieged
Megalopolis, but was bassed with great loss.
in every thing into the Town that was in the Fields: Then taking an account of
their strength they found that in ancient Citizens, Strangers and Servants,
they were in number Fifteen thousand who were able to bear Arms; They forthwith
therefore formed some into Regiments; others they appointed to work in the
Fortifications; and to some were allotted the care and charge of Guarding of
the Walls; so that at one and the same time, some were employed in drawing a
deep Trench round the City, some carrying Earth out of the Fields, and others
repairing and making up the Breaches in the Walls, others hammering of Arms,
and others were busy in making of Darts and Artillery: So that the Dangers
which threatened, and the forwardness of the Inhabitants put the whole City in
action: For the Greatness of the Kings Army, and the wonderful strength of the
Elephants that attended them, was noised abroad in every place. And now all
things were ready and prepared, when Polysperchon approached with his Army, and
Encamped near Ant. Chapter 318.
the City, dividing his Forces into two Camps, one of Macedonians, and another
of Confederates; and then brings to the Walls wooden Towers of that height as
to overtop them; and upon the Towers Men placed with all sorts of Weapons, and
with these he drove them off, who were placed upon the Rampires. P. 665


In the mean time, the Walls being Undermined, and the Props and Supporters set
on fire, three of the largest Towers were overwhelmed and tumbled down, with
the ruin of the like number of Turrets placed between them. This great and
sudden Destruction caused the Macedonians to set up a shout, and the
strangeness of the thing amazed the Besieged: And now the Macedonians rush
through the Breach into the City, and the Megalopolitans before in parties, now
all together (having the advantage of the Difficulty of the Place occasioned by
the Rubbish) made up to one part, and bravely bore the Brunt of the Enemies
attack, and beat them off: Then they cast up another Work of Earth to guard the
Breach; and working Night and Day without any intermission, raised another Wall
between them and the Enemy; which was presently completed; for being they were
furnished with every thing that was necessary, and had many Hands at work, the
Megalopolitans quickly repaired the damage sustained. As for those that
assaulted them from their Wooden Towers, they plied them with their Engines of
Artillery, and with Darts and Stones out of Bows and Slings, galled and wounded
many of their Enemies. After many were killed and wounded on both sides, till
Night approaching, Polysperchon sounded a Retreat, and drew off his Men into
the Camp.

The next day he removed the Rubbish before the Breach, to make way and passage
for the Elephants, for he thought by the strength of these Creatures to break
through into Ant. Chapter 318.
the City: But the Megalopolitans by the help and conduct of Damides (who in
the Wars under Alexander, experimentally knew the Nature and Use of the
Elephants) altogether baffled the Enemy: For he making use of his own Reason
and Industry against the Beasts Strength and Violence, made their strong Bodies
Useless and Unserviceable; for in a Damides spoils the Elephants of
Polysperchon at Megalopolis, by a Stratagem.
great number of Planks he drove sharp Spikes, and then strewn them here and
there in deep Trenches covered with Earth, so as that the Points of the Spikes
might not be seen, and thus over these he left the Passage into the City: But
he suffered none of the Soldiers to stand in the Front, but placed a great
number of Darters and Archers, and Engines of Artillery in the Flank.

Polysperchon therefore having cleared the Place, and now approaching with the
throng of his Elephants, an unexpected misfortune befell them: For none
appearing in Front to oppose them, the Indians pressed them forward to make
their way into the City, who by the great weight of their Bodies pressed down
upon the Spikes, so that their Feet being wounded, and even pierced through,
they were so foundered, that they were neither able to go forward, or return
back: And besides, showers of all sorts of Darts and Arrows being poured upon
them from the Flankers, some of the Indians were killed, and others so wounded,
that they were not able to do any further service.

In the mean time, the Elephants (through the multitude of Darts, and the
strange and unusual Wounds by the Spikes) were so cruelly tormented, that they
forced back Ant. Chapter 318.
through their own Men, and trod down many under foot: At length the strongest
and most formidable amongst them fell down, others became altogether
Unserviceable, and some killed many of their own Men.

Upon this Success the Megalopolitans were greatly encouraged; but Polysperchon
wished he had never undertaken the Siege; and because he could stay no longer
there, he left part of the Army to carry it on, and betook himself to matters
of more necessary consequence. Then he sent away Clitus the Admiral with the
Fleet, Commanding him to P. 666.
lie upon the Coasts of the Hellespont, to stop the Passage of the Forces out
of Asia into Europe, and to join with Arrhideus, who had fled to the City of
the Ganians, being Enemy to Antigonus. After he had passed over the Hellespont,
and taken in the Cities of the Propontis, he strengthened his Army with the
Forces of Arrhideus. Nicanor the Governor of Munychia, on the other side, being
sent away with the whole Fleet by Cassander, sailed to those Parts where Clitus
lay: He joined likewise with the Navy of Antigonus, so that he had a Fleet of
above a Hundred Sail.

Hereupon there was a Fight at Sea near Now Constantinople. Ant. Chapter 318.
Byzantium, wherein Clitus was Conqueror, A Sea Fight between Clitus and
Nicanor. Clitus Victor.
and sunk Seventeen of the Enemy's Ships, and took no fewer than Forty,
together with all their Men. The rest got into the Haven of Chalcedon. Clitus
being thus successful, supposed the Enemy by reason of this great loss durst
never engage more at Sea.

But Antigonus having intelligence of this Defeat of the Fleet, by his Industry
and admirable Conduct, presently repaired it: For having sent for several
Transport Ships in the Night from the Byzantians, on these he put on board
Darters, Slingers, and other light-armed Men, sufficient for the present
design, and in the Night transported them to the other side; who before Day
setting upon the Enemy at Land (who had left their Ships and were there
Encamped) put Clitus and his Men into great Terror and Confusion; who in that
sudden Fear and Amazement leaped into their Vessels; so that through the cumber
of their Luggage, and multitude of Prisoners, the Tumult and Disorder exceeded.

In the mean time, Antigonus had fitted out some Men of War.
Long Ships, and Manned them with many of his stoutest Foot Soldiers, and bid
them boldly attack the Enemy, for they were sure to be Conquerors. Hereupon
they came up with Nicanor in the Night, and about Another Sea Fight between
Clitus and Nicanor. Clitus totally reuted. Ant. Chapter 318. Clitus slain by
Lysimachus his Soldiers.
break of Day fell in suddenly upon the Enemy still in confusion, and presently
upon the very first Charge put them to flight; some of the Enemy's Ships they
broke in pieces with the Beaks of their own, and brushed off the Oars of
diverse; some they gained without fighting; being delivered up by the Men
themselves that were on board. At length all the rest (except the Admiral's
Ship) fell into their Hands. Clitus forsook his Ship and got ashore, and
designed to have preserved himself by getting into Macedonia; but in his way
falling amongst some of Lysimachus his Soldiers, he was slain.

Antigonus his Reputation for Skill and Prudence in the management of Martial
Affairs, was much advanced by this remarkable Victory. Hereupon he was very
earnest and intent Antigonus goes after Eumenes.
to be Master at Sea, and (without the least doubt of the matter) to gain the
Sovereignty of Asia. To this end he picked out of his whole Army, Twenty
thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, that were the briskest and most active
Men, and marched toward Cilicia to break Eumenes before he grew too strong.
But Eumenes understanding the hot Temper of Antigonus, marched away into
Phaenicia to regain it for the Kings, then unjustly detained from them by
Ptolemy: But not having an opportunity to do what he designed, he removed out
of Phaenicia, and marched with his Army through Caelo-Syria, to get into the
higher Provinces. Afterward he lost some of his Men at the River Tigris, by an
attack upon him in the Night by some of the Inhabitants. In the like manner he
Eumenes near losing his whole Army by the Breach of a Dike in Babylonia. Ant.
Chapter 318.
was fallen upon in the Province of Babylon, by Seleucus, near the River
Euphrates, and was in great danger to have lost all his Army; where by the
Breach of a Dyke his whole Camp was very near being over-flow'd and drowned.
But setting his Wits at work he fled to a high Bank of Earth, and diverting the
Water another way, preserved both himself and his Army.

And so beyond his expectation he escaped Seleucus, and got into Persia with
Fifteen P. 667.
thousand Foot, and Three thousand in the Margent.
Thirteen hundred Horse. Having refreshed his Soldiers after all their Toils
and Labors, he sent to the Governors and Captains of the higher Provinces to
furnish him with more Men and Money. And in this State were the Affairs of Asia
this Year.

But as for Europe, after the Losses and Misfortunes of Polysperchon at
Megalopolis, many of the Greek Cities revolted from the Kings to Cassander. And
because the Athenians In Greece the Greek Cities revolted to Cassander.
could not get rid of the Garrison either by the help of Polysperchon or
Olympias, one of the most eminent Citizens made bold to say in the public
Assembly, That it was for the Interest of the City to close with Cassander. At
the first there was a great Hurly-burly, some being for and others against what
was said: But the advantage being more calmly debated and considered, by common
consent it was at length decreed, That Peace should The Athenians make Peace
with Cassander. Ant. Chapter 318.
be made with Cassander, upon such Conditions as could be obtained by their
Ambassadors. In pursuance whereof, (after some Meetings) these were the Terms
of Peace agreed upon, That the Athenians should quietly enjoy the City, the
Territory and all the Profits, together with the Shipping and all other things,
and should for the future be Friends, and Confederates with Cassander; but that
Cassander should for the present hold Munichia till the War was ended with the
Kings: And that the Commonwealth should pay a Tribute of Ten Minas; and that
an Athenian should be constituted Protector and Guardian of the City, whom-ever
Cassander pleased. Whereupon Demetrius the Phalerian was chosen; who being
invested with the Office, kept the City in perfect Peace, and carried himself
very obligingly toward all the Citizens.

After this Nicanor brought his Fleet into the Pireum, adorned with the Beaks
of Ships gained in the late Victory: Upon the account of which success he was
at the first highly Cassander kills Nicanor.
honored by Cassander, but afterward perceiving that he grew Proud and
Haughty, and still detained the Fort of Munichia with his own Soldiers, he had
a jealousy of him that he intended to revolt, and therefore laid a Trap for
him and cut him off. Then he marched into Macedonia, where many of the
Inhabitants revolted to him; many likewise of the Greek Cities were inclined to
join with Greek, Antipater, but Erroneous. Many in Macedonia join with
Cassander. Ant. Chapter 318.
Cassander. For Polysperchon seemed to be slothful and careless in managing the
Affairs both of the Kingdom and the Allies. Cassander on the other hand,
behaved himself with great Candor toward all, and approved himself industrious
in the Management of Public Affairs, so that he gained many who countenanced
him in his seeking to obtain the Supreme Authority.

But now because Agathocles the Year next following became Tyrant of Syracuse,
we shall, as we designed at the beginning, put an end to this Book, and begin
the next with Agathocles his advance to the Throne, and go on with the Affairs
proper and pertinent to our History.

BOOK XIX.
It Is an old Saying, (brought down to us by Tradition) That none overturn
Democracies, P. 670. PREFACE
but Men that overtop others in Power and Interest. For which reason some
Cities are always jealous of such of their Fellow Citizens as grow Great and
Powerful; and therefore do what they can to depress them. For when Men are in
Power, the next Step is to domineer over their Country; and for those that
(through the Greatness of their Interest above others) have Grounds to expect
the Sovereign Authority, it is very difficult to be free from an Itch of
Monarchy. For it is very natural for them that are ambitious, when they have
much, to thirst after more, and never set Bounds to their insatiable Ambition.

The Athenians therefore, upon this very account, made a Law, which they called
Ostracism, for the banishing such as grew Great amongst them; not so much to
punish them for any Fault they had committed, but to prevent the Mischief and
Prejudice to their Country, which by their Power and Interest they were in a
Capacity to bring upon them: For they remembered (as it were an Oracle) what
Solon had formerly said, who foretelling the Tyranny of Pisistratus, composed
this Elegiack:

(...)
(...)
A City by Great Persons is overthrown;
And Fools beneath a Monarchy do groan.
Of all other Places, Sicily was most infected with this Itch of Monarchy,
before the Romans reduced it into the Form of a Province. For the Cities,
deceived by the Flatteries of the Orators, advanced inconsiderable Men to that
height, till they became absolute Lords over the deluded Multitude.

But the Advancement of Agathocles to be Prince of Syracuse, is above all
others Agathocles.
the most singular and remarkable: For he began at first in very mean and
unlikely Circumstances; but at last he involved not only Syracuse, but all
Sicily and Lybia it self in Blood and Slaughter. He was so mean and low in the
World in his Original, that he followed the Trade of a Potter; from whence he
rose to that height of Power and Cruelty, that he Lorded over the greatest and
richest Island in the World; and for some time gained the greatest part of
Africa, and some Parts of Italy, and filled the Cities of Sicily with
Butcheries and Oppressions. None of the Tyrants that ever were before him
committed the like Villainy, or exercised such barbarous Cruelty upon their
Subjects. For as for his own Kindred, he put them all to Death, Root and
Branch; and so plagued the Cities, that he sometimes butchered all that were at
Men and Women's estate; and would would cut the Throats of Multitudes of poor
Innocents for the Faults of a few, without any difference or distinction; and
then presently would murder whole Cities, Men, Women, and Children.

But because this Book, with others that follow, comprehend the Tyranny of
Agathocles, omitting any further Preface relating thereunto, we shall now
connex things coherent with those that were before related, first allotting to
everything we treat of its due and proper time.

In the preceding Eighteen Books, we have endeavored to set forth whatever was
done in the known Parts of the World, from the beginning of Time, to the Year
next before the From the taking of Troy 866 years.
Reign of Agathocles, to which time, from the Taking of Troy, are computed
Eight hundred sixty six Years.

In this Book, beginning with the first of his Reign, we shall end with the
Battle P. 671.
fought by Agathocles with the Carthaginians, containing an account of Affairs
for the space of Seven Years.

CHAP. I.
Agathocles his Parentage and Education: His Rise: His Stratagems: His bloody
Massacre at Syracuse. He gains the Sovereign Power. The Affairs of Italy.
Olympias returns into Macedonia by Polysperchon's means. The Armies revolt to
her. Her Cruelties. She murders Euridice, and Arrideus her Husband. Affairs in
Asia. Eumenes and Seleucus. Eumenes joined by many of the Captains. The number
of their Forces. He comes to Susa. Attalus and others imprisoned by Antigonus
in a strong Castle, seeking to escape, are afterward besieged, and taken.

IN the Rule of Demogenes Chief Magistrate of Athens, and when Lucius Plotius
and Olymp. 115. 4. Ant. Chapter 315. An. M. 3633.
Manius Fulvius were Roman Consuls, Agathocles became Tyrant of Syracuse. That
things as they were severally done may be more clearly and distinctly
understood, we shall premise a few things concerning the forementioned Prince.

Carsinus of Rhegium being banished from his Country, dwelt at Thermis in
Sicily, which City was then in the hands of the Carthaginians: This Man married
a Woman of that Place, who when she was big with Child, used often to be
troubled with strange Dreams. The Parents of Agathocles.
Being therefore much perpiex'd in his Mind concerning this Embrio, he
entrusted this Affair with some devout Carthaginians, who were then going to
Delphos, and desired them to enquire of the Oracle concerning this Child; who
faithfully performing what they were enjoined, the Oracle gave this Answer,
That that Child would bring dreadful Calamities upon the Carthaginians and all
Sicily. The Father being terrified with this Prediction, exposed the Child in
the open Fields, and left it with some to watch to observe its end. After
several days it still continued alive, and the Guard upon it growing remiss and
careless, the Mother in the mean time stole the Child away in the Night, but
durst Ant. Chapter 315.
not bring it back to her own House for fear of her Husband; but entrusted it
with her Brother Heraclides, and called it Agathocles, after the Name of her
own Father.

Where being brought up, he grew very Beautiful, and of Strength of Body above
what was usual at his Age. When he came to be seven years old, Carsinus was
invited His Education.
by Heraclides to Invited to a Feast at a Sacrifice.
Sacrifice, and there seeing Agathocles playing with other Children about the
same Age, he greatly admired both his Strength and Beauty; and when his Wife
told him, That the Child which he so exposed, if he had been brought up, would
have proved as Manly a Child as that he then saw; he answered, that he was
sorry for what he had done, and then fell a weeping: Whereupon the Woman
perceiving that what she had done would be very pleasing and agreeable to her
Husband, she discovered to him the Truth of the whole matter; whereat he was
mightily pleased, and took away his Son; and out of fear of the Carthaginians,
removed with all his Family to Syracuse: but being but a poor Man, he taught
his Son, then a Child, the Potter's Trade; at which time Timaleon the
Corinthian having routed the Carthaginians at the River Cremissus, made all
free of the City that would come in to him, amongst whom Carsinus (with
Agathocles) were enrolled as Citizens; and Carsinus died a little time after.

The Mother of Agathocles had in a certain place set up her Son's Statue in
Stone, upon which a Swarm of Bees fastened, and began to make their Wax-Combs
upon the Hips of the Statue; which remarkable Passage being related to those
who apply themselves to Studies of that kind, all unanimously agreed, That when
he came to be a Man, he would Ant. Chapter 315.
be famous; which happened accordingly: For Demas, a Nobleman of Syracuse,
falling Agathocles a Catamite to Demas.
in love with Agathocles, first supplied him liberally with every thing he had
occasion for; so that he began in some measure to taste of Plenty; afterward
being created Demas.
General of the Agragentines, he advanced him to be a (...), Captain of 1000.
Colonel in the room of one that was then lately dead. He was indeed very
remarkable and of great Esteem before he was an Officer, upon the account of
the Strength of his Body; for in the time of Training and Military Exercise, he
bore so great a weight of Armor, and carried such mighty Weapons, that no
other Man was able to bear. But now since he was made a Military Tribune, his
Fame spread abroad much more than it did before; for he was eager to fight,
daring in Action, and bold, nay, impudent in his Harangues to the People. Demas
afterward fell sick, and died; and having left all his Estate to his Wife,
Agathocles married her, and Agathocles his rise.
so was esteemed one of the richest of the Citizens.

Afterward the Crotonians being besieged by the Brutians, the Syracusians sent
a great Army to their relief, under the Command of Antander, the Brother of
Agathocles and others: P. 267.
But the Sovereign Command and chief Management of the Affair was committed to
Heraclides and Sosistratus, Men that employed themselves all their Lives long
in Assassinations, Murders, and all kinds of Wickedness and Debauchery. Which
the Nothing said of them in the preceding Book, therefore some mistake or want.
Rhodomanus thinks there was either another Book between these, or a want of
what was inserted in the preceding Book. See his Notes.
Book Ant. Chapter 315.
next preceding this has particularly set forth. With those in this Expedition
(by a Decree of the People) was joined Agathocles, who was then a Colonel; and
though he had remarkably approved his Valor against the Barbarians, yet he was
so envied by Sosistratus, that he altogether disregarded him, not allowing him
the Honor due to his Deem rits: At which he was so exasperated, that he
accused Sosistratus and his Followers to the People, as having designs to
advance him to the Monarchy. But the Syracusians giving no regard to those
Accusations, Sosistratus, after his return from Crotona, became Supreme and
Absolute Lord of his Country.

Agathocles being incensed against him, first (with those that sided with him)
remained in Italy, and endeavored to possess himself of Crotona, but failing
in his design, with some few along with him, he escaped to Tarentum; by whom he
was entertained and taken into Pay; but committing many rash and inconsiderate
Acts, he began to be suspected of some intended Innovation; and thereupon his
Commission was taken from him; upon which he got together the Exiles of Italy,
and relieved them of Rhegium, who were then besieged by Heraclides and
Sosistratus. Afterward, when the Monarchy was abrogated at Syracuse, and
Sosistratus was expelled out of the City, he returned into his Country. And
Ant. Chapter 315.
in regard at that time, many of the Nobility who were for an Oligarchy (to the
number of Six hundred of the greatest Persons of Quality) were together with
the Magistrates thrust out of the City, a War broke out between the Exiles, and
those that were for a Democracy; and the Carthaginians sided with Sosistratus
and his Exiles: Hereupon, there were daily Skirmishes and Drawing-up of Armies
one against another; in which Agathocles Agathocles his Stratagem.
acting sometimes as a Private Soldier, and at others as a Commander, gained
the Reputation both of Valor and Policy; for always upon every opportunity, he
invented some stratagem or other which proved advantageous to his Party;
amongst which there was one thing especially to be remembered.

The Syracusians had Encamped near to Gela, and at that time in the Night he
broke into the Gela.
City with a Thousand Men at Arms, who were presently met by Sosistratus, with
a strong and well-ordered Party, who forced them that had entered, back, and
killed Three hundred of them: The rest looking upon themselves all as lost,
endeavored to get out at a Sally-port, and were beyond all Hope and
Expectation, freed from their present imminent danger by Agathocles: For he
fought with great Valor and Resolution at the Head of his Men, and received
seven Wounds; and when he was even ready to faint (through loss of Blood) and
the Enemy bearing down upon him, he commanded the Trumpeters to sound a Charge
at both parts of the Walls; which being presently done, those who came to force
out them that were entered, could not discern the truth of the thing, because of
the Darkness of the Night, and therefore believing that another Ant. Chapter 315.
Party of the Syracusians had broken in at both Places, they made an Halt and
pursued no further. And so being divided into two Parts, at the Sound of the
Trumpets, they forthwith ran together to defend the Walls. In the mean time,
Agathocles with his Soldiers, having thus made room for themselves, got safe to
the Trenches; and thus having deluded the Enemy, he not only wonderfully
preserved his own Men that first entered, but seven hundred more that came in to
his assistance.

After this, Acestorides the Corinthian being created General at Syracuse;
Agathocles was thought to aspire to the Monarchy for his good Service, but he
avoided the Danger that hung over his Head upon that account: For Acestorides
(not willing to cut him off P. 673.
for fear of a Tumult) commanded him to depart the City, and ordered some to
kill him in the Night as he was making away. But Agathocles conceiving what the
General was plotting against him, picked out one of the young Men that was very
like himself, both in Stature and Feature; and delivered to him his Horse,
Arms, and Garments, and by this means subtly deceived them who were sent out
to be his Murderers; but he himself slink'd away in Bypath in a poor ragged
Coat; and they by the Arms and other signs, conjecturing that the other was
Agathocles, (the Darkness of the Night not permitting a Ant. Chapter 315.
perfect Discovery) perpetrated indeed the Murder, but missed the Person.

Afterward the Syracusians having readmitted the Exiles that were driven out
of the City with Sosistratus, and having made Peace with the Carthaginians;
Agathocles himself now an Exile, raised an Army of his own in the Heart of the
Country; at which not only the Citizens but the Carthaginians were much
affrighted; and therefore he was courted to return into his own Country; and
when he came, being conducted into the Temple of Ceres by the Citizens, he
there swore that he would do nothing to the Prejudice of the Democracy.

Putting on therefore a Cloak of Dissimulation, as if he would protect the
Democracy, and having caught the People by diverse Tricks and Devices, he was
made General and Conservator of the Peace, till all Matters should be appeased
amongst the Exiles that were returned to the City. For every Company and
Fraternity were divided into many Factions, and very great Heart-burnings there
were between private and particular Persons: But the Senate of Six hundred that
was appointed to govern the City after an Oligarchy, was most fierce against
Agathocles's Party; for the Members of this Assembly were such as were the
Richest and of the best Quality among the Syracusians. Ant. Chapter 315.


However, Agathocles, who now affected the Sovereignity, gained many
opportunities for the accomplishing of his Designs: For he had not only a
Command of an Army as General, but News being brought that there was an
Insurrection in the Bowels of the Country at Erbita, he gained a further
opportunity to increase his Army, and raise what Men he pleased without
suspicion. Under color therefore of his Expedition to Erbita, he raised Men
out of Morgantina and other Cities, in the Heart of the Country, together with
those that had formerly served him in the Wars against the Carthaginians; for
all these had a great respect for Agathocles, upon the account of the many
instances of his kindness toward them, throughout the whole War. On the other
hand they hated the Six hundred who had been a part of the Oligarchy in
Syracuse, and no less abhorred the People who forced them into Obedience. There
were Three thousand of them that were thus very ready with Heart and Hand to
overturn the Democracy: To these he joined some of the Citizens, who by reason
of their Poverty envied the Power and Pomp of the great Ones.

When every thing was ready, he ordered the Soldiers to meet him at spring of
Day, in a Body at Near Syracuse.
Timoleontium; and he himself in the mean time sent for Pisarchus and Decles,
Ant. Chapter 315.
(who seemed to be the most leading Men among the Six hundred) pretending to
discourse with them concerning some Matters relating to the Public Good: When
they came to him, accompanied with forty of their Friends, he pretended he was
to be betrayed by them, and thereupon seized them all, and accused them to the
Soldiers, declaring, that for his love to the People, he was likely to be
hurried away to destruction by the Six Agathocles Cruelties in Syracuse.
hundred, and sadly bewailed his Miserable State and Condition; at which all
the Soldiers were so enraged that they cried out, that Revenge should be
presently taken without any further delay, upon the Authors of such Injustice:
Upon which he commanded the Trumpets to sound a Charge, and ordered his
Soldiers to kill those that were the Ringleaders of the Mischief, and spoil
and plunder the Six hundred, and all those that sided with them, of all their
Goods and Estates. Hereupon all being now eagerly set upon Ravage P. 674.
and Spoil, the whole City was filled with Horror and Confusion; for the most
Innocent of the Citizens not dreaming of any Massacre designed against them,
ran out of their Houses into the Streets, to see what the Ground was of the
Uproar; whereupon, the Soldiers, partly through their Covetousness to enrich
themselves, and partly through Madness and Rage, fell upon the Naked People
that (through Ignorance) had no Arms Ant. Chapter 315.
to defend themselves, and put them all to the Sword. For the Soldiers having
secured all the Narrow Lanes and Passes in the City, the Citizens were
inhumanly Murdered, some in their Houses. and others in the Streets, and many
(altogether Innocent, not accused of the least Fault) were knocked on the Head
while they were asking the reason why they were to be killed. For the common
Soldiers (having now all in their Hands) made no difference betwixt Friend and
Foe; but he was sure to be reputed an Enemy where most was to be gotten by his
Fall; so that then you might see the whole City filled with Violence, Murders,
Slaughters, and all kinds of Wickedness: For some out of former grudges spared
not to load those they before hated with all sorts of Disgrace, having now full
sway to do whatever they pleased; others judging it an act of Prudence to
enrich themselves by the Butcheries of them that were rich; spared no means,
nor omitted any contrivance to destroy them. For some broke down the Gates of
the Out-Courts, others by Ladders ascended the House Tops, and some fought with
them that defended themselves from the Roofs of the Houses. Nay, there was no
safety even to them who fled to the Temples under the shelter of the Gods; but
Piety toward the Gods was crushed and born down by the Cruelty of Men: And
these things Greeks against Greeks in their own Country, and Kindred against
Kindred in a time of Peace, without any regard Ant. Chapter 315.
either to the Laws of Nature, or Leagues or Reverence to the Gods, dared thus
audaciously to commit: Upon which account not only Friends, but even Enemies
themselves, and every sober Man, could not but pity the miserable Condition of
these distressed People. All the Gates were shut up, and above Four thousand
were killed in one day, for no other fault but that they were in greater esteem
than others: Of those that endeavored to fly, some in running to get out of
the Gates were laid hold on, others who cast themselves over the Walls escaped
to the next Towns. Some through Fear and Inconsiderateness leaped off the Walls
and broke their Necks. After all, there were thrust out of the City as Exiles,
above Six thousand, of whom the greatest part fled to Agrigentum, where they
were received and entertained with that Humanity as was agreeable to their
present Condition. But those of Agathocles his Faction, (who spent the whole
day in Butchering of the Citizens) were not sparing in committing their Rage
and Villainies upon the Women, but thought they should be revenged upon them
that escaped Death, if they could but abuse their Kindred and Relations, in the
most Vile and Beastly manner imaginable: For that it was very reasonable to
think, that it would be more bitter than Death it self to Husbands and Parents
to think of the Abuses of their Wives, and the Ravishings of their Daughters:
But from hence we must forbear composing a Tragedy as is very usual Ant. Chapter
315.
with other Writers, especially to stir up compassion toward them that are
involved in such horrible Sufferings; because none will expect an express
account of every Particular, when the whole is so ready and clear to be
understood. For they that durst impudently at Midday murder Innocents in the
open Streets and Market place, have no need of a Writer to set forth what they
did in the Houses in the Night, and how they behaved themselves toward Wives
and young Maids then in the power of their Enemies, without any guard or
defense to protect them.

But Agathocles, after he had glutted himself with the slaughter of the
Citizens two whole Days, brought together all the Prisoners, and released
Dimocrates, upon the account of an old Friendship between them: But as to the
rest, such as were his greatest Enemies, he put to Death, and banished the
other. Then calling a common Assembly, he accused the P. 675.
Six hundred, and those who had favored the Oligarchy, declaring that he would
purge the City of all those that affected a Monarchy; and restore the People to
perfect Liberty, and that he would henceforth stand upon equal ground with them
all, and live a private Life, free from further Cares and Toils. Upon saying of
which he threw away his Generals Ant. Chapter 315.
Coat, and put on a Jacket, and so went his way, making a show of himself as
but one of the Common People. He did this dissemblingly to act the Part of a
Commoner; being in the mean time very well assured, that there were many in the
Assembly that were Brethren in Iniquity with himself, who would never suffer
the Generalship to be devolved upon any other.

Hereupon, those that had robbed the oppressed People of their Goods,
immediately cried out, and with a loud Voice wished him not to desert them, but
to take upon him the entire and absolute Management of all Affairs. At first he
seemed to be very shy; but Agathocles gains the Sovereign Command
being afterward more earnestly pressed by the Multitude, he told them he was
willing to accept of the chief Command as General, provided he should not be
joined with any other Colleague, for he should never be content to be
accountable (as the Law then was) for the Miscarriages and Irregularities of
those that should be joined with him in Commission. Hereupon, the People having
agreed, that the whole Power should be in him alone, they voted him General,
with full and absolute Authority; so that for the future he plainly acted the
Part of a Monarch, and managed the Affairs of the whole City.

The Syracusians as yet (...), Without Hernts
Tame and Quiet, some curbed by Fear, and others kept down by Force, durst not
discover (as a thing vain and to no purpose) the Heart-burnings that were among
them.

But many of the Poorer sort, and those that were in Debt, were much pleased
with Ant. Chapter 315.
this Revolution: For Agathocles had promised in the Senate, that all former
Debts should be (...). Caused to be cut off.
remitted and made Void, and that Lands should be allotted and shared out to
the Poor.

After he had finished these things, he ordered that none for the future should
be killed or otherwise abused. But on the contrary, changing his former course,
he carried himself with a great deal of mildness toward the People,
encouraging many with Rewards, and not a few with large Promises, and courting
all with smooth words, he no little winded himself into the favor and good
Opinion of the People: And though he was advanced to so high a pitch of Honor,
yet he put not on a Diadem, nor suffered the Attendance of a Lifeguard, nor
admitted any difficulty of access to his Person, which is the common practice
almost of all Tyrants: But he made it his business chiefly to look after the
Public Revenue, and the making and providing all sorts of Weapons and Arms: He
built likewise other long Ships to increase and strengthen his Fleet: And
lastly, brought many of the Cities and Towns in the Heart of the Country to
stoop to his Authority. And thus then stood the Affairs of Sicily.

In Italy this was the Ninth year of the War of the Romans with the Samnites;
before The Affairs of Italy.
which time there had been very sharp Battles and Engagements between them; but
then (except some Incursions into the Enemies Country) there was little or
nothing done worth taking notice of; only some Forts were taken, and the
Country harrass'd. But in Apulia The Romans. Ant. Chapter 315.
they wasted and spoiled all Now Capitania in the Kingdom of Naples.
Daunia, and having conquered the Canutii in France, now called Chartres.
Canutii, received of them Hostages. There were added likewise two other Tribes
to the former, the one of Falernia, and the other of Ufentina.

While these things were acting, the Crotonians made Peace with the Brutians;
but the War being continu^d another year with the Exiles, (who were expelled by
the People for their conspiring with Heraclides and Sosistratus, of which we
have given a particular Account in the No such Account appears there. P. 676.
former Book) they created Parones and Menedemus their Generals. In the mean
time the Exiles went to Thurium, and there listed Three hundred Mercenaries,
and endeavored in the Night to have broke into the City: But being repulsed by
the Crotonians, they Encamped in the Confines of the Brutians; but within a
short time after they were every Man cut off by a much stronger Party, who
sallied out of the City against them.

And now having given an account how things went in Sicily and Italy, we shall
pass to the things done in other Parts of Europe.

Eurydice being Queen-Regent in Macedonia, as soon as she heard that Olympias
was preparing for her return, sent an Express to Cassander, then in
Peloponnesus, wishing him to Affairs in Macedonia.
hasten to her Aid and Assistance; and in the mean time, by her Bribes and
Promises, she brought over the most active and stirring Men among the
Macedonians, to favor her in her designs.

But Polysperchon got an Army together, and being joined with Aeacides of
Epirus, he brought back Olympias, with His Name was Alexander, the Son of
Roxana. Ant. Chapter 315. Olympias returns into Macedonia.
Alexander's Son into the Kingdom. And hearing that Eurydice was at Evia in
Macedonia with an Army, aiming to make an end of all by one Battle, he makes
swiftly after; and presently as soon as the Armies Encamped one over against
the other, on a sudden the Macedonians (in reverence to Olympias, and calling
to mind the many Advantages and Kindnesses they had received at the hands of
Alexander) turned about; whereupon, King Aridaeus called Philip.
Philip with all his Servants were presently taken. Euridice the Wife of Philip.
Eurydice likewise, together with Polycles (one of her Counselors) were
afterward taken; being before returned to Amphipolis.

Olympias having thus gained the custody of both the Kings, and likewise the
Kingdom, without Blood; used not her good Fortune with that Humanity as she
ought to have done: But at the very first imprisoning both Eurydice and Philip
her Husband, she used them very cruelly: For she cooped them both up in a very
straight and narrow Place, where through a little narrow Hole every thing for
their necessary use was delivered in to them. And for many days together, she
thus (against all Law and Conscience) exercised her Rage and Revenge upon these
miserable Princes.

But when she perceived that the Macedonians spoke ill of her, out of Pity and
Commiseration She cruelly Murders Euridice and Arrideus her Husband. Ant. Chapter
315.
toward those that were thus miserably dealt with, she delivered Philip to
certain Thracians, (after he had reigned Six Years and Four Months) to be
stabbed with Ponyards. But Eurydice she ordered to be more severely dealt with;
because she was to free of her Tongue, that she was still blabbing it out, that
she was fitter to rule the Kingdom than Olympias: And therefore she sent to her
a Sword, a Rope, and a Cup of Poison, bidding her choose which she would to
dispatch her self with, neither valuing the former State and Dignity of the
Injured Lady, nor commiserating the common lot of Mankind: And therefore she
came at length to experience the same turns of Fortune her self, and came to an
end, every way worthy her Cruelty. For Eurydice in the presence of the Person
that brought her the Instruments of her Death, prayed the Gods that she might
have the like Present sent to her; and then having bound up the Wounds of her
Husband, as well as the shortness of time would permit, she wrapped him up, and
so without any Womanish Complaints, or any base dejection of Spirit, through
the greatness of her Misery, she strangled her self in her own Garter.

Having made an end of these two, she killed Nicanor, the Brother of Cassander:
Then she picked out a Hundred Macedonians of Cassander's Friends, and put them
all to Death. Having gratified her Revenge by these Cruel Acts, many of the
Macedonians were incited to hate her mortally for her Cruelty: For they all
remembered the Words of Antipater, who, like an Oracle, a little before his
Death, had given strict charge not to admit this Woman to govern the Kingdom.
Olympias therefore managing things after this rate in Macedonia, it clearly
pointed out a Revolution in the State.

In Asia, Eumenes having with him the Argyraspides under their Captain
Antigenes, wintered Ant. Chapter 315. Affairs in Asia. P. 677. Eumenes and his Army
near being drowned by Seleucus.
in the Province of Babylon, in the Towns called Carrhe; thence he sent
Ambassadors to Seleucus and Pitho, requiring them to assist the Kings, and that
they would join with him in the War against Antigonus. Pitho was appointed
Lord Lieutenant of Media, and the other of the Province of Babylon, when the
second Division of the Provinces was made in Triparadisus. Seleucus answered,
That he, and those with him, would supply the Kings with what ever they wanted,
but that he would never observe any of the Commands of Eumenes, who was
adjudg'd to die by the common Suffrage of the Macedonians. After many Disputes
relating to this Resolution, Pitho and Seleucus.
they solicited Antigenes and the Argyraspides by their Agent to cast off
Eumenes.

But the Macedonians rejecting what they required, Eumenes commended them for
their Fidelity and marched away, and came to the River Tigris, and there
encamped Three hundred Furlongs from Babylon: For he designed to march to Susa,
because he intended to raise Forces out of the higher Provinces, and to make
use of the King's Treasures as there should be occasion. But he was forced to
pass the River, because that part on this side was eaten up by Forraging and
Depredations, and the Country on the other side was yet untouched, and afforded
plenty of Forage and other Provision for his Army. While he was getting
Vessels together, in order to his passing over the River, Seleucus and Pitho
Ant. Chapter 315.
sailed up the River with two Galleys of three Tire of Oars, and many other
little Vessels, being part of those that Alexander built at Babylon.

As soon as they arrived at the place where the Passage was intended, they
renewed their Solicitation to the Macedonians to persuade them to cast off
Eumenes, and not to abet and encourage a Fellow against them who was but a
Stranger, and had destroyed Multitudes of the Macedonians. But when Antigenes
could not be prevailed with upon any Terms whatsoever, the Seleucians sailed to
an old Sluice, and broke down the Head of it, where it was grown up through
length of Time: Upon which the Macedonian Camp was surrounded with Water, and
all the Tract of Ground overflowed, so that the whole Army was in great danger
to be utterly lost. All that day therefore they rested, considering and
advising what was best to be done in such an Exigent. The next day, without any
Disturbance from the Enemy, they transported the greatest part of the Army in
Flatbottom'd Boats, to the number of Thirty, forced forward with long Poles:
For Seleucus had only Horse with him, and those far inferior in Number to the
Enemy. And now Night approached, when Eumenes (in great Pain for his Carriages
left behind) caused all the Macedonians to repass the River; and then, by
Direction of one of the Natural Inhabitants, he set upon cleansing another
suchlike place, by which the Water might be Ant. Chapter 315.
easily diverted, and the Ground all round about drained dry. Which when
Seleucus perceived, (minding to be rid of them out of his Province with what
speed he could) he sent Ambassadors to them to make a Truce, and so permitted
them to pass over the River: But forthwith sent Expresses to Antigonus in
Mesopotamia, to desire him with all speed to come down with his Army, before
the Governors of the Provinces came in with their Forces.

Eumenes having now passed the River Tigris, as soon as he came into Susiana,
he divided Eumenes comes into Susiana.
his Army into three Bodies, by reason of the Scarcity of Provision; and thus
marching through the Country three several Ways, he was in great want of Bread
Corn, therefore distributed Rice, Of which the Indians make Oil: A white Grain.
Millet and Dates (with which that Country abounded) amongst the Soldiers.

Although he had before taken care to send away the Kings Letters to the Lords
Lieutenants of the Upper Provinces, yet he then again sent Expresses, to desire
them all to meet him with their Forces in Susiana. At which time it so
happened, that they had their Forces then in the Field, and were got together
for some other Reasons. Of which, it is Ant. Chapter 315.
necessary here to say something before we proceed further.

Pitho was Lord Lieutenant of Media, and General of all the higher Satrapies,
by Nation The Captains in Asia draw into the Field, and the reason. P. 678.
a Parthian, who had killed Philotas the former General, and had placed Eudamus
his own Brother in his Room. Upon which, all the other Provinces joined
together, lest they should be served the same Sauce, because Pitho was of a
restless Spirit, and had engaged himself in Matters of high Importance. Having
therefore overcome him in Battle, and cut off most of his Army, they drove the
Man himself out of Parthia; who first sought for shelter in Media, and in a
short time after he went to Babylon, and prayed Assistance from Seleucus, and
that they might join together in one common Interest. The Governors therefore
for these Causes having drawn their Forces together, Eumenes his Messengers
came to the Armies when they were ready, and prepared in the Field. Peucestes
was the most Renowned Captain of them all, and was made General by an unanimous
Assent. He was formerly Squire of the Body to Alexander, and advanced by the
King for his Valor. He was Lord Lieutenant of the greatest part of Persia, and
in great Esteem among the Natives. And for this Reason, he of all the
Macedonians was allowed by Alexander to wear a Persian Gown, because he thought
thereby to ingratiate himself with the Persians, and engage them to be more
observant to all his Commands. Ant. Chapter 315. The Number of the Forces that
joined with Eumenes.
He then had with him Ten thousand Persian Archers and Slingers, and of other
Nations (taken into the Rank of Macedonians) Three thousand, with Six hundred
Horse of Greeks and Thracians, and of Persian Horse Four hundred. Polemon a
Macedonian, Governor of Carmania, had Fifteen hundred Foot, and Seven hundred
Horse. Sibyrtius, Governor of Arachosia, had a Thousand Foot, and Six hundred
and ten Horse. Androbazus likewise was sent from Parapamysus (of which Province
Oxyartes was Governor) with Twelve hundred Foot, and Four hundred Horse.
Stasander, Governor of Aria and Dranginas, being joined with the Bactrians, had
with him Fifteen hundred Foot, and a Thousand Horse. Out of India came Eudamus
with 300 in the Margin. Ush. Ann. 307.
Five hundred Horse, and Three thousand Foot, and a Hundred and twenty
Elephants, which he got after Alexander's Death, when he treacherously slew
Porus. There were in the whole, with the Governors of the Provinces, above The
Particulars make One and twenty thousand.
Eighteen thousand and Seven hundred Foot, and Four thousand and Six hundred
Horse.

When all these came into the Province of Susiana, and joined with Eumenes, a
public Assembly was called, where was a hot Dispute concerning the Choice of a
General. Peucestes, upon the account of his bringing in most Men into the
Field, and his eminent Post under Alexander, conceived he had most Right to
challenge the chief Command. Antigenes, Captain of the Argyraspides.
Silver Targateers, insisted upon it, That the whole Power of Election ought to
be committed to his Macedonians, who under Alexander had conquered Asia, and by
their Valor had so signalized themselves, as to gain the Reputation of being
Ant. Chapter 315.
Unconquerable. But Eumenes fearing lest by their Divisions they should become
an easy Prey to Antigonus, advised that they should not make only one General;
but that all who were before chosen Captains, and Commanders, should meet every
day in the King's Pavilion, and there consult of all the public Affairs. For a
Tent had been before erected to Alexander, and his Throne placed therein, to
which they used to resort, (offering Incense as to a God) and there debate all
Matters of Weight, and special Concern. This Advice being Approved and
Applauded by all, they met there every day, as in a City governed by a
Democracy. Afterward being come to Susa, there Eumenes was supplied with what
Moneys he had occasion for out of the King's Exchequer. For the Kings by
Eumenes come to Susa.
their Letters had ordered the Treasures, that they should issue to Eumenes
alone so much Money as he at any time required. Hereupon he gave the
Macedonians Six Months Pay P. 679.
beforehand, and to Eudamus (who brought the Elephants out of India) he paid
Two hundred Talents, under color to defray the Charge and Expense of the
Elephants, but in truth the more to engage him to his Interest. For if Contests
should arise, that Party would have the greatest Advantage with whom he sided,
by reason of the Terror occasioned by the use of these Beasts. The rest of the
Governors, every one maintained their own Soldiers they brought with them. This
done, Eumenes continued for some time in Ant. Chapter 315.
Susa, and there refreshed his Army.

In the mean time Antigonus, who Wintered in Mesopotamia, resolved forthwith to
set upon Eumenes before he grew too strong: But when he heard, that the
Provincial Governors with their Forces, together with the Macedonians, were
joined with him, he let his Soldiers rest, and made it his Business to raise
more. For he saw that he had need of a great Army, and reason to make more than
ordinary Preparations for the War.

In the midst of these Preparations, Attalus, Polemo, Docimus, Antipater, and
Philotas, who before were Commanders in Alcetas his Army, and were taken
Prisoners, and now kept Several Captains being Prisoners in a strong Castle,
seek to escape.
close Prisoners in an extraordinary strong Castle, hearing of Antigonus his
intended Expedition into the higher Provinces, (conceiving now they had gained
a fair opportunity,) hired some of their Keepers to suffer them to escape.
Having therefore gotten Arms, about Midnight they set upon the Guard: They
themselves were but Eight in Number, (surrounded with Four hundred Men,) yet
Valiant and Expert Soldiers through their Experience in the War with Alexander.
Xenopithes, the Governor of the Castle, they Ant. Chapter 315.
threw off from the Walls headlong down a steep Rock, a Furlong high; and as to
the rest, some they killed upon the place, and others they hurled down, and
then set the Houses on fire. Hereupon they took into the Castle Five hundred
Men that were without expecting the Issue: It was indeed very well stored with
Provision, and all other Things necessary: But they consulted together, whether
it was better to stay there, and trust to the Strength of the Place, waiting
for Relief from Eumenes, or to get away, and wander about in the Country,
making use of a Change and Turn of Fortune when it might happen. Much
Canvassing and Disputing there was on both sides: Docimus was for leaving the
Place; but Attalus declared, he was not able to endure Labor, by reason of the
Hardship of his late Imprisonment.

Whilst they were thus at Difference amongst themselves, above Five hundred
Foot and Four hundred Horse were drawn out of the Neighboring Garrisons, and
got together in a Body, besides Three thousand of the natural Inhabitants and
upwards gathered from all Parts of the Country; these created one from among
themselves to be their General, and laid close Siege to the Castle.

Being therefore thus unexpectedly again cooped up, Docimus acquainted with a
Passage underground, where no Guard was set, by a private Messenger kept
Correspondence with Stratonice the Wife of Antigonus, who was not far distant
from the Place: And afterward he, with one other in his Company, through this
Pass slipped out to her; but, contrary Ant. Chapter 315.
to her Promise, he was seized and secured. And he that came out with him;
undertook to conduct the Enemy into the Castle, and accordingly brought in a
great Number, and with them gained one of the highest Rocks within the Fort.

And although Attalus, and all those with him, were far inferior in Number,
yet they defended the Place courageously, fighting valiantly every day, till at
length they fell into the Enemies hands after a Siege of Sixteen Months.

CHAP. II.
Antigonus marches after Eumenes to Tigris. Eumenes cuts off many of his Men at
Pasitigris. Antigonus goes into Media. Eumenes comes to Persepolis. The
Description of Persia. Peucestes his great Feast. Eumenes his Policy. His Tale
of the Lion. A Battle in Pareteceni, between Antigonus and Eumenes. Antigonus
returns into Media. The Story of Ceteus his two Wives striving which should be
burnt. Eumenes marches to Galiene; Cassander to Macedonia. Olympias goes to
Pydna; is there besieged. The Epirots forsake their King, and join with
Cassander. Antigonus designs to surprise Eumenes, who stops his March by a
Stratagem. The last Battle between them in Gabiene. Eumenes basely delivered
up. Antigonus returns to Media. The dreadful Earthquakes in the Country of
Rhages.

Afterward Democlides was chief Governor at Athens, and Caius, Junius and
Quinius Olymp. 116. 1. Ant. Chapter 314. An. M. 3634. Antigonus marches after
Eumenes to Tigris. P. 680.
Emilius were Consuls at Rome. At that time was celebrated the Hundred and
sixteenth Olympiad, at which time Deinomenes the Laconian gained the Victory.
About this time Antigonus marched out of Mesopotamia and came to Babylon, and
made a League with Seleucus and Pitho, and having strengthened himself with
Forces received from them, made a Bridge of Boats over the River Tigris, and
passed over his Army, and hasted away with a swift March after the Enemy. Of
which, Eumenes having Intelligence, he sent to Xenophilus, Or Treasurer.
Governor of the Citadel at Susa, not to give any Money to Antigonus, nor by
any means to come out to Parley with him.

He himself marched with the Army to Tigris, a day's Journey distant from Susa,
where he came into the Country of the Uxians, a free People. The River is in
some Places three, and in others four Furlongs broad. The depth in the middle
of the Channel was equal with the height of the Elephants. It runs in a Current
from the Mountains Seven hundred Furlongs, and empties it self into the Red
Sea. There are many Sea Fish and Whales in this River, which appear chiefly at
the In the Dog Days. About the end of July.
Rising of the Dog Star.

The Eumeneans had the River before them for a Defense, and manned the Bank all
along from the Head of the River to the The Red Sea, (...) Persian Gulf.
Sea, with Forts every where built upon the Bank, and there waited for the
Enemies approach. But because those Forts required a great number of Men to
keep them, in regard they stretched out a great length, Eumenes and Antigenes
solicited Peucestes to send for Ten thousand Archers more out of Persia; who
at first refused, complaining how he was denied to be General of the Army. But
afterward upon mature Deliberation with himself he complied, concluding that
if Ant. Chapter ^14.
Antigonus prevailed, he should lose both his Province, and be in danger of
losing his Life besides; careful therefore to preserve his own Interest, and
hoping thereby with more ease to gain the chief Command by having more Men than
any of the rest, he brought Ten thousand Archers more into the Camp according
to their Desire. And though An Army 30 days March asunder, and all able to hear
the lord of Command in one day.
some of the Persians were distant one from another Thirty days March, yet they
had placed their Guards with that Art and Exactness, that they all heard the
Word of Command in one and the same day; the Reason of which is worthy Remark:
For Persia is full of long and narrow Valleys, and has many high Watch-Towers,
upon which were placed some of the Inhabitants that were Men of loud and strong
Voices: When the Voice was heard by those in the next Division, they imparted
it in the same manner to the other, and they again to the rest, one after
another till what was Commanded came at length to the end of the Province.

While Eumenes and Peucestes were busy about these Affairs, Antigonus came with
his Antigonus comes to Susa.
Army to the King's Palace in Susa, and made Seleucus Lord Lieutenant of the
Province, and leaving with him a sufficient Army, ordered him to besiege the
Citadel, Xenophilus the Treasurer refusing to obey his Commands; but he
himself marched away with his Army against the Enemy, through a hot scalding
Country, very dangerous for Foreign Armies to pass. Therefore they were forced
to march in the night, and encamp near Ant. Chapter 314.
the River before Sunrising: However he could not secure himself from all the
Inconveniences and Mischiefs of that Country: For though he did all that was
possible for him to do, yet through the excessive Heat of the Season, (being
about the rising of the Sea the foregoing Page.
Dog Star,) he lost a great Multitude of his Men. Coming at length to the River
Coprates, he prepared what was necessary for the passing over of his Men. This
River issues from a Mountainous Country, and runs into Tigris, and is Four
Acres broad, and was Fourscore Furlongs distant from Eumenes his Camp. The
Stream is so rapid and swift, that there is no passing over without Boats, or a
Bridge. Having therefore got together a few Flat bottomed Boats, in them he put
over some of his Foot, ordering them to draw a Trench and cast up Works to
defend it, and there to attend the coming over of the rest.

Eumenes having Intelligence by his Scouts of the Enemies Designs, passed over
the Bridge of Tigris with Four thousand Foot and Thirteen hundred Horse, and
found above Eumenes cuts off Antigonus his Men near Tigris.
Three thousand Foot and Three hundred Horse of Antigonus his Army got over The
River Coprates. Pasitigris. P. 681.
; and no less than Six thousand who were forraging up and down the Country:
These he suddenly set upon and routed them, and presently put the rest to
flight. As for the Macedonians (who stood their Ground) being overpowered with
Number, he forced them all to the River, where running headlong into their
Boats, and overcharging them, they sunk down: Upon which many of them
endeavoring to swim, some few of them escaped, but the rest were all drowned.
Others that could not swim, (judging it more advisable to fall into the Enemies
hand, than certainly to lose their Lives in the River,) were taken Prisoners,
to the number of Four thousand. Antigonus, for want of Boats, was not able to
help them, though he saw such Multitudes perish. Conceiving therefore Ant. Chapter
334.
that it was impossible to pass the River, he marched back to the City Badaca,
seated upon the River Ulaie. By reason of the vehement Heat, this March was
very sweltering and The River Ulaie.
troublesome, and many of the Army were tired out, so that they were Heartless,
and even at their Wits end: But when he came to the City beforementioned,
staying there some days, he refreshed his Army. Thence he judged it advisable
to march to Ecbatane in Antigonus marches into Media.
Media, and making that the Seat of War, to take in all the higher Provinces.

There were two Ways that led to Media, and both were difficult; that over the
Mountains was pleasant, and the Highway; but scorching hot, and very long,
almost Forty Days Journey. That through the Country of the Cosseans was strait,
narrow, and steep, leading through the Enemies Borders, and barren and scant of
Provision, but a short Cut, and more cool; yet it was not easy for an Army to
march this way, unless Agreement were made with the Barbarians, who inhabit the
Mountains.

The Cosseans.
They have been a Free People time out of Mind, and inhabit in Caves, and feed
upon Acorns and Mushrooms, and the salted Flesh of wild Beasts. But he looked
upon it as a dishonorable thing for him who commanded so great an Army, to
court these Barbarous People with smooth Words, or gain them by rich Gifts. He
picked out therefore the choicest of his Targateers, and divided the Archers
and Slingers, and such like light-armed Men into two Bodies, and delivered them
to Nearchus, with command to go before him, and first secure the Streights, and
difficult Passes. These being posted all along in the Way, he himself led the
Phalanx, and Pitho commanded the Rear. Ant. Chapter 314.


They that were sent with Nearchus, had endeavored to possess themselves of a
few Watch Towers; but being hindered and prevented of many, and the most
Necessary and Commodious Places, they lost many of their Soldiers, and being
set upon on every side by the Barbarians, they had much ado to make their way
through them. And as for those that followed Antigonus, (having entered the
Streights) they fell into dangers that were inextricable: For the Natives being
well acquainted with the Places, and having before possessed themselves of the
Steep and Craggy Rocks, cast down massy Stones upon the Soldiers Heads as they
passed by; and besides making use of showers of Arrows, they so galled them,
that they were neither able (through the inconveniency of the Place) to annoy
their Enemies, nor avoid their shot: And in regard the Passage was very craggy
and difficult, the Elephants, Horses, and heavy armed Men, were involved both
in Toils and Hazards at one and the same time, and in no capacity to help
themselves.

Antigonus being brought into these streights; now repented that he did not
follow the Counsel of Pitho, who had advised him to have bought his Passage by
Money. But after the loss of many of his Men, and the rest still in imminent
hazard, after nine Days troublesome march, he came at length to the Inhabited
Parts of Media.

One Mischief on the Neck of another thus falling upon the Army, the
intolerable Distresses Ant. Chapter 314. P. 682.
they were brought unto, stirred up the Soldiers to cry out against Antigonus,
insomuch as they gave him very harsh and bitter Words.

For in Forty Days time, they had three several times been miserably
slaughtered; but by fair Words, and plentiful Provision of all things
necessary, he at length quieted them. Then he commanded Pitho to go over all
Media, to get together Horsemen and Horses and Carriages, which he easily
performed, the Country abounding with Horses and Cattle. For Pitho returned,
bringing along with him Two thousand Horsemen and a Thousand Horses, ready
furnished, and so many loads of Munition as that the whole Army might be
completely armed, together with Five hundred Talents out of the King's Treasury.

Antigonus formed the Horse into Regiments, and distributed the Horses among
those that had lost their own, and gave the Draught-Beasts freely among those
that wanted them, whereby he regained the former Love of the Soldiers.

In the mean time, the Governors of the Provinces, and Captains of the Forces
with Eumenes, when they heard that the Enemy was in Media, were in various
Opinions what to resolve upon: For Eumenes, Antigenes, and the rest who came up
from the Seacoasts, were for returning thither again. But those who came from
the higher Provinces (upon the account of their Friends and Relations that were
left at home) were for defending those Parts. The Contest waxing hot, Eumenes
considering that one part of the Army Eumenes comes to Persepolis.
(which was now divided into two) was not strong enough to cope with the Enemy,
complied with the Governors of the Upper Provinces. Decamping therefore from
Pasitigris, he moved toward Persia, and came to the Regal Seat of the Kingdom,
Persepolis, Ant. Chapter 314.
at the end of Four and twenty days march.

The Country in the first Entrance into it, and as far as the Ladders (as they
are called) The Description of Persia toward Persepolis.
is Flat and Low, exceeding Hot, and barren of Provision; but the rest is
higher, of a wholesome Air, and very Fruitful: Wherein are many shady Valleys,
variety of (...).
Pleasant Gardens, natural Walks bounded on either side with all sorts of
Trees, and watered with refreshing Springs. So that those that pass this Way,
many times stop here and solace themselves in these pleasant Places with great
delight.

Here the Inhabitants brought in to Peucestes abundance of all kinds of Prey
and Booty, which he largely distributed among the Soldiers, to gain their
Favor and Good will. In this Tract inhabit the most Warlike of the Persians,
being all Archers and Slingers, and is far more populous than any of the other
Provinces.

When they came to Persepolis, the King's Palace, Peucestes the Governor, and
General of the Province, ordered a magnificent Sacrifice to the Gods, and to
Alexander and Philip, and to that end sending almost over all Persia for Beasts
to be sacrificed, and abundance of all other Provisions, necessary for a
Festival and public Solemnity, he Feasted the whole Army.

In this Festival the Guests were placed in four Rounds, including one within
another, Pencestes Feasts the Army in Persia. Ant. Chapter 314.
the greatest surrounding all the rest, which was ten furlongs in Compass, and
was filled with Mercenaries and Confederates.

The second Round was eight Furlongs, in which were placed the Argyraspides.
Macedonian Silver Targateers, and the rest of Alexander's Fellow Soldiers. The
other Circle was of four Furlongs, and filled with inferior Officers, special
Friends, Commanders, and Horsemen.

That in the midst of all was two Furlongs, wherein the Generals, Masters of
the Horse, and the Nobility of Persia, had their several Tents allotted them,
and in the midst of them were placed the Altars of the Gods, and of Alexander
and Philip.

The Tents were made of green Booths of Trees, covered with Arras, and all
sorts of P. 683.
Tapestry Hangings; Persia plentifully affording every thing for Pleasure and
Delight.

The Rounds were at that convenient distance one from another, as that the
Guests found nothing of trouble or uneasiness, but every thing that was
prepared was near at hand. All being thus gracefully managed, with the general
applause of the common Soldiers, thereby expressing how great Peucestes was in
their Favor and Esteem, he was suspected by Eumenes, conceiving that Peucestes
did this to ingratiate himself with the Army, and thereby to gain the Sovereign
Command; he therefore forged a Letter, by which he raised up the Spirits of the
Soldiers, and made them more Courageous, and brought down the haughty Spirit
and Pride of Peucestes; but advanced his own Reputation with the Army, with the
hopes of good Success for the future. The Contents of the Letter were these:
That Olympias with Alexander's Son (having killed Cassander) had fully
recovered the Kingdom of Macedon, and that Polysperchon with the main Power of
the King's Army Ant. Chapter 314. Eumenes his Policy to forge a Letter from
Olympias.
and his Elephants, had put over into Asia against Antigonus, and was then in
Capadocia. This Letter was writ in Syriack Characters, in the Name of Orontes,
Governor of Armenia, an intimate Friend of Peucestes. These Letters going for
current, because of the continual Correspondence between him and the
Lord-Lieutenants; Eumenes ordered them to be carried about, and showed to the
Captains and most of the Soldiers. Hereupon, the whole Army changed their Mind,
and all Eyes were upon Eumenes as the chief Favorite, and therefore resolved
to depend upon him, as he whose Interest in the Kings would be able to advance
whom he pleased, and to punish whom he thought fit.

When the Feasting was ended, Eumenes the more to terrify them that were
regardless of his Orders, and that affected the Sovereign Command, called in
Question in due form of Law, Sibertius the Governor of Aracosia, Peucestes his
special Friend. For Peucestes sending away some Horse into Aracosia, had
secretly commanded Sibertius to intercept the Carriages coming from thence.
Whereupon, Eumenes brought him into that eminent Danger, that unless he had
privately withdrawn himself he had been knocked on the Head by the Soldiers. By
this piece of Policy, having terrified others, and advanced his own Honor and
Reputation, he put on a new Face again; and so gained upon Peucestes with
smooth Words and large Promises, that he became both kind and courteous to him,
Ant. Chapter 314.
and cheerful and ready to afford Aid and Assistance to the Kings. Desiring
likewise to be assured of the rest of the Governors and Captains by some
Pledges, which might engage them not to forsake him, he pretended to want
Money, and desired them to contribute every one according to his Ability to the
Kings.

Hereupon, receiving Four hundred Talents from among so many of the Captains
Good Policy by borrowing of Money.
and Generals as he thought fit, those whom he before suspected of Treachery or
Desertion, became most Faithful Attendants and Guards to his Person, and stuck
close to him in all Encounters.

While he thus prudently managed Affairs, and was providing for the Future,
News was brought by some who came out of Media, that Antigonus was marching
with his Army into Persia: Whereupon he moved forward, with a design to meet
and engage the Enemy.

The second Day of their march he sacrificed to the Gods, and plentifully
feasted the Army, wishing them to continue Firm and Faithful to him: But
minding to comply with the humor of his Guests, who loved to drink freely, he
fell into a Distemper, which caused him to lie by it, and so hindered his March
for some Days.

In the mean time the Army was greatly dejected, to consider, that the most
Expert and Bravest Commander of all the Generals, should be now Sick at the
very time (as they thought) they were even ready to fight the Enemy.

But his Distemper abating, and after a little time having recovered himself,
he pursued Ant. Chapter 314. P. 684.
his March, Peucestes and Antigenes leading the Van; and he himself in a Litter
followed after with the Elephants, to prevent disturbance by the Crowd, and the
Inconveniency by the straightness of the Places they were to pass.

And now the two Armies were within a days march one of another, when the
Scouts on both sides brought an account of their approach, and what numbers
they were, and ways Eumenes and Antigonus their Armies near, but fight not.
they took. Whereupon, each Party prepared for Battle: But at length they
parted without fighting; for there was a River and a deep Trench between the
two Armies. Both indeed were drawn forth in Battalia, but by reason of the
Badness of the Ground they could not come to fight: Wherefore, drawing off one
from another three Furlongs space, they spent four Days in light Skirmishes,
and foraging the Country thereabouts, being pinched with want of all things
necessary. The fifth day Antigonus, by his Agents, again solicited the
Governors of the Provinces and the Macedonians, to desert Eumenes, and commit
themselves to his Protection. For he promised that he would leave to every one
of them their own several Provinces, and would bestow large Territories upon
the rest, and others he would send into their own Country, laden with Honors
and great Rewards; and as for those that were willing still to bear Arms, he
would give them Places and Posts in the Ant. Chapter 314.
Army suitable to their several Circumstances: But the Macedonians would not
harken to any thing of these Terms, but sent away the Messengers with great
Indignation and Threats: Upon which Eumenes came amongst them, and gave them
Thanks, with Commendations of their Fidelity, and told them an old Story, but
very pat to the present Occasion; That a Lion falling in Love with a young
Lady, treated with her Father to Eumenes his Tale of the Lion.
bestow her upon him in Marriage; who answered, That he was very willing to
give the young Woman to be his Wife, but that he was afraid of his Claws and
Teeth, lest when he was married, according to the Nature of his Kind, he would
devour the poor Girl. Hereupon, the Lion beat out his Teeth, and tore off his
Claws: Upon which the Father perceiving that now he had lost whatever before
made him formidable, fell upon him and easily cudgelled him to Death. And that
now Antigonus was acting a Part not much unlike to this: For he courted them
with fair Promises, till such time as he can get the Army into his Power, and
then he will be sure to cut the Throats of the Commanders. This fine Story thus
handsomely told, was highly applauded by the Army; and hereupon he dismissed
them.

The next Night some Deserters from Antigonus came in, and gave Intelligence,
that he had ordered his Army to march at the second Watch. Hereupon, Eumenes
upon serious Ant. Chapter 314.
Thoughts, and musing of what his Designs might be, at length hit upon the
truth of the Matter, that the Enemy's purpose was to march to Gabene, which was
a Country three days march distant, then untouched, abounding in Corn and
Forage, sufficient to supply the greatest Army plentifully with all sorts of
Provision; and besides, was a Place of great advantage, full of Rivers and deep
Gutters that were unpassable. Contriving therefore to prevent the Enemy, he put
in execution the like project; and sent away some of the Mercenaries (whom he
hired for Money) under color of Run-aways, with order to inform Antigonus that
Eumenes would fall upon his Camp that Night. But Eumenes himself sent away the
Carriages before, and commanded the Soldiers with all speed to eat their
Suppers and march: All which was presently dispatched.

In the mean time, Antigonus, upon the Intelligence received from the
Deserters, resolved to fight the Enemy that Night, and therefore put a stop to
his march, and placed his Army in order of Battle.

During which hurry of Antigonus, and while he was preparing to meet his Enemy,
Eumenes stole away with his Army and made toward Gabene before. Antigonus for
some Eumenes marckes toward Gabene. Ant. Chapter 314.
time waited with his Soldiers at their Arms, but receiving Intelligence by his
Scouts, that Eumenes his Army was gone, he perceived a Trick was put upon him.
However, he went on with what he before designed; and to that end, giving the
Word of Command to his Army to march, he posted away with that haste and speed,
as if he had been in a Pursuit.

But when he understood that Eumenes was got Two Watches of the Night.
six Hours march before him, and so P. 68^.
perceiving he was not able at so great a distance to overtake him with his
whole Army, he contrived as follows; he delivered the rest of the Army to
Pitho, willing him to come softly after him; and he himself posted away with
the Horse: About spring of Day he came up even with the Rear of the Enemy's
Army, as they were marching down a Hill; upon the Top of the Mountain he made a
Halt, and presented himself to the View of the Enemy

Eumenes, at a convenient Distance, seeing the Enemy's Horse, conceived the
whole Army was near at hand, and therefore made a Stand; and drew up his Men in
order of Battle, as if they should forthwith Engage. In this manner these two
Generals put Tricks one upon another, as if they were striving which should
out-wit one the other; hereby showing, that all their hopes of Victory lay and
were grounded upon their own Stratagems.

By this means therefore, Antigonus put a stop to the Enemy's march, and gained
time for his Army to come up to him; which at length joining with him he drew
up in Battalia, and in that order marched down the Hill in a terrible manner
upon the Enemy. The whole Army, (with those brought in by Pitho and Selencus)
amounted to above Eight and Twenty thousand Foot, Eight thousand and Five
hundred Horse, and Sixty Ant. Chapter 3^4.
five Elephants. Both the Generals ranged their Armies in an Array that was
strange and unusual, as if they strove which should excel each other even in
this piece of Art also. In the Left Wing Eumenes placed Eudamus the Captain of
the Elephants from India, who Battle between Eumenes and Antigonus in the
Country of the Pareteceni.
had with him a Body of an Hundred and fifty Horse: In Front of these were
drawn up Two Squadrons of choice Horse armed with Lances, Fifty deep; and were
all joined to them who were placed upon the rising Ground near the Foot of the
Mountain. Next to them was drawn up Stafandrus, with Nine hundred and fifty of
his own Horse. After these, he ordered Amph^machus Lord Lieutenant of
Mesopotamia, who had under his Command Six hundred Horse. Next to them were
drawn up the Horse from Arachosia, lately commanded by Sibycitus, but by reason
he was then fled, the Command was given to Cephalus. Close to these were Five
hundred Horse from Paropamisada, and as many Thracians from the upper Colonies.
In the Van of all these stood Five and forty Elephants, drawn up in a
Half Moon, lined with so many Archers and Slingers as was thought fit.

Then he drew up his main Body of Foot in a Phalanx in this manner: At the
farthest Point were placed above Six thousand Foreign Soldiers, then five
Thousand out of several Countries armed after the manner of the Macedonians;
after these were drawn up no more than Three thousand Argyraspides, but Men
never conquered, and for their Valor dreaded by the Enemy. And lastly, after
all Three thousand Targateers of the Lifeguard; which, together with the
Argyraspides, were commanded by Antigenes and Tautamus. And in the Van of this
Phalanx stood Forty Elephants, lined with light-armed Men. Next to the Phalanx
in the Right Wing he drew up Eight hundred of Carmanian Horse, under the
Command of Tlepolimus the Governor of that Province; and after them Nine
hundred who were called Companions. Then the Squadron of Antigines and
Peucestes, being Three hundred Men in one Troop. In the utmost part of the Wing
was placed Eumenes his own Regiment, consisting of as many Horse; and before
these was a Forlorn-Hope made up of Eumenes his Servants, placed in two Bodies,
consisting of Fifty Horse apiece. There were likewise Two hundred Horse drawn
up into Four Squadrons, P. 686.
and placed in the Flank at a distance from the main Wing, to be a Guard to
that part. And besides all these, he placed Three hundred Horse, culled out of
all the Provinces for strength and speed, to be a Guard to the Rear of his
Squadron: And in the Van of this Wing thus arrayed, were placed Forty
Elephants, for the better Defense of the whole. Eumenes his whole Army amounted
to Five and thirty thousand Foot, Six thousand and one hundred Horse, and One
hundred and fourteen Elephants.

Antigonus observing from the Top of the Hills how the Army of the Enemy was
drawn up, drew up his likewise so as might be most convenient to the present
Circumstances. Ant. Chapter 314.
For taking notice that his Enemy's Right Wing was very strongly guarded with
Horse and Elephants, he fronted them with the choicest of his own Horse, who
being in small Parties at a considerable distance one from another, might
Charge in manner of a Running Fight, wheeling off one after another, and so
still renew the Fight by fresh Men. And by this means, the Strength of that
part of the Enemy's Army, wherein they placed their greatest Confidence, was
wholly eluded. For in this Phalanx he had placed about a Thousand Archers and
Launceteers on Horseback out of Media and Armenia, who had ever been used to
this way of Charging by Turns. Next to them were drawn up Two thousand and Two
hundred Tarentines, who came up with him from the Sea Coasts, who were Men very
expert in laying Ambuscades, and contriving other Stratagems of War, and had a
great Respect and Kindness for him: A Thousand likewise out of Phrygia and
Lydia; Fifteen hundred under the Command of Pitho; and Four hundred Spear-Men
led by Lysanias. After all these followed those called the Anthippi: i. e.
Enemies or Opposers of the Horsemen.
Anthippi, and them out of the higher Provinces, to the number of Eight
hundred. And of this Body of Horse was the Left Wing completed and made up,
all under the Command of Pitho. In the main Battle, of Foot were placed in the
Front Nine thousand Foreigners; next to them Three thousand Lycians and
Pamphilians, and above Eight thousand out of diverse Nations, Armed after the
Macedonian manner; and in the Rear were the Macedonians, Ant. Chapter 314.
to the number of Eight thousand, which Antipater had formerly sent as Recruits
when he took upon him the Government of the Kingdom. In the Right Wing of
Horse, close to the Right of the Phalanx of Foot, were first placed Five
hundred Mercena^ies; next to them a Thousand Thracians, and as many
Confederates; and close after them were a Thousand called Companions. These
were all commanded by Demetrius the Son of Antigonus, which was the first time
he appeared in Arms to assist his Father: In the utmost part of the Wing were
placed Three hundred Horse, with which Antigonus himself engaged. This Squadron
consisted of Three Troops of his Servants, and as many of there is, drawn up in
equal Distances one from another, supported by a Hundred Tarentines. Round this
Wing were placed Thirty of the strongest of his Elephants in form of an
Half Moon, interlin'd with light-armed Men: Many of the other Elephants he
placed in the Front of the Phalanx of Foot, and a few with some Horse in the
Flank on the Left. The Army arrayed in this manner, he marched down upon the
Enemy in an oblique Battle: For he ordered the Right Wing to be stretched out
far in length, and the Left to be much contracted, designing with this to make
a Running Fight, and to Engage Hand to Hand with the other.

And now the Armies drew near one to the other, and Signal of Battle being
given on both sides, Shouts echoed one to another, and the Trumpets sounded a
Charge. And first the Horse with Pitho fellon, although they had no Forlorn
either of Men or Elephants Ant. Chapter 314.
for a firm Defense, yet overpowering the Enemy in Number and Swiftness, made
use of that Advantage: But looking upon it not safe to encounter the Elephants
in the Front, P. 687.
they wheeled about, and poured in showers of Shot upon the Enemy in the Flank,
and with little or no Prejudice to themselves, by reason of their speed, and
nimbleness of their Horses, for they forely galled the Enemy, who were neither
able to fall upon the Assailants by reason of the Weight of their Arms, nor in
a Capacity to avoid them as Occasion required. Hereupon Eumenes seeing how the
Right Wing was distressed by Multitudes of Archers on Horseback, sent for some
of the swiftest Horse from Eudamus, who commanded the Left Wing; and by this
Body of Horse brought in from the other Wing, (though it were but small) he
made so fierce a Charge upon the Enemy, being seconded by his Elephants, that
he easily put the Pithonians to flight, and pursued them as far as to the Foot
of the Mountains.

In the mean while the Foot fought stoutly a long time together; at length,
after many falling on both sides, the Eumenians routed them by the Valor of
the Argyraspides.
Silver Shields. For though they were now very old, yet by frequent use of
their Arms in many Battles, they so excelled all others, both as to Courage and
Skill in their Weapons, that none Ant. Chapter 314.
were able to stand before them. And therefore at this very time, though they
were only Three thousand, yet they were the very Strength and Support of the
whole Army.

When Antigonus perceived that his Left Wing was routed, and the whole
Battalion of Foot.
Phalanx put to flight, though he was advised (being that part of the Army with
him was yet entire) to retreat to the Mountains, and receive in again those
that were fled, yet he would not hear of it; but prudently making use of the
present Opportunity, both saved his own Men, and gained likewise the Advantage.

For the Argyraspides, with Eumenes and the rest of the Foot, having put the
Enemy to flight, continued their Pursuit to the Foot of the Mountains: Upon
which, Antigonus, through an open Passage made into the Enemies main Body, with
a Party of Horse fell upon the Flank of Eudamus his Regiments which were in the
Left Wing and by his sudden and unexpected Charge put them to flight, and after
the slaughter of Multitudes, sent away some of the swiftest of his Horse to
recall his own Men that were before fled, and so caused them to rally at the
Foot of the Mountains. And Eumenes also perceiving the flight of his Men,
hastened to the Relief of Eudamus, and recalled by sound of Trumpet those of
his that fled. And now the Stars began to appear, when the Generals having
recalled their flying Men on both sides, prepared for Fight afresh; such was
the Heat and Vigor both of the Officers and Common Soldiers. The Night was
very clear and serene, and the Moon at Full; and the Armies being about Four
Acres distant one over against another, the clattering of Arms, and the
neighing of Horses, seemed Ant. Chapter 314.
on both sides as if they had been in the midst of one another. It was now
Midnight when they had drawn off about Thirty Furlongs from the Place of Battle
where the Dead lay, and by reason of the Troublesomness of the March, and the
Toils and Grievances of the Fight, with the want likewise of Provision, both
sides were but in an ill Condition: Therefore they were forced to leave off
fighting, and encamp. Eumenes had a design to have marched back to the Slain in
order to have buried them, as a sign of his being absolute Victor: But the Army
refused, and all were instant with loud Cries to return to their Carriages,
which were then at a great distance from them, so that he was forced to submit.
For being there were so many that affected the chief Command, he had no Power
to move the Army by Threats, nor saw at that time any convenient opportunity to
gain upon them that were Obstinate by Arguments and Entreaties. But Antigonus
on the contrary was an Absolute General, without any dependence upon the
Popularity, P. 688.
and therefore forced the Soldiers to encamp near the Dead Bodies; and so
gaining the Privilege of burying the Dead, he raised a Doubt who was
Victorious, saying, That he who had Power to bury his Dead, was ever to be
esteemed Conqueror of the Field.

In this Battle, there were killed on Antigonus his side Three thousand and
Seven hundred Foot, and Fifty four Horse, and above Four thousand wounded. On
Eumenes his Party were slain Five hundred and Forty Foot, but very few Horse,
and above Nine hundred hurt.

Antigonus, after the Battle was over, perceiving that the Spirits of his
Soldiers were very low, resolved with all the have he could, to remove far off
from the Enemies Camp, Ant. chapter 314.
and that his Forces might march the more readily, he sent away the wounded Men
and heavy Baggage to a Town near at hand. Then having buried the Dead, about
Break of Day, (detaining with him the Herald that was sent to him by the Enemy
to beg the Bodies of the Dead,) even at that very Hour he commanded his
Soldiers to dine. At Night he discharged the Herald, and gave Leave to come and
bury the Dead the next day. He himself presently at the first Watch of the
night moved with his whole Army, and by continued and long Marches, got a long
way off from the Enemy to a Country untouched, where he had plenty of Provision
for the refreshing of his Army: For he marched as far as to Gamarga in Media, a
Country under the Command of Pitho, abounding in all Things for the maintaining
of the greatest Armies. Eumenes having Intelligence Antigonus marches back to
Gamarga in Media.
by his Scouts that Antigonus was gone, would not follow after him, both
because his Army was in want of Provision, and in other ill Circumstances, as
likewise for that he had a great desire to inter his Dead in the most solemn
manner he possibly could.

Upon which occasion, here sell out a strange Accident at this time, very
unusual and dissonant from the Laws of the Grecians: For there was one Ceteus,
who commanded them The Story of Ceteus his two Wives.
that came out of India, and fought with great Resolution, but di'd in this
Battle: He left two Wives behind him, who followed him all along during the
Campaign: One he had but lately married, the other had been his Wife for some
years before; and both loved their Husband exceedingly. It had been an ancient
Custom in India, for Men and Women to marry themselves with their own mutual
Liking, without consulting the Advice of their Parents. And in regard that in
those former times young People would rashly marry one another, and often
repent afterward, as being deceived in their Choice; many Wives were
corrupted, and through their inordinate Lusts fell in Love with other Men; and
because they could not with their Credit and Reputation leave them they first
chose, they would often poison their Husbands; to the more ready effecting of
which, the Country did not a little contribute, by bearing many and diverse
sorts of Poisonous Plants, some of which never so little bruised either in Meat
or Drink, do certainly kill the Party. This wicked Art growing still more and
more to Perfection, and many being destroyed by this Means, and though several
were punished for these Pieces of Villainy, yet other would not be reclaimed,
nor restrained from the like Practices; another Law therefore was made, That
Wives should be burnt together with their dead Husbands, except they were with
Child, or had born Children; and that she who would not observe the Common Law
of the Land, should remain a Widow, and, as one convicted of that Impiety,
should be excluded from all sacred Rites, and all other Benefit and Privilege
of the Laws. This being thus established, hence-forward this Wickedness of the
Wives was changed into a contrary P. 689. Ant. Chapter 314.
Practice. For being that every Wife, to avoid that insufferable Disgrace, was
voluntarily to Die, they became not only careful to preserve the Health, and
provide for the Well-being of their Husbands, as that which was likewise their
own Preservation; but the Wives strove one with another, as who should gain the
highest pitch of Honor and Reputation. An Example of which sell out at this
time. For although by the Law one only was to be burnt with the Husband, yet at
the Funeral of Cetius, both strove which should die, as for some Honorable
Reward of their Virtue: Whereupon the Matter was brought before the Generals
for their Decision. The Younger declared, That the other was with Child, and
therefore her Death could not satisfy the Law: The Elder pleaded, That it was a
greater Piece of Justice, that she who was before the other in Years, should be
preferred before her in Honor: For in all other Cases, the constant Rule is to
yield more Honor and Respect to the Elder, than to the Younger. The Captains
being informed by the Midwives, that the Elder was with Child, preferred the
Younger before the other: Upon which, she lost her Cause, went out weeping and
wailing, renting her Vail in pieces, and tearing her Hair, as if some sad and
dreadful News had been told her: The other rejoicing in the Victory, made
forthwith to the Funeral Pile crowned by the Women of her House with Attires
called Attires Women used to wear, with Labels hanging down.
Mitres, and by her Kindred brought forth most richly adorned, as to some
Nuptial Festival, setting forth her Praises all along as they went, in Songs
fitted for that occasion.

As soon as she came to the Pile she threw off her Attire, and distributed them
amongst Ant. Ch; 14.
her Servants and Friends, leaving these behind her, as tokens of Remembrances
for them that loved her. Her Attire was multitudes of Rings upon her Fingers,
set with all manner of precious Stones of diverse Colors. Upon her Head were a
great number of little Golden Stars, between which were placed sparkling Stones
of all sorts. About her Neck she wore abundance of Jewels, some small, others
large; increasing by degrees in bigness as they were put on one after another.
At length she took leave of all her Family and Servants, and then her Brother
placed her upon the Pile, and to the great Admiration of the People (who
flocked thither to see the Sight) with an Heroic Courage she there ended her
Life.

The whole Army solemnly in their Arms marched thrice round the Pile before it
was kindled: She in the mean time (disposing of her self toward her Husband's
Body,) discovered not by any Screeks or otherwise, that she was at all daunted
at the Noise of the Crackling Flames, so that the Spectators were affected some
with Pity, and others with Admiration, and extraordinary Commendation of her
Resolution. However, there are some who condemn this Law as Cruel and Inhumane.

After the Funeral was over, Eumenes marched from Patetacine to Gabiene, which
being Eumenes marches to Gabiene. Ant. Chapter 314.
yet untouched, was in a condition to supply the Army with all Things
necessary, which was distant from Antigonus his Army (going through the
Countries inhabited) Five and twenty Days Journey; but passing through the
Deserts, (where there is no Water,) it is but Nine Days Journey: Being thus far
distant one from another, he there wintered, and so gave his Army time to
refresh themselves.

As for the Affairs of Europe, Cassander, while he lay at the Siege of Tegea,
hearing of Cassander marches into Macedonia.
the return of Olympias into Macedonia, and of the Death of Eurydice and King
Philip, and what was done to the Sepulcher of Jollas his Brother, agreed with
the Taegeans, and marched with his Army into Macedonia, leaving his
Consederates in great Trouble and Perplexity. For Alexander the Son of
Polysperchon was then entered Peloponnesus, and ready P. 690.
to set upon the Cities with a great Army. And the Aetolians to ingratiate
themselves with Olympias and Polsyperchon, seized upon the straight Passes at
Pylas, and blocked up the Passage to stop Cassander in his march: But he
perceiving that it was very difficult for him to force his way through those
narrow Streights, by the help of some Ships and several Boats out of Eubea and
Locris, passed over into Thessaly. And hearing that Polysperchon lay with his
Army in Perrhabea, he ordered away Callas his General, with some Forces to
fight him. In the mean time, Dinias being sent away to secure the Strights of
Perrhabea.
Streights, possessed himself of those Passes before the Forces of Olympias
could reach them.

As soon as Olympias heard that Cassander was entering Macedonia with a great
Army, she created Aristonous General, and commanded him to fight Cassander. She
her self (taking Ant. Chapter 314.
along with her the Son of Alexander and Roxana his Mother, and Thessalonica
the Daughter of Philip the Son of Amyntas, Deidamia the Daughter of Eacides
King of Epirus, and Sister of Pyrrhus (who afterward made War upon the Romans)
and the Daughters of Attalus, and other Kindred and eminent Relations) entered
into Pydna, so that a great Olympias goes to Pydna, and is there besieged.
throng of People, Useless and Unserviceable for War, attended upon her:
Neither was there Provision in that Place sufficient for such a Multitude, to
hold out any long Siege. All which disadvantages, though they were clear
Evidences of the greatness of the Danger, yet she was resolved to stay here,
expecting many Greeks and Macedonians to come in to her assistance by Sea.

There were with her some Horse from Ambracia, and many of the Troops of the
Household; and the rest of Polysperchon's Elephants: The other had been before
taken by Cassander at his former irruption into Macedonia; who now having
recovered the Passes at Perrhebea, so as that he had his way open to Pydna,
begirt the Town round with a Mud-wall from Sea to Sea; and sent for Shipping
and all sorts of Weapons and Engines of Battery from his Confederates, with a
design to block up Olympius both by Sea and Ant. Chapter 314.
Land.

But when he had Intelligence that Eacides, King of Epirus, was coming with a
strong Army to the Relief of Olympias, he delivered some Forces to the Command
of Atarchias, with Orders to meet the Epirots, who presently executing what he
was commanded, possessed himself of the Passes into Epirus, so that Eacides was
wholly deseated in his Design.

For the Epirots were forced against their Wills to the Expedi^ion into
Macedonia, and therefore mutiny'd in the Camp: However, Eacides, desirous by
any way possible to R^heve Olympias, cashiered all those that favored not his
Design; taking in those who were willing to run the same risk with himself; he
was indeed very forward to Engage, but had not yet force enough; for the Party
that stuck to him was very small.

In the mean time, the Epirots that were sent away into their own Country,
revolted from the King, and his People, by a common Decree of the State,
Banished him the The Epirots forsake their King, and join with Cassander.
Kingdom, and Consederated with Cassander; like to which never before happened in
Epirus from the time that Neoptolimus, the Son of Achilles, reigned there. For
the Kingdom ever descended from the Father, by Right of Succession to the Son,
till this time.

When Cassander was thus supported by the Confederacy of the Epirots, and had
sent Lyciseus both as General and (...), Governor. Ant. Chapter 314.
Viceroy into Epirus, they in Macedonta, who before were at a stand, whether
they should Confederate with Olympias or not, now (seeing no hopes remaining
for the retrieving her Affairs) joined with Cassander. So that now the only
Prop remaining to rely upon for Relief was Polysperchon, and this was presently
in a strange manner shattered and broken in Pieces; for when Callas, who was
sent as Geneneral Olympias her Affairs brought very low.
by Cassander, sat down with his Army near to Polysperchon in Perrebia, he so
corrupted most of his Soldiers with large Bribes, that very few remained,
especially of those that were looked upon to be most Faithful: And thus low
were the Affairs of Olympias P. 691.
sunk in a very short time.

As for the Affairs of Asia at this time; Antigonus then Wint'ring in
Gadamalis, otherwise Gaderlis, looking upon his Army too weak for the Enemy,
contrived how to fall upon them unawares, and to Out wit them. Eumenes his
Soldiers were so scattered and dispersed in their Winter Quarters, that some of
them were six days march distant one from another. But Antigonus judged it not
advisable to march through the Countries Antigonus his design to have
surpised Eumenes.
that were Inhabited, both in regard the Journey would be very long and
tedious, and likewise presently known to the Enemy, but conceived it much more
for his advantage to lead his Army through the dry and barren Deserts, though
it were far more troublesome, for that it was much the shorter Cut; and by that
means his march would be secret, Ant. Chapter 314.
and so he might fall upon the Enemy suddenly and unexpectedly, as they lay
dispersed and scattered in their Quarters, never dreaming of any such thing.

Upon these Considerations he commanded his Soldiers to be ready for a March,
and to prepare for themselves Ten Days Victuals (...) neither Rosting nor
B^^ling.
such as need not the Fire. He himself gave it out, that he would march through
Armenia: But on a sudden, contrary to the Expectation of his whole Army, The
Winter Trop^ck.
in the Depth of Winter, he marched toward the Deserts. In their march he
ordered Fires to be made in the Day, but to be put out in the Night, left that
any seeing them far off from the Mountains, might discover his approach to the
Enemy: For the Desert was almost all wholly Plain and Champaign, surrounded
with many high Hills, from whence it was easy a long way off to discover the
Fires. But when the Army had spent Five days in this tedious Journey, the
Soldiers for very Cold, as for other necessary Uses, fell to making of Fires by
Night as well as by Day; which some of the Inhabitants of the Wilderness
espying, they presently the very same day sent away Messengers upon Dromedaries
to give Intelligence thereof to Eumenes and Peucestes. This Beast will commonly
run (...).
Fifteen hundred Furlongs a Day. ^00 M(...) (...)


Peucestes being informed, that the Enemy's Army was seen half way of their
march, began to think of running away To the utmost ^ounds of their Winter
Quarters.
as far as he could, being afraid the Enemy would be upon him before he could
get the Forces together, from every Quarter where they then lay dispersed.
Eumenes perceiving the Fright he was in, bid him be of good Heart, and continue
upon the Edge of the Wilderness, for he had found out a way that Antigonus
should not come into those Parts in three or four days. And having done that,
they Ant. Chapter 314.
should be able within that time easily to get all their Forces together; and
so the Enemy being tired out, and starved for want of Provision, would all fall
into their hands. All wondered at this strange Undertaking, and every one was
earnest to learn what it was that should give a stop to the Enemy. Eumenes
hereupon commanded all the Captains Eumenes his stratagem to stop Antigonus in
his march.
and Soldiers that were then at hand, to follow him with a great number of Urns
full of Fire, and then chose out some of the Highest Ground in the Country,
which looked every way toward the Wilderness, and there marked out several
Places within the Compass of Seventy Furlongs, and allo^ted to every Captain a
Post distant about Twenty Cubits one from another, with Command to kindle a
Fire in the Night in every Place; and at the first Watch to make the greater
Fires, as if they were then still upon the Guard, and going to Supper and
refreshing themselves; at the Second, that the Fires should be less; and the
Third to be left near Out and Extinct, that so at a Distance it might seem as
if the Army were certainly there Encamped together.

The Soldiers observing the Order given them, some of the Inhabitants of the
Mountains over against them (Friends to Pitho the Governor of Media) perceived
the Fire, and supposing the Army was really there Encamped, ran down into the
Plain, and informed both Pitho and Antigonus; who being amazed, (and as it were
Thunderstruck at P. 692.
this strange and unexpected News) made an Halt, and Consulted with those that
brought them the News what Course was best to be taken. For Men that were tired
out, and Ant. Chapter 314.
in want of every thing that was necessary, to Engage with an Enemy prepared,
and furnished with plenty of all sorts of Provision, was alleged to be a
desperate and hazardous Adventure. Concluding therefore that they were
betrayed, and that the Enemies Forces were drawn together, (upon Intelligence
given them of what was designed) it was resolved not to march forward, but turn
aside to the Right; and so the Army moved into both parts of the Countries
inhabited, to the end the Soldiers might refresh themselves after their toilsom
March.

In the mean time, Eumenes having by this Stratagem thus deluded the Enemy, got
all his Army together from all Parts where they were in their Winter Quarters,
and fortifying his Camp with a Rampire and a deep Trench, he there received his
Confederates as come in to him, and plentifully furnished his Camp with all
things necessary.

But Antigonus, after he had marched through the Desert, receiving Intelligence
from the Inhabitants, that the rest of Eumenes his Forces were almost all come
to him; but that his Elephants coming out of their Winter-Stations, were not
far off with a very slender Guard, sent out Two thousand Horse-Lanceliers, Two
hundred Tarentines, and all his light-armed Foot to intercept them: For setting
upon them as they were without a sufficient Guard, he hoped he might easily
make himself Master of 'em; and so deprive the Enemy of the main Strength of
his Army. But Eumenes fearing the worst that might happen upon that account,
sent away (for a further Guard) Five hundred of his best Ant. Chapter 314.
Horse, and Three thousand light-armed Foot.

As soon as Antigonus his Soldiers came in sight, the Commanders of the
Elephants drew them into a square in the form of a Tile, and placed the
Carriages in the middle, and so marched on. They were supported in the Rear
with no more than four hundred Horse. The Enemy then pouring in all their Force
upon them, and pushing on still with great Violence, the Horse in the Rear
being overpowered, made away. The Masters of the Elephants stood for some
time, galled with Darts and Arrows on every side, not able to endamage or touch
the Enemy: And just now when they were ready to give up all, in comes
unexpectedly the Eumeneans, who Extricate them out of all their Dangers. A few
Days after, the Armies Encamped within forty Furlongs one of another; and now
being about to lay all at stake, both sides prepared for Battle.

Antigonus drew up his Horse into two Wings, and committed the Left to Pitho,
and The Last Battle between Antigonus and Eumenes in Gabiene. Ant. Chapter 314.
the Right to his Son Demetrius, where he himself intended to Charge; the Foot
was in the middle Battle, and all the Elephants he placed in the Front of the
whole Army, interlin'd with Light-armed Men. His whole Army was Two and twenty
thousand Foot, and Nine thousand Horse, besides those that were listed in
Media; and Elephants Sixty five.

When Eumenes understood, that Antigonus had placed himself in the Right Wing
with the best of his Horse, he himself fronted him with the Choicest of his
own, in the Left; for here he placed most of the Governors of the Provinces,
with the Best of that Horse which they themselves brought into the Field, and
with these he ventured himself.

In this Wing likewise was Mithridates, Son of Ariobarzanes, descended from one
of those seven Persians, who slew Smerdis, one of the Magi, a Man of exemplary
Valor, and brought up in the Feats of War from his very youth. In the Front of
this Wing he placed Threescore of the best of his Elephants, drawn up in form
of an Half Moon, interlin'd with Light-armed Men.

As to the Foot, the Targateers were placed in the Front; then the
Argyraspides; and P. 693.
in the Rear all the Foreigners, and those that were armed after the manner of
the Macedonians, and so many Elephants and Light-armed Men were placed in the
Front of the main Battle of the Foot, as was thought sufficient. In the Right
Wing were drawn up such Horse and Elephants as were judged the most Weak and
Feeble of all the rest, and over these was appointed Philip as Commander, who
was ordered to retire leisurely as he Ant. Chapter 314.
fought, and diligently to observe the Event of the other side.

Eumenes his Army amounted to Thirty six thousand and seven hundred Foot, Six
thousand and fifty Horse, and a Hundred and fourteen Elephants.

A little before the Battle, Antigenes, General of the Argyraspides, had sent a
Macedonian Horseman to the Enemy's Phalanx, with Command to ride up as close to
them as possibly he could, and proclaim with a loud Voice what he had ordered
him. Hereupon, when he was come up within hearing of that Part of the Army
where Antigonus his Macedonian Phalanx was drawn up, he cried out with a loud
Voice thus, Oh ye Villains! Ye fight against your Fathers, who ventured their
Lives, and performed all those Noble Acts with Philip and Alexander, whom you
shall shortly experience to be Men worthy those Kings and those former
Conquests! The Youngest of the Silver Shields.
Argyraspiaes at that time were at least Threescore years of Age; but most of
the rest were Seventy, and some older; all of them for Strength and Skill in
their Weapons unconquerable: For continual Practice of their Arms had made them
Expert and Daring.

Proclamation being made, as we have before said, there were many harsh Words
and discontented Speeches cast out in Amigonus his Army. That they should be
forced to fight against their own Countrymen, and with those that were so much
older than themselves. In Eumenes his Army on the other hand, they were
continually crying out while the Army was drawing up, to be led out against the
Enemy: Eumenes seeing the Alacrity of the Soldiers, lift up the Ensign of
Battle, upon which forthwith the Trumpets sounded a Charge, and the whole Army
set up a shout for the Onset. The Elephants in the first place fought one with
another; then the Horse Charged on both sides. The Field was very Large, Sandy,
and Waste, so that so much Dust was raised by the Trampling of the Horses, as
that a Man could not see what was done, though but at a small distance from
him: Which Antigonus observing, sent forthwith away some Median Horse, and a
Body of Tarentines, to set upon the Baggage of the Enemy.

For he hoped by reason of the Dust that was raised (as the thing in truth
proved) that they would not be discerned, and that if he got possession of the
Carriages, he should easily bring the whole Army into his power. Hereupon,
those that were sent forth secretly slipping by the Enemies Wing, set upon the
Pages, (...), Drudges.
Scullion Boys, and others that were with the Baggage, and about five Furlongs
distant from the Place of Battle.

There they found a Multitude of Useless and Unserviceable Rabble, and a very
small Guard in the Place, so that they were presently put to flight, and the
rest all fell into Eumenes his Carriages taken.
the Enemies hands. In the mean time, Antigonus charging the Enemy with a
strong Body of Horse, so terrified Peucestes, Governor of Persia, that he with
his Horse got out of the Dust, and drew Fifteen hundred more after him. But
Eumenes, though he was left Ant. Chapter 314.
but with a very few in the out Skirts of the Wing where he was, yet counted it
base to flag or fly; judging it more honorable to be Faithful to his word, in
the Quarrel of the Kings, and to die in an honest and just Cause with
Resolution, made a fierce Charge upon Antigonus; so that now there was a sharp
Dispute between the Horse; where the Eumeneans excelled the other in Heat and
Resolution, but the Antigontans them in Number. and Multitude; and many fell on
both sides. At which time, the Elephants fighting one with another, the Leader
on Eumenes his side, engaging with one of the Stoutest of the other, was there
slain. Hereupon, Eumenes perceiving his Horse to be worsted on P. 694.
every hand, withdrew with the rest of the Horse out of the Fight, and passed
over to the other Wing, and joined himself to those with Philip, whom he had
ordered to make a leisurely Retreat. And thus ended the Engagement between the
Horse.

But as to the Foot, the Argyraspides (or Silver Shields) in a full Body flew
with that Violence upon the Enemy, that some they killed upon the spot, and
they rest they put to flight: For they were not to be withstood; who though
they engaged with the Enemy's Ant. Chapter 314
main Battle, yet they signalized both their Valor and Dexterity to that
degree, that they killed above Five thousand without the loss of one Man, and
put the whole Nota.
Foot to flight, though they were far more in number than themselves.

When Eumenes understood, that all the Carriages were taken; and that Peucestes
was not far off with the Horse, he endeavored to get all to rally in a Body
together again, and to try their Fortune in a second Engagement with Antigonus:
For he concluded, if he prevailed he should not only recover his own Carriages,
but likewise possess himself of the Enemy's: But Peucestes would not hear of
fighting any more, but got further off, so that Eumenes was forced to yield the
Day.

Then Antigonus dividing his Horse into two Bodies, he himself with one sought
how to entrap Eumenes, observing which way he made; the other he delivered to
Pitho, with Orders to fall upon the Argyraspides, who then were forsaken by
their Horse; who forthwith setting upon them, as he was commanded, the
Macedonians drew up in form of a Square, and got safe to the River, exclaiming
against Peucestes, as the Cause of the routing of the Horse.

When Eumenes came up to them in the Evening, they consulted together what was
then fittest to be done. The Governors of the Provinces were for returning with
all speed into the Higher Provinces; but Eumenes was for staying where they
were and fighting, and in regard the Enemies main Battle was broken and cut
off, and that they were then equal in Horse on both sides. But the Macedonians
seeing that they had lost their Carriages, Wives, and Children, and whatever
was dear to them, declared they would neither do the one or the other. And so
at that time, without agreeing in any thing, they parted. But afterward, the
Macedonians secretly corresponding with Antigonus Eumenes base^ly delivered up
by his own Men.
seized upon Eumenes, and delivered him up into his Hands. And having received
their Carriages, and Faith taken for security, they all marched away together:
Whose Example the Governors of the Provinces and most of the other Captains and
Soldiers followed, forsaking their General, chiefly consulting their own Safety
and Preservation.

Antigonus having thus strangely and unexpectedly possessed himself both of
Eumenes and his whole Army, seized upon Antigenes, Captain of the Argyraspides,
and put him alive into a Coffin, and burnt him to Ashes. He put to death
likewise Eudamus, who brought the Elephants out of India, and Celbanus and some
others: Who upon all occasions appeared against him. But for Eumenes, he put
him in Prison, and took time to consider how to dispose of him. For he had in
truth an earnest desire to have gained so good a General to his own Interest,
and to have obliged him upon that account; but because of the great Kindness
and strict Correspondency which passed between him and Olympias, and the Kings,
he Ant. Chapter 314.
durst not absolutely rely upon him; for but a while before, though he had
delivered him out of the straits he was in at Nora in Phrygia, yet he presently
upon it fell in and sided with the Kings; and therefore, upon the pressing
Importunity of the Macedonians he put him to Death. But in respect of his
former Familiarity with him, he caused his Body to be burnt, and his Bones to
be put into an Urn, and delivered to his nearest Friends. Amongst those that
were Wounded and Prisoners, was Hieronymus of Cardia, Historiographer, P. 695.
who having been ever in great Esteem with Eumenes during his Life, after his
Death found great Favor also with Antigonus.

Antigonus returning into Media with his whole Army, spent the rest of the
Winter in a Town not far from Ecbatane, where stood the Palace-Royal of that
Province. He distributed The dreadful Earthquake in the Kingdom of Rhages.
Strabo Jays Two thousand Towns and Cities.
his Army here and there all over that Province, and especially in the Country
of Rhages; so called from the Calamities it had miserably suffered in former
times. For being heretofore full of Rich and populous Cities, there happened such
terrible Earthquakes in those Parts, that both Cities and Inhabitants were
swallowed up altogether, not one left, and the very Face of the Country was so
changed, that new Rivers and Ponds appeared in the room of the Old.

CHAP. III.
The Innundations at Rhodes. Antigonus kills Pitho, getting him into his power
by Dissimulation. Then marches into Persia. Revolters from Antigonus cut off in
Media. He divides the Asian Provinces, and contrives to destroy all the
Argyraspides. Gets great Treasure in Susa. Cassander besieges Olympias in
Pydna; The great Distress to which it was reduced. Amphipolis surrendered to
Cassander. He kills Olympias. Marries Thessalonices; Builds Cassandra.
Imprisons Rhoxana and her Son Alexander. His Expedition into Peloponnesus
against Alexander, the Son of Polysperchon: The History of Thebes. Cassander
rebuilds Thebes.

ABout this time happened a Flood near the City of Rhodes, which destroyed many
of the Inhabitants. The first Flood did little prejudice, because the City was
but Olymp. 116. 1. An. M. 3656. Ant. Chapter 314.
then newly built, and far larger in Compass: But the second was more
Mischievous, and destroyed Multitudes. The last fell out at the Beginning of
the Spring, accompanied with violent Storms of Rain, and Hailstones of an
incredible Bigness; for they were a Mina in weight, and sometime more, so that
they not only beat down Houses, but killed The (...)dations at Rhodes.
many Men. And in regard Rhodes was built in Form of a Theater, and that the
Water ran for the most part into one Place, the lower Parts of the City were
presently filled with Water, (for that the Winter being now looked upon to be
over) no care was taken to cleanse the Channels and Aqueducts; and the Pipes
likewise in the Walls were choked up; so that the Waters flowing in altogether
on a sudden, all the Ground about the Some Monument in the Town, in Memory of
some remarkable Event either Go^d or Bad.
Deigma, (as it is called) and the Temple of B^cchuss was filled with Water;
and now it rising up like a standing Pond to the Temple of Esculapius, all were
in a Consternation, and could not agree together what should be done, in order
to their Preservation. Some were for making to the Ships, and others for
hasting to the Theater. Some now almost surrounded with the Evil that
threatened them, in great Terror and Amazement climbed up to the top of the
highest Altars, and others to the top of the Pedestals of the Statues. The City
being in this Danger to be overwhelmed and ruined, with all its Inhabitants,
Ant. Chapter 314.
on a sudden they were unexpectedly delivered: For the Wall burst asunder in a
large Breach, and the Water that stood on an Heap made its way through, and ran
with a violent Current into the Sea, and so every one presently had free
passage to his own House.

It was of great advantage to these distressed People, that this Inundation was
in the day time: For most of the Citizens ran to the highest parts of the City
for shelter. And another advantage was, that the Houses were not built of Tile,
but of Stone; so that they who got to the House-tops escaped without any great
Damage: However, there perished in this common Calamity above Five hundred
Souls; and some of the Houses were born down to the Ground, and others very ill
torn and shaken. And in this danger was Rhodes.

Antigonus, while he Wintered in Media, discovered Pitho plotting to draw over
the Soldiers then in their Winter Quarters, partly by Bribes, and partly by
fair Promises to his own Interest, and to make a Turn and Defection in the
Army. But Antigonus covered and concealed his Design, and made show as if he
gave no Credit to the Informers, but chid them as those that contrived only to
set him and Pitho together by the ears. In the mean while, he caused it to be
noised abroad, That he intended to leave Pitho, with a considerable Ant. Chapter
314. P. 696.
Army for his Defense, Lord Lieutenant of the higher Provinces; and he wrote
likewise to him, and desired him to hasten to him with all speed, that after
they had consulted together of some weighty Affairs, they might forthwith march
away into the Lesser Asia. To the parts on the Seacoasts.
Thus he managed his Business, whereby to remove all ground of Suspicion, and
to get the poor Man into his hands, upon an expectation and hopes to be left
Governor of those Provinces: For it was a difficult matter to take one by force
who was in so great Repute with Alexander, and for his Valor advanced by him
to Places of Honor; and who being then Governor of Media, was a help and
support to the whole Army.

Pitho was at that time in the furthest Parts of all Media in his
Winter Quarters, and had now corrupted many, who had promised to join with him
in the Defection. His Friends likewise acquainting him by their Letters with
Antigonus his Purpose, possessed him with an Expectation of mighty Things: And
thus guil'd, to Antigonus he went; who having now seized his Prey, brought him
before a Council of War even of his own Antigonus kills Pitho.
Confederates, where he was easily convicted, and forthwith had his Head
chopp'd off.

Hereupon Antigonus gathering all his Army together, committed the Government
of Media to Orontobates a Median born; but made Hippostratus General of the
Army, who Ant. Chapter 314.
had Three thousand 500 foreign Foot-Soldiers under his Command. He himself
taking with him the Body of his Army, went to Ecbatana, where receiving Five
thousand Talents of massy Silver, he marched into Persia; and it cost him
twenty days march before Antigonus marches into Persia
he arrived at the Capital City Persepolis.

In the mean time, while Antigonus was on his march, Pitho's Friends, who were
concerned with him in the Conspiracy (the chief of whom was Meleager and
Menoetas) and other Well-willers of Eumenes and Pitho, who were scattered
abroad into Corners, met together, to the number of Eight hundred Horse; and in
the first place wasted the Territories of the Medes who refused to join with
them. Then receiving Intelligence where Revolters from Antigonus cut off in
Media.
Hippestratus and Orontobates lay encamped, they broke in upon them in the
night, and were not far off from effecting what they designed; but being
overpowered by number, and having only enticed some of the Soldiers to run the
same course with them, they were forced to retreat; yet some of the nimblest of
them (all being Horsemen) made many sudden Incursions upon the Country, and
caused a great Consternation and Hubbub amongst them; but were atlast enclosed
in a place compassed about with Rocks, and were there all killed or taken. But
Meleager and Cranes the Median, and some of the better sort of them stood it
out to the last, and died with their Swords in their hands. And this was the
Condition of the Conspirators in Media.

As for Antigonus, as soon as he came into Persia, the People honored him as a
King, as he that was now undoubtedly absolute Lord of all Asia: There calling
together a Council of his Nobility, he propounded to them the matter concerning
the Government Ant. Chapter 314. Antigonus divides the Asian Provinces.
of the Provinces: In which Consultation they left Carmania to Tlepolemus, and
Bactria to Stasanor; for it was no easy matter to expel them, having gained
the Hearts of the People by their fair Deportment, and likewise were associated
with potent Confederates. Eritus he sent into Aria; who dying shortly after,
was succeeded by Evagoras, a Man of wonderful Valor and Prudence. Oxyatres
likewise, the Father of Roxana, was permitted to enjoy the Province of
Parapamisus, as he did before: For neither could he eject him without a long
expense of Time and a very great Army.

But he sent for Sibyritus, a Well-willer of his, out of Arachosia, and
bestowed upon him the Government of that Province, and gave him the most
turbulent of the Silver Shields, under color of serving him in the War, but in
truth with a design to have them all cut off; for he gave him private
Instructions to employ them in such Services as that by degrees they might all
be destroyed. Amongst these were those that betrayed Eumenes, that Vengeance P.
697. The Argyraspides contrived to be destroyed.
might in a short time after overtake these perfidious Villans for their
Treachery against their General. For Princes, by reason of their great Power,
may reap advantage by the wicked Acts of others; but private Men who are the
Actors, for the most part are by those means brought into miserable Disasters.

Antigonus moreover finding that Peucestes was much beloved in Persia, made it
one of his first Works to strip him of that Government. At which all the
Natives greatly repined; and a Chief Man amongst them called Thespias spoke
openly against it, and said, Ant. Chapter 314.
That the Persians would be governed by no other Man but Peucestes; whereupon
he flew Thespias, and made Asclepiodorus Governor of Persia, and committed to
him a considerable Army; and held on Peucestes with vain Hopes of preferring
him with higher Preferments elsewhere, until he had drawn him quite out of the
Country.

While Antigonus was on his way to Susa, Xenophilus, who had the keeping of the
King's Treasure there, being sent by Seleucus, went and met him at Pasitigris,
and offered him his Service in whatsoever he pleased to command him. Antigonus
received him very graciously, and seemed as if he honored him above all the
Friends he had, fearing left he might alter his Mind, and keep him out when he
came thither. But when he He gets great Treasure at Susa.
came into the Castle of Susa, he possessed himself of it, and there seized
upon the Golden Vine, and store of other such Rarieties, to the value of
Fifteen thousand Talents: All which he turned into ready Money, besides what he
made of Crowns of Gold, and other Presents and Spoils taken from the Enemy,
amounting to Five thousand Talents more, and a like quantity collected out of
Media, besides the Treasure had from Susa; so that in the whole he heaped
together Five and twenty thousand Talents. And thus stood the Affairs of
Antigonus at that time.

Since we have handled the Affairs of Asia, we shall now pass over into Europe,
and relate what was done there concurring and cotemporary with the former.
Cassander having Ant. Chapter 314.
shut up Olympias in Pydna in Macedonia, could not assault the Walls by reason
of the Winter Season; but he blocked up the City with his Forces on every side,
and drew a Cassander besieges Olympias in Pydna.
Mud-wall from Sea to Sea; and to prevent all Relief by Sea as well as by Land,
he guarded the Mouth of the Harbor with his own Shipping. Insomuch as their
Provisions being near spent, the Besieged were reduced to that Extremity of
Want, that they were near starved. For they were brought to that strait, that
every Soldier was allowed but About Seven Quarters and half a Pont.
Five Choenices of Bread-Corn every Month, and the Elephants were fed with
Sawdust. At last they killed the Draught-Beasts and Horses for Meat.

While the City was in this State, and Olympias earnestly expecting Foreign
Aid, the Elephants pined away for want of Food. And the Horsemen that were
Foreigners almost all died, having no proportion of Bread allotted them, and
many of the other Soldiers fared no better. Some of the Barbarians (Hunger
overcoming what Nature would have otherwise dreaded and abhorred) fed upon the
Carcasses of the Dead.

The Town being now filled with dead Bodies, the Colonels and Captains of the
King's Guards buried some, and threw others over the Walls; insomuch as not
only the Queens, (who were bred up deliciously all their Days,) but even the
Soldiers, who were Ant. Chapter 314.
always inured to Hardship, could not endure the Sight, nor Stink of the
Carcasses.

And now the Spring came on, and the Famine increased every day, whereupon most
of the Soldiers came up in a Body, and entreated Olympias to suffer them to
leave the Place because of the Scarcity, who (not being able to supply them
with Bread, nor in a condition to raise the Siege) let them go; and they were
all kindly received by Cassander, P. 698.
and disposed of into several Towns and Cities round about. For he hoped, that
the Macedonians coming to understand by them how weak Olympias was, would
conclude her Affairs Desperate and Remediless. And he did not miss the Mark in
his Conjecture; for they who were just now sending Relief to the Besieged,
presently altered their Purpose, and sided with Cassander. Only Aristonous and
Monimus of all the Macedonians continued firm and faithful to Olympias, of whom
Aristonous was Governor of Amphipolis, and the other of Pella. At length
Olympias perceiving that many went over to Cassander, and those who were her
Friends were not able to help her; without further delay got ready a Galley of
Five Oars on a Bank, with a design to rescue her and all her Kindred out of the
present Danger: But being discovered to the Enemy by some of the Deserters,
Cassander sailed to the Place, and seized the Vessel. Whereupon Olympias
looking upon her self in a desperate Condition, sent an Herald to Cassander to
treat upon Terms of Pacification; but he insisting upon the delivering up of
her self to his Mercy, with much ado she at length prevailed only for the
preservation of her Person: Being therefore now possessed of the City, he sent
some away to summon Pella and Amphipolis.

Monimus the Governor of Pella hearing how Things went with Olympias, presently
surrendered: But Aristonous at first resolved to hold out and maintain the
Cause of the Kings, in regard he had a strong Garrison, and had been then lately
Prosperous and Successful. For a few days before, he had fought with Crateuas,
one of Cassander's Captains, Amphipolis surrendered to Cassander.
and cut off many of the Enemy, and drove Crateuas himself, with Two thousand
of his Men, into the City Bedys in Bisaltia, and there besieged him, took him
and disarmed him, and then upon mutual Pledges of Faith given and taken,
discharged him. Being encouraged upon this account, and knowing nothing but
that Eumenes was still living, and concluding he should be sure of Aid and
Relief from Alexander and Polysperchon, he refused to surrender Amphipolis.

But as soon as he received Letters from Olympias, (whereby she commanded him
upon the Faith of his former Engagement to restore the City,) he observed her
Commands, and Amphipolis surender'd to Cassander.
delivered it up, upon assurance of his own Preservation. But Cassander
perceiving that he was a Man of great Interest by reason of the Honors
conferred upon him by Alexander, and minding to take all such out of the way as
might be in a Capacity to make any Disturbance, by the help of Crateuas his
Kindred he put him also to Death. Then he incited the Relations of such as were
put to Death by Olympias, to prosecute her in the General Assembly of the
Macedonians, who thereupon very readily complied with what they were put on to
do; and though she her self was not then present, nor had any Person there to
plead her Cause, yet the Macedonians condemned her to Die. Cassander thereupon
sent some of his Friends to Olympias, and advised her to get out of the way,
and promised to procure for her a Ship, and cause her to be conveyed safe to
Athens. And this he did not as any ways minding her Preservation, but as one
conscious of her own Guilt by her flight, it might be judged a just Vengeance
upon her if she perished and was cut off, as she was in her Voyage. For he was
afraid as well of the Fickleness of the Macedonians, as of the Dignity of her
Person. But Olympias refused to fly, but said, She was ready to defend her
Cause before all the Macedonians.

Cassander therefore fearing lest the People calling to mind the worthy Acts
and Kindnesses of Philip and Alexander toward the whole Nation should change
their Minds, and so take upon them to defend the Queen, sent to her a Band of
Two hundred Soldiers Ant. Chapter 314.
well Armed and Accouter'd, with Orders to dispatch her forthwith; who rushing
on a Cassander kills Olympias.
sudden into the Palace, as soon as they saw her, (in Reverence to her Person,)
drew back, without executing what they were commanded. But the Kindred of those
she P. 699.
had put to Death, both to ingratiate themselves with Cassander, and likewise
to gratify their own Revenge for the Death of their Relations, cut her Throat,
she not in the least crying out in any Womanish Terror or Fear to spare her. In
this manner died Olympias, the greatest and most honorable Woman in the Age
wherein she lived, Daughter of Neoptolimus King of Epirus; Sister of Sister of
Alexander, that is, Pyrrhus.
Alexander, who made the Expedition into Italy; Wife of Philip, the greatest
and most victorious Prince of all that ever were before in Europe; and lastly,
the Mother of Alexander, who never was exceeded by any for the many great and
wonderful Things that were done by him.

Cassander now seeing all Things go on according to his Heart's Desire, in his
Hopes and Expectations was already possessed of the Kingdom of Macedon: He
therefore now marries Thessalonices Daughter of Philip, and Sister of Alexander
by the same Father, ambitious Marries Thessalonices.
to be related in Affinity, and esteemed as one of the Royal Family. He built
likewise Cassandria (calling it after his own Name) in Builds Cassandria.
Pallene, and Peopled it by Inhabitants Ant. Chapter 314.
drawn out of the Cities of the The Chersonesus of Pallene in Thrace.
Chersonesus, and out of Potidea and many other neighboring Cities, and placed
there likewise those Olynthians that were left, of whom there were still a
considerable Number. To this City he laid a large and rich Territory, and made
it his earnest Care to advance the Glory and Splendor of this Place; so that
it grew up in a short time to that degree of Power, as to excel all the Cities
of Macedonia.

Cassander likewise minding to cut off all the Posterity of Alexander, (that
there might be none of his Line left to succeed in the Kingdom,) purposed to
kill the Son of Alexander, and Roxana his Mother. But for the present being
willing first to observe what People's Discourses were concerning the cutting
off of Olympias, and having as yet no certain Account how Things went with
Antigonus, he committed Roxana and her Son close Prisoners to the Castle at
Amphipolis under the Charge of Glaucias, then by him made Imprisons Roxana and
her Son Alexander. Ant. Chapter 314.
Governor, and one of his Friends, in whom he placed great Confidence. He
likewise took away from the young King those Children that were bred up with
him as his Companions, and ordered that he should be no longer attended as a
King, nor regarded otherwise than as a private Person.

And now Ruling the Kingdom in all Things as King, he Royally and Sumptuously
Interred at Aegis, Eurydice and Philip, the late King and Queen; and Cinna,
whom Alcetas had put to Death, gracing the Dead with the Solemnity of Funeral
Sports and Plays.

Then he raised Soldiers out of Macedonia for the Expedition resolved upon into
Peloponnesus. While he was employed in these Affairs, Polysperchon, who was
then besieged in Naxius in Perrebea, when he heard of the Death of Olympias, in
despair of retrieving of his Affairs in Macedonia, with a few in his Company
broke out of the City, and passed through Thessaly, together with Aeacides, and
came into Aetolia, where he judged he might safely abide, and observe how
Things went, for that there was a good Understanding between him and this
Nation.

But Cassander having now raised a considerable Army, marches out of Macedonia
with an Cassander's Expedition into Peloponnesus against Alexander the Son of
Polysperchon. Ant. Chapter 314.
intent to drive Alexander the Son of Polysperchon out of Peloponnesus: For he
with his Army was the only Enemy left, and had possessed himself of many
convenient Posts and Towns there. Through Thessaly he marched without any
opposition; but found the Pass at Pylas guarded by the Etolians, whom having
with much difficulty beaten off, he came into Boeotia, where getting all the
Thebans together that were remaining from all Parts, he set upon repeopling of
Thebes, conceiving now he had a fair opportunity put into his hands for the
rebuilding of that City, famous both for its renowned Actions, and the ancient
Stories concerning it. And by so good a Work, he concluded he should reap the
Fruit of an Immortal Fame and Glory.

This City had felt very many Changes and Turns of Fortune, and those to the
utmost The History of Thebes.
Extremity, being sometimes in danger of being razed to the Ground. Of which,
to say something briefly will not be any foreign Digression.

After Deucolion's Flood, when Cadmus had built the Citadel, called Cadmea
after his own P. 700.
Name, the People called Spartans or Sparsans flocked thither in droves, called
so by some, because they flocked together from all Places; others called them
Born at Thebes.
Thebigens, because the Natives of Thebes were forced away by the Flood, and
dispersed here and there up and down in the Country. When these were again
returned, they were afterward expelled by force of Arms by the Ench^lensians,
and then even Cadmus himself was forced to fly to the Illyrians. After this,
when Amphion and Zethus ruled, and there first built the City, (as the Homer.
Poet says,)

(...).
Who first Thebes Walls with Seven Gates did raise. Ant. Chapter 314.

The Inhabitants were again expuls'd, when Polydorus the Son of Cadmus returned
into the Kingdom, where all Things were then carelessly managed, by reason of
the sad Condition of His 7 Sons and 7 Daughters by Niobe were killed by Jupiter
and Diana with Arrows. Paus. in Boet. Diod. lib. 4.
Amphion for the Loss of all his Children.

Then again in the time of the Reign of his The Posterity of Polydorus.
Posterity, (when all the Country was called Boeotia, from one Boeotus the Son
of Melanippes and Neptune, who reigned there,) the Thebans were expelled the
third time by the The Posterity of the 7 Captains who besieged Thebes.
Epigoni of Argos, when they took the City by force. Those that escaped of
those that were expelled, fled to Alalcomenia and the Mountain Tilphosius; but
after the Death of these Argives, they returned into their own Country.

This Story of the Crows is, That the Oracle said, the Boeotians should be
expelled when they saw white Crows, which happened afterward by playful Boys
painting Crows white, and then letting them go. A little while after, the
Boeotians were ejected by the Aeolians. See the Annot. upon Erasm. Adag. (Ad
Corvos.) p. 374.
In the time of the Trojan War, when the Thebans were in Asia, those who stayed
at home, together with other Boeotians, were expelled by the Pelasgians: and
after they had endured many and various Calamities in the course of near four
Generations, (according to the Oracle relating to the Crows,) they returned,
and inhabited Thebes.

From this time this City continued in a State of Prosperity near Eight hundred
Years. And the Thebans at the beginning had the chief Command over all the rest
of their Country.

Afterward when they attempted to be Sovereign Lords of all Greece, Alexander
the Son of Philip took it by Storm, and razed it to the Ground. In the
Twentieth Year next after, Cassander, to make himself Famous, and advance his
own Reputation, he so Ant. Ch: 314.
far prevai^d with the Boeotians for their Concurrence, as that he rebuilt the
City, and restored Cassander rebuilds Thebes.
it to those Thebans that were then remaining of the old Stock. Many of the
Greek Cities afforded their Assistance to the rebuilding of this Place, out of
Compassion to the distressed Condition of the Thebans, and the ancient Fame and
Glory of the City. The Athenians built the greatest part of the Walls, and
others assisted according to their several Abilities; and Contributions were
sent not only from all Parts of Greece, but from some both in Sicily and Italy.
And thus the Thebans came to be restored to the ancient Seat of their
Ancestors. Then Cassander moved with his Army toward Peloponnesus; and when he
found that Alexander the Son of Polysperchon had fortified the Isthmus with
strong Guards, he turned aside to Megara; and there he fitted out some Boats,
and in them transported his Elephants to Epidaurus, and the rest of his Army in
other Ships. Thence coming to Argos, he forced them to quit their Confederacy
with Alexander and join with him. Afterward he brought over to him all the
Cities and Towns, with the Territories of Messina, except Ithom; and Hermonides
he took in upon Articles of Agreement: But upon Alexander's marching down to
fight, he left Two thousand Men at Geraneia, a Hill near the Istmos, in Megaris.
Geraneia, near the Istmos, under the Command of Molycus, and and returned into
Macedonia.

CHAP. IV.
Antigonus his Army feasted by Seleucus in Babylon. Falls out with Seleucus,
who flies to Ptolemy, and is kindly received. Ptolemy, Seleucus, Cassander, and
Lysimachus, join against Antigonus, They send Ambassadors to him, who Winters
in Cilicia He goes into Phoenicia, and there builds Ships; besieges Tire. The
Praise of Phyla, Wife of Demetrius. Aristodemus raises Forces for Antigonus in
Peloponnesus. The Acts of Ptolemy, one of Antigonus his Captains. Antigonus his
Policy. Tire delivered. The Agreement of Ptolemy's Captains and the rest at
Cyprus. The Acts of Seleucus. A Fleet comes to Antigonus from the Hellespont
and Rhodes. Things done in Peloponnesus. Cassander's Acts there, and in Greece.
The great Victory by Sea and Land obtained by Polyclitus Seleucus, his
Lieutenant: He Is rewarded by Ptolemy. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. The
Romans War with the Samnites.

AT the end of the former Year, Praxibulus was created chief Magistrate at
Athens, P. 701. Olymp. 116. 2. Ant. Chapter 313. An. M. 3657. Antigonus comes to
Babylon, his whole Army feasted by Seleucus.
and Spurius Nautius and Marcus Popilius bore the Office of Consuls at Rome; at
which time Antigonus left one Aspisa a Native, Governor of Susiana. He himself
resolving to carry away with him all the Moneys, prepared Carriages and Camels
for that purpose to bring it down to the Seaside, and so having it along with
him, marched with his Army toward Babylon, which he reached in Two and twenty
days March; where Seleucus the Governor of the Provinces received him with
Royal Presents, and feasted the whole Army. But when Antigonus demanded an
Account of the Revenue, he told them, He was not bound to give any Account of
that Province which the Macedonians had bestowed upon him as a Reward of his
Service in Alexander's Lifetime. The Difference growing wider and wider every
day, Seleucus remembering Pitho's fall, was thereupon the more afraid, lest
Antigonus should catch an Opportunity to put him also to Death. For he seemed
to have a Design to cut off (as soon as possible he could) all Men in Power,
and such as were in a Capacity to struggle for the chief Command: Whereupon,
for fear of the worst, he forthwith made away with Fifty Horse only in his
Company, intending to go into Egypt to Ptolemy. For his Kindess and courteous
Behavior Falls out with Seleucus, who flies to Ptolemy. Ant. Chapter 313.
toward all that came to him for Protection and Shelter, was cried up in every
Place. When Antigonus came to understand this, he rejoiced exceedingly, in that
he was not forced to destroy his Friend and potent Confederate, but that
Seleucus by his own voluntary Banishment had seemed to deliver up the Province
of his own accord, without a Stroke struck.

Afterward the Caldeans came to him, and foretold, That if Seleucus got
absolutely away, he should be Lord of all Asia, and that in a Battle between
them Antigonus himself Caldean South(...).
should be killed. Whereupon being sorry that he had let him go, he sent some
away to pursue him; but having followed him some little way, they returned as
they went. Antigonus was wont to slight these kind of Divinations in other Men,
but at this time he was so amazed and affrighted with the high Esteem and
Reputation of these Men, that he was very much disturbed in his Thoughts: For
they were judged to be Men very expert and skilful through their exact and
diligent Observation of the Stars: And they affirm, that they and their
Predecessors have studied this Art of Astrology for above Twenty thousand
Years. And what they had foretold concerning Alexander's Death, if he entered
into Babylon; was found true by late Experience. And in truth, as those
Predictions concerning Alexander came afterward to pass, so what they now said
relating to Seleucus were likewise in due time accomplished. Of which we shall
treat particularly when we come to the Times proper for that purpose.

Seleucus, when he was got safe into Egypt, was entertained by Ptolemy with all
the Expressions of Kindness and Affection that might be; where he bitterly
complained against Ant. Chapter 313. Seleucus kindly received by Ptolemy.
Antigonus, affirming that his Design was to expel all Persons of eminent
Quality out of their Provinces, and especially such as were in Service under
Alexander; which he backed with Arguments from Pitho's being put to Death, and
Peucestes being deprived of the Government of Persia, and from the Usage he
himself had lately met with; and all these, though they had never done any
thing to deserve it, but rather upon all Occasions performed all the Acts of
Kindness and Service to him that was in their Power, and this was the Reward of
all they reaped from their Service. He reckoned up likewise the Strength of his
Forces, his great Treasure, and his late Successes, which so puffed him up,
that he was in hopes to gain the Sovereign Command over all the Macedonians.
Ptolemy, Seleucus, Cassander, and Lysimachus, join against Antigonus. P. 702.
Ant. Chapter 313.


Having by these Arguments stirred up Ptolemy to make War against him, he sent
some of his Friends over into Europe, to prevail with Cassander and Lysimachus
with the like Arguments to appear in Arms against Antigonus. Which Orders being
forthwith executed, Foundations were laid for a mighty War, which afterward
followed.

Antigonus upon many probable Conjectures, conceiving what was Seleucus his
design, sent Ambassadors to Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus, to desire them,
that the ancient Friendship might be preserved and maintained amongst them. And
then having made Pithon, who came out of India, Lord Lieutenant of the Province
of Babylon, he broke up Antigonus Winters in Cilicia.
his Camp, and marched toward Cilicia. As soon as he came to In Cilicia.
Mallos, he distributed his Army into Winter Quarters, about the Month of After
the s^tting of Orion.
November: And he received out of the Treasury in the City of Quindi Ten
thousand Talents, and Eleven thousand Talents out of the yearly Revenues of
that Province. So that he was very formidable both in respect of his great
Forces and the vastness of his Treasure. And now being removed into the Upper
Syria, Ambassadors came to him from Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus,
Ambassadors sent to him from Ptolemy, Cassander and Lysimachus.
who being introduced as he sat in Council, demanded all Cappadocia and Lycia,
to be be delivered up to Cassander; Phrygia, bordering upon the Hellespont, to
Lystmachus; all Syria to Ptolemy; and the Province of Babylon to Seleucus; and
all the common Stock of Moneys which he had incroach'd upon since the Battle
with Eumenes, to be shared equally amongst them; which if he refused, then they
were to let him know, that their Ant. Chapter 3^3.
Masters intended with their joint Forces to make War upon him. Whereunto he
answered roughly, That he was now making a War upon Ptolemy; and thereupon, the
Ambassadors returned, without any effect of their Embassy: And upon this
Answer, Ptolemy, Cassander, and Lysimachus entered into a League amongst
themselves, and gathered their Forces together, and made it their business to
provide Arms, and all other things necessary for the War.

And now Antigonus perceiving how many great and potent Adversaries had
confederated against him, and what a Storm was ready to fall upon him, sought
the Alliance and Confederacy of other Cities, Nations, and Princes; and to this
purpose dispatched away Agisilaus to the King of Cyprus, Idomineus and Moschion
to Rhodes, and one Ptolemy, his own Brother's Son, with an Army to raise the
Siege of Amisus in Cappadocia, and to drive out those that were sent thither by
Cassander. He commanded him likewise to go to the Hellespont, and fall upon
Cassander, if he attempted to pass over out of Europe into Asia. He sent away
likewise Aristodemus the Milesian, with a thousand Talents, with Orders to
enter into a League of Amity with Alexander and Polysperchon, and to hire
Soldiers, and make War upon Cassander: And he himself disposed Becons and
Courriers throughout all Asia, which was wholly at his Command, hereby to give
and get Knowledge of all things that passed, and to manage his Affairs with the
greater Expedition.

Having taken this Order, he marches into Phaenicia to provide a Fleet: For at
that He goes into Phenicia, and there builds Ships. Ant. Chapter 313.
time the Enemy had the Command of the Sea, being furnished with abundance of
Shipping, when he himself had not one. Encamping near to Tire, with design to
Besiege it, he sent for the petty Kings of Phaenicia, and Governors of Syria,
and dealt with them to join with him in the Building of Ships, because all the
Ships that belonged to Phaenicia were then with Ptolemy in Egypt. He gave them
likewise Order to bring him with all speed Four Millions and Five hundred
thousand Bushels of Wheat; for to so much came the yearly Expense of his Army.
Then he got together Hewers of Timber, Sawers, and Ship Carpenters, from all
Parts, and caused Timber to be brought down from Mount Lebanon to the Seaside,
employing therein Eight thousand Men to Work, and a Thou-Beasts for Carriage
This Mount runs through Tripolis, Byblia, and Sidonia, and abounds in most
beautiful tall Cedars and Cypress Trees. He appointed three Arsenals in
Phaenicia, P. 703.
one at Tripolis, another at Byblia, and the Third at Sidon; a Fourth he had in
Cilicia, whither Timber was brought from Mount Taurus; and a Fifth in Rhodes,
where the Inhabitants suffered him to build Ships of Timber, conveyed thither
at his own Charge.

While Antigonus was thus employed and lay Encamped by the Sea side, Seleucus
came with a Fleet of an Hundred Sail out of Egypt, quick Sailers, and Royally
furnished, and in a scornful manner skirr'd under the Noses of them; which not
a little troubled the Minds of his new Associates, and those that joined with
him in the carrying on of the Work. For it was very apparent, that the Enemy
now being Master at Sea, would be sure to waste and spoil those who out of
kindness to Antigonus had joined with their Adversaries.

But Antigonus bid them be of good cheer, for before the end of Summer, he
said, he would be at Sea with a Fleet of Five hundred Sail.

Agesilaus, in the mean while, returned with his Embassy out of Cyprus, and
brought word, that Nicocreon, and the most potent Kings of that Island had
already confederated Ant. Chapter 313.
with Ptolemy; Nevertheless, that Citticus, Lapitbius, Marius, and Cyrenites,
would join with him: Whereupon, he left Three thousand Men under the Command of
Andronicus, to maintain the Siege against Tire, and he himself marched with the
rest of the Army against Antigonus be sieges Tire.
Gaza and Joppe, which stood out against him, and took them by force; and such
of Ptolemy's Men as he found there, he took and distributed them among his own
Regiments, and placed Garrisons in both those Cities to keep them in Obedience.
Which done, he returned to his standing Camp about Tire, and prepared all
necessaries for a Siege against it. At the same time, Aristo, who was entrusted
by Eumenes to carry Craterus his Bones, delivered them to Phila to be buried,
who was married first to Craterus, and at that time to Demetrius the Son of
Antigonus, who was a Woman of excellent Parts and Prudence; for by her prudent
Behavior and Carriage toward every Soldier in the Army, she was able The
Praise of Phila, the Wife of Demetrius.
to qualify and moderate those that were most Turbulent, and she put forth the
Daughters and Sisters of those that were Poor, at her own Charge; and prevented
the Ruin of many that were falsely accused. Its reported, that Antipater her
Father, (who was the most prudent Prince that Governed in this Age) was used to
consult with Phila his Daughter, in the most weighty Affairs, while she was but
yet a Girl. But the Prudence of this Woman will more fully appear in the
following Narration, and when things tended Ant. Chapter 313.
to a Revolution, and the fatal Period of Demetrius his Kingdom. And thus stood
the Affairs of Antigonus and Phila at this time.

Amongst the Captains sent away by Antigonus, Aristodemus passed over to
Laconia, and having got leave of the Spartans to raise Soldiers, got together
Eight thousand out of Peloponnesus; Aristodemus raises Forces for Antigonus in
Peloponnesus.
and upon Conference with Polysperchon and Alexander, joined them both in a
firm League of Amity with Antigonus, and made Polysperchon General over the
Forces in Peloponnesus; but prevailed with Alexander to pass over into Asia to
Antigonus.

Ptolomeus, another of his Captains, going into Cappadocia with an Army, and
there Ptolomey, a Captain of Antigonus, raises the Siege of Amisus in
Cappadocia.
finding the City of Amisus besieged by Asclepidorus, a Captain of Cassander's,
raised the Siege and secured the Place; and so having sent away Asclepidorus
packing upon certain Conditions, recovered that whole Province to Antigonus;
and marching thence through Bithynia, came upon the back of Zibytes King of the
Bithynians, whilst he was busy in besieging of two Cities at once, that of the
Assarenians, and the other of the Calcedonians, and forced him to raise his
Siege from both; and then falling to Capitulations both with him and the Cities
that were besieged, after Hostages received, removed thence Ant. Chapter 313.
toward Ionia and Lydia; for that Antigonus had written to him to secure that
Coast with Two other Cities raised by him in Bithynia. P. 704.
all possible speed, having intelligence that Seleucus was going into those
Parts with his Fleet; whither indeed he came and besieged Erythras: But hearing
of the Enemies approach left it, and went away as he came. Mean while,
Alexander the Son of Polysperchon, came to Antigonus, who made a League with
him; and then calling a general Antigonus his Policy.
Council of the Army and the Strangers there resident, declared unto them how
Cassander had murdered Olympias, and how villainously he had dealt with Roxana
and the young King, and that he had forced Thessalonices to marry him, and that
it was very clear and evident that he aspired to the Kingdom of Macedonia.
Moreover, that he had planted the Olynthians, the most bitter Enemies of the
Macedonians, in the City called after his own Name; That he had rebuilt Thebes
that was razed by the Macedonians: Having thus incensed the Army, he made and
wrote an Edict, That Cassander should be taken as an open Enemy, unless he
razed the two Cities, released the King and Roxana his Mother, and returned
them safe to the Macedonians: And lastly, Unless he submitted to Antigonus, as
General and sole Protector of the Kingdom; and free all the Greek Cities, and
withdraw all the Garrisons out of them.

When the Army had approved of this Edict by their Suffrages, he sent Courriers
away to publish it in all places: For he hoped, that by this Means all the
Grecians, in expectation of having their Liberties restored, would be his
Consederates, and readily assist him in the War, and that all the Governors of
the Higher Provinces, who before suspected him, as if he designed to deprive
the Posterity of Alexander of the Kingdom, (now that Ant. Chapter 313.
it clearly appeared that he took up Arms in their behalf) would observe all
his Commands of their own accord.

Having dispatched all these Matters, he sent back Alexander with Five hundred
Talents into Peloponnesus, with his hopes raised in expectation of mighty
Matters: And he himself with Shipping had from Rhodes, and others he had lately
built, set sail for Tire; where being now Master at Sea, he so blocked it up
for thirteen Months together, that no supply of Victuals could be brought
thither, and thereby reduced the Inhabitants into so Tire delivered to
Antigonus.
great distress, that at length (upon suffering the Soldiers to march away with
some small things that were their own) the City was surrendered to him upon
Terms; and he placed a Garrison in it for its Defense.

In the mean time, Ptolemy hearing what a Declaration Antigonus with the
Macedonians had made, concerning the Liberty of the Grecians, made the like
himself, as desirous that Prolemy proclaims Liberty to the Grecians.
all the World should take notice, that he was no less zealous for the Liberty
of Greece than Antigonus was: For both of them well considering of how great
moment it was to their Affairs to gain the good Will of the Grecians, strove
one with another which should oblige them most by Acts of Grace. Then he joined
to his Party the Governor of Caria, who was a Man of great Power, and had many
great Cities under his Command. And tho he had before sent Three thousand
Soldiers to the Kings in Cyprus, yet he hastened away Ptolemy sends Men into
Cyprus.
many more, to reduce those who had there sided against him. Those sent were
Ten thousand, under the Command of Myrmidon, an Athenian born, and an Hundred
sail of Ships, Commanded by Polyclitus: And the General over all he made his
Brother Menelaus.

These coming into Cyprus, joined then with Seleucus and his Fleet, and in a
Council of War advised what course was fit to be taken. The Result of which
was, that Polyclitus with Fifty sail should pass into Peloponnesus, and there
should make War upon Aristodemus, Polysperchon, and his Son Alexander: That
Myrmidon should go with an Army of Foreigners The Agreement of the Captains of
Ptolemy, and the rest at Cyprus. P. 705. The Acts of Seleucus.
into Caria, there to help Cassander against Ptolemy, a Captain of Antigonus,
who pressed hard upon him; and that Seleucus and Menelaus staying in Cyprus,
should bear up Nicocreon the King, and the rest of their Confederates, against
their Enemies.

Having thus therefore divided their Forces, Seleucus went and took Cyrinia and
Lapithus; and having drawn over Stasiecus, King of the Malenses, to his Party,
he forced the Prince of the Amathusians to give him Hostages for his Fealty for
the time to come. As for the City Citium (seeing it would come to no Agreement
with him) he fell to besiege it with his whole Army.

About the same time came Forty Ships out of the Hellespont and Rhodes, under
the Command of one Themison, their Admiral, to Antigonus; and after them came
Dioscorides Ant. Chapter 313. A Fleet comes to antigonus from Hellespont and Rhodes.
with Fourscore more; though Antigonus had already a Navy of his own, new built
in Phenicia, to the Number of an Hundred and twenty Ships, with those that he
left at Tire; so that he had in the whole Two hundred and forty Men of War, of
which there were Ninety of four Tire of Oars; Ten of Five, Three of Nine; Ten
of Ten; and Thirty open Galleys.

Antigonus dividing this Navy into Squadrons, sent Fifty of them into
Peloponnesus, and the rest he committed to Dioscorides, his own Brother's Son,
with this Charge, That he should guard the Seas, and help his Friends as their
occasion required, and that he should gain unto his Party such of the Islands
as hitherto stood out against him. And in this Posture stood the Affairs of
Antigonus.

And now, having related the things done throughout all Asia, we shall give a
particular Account of the Affairs of Europe.

Apolenides being made Commander of the Argives by Cassander, in the Night
broke into Arcadia, Things done in Peloponnesus.
and surpised the The City Stymphalus, near the Stymphalian Lake.
City of the Stymphalions. And while he was absent, some of the Argives
(Enemies to Cassander) corresponded with Alexander the Son of Polysperchon, and
promised to deliver up the Argos.
City into his Hands. But Alexander being too slow, Apolonides comes to Argos
before him; and surpised Five hundred of the Conspirators that were in a
Senate in the A public Place where the great M^n used to Sacrifice, or a Place
where a Court was held belonging to the Senate. The Acts of Cassander in
Peloponnesus. and elsewhere.
Prytaneum, and kept them in, and burnt them there alive; most of the rest he
banished, and some few more he took and put to Death.

Cassander having intelligence, that Aristodemus was arrived in Peloponnesus,
and that he had listed there great numbers of Soldiers, in the first place
sought to draw off Polysperchon from Antigonus; but not being able to prevail,
he marched with an Army through Thessaly and came into Boeotia; where having
assisted the Thebans in raising of their Walls, he passed into Peloponnesus,
and first having taken Cencrea, he Spoiled and Harrass'd all the Territory of
Corinth. Then he took two Castles by Storm, and upon future Faith and
Allegiance, dismissed all the Garrison Soldiers that were placed there by
Alexander. Afterward he besieged Orchomenon, and being let into the Town by
Alexander's Enemies, he put a Garrison into the City; Those that sided with
Alexander took Sanctuary in Diana's Temple, whom he gave up to the Citizens to
do with them as they thought fit; whereupon the Orchomenians drew them all out
of the Temple by Force, and against the common Laws of Greece put them all to
Death.

Cassander went thence into Messenia, but finding the City strongly Garrisoned
by Polysperchon, he thought not fit for the present to besiege it, but marched
into Arcadia, where he left Damides Governor of the City Stamphalus. Vid. p.
705.
City, and returned to Argia. P. 706.
Argolides, and there celebrated the Nem'an Games, and returned into Macedonia.
When he was gone, Alexander with Aristodemus lay before the Cities in
Peloponnesus, to expel the Garrisons of Cassander, and endeavored all he could
to restore the Cities to their Liberties: Which coming to the Ears of
Cassander, he sent to him Prepelaus to work upon him to desert Antigonus, and
enter into a League of Friendship and Amity with himself; promising, that if he
would do so, he would give him the Sovereign Command of all Peloponnesus, and
create him General of the Army, and would advance him to high Places of Honor
and Preferment. Alexander seeing he was now like to attain that for which from
the beginning he made War upon Cassander, enters into a League with him, and so
is made General of all the Forces in Peloponnesus.

In the mean while, Polyclitus, Secleucus his Lieutenant, sailing from Cyprus
came to Cencrea; where hearing of the Defection of Alexander, and finding no
Enemy there to The great Victory both by Sea and Land obtained by Polyclitus,
Seleucus his Lieutenant.
Encounter, he changed his Course and set sail for Pamphylia; and from thence
arriving at Aphrodisiades in Cilicia, he there understood that Theodotus,
Admiral of Antigonus his Navy, passed by from Patara, a Port in Lycia, with the
Rhodian Fleet, furnished with Mariners out of Caria; and that Perilaus with a
Land-Army coasted along by the Shore, for the defense of the Fleet if need
should be: In this case he outwitted them both; for he Landed his Men in a
Place out of view, where the Land-Army must of necessity pass, and himself with
the Fleet went and lay behind a Foreland, waiting for the coming of the Enemy;
there the Enemy's Foot fell into an Ambush, and Perilaus himself being taken
Prisoner, and his Men all either killed or taken. The Fleet at Sea seeing the
Land-Army engaged, hasted to their Relief; but then Polyclitus coming upon them
in this Confusion, with his Ships drawn up in a Line of Battle, put them easily
to flight; so that Polyclitus took all their Ships and most part of the Men in
them, and amongst the rest Theodotus Ant. Chapter 313.
himself their Admiral, sorely martyred with Wounds, of which he shortly after
died.

Polyclitus having sped so well on all hands, sailed back first to Cyprus, and
then to In Egypt.
Pelusium, where Ptolemy richly rewarded him for so great a Service, and withal
promoted him to a far higher Dignity and Place of Honor than he was in before,
as the Author He Is highly rewarded by Ptolemy.
of so great a Victory: But released Perilaus and some other Prisoners, which
Antigonus desired by a Messenger sent to him for that purpose. And then himself
going to a Place called Ecregma, came to a Parley with Antigonus, but Antigonus
refusing to grant him what he demanded, he left him and returned.

Having now given an account of the Affairs of the European Greeks, both in
Greece and Macedonia, we shall run over to the Parts lying toward the West.

Agathocles, Prince of Syracuse, having possessed himself of a Castle belonging
to the Messenians, promised to restore it upon receiving of Thirty Talents of
Silver: Which The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily.
when the Messenians had paid, he not only broke his Faith, but endeavored to
have seized upon Messina it self. For being informed that part of the Walls
were fallen down, he sent a Party of Horse by Land from Syracuse, and he
himself in some Ships called Barks or Frignts.
Hemiolias, went by Sea, and arrived in the Night close under the Walls of the
City: But they coming to understand his Design beforehand, wholly defeated him
in what he had contrived. However, He came to Mylas, and upon laying Siege to
the Castle, had it Ant. Chapter 313.
delivered up to him; and then returned to Syracuse. In Harvest-time he made a
second attempt upon Messina, and Encamping near the City, made continual
Assaults, but was not able to effect any thing considerable: For many Exiles
were flocked into this Place from Syracuse, who both for the sake of their own
Preservation, and out of Hatred to the Tyrant, fought most Courageously.

About this time came Ambassadors from Carthage, arguing the Case with
Agathocles, and complaining of the Breach of Articles; and making Peace with
the Messenians, they forced the Tyrant to restore the Mylas. P. 707.
Castle, and then sailed back into Africa.

After which Agathocles went to Abecenus, one of his Confederate Cities, and
there he put to Death Forty, whom he looked upon to be his Enemies.

In these times the Romans were at War with the Samnites, and took Ferentum by
Storm; and the Inhabitants of Nuceria (called Alphatema) were, by the
Persuasions of some Persons, prevailed with to desert the Romans, and join in
League with the Samnites.

CHAP. V.
The Acts of Aristodemus, Antigonus his General in Peloponnesus. The Dimeans in
Achaia seek to free themselves from Cassander's Garrison: They take the
Citadel. Alexander, Son of Polysperchon, Assassinated. The praise of
Cratesipolis his Wife. The Acts of Cassander in Etolia, and other Parts of
Greece. The Cruelty of the Etolians. Cassander sends an Army into Caria; and
Aristotle with a Fleet to Lemnos. The Acts of Cassander's Army in Caria.
Antigonus Leaves his Son Demetrius in Syria to watch Ptolemy. His troublesome
March into Asia. The Affairs of Sicily. Acrotatus his Misgovernment and
Cruelties in Sicily. The Acts of Agathocles. The Affairs of Italy.

WHEN the former year was ended, Nichodorus was created Archon at Athens, and
Olymp. 116. 3. Ant. Chapter 312. An. M. 3658.
Lucius Papirius chosen the Fourth, and Quintus Publius the second time Consul
at Rome. At that time Aristodemus, made General by Antigonus, hearing of the
Defection of Alexander the Son of Polysperchon, after he had opened the Justice
of the Cause before the Senate of the Etolians, solicited them to be assistant
to the Affairs of Antigonus. Then passing into Peloponnesus with the
Mercenaries, found Alexander with the Eleans besieging Aristodemus raises the
Siege of Cyllene. The Acts of Aristodemus in Peloponnesus.
Cyllene, and coming in nick of time raised the Siege; and then leaving a
Garrison to defend the Place, he moved toward Actria, and frees Patras from the
Garrison of Cassander; but Egeum he took by Force, and being possessed of the
Place, was ready to restore the Egeans to their Liberty, according to the
former Decree, but that he was prevented by this Accident. The Soldiers began
to Plunder; and upon that occasion many of the Citizens were killed, and the
greatest part of the Town was burnt down to the Ground.

After which he sailed back into Etolia; the Dymeans, who were awed by a
Garrison Ant. Chapter 312. Of Dyme in Achaia. The Dimeans seek to free themselves
from Cassander's Garrison.
of Cassander's in the Castle, separated their City from the Citadel by a Wall
drawn round it, and encouraging one another to stand up for their Liberties,
besieged the Castle, and infested it with continual Assaults. Of which
Alexander receiving Intelligence, he came upon them with his Army on a sudden,
and drove them within their Walls, and entered pell-mell with them into the
City, and took it: Some of the Dymeans he put to the Sword, others he
Imprisoned, and many of them he Banished. After Alexander went away, the rest
of them were quiet for a little while, being both terrified with the greatness
of the late Calamity, and likewise wanting the Assistance of their
Confederates. But some time after, they made application to Aristodemus his
Mercenaries, who marched to them from Egeum. Whereupon, they again assaulted
the Citadel, and took it, and freed the City, and put many of the Garrison to
the Sword, and put to Death such of their own Citizens as favored Alexander's
Party.

Amongst these Turns and Changes of Fortune, while Alexander with his Army was
Alexander, Son of Polyspachon killed.
marching from Sycion, he was killed by Alexion, a Sycionian, and some others,
who pretended themselves to be his Friends. His Wife, Cratesipolis, after his
Death, took upon her the Management of Affairs, and kept the Army in due
Obedience: Her obliging Carriage and Bounty was such, as that she was greatly
beloved of the Soldiers; for she The praise of Cratesipolis, Wife of Alexander,
Son of Polysperchon.
was continually affording all the help she could to them that were in
Distress, and relieving and supporting many that were in Want: Besides, she was
a Woman of admirable Prudence in managing Affairs, and of Courage beyond the
natural Temper of her Sex. For when the Sycionians in contempt of her, (after
the Death of her Husband) rose up in Arms for the Recovery of their Liberty,
she executed her Revenge by cutting off Multitudes Ant. Chapter 312.
of them in a Field-battel; and crucified Thirty of those she had taken
Prisoners; and so having settled the Affairs of the City, she reigned over the
Sycionians, having under her Command multitudes of Soldiers ready upon all
occasions for any Undertaking, though never so hazardous. And this was then the
State and Condition of Peloponnesus.

Cassander perceiving that the Etolians assisted Antigonus, and were then
likewise engaged in a War with their Neighbors the Acarnanians, judged that
the most probable way to P. 708.
bring down the Etolians, was for him to join with the Acarnanians. To this
end, he marched out of Macedonia with a great Army, and came into Etolia, and
Encamped near Cassander joins with the Acarnanians against the Etolians.
the River Campylus. Here he invited the Acarnanians to a common Consult, where
he set forth how they had been vexed for many Generations past, by War from
their unruly and troublesome Neighbors; and therefore advised them, that they
should leave their little Forts and Castles, (though they were fortified) and
betake themselves to a few Cities, lest being so dispersed and scattered in
their Habitations, they should not be able to get together to assist one
another, when the Enemy at any time should suddenly and unexpectedly break in
upon them. The Acarnanians followed his Advice, and the most of them removed to
Stratopolis, which was the strongest and largest of their Cities. The Ant. Chapter
312.
Oeniades and some others, went to Saurion; the Doreans with the rest to
Agrinium.

Cassander hereupon, left Lyciscus his General in those Parts, with a
considerable Body of Men, with Orders to assist the Acarnanians; and he himself
marched with his Army The Acts of Cassander.
to the City Leueades, and by Treaty gained them for Consederates. Then with a
swift March he came suddenly into Adria, and took in Apollonia his first
approach. Thence marching into Illyria, he passed over the River Hebrus, and
fought with Glaucius the Illyrian King, and routed his Army; after which he
made Peace with him, upon Condition, that he should not make War upon any of
his Confederates. Then he took in Epidamnum bordering upon the Adriatic Sea.
Now called Durazzo, called also Dyradrium. The Cruelty of the Etolians. Ant.
Chapter 312.
Epidamnum, and placing there a Garrison returned into Macedonia.

After Cassander had left Etolia, the Etolians joining together, to the Number
of Three thousand besieged Agrinium, girting it round with a Trench and a
Breast-work. But the Inhabitants that came before out of the Country, treated
and agreed with the Enemy, That upon delivery up of the City their Persons
should be secure, and they should have liberty to depart and leave the Place.
Whereupon, after Faith given for their security, they went out, and when they
were in their way, the Etolians Falsely and Treacherously, when the other never
suspected any thing, pursued 'em, and killed 'em almost every Man.

Cassander being returned into Macedonia, as soon as he heard how the Cities in
Caria (that had Confederated with Ptolemy and Seleucus) were infested by the
War, put over Cassander sends an Army into Caria.
an Army into Caria, both to help the Confederates, as also in time to divert
Antigonus, that he might have no leisure to come into Europe. He commanded also
by his Letters Demetrius, Phalerius, and Dionysius Governor of the Fort of
Munychia, to fit out forthwith Twenty Ships for Lemnos. Who thereupon,
presently dispatched away the Ships, under Sends Aristotle with a Fleet to
Lemnos.
the Command of Aristotle, their Admiral, and he arriving at Lemnos, and being
there joined with Seleucus and his Fleet, he prevailed with them of Lemnos to
desert Antigonus. But they afterward retracted what they had before engaged
to, and thereupon he wasted and harrass'd the Country, and drew a Trench round
the City and besieged it.

About this time Seleucus arrived at Coos; whose coming there being noised
abroad, Dioscorides, Admiral of Antigonus his Fleet, sailed to Lemnos, and
drove Aristotle out of the Island, and took many of his Ships, together with
all their Men on board.

One Cassander and Prepalaus were Commanders of the Forces sent into Caria by
Cassander; who hearing that Ptolemy, Antigonus his General in those Parts, had
distributed his Army into their Winter Quarters, and that he himself was busy
in the burying of his Father, sent away Eupolemus with Eight thousand Foot and
Two thousand Horse, to a Ant. Chapter 312.
Place called Caprima, in Caria, to lie in Ambushment for him there: But
Ptolemy getting notice thereof by some that fled over to him, got together out
of the next Winter Quarters The Acts of Cassander's Army in Caria P. 709.
Eight thousand and Three hundred Foot, and Six hundred Horse, and falling
about Midnight into the Enemies Trenches, and finding them near all fast
asleep, took Eupolemus Prisoner, and forced all his Men to submit to
discretion. And this was then the Condition of those sent by Cassander into
Asia.

But Antigonus perceiving that Cassander aimed at the Sovereignty of Asia, left
his Son Demetrius in Syria, with instructions to intercept Ptolemy's Men, whom
he suspected were then coming with an Army further up into Syria; and to that
purpose left with him Ten thousand Foot of other Nations, Two thousand
Macedonians, Five hundred out of Lycia Antigonus leaves his Son Demetrius in
Syria to watch Ptolemy.
and Pamphilia, Persian Archers and Slingers Four hundred, and Five thousand
Horse, and above Forty Elephants; and four Men for his Counselors, Nearchon,
Pitho Son of Agenor, who came lately from Babylon, Andromicus of Olynthus, and
Philippus; all Men of mature Age and Judgment, and such as had attended upon
Alexander in all his Wars: For Demetrius himself was but a young Man, not above
Two and twenty years of Age. Upon Antigonus himself, while he past with the
rest of his Army over Mount Taurus, there fell a mighty Snow, wherein he lost
many of his Men. Whereupon, he returned Ant. Chapter 312. His troublesome march
into Asia.
back into Cilicia, where he advised himself of a better Way to pass that
Mountain, and with little damage to his Army; and so coming to Celenae in
Phrygia, he there put his Army into their Winter Quarters. Then he sent for the
Fleet out of Phenicia, of which Medius was Admiral, who by mere chance in his
way met with a Fleet of Thirty six Sail belonging to the City of Pydna, and
defeated them, and brought the Ships with all their Men under his Subjection.
In this Posture stood the Affairs both of Greece and Asia at this time.

In the mean time in Sicily the Exiles of Syracuse, who were then in
Agrigentum, stirred up the great Men of the City not to suffer Agathocles in
that manner to make The affairs of Sicily.
a Prey of the Cities; alleging that it was better to set upon the Tyrant
before he grew too strong, than to loiter till he was in greater power, and
then to be forced to Contend with him when it was more hazardous: Whereupon the
Agrigentines approving of his Advice, decreed by their suffrages War against
him; and joining in Confederacy with the Geloans and Messenians, they sent some
of the Exiles to the Lacedaemonians with Orders to procure a General to be sent
to them from thence. For they suspected that some of their own Citizens were
too much inclined to Tyranny themselves, but judged that Foreigners if they
remembered the Government of Timolion the Corinthian, would better manage the
public affairs. When they arrived therefore in Laconia they found Acrotatus,
the Son of King Claomenes, much hated by many of the young Noblemen at Ant. Chapter
312. Acrotatus invited to be General by Agrigentines.
home, and therefore very desirous to be employed abroad. For when the
Lacedaemonians after the Fight with Antipater had acquitted those that escaped
in that Battle from all Censures of Disgrace, he only opposed the Decree; so
that many were offended at him, especially those that were liable to the
penalty of the Laws. And upon that account they had lain in wait for him, and
beaten him, and were constantly seeking to entrap him: Being therefore for this
reason desirous of a foreign Command, he very freely complied with the
Agragentines; and thereupon without the Order of the Ephori (resolving upon the
Voyage) he set Sail with a few Ships for Agrigentum: But being driven back by a
Storm into Adria, he arrived in the Territory of the Apolloniates; where
finding the City besieged by Glocias, King of the Illyrians, he persuaded the
King to raise the siege, and enter into a League of Friendship with the
Apolloniates. Then he sailed to Tarentum, and there Solicited the People to
join P. 710.
with him in procuring the Restoration of the Syracusians to their Ancient
Liberties, and so far prevailed, that they Decreed to assist them with Twenty
Sail of Ships. For on the account of his Kindred and the nobleness of his
Family, his words were of great Ant. Chapter 312.
Weight and Credit. While the Tarentines were making preparations, he himself
sailed to Agrigentum, and there took upon him the Command of the Army;
whereupon the People were in high expectations, in so much as that all
concluded that an end would be presently put to the Tyranny: But in a short
time it plainly appeared that he did nothing worthy, either the Nobility of his
Birth, or the reputation of his Country. But on The misgoverment and cruelty of
Acrotatus the Corinthian in Sicily.
the contrary became more cruel and bloody than the very Tyrants themselves,
and so fell into the Hatred of the People: He degenerated likewise from the
custom of his Country in his manner of living; and so indulged himself in
voluptuousness, that he seemed more like a Persian, than a Spartan. After he
had lavished away the greatest part of the public Revenues, partly by his
misgovernment, and partly by robbing of the Treasury; in the Conclusion he
invited Sosistratus (the most eminent person among the Exiles, and one who had
been a General of Armies) to Supper, and treacherously killed him, having not
anything in the least to lay to his charge, but only that he might take out of
the way a stout and valiant man, and one that was able to discern and discover
his Miscarriages: Which wicked fact being presently noised abroad, the Exiles
in a Body came upon him, and every body else forsoook him, and in the first
place they deposed him, and presently after attempted to stone him to death; to
avoid therefore the rage of the People he stole Ant. Chapter 312.
away in the night and landed privately in Laconia: After his departure the
Tarentines recall their Fleet they had before sent into Sicily.

Hereupon the Agrigentines Geloans and Messenians by the mediation of Amilcar
the Carthaginian General, make peace with Agathocles; the Conditions of which
were as follow; that Heraclea Selinum and Himera, part of the Greek Cities,
should belong unto the Carthaginians, as they did before; all the rest under
the power of the Syracusians should be free to be governed after their own
Laws. But afterward Agathocles, when he saw the The Acts of Agathocles in
Sicily.
coast clear, and Sicily free and cleared from all appearance of an Enemy, he
fell upon the Cities, and without any difficulty brought them under his
subjection; and gaining many in a very short time, strongly fixed himself in the
Principality. For in the multitude of his Confederates, the greatness of his
Yearly Revenues, and the power of a mighty Army, he grew very strong. For
besides his Confederates and those raised from among the Syracusians, he had of
mercenaries Ten thousand Foot and Three thousand and fifty Horse; he furnished
himself likewise with all sorts of Arms, foreseeing that the Carthaginians (who
had smartly rebuk't Amilcar for making the Peace) would in a short time make
War upon him. And such was the estate of Sicily at this time.

In Italy the Samnites having now been in Wars with the Romans for many Years
last The affairs of Italy. Ant. Chapter 312.
past, took Plistia, wherein was a strong Roman Garrison; and prevailed with
the Soranions to massacre all the Romans that were there, and to confederate
with the Samnites.

Afterward while the Romans were besieging of Satricula, they came upon them
with a strong Army resolving to raise the siege; upon which followed a sharp
Engagment, and after many killed on both sides the Romans carried the day; and
then presently after they took the Town, and gained several other neighboring
Towns and Castles. And now the War was brought over amongst the Cities of
Apulia; whereupon the Samnites Listed all that were of Age to bear Arms, and
marched out and Incampt close to the Enemy, being now resolved to win or lose
all. The People of Rome therefore to prevent the worst, sent thither a great
number of Soldiers: And because they P. 711.
were accustomed in perilous times to choose one of the most Noble and Eminent
Persons to be their General, with full and absolute power and Authority; they
therefore pitched upon Quintus Fabius and Quintus Aulius, Master of the Horse,
for that honorable employment. These Generals afterward fought the Samnites
at Lautulas, where they sustained great loss of their men; and the whole Army
fled outright, only Aulius (being ashamed of the dishonor) opposed the whole
Body of the Enemy, not out of any hopes or expectation of gaining the Victory,
but to have it manifest and apparent to all from his own valor, that his
Country was unconquerable. Not sharing therefore with the rest of the Citizens
in the Dishonor of the flight, he died there a glorious and honorable death.

The Romans now fearing lest they should lose all Apulia, sent Colonies into
Luceria now Nocera.
Luceria, the most famous City of all those parts; and this proved of great
advantage to them by the frequent Eruptions made upon the Samnites. For by the
help and advantage of this City they became Conquerors, not only in this war,
but several times afterward; and even to our own present Age they have
constantly made use of this City as a strong Fort and Citadel of War against
all the neighboring Nations.

CHAP. VI.
Several Cities revolt, Lysimachus comes against them. Philip, Cassander's
General, Routs the Epirots and Etolians. Cassander agrees with Antigonus.
Antigonus gains the Cities in Caria. Cassander's Acts in Greece. The Samnites
Routed by the Romans. Polemon sent by Antigonus into Greece, to set the Cities
at liberty. The Acts of Antigonus and Cassander. Polemon's Acts in Greece for
Antigonus. Ptolemy goes against Cyrene and Cyprus; Then against Demetrius. The
Battle with Demetrius at Gaza. Ptolemy takes Tire. The Acts of Antigonus his
Commanders in Greece. The Epirots make Alcetas King, who is beaten by Lyciscus,
Cassander's General, and he is beaten again by the other. Cassander goes against
the Apolloniats. Seleucus recovers Babylon with a small Army. Demetrius Routs
Cilles, Ptolemy's General. Ptolemy returns to Egypt, first wastes Samaria, Gaza,
Joppa, etc. Athaneus sent against the Nabatheans by Antigonus. The Customs of
the Arabians. Atharieus killed, with most of his Men! Demetrius sent against
them. Description of the Asphaltes, or Lake of Sodom. Demetrius sent against
Seleucus in Babylon. The Wars between the Romans and Samnites in Italy. The
Acts of Agathocles in Sicily.

THE Affairs of this Year being brought to this Conclusion, Theophrastus became
Olymp. 116. 4. Ant. Chapter 311. An. M. 3659.
chief Magistrate of Athens, and Marcus Petilius and Caius Sulpitius were
invested with the Consular dignity at Rome. Then the Callantinians.
Callentinians, the Inhabitants residing in the parts on the left hand of
Pontus, cast out the Garrison put upon them by Lysimachus, and recovered their
liberty. In the same manner the Istrians freed their City, and Confederated
with the neighboring inhabitants to join together in a War against their
Prince. The Thracians and Scythians likewise joined with their Neighbors; so
that all Several Cities revolt from Lysimachus.
the Forces together were of that strength, that they were able to cope with
the most potent Army.

Lysimachus hearing what was done, marched with his Army against the Rebels,
and Lysimachus comes to reduce them.
passing through Thrace, when he had got over Mount Emus, Incampt near Odessus,
which (upon blocking it up) the Inhabitants in a great Consternation delivered
up to him: Reducing likewise the Istrians in the same manner, he marched thence
against the Callantians; about which time the Thracians and Scythians came in
with a great Army to the assistance of their Confederates: Upon which
Lysimachus advancing forwards, faced them, and forthwith lifting up his Ensigns
for Battle, the Thracians were so terrified that they marched off and went their
way. But the Scythians he Engaged, and Routed them, killing a great number, and
driving the rest out of the Country. Then he laid close Siege to the City of
the Or Callentians.
Callentinians, setting all his wit at work, and making it his main and only
business how he might be revenged on the Authors of the defection. While he was
busying himself in this concern, News was brought him that Antigonus had sent
two Armies to the assistance of the Callentinians, one by Land and another by
Sea; and that Lyco the Admiral was with the Navy in Pontus, and that Pausanias
was Incampt with a great Land Army at Hieron. At this News Lysimachus was much
concerned, and thereupon leaving a considerable Body to maintain the Siege, he
speedily marched away Ant. Chapter 311.
with the main strength of the Army designing to engage the Enemy; and being
ready to pass over Emus, he found Seuthes King of Thrace (who had revolted to
Antigonus) obstructing his passage with a great Body of Men; upon which they
engaged and he forced his way through the Barbarians with the loss of a great
number of his own men, but many more of the Enemies.

Then he fell upon the Pausanians, finding them in the Streights, whither they
had fled. P. 713
These he gained by force, and having killed Pausanias, he discharged some of
the Soldiers upon Ransom, and others that took up Arms with him he distributed
amongst his own Troops. And thus stood the affairs of Lysimachus. But when this
Enterprise succeeded not, Antigonus sent Telesphorus into Peloponnesus with a
Fleet of Fifty Sail, and a considerable number of Soldiers, with Orders to free
all the Cities that they might live according to their own ancient Laws. This
he did, hoping by this means to gain credit amongst the Grecians as one that
really intended the procurement and preservation of their Liberties; and by
this method he concluded he should find out how things stood with Cassander.

Telosphorus therefore as soon as he arrived in Peloponnesus, went to
Alexander's Garrisons, and set them all free, except Sicyon and Corinth. For in
these Polysperchon had placed great numbers of Soldiers, trusting to them and
the strength of the places.

In the mean time Philip being sent by Cassander as General to make War upon
the Etolians; as soon as he came with his Army into Acarnania, the first thing
he did was to harrass and spoil Etolia; but not long after hearing that Eacides
King of Epirus (who was now Restored to his Kingdom) had raised a strong Army,
he made against him with Ant Chapter 311. Philip, Cassanders General, Routs the
Epirots and Etolians.
all speed: For he endeavored all he could to Fight him before the Etolians had
joined him. And finding the Epirots ready prepared to fight, he forthwith
engaged, and killed multitudes of them, and took many Prisoners; amongst whom
it happn'd that there were about Fifty of the Faction that were the instruments
to restore Eacides whom he sent away bound to Cassander. Afterward the broken
Troops of Eacides Rallying again, joined with the Etolians, and Philip set upon
them and Routed them a second time with the slaughter of many, amongst whom was
Eacides himself.

Having effected such great matters in so short a time, the Etolians were so
terrified that they forsook their unfortifi'd Cities, and fled with their Wives
and Children unto the fastnesses of the Mountains, where it was very difficult
to come at them: And this conclusion had the affairs of Greece at that time.

As for Asia Cassander, though he was chief Governor there yet overpress'd
with the weight of the War, he agreed with Antigonus upon these terms; that he
should deliver all the Soldiers into the hands of Antigonus, and should grant
Liberty to all the Greek Cities Cassander's Agreement with Antigonus. Ant. Chapter
311.
there to Govern according to their own Laws; and that he should keep the
Province he formerly possessed as by grant from him, and should be ever after
Antigonus his firm friend.

And for the true performance of these Conditions he delivered to him his
Brother Agathonas as Hostage; but within a while after he repented of what he
had done, and got his Brother out of their clutches that had him in custody,
and sent an Ambassador to Ptolemy and Seleucus, to desire them to send him Aid
with all speed: At which Antigonus was highly incensed and sent away Forces
both by Sea and Land with Orders to free all the Cities, and Created Medius
Admiral of the Fleet, and Docimus General of the Forces at Land.

These Commanders coming to Miletum dealt with the Inhabitants to stand for
their Liberties, and took the Citadel with the Garrison therein, and restored
the ancient Laws to the Cities.

In the mean time Antigonus took Tralles; and then lay before the City Caunus,
and Antigonus gains the Cities in Caria.
sending for his Fleet took that likewise, except only the Castle; about which
he cast a Trench and made continual assaults upon it in those parts where there
was any hopes of Entry: He had sent Ptolemy to the City Jassus with a
considerable Army, but he was fain to come back and join again with Antigonus;
and so all those Cities in Caria came at that time into his hands.

Within a few days after came Ambassadors from the Etolians and Beotians with
whom Antigonus entered into a League of Confederacy; but going to Cassander to
the Hellespont to Treat with him upon terms of Peace, he returned without
effecting any P. 713.
thing, for they could not hit it upon any score: Whereupon Cassander casting
aside all hopes of any accommodation, resolved again to pursue the settlement
of his Affairs in Ant. Chapter 111.
Greece. To that end he sailed away with a Fleet of Thirty Sail and laid close
Siege to the City In Eubea now Negropont. Cassander' s Acts in Greece.
Oreum, which he so fiercly assaulted that he took it by Storm; presently upon
this came in Telesphorus from Peloponnesus with Twenty Ships, and a Thousand
Soldiers, and Medius out of Asia with a Hundred Sail to the relief of Oreum;
who spying Cassander's Ships then at Anchor in the Harbor, burnt four of them,
and disabled almost all the rest. But the Athenians coming in to their relief,
Cassander in scorn and contempt of the Enemy falls upon them afresh, and in the
Engagement sinks one, and takes three, together with all their Men: And thus
were Affairs then managed in Greece.

In Italy the Samnites wasted and spoiled the Towns and Country round about
that sided with their Enemies: But the Roman Consuls marched into those Parts
with an Army, in order to succor their Confederates; and there encamping near
Cinna in the face of the Enemy, they allayed the Fears of the City. A few days
after, the Armies on both sides drew up in Battalia, and fought a bloody
Battle, wherein multitudes fell on Samnites Routed by the Romans.
both sides; but at length the Romans breaking through the main Body of their
Enemies, totally routed them, and pursued them a long way, and killed above Ten
thousand.

In the mean time, the Campanians (not knowing of this Battle) in contempt of
the Romans, rebelled: Whereupon the People of Rome forthwith sent out a strong
Army against them, under the Command of Caius Menius, as General, with absolute
and unlimitted Power, with whom was joined, according to the Custom of the
Romans, Marcus Follius, Master of the Horse. These Consuls sitting down with
their Army near Capua, the Campanians at first resolved to fight them; but
afterward hearing of the Rout and Slaughter of the Samnites, thinking the
Romans would fall upon them with their whole Forces, they made Peace with them:
For they gave up the Ringleaders of the Defection who after they were Or
indicted before the Judges called Judices Questionum, Judges of the Questions:
Or when the Trial was appointed.
examined, prevented the Sentence of Condemnation by murder ing themselves. But
the Cities were pardoned, and so returned to their former Allegiance.

The former Year being ended, Polemus executed the Place of the Chief
Magistrate at Olym. 117. 1. Ant. Chapter 110. The Acts of Polemon in Greece.
Athens, and Lucius Papirius the Fifth, and Caius Junius the Second Consulate
at Rome, in which Year was celebrated the Hundred and seventeenth Olympiad, in
which Parmenio of Mitylene carried away the Prize. At this time Antigonus sent
Polemon into Greece, to set at liberty all the Grecian Cities, and with him a
Hundred and fifty Men of War.
Long Ships, under the Command of Medius his Admiral; on board of which Vessels
were Five thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse. Having made a League with the
Rhodians, he received likewise Ten Ships of War more from them, to help forward
the restoring of the Greek Cities to their Liberties. About the same time
Antigonus his General. Ant. Chapter 310.
Ptolemy arrived in the Harbor of Boeotia (called the Deep) with the whole
Fleet, and received from the Boeotians Two thousand and Two hundred Foot, and
Thirteen hundred Horse. He sent likewise for Shipping from Oreum, and walled
Salganeus in Boeotia near Chalchis.
Sagonea, and there rendezvous'd his whole Army; for he was in good hopes that
the Chalcideans would confederate with him, who were the only Eubeans that were
Garrisoned by the Enemy. But Cassander was jealous of Chalcis in Boeotia. P. 714.
Chalcis, and therefore raised his Siege before Oreus, and sent for his Forces
thither.

Antigonus being informed that the Armies lay encamped one over against another
in Eubea, recalled Medius with the Fleet into Asia; and forthwith got his
Forces together, and with a swift March made for the Hellespont, with a purpose
to pass over into Macedonia, that he might either seize upon it while Cassander
was busy in Eubea, and the Country void of sufficient defense; or that by
forcing him to come in with Aid for the defense of the Kingdom, he might
thereby divert him from prosecuting the War in Greece, and necessitate him to
endeavor the preservation of his Concerns nearer at home.

But Cassander coming to understand what he designed, left Plistarchus to guard
Chalcis, and he himself marched away wtth the whole Army, and took Oropus by
Assault, and brought over the Thebans to be his Consederates, and entered into
a Truce with the rest of the Boeotians; and having so done, he left Eupolemus
to defend Greece, and returned into Macedonia with his Head full of Care,
concerning the Enemy's March into that Country.

When Antigonus came to the Propontis, he solicited the Byzantines by his
Ambassadors to join with him as his Consederates; but it proved that there were
there at the same time Agents from Lysimachus, treating with them not to engage
in any thing either against him or Cassander. Whereupon the Byzantines resolved
to sit quiet at home, and stand upon even Terms of Peace and Amity with both
sides.

This unlucky Accident giving a stop to Antigonus his further Progress in this
Affair, Ant. Chapter 310
together with the approach of the Winter, he distributed his Soldiers in the
Towns round about into their Winter Quarters.

In the mean time, the Corcyreans assisted the Apolloniates and them of
Epidamnus, and upon Terms of Agreement sent away Cassander's Soldiers; and
thereupon restored Apollonia to their ancient Liberties, and Epidamnus they
delivered up to Glaucias, King of the Illyrians.

But Ptolemy, Antigonus his General, upon Cassander's return into Macedonia,
and the Consternation Chalchis was in, had the City delivered up to him, and so
freed the Chalcidains from receiving any further Garrison; to the end every one
might take notice, that Antigonus was sincere, and did really design to restore
all the Greek Cities to their Liberties: For it was a City of eery great Moment
and Concern to such as were ambitious of gaining the Sovereignty of Greece, and
valued a Place of Strength for that purpose.

Palemon likewise took Oropus, and delivered it up to the Boeotians, and made
all Cassander's The Acts of Polemon in Greece.
Soldiers Prisoners at War; and after he had brought in the Eretrians and
Carystians to join as Confederates, he led his Army into Attica, Demetrius
Phalerius being then Chief Magistrate of the City. For those Athenians that
desired to be restored to their ancient Laws, had not long before sent some
privately to Antigonus to treat with him upon that account; and now being more
resolved and encouraged upon Ptolemy's drawing near to the Athens. Ant. Chapter 310.
City, they forced Demetrius to make a Truce, and send an Agent to Antigonus,
in order to treat of a League with him.

Out of Attica Ptolemy.
he marched into Boeotia, and took the Citadel Cadmea, and freed the Thebans
from that Garrison. Thence he went forward into Phocis, and reducing several
Cities there, he cast out the Garrisons of Cassander in every Place wherever
he came. Then he invaded Locris; and because the Opuntians joined with
Cassander, he besieged them, and pressed upon the Place with continual Assaults.

About the same time the Cyrenians revolted from Ptolemy King of Egypt, and
besieged Ptolemy goes against Cyrene
the Castle there so fiercely, as if they would presently have taken it; and
when Messengers came from Alexandria, persuading them to desist, they struck
off their Heads, and fell to work against the Castle more fiercely than ever
they did before. Ptolemy being exceedingly moved hereat, sent one Agis, a
Captain of his, thither with an Army, and P. 715.
withal a Navy to assist him by Sea, under the Command of Epenetus. Agis
vigorously pursuing the War against those Rebels, took Cyrene by Storm, and
committed the Authors of this Sedition to Prison, and then sent them bound to
Alexandria, and disarmed the rest: And so having set things in order there (as
he saw cause) returned into Egypt.

Ptolemy having had this good Success at Cyrene, took Shipping, and with his
Fleet passed over out of Egypt into Cyprus, against those who rebelled against
their Kings; and having Ptolemy against Cyprus.
gotten Pygmalion (whom he found Corresponding with Antigonus) he put him to
death. Then he took Praxippus King of the In Thessaly.
Lapithi and Prince of In Arcadia.
Cerynnia, who was suspected of a Revolt, and laid them fast: He took likewise
Stasiecus, a petty King of the Malieans in Thessaly.
Malieans, and destroying their City, removed the Inhabitants from thence to 24
Stathmuses, every one of* which Theodotus says is 150 Furlongs.
Paphos; which done, he made Nicocreon Commander over all Cyprus, and gave him
the Cities, together with the Revenues of all the Kings which he had cast out
of their Dominions, and then went with his Army into the Upper Syria, and
sacked the Cities Posideum and Potamos of the Carians. That done, he went with
a flying Army into Celicia, and took Mallus, and sold all the Inhabitants for
Slaves, and wasted all the Region thereabouts; and having stored all his Army
with rich Plunder, sailed back again to Cyprus. He so shared with his Soldiers
in all Hazards and Dangers, that he stirred them up by his Example cheerfully
and readily to undergo all manner of Difficulties.

Mean while, Demetrius, the Son of Antigonus, kept in Coelo-Syria, expecting
the coming of the Egyptians; but when he heard of the taking of so many Cities,
he left Pithon to Command in those Parts, leaving his Corseletiers and
Elephants with him, and he with his Horse and Companies of light-armed Soldiers
hasted away with all speed toward Cilicia, to aid them that were in distress
there; but coming too late, and finding the Enemies all gone, he returned
speedily to his Camp again, spoiling many of his Horse by the way; for in six
days time he made away from Mallus (...). Gees against Demetrius.
Four and twenty days Journey by their ordinary Stages; so that through their
immoderate Travel, none of their Servants or Horse-boys were able to keep them
company.

Ptolemy therefore seeing all go every where as we would have it, for the
present returned into Egypt. But not long after, being put on by Seleucus (for
the hatred that he bore unto Antigonus) he resolved to march into Coelo-Syria,
and there to try it out with Demetrius: Wherefore gathering all his Army
together, he marched from Alexandria to Pelusium, having with him Eighteen
thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, whereof some were Macedonians, and some
hired Soldiers: As for the Egyptians, some Ant. Chapter 310.
served to carry their Darts and Weapons, and other Luggage of the Army, and
some for Soldiers; and having passed the Desert from Pelusium, he encamped near
the Old City of Gaza in Syria, not far from the Enemy.

Demetrius, on the other side, called all his Army out of their
Winter Quarters, and appointed them to Rendezvous at Gaza, there to attend the
Enemy's approach. His Friends indeed advised him not to sight with so Great a
General, who had the advantage of a far more numerous Army; but he rejected
their Council, and confidently prepared himself for Battle; though he was then
but a mere Boy, and was to undertake so hazardous an Engagement without his
Father. Calling therefore now the Soldiers as they stood at their Arms, he
mounted an Ascent raised by Earth, and there stood as if he were in Amaze and
Astonishment: Upon which, all the Soldiers cried out with one Voice, Be
Courageous; and presently there was a deep silence before the Herald could
command it: For being that he had but newly taken upon him the Sovereign
Command, none took any Offense at his Deportment, in relation either to Civil
or Military Affairs, which is frequently the Lot of Old Captains, who have many
times all their Faults ripped up together P. 716.
at one time. For the Common People are not long pleased with the same Things;
and whatever grows stale in the Use, has a pleasant Gust in the Change and
Alteration. And besides the expectation of his coming to the Kingdom (his
Father being now old) conjoined in his Succession both the Supreme Command and
the Good Will of the People together. Moreover, he was a very proper and comely
Person, and being clad in Royal Armor, appeared Ant. Chapter 310.
in that Majesty as possessed the Beholders with Awe and Reverence, and raised
up the Spirits of the Army with high Expectations of Great Things to come. He
was likewise of a mild Disposition, becoming a new Prince and General, by which
he wan the Love of all, insomuch as even those as were not as yet reduced into
Orderly Regiments, flocked to him to receive his Commands, being much concerned
upon the account of his Youth, and the hazardous Battle that was presently to
be fought. For he was not only to try the Fortune of War against a greater
number of Men, but against the most Eminent and Expert Commanders of the Age,
Ptolemy and Seleucus, who had been Captains under Alexander in all his Wars,
and had been often Generals of their own Armies, never conquered to that day.

Demetrius therefore, after he had with winning and obliging Expressions
courted the The Battle between Ptolemy, Seleucus, and Demetrius at Gaza.
Soldiers, and promised Rewards suitable to every Man's Merit, drew up the Army
in Battalia. In the Left Wing (where himself intended to be) he placed first
Two hundred choice Horse, amongst whom, with other of the Nobility, was Pitho,
who had served under Alexander, and had been made General of all the Forces by
Antigonus, and Fellow-Partner with him in all his Concerns. In the Front he
placed Three Regiments of Horse, and as many Flankers to support them: At a
distance out from the Wing were Three other Regiments of Tarentines, to the end
that Five hundred Horsemen with Lances, and a Hundred Tarentines, might be
ready at hand as the King's Lifeguard. Next he placed Eight hundred Horse,
which were called Associates; and after them Fifteen hundred out of several
Nations; and before the whole Wing stood as a Guard Ant. Chapter 310.
Thirty Elephants, lined with light-armed Men, of whom a thousand were Darters
and Archers, and Five hundred Persian Slingers. And in this manner was the Left
Wing drawn up, with which he intended to make the Onset: Then was ranged the
main Battle, consisting of Eleven thousand Foot, of whom Two thousand were
Macedonians, and a Thousand Lycians and Pamphylians, and Eight thousand hired
Soldiers.

In the Right Wing he drew up the rest of the Horse, to the number of Fifteen
hundred, under the Command of Andronicus, who had Orders to keep in an oblique
Line, and make a running Fight of it, still observing how it went with
Demetrius. The rest of the Elephants, to the number of Thirteen, he placed
before the main Battle of the Foot lining them with as many light-armed Men as
were sufficient. And in this manner Demetrius drew up his Army.

As for Ptolemy and Seleucus, at the first they made it their Business to place
their greatest Strength in their Left Wing, not knowing what the Enemy
designed: But being afterward informed by their Scouts what was done, they
forthwith so drew up, as that the greatest Strength being in their Right Wing,
they might be the better able to engage with Demetrius in the Left; and
therefore in that Wing were drawn up Three thousand of the best Horse, amongst
whom they themselves intended to charge. Before these were placed those who
bore an artificial Palisado before them, sharp-pointed with Iron, and fastened
together with Chains, prepared against the Shock of the Elephants; for this
being P. 717.
drawn out in length, it was an easy matter by this means to put a stop to
their further Career. In the Front of this Wing were placed light-armed
Soldiers, who were commanded to ply the Elephants and their Riders with Darts
and Arrows as they came on. The Ant. Chapter 310.
Right Wing being thus drawn up, and the rest of the Army so disposed as the
present Occasion at that time most required, they led forth the Army with a
great Shout toward the Enemy; who, on the other side, drawing down upon them,
the Fight was begun by the Horse in the Fronts of both Wings, where the
Demetrians had much the better; but within a little time after the Ptolemeans
and Seleucians (having surrounded the Wing) made a fierce Charge with their
whole Body; upon which (through the Resolution of both Parties) there followed
a very sharp Engagement. Upon the first Onset they fought with their Lances,
where many were killed, and as many wounded on both sides. Then they fell to it
with their Swords, and there thronging together, thrust one another through,
and fell in heaps together.

The Generals exposing themselves to the utmost Hazard, led on their Men, and
encouraged their Troops to stick to it like valiant Men. The Horse that were
placed to guard the Wings, were all Brave and Gallant Men, and having their
Commanders (who fought together with them) Eyewitnesses of their Valor,
strove to outvie one another. And now the Fight between the Horse had been for
a long time doubtful, when the Elephants (forced on by the Indians) made so
terrible an Onset, as if it had been impossible for any to have stood before
them: But when they came up to the Palisado, the Archers and Darters sorely
galled both the Beasts and their Riders; and being still forced on forward and
whipped up by the Indians, some of them stuck upon the sharp Points of the
Palisado, with which (together with the multitude of Darts and Arrows that
galled them) they were in that Pain and Torment, that they caused an horrible
Tumult and Confusion. For these Creatures in plain and even Places bear down
all before them, but in those that are Rough and Craggy, they are of no use or
service, because of the tenderness of their Feet. Ptolemy therefore wisely
foreseeing of what advantage this Palisado Ant. Chapter 310.
would be, by that means frustrated the Rage and Fury of the Beasts. At length,
most of the Indians that rid them being killed, all the Elephants were taken;
upon which the greatest part of Demetrius his Horse were in such a
Consternation that they forthwith fled; and he himself was left with a very few
that attended him; but not being able with Demetrius routed.
all the Arguments he could make, to persuade his Men to stand their Ground and
not forsake him, he was forced likewise to retreat. A great part of the Horse
that followed the other, retired in good Order, and kept themselves unbroken
till they came to Gaza, so as that none of the Pursuers durst hastily fall upon
them. For the Field being a large even Plain, they had the more Liberty to draw
off in order and retreat in a formed Body. Some likewise of the Foot, (who
judged it the best course to forsake their Colors and look to themselves) cast
away their Arms, and followed the Horse.

About Sunsetting Demetrius.
he passed by Gaza in Judaea, where Sampson carried away the Gates.
Gaza; but some of the Horse left him and entered the City, to fetch out some
Luggage. The Gates therefore being open, and the Streets full of Sumpter
Horses, and all busy in leading and carrying out their Goods, there was such
Disorder and Thronging at the Gates, that upon the approach of the Ptolimeans,
none could get up to them to shut them to prevent their Entry; so that the
Enemy breaking in, the City thus fell into the hands of Ptolemy. And this was
the Issue of this Battle.

Demetrius, without stop or stay, about Midnight came to Asdod in Judaea, now a
small Village. called Alzote.
Azotus, having from the Place of Battle rid above Two hundred and seventy
Furlongs. P. 718. Ant. Chapter 310.
Thirty Mile. Thence he sent a Trumpet to beg the Bodies of the Dead, being
very earnest to perform the last Office of right due to them that were slain.
Many of his Nobility were there slain, amongst whom, the most eminent was
Pitho, joined in equal Commission with himself, and Beotus who had long lived
with Antigonus the Father, and was ever privy to all his Designs, and partaker
of all his Councils. There were slain in this Battle on Demetrius his side,
above This Five hundred should be Five thousand as Plutarch.
Five hundred, of whom the greatest part was Horse, and the Chief of his
Nobility; and Eight thousand and upward were taken Prisoners.

Ptolemy and Seleucus, not only granted him the dead Bodies, but sent him back
his own Pavillion, with all the Furniture belonging to it, and all such
Prisoners as were of his Household, free and without Ransom; withal letting him
know, that they fought not with Antigonus for these things, but because he had
not restored those Provinces to the Governors that were conquered by their
joint Arms in the War first against Perdictas, and then against Eumenes; and
for that after he had renewed his League of Friendship with Seleucus, he had
most Unjustly, and against all Right deprived him of the Province of Babylon.
Other Prisoners Ptolemy sent into Egypt, with Orders to distribute them amongst
the several Regiments in his Fleet.

After Ptolemy had with great Pomp and Solemnity buried those that were slain
in the Battle, he marched with his Army against the Cities of Phenicia,
besieging some, and persuading others to yield. Demetrius in the mean time
(being no longer able to hold out) dispatched away a Messenger with Letters to
his Father, to pray him to come away speedily to his help; and he himself
coming to Tripoli in Phenicia, sent for the Soldiers that were in Cilicia and
elsewhere in Garrisons remote and far distant from the Enemy's Quarters, to come
to him. But Ptolemy keeping with his Army still in the open Field, marched Ant.
Chapter 310.
into the Coasts of Sidon, and Encamping near Tire, sent to Andronicus,
Governor of the Garrison there, to render up the City to him, making him large
Promises both of Wealth and Honor. But he not only answered, That he would
never betray the Trust which Antigonus and Demetrius had put in him, but also
used many reviling Speeches against Ptolemy; but a little while after he was
surpised by a Mutiny of his own Soldiers, and fell into his Hands; and
thereupon expected nothing but Death for his refusal to deliver up Ptolemy
takes Tire.
the City, and for his reviling Language: But Ptolemy not only forgot the
Injury, but highly rewarded him, and took him into the number of his Friends,
and honorably preferred him. For this Prince was of a most affable and gentle
Disposition, and very Kind and Generous, which much contributed to the Increase
of his Power, and the Advancement of his Honor and Reputation, and induced
many upon that account to join with him, as his Allies and Confederates. For he
honorably received Seleucus when he was cast out of Babylon, and made him and
the rest of his Friends partners with him in that Plenty, and state of
Prosperity that he himself enjoyed: And therefore, when Seleucus desired some
Forces from him to go along with him to Babylon, he very readily granted them,
and withal promised he would assist him in every thing to his Power, till he
had recovered his former Government. In this Condition stood the Affairs of
Asia at that time.

In Europe, Telesphorus, Antigonus his Admiral, who then lay with the Fleet at
Corinth, seeing how Ptolemy was preferred before him, and that all the Concerns
of Greece were entrusted in his hands, accused Antigonus upon this Account, and
delivered up to him those Ships he had with him. Then picking out so many of
his Soldiers as were willing to join Ant. Chapter 310.
with him in his designs, he began to play his own Pranks. For pretending to be
at one with Antigonus, he entered Elis, and fortified the Citadel, and enslaved
the City. He robbed likewise the Temple at Olympus, and took thence above Fifty
Talents of Silver, wherewith he raised and hired Foreign Soldiers. And thus
Telesphorus, out of Envy to the P. 719.
Advancement of Ptolemy, became a Traitor to Antigonus.

But Ptolemy, Antigonus his General in Greece, (as soon as he heard of the
Defection of Telesphorus, and that he had seized upon the City of the Elians,
and robbed the Temple at Olympus) marched with an Army into Peloponnesus: And
coming to Elis, razed the Citadel to the Ground, restored the Elians to their
Liberty, and the Money to the Temple.

Afterward, he so far wrought upon Telesphorus, that he regained Cyllene,
wherein Telesphorus had put a Garrison, and restored it to the Elians.

In the mean time, while these things were in acting, the Epirots (Eacides
their King The Epirots make Alcetas King.
being dead) delivered up the Kingdom to Alcetas, who had been before him
banished by his Father Arybilus. This Alcetas was an inveterate Enemy to
Cassander, and therefore Lyciscus, Cassander's General in Acarnania, marched
with an Army into Epirus, hoping he should easily depose him, the Affairs of
the Kingdom being then scarce well settled.

Lyciscus to this end Encamping at Cassopia, Alcetas sent his Sons, Alexander
and Teucrus, Ant. Chapter 310.
to all the Cities, to raise as many Soldiers as possibly they could; and he
himself marched forward with what Forces he had, and when he came near the
Enemy, made an Halt, waiting for the coming up of his Sons.

But Lyciscus, who far exceeded him in number, pressing upon him, the Epirots,
in a great Terror and Amazement, ran over to the Enemy: Whereupon, Alcetas
being thus forsaken, fled to Eurymenas, a City in Epirus; while he was closely
besieged in this Place, in comes Alexander with an Aid to the Relief of his
Father; upon which followed a sharp Engagement, in which many of Lyciscus his
Men were cut off, amongst whom (besides other Persons of great account) were
Micythus, a great Captain, and Lysander the Athethenian, Cassander's
Lord Lieutenant of Leucadia.

Afterward, Dinias coming in to the Assistance of those thus worsted, there
happened a second Engagement, in which Alexander and Teucer being routed, they,
together with their Father, fled to a strong Castle thereabout for shelter.
Lyciscus presently took Eurymenas, plundered it, and razed it to the Ground.
Ant. Chapter 310.


Cassander at this time hearing of the Defeat of his Forces, (but having no
intelligence of the Success which followed) hasted away into Epirus to succor
Lyciscus: But when he came to understand how well things had succeeded on his
side, he made Peace, and entered into a League of Friendship with Alcetas. Then
with part of his Army he marched into A City and Country upon the Coasts of the
Adriatic Sea. Cassander goes against the Apolloniates.
Adria, in order to besiege the Apollonia, a City of Thrace.
Apolloniates, who had cast out his Garrison, and joined with the Illyrians. But
the Inhabitants were not at all affrighted, but having sent for aids from
others that were their Confederates, they drew up in Battalia before their
Walls: Upon which, there was a sharp Dispute for a long time together; but the
Apolloniates over-powering the other in number put their Enemies to flight.
Cassander therefore having lost many of his Men, and wanting Forces sufficient,
and perceiving the Winter to draw on a pace, returned into Macedonia.

After his departure, the Leucas, a Pen^nsula near to the Ambracian G^lf,
bordering upon Epirus, called also Neritis. The City called Leucadia.
Leucadians, assisted by the Corcyrians, drove out the Garrison of Caessander.
As for the Epirots, they were quiet under the Royal Government of Alcetas for a
time; but when he grew more Severe and Tyranical, they Murdered both him and
his two Sons, Hesioneas and Nisus, who were but then young Children.

In Asia, Sele^ous, after the routing of Demetrius at Gaza in Syria, (receiving
from Ptolemy no more than Eight hundred Foot, and Two hundred Horse) marched
toward Babylon P. 720.
with that Confidence as to believe, that though he had no Forces at all with
him, yet he should be able to go up into the Higher Provinces, only with his
own particular Seleucus marches for Babylon (...) (...) Num^er, and gains the
P(...)v(...). Ant. Chapter 310.
Friends and Servants; being verily persuaded, that the Babylonians (for the
former Love and Affection they bare him) would readily come in and side with
him; and that now he had a fair Opportunity to accomplish his Design, Antigonus
being with his Army at a great distance from the Place.

However, though he went on with such assuredness of Mind, yet his Friends that
were with him, (seeing the inconsiderable Number of his Soldiers, and on the
other hand the great Strength of his Enemies against whom he was marching, and
the fullness of Provision, and number of the Confederates wherewith they were
supplied and furnished) were greatly discouraged: Which Seleucus taking notice
of, spoke to them to this effect: It becomes not the Captains and Fellow.
Soldiers of Alexander, in the Expeditions of War, to confide only in the
strength of Arms and confluence of Wealth, but in their Military Art and
Prudence, through which he accomplished great and wonderful Things, by all for
ever to be admired: But it is our Duty rather to believe the Gods who have
assured us, that this Expedition shall be Prosperous and Successful. For he
told them, That in Consulting the Oracle at The T^mple of Apollo at Dydimus in
Ionia, where the Priests and Inhalitants were called Branchides
Branchides, some considerable time before the God called him King; and that
Alexander stood by him in his Sleep, and clearly discovered to him the Royal
Dignity, to which in due time he should be advanced; and further declared, That
whatever was Great and Glorious amongst Men, was always to be attained by
Hazards and Toil. And withal, carrying himself Fairly and Amicably to all his
Soldiers he was honored by every body, and all were willing to run with him
the Hazard of this desperate Enterprise.

On then he marched, and coming with them into Mesopotamia he there dealt with
such Macedonians as he found dwelling in Carran, where Abraham sofourn'd.
Carran, and some of them by Persuasions, and some of them by plain Force he
drew to go along with him in this Expedition. As soon as Ant. Chapter 310.
he entered into Babylon, the Inhabitants came in flocking to him, and offered
him their Service; for he had before carried himself in the most obliging
manner to all for the space of Four years together when he was Governor of the
Province, thereby to gain the good will of the People, and to secure an
Interest for himself, if at any time afterward he should have an Occasion to
contend for the Sovereign Command. Polyarchus also came in to him, who bare
some kind of Office among them, with above a Thousand Men completely armed. But
they who stood for Antigonus, when they perceived the general and irresistible
Inclination of the Multitude toward him, fled all to the Castle, which was
commanded by Diphilus; and Seleucus fell presently to besiege it, and having
taken it by Force, delivered such Children and Friends of his as Antigonus
(when Seleucus for fear fled away from Babylon into Egypt) had there committed
to Prison. This done, he fell to raising of Soldiers in the Country, and having
bought Horses, distributed them among such as were fit to ride them. And
withal, carrying himself with all Fairness and Affability toward all sorts;
made them all ready to run any hazard with him, and so in a trice recovered all
his Government of Babylon. But afterward, Nicanor, whom Antigonus had made
Governor of the Province of Media, marched against him with Ten thousand Foot,
and Seven thousand Horse; and Seleucus without delay went out to meet him:
Having with him in all a little above Three thousand Foot and Four hundred
Horse; and passing the River Tigris, when he heard that the Enemy was not far
off, he hid his Ant. Chapter 310.
Men in the Fens there near at hand, purposing to set upon Nicanor at unawares;
who when he came to the Bank of Tigris, and found no Enemy there, went and
Encamped near P. 721.
to a (...).
Post House of the Kings, little thinking the Enemy had been so near. But the
Night following (through a careless Regard and Contempt of the Enemy) not
keeping a due Watch Seleucus fell upon him, and raised a great Tumult in his
Army: For the Persisians putting themselves forward to fight, Evager their
General, with sundry others of their Commanders were slain. After which Broil,
the greater part of Nicanor's Army, what for the present Danger they were in,
and what for the Disgust they had to Antigonus his Government, left him and
came to the Service of Seleucus. Whereupon, Nicanor fearing lest at the next
bout his Soldiers would deliver him up to Seleucus, fairly stole away with some
few of his friends, and fled through the Desert. Seleucus having by this means
gotten a potent Army about him, and continued his fair Carriage to all Men as
before, easily procured the Provinces of Media and Susa, and other Countries
bordering thereupon, to come under his Subjection; and sent Ptolemy word how he
had sped, having now gotten a full Royal Power and Majesty into his hands.

Ptolemy continued still in Coelo-Syria after the great Victory gained over
Demetrius, whom Demetrius routs Celles, Ptolemy' s General.
he heard was returned out of Cilicia, and lay encamped in the Upper Syria;
whereupon, he sent one of his Nobility about him, called Celles (a Macedonian
Born) with a great Army, Commanding him either to drive him out of every part
of Syria, or to coop him up and tread him to dirt where he lay. While he was
upon his March, Demetrius understanding by his Scouts, that Celles lay
carelessly with his Army at Myus, leaving his Ant. Chapter 310.
Carriages behind him, Marched away with a Company of Light-footed Lads, who
traveled all Night, and a little before Day fell in upon Celles his Camp, took
it Without a stroke struck, and Celles himself prisoner; by which Victory (it
was judged) he was quit with them for the former Loss he had sustained. Yet
because he thought Ptolemy himself was coming after with all his Army, he
therefore pitched his Camp in a place where he had a Bog on the one hand, and a
Lough on the other. Demetrius writ Letters of this his good Success to his
Father Antigonus, wishing him either to send an Army speedily, or to come
himself in Person into Syria. Antigonus was then at Cellnas in Phrygia, and
having read the Letter, was wonderfully pleased with the News, both because the
Victory was gotten by his own Son's Conduct (who was so young) and for that he
had shown himself a Man worthy to wear a Crown hereafter. Upon this News, he
himself with his Army marched out of Phrygia, and having passed over Mount
Taurus in a few days time he joined with Demetrius.

Ptolemy hearing of the coming of Antigonus, called a Council of War, to advise
whether it was better to stay where he was, and there to try it out with him in
Syria, or to return into Egypt and Fight with him from thence, as he had done
before with Perdiccas? The result of the Council was, That he should not hazard
himself by engaging with an Army far more numerous than his own, and where
there were such multitudes of Elephants, and all under the Command of a General
never yet Conquered; and that it was much safer for him to fight in Egypt,
where he would be better supplied with Provision, then Ant. Chapter 310.
the Enemy could be, and had places of Strength wherein he might confide.
Determining therefore to leave Syria, before he went, he laid wast, and
destroyed the Principal Ptolemy wastes Samaria, Joppa, Gaza, etc.
Cities he held there at that time in his Possession, as Achon in Syrophenicia,
Joppa, and Samaria; and Gaza in Syria. Then taking along with him out of the
Country, whatever he could drive or carry (laden with Wealth) he returned into
Egypt.

Antigonus, when he had without stroke stricken recovered all Syria and
Phenicia, took a Jouney into the Country of the Arabians, called the *
Nabatheans; for thinking that they P. 722. Nabaioth of the Seed of Ishmael.
never much favored his proceedings, he appointed one of his Nobility, called
Atheneus, with Four thousand Foot, and Six hundred light Horse to fall in upon
them, and to bring away what spoil he could out of their Country.

It Is worth our pains here to relate the Manners and Customs of these Arabians,
for The Customs of the Arabians.
the information of them that are ignorant; by the use of which Customs they
have hitherto secured themselves and preserved their Liberty. They live in the
plain and open Fields, calling that Desert their Country, wherein are neither
Inhabitants, Rivers or Springs, whereby any Enemies Army can be relieved. It Is a
Law amongst them, neither to Sow, Plant, Build Houses, or Drink any Wine; and
he that is discovered to do any of these, is sure to Die for it. And the reason
of this Law is, because they conceive that those who are possessed of such
things, are easily (for fear of losing of what they have, or in hopes of
gaining more,) forced to comply with the Will and Humor of those that are more
powerful. Some of them breed up Camels; others employ themselves in feeding of
Sheep, roving to and fro in the Wilderness for that purpose. There are no few,
indeed, of the Arabians, that though they give themselves to the Pasturage of
Cattle in the Deserts, yet are far richer then the rest, but exceed not in
number above Ant. Chapter 310.
Ten thousand. For many of them use to carry Frankincense, Mirrh, and other
rich Perfumes down to the Sea side, which they traffic for, and receive from
them that bring them from Arabia the Happy. They highly prize and value their
Liberty, and when any strong Armies invade them, they presently fly into the
Wilderness, as to a strong Fort and Castle for refuge; for being no Water is
there to be had, none can follow them through these Deserts: But as to
themselves, they have a sure and safe Retreat, by the help of Earthen Pots and
Vessels hid in the Earth prepared before hand. For the Soil is a fat Clay,
under which lies a soft Stone, in which they dig great Caves very narrow at the
entrance, but enlarging by degrees as they grow in depth, till they come at
length to that bigness, as to be a hundred Foot Square; these Caves they fill
up to the Mouths with these Vessels filled with Rainwater; then they lay all
even with the rest of the Ground, and leave certain Marks where to find the
place known to none but themselves. For the Cattle (driven away along with
them) they take so much Water as may serve them for Three Days, lest while they
are in their flight in dry and parched places, they should be ever and anon put
to a stop by the continual watering of their Cattle.

Their Food is Flesh, Milk and Roots. For Drink they have abundance of wild
Honey, and a kind of Pepper growing upon some Trees, both which they mix
together in Water for that purpose.

There are likewise other kinds of Arabians, some of whom employ themselves in
Husbandry, Ant. Chapter 310.
Selling of Corn, with other Provisions, and agree with the Syrians in all
other things, except dwelling in Houses. And such were then the Customs of
these Arabians.

Near at hand there was a Public Meeting of these The Nabatheans.
Arabians, whither all bordering Nations used to come, as to a common Mart to
sell off to them their Commodities, and to buy from them the Merchandise of
their Country. To this Mart the Nabatheans now went, leaving their Wealth and
Old Men with their Wives and Children upon the top of a Rock. The place was
very strong, but Un-Wall'd, and distant Two Days Journey from the Country that
was inhabited. Atheneus watching his opportunity, marched speedily to this
Rock; and having marched out of the Province of Edom the space of Above Two
hundred and threescore Miles. P. 723.
Two thousand and two hundred Furlongs in Three Days and Three Nights, late at
Midnight (the Arabians knowing nothing of his coming) possessed himself of the
Place; of the Soldiers there sound, some he put to the Sword, and others he
made Prisoners, and such as were wounded he there left behind him; and carried
away the greatest part of their Mirrh and Frankincense, with Five hundred
Talents of Silver, and staying there * not past Three Hours, for fear of the
Countries coming in upon him, returned Above the time of a Watch.
presently again. And now he and his Soldiers having gone Two hundred Furlongs,
could go no further for very weariness, and therefore rested there, keeping
neither Watch nor Ward, as presuming that the Country People could not reach
thither in Two or Three Days after. But the Arabians receiving intelligence by
some that saw the Army, presently got together, left the Fair and returned to
the Rock; where being more fully informed by the wounded Men, of what was done,
they incontinently pursued the Greeks with Might and Main. And because Atheneus
his Men kept no Watch, and after their long Journey lay weary and fast asleep,
some of the Prisoners stole away from them; from whom, when their Countrymen
(whom they met) had learnt how the Enemies Camp lay, they hasted to the place,
and coming upon them at Three of the Clock in the Morning, fell into their
Trenches, to the number of Eight Thousand of Atheneus killed and most of his
Men by the Nabatheans.
them, and cut the Throats of some snorting in their Cabins; others that made
resistance they slew. To make short, they utterly destroyed all their Foot,
only Fifty of their Horse got away, and they wounded too for the most part. And
thus Atheneus, though he began well, yet through his own imprudence lost all in
the close. And therefore some, not without Cause, are of Opinion, that it is
easier to improve Misfortunes to the best advantage, than to carry it with
Prudence under extraordinary Successes. For the first through Fear of what
further mischief may afterward follow, puts a Man on to a more exact and
careful management of his Concerns; but by prosperous Adventures Men are many
times flattered into gross negligence and security.

The Nabatheans having thus revenged themselves of their Enemies, and recovered
their Goods again, returned to the Rock; and by a Letter of theirs, written to
Antigonus in Syriac Characters, complained of Atheneus, and the wrong he had
done them, and excused themselves. To whom Antigonus wrote back again
cunningly, telling them, that Atheneus Ant. Chapter 310.
was well enough served by them; blaming him for what he had done, and assuring
them he had given him no such Orders. This he did to cover what he was really
designing against them, and to make them the more secure, that thereby he might
with more ease effectually accomplish what he was in contriving. For without
some Stratagem it was no easy matter to overcome Men that wandered up and down
continually here and there, and had the Wilderness for an inaccessible Shelter
and Refuge at the last.

The Arabians upon the receipt of the Letter rejoiced that they seemed at
present to be freed from their great fears; but yet they did not wholly rely
upon his Letter; But being between Hope and Fear, placed Spies upon
Watch-Towers and other high places, whence they might easily see afar off, when
any Enemy made an incursion into Arabia; and they themselves put all things in
readiness, waiting for the issue and event.

But Antigonus having for a time carried himself as a Friend toward these
Barbarians, Demetrius sent against them.
now judged he had a fair opportunity to set upon them, having brought them, as
it were, to his bait. To this end therefore he chose out of all his Army, Four
thousand Foot light Armed, and the swiftest of Foot he could find, and added to
them Four thousand Horse, willing them to take with them as many Days Victuals
as they could well carry, and such as needed no Cooking; and assigning
Demetrius his Son to Command them, he Ant. Chapter 310.
sent them away about the first Watch of the Night with this Charge, that he
should by all means be revenged of them. He therefore Traveled Three Days
Journey through the Desert, hastening to fall upon them at unawares. But their
Scouts perceiving the first approach of the Enemy toward their Borders,
immediately gave notice of their coming to the Country: whereupon they
presently got them to their Rock, where there was but one way up, and that made
by Art, and there laid all their Baggage, and left a sufficient P. 724.
Guard to keep it; and the rest went and drove away their Cattle, some to one
place and some to another in the Desert. Demetrius when he came to the Rock and
saw all the Cattle driven away, presently went to Besiege it: but they that
were within manfully defending it, by the advantage of the place, had all the
day long the better of it; so that Demetrius was forced at last to draw off.
The next Day when he approached again with his Forces to the Rock, one of the
Barbarians cried out: What would thou have, O King, DEMETRIUS? or what has
provoked thee to make War upon us who inhabit the Wilderness, and in places
where there is neither Water, Corn nor Wine, nor any thing else which you cannot
be without. But as for us, who can upon no terms endure to be Slaves, we betake
our Selves to a Country destitute of all things that are of absolute necessity
to all other Men; and we choose to live a solitary Life altogether, like the
Beasts of the Field, without doing the least harm to any of you. Therefore we
entreat you Demetrius, and your Father, that you injure not us, but that you
would accept of some Presents, and march away with the Army from us, and
receive the Nabatheans Ant. Chapter 310.
into the number of your Friends for the time to come.

Neither can you possibly stay here many days (though you had never so great a
mind to do it) for want of Water and all other necessaries; neither can you
ever force us to change our course of Life, though perhaps you may take some poor
dispirited Prisoners who will never endure to be brought under the Power of
other Laws and Rules of Living

After this was said, Demetrius drew off his Army, and wished them to send
Ambassadors to him to Treat of these Matters. Hereupon the Arabians sent their
oldest Men, who (using the same Arguments with those before related) persuaded
Demetrius to accept of such Gifts as were of greatest Esteem and Value among
them, and so put an end to the War. Upon Hostages therefore given him, and such
Gifts as were agreed upon between them, he drew off Almost Forty Miles.
from the Rock, and so removing with his Army Three hundred Furlongs off, he
encamped near to the Lake Asphaltes, or the Dead Sea, The Lake of Sodom.
Asphaltes; the nature of which it is not fit to pass over without giving some
account of it.

It lies in the midst of the Province of Edom; and stretches forth in length
Above Sixty Miles. Joseph. lib. bellor. Jud. 5. C. 5. says it is 580 Furlongs
long, and 150 broad
Five hundred Furlongs: but in breadth it is but Threescore. The Water is very
bitter and stinking, so that neither Fish, nor any other thing used to the
Water can live in it. And though many remarkable Rivers of very sweet Water
empty themselves into it, yet it remains as corrupt and unsavory, both as to
Taste and Smell as ever it did before. Every Year rises out of the middle of it
great massy pieces of Bitumen and Pitch, sometimes bigger then Three Every
Plethra is 100 Foot.
Plethras, and sometimes a little less then one. And upon that account the
Barbarous Inhabitants call the larger pieces Bulls, and the less Calves. These
pieces of Pitch and Brimstone floating upon the Water, seem at a distance to be
as so many Islands: There are evident Signs that sorgoe and give notice of the
casting up of this Bituminous Matter, at least Twenty Days before. For a horrid
smell of Brimstone and Pitch infects the Air round about the Lake at many
Furlongs distance; and all Metals, whether of Gold, Silver or Copper near the
place, change their natural Color, which presently returns again as soon as
the Brimstone is exhaled. The places bordering upon it are so burning hot (by
reason of the Sulphur and Brimstone under ground) and cast forth such an
horrible stench, that the Inhabitants are very unhealthy, and short lived: yet
the Country thereabouts being watered with many pleasant Rivers and refreshing
Springs, bears abundance of Palm Trees; and in a certain Vale near to this
place grows that they call The Balm of Gilead. P. 725.
Balm, from which they raise a great Revenue; inasmuch as this Plant grows in
no other part of the World beside; and is of excellent use amongst Physicians
for the healing and curing of Wounds, and other Distempers. The Inhabitants on
both sides this Lake, are so earnest to carry away this Brimstone, that they
fight one with another; and they bring it off in a strange manner without
Shipping. For they cast in huge Bundles of Butrushes fastened close together,
upon which Three or more of them place themselves, two of which ply the Oars
that are fastn'd to the Bulrushes, and the third carrys a Bow and Arrows to
defend themselves against such as attempt to make up upon them from the other
side, or that offer them any violence. As Soon as they come to the Brimstone
they get upon it, and hew it in pieces with Axes, as pieces of stone out of a
soft Rock, and so loading the Bulrish Boat, they row back. If any fall into the
Water through the deficiency of the Boat, yet he never sinks as in other
waters, though he knows not how to swim, but lies upon the water as if he were
the best swimmer in the World. For this Lake naturally bears any thing that has
either a vegetative or an animal Life, except such things as are solid, and
seem to be without Pores, as Silver, Gold, Lead, or the like; and these
likewise are much longer and slower in sinking than when they are cast into
other waters. And this profit and advantage the Barbarians reap from it; they
Transport this Pitch into Egypt and there sell it for the use of embalming of
the Dead; for if they do not mix this with other Aromatic Spices, the Bodies
cannot be preserved long from putrefaction.

Antigonus at the Reign of Demetrius having heard the Relation of his Voyage
blamed him for his making Peace with the Nabatheans, saying that those
barbarous people having so escapt would thereupon grow more insolent than
before, concluding that they were not favored out of love or compassion of the
Conqueror, but in despair of the Conquest; but he commended him for discovering
the Lake Asphaltes, seeing that from thence he Ant. Chapter 310.
might raise some yearly Revenue to himself, and made Hieronimus Cardianus the
Historian his Treasurer for that Revenue, and commanded him to build Ships and
gather together all the Bitumen, or liquid Brimstone that could be gotten out
of that Lake: But Antigonus in the event was frustrated of his hope; for the
Arabians coming together to the number of Six thousand Men set upon them as
they were in their Ships, gathering this Brimstone, and shot them almost all to
death with their Arrows; whereby Antigonus lost all hopes of making any
standing Revenue that way, and forbore all further prosecution of that design
both upon the account of the miscarriage already, and likewise for that he had
matters of greater weight and concern then in his head.

For about that time a Courrier came, and brought Letters to him from Nicanor,
Governor of Media, and others, how Seleucus was returned and prosper'd in those
parts: Whereupon Antigonus being much concerned for the upper Provinces, sent
his Son Demetrius with Five thousand Macedonian Foot, and Ten thousand
Mercenaries, and Four thousand Horse with charge that he should march to the
very Walls of Babylon, and having recovered that Province should from thence
march down to the Sea. Demetrius hereupon departed from Damascus in Syria, and
went vigorously on to fulfill his Fathers Command. But Patrocles, whom Celeucus
had made President of Babylon, so soon as he heard that Demetrius was falling
into Mesopotamia, not daring to stay his coming (because he had but a small
power about him) commanded the rest to leave the City, and that passing the
Euphrates they should flee some into the Deseart, others over the Tigris into
the Province of Susa, and to the The Red Sea in the Greek but mistook. Ant. Chapter
310.
Persian Sea; and he himself with a company which he had about him trusting in
the Bars of the Rivers and Dikes of the Country thereabouts, instead of so
many Fortresses and Bulwarks for his defense, kept himself still within the
Bounds of his own Government, and cast about how to entrap his Enemy, sending
ever and anon Tidings to Seleucus in Media how how things went with him, and
desiring aid to be speedily sent to him.

Demetrius when he came to Babylon and found the City it self void of
Inhabitants, fell P. 726.
presently to besiege the Forts and Castles that were therein,; and having
taken one of them, gave the spoil thereof to his Soldiers: But having besieged
the other for some days together, in have, he departed, leaving Archelaus, one
of his trusty friends, to maintain the Siege with Five thousand Foot and a
Thousand Horse; and himself, seeing the time run out, which his Father had
appointed him to finish his work in; returned with the rest of the Army into
the lesser Asia.

While those things were acting, the Wars between the Romans and the Samnites
continued still in Italy, wherein there were daily excursions into one another
Territories, Besieging of Cities and Incamping of Armies on both sides: For the
Contest between the most warlike Nations of Italy was, which should gain the
Empire and Sovereign Wars in Italy.
Command of the whole, upon which account many great Battles were fought.

At length the Consuls of Rome with a part of their Forces Incampt in the face
of the Enemy, watching for a fit opportunity to fall upon them, by which means
they preserved their Consederate Cities from annoyance and disturbance from the
Enemy. With Ant. Ch ^10
the rest of the Army Quintus Fabius the Dictator took Fretomanum, and carried
away the persons of greatest quality that were Enemies, to the Romans, to the
number of Two hundred and upwards, and brought them to Rome, and exposed them
as a public Spectacle in the Forum; and when he had scourged them, according
to the Roman Custom, cut off their Heads. He made likewise an inroad into the
Enemies Territories, and took Celia and the Citadel of A City in Campania in
Italy.
Nota, with abundance of Spoil, and divided a great part of the Country by Lot
among the Soldiers; the Romans hereupon encouraged with these successes which
fell out according to their hearts desire, sent a Colony into the Island called
Pontiae Insulae in the Tuscan Sea Plin. lib. 3. c. 6. Porcia an Island in the
same Sea called commonly Porce. The Acts of Agathocles in Sicily. Ant. Chapter 310.
Pontia.

As for Sicily, after that Agathocles had made Peace with all the Sicilians,
except the Messenians the Refugees of Syracuse, all flockt to Messina, because
they saw that to be the only City that stood out against him. Agathocles
therefore with all speed made it his business to break their Confederacy, and
to that end sent away Pasiphilus his General with an Army to Messina, with
private instructions to do what he thought fit, and most agreeable to the
circumstances of Affairs as he should find them; hereupon he entered the
Country on a sudden, and after he had taken many Prisoners, and got much
spoil, he Solicited the Messenians to Peace and Amity, and that they would not
suffer themselves so to be led aside as to join with the implacable Enemies of
Agathocles.

Upon which the Messenians hoping to extricate themselves out of the War
without Blows, cast out all the Syracusians Fugitives, and received Agathocles
with his Army into the City; who at the first carried himself very courteously
and obligingly toward all, and courted them to admit those Exiles that were in
his Army, (and had been by them according to Law formerly banished) into the
Freedom and Liberties of the City.

But afterward he sent for such out of Tauromenium and Messina as formerly had
opposed his Government, and put them all to death, to the number of Six
hundred; for intending to make War upon the Carthaginians, he resolved to rid
himself of every thing that looked like an Enemy in Sicily: The Messenians
therefore seeing their chief Citizens cut off that opposed the Tyrant, and that
they themselves had driven those strangers out of the City that wished them so
well, and that would have been their main strength against him, and had been
forced to receive those that had been formerly condemned for their notorious
Crimes, much repented themselves of what they had done; but out of fear of the
power of the Conqueror they were forced to stoop.

Thence he moved in the first place toward Agrigentum, with design to make a
prey P. (...)
also of this City: But because the Carthaginians were there lately arrived
with a Fleet of Sixty Sail, he desisted and left off that project, but wasted
and harrass'd the Territories of the Carthaginians, and took some of their
Forts and Castles by Storm, and gained others by surrender.

Among these Turmoiles Dinocrates, Captain of the Syracusian Exiles, sent to
desire Aid of the Carthaginians before Agathocles had brought all Sicily under
his own Power and Sovereign Command; he himself received all those Exiles which
the Messenians had Ant. Chapter 310
banished the City, and having now a very great Army, sent Nymphodorus one of
his Trusty Friends with part of the Army to the City of the Centorippians: For
this place being a Garrison of Agathocles, some of the Citizens had undertaken
to betray it, upon condition they should be suffered to govern according to
their own Laws. Upon this encouragement therefore breaking into the City in the
night, the chief Commanders of the Garrison presently took the Alarm, and
killed both Nymphodorus and all the rest that had entered within the Walls.
Agathocles made use of this as an occasion and ground to accuse the
Centorippians of Contrivances against his Government, and cut the Throats of
all those that he looked upon to be the Ringleaders of the Defection.

While he was thus employed the Carthaginians entered the Port at Syracuse with
a Fleet of Fifty Sail, but all that they did there was the sinking of two
Transport Ships (one of which belonged to the Athenians) and cut off the Hands
of all those that were on board: Which was looked upon as a piece of extreme
Cruelty toward those that never offered them the least Injury; and this God
made presently to appear; For soon after some Ships that were forced from the
rest of the Fleet about Brutta, fell into the hands of Agathocles, where those
Carthaginians that were taken were served the same sauce with those that were
by them taken Prisoners before.

But Dinocrates Commander of the Exiles having with him above Three thousand
Foot and Two thousand Horse, seized upon Or, Galatina
Galaria (as it is called) invited thither by the Inhabitants, and cast out
those that sided with Agathocles, and then Encamped before the Walls of the
City.

Agathecles presently sent against him Pasiphilus and Demophilus with Five
thousand Men, who fought with the Refugees; whose Captains were Dinocrates and
Philonides, who commanded separately in the two Wings. The Battle was doubtful
for a long time together, while both Armies obstinately stood to it Tooth and
Nail: But Philonides, one of the Captains, being slain, that Wing fled, and
Dinocrates was thereupon forced likewise to give Ground, and Pasiphilus killed
many of them in the Pursuit, and recovered Galaria, and put to Death the
Authors of the Defection.

Agathocles receiving Intelligence of what was done, resolved to fall upon the
Carthaginians Ant. Chapter 310.
with his whole Army, who had then possessed themselves of the Hill in Geloa,
called That is, Wicked. See p. 729.
E^^^mes. To that end, without any further Delay he made up to them, and as
soon as he came near, offered them Battle, being puffed up with the Success of
his late Victory. But the Barbarians durst not engage, and thereupon (supposing
he was absolute Master of the Field without sighting) he returned to Syracuse,
and adorned the chiefest Temples there with the Spoils. And these were the
Actions of this Year as far forth as is needful for us to give an Account.

CHAP. VII.
Cassander, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus, make Peace with Antigonus. Cassander
murders Rhoxana and her Son. The Governors take the Style of Kings upon them.
The Carthaginians raise Forces against Agathocles. Four thousand Geloans
murdered by Agathocles. The Battle between Agathocles and Amilcar the
Carthaginian at Himera. Agathocles routed. Several Cities revolt from
Agathocles.

WHen Simonides was Lord-Chancellor of Athens, and the Romans had created
Marcus Olymp. 117. 2. Ant. Chapter 309. Cassander, etc. make s Peace with Antigonus.
P. 728.
Valerius and Publius Decius Consuls, Cassander, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus, made
Peace with Antigonus, the Form of which was put into Writing, and contained the
Terms following: That Cassander should be the Sovereign Lord of all in Europe,
till Alexander the Son of Rhoxana came of full Age: That Lysimachus should have
the chief Command in Thrace: Ptolemy should enjoy the Sovereign Power in Egypt,
and the bordering Cities in Arabia and Africa: That Antigonus should be Lord of
all Asia; And the Greeks should Govern according to their own Laws. But these
Conditions they observed not long; but every one took one Occasion or other to
incroach upon more than his Part came to.

Cassander seeing that Alexander the Son of Rhoxana now grew up toward Man's
Estate, and hearing how it was the Discourse of some throughout all Macedonia,
That it was now Rhoxana and her Son murdered.
fit the young Man should be freed from his Prison, and assume the Government
of his Father's Kingdom into his own hands; out of fear of being supplanted,
commanded Glaucias the Keeper to murder both Rhoxana and the King, and to hide
their Bodies when he had done, and by all means possible conceal their Deaths.
This he effectually executed, and so by this means Cassander, Lysimachus,
Ptolemy, and Antigonus himself, were freed from all Grounds of Fear upon the
account of the King. For now all the Seed Royal being extinct, and no Successor
remaining, every one of the Captains that had possessed themselves of Provinces
or Cities, took upon themselves the Titles and The Captains take the Title of
Kings.
Styles of Kings; and every one claimed the Province, of which he was Governor,
as a Conquered Kingdom. And thus stood the Affairs in Asia, Europe, Greece, and
Macedonia.

In Italy, the Romans marched with a great Body of Horse and Foot against
Pollitium, a City of the Marucci; where they removed part of the Citizens, and
made them a new Colony, giving them Interamna (as it is called) to inhabit. Ant.
Chapter 309. Carthaginians raise Forces against Agathocles.


In Sicily, the Power of Agathocles increased every day, his Forces growing
stronger and stronger: Whereupon the Carthaginians being informed, that he had
gained almost all the Towns and Cities through the Island, and that their
Captains and Commanders there were not able to deal with him, they resolved to
pursue the War with more Vigor. To this end they forthwith provided a Fleet of
a Hundred and thirty Sail of Men of War, and made Amilcar (a Person of eminent
Quality) General. and delivered to him Two thousand Soldiers raised out of the
City, amongst whom, many were Men of Note: Out of Afric^, Ten thousand; from
Tyrrhenia, a Thousand Mercenaries and Two hundred Charioteers, and a Thousand
Slingers from the Baleary Islands. They provided likewise a great Treasure, all
sorts of Weapons, store of Corn, and all other Things necessary for carrying on
the War, as they had occasion to use. And now when the whole Fleet had hois'd
up Sail and were come into the open Sea, on a sudden a violent Storm arose,
which sunk Sixty of the Galleys, and broke in pieces Two hundred of the Ships
laden with Corn and Provision. The rest of the Fleet, after much Hardship at
Sea, with much ado got into Sicily. Many of the most eminent Men of Carthage
were lost at this time, which occasioned a public Lamentation in that City.
For when any Misfortune happens to that Place greater than ordinary, their
Custom is to cover the Walls Ant. Chapter 309.
with black Cassocks or Cloaks.

Amilcar the General, after he was landed, mustered those that were saved from
the Storm; and to supply those that were lost, listed Foreign Mercenaries, and
raised others from among the Confederates throughout all Sicily, whom he joined
with the rest of the Forces that were there before; and carefully providing
every thing that was necessary for the War, he kept the Army in the Field,
having under his Command about Forty thousand Foot, and near Five thousand
Horse. Having therefore in a short time recruited himself, (and being accounted
a Man of great Reputation for Honesty and Integrity,) he both revived the
Courage of the Confederates, and in no small measure struck a Terror into the
Hearts of his Enemies.

On the other side, Agathocles perceiving that he was far overpowered by the
Carthaginians in Number of their Forces, concluded, that many of the Forts and
Castles, and those Cities and Towns that bore him a Grudge, would revolt to the
Enemy; especially P. 729.
he feared the City of the Geloans, because he heard all the Enemies Forces
were encamped in their Territories: And besides, no small Detriment befell him
at this time in his Fleet, for about Twenty Sail then at Sea together, with
their Men, all fell into the Hands of the Carthaginians. However, he conceived
it fit to put a Garrison into the Place for its Security, but durst not bring
any Forces openly into the City lest the Geloans should prevent him, who had
not then at any time before any Occasion offered them to rebel: And so by that
means he might come to A (...), Cast away.
lose a Town that had been very useful and serviceable to him. Therefore (to
prevent Suspicion) he sent into the City Soldiers by degrees, a few at a time,
(as if they had come there for other Purposes,) till he had got so many into
the Town as far exceeded the Citizens in Number. And then a while after he came
thither himself, and charged the Geloans with a traitorous design to revolt:
However, whether this were true or not, or that they were falsely accused by the
Exiles, or that his Design was to scrape and get together what Money he could;
he put to Death above Four Four thousand Geloans murdered by Agathocles.
thousand of the Geloans, and confiscated all their Estates; and threatened all
the rest with Death that did not bring forth all their Money, whether Silver or
Gold, coined or uncoin'd. Whereupon all (out of fear of this thundering Edict)
forthwith obeyed his Command; whereby he heaped together a vast Treasure, and
became a Terror to all his Subjects. And though he was judged to deal too
severely and cruelly with the Geloans, yet he ordered them to be decently
buried without the Walls; and then leaving the City with a strong Garrison,
encamped with his Army over against the Enemy. The Carthaginians possessed the
Hill Ecnomen, where formerly stood the Castle of Phaleris, as is reported,
where they say the Tyrant had the Brazen Bull contrived to torment Offenders,
by putting Fire under it, thereby causing it to grow scorching hot by degrees.
And therefore, by reason of this horrid Cruelty executed upon poor miserable
Creatures, the Hill was called The wicked Place.
Ecnomen. Agathocles possessed himself of another Castle of Phaleris
over against them, which he called Phalerius: Between both Armies lay a River,
which was as a Defense and Bulwark to both sides. There was an ancient
Prophecy, That a great Battle should be fought, and Multitudes of Men destroyed
about this Place; and being that it Ant. Chapter 309.
was uncertain on which side the Slaughter should mainly fall, out of a
superstitious Awe of the Gods, the Armies were more backward and slow to
engage; and therefore neither Party for a long time durst pass the River with
their whole Forces, till a sudden and unexpected Occasion forced them to fight.
For the Africans making a sudden Incursion upon the Enemy, stirred up
Agathocles to do the same: For when the Greeks were driving away their Cattle,
and some Carriage. Horses and other Beasts out of the Camp, some sallied out
from among the Carthaginians to pursue them. But Agathocles foreseeing what The
Battle between Agathocles and Amilcar at Himera.
the Enemy would do, had before laid an Ambuscado of stout and resolute Men
near the River, who, as soon as the Carthaginians had passed the River, and
were in pursuit of those that were driving away the Cattle, rose out of the
Ambush, and fell upon them as they were then in Disorder, and easily routed
them and put them to flight. While the Barbarians were thus hewed down, and
flying to their Camp, Agathocles looking upon it now as a sit time to engage,
led forth his whole Army against the Enemy; and falling upon them on a sudden,
presently filled up a part of their Trench and cut through their Breast-work,
and so forced their Camp. The Carthaginians amazed with this sudden Attack,
having no time to put themselves in order of Battle, fell in as Fortune led
them, and engaged the Enemy in the best manner they could: And in regard the
hotest Work was near the An. Chapter 309.
Trench, the Ground all thereabout was strewn with dead Carcasses; for the
chiefest of the Carthaginians made to the Defense of that Place where they saw
the Camp entered. P. ^^0.


On the other hand, the Agathocleans encouraged by the happy Success of their
Attempt, and supposing they should put an end to the War by this one Battle,
pressed resolutely upon the Barbarians: Amilcar therefore perceiving that his
Men were too weak, and that the Grecians were continually pouring in more Men
into the Camp, brings up a Thousand Slingers of the Baliary Islands, who
wounded many by multitude of great Stones out of their Slings, and killed many
that were forcing into the Camp, and broke in pieces the Shields and Armor of
many of their Assailants. For these Men being used to cast Stones of Mina
Weight.
Three Pound Weight, were always very serviceable, and contributed much in
several Battles to the gaining of the Victory, as being those that were
diligently taught and well exercised in the Art of Slinging from their very
Childhood. And now at this time they gained the Point, driving the Grecians
back again beyond the Outworks of the Camp. But Agathocles broke into it in
other places; and just as the Camp was forced, unexpectedly arrived Succors
from Carthage, which again revived the Spirits of the Carthaginians, and those
in the Camp fought the Enemy in the Front, and the new Supplies hemmed the
Greeks in the Rear, and hewed them down, so as the Fortune of the Day
Agathocles routed.
turned suddenly and unexpectedly. For the Grecians fled outright, some to the
River Himera, and others to their own Camp, which was About 6 miles.
Forty Furlongs distant; and being a Plain and Champain Country, they were
pursued with no fewer than Five thousand of the Barbarian Horse, so that the
Plain all along was covered with dead Bodies, the River contributing much to
the Destruction of the Greeks. For the pursuit being about Noon, Ant. Chapter 309.
and in the Dog Days, many of them that fled were so parched with Thirst, by
the Heat of the Weather and the Fatigue of their Flight, that they greedily
swill'd themselves with salt Water, insomuch that as many (that had not the
least Hurt) were found dead near the River as were killed by the Sword in the
Pursuit. There were killed of the Barbarians in this Battle about Five hundred,
but no fewer than Seven thousand of the Greeks.

Agathocles being thus grievously defeated, after he had received all those
that had escaped, burnt his Camp and went to Gela. But he had caused it to be
rumored abroad, that he was gone strait away for Syracuse. It happened that
Three hundred African Horse then in the Country fell in among some of
Agathocles his Soldiers, who told them, that Agathocles was gone back to
Syracuse, and thereupon the Horsemen entered Gela as Friends: But being thus
deluded, they were all shot to Death by Darts: Yet Agathocles shut not himself
up in Gela, because he could not get safe to Syracuse, but that he might divert
the Carthaginians from Syracuse to the Besieging of Gela, that so by that means
the Syracusians might have leisure enough to get in their Harvest, while he
protracted the time at Gela. Amilcar indeed at the first intended to have
besieged Gela; but hearing that there was there a strong Body of Men to oppose
him, and that Agathocles was furnished with plenty of all things necessary, he
laid aside that design, and made his approaches to the Forts and Castles, and
had them all surrendered to him; and to gain the good Opinion of the Sicilians,
Several Cities revolt from Agathocles. Ant. Chapter 309.
he carried himself Courteously and Obligingly toward all. The Camareans,
Leontines, Cataneans and Tauromeneans, sent continually Ambassadors, and made
their Applications to the Carthaginians. And a little time after, the
Messenian. and Abacenians, and many other Cities who before were at variance
amongst themselves, all went over to Amilcar; such was the Zeal of the Common
People after the late Defeat, through the Hatred they bore against the Tyrant.

But Agathocles led away all the Forces that were yet left him, to Syracuse,
and there repaired the ruinous Parts of the Walls, and got in all the Corn and
Fruits out of the Fields; and now contrived to leave a strong Garrison for the
Defense of the City, and to transport the Power and Strength of the Army into
Africa, with an intent to draw the War out of P. 731.
the Island into the Continent. We shall therefore, as we at first designed,
begin the following Book with the passing of Agathocles into Africa.

BOOK XX.
THose who stuff their Histories with long and tedious Harangues, or are ever
P. ^^3. PREFACE.
and anon setting forth their Matter with Rhetorical Orations; are, not without
just Cause to be blamed. For besides, that it interrupts and cuts off the
natural Course of the History, by an unseasonable Introduction of set and
contrived Speeches, it likewise gives an unpleasant Check to the earnest
Expectation of such as are eager to know the Issue of the Matters of Fact. Yet
it is no ways to be disapproved for such as desire to be cried up for Eloquent
Orators, to compose public Orations and Speeches made by Ambassadors, and
Panegyricks of Praise and Dispraise, and such like. For they that manage both
Parts well and distinctly in a modest Style, are justly to be praised and
commended in both kinds of the Discourse. But there are some who so over-abound
in Rhetorical Flourishes, that they make their whole History but as an Appendix
(as it were to the other). For such tedious manner of Writing, is not only
troublesome, but in this respect likewise is to be condemned, That although the
Writer seem in other things to have hit the Mark, yet by this kind of Writing
he seems to straggle and wander from the due Course both of Time and Place: And
therefore they who read such sort of Writings, partly pass over such artificial
and framed Discourses, though they are never so pat and fit to the Purpose; and
partly tired out with the tedious and unseasonable artificial Digression of the
Author, leave off reading altogether. For the Nature of History is simple, and
in every part agreeable to it self, like to the Body of a living Creature,
where the Cutting off of one Member is the Deformity of the whole. On the other
side, that which is duly and orderly Composed, keeps within its proper Bounds,
and the Coherence of the Whole, affords a clear and pleasant View and
Understanding of the Matter in the Reading.

However, we do not altogether abandon Rhetoric and Oratorical Flourishes out
of History: For because it ought to be adorned with Variety, its absolutely
necessary in some Places to insert these Speeches and Orations. And I my self
would not be deprived of making use of them upon such Occasions; and therefore
when the Circumstances of the Matter related are such as that the Speech of an
Ambassador, or the Harangue of a popular Senator, or the like, fall in
naturally and easily, he that does not then put himself forth to the utmost in
this kind, deserves justly to be Censured and Condemned.

A Man may be able to give many Reasons why Rhetorical Adornments are often to
be made use of. For amongst quaint and eloquent Discourses, such asare worthy
remark, and bring Profit and Advantage along with them together with the
History, are by no means negligently to be passed over: Or when the Subject
treated of is high and lofty, of things Famous and Remarkable, then it is very
unbecoming, and not in the least to be endured, that the manner of Expression
should sink meanly below the greatness of the Acts related. It may be likewise
necessary when some extraordinary Event happens, so as that we are forced to
make use of words adapted to the Occasion, in order to clear up and make plain
the dark and intricate Grounds and Reasons of such an Accident. But what we
have said of these things shall suffice, and we shall now proceed to the
Relation of those Affairs we before designed, first observing the Time, where
we are now fallen in the Course of our History. In the former Books we have
treated of the Affairs both of the Greeks and Barbarians from the most ancient
Times, till the Tear next preceding the Expedition of Agathocles into Africa:
From the Sacking of Troy to which time, are P ^^4.
run up Eight hundred fourscore and three Years, and something more. In this
Book we shall go on with things next in Course, and coherent with the former
Relation, and begin with the Descent of Agathocles into Africa, and end with
that year wherein the Kings agreed to join together in a Common War against
Antigonus, the Son of Philip, comprehending the Transactions of Nine years.

CHAP. I.
Agathocles designs to invade Africa. His Cruelty; Pursued in his Voyage. An
Eclipse of the Sun very great. Lands in Africa. Burns his Ships. His successes
in Africa. Hanno and Bomilcar made Generals in Africa. Battle between them and
Agathocles, who routs them, Kills Hanno. His stratagem by Owls. The Cruel
Superstition of the Carthaginians in sacrificing their Children. The Actions at
Syracuse. Actions of Agathocles in Africa. The Acts of Cassander in Macedonia.
Polysperchon seeks to restore Hercules Alexander's Son. The miserable
Destruction of Nichocles and his Family in Cyprus. The Wars of Parysidas his
Sons, King of the Cimerean Bosphorus. The Valor of Satyrus, one of the Sons;
His Death. The sad Death of Eumelus, another Son.

IN the Chancellorship of Hieromnemones at Athens, and the Consulship of Caius
Julius Olymp. 117. 1. Ant. Chapter 308.
and Quintus Aemilius at Rome; Agathocles being routed at Himera in Sicily by
the Carthaginians, and having lost the greatest and best Part of his Army, fled
to Syracuse; where perceiving that he was for saken of all his Consederates,
and that the Barbarians had got into their hands almost all Sicily (except
Syracuse) and that they far overpowered him by their Forces both by Sea and
Land, undertook a very Rash and desperate Adventure. For when all were of
Opinion that it was not advisable for him in the least to endeavor to contend
with the Carthaginians, he even then resolved to leave a strong Garrison
Agathocles intends to invade Africa.
in the City, and with the Choicest of the rest of his Forces to make a Descent
into Africa; and by that means he hoped by his Old and and experienced
Soldiers, easily to vanquish the Carthaginians, who (through a long Peace) were
grown Soft and Delicate, and unexpert in their Arms; and besides, hereby he
thought that their Confederates, who had been for a long time very uneasy
under the Yoke of their Government, would take an occasion to Revolt. And which
most induced him was, That by this sudden and unexpected Invasion, he should
load himself with the Spoils of a Country that was never before harrass'd, and
that abounded in the Confluence of all forts of Worldly Blessings. And to sum
up all, That he should by this Course draw the Barbarians, not only out of his
own Country, but out of all Sicily, and transfer the War entirely over into
Africa, which happened accordingly.

For without advising with any of his Friends he made Antandrus, his Brother,
Governor of the City, leaving with him a considerable Garrison; he himself
Listed what Soldiers he thought fit for his purpose, ordering the Foot to be
ready with Arms at Ant. Chapter 308.
the first Call, and commanded the Horsemen, that besides Arms they should
every one carry along with them a Saddle and Bridle, that when ever he could
get Horses he might have have those ready to mount them who were furnished with
all things encessary for that purpose.

For in the late Battle most of his Foot were cut off: but most of his Horse
escaped; but their Horses he could not transport into Africa.

And to prevent all stirrs and commotions (in order to a defection) in Syracuse
in his absence, he divided Kindred and Relations one from another, especially
Brothers from Brothers, and Parents from Children, taking some along with him
and leaving others behind: And he acted in this very wisely; for certain it
was, that those who remained in Syracuse, although they hated the Tyrant, yet
would attempt nothing to his prejudice, by reason of their natural Love and
Affection to their Children, and near Relations and Kindred. And because he was
in great want of Money, he took the Estates of Infants out of the hands of
their Guardians; declaring, That he would have a far greater Care of them than
they had, and be more faithful in giving them an Account, and making
restitution when they came to full Age. He borrowed likewise much from the
Merchants, and converted to his own use some of the Sacred Treasures of the
Temples; and took the Jewels and Ornaments from the Women's Backs.

Whereupon, discerning that the Richer sort were highly displeased and incensed
at this Usage, and for that reason hated him, he called a General Assembly, in
which he greatly lamented the late Overthrow, and the dreadful Calamities that
from thence seemed to hang over their Heads. He told them, that he indeed that
was inured to Hardships, could easily endure the Miseries of a Siege; but that
he should greatly pity the Citizens, Ant. Chapter 308.
if they should be block^d up, and forced to undergo the like. Therefore he
ordered those that were not willing to suffer what might be their Fortune and
Lot, to provide for His Cruelty.
the safety of themselves and their Estates. Upon which, the most wealthy
Citizens (who bore a most implacable hatred against him) forthwith left the
City: But he presently P. 735.
sent out some of his Mercenaries after them, and cut all their Throats, and
consiscated their Estates. And thus, when by one and the same Act he had both
enriched himself, and likewise purged the City of those that were his Enemies,
he manumitted all the Slaves and Servants that were fit to bear Arms: And now
having all things in readiness, and furnished with a Fleet of Sixty Sail, he
only waited for a fair Wind. His Design being not commonly known, some reported
that he intended an Expedition into Italy; others that he purposed to waste and
destroy that part of Sicily that belonged to the Carthaginians; to conclude,
every body gave them (who were ready to Sail) all up for lost Men, and
condemned the folly and madness of the Prince. The Enemy at that time had a
Fleet far exceeding him in number in the Harbor, therefore he was forced for
some days at the first, to lie still with his Men on Board, because he had not
an opportunity to set Sail. Afterward some Transport Ships laden with Corn,
making with full Sail toward the City, the Carthaginians pursued them with
their whole Ant. Chapter 308.
Fleet: Whereupon Agathocles (almost before in despair to accomplish his
Design,) as soon as he saw the Mouth of the Harbor open, causing the Rowers to
ply their Oars with all the quickness imaginable, he broke out of the Harbor.

The Carthaginians being now come up near to the Transport Ships, and seeing a
Fleet of their Enemies Ships sailing out of the Harbor, thought at first that
they came to secure and defend the Corn Ships; Whereupon they tacked about, and
prepared to Fight: But when they saw that they made their Course straight
forward, and were far before them, they pursued them with all the Sail they
could; and while these were striving to Out-sail each other, the Transport
Ships unexpectedly escaped the danger, and plentifully supplied the City that
was before in great streights for want of Corn and Provision. Agathocles also,
though closely pursued by the Enemy, by the advantage of the Night coming on
(beyond all hope) got safe off This was on the 15 of August. Ush. Ann. P. 323.
Justin. lib 22. c. 6. Eclipse of the Sun.
from them. The next day there was such an Eclipse of the Sun, that the Stars
appeared every where in the Firmament, and the Day was turned into Night: Upon
which Agathocles his Soldiers (conceiving that God thereby did foretell their
Destruction,) fell into great Perplexities and Discontents concerning what was
like to befall them. Having therefore sailed Six Days and Six Nights, early in
the Morning they suddenly spied the Carthaginian Fleet making up close upon
them: Upon which, all set themselves to it with might and main to ply their
Oars: The Carthaginians concluding, that together with the Ships they should
not only take all the Syracusians prisoners, but should deliver their Country
from present imminent danger: The Grecians on the other hand saw apparent
destruction to themselves before their Eyes, and Ant. Chapter 308.
intolerable Bondage and Slavery to all their Kindred and Relations they had
left at home, if they did not recover the Shore before the Enemy. And now
Africa was in view when all the Sailers and Rowers called out earnestly one to
another to bestir themselves, so that the strife and pains to get to Land was
incredible. The Barbarians indeed were more swift Sailors, because they were
more accustomed to the Sea than the others; but the Grecian Ships kept still a
considerable distance before them: Making therefore away with all the
Expedition imaginable, when they came near the Shore, they leaped out of their
Ships in throngs upon the Strand, as if they had been contending for the
Mastery at the Gymnastick Games: For the first Squadron of the Carthaginians
Ships were come up within a Darts cast of those in the Rear of the Grecian
Fleet. After therefore some Contest for a while with their Bows and Slings (a
few of the Barbarians Ships only being come up) Agathocles (overpow'ring the
other by number) gained the advantage; whereupon the Carthaginians tackt about
and stood off a little above the Cast of a Dart. Hereupon Agathocles presently
landed his Men at a place called the Quarries, Lands in Africa.
and drew a Breast work for the security of his Shipping all along from Sea to
Sea: And after he had effected this bold and daring attempt, he set upon
another far more dangerous: For taking to him such of his Captains and
Commanders as were wholly at his Devotion, he first Sacrificed to Ceres and
Proserpina, and then called a Council of War; where coming into the Assembly to
make his Harangue, splendidly clothed in Royal Robes, and with his Crown upon
his Head (after a few things premised, to make an introduction to what he had
further to say) he told them, That at the time they were pursued by the
Carthaginians he had made a Vow to the Goddesses Ceres and Proserpina, the P.
736.
Protectoresses of Sicily, that he would Consecrate all the Ships in the Fleet
to them, by burning them all into so many burning Lamps; and therefore, since
they were now safe and were delivered, it was just and fit that they should pay
their Vows; and he promised Antichrist. 308.
that if they fought courageously, he would return them far more than those
Ships they then had: For the Gods by the Sacrifices, did foretell that they
should be Conquerors throughout the whole War: While he was speaking, one of
his Servants brought him a lighted Firebrand, which catching hold of, and
commanding the like to be delivered to the rest of the Captains, he invocated
the Goddesses, and was the first that made to the Admiral's Vessel, and
standing upon the Stern, commanded the rest to follow his Example: Whereupon,
all the Captains of the Vessels set fire to their Ships, and forthwith the
Flame mounted alost, the Trumpets sounded a Charge, and the whole Army set up a
shout, and all as one Man offered up their joint Prayers to the Gods, for their
safe return to their own Country. And all this was done by Agathocles, that he
might necessitate his Soldiers to fight, without ever thinking of turning their
Backs. For it was plain, that having no Shipping left for their last Refuge,
they could not have the least hope of safety in any thing but by being absolute
Conquerors. Then he considered, that having Burns his Ships.
but a small Army, if he would guard his Fleet he must be forced to divide it,
and so should not be strong enough to venture a Battle; and if he left the
Ships without any Guard, they would (...) fall into the hands of the
Carthaginians. However, while the whole Navy was on fire, and the Flame spread
it self round at a great distance, the Hearts of the Sicilians quaked: For at
first, being deluded by the juggling Tricks of Agathocles, and the the quickness
of Execution, giving them no time to consider, they all consented to what was
done: But when they had leisure distinctly to weigh every particular, they
repented Ant. Chapter 308
themselves of what they had done; and pondering in their Minds, the vastness
of the Sea by which they were separated from their own Country, they utterly
despaired of their Safety and Preservation. Agathocles therefore minding as
soon as possibly he could, to cure this Pusilanimity in his Soldiers, led his
Army to the Samatho in the Punick Language White. His Successes in Africa.
great City (as it is called) within the Dominion of the Carthaginians. The
whole Country through which they marched, was beautified with Gardens, Planted
with all sorts of Fruit Trees, and Sluices, and Canals were cut all along for
the convenience of Water, by which that whole Tract was every where abundantly
watered. This part of the Country was likewise full of Towns and Villages,
adorned with stately Houses, whose Roofs were curiously wrought all setting
forth the Wealth and Riches of their Owners. The Houses were full of all manner
of Provision of every thing that was needful, for the Inhabitants (through a
long Peace) had stored up their Treasures in great plenty and abundance. The
Country is planted partly with Vines, and partly with Olive Trees, and
furnished likewise with many other Fruit Trees: In another part, the Fields are
pastur'd with Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Cows and Oxen; and in the
neighboring Fens run great numbers of breeding Mares. And what shall I say
more? Those places abounded with plenty of all things for the use of Man, and
the rather for that they were the Possessions of the Nobility of Carthage, who
laid out much of their Estates and Wealth with more then ordinary Curiosity to
improve them for their Delight and Pleasure; so that the fertility and
sweetness of the Country, was the admiration of the Sicilians, and roused up
their drooping Ant. Chapter 308.
Spirits in the view they had of those Rewards, and rich Returns, which they
judged were well worthy the hazards to be run by the Conquerors to obtain them.
Agathocles therefore perceiving that his Soldiers were now recovered out of
their dumps, and former melancholy apprehensions, makes a sudden Assault upon
the Walls of the City; which being so surprising and unexpected, and the
Citizens unskilful in their Arms, after a short resistance he took the City by
Storm; and gave the plunder of the Town to the Soldiers, which both encouraged
'em and enriched 'em at once. Thence he forthwith P. 737.
moved with his Army to (...)(...), White Tunis.
Tunis, and gained that City, which is Two thousand Furlongs from Carthage. The
Soldiers would willingly have Garrisoned these Two Cities, having Stored and
laid up in them the Plunder they had got. But Agathocles weighing About 250
Miles.
what was most expedient in his present circumstances; therefore after he had
convinced the Soldiers, that it was by no means convenient to leave any place
to fly to for shelter, till they had conquered the Enemy by downright blows,
he razed the Citys to the ground, and encamped in the open Field. In the mean
time the Carthaginians that lay near to the Sicilians Fleet, at first greatly
rejoiced when they saw their Ships all in a Flame, supposing they were
constrained to burn their Navy out of fear of their Enemies: But after they
perceived them to march forward up into the Country with their whole Army, and
imagining what they intended to do, they then concluded, that the burning of
the Ships was a designed mischief to them: Whereupon they spread Leathern Hides
upon the Fore-Castles of all their Ships, which is their constant manner when
ever any misfortune seems to threaten the Carthaginian Commonwealth; Moreover,
they took into their own Galleys the Iron Beaks out of Agathocles's Ships, and
sent Expresses to Carthage to give them a particular Account of every thing
that had happened. But before these Ant. Chapter 308.
Messengers reached the City, some out of the Country who had discerned
Agathocles his Fleet to be near at hand, presently ran to Carthage to give them
an Account, who were thereupon so amazed with the surprising news of such an
unexpected accident, that they forthwith concluded that their Armies in Sicily
were utterly cut off and destroyed; for that it could not be that Agathocles,
unless he were Victorious, would dare to leave Syracuse naked without any
Garrison, or pass over his Army when at the same time his Enemy was Master at
Sea. The City therefore was in a great hurly burly, terror and confusion, and
the People thronged into the Marketplace, and the Senate met together to
consult what was fit to be done in the present Exigency: for they had no Army
at hand wherewith to fight the Enemy; besides, the common Citizens being raw
and ignorant in matters of War, were altogether heartless, and every body
thought the Enemy was then just at their Walls. Some therefore were for sending
Ambassadors to Agathocles to propose terms of Peace, who might likewise at the
same time discover the posture of the Enemy. Others were for staying and
expecting till they should have perfect intelligence of every thing that was
done.

While the City was in this hurry and perplexity, arrived those that were sent
from the Admiral of the Fleet, and declared to them all that was done:
Whereupon, their Courage revived; and the Senate blamed all the Officers of the
Fleet, that being Masters at Ant. Chapter 308.
Sea, they should be so careless as to suffer the Enemies Forces to make a
Descent upon Africa; and they created Hanno and Bomilcar Generals of their
Army, notwithstanding Hanno and Bomilcar made Generals.
they were at private feuds between themselves, and that ancient grudges had
been in their Families one toward another. For they thought that these private
Quarrels would much tend to the common advantage of the City: But they were
very much mistaken, For Bomilcar had for a long time been ambitious of the
Monarchy, but never yet had an opportunity fitted for his purpose to put his
Designs in execution, and therefore he greedily embraced the offer of such a
Command as was exactly agreeable to what he was aiming at: And the chief cause
of these Plots and Contrivances of his, was the severity and cruelty of the
Carthaginians: For they advance the most eminent Persons to be Generals in
their Wars, because they conclude they will fight with more Resolution then
others, when all lies at stake: But after the Wars are ended and Peace
concluded, then they bring false Accusations against them, and most unjustly,
through Envy, put them to death: And therefore some Generals out of fear of
those unjust Sentences, either give up their Commissions, or seek to be
absolute Monarchs; as Bomilcar one of the Carthaginian Generals P. 738
then did; of whom we shall speak by and by.

The Carthaginian Generals therefore seeing now that delays were dangerous,
waited not for Soldiers to be raised out of the Country, and from the Cities of
their Confederates, but led out the Citizens themselves into the Field, having
under their Command no Ant. Chapter 308. Battle between the Carthaginians and
Agathocles.
less than Forty thousand Foot, a thousand Horse, and Two thousand Chariots;
and possessing themselves of a Hill not far from the Enemy, drew up in Batalia:
Hanno commanded the Right Wing supported by them of the Sacred Brigade:
Bomilcar the Lest, making his Phalanx very deep, because the nature of the
place would not allow him to extend his wing further in front: The Chariots and
Horsemen he placed in the Van, to the end, that with these at the first Charge
they might try the Courage of the Greeks. Agathocles on the other side, viewing
how the Barbarians had drawn up their Army, committed the Right Wing to
Archagathus his Son, delivering to him Two thousand and five hundred Foot. Then
he drew up about Three thousand and five hundred Syracusians: Next to them
Three thousand Mercenaries out of Greece; and Lastly, Three thousand Samnites
Tyrrhenians and Celts. He himself with the Troops of the Household, and a
Thousand heavy Armed Men commanded in the Left Wing, opposite to the
Carthaginians Sacred Brigade. The Archers and Slingers, to the number of Five
hundred he mixed here and there in the two Wings. The Truth was, his Soldiers
were scarce all Armed; And therefore when he saw some of those that were naked
and without Arms; he took the Covers and Cases of the Shields and stretched them
out upon Sticks in the round shape of a Shield, and so delivered 'em to them;
however in truth useless, yet so contrived by him, to the end that those that
were at a distance (and knew nothing of the Stratagem) should look upon them to
be Armed Men.

Perceiving likewise, that the Spirits of his Soldiers were very low, and much
discouraged, by reason of the great numbers of their Enemies, especially of
their Horse, he Ant. Chapter 308.
let out several Owls (which he had before prepared for the purpose) into
diverse parts of the Camp here and there, to rid them of their fears; which
Birds flying up and down His Stratagem of Owls.
through the Army, and lighting ever and anon upon their Shields and Bucklers,
cheered up the spirits of the Soldiers, all taking it for a very happy Omen
because that creature is sacred to Minerva: These sorts of tricks and devices
although they may seem to some to be foolish and vain, yet they have many times
been the causes of extraordinary success. As it fell out likewise at this time;
for the soldiers by this means growing more bold and courageous, and it being
generally noised abroad that the Goddess plainly soretold that they should be
victorious, they more resolutely underwent all dangers and difficulties: For
when the Chariots charged fiercely upon them, some they pierced through with
their Darts and Arrows, others they avoided and suffered to pass by, and most
of them they drove back into the midst of their own Foot. In the same manner
they received the Charge of their Horse, wounding many and putting them all at
last to flight.

When they had thus gallantly behaved themselves in the first Charge, the
Barbarians began to fall upon them with their whole Body of Foot at once; upon
which there was a very sharp Engagment, wherein Hanno with that Body of Men
called the Sacred Brigade (striving to win the day by his own Valor) makes a
fierce Charge upon the Grecians, and hews down many of them: And though he was
even overwhelmed with showers of Darts and Arrows, yet he fell not; but
receiving one Wound after another, on he still goes, till being overprest and
altogether tired out, down he fell and gave up his last Breath. On the other
hand Agathocles his Soldiers were so lifed up with expectations Ant. Chapter 308.
of Victory that they were still more and more courageous; which when the other
General Bomilcar came to understand, conceiving that the Gods had put an
opportunity into his hand to gain the Tyranny, he reasoned with himself, That
if the Army of Agathocles were destroyed, he could not mount the Throne because
the City would be too strong for him; but if Agathocles were Conqueror, and by
that means broke the Spirits of the Carthaginians, then (when they were brought
low) he should be able to lead them which way he would; and as for Agathocles
he concluded he should be able to subdue him P. 739.
when ever he pleased. Revolving these things in his mind, he began to face
about and Retreat, willing the Enemy should take notice of what they were about
to do; then telling his Soldiers that Hanno was slain, ordered them to keep
their ranks and get to a rising ground there near at hand; for that was now the
last course for them to take. But the Retreat looking like a downright flight,
the Enemy pressed so close upon them, that the Africans who were in the Rear,
supposing that those in the Front of the Battle were Routed, took to their
Heels likewise.

In the mean time those in the Sacred Brigade fought bravely for a while after
the death of Hanno, and resolutely pressed forward upon the Enemy over the
Carkases of their fellow soldiers; but when they perceived that most of their
Army was fled, Ant. Chapter 308.
and that the Enemy was surrounding them at their backs, they were forced
likewise to give way and be gone.

The whole Carthaginian Army being thus put to flight, the Barbarians made
toward, Carthage; whom Agathocles pursued but a little way, and then returned,
and took the Pillage of the field; In this Battle were slain Two hundred
Grecians, and not above a Thousand Carthaginians, though some have written
above Six Thousand: Amongst other rich spoils there were found many Chariots
in the Carthaginians Camp, in which were carried above Twenty thousand pair of
Fetters and Manacles. For concluding that they would easily overcome the
Greeks, they agreed together to take as many Prisoners as they could, and threw
them into the Dungeons setter'd hand and foot; but God (I conceive) purposely
sets himself by mere contrary Events to cross the expectations of such, who
proudly before hand resolve what shall absolutely be done.

Agathocles having now Routed the Carthaginians both beyond their, and even his
own expectation, blockt them up within their Walls; and thus we see Fortune
whose common Course it is to make Chequer-work of good and bad success, of
Routs and Victories in their several turns, now humbled the Conquerors as well
as those that were before conquered. For the Carthaginians after they had
beaten Agathocles in Sicily in a great Battle, besieged Syracuse; and now
Agathocles having Routed them in Africa, Besieges Carthage: And that which was
most to be admired was that this Prince was beaten by the Ant. Chapter 308.
Barbarians in the Island when all his Forces were with him whole and entire:
but now is Victorious in the Continent over the Conquerors with a piece of a
broken and shattered Army. The Carthaginians therefore concluding that this
miserable misfortune was brought upon them by the Gods, they all betook
themselves to Prayers and Supplications to the (...) All sorts of Prayers.
Deity; especially thinking that Hercules, the Tutelar god of their Country,
was angry at them, they sent a vast sum of Money, and many other rich Gifts to
Tire. For in as much as they were a Colony which came out from them, they used
in former Ages to send the Tenth part of all their Revenues as an Offering to
that God: But after that they grew wealthy, and their Revenues very great, they
began to flack in in their Devotion, and sent thither but a small pittance to
their God. Being therefore brought to repentance by this remarkable Slaughter,
they remembered all the Gods in Tire; they sent likewise out of their Temples to
the Images of Golden Shrines in order to Supplications, supposing they should
prevail the more in averting the Anger of the God by sending sacred gifts to
pacify him. They gave just cause likewise to their God Saturn to be their
Enemy, for that in former times they used to sacrifice to this god the sons of
the most eminent persons, but of later times they secretly bought and bred up
Children for that purpose. And upon strict search made, there were found
amongst them that were to be sacrificed some Children that were changed and put
in the place and room of others. Weighing these things in their Minds, and now
seeing that the Enemy lay before their Walls, they were seized with such a pang
of Superstition, as if they had utterly forsaken the Religion of their Ant. Chapter
308. P. 740.
Fathers. That they might therefore without delay reform what what was amiss,
they offered as a public sacrifice Two hundred of the Sons of the Nobility;
and no fewer than Three hundred more (that were liable to censure) voluntarily
offered up themselves; Cruel Superstition.
for among the Carthaginians there was a Brazen Statue of Saturn putting forth
the Palms of his Hands so bending toward the Earth, as that the Boy that was
laid upon them in order to be sacrificed, should slip off and so fall down
headlong into a deep fiery Furnace. Hence it is probable that Euripides took
what he fabulously relates concerning the sacrifice in Taurus, where he
introduces Iphigenia asking Orestes this Question --

(...)
(...)
But what Sepulcher will me dead receive,
Shall the Gulf of Sacred Fire then me have?
The ancient Fable likewise that is common among the Grecians, that Saturn
devoured his own Children, seems to be confirmed by this Law among the
Carthaginians.

But after this change of affairs in Africa the Carthaginians sent to Amilcar
into Sicily The actions at Syracuse.
to hasten over to their assistance with all speed, and ordered that all the
Beaks of Agathocles his Ships should be carried to him. When the Messengers
arrived, he commanded them not to say any thing of the Routing of their Forces,
but to noise it abroad among the Soldiers, that Agathocles his Fleet and Land
Army were both utterly destroyed. And he himself sent away some (that were
newly come from Carthage) to Syracuse, together Ant. Chapter 308.
with the Iron Beaks, to demand the delivery up of the City, and to tell them
that all their Forces were cut off by the Carthaginians, and their whole Navy
burnt; and that if they would not believe them, the Beaks of their Vessels
(there showed) were a sufficient evidence of the truth of what they related.
when they that were in the City heard of this overthrow of Agathocles, many
believed it: But the leading men of the City, minding to keep private a matter
that was yet uncertain, and to prevent Tumults, forthwith dismissed the
Messengers, and sent them away. They cast out of the City likewise the Kindred
and friends of the Exiles, and Eight thousand at least of others that seemed to
be uneasy under the Government; whereupon when so great a Number on a sudden
were forced to leave the place of their Birth, the City was full of Confusion,
Lamentation and crying of Women running up and down in the Streets; neither was
there any House at this time that had not its share of weeping and mourning.
For they who favored the Tyrant bewailed the Ruin of Agathocles, and the loss
of their Sons; others wept for those of their friends who they supposed were
all cut off in Africa; others grieved and mourned for them that were compelled
to forsake their Houses, and the Gods of their Forefathers; and who were
neither suffered to stay, nor could get well out of the City by reason of the
Siege. And besides these most grievous and bitter sufferings (which they
labored under) they were forced to fly with their Wives, and drag along with
them their little young Children; But Amilcar courteously received and secured
the Exiles, and marched to Syracuse with his Army, as if he should forthwith
possess himself of the City, Ant. Chapter 380.
upon the account of the place being destitute of Inhabitants, and the misery
those were in (as he heard) who were left behind: However he sent Messengers
before, and promised pardon to Antandrus, and all those that sided with him if
he would deliver up the City into his hands. Upon which there was a Council of
War called of those Captains that were in the greatest Authority; where after
many bandings and debates pro and con, Antander (who was naturally a poor
spirited Man, and of a weak head, and much below the courage and resolution of
his Brother) was for delivering up of the Town: But Eurymnon the Etolian (whom
Agathocles had left to assist his Brother in Advice and Counsel) was of another
Opinion, and prevailed with them all to hold out till they had certain
Intelligence of the Truth. Whereupon, Amilcar coming to understand the
resolution of the Townsmen, prepared all his Engines with a full Resolution to
batter down the Walls

Agathocles, after the late Battle, built two Ships of Thirty Oars a piece;
and in one of them put on board the best of his Rowers, with Nearchus, one of
the most faithful Friends he then had with him, and sent them away to Syracuse,
to give an account of his P. 741.
Victory. Having therefore the Wind fair, the Fifth day (in the Night) they
arrived in the Harbor of Syracuse, and at break of Day, Crowned with Garlands
and singing the Pean, a Song of Praise to Apollo for the Victory.
Pean all along as they sailed, they made for the City; which being perceived
by the Carthaginian Guard-Ships, they pursued them with all their might, and
the other being not far before them, there was great striving among the Rowers
on both sides. While the Seamen were thus contending, both Besiegers and
Besieged understanding the Matter, ran down to the Port, and each fearful of
the event, called out and encouraged every one their own Men. And now the Ship
was upon the point of falling into the hands of the Pursuers, upon which the
Barbarians gave a shout: but the Citizens not being able otherwise to assist,
prayed to their Gods for the Preservation of their Men on board. The Pursuers
being now ready to board her not far from Land, she got within a Darts cast of
the Shore, and by the help of the Syracusians, who came in to her relief,
narrowly escaped the Danger. Amilcar perceiving that the Citizens, (upon the
account of the late Contest, and the sudden arrival of the Intelligence
expected) were all flocked down to the Port; and thereupon conceiving part of
the Walls were left Naked, ordered the stoutest of his Soldiers to rear up
Scaling-Ladders; who finding there no Guards, mounted the Walls without being
discerned; and had almost possessed themselves of an entire Part lying between
two Towers, when they that used to go the Round, came just then to the Place,
and so discovered them. Upon which, they fell to it, and the Citizens came
flocking in, before any Relief could be brought to the Assailants, so that some
were killed outright, and others were thrown down Headlong over the Walls. At
which Amilcar was so mortified, that he drew off his Forces from the City, and
sent away Five thousand Men to the Relief of Carthage.

While these things were in action in Sicily, Agathocles being now Master of
the Field, Ant. Chapter 308. Acts of Agathocles in Africa.
took some Forts and Castles near to Carthage by Storm; and other Cities, some
out Fear, and some through hatred of the Carthaginians, voluntarily surrendered
themselves. Having fortified his Camp near Tunis, he left there a sufficient
Guard, and moved toward the Towns lying upon the Seacoasts: And first he took
by Storm the New City, but dealt very favorably with the Inhabitants: Thence
he marched to Adrymetes, and besieged it, and Confederated with Elymas King of
Lybia. News whereof being brought to the Carthaginians, they bent all their
Arms against Tunis; and possessed themselves of Agathocles his Camp; and with
their Battering Rams pressed upon the City with continual Assaults. Agathocles
receiving Intelligence of the slaughter of his Men, leaving the greatest part
of his Army to carry on the Siege, and taking with him his Lifeguard, and a
small Body of Men, secretly marched up to the Top of a Mountain, whence he
might view both the Country of the Adrymetines, and likewise the Carthaginians
that besieged Tunis. In the Night he commanded his Soldiers to kindle Fires,
and with them to take up a large Tract of Ground, to the end the Carthaginians
might think he was making toward them with a strong Army, and that the
Besieged might conclude, that fresh Forces in vast numbers were come up to him
for his Assistance; both being deceived by this Stratagem were suddenly caught
in the Snare; for they who besieged Tunis, fled, and left their Engines behind
them; and the Adrymetines surpised with Fear surrendered the City, which was
gained, upon certain Ant. Chapter 308
Terms agreed upon, but Thapsus he afterward took by Storm: And several other
Cities he took in this Tract, some by Force, and others upon Conditions. Having
at length gained in the whole above Two hundred Towns and Cities, he resolved
upon an Expedition (...). (...)
into the Higher Libya: To that end he raised his Camp, and marched on many
days Journey.

Then the Carthaginians marched out with those Forces (besides others) which
were sent out of Sicily, and besieged Tunis a second time, and recovered a
great part of the Country that was then in the Hands of the Enemy. When
Couriers came from Tunis, and gave an account what the Carthaginians had done,
Agathocles forthwith returned: Being come within Two hundred Furlongs of the
Enemy, he Encamped, and commanded his Soldiers not to kindle any Fires: Then
making a sudden March in the Night, about spring of Day he fell upon those as
were Wasting and Harrassing the Country, and disorderly roving up and down, and
killed above Two thousand of them, and took many Prisoners, which was a great
Step to his many Successes afterward: For the Carthaginians being reinforced
by their Aids from Sicily, and strengthened by their Confederates in Africa,
thought they had been too strong for Agathocles: But after this Misfortune, the
Hearts of the Barbarians were quite down; for he had overcome Elymas the King
of Libya, (who had deserted him) and killed likewise the General, with a great
number of the Barbarians. And thus stood Affairs in Ant. Chapter 308.
Sicily and Africa at this time.

In Macedonia, Cassander came in to the Assistance of Autoleontes King of the
Peonia is a part of Macedonia.
Peonians, Acts of Cassander in Macedonia.
who was then in War with the Autariats, and rescued him out of the Streights
and Dangers he was in at that time, and transplanted the Autariats together
with their Wives and Children, that were then with them, to the Number of
Twenty thousand, and placed them near the Mountain Orbelus, a Mountain in
Macedon^s
Orbitaus.

While he was thus employed, Ptolemy, Antigonus his General in Peloponnesus,
who was Autariats, a People of Dalmatia.
entrusted by him with an Army in these Parts, (took a Pique against Antigonus,
thinking he was not rewarded according to what he might justly expect) revolted
and joined with Cassander. He had left one Phaenix, (one of his Confederates)
President of the Province adjoining to the Hellespont, and sent over some
Soldiers to him, wishing him to take care of the Castles and Cities there, and
for the future not regard any Orders that came from Antigonus.

It was generally agreed by Alexander's Captains, (as part of their Articles
among themselves) that the Greek Cities should be all restored to their ancient
Liberties. Therefore Ptolemy, King of Egypt, (charging Antigonus that he had
put Garrisons into several Greek Towns and Cities) prepared to make War upon
him: And sent Leonides, a Captain of his own, into Cilicia Aspera, and there
possessed himself of certain Cities and Places belonging to Antigonus; and
moreover, sent his Agent to some Cities appertaining to Cassander and
Lysimachus, that they would follow his Advice, and not suffer Antigonus to grow
too fast in Power.

And as for Antigonus, he sent his younger Son Philip to make War upon Phaenix,
and Ant. Chapter 308.
others, who had revolted from him in Hellespont; but his Son Demetrius he sent
into Cilicia, who putting in Execution what he had in Command, routed the
Captains of Ptolemy that were there, and recovered the Cities.

While these things were doing, Polysperchon, (then residing in Peloponnesus)
still affecting Polysperchon seeks to restore Hercules.
the Government of Macedon, cried out against Cassander, and sent for Hercules,
a Son of The Great.
Alexander, (begotten upon Barfine) out of Pergamus, (now of the Age of
Seventeen years) and sent up and down to those who were his own Friends, and
Enemies to Cassander, to help to set this young Man unto his Father's Kingdom.
He solicited likewise by his Letters the Aetolians, to assist him in his
present Design; promising, that they should find more Grace and Favor at his
hands than at any time before, if they would help him to restore the young Lad
to his Father's Throne.

All things going on according to his Heart's desire, (and the Aetolians
complying with his request) many others came flocking in to restore the New
King, so that there were got together above Twenty thousand Foot, and no less
than a Thousand Horse. And P. 743.
thus setting himself with all his might to the Work, he raised what Money he
could, and sent some to solicit his Friends in Macedonia to assist him.

In the mean time, Ptolemy of Egypt having all Cyprus under his Command, and
finding The miserable Destruction of Nicocles and his Family, in Cyprus. Ant.
Chapter 308.
that Nicocles, the King of Paphos, held Correspondence underhand with
Antigonus, sent two Confidents of his own, Argaus and Callicrates, with
Instructions to make away Nicocles; for he was much afraid lest some others
also should fall off, as he had perceived many others had done before.
Wherefore, passing into Cyprus, and taking with them a certain Number of
Soldiers from Menelaus, who commanded the Army there, they beset the House of
Nicocles; and then telling him what the King's Pleasure was, advised him to
dispose of himself for another World. He at first went to clear himself of what
was laid to his Charge, but when he saw that no Man hearkened to what he said,
drew his Sword and slew himself. Axiothea his Wife, hearing of her Husband's
Death, took her Daughters, who were all Young and Virgins, and cut their
Throats, that they might not fall into any of the Enemy's hands, and was
earnest with the Wives of Nicocles his Brothers to accompany her in her own
Death; whereas Ptolemy had given no order concerning any of them, save only to
preserve them. The King's Palace therefore thus filled with the sudden and
unexpected Slaughters and dreadful Spectacles, so affected the Brothers of
Nicocles, that they shut every Man his own Door upon him, and set fire on their
Houses, and slew themselves, so the whole Race of the Kings of Paphos came to a
Tragic and Lamentable End. Having given an Account of those Affairs we before
promised, we shall now proceed to those that follow next in order.

About this time in In the Cimmerian Bosphorus near Pontus Euxinus, or in
Taurica Chersonesus.
Pontus, after the Death of Parysadas, King of the Cimmerian Bosphorus, his
Sons Eumelus, Satyrus, and Prytanis, contended one with another for the
Kingdom: Satyrus, the Eldest was appointed Successor by his Father, who reigned
Eight and Thirty Years.

Eumelus compacting with some of the Natives adjoining, raised an Army, and
laid claim to the Kingdom against his Elder Brother; of which Satyrus being
informed, went against him with a great Army, and passing the River Thapsus,
when he came near his Camp with his Carts and Wagons, wherein he had brought an
infinite quantity of Provision; Ant. Chapter 308.
and ranging afterward his Army in the Field, (after the manner of the
Scythian Kings) he led the main Battle himself. He had not in his Army above A
Thousand in the Margent.
Two thousand Greeks, and as many Thracians; all the rest were Scythians, which
came to assist him, to the number of Twenty thousand, and no less than Ten
thousand Horse. Eumelus was assisted by Ariophames, King of Thrace, with Twenty
thousand Horse, and Two and twenty thousand Foot. Between these Forces a bloody
Battle was fought, wherein Satyrus (who had with him a choice Party of brave
Horse) encountered first with Ariopharnes in a Skirmish of Horse; who likewise
commanded the middle Battle opposite to Satyrus; many fell on both sides; at
length he forced his way through, and put the Barbarian King to flight, and
being the first in the pursuit put every Man to the Sword that was in his way.
But when he heard, that his Brother Eumelus in the right Wing, had routed the
Mercenaries, he left off the Pursuit, and made up to the Succor of those that
fled, and regained the day, and utterly broke and routed the whole Army,
putting them all to flight; so that he gave a clear Testimony that he justly
deserved to Wear the Crown, as well upon the Account of his Valor, as upon the
Privilege of his Birth.

Ariopharnes and Eumelus thus beaten, fled into the Ariopharnes his Palace. P.
744. Ant. Chapter 308.
King's Palace, which was environed with the River Thasis, of an exceeding
depth, so that the Place was of difficult approach; it was surrounded likewise
with steep Rocks and thick Woods, into which there were only two Entrances made
by Art: One leading straight to the Palace, defended with high Towers and
Bulwarks; the other on the other side, was made in the Fens, guarded with Forts
and Towers of Timber, raised upon Pillars over the Water. The Place being very
strong, Satyrus first wasted the Enemy's Country, and burnt their Towns, whence
he carried a vast Number of Prisoners, and abundance of Spoil. Afterward he
attempted to force his way through the Passes, but losing many of his Men at
the Bulwarks and Towers, he was forced to Retreat. But making an Attack upon
that side toward the Fenns, he took the Timber-Forts which he demolished, and
then passed the River. Upon which he began to fell a Wood, through which he
must needs pass to the Palace; and while these attempts were carrying on in
great Earnestness, King Ariopharnes fearing lest the Castle should be taken by
Storm, valiantly fell upon them, perceiving there were no hopes of safety
remaining but in an absolute Victory. He placed likewise Archers on both sides
the Passage, by whom he sore galled the Fellers of the Wood, because they could
neither see the Arrows before they pierced them, nor come at the Archers, nor
return the like upon them, by reason of the thick and close standing of the
Trees. However, Satyrus his Soldiers continued falling the Wood, and opening a
Way to the Palace, for three Days together, though with great Toil and Hazard;
the Fourth day they came under the Wall. But being worsted through showers of
Arrows and straightness of the Places, they sustained very great loss: For
Meniscus (who led the Mercenary Companies) having got Ant. Chapter 308.
in at a Passage (though he Fought very manfully) was nevertheless (being
over-laid with the Multitude within) forced to retreat: Whom Satyrus seeing in
such imminent Danger, came up to him with seasonable Relief, and bearing up
against the Enemy's Charge, was run through the Arm with a Spear, which was so
sore, that it forced him to retire to his Camp, and the next Night died of the
Wound, having reigned scarce nine Months after the Death of Parasydas his
Father. Hereupon, Meniscus, Captain of the Mercenaries, breaking up the Siege
drew off the Army to a City called Gargaza, and from thence carried the King's
Body down the River, to a City called Pantacapeum, to his Brother Prytanis, who
having magnificently buried it, and laid up the Relics in the King's
Sepulcher, went presently to Gargaza, and there took into his hands the Army,
together with the Kingdom

Hereupon, came the Agents of Eumelus to him to treat concerning the parting of
the Kingdom between them two, which he would not hearken to: Leaving therefore
a strong Garrison at Gargara, he returned to Pantacapeum, there to settle the
Affairs of his Kingdom. But a while after, Eumelus, by the help of some
Babarians, possessed himself of Gargara, and sundry other Towns and Castles.
Whereupon, Prytanis marched with an Army against him, but was overthrown in a
Battle by his Brother; and being shut up within a Neck of Land, near the Lough
of Meotis, was forced to render himself upon Ant. Chapter 308.
Conditions, which were to give up all his Army and depart the Kingdom.

Nevertheless, when Prytanis returned to Pantacapeum, which is the Place where
the Kings of Bosphorus keep the standing Court, he there endeavored again to
recover his Kingdom; but being foiled there again, he fled to a Place called
the Gardens, and was there slain.

Eumelus, after the Death of his Brother, to confirm himself in the Kingdom,
put to Death all the Friends, Wives and Children of both his Brothers, Satyrus
and Prytanis; only Parisades, Satyrus his Son, being but a very Youth, escaped
his Hands; for by the P. 745.
benefit of a swift Horse he got away out of the City to Agarus King of the
Scythians. But when Eumelus saw that the People repined at the loss of their
Friends whom he had murdered, he called them all together, and there excused
himself, and restored to them their ancient form of Government, and to the
Citizens of Pantacapeum their former Immunities, and promised to discharge them
of all kind of Tributes, sparing for no fair words which might reconcile the
Hearts of the People to him; by which means, having regained their good
Opinions, he held a just and moderate Hand over them, and grew afterward into
no small admiration for all kind of Virtue among them. For he omitted not to
oblige the Byzantians and Sinopians, and the rest of the Grecian Inhabitants of
Pontus by all the demonstrations of Kindness imaginable. For when the
Collantians were besieged by Lysimachus, and were brought to great distress
through want of Provision, he entertained a Thousand of them who left the Place
for want of Bread, and not only granted them a safe Protection, but allotted
them Habitations within the City. And divided likewise a Place Ant. Chapter 308.
called Psoa, with the Territory thereunto belonging, among them by Lot. And
for the Benefit of the Merchants that Traded to Pontus, he made War upon the
Barbarous piratical Heniochians, and them of Taurus, with the Acheans, and
scowr'd and cleans'd the Seas of them. So that his Name was advanced to the
Skies, (as the Fruit of his Generosity) not only in his own Kingdom, but almost
all the World over, while the Merchants every where published the Greatness and
Braveness of his Spirit. Moreover, he much enlarged his Dominion, by the
addition of a considerable Part of the Barbarians Country bordering upon him,
and advanced the Fame and Reputation of his Kingdom, above whatever it was
before.

In conclusion, he had a Design to have brought under all the neighboring
Nations, and had certainly effected in short time what he had so designed, if
he had not been prevented by Death: For after he had reigned five Years and as
many Months, he ended his days by a sudden and unusual Accident: For returning
home out of Scythia, with a great desire to be present at a certain Sacrifice,
and making toward his Palace in a Running upon Four Wheels. The sad Death of
Eumelus.
Chariot with four Horses, covered over with a Canopy; the Horses took a Fright
at the Canopy, and violently ran away with him, the Coachman not being able to
stop them in their Carreer: Upon which, Eumelus fearing lest he should be born
away headlong down some steep Rock, threw himself out, but his Sword entangling
in one of the Wheels, he was hurried away with the violent Motion of the
Chariot, and killed forthwith.

It Is reported there were some Predictions concerning the Death of Eumelus and
his Ant. Chapter 308.
Brother Satyrus, though something Foolish and Vain, yet credited by the
Inhabitants. For they say, that the Oracle warned Satyrus to be aware of one
Musculus, lest he should kill him, and that for that reason he would not suffer
any of that name, whether Bond or Free, to abide within his Dominions; and that
upon that account he was afraid both of House and Field- Musculus is little
Mouse, (...) Mice.
Mice, and continually charged the Children to kill 'em, and stop up their
Holes. At length, when he had done all that possibly he could to avoid his
Fate, he was at last killed by a Wound in the Muscle of his Arm. And as for
Eumelus, that he was charged by the Oracle to take heed of a Moving House; and
therefore that he durst not go into his House before his Servants had made a
diligent Search to see that both the Roof and Foundation were sound. But after
that they came to understand that the Canopy placed upon the Chariot was the
Occasion of his Death, every one concluded that the Prophecy was fulfilled. But
this shall suffice, concerning the Affairs of the Bosphorus.

In Italy the Roman Consuls entered the Country of the In the Greek Italy is
for Samnium, and Italium for Talium.
Samnites with an Army, and P. 746.
routed them in a Battle at Talius. But the routed Party afterward possessing
themselves of an Hill, and the Night drawing on, the Romans retreated to their
Camp; but the next day the Fight was renewed, and great numbers of the Samnites
were slain, and above Two thousand and Two hundred were taken Prisoners. The
Romans being thus successful, now quietly enjoyed whatever they had in the open
Field, and brought under all the revolting Cities, and placed Garrisons in
Cataracta and Ceraunia, Places they had taken by Assault, and others they
reduced upon Terms and Conditions.

CHAP. II.
The Acts of Ptolemy in Cilicia, and elsewhere. Polysperchon murders Hercules,
Alexander' s Son, by Instigation of Cassander. Amilcar taken, and put to Death
by the Syracusians. His Head sent to Agathocles in Africa. The Transactions in
Sicily. Archagathus Agathocles' s Son, kills Lysiscus; he and his Son in in
great Danger by the Army. Affairs in Italy. The Works of Appius Claudius; the
Appian Way. Ptolemy comes to Corinth; his Acts there. Cleopatra, Alexander' s
Sister, killed by the Governor of Sardis. The further Acts of Agathocles in
Africa. Ophellas decoyed, and cut off by Agathocles. Ophellas his troublesome
March to Agathocles. Lamias' s Cruelty, and the Story of her. Bomilcar seeks to
be Prince of Carthage, but is put to Death by the Citizens. Agathocles sends
the Spoils of the Cyrenians to Syracuse; most lost in a Storm, Affairs in Italy.

WHen Demetrius Phalerius was Lord Chancellor of Athens, Quintus Fabius (the
second Olymp. 117. 4. Ant. Chapter 307.
time) and Caius Martius were invested with the Consular Dignity at Rome. At
that time Ptolemy King of Egypt hearing that his Captains had lost all the
Cities again in Cilicia, put over with his Fleet to Phaselis, and took that
City by Force, and from thence The Acts of Ptolemy in Cilicia, and other
Places. Ant. Chapter 307.
passing into Lycia, took Xanthus by Assault, and the Garrison of Antigonus that
was therein. Then sailing to Caunus, took the City by Surrender, and then set
upon the Citadels and Forts that were in it, and took them by Assaults.

As for Heracleum, he utterly destroyed it; and the City Persicum came into his
Hands by the Surrender of the Soldiers that were put to keep it. Then sailing
to Coos, he sent for Ptolemy the Captain, who was Antigonus his Brother's Son,
and had an Army committed to him by Antigonus: But now forsaking his Uncle, he
clave to Ptolemy, and joined with him in all his Affairs. Putting therefore
from Cholcis, and arriving at Coos, Ptolemy the King at first received him very
courteously; yet after a while, when he saw the Insolency of his Carriage, and
how he went to allure the Officers by Gifts, and held secret Cabals with them,
for fear of the worst he clapped him up in Prison, and there poisoned him with a
Draught of Hemlock: As for the Soldiers that came with him, he made them his
own by large Promises, and distributed them by small Parcels among his Army.
Whilst these Things were acting, Polysperchon having raised a great Army,
restored Hercules the Son of Alexander, begotten upon Barsinoe, to his Father's
Kingdom. And while he lay encamped at Stymphalia, Cassander came up with his
Army, and both encamped near one to another: Neither did the Macedonians grudge
to see the Restoration of their King.

Cassander therefore fearing, lest the Macedonians (who are naturally
Inconstant) should Revolt to Hercules, sent an Agent to Polysperchon, chiefly
to advise him concerning the Business Ant. Chapter 307.
of the King. If the King was restored, he told him, he must be sure to be
under the Commands of others; but if he would assist him, and kill the young
Man, he should enjoy the same Privileges and Honors in Macedonia that ever he
had before. And besides, that he should have the Command of an Army; that he
should be declared Generalissimo of Peloponnesus; and that he should share in
the Principality, and be in equal Honor with Cassander. At length he so caught
and ensnared Polysperchon with many large Promises, that they entered into a
secret Combination, and Polysperchon undertook to murder the young King, which
he accordingly effected; upon which Polysperchon openly Polysperchon betrays
and murders Hercules by Cassander' s Instigation.
joined with Cassander in all his Concerns, and was advanced in Macedonia, and
received (according to the Compact) Four thousand Macedonian Foot, and Five
hundred Thessalian Horse; and having listed several other Volunteers, he
attempted to pass through Boeotia into Peloponnesus: But being opposed by the
Boeotians and the Peloponnesians, he was forced to retire, and march into
Locris, where he took up his Winter Quarters.

During these Transactions, Lysimachus built a City in Chersonesus, and called
it after his own Name, Lysimachia. Cleomenes King of Lacedaemon now died, when
he had reigned Threescore Years and Ten Months; and was succeeded by Aretas his
Son, who Ruled P. 747.
Forty Four Years.

About this time Amilcar, General of the Forces in Sicily, having reduced the
rest of that Amilcar taken, and put to Death by the Syracusians. Ant. Chapter 307.
Island, marches with his Army to Syracuse, as if he would presently gain that
City by force of Arms; and to that end hindered all Provision from the Town,
having been a long time Master at Sea; and having wasted and destroyed all the
Corn, and other Fruits of the Field, attempted to possess himself of all the
Places about A strong Fort near the Temple of Jupiter Olympus.
Olympias lying before the Town. Then he resolved forthwith to assault the
Walls, being encouraged thereunto by the Augur, who by viewing of the Intrals
of the Sacrifice, foretold that he should certainly sup the next day in
Syracuse. But the Townsmen smelling out the Enemies Design, sent out in the
night Three thousand Foot, and about Four hundred Horse, with Orders to possess
themselves of Or Euryalus, a Fort upon the highest Point of the Hill over the
City called the Epipole.
Euryclus, who presently effected what they were commanded to do. The
Carthaginians thinking to surprise the Enemy, fell on about midnight. Amilcar
commanded the whole Body, and led them up, having always a strong Party near to
support him. Dinocrates, Master of the Horse, followed him. The Army was
divided into two Battalions, one of Barbarians, and the other of Grecian
Confederates. A Rabble likewise of diverse other Nations followed, to get what
Plunder they could; which sort of People, as they are of no use in an Army, so
they are many times the cause of sudden Alarms, and vain and needless Fears,
which often occasions great Mischief and Prejudice. And at that time the Passes
being strait and rough, the Drivers of the Carriages, and other Servants and
Attendants of the Army that were not of any Ant. Chapter 307.
formed Companies, quarreled one with another for the Way, and not being able
to move forward by reason of the Throng, some fell to downright Blows; so that
many on each side coming in to help their several Parties, a great Tumult,
Noise and Clamor, ran through the whole Army. Upon which, the Syracusians, who
were posted at Euryclus, understanding the approach of the Barbarians by their
tumultuous March, and having the higher Ground, fell in upon the Enemy. Some
from the high Places where they were posted, galled them as they came on with
their Darts and Arrows, and some prevented them by gaining the necessary
Passes, and so blocked up their Way. Others drove those that fled Headlong down
the Rocks; for by reason of the Darkness of the Night, and want of
Intelligence, they thought the Enemy was coming upon them with a mighty Army;
so that the Carthaginians. by reason of the Disturbance and Tumult amongst
their own Men, (...).
their Ignorance of the Ways, and straitness of the Passages, were at a stand,
and confounded, and at last fled outright: And because there was no room to
give way, great numbers of them were trodden under Foot by their own Horse; and
part of the Army fought one with another, as if they had been Enemies, led into
the Error by the Darkness of the Night. Amilcar indeed at the first received
the Enemy's Charge with great Resolution, and called out to the Colonels and
Commanders to stand to it, and valiantly bear the Brunt with the rest. But
afterward being deserted by his Soldiers, through the Consternation that was
amongst them, (having much ado to save his Life) * For that some made away even
upon the appearance of the Enemy, especially being penned up, and in amaze
through their Ignorance of the Places.
he fell into the hands of the Syracusians.

Here a Man may justly observe the Inconstancy of Fortune, and the surprising
Events Men are overtaken with, contrary to what they expected. For Agathocles
not inferior to any for Valor, and who had the Command of a great Army in the
Battle at Himera, was not only beaten by the Barbarians, but lost the best and
greatest part of his Army. But those that were left, and penned up within the
Walls of Syracuse, with a small handful of Men, that had been before beaten,
not only routed the Army of the Carthaginians, by whom they were besieged, but
took Amilcar the General, one of the noblest of the Citizens of Carthage,
Prisoner: And that most to be admired is, that a small Body of Men by an
Ambuscado, and the Advantage of the Place, should utterly rout Ant. Chapter 307.
an Army of an Hundred and twenty thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse. So
that it is very true what is in every Body's Mouth, Many things are vain and to
no purpose in P. 748.
War.

After this Flight, the Carthaginians scattered and dispersed far one from
another, scarce got together the next day. But the Syracusians returning to the
City with much Spoil, delivered Amilcar to them that were resolved to revenge
themselves of him: They remembered what was foretold by the Augur, That he
should Sup in Syracuse the next day; the Truth of which, the Deity now
confirmed by the Event. The Kindred therefore of them that were slain, led
Amilcar bound through all Parts of the City, and after they had most horridly
tormented him, killed him with the greatest Scorn and Contempt imaginable. Then
the principal Men of the City sent his Head to Agathocles, with an Express
Amilcar. Head sent (...) Africa.
to give him an Account of the late Victory.

But the Army of the Carthaginians after their Defeat, though they came to
understand what was the Cause of such great Calamities and Misfortunes, yet
were scarce after all Ant. C(...)
freed from their Fears: And because they wanted a General, Quarrels arose
between the Barbarians and the Grecians. The Exiles therefore, and the rest of
the Greeks, made Dinocrates General over themselves: And the Carthaginians
entrusted the supreme Command with those that were next in Dignity to the late
General At this time, when the Agrigentines The Agrigentines seek to Command
Sicily.
perceived that Sicily was now in that Condition, as that it might be easily
gained, they began to seek after the Sovereign Command of the Island
themselves. For they supposed, that the Carthaginians were not able to deal
with Agathocles in the War; and that Dinocrates, who had none but a company of
Fugitives about him, might be easily vanquished; and that the Syracusians, who
were grievously pressed for want of Provisions, would not so much as attempt to
gain the Sovereign Command. And lastly, that which was of greatest weight was,
That inasmuch as they took up Arms to free all the Greek Cities, they
concluded, that all would readily concur, both upon the account of the Hatred
they bore against the Barbarians, and the Natural Love and Regard they all had
to the Laws of their own Country. They created therefore Xenodicus General, and
sent him forth to the War with a considerable Army, who forthwith makes to
Gela, and by some of his own Friends, was in the Night let into the City; and
so gained both the Town more Forces, and a great deal of Money, at one and the
same time. The Geloans having thus (...) Chapter 307.
recovered their Liberty, joined in the War with the whole Strength and Power
of the City, and most readily put to their helping Hands for the restoring all
the Cities to their ancient Laws.

This Attempt of the Agrigentines being noised abroad throughout the whole
Island, a sudden itch of Liberty spread over all the Cities: And first, the
Enneans sent Agents, and delivered up their City to the Agrigentines, who
freeing this City, marched on to Erbessus, a Garrison of the Carthaginians: Here
was a sharp Engagement; but the Citizens coming in to the Assistance of the
Agrigentines, the Garrison was expuls'd, and many of the Barbarians killed, and
Five hundred laid down their Arms and gave up themselves.

While the Agrigentines were busi'd in these Affairs, some of Agathocles his
Soldiers in Syracuse having taken Echetla, wasted and harrass'd the Country of
the Leontines and Camareans. This Calamity grievously afflicted the Cities,
because the Country was laid wast, and all the Corn and Fruits destroyed:
Whereupon Xenodicus the General marched into those Parts, and drove the Enemy
out of the Country of the Leontines and Camarenians, and then retaking Echetla,
which was a very strong Fort, he restored the Democratical Government to the
City, and struck a Terror into the Syracusians. To conclude, he marched up and
down to the several Garrisons and Cities, and freed them from the Carthaginian
Government. P. 749.


In the mean time, the Syracusians being in great Straits and Perplexity for
want of Provision, Ant. Chapter 307.
when they understood that some Ships were coming with Corn, fitted out Twenty
Galleys; and understanding that the Barbarians kept but a slight Guard where
they lay, they slipped by undiscerned, and got as far as to the Megareans, and
there waited for the Megara in Sicily, at the Foot of the Mountain Megara.
Merchants. But Thirty Carthaginian Galleys making up to them, they prepared
themselves at first to fight: But being presently driven ashore, they left
their Ships and swam out, and so escaped to a certain Temple of Juno, upon
which there was a sharp Dispute about the Ships; the Carthaginians threw in
Grappling-Irons, and haled them with Force off from the Land, and so took Ten
of them; the rest were saved by some Help that came in out of the City. And
this was the Condition of Sicily at that time.

In Africa, after that they who brought the Head of Amilcar were arrived there;
Agathocles, as soon as he had received it, rid up so near to the Enemy's Camp
as that his Voice might be heard, and showing them the Head, told them how all
their Forces in Sicily were destroyed, which presently caused most bitter
Mourning and Lamentation among the Carthaginians, who bowed down themselves in
Adoration of the Head of their King, (according to the Custom of their
Country,) and looking upon his Death to be their own Calamity, had no Hearts
further to prosecute the War. Agathocles on the other side, (lifted up with his
Successes in Africa, and with such Confluence of Prosperity,) bore himself high
in mighty Hopes and Expectations for the future, as if he had been now out of
the reach of all Dangers. But Fortune did not think it fit to suffer Things to
run on Ant. Chapter 307.
in the same course of Prosperity, but brought him under most imminent Hazards
and Difficulties from his own Soldiers. For one Lysiscus, one of his Colonels,
being invited by Agathocles to Supper, when he was heated with Wine, and in his
Cups fell a railing against him with most bitter Imprecations. But (...),
because he had a great Esteem for the Man upon the account of his Valor,
passed by all with a left: But Archagathus his Son on the contrary being
enraged at him, ^^torted upon him with bitter Reproaches and Threats. When
Supper was ended, and every one was returned to his Tent, Lysiscus
contemptuously charged Archagathus as an incestuous Adulterer with his own
Stepmother: For he was judged to be too familiar with Alcia, his Father's
Wife. Whereupon Archagathus, Agathocles his Son, kills Lysiscus; all the Army
Mutiny upon it.
Archagathus, stirred up to a higher degree of Madness and Rage, snatched a
Lance out of the Hands of one of the Guard and ran him through the Side, who
falling down dead, immediately was carried into his Tent by those that attended
him. As soon as it was day, the Friends of him that was slain, and many others
of the Soldiers, ran up and down, and (enraged at the Fact that was committed)
filled the Camp with Tumult and Confusion. Many likewise of the Captains, who
were subject to be called in Question for their Crimes, fearing what might
ensue, made use of the present Occasion, and stirred up the Soldiers to a
terrible Mutiny: So that the whole Army inflamed with the Hatred of his
Cruelty, ran to their Arms to execute condign Punishment upon the Murderer. At
length they resolved to put Archagathus to Death; and that if Agathocles did
not deliver up his Son, he should Die in his Room: Besides, they demanded of
him their Arrears, and chose new Officers and Captains to Command the Army. At
length they possessed themselves of the Walls of Tunis, and hemmed in the
Princes round with their Ant. Chapter 307.
Guards. This Mutiny coming to the Ears of the Enemy, the Carthaginians sent
some of their own Men, to persuade the Soldiers to a Revolt, promising them
larger Pay, and ample Rewards: Whereupon many of the Captains promised to bring
over the Army to them. But Agathocles, when he saw he was in the utmost
extremity of Danger, and Agathocles his Stratagem (...) deliver himself from
his own Soldiers. P. 750.
fearing lest if he were given up to the Enemy, he should end his Days with
Disgrace and Dishonor, concluded that it was much better if he must Suffer, to
be killed by the Soldiers: Whereupon he laid aside his Purple Robe, and put on
a poor Country-fellow's Habit, and came into the midst of them; at which
strange Sight there was a deep Silence, and many came in from every Quarter
flocking about him; where he made a Speech to them fitted for the present
Occasion, wherein he set forth the Acts he had done to that time, and told
them, He was now ready to Die, if they (his Fellow Soldiers) thought fit it
should be so. For he was resolved never (like a Coward) to make exchange of his
Honor for his Life, of which (he said) they should be then Eyewitnesses, and
thereupon drew out his Sword as if he would run himself through: And just as he
was ready to thrust it into his Body, the whole Army called out aloud to him to
Forbear, and all gave their Voices generally, That he should be Acquitted and
Discharged from all further Accusation. The Soldiers then wishing him to put on
his Royal Robes, he Ant. Chapter 30(...)
returned them many Thanks, shedding many Tears, and then Clothes himself
again as became his State and Dignity, and the People with cheerful
Countenances congratulated the Reassumption of his former Power. In the mean
time, the Carthaginians expected every hour that the Greeks would come over to
them.

But Agathocles, that he might not lose the Advantage of the present Occasion,
led the Army out against them; for the Carthaginians expecting continually a
Revolt and a Desertion from the Enemies Camp, never in the least dreamed of
what was really in Agitation. But Agathocles, as soon as he approached the
Enemies Camp, presently commanded his Men to sound a Charge, and so forthwith
fell in upon them, and hewed them down before him. The Carthaginians being
surpised by this sudden Attack, after the Loss of many of their Men, fled to
their Camp. And thus Agathocles, who was near losing of his Life through the
Rashness of his Son, by his own Valor not only extricated himself out of the
Snare, but utterly routed his Enemies: But they who were the Heads and
Ringleaders of the Mutiny, and as many others as bore a Grudge to the Prince,
to the Number of Two hundred and upwards, vilely deserted, and went over to the
Carthaginians.

Having now gone through the Affairs of Africa and Sicily, we shall next take
notice of what was done in Italy. For there the Hetruscans came with a great
Army against Sutrium, a Roman Colony: To whose Defense the Consuls marched out
with great Forces Affairs in Italy. Ant. Chapter 307.
and fought and routed the Hetruscans, and pursued them to their very Camp.
About' the same time the Samnites (when the Roman Army was abroad at a great
distance without the least fear of an Enemy) besieged the Japyges, Allies to
the Romans: Therefore the Consuls were forced to divide their Forces. Fabius
continued in Hetruria; but Marcius marched against the Samnites, and took the
City of Allita by Storm, and freed their Allies from the Siege of Japyges. But
Fabius, while the Hetrurians flocked in great multitudes to besiege Sutrium,
slipped secretly by the Enemy through the bordering Country, and made an
Incursion into the Higher Hetruria, which had for a long time been free from
all manner of Inroads and Invasions; where breaking in upon the sudden, he
wasted and harassed the Country up and down, and routed those of the
Inhabitants that made head against him, and killed many of them, and took a
great number of Prisoners. Afterward he overcame and killed many of them in
another Battle at a Place called Perusia, and put that People into a great
Consternation. He was the first of the Romans that ever entered with an Army
into those Parts. But he made Peace with the Arretines and Crotoneans, and them
of Perusina; and taking the City called Castula, he forced the Hetrurians to
raise their Siege before Sutrium.

This Year there were two Censors created at Rome; the one of whom was Appius
Claudius, who with the concurrence of his Colleague, Caius Plautius, abrogated
many of the ancient Laws: For to gratify the People, he made no account of the
Senate. He brought Water (which was from him called Appia) into Rome from
Places About 10 miles.
fourscore Furlongs distant, P. 751.
and expended a vast Sum of Money in this Work, received out of the Treasury by
Consent of the Senate. Then he laid a Causey of hard Stone the greatest part of
that way, which is from him called Appia, extending from Rome to Capua, a About
120 miles.
Thousand Furlongs An(...) Chapter 307. The Appian (...).
and upwards; and with great Costs and Expense levelled all the rising Grounds,
and filled up all the Holes and hollow Places, making all even and plain; but
hereby drained the Treasury almost of all the Money that was in it. And by this
his laying out of himself in promoting the Public Good, he left behind him an
immortal Memorial. He also made up the Senate not only of the Nobility (as the
ancient Custom was) but likewise of the Such as had been Slaves, and were see
free.
Libertines, by choosing many of them, and mixing them with the other, which the
Patritians took very heinously. Moreover, he gave liberty to the Citizens to
incorporate themselves into what Tribe they thought fit, and to be taxed in
what Rank soever they pleased.

At length, perceiving how greatly he was envied by the Nobility, he avoided
the Storm by insinuating himself into the favor of the Common People, and
making use of them as a Bulwark against the Envy of the Patricians. In must'
ring of the Horse, he never took any Man's Horse from him; neither ever removed
any Person never so mean out of the Senate (that was once chosen) when he took
an account of the Senators, which the Censors used to do. But the Consuls, both
out of Envy, and to gratify the Nobility, convened a Senate of such as were
enrolled by the former Censors, and not those that were allowed by him: But the
People opposed them, and sided with Appius; and that he might confirm the
Advancement of such as were but of mean and obscure Birth, he preferred one
Cains Flavius, the Son of a Libertine, to the Office of Aedilis, and to the
highest Place in that Office. And this was the first Roman born of a Libertine,
that ever before was advanced to that Honorable Station. Appius at length
being removed out of his Office, out of fear of the Senate's Malice, kept his
House, under pretense of being blind.

Now Charinus was Chief Governor at Athens, and the Romans created Publius
Decius and Olym. 118. 1. Ant. Chapter 306. An. M. 3642. The Acts of Ptolemy in
Corinth and other places.
Quintus Fabius Consuls. And at Elis was celebrated the Hundred and eighteenth
Olympiad, in which Apollonides of Tegeata bore away the Prize: At which time
Ptolemy sailing from Myndus along the Islands which lay in his way, came to
Andros, and putting out the Garrison that was there, restored it to her former
Liberty: Thence he sailed to the Isthmus, and received Sicyon and Corinth from
Cratesipolis. But for what reasons, and upon what account he took these eminent
Cities into his hands, we have related in the former Books, and therefore we
shall forbear repetition. He designed also to restore the rest of the Greek
Cities to their Liberties, judging that by gaining the Hearts of the Grecians,
he should very much promote his own Interest. But when the Peloponnesians were
ordered to provide Money and Victuals, but performed nothing of what they had
agreed to, he was so incensed, that he made Peace with Cassander, upon this
Condition, That each of them should retain those Cities they had then in their
hands. Then having put Garrisons into Sicyon and Corinth, he returned into
Egypt.

In the mean time, Alexander's (...) Ant. Chapter 306.
Cleopatra being incensed against Antigonus, of her own accord inclined to
Ptolemy, and left Sardis to go to him: She was Sister of Alexander, the
Conqueror of the Persians, the Daughter of Philip Son of Amyntas, and the Wise
of Alexander, who undertook an Expedition into Italy. And therefore upon the
account of the Nobleness of her Birth, Cassander, Lysunachus, Antigonus, and
Ptolemy, and even the Chiefest of Alexander's Captains after his death, were
every one ambitious to marry her: For every one hoped by this Marriage to draw
all the the Macedonians after them; and therefore P. 752.
each coveted to be related to the Royal Family, looking upon that as the way
to gain the Sovereign Power and Command over all the rest. But the Governor of
Sardis (whom Antigonus had commanded to retain Cleopatra) stopped her Journey;
and afterward by Order from Antigonus, with the help of some Women, privily
murdered her. But Antigonus, Cleopatra killed by the Governor of Sardis.
who would no ways be thought guilty of her death, struck off the Heads of some
of those Women, for having a hand in her Murder, and buried her with all the
Magnificence that might be. And such was the end of Cleopatra, before any
Solemnization of Marriage; who was earnestly coveted as a Wife by all the most
Noble Captains and Generals of the Army.

Having now gone through the Affairs of Asia and Greece, we shall pass over to
other Parts of the World.

In Africa the Carthaginians sent an Army against the Numidians (who had
revolted from them) in order to reduce them. Upon which, Agathocles left his
Son Archagathus with Ant. Chapter 306. Agathocles. farther acts in Africa.
part of the Army at Tunis; and he himself, with Eight thousand Foot, and Eight
hundred Horse of the most Valiant Men of his Army, and Fifty African Carriages,
made after the Enemy with all speed possible. In the mean time the
Carthaginians being come among the Numidians, called Suphons, caused many of
the Inhabitants to join with them; and reduced likewise some of the Revolters
to their former Alliance and Confederacy with them; but when they heard of the
Enemies approach they Encamped upon an high piece of ground lying on the other
side of a deep and unpassable River, to secure themselves against all sudden
Attacks and incursions of the Enemy; and commanded the most active Numidians to
hinder the march of the Grecians by vexing them ever and anon with continual
Attacks in the Rear; who accordingly executing their Commands, Agathocles sent
out the Archers and Slingers against them; and he himself with the rest of the
Army made toward the Enemies Camp. But the Carthaginians understanding his
design drew the Army out of the Camp, and stood ranged in Battle array, ready
and prepared for fight: As soon as they saw Agathocles his Soldiers pass the
River, they fell upon them in a full Body, and made a great slaughter at that
part of the River where it was so difficult to pass; and in this endeavor to
force their way through the River, the Greeks as far excelled the Barbarians in
valor as they did them in number and multitude; while both sides stood Ant.
Chapter 306
stoutly to it for a long time, the Numidians in each Army left off fighting
expecting the issue of the Engagement, with a design to rifle the Carriages of
that party that was Routed. At length Agathocles with those brave and valiant
men he had about him, broke through that part of the Enemies Battalion, that
was opposed to him, and put them to flight, and the rest presently followed
them; only the Grecian Horse that sided with the Carthaginians under the
Command of Clino bore the shock of the Agathocleans, who pressed very sore upon
them; upon which there was a very sharp Engagement, and many fighting
courageously di'd upon the spot, the rest by good fortune escaping: Then
Agathocles leaving off the pusuit, bent all his strength against them who had
fled back into the Camp; but endeavoring to break in at places strongly
fortified and of difficult approach, he sustained as much loss as the
Carthaginians; however he remitted nothing of his resolution, but being lifted
up with his Victory still pressed upon the Enemy, confidently concluding he could
force the Camp. In the mean time the Numidians were very intent in observing
how things were like to go, but could not fall upon the Bag and Baggage P. 753
of the Carthaginians because both Armies were so near the Camp. When therefore
they saw that Agathocles was at a great distance, and the Guards but small in
the Grecians Camp, they broke in there, and easily killed those that withstood
them, and took many Prisoners, and possessed themselves of other prey and
plunder. Which as soon as Agathocles came to understand, he hasted thither with
his Forces, and recovered some of the spoil: but the Numidians carried most
away with them, and in the night got a long way off from the place. Then the
Prince erected a Trophy, and divided all the Booty Ant. Chapter 306.
amongst the Soldiers that none might repine at the losses they had sustained.
The Greeks likewise that sided with the Carthaginians, he committed Prisoners
to a Castle, who fearing the Prince would revenge himself of them in the Night
fell upon the Guard in the Castle; but being worsted, they got into a Fort and
sheltered themselves there to the Number of a Thousand at least, amongst whom
were above Five hundred Syracusians. As soon as Agathocles came to know what
was done he marched with his Army thither, where after Terms and Articles
agreed upon, those Complotters came forth of the Hold, but he put them all to
the sword. Being crowned with this Victory, and having done all that he could
possibly contrive for the subduing of the Carthaginians, he sent Ortho the
Syracusian to Cyrene as his Ambassador to Ophellas, who was one of Alexander's
Captains all along in the late Wars, and was then possessed of Cyrene with the
Ophellas Lord of Cyrene deco(...) and cut off by Agathocles.
neighboring Cities, and had the Command of a great Army, and was contriving
how to enlarge his Dominion, and while he was beating his brains with these
ambitious projects, Agathocles his Agent just then arrived, to solicit him to
join with him in affording his assistance to subdue the Carthaginians. In
return of which piece of service Agathocles promised him he would yield up to
him the Soveragin Command of all Africa, and that he himself would be content
with Sicily, where being freed from all fear of future dangers and troubles
from the Carthaginians he should be able with ease and safety to Ant. Chapter 306.
reduce the whole Island to his Obedience. And if he should have a desire to
enlarge his Dominion, he said that Italy was near at hand, where he might
gratify his Ambition in that respect. That Africa was far from him, separated
by a large Sea, and that he came not into it of choice, but was driven thither
of necessity. This therefore coming in the way so heightened him in his former
hopes that he readily hearkn'd to him, and sent his Agent to Athens to pray
their Aid and Association in this War. For he had married from thence Eurydice
the Daughter of Miltiades, who was General of the Conquerors at the Battle of
Marathon; and therefore upon the account of this Marriage, and other acts of
kindness he was received into the Franchises of the City; many of the Athenians
readily hearkened to this motion, and not a few likewise of the other Grecians
willingly joined in this Expedition, hoping thereby to have the sharing of the
richest parts of all Africa with all the wealth of Carthage amongst themselves:
For the State of Affairs of Greece by season of the continual Wars, and
Quarrels of the Princes among themselves was but in a very weak and low
condition, therefore they concluded they should not only reap much advantage,
but be freed likewise from those pressing evils which at that time lay heavy
upon them.

Ophellas at length (when he had made plentiful provision of all things
necessary for the Expedition in hand) led forth his Army, having with him above
Ten thousand Foot, Ant. Chapter 306.
and Six hundred Horse, and a Hundred Chariots, and above Three hundred
Men-drivers and Soldiers to manage them, besides Extraordinaries and followers
of the Camp to the number o^ Ten thousand more; many of which drew their Wives
and Children with their stuff and Baggage along with them, so that they looked
like to a Colony going to be planted. Having therefore marched Eighteen days
journey, and in them gone About 360. (...). P. 754.
Three thousand Furlongs, they came to a City called Automolus, and there
Encamped; thence marching forward, they came to a mountain shelving down on
both sides with steep and sharp Rocks, having a deep Valley in the midst, out
of which rose a soft stone spiring up like unto a sharp Rock, at the Foot of
which was a wide Cave overshadow'd with Ivy and Leaves of the Yew tree, in
which is reported, Queen Lamia, a Lady of admirable Lamias Cave.
Beauty formerly dwelt; but for her Cruelty, they say her face was afterward
transformed into the shape of a Beast; for it is reported that All her Children
(they say) were killed by Juno because they were got by Jupiter.
being bereaved of all her Children, she took it so grievously, that she envied
all other women that had Children, and commanded the poor Infants to be plucked
out of their mothers Arms, and forthwith murdered. And therefore even to this
day the Tale of this woman is fresh among Children, and with the Name of Lamia
they are presently put into a very great fright. Moreover, being given much to
Drunkeness, she let every one do what they pleased, without any inquiry after
men's manners; and because she never seriously minded what was done in her
Province, it was believed that she was blind. And therefore there is a Ant. Chapter
306.
Fable told by some that she put her Eyes into a little purse, excusing her
drunken Sottishness by such an invented Tale, as if that was the reason she saw
nothing. That she was in Africa one brings in Euripides for a witness, for so
he says

(...)
(...)
To whom is that most hateful Name unknown?
Or of the African Lamia the spawn?
But Ophellas removing again. Traveled with great toil and labor through a dry
and thirsty Country full of wild Beasts; for they did not only want Water, but
Bread and other Provision, so that the whole Army was in danger to perish.
These Sandy Deserts near the Syrtes were pestered with noisome Serpents and all
sorts of hurtful beasts, and it being for the most part deadly to be bitten by
these venomous creatures, many were brought into a sad condition; out of the
reach both of friends help, and remedy from Medicines. For some of the Serpents
were of the same color with the Earth, so that none could see them before they
were hurt, so that many treading upon them were stung to death. At last after
two months miserable travel with much ado they carne to Agathocles his Camp,
where they pitched their Camps at a small distance one from another; on the
other hand the Carthaginians hearing that they were come up to him, were in a
great Consternation, seeing the great forces that were making against them.

Agathocles hearing of his approach, went to meet him, and advised him by all
means to have a care of his Army after so tedious and hard a Journey, and to
see them well refreshed. He himself lay quiet a few days, observing every thing
that was done in the neighboring Camp, at length taking his opportunity when
the greater part of Ophellas his Army were gone a forraging into the Country,
and taking notice that Ophellas never suspected any thing of what he was in
contriving, he suddenly called his Army together, and before them accused
Ophellas, for that being called for as an Assistant, in this War, he went about
Ant. Chapter 306
to betray him; and having incensed the multitude, drew out his whole Army in
Battalion against him and his Cyrenians. Ophellas growing amazed at this
unexpected alteration, put nevertheless himself and the men he had with him, in
a posture of defense: but the Enemy being too quick for him, and he too weak
for them, he was there slain upon the place. Agathocles persuaded the rest that
were left, to lay down their Arms; then telling them what great things he would
do for them, he got the whole Army to himself. And thus Ophellas by indulging
his Ambition, and being over credulous came to this fatal Catastrophe: In the
mean time Bomilcar at Carthage was waiting for an opportunity Bomilcar ^sp(...)
to b(...) (...) of C^rthage, (...), an is put to a(...). P. 755.
to put in execution what he had a long time been hammering in his brain in
order to gain the Sovereign power and authority. And although he had several
times fit occasions offered him for that purpose, yet always some light and
inconsiderable cause or other intervening, put a stop to his design. For some
superstitious persons many times are preparing to act great and remarkable
pieces of Wickedness, and yet always choose rather to delay, than act, to put
off, than execute the thing; which even then Ant. Chapter 306
came to pass. For concluding he had a fair opportunity offered him, the better
to effect his purpose, he sent away the most eminent Persons of the Citizens
that were about him, in an Expedition against the Numidians, that he might have
none of the Nobility at hand to oppose him; but then checked by his own Fears,
he durst not reveal to any his design of gaining the Principality, and so he
let the matter fall again. At length it fell out that he attempted to set up
himself at the very same time that Ophellas was cut off by Agathocles; and
neither of them knew what was done in one another's Camp. For Agathocles knew
nothing of the Ambition of the other, or of the Tumult and Disorder that was in
the City, which he might at that time have easily subdued: For if Bomilcar had
been surpised and taken in the very Fact, he would have chosen rather to have
joined with Agathocles, than to have given up himself to be punished by the
Citizens: Neither did the Carthaginians know any thing of Agathocles his
falling upon Ophellas; for they might easily have overcome him by joining with
Ophellas. But I suppose both sides were well enough content to be ignorant,
although they were things of great weight and concern, and contrived by them
that were near one to another.

For Agathocles being plotting to cut off a Person that was his Friend and
Associate, minded not to enquire after any thing that was in doing with the
Enemy: And Bomilcar on the other side, contriving how to overturn the Liberties
of his Country, cared not what was in agitation in Agathocles his Camp, whose
purpose was now not so much to conquer Ant. Chapter 306
an Enemy, as to subdue his own Fellow-Citizens. Matters being thus, here some
may find fault with History, seeing many things of diverse Natures falling out
at one and the same time, and that Writers are forced to break in with new
Matter of another nature, and to divide between things done at the same
instant, that the Truths related may delight the more. But to Answer this, the
History that is denied this liberty; although it afterward represents the
things done, yet it Postpones the true pleasure of the thing at too great a
distance from the first Relation.

Bomilcar therefore picking out a select number of Men in the Neopo(...).
New City (as it is called) not far distant from the Old Carthage, dismissed all
the rest; then having called togther Five hundred of the Citizens, who were
(...)(...)
privy to his Design, and about a Thousand Mercenary Soldiers, he declared
himself sole Monarch of the Carthaginians. Then he divided his Troops into Five
Bodies, and set upon the City, killing all that he met in the Highways; upon
which, an incredible Terror and Amazement possessed the whole City; At first, the
Carthaginians suspected that the Town was betrayed, and that the Enemy had
broke in by that means. But when the Truth was known, the young Men Marshalled
themselves, and made against the Tyrant; who hastened into the Forum, killing
all he met in the Streets, and slaughtering great numbers of naked and unarmed
Citizens. But Ant. Chapter 306.
the Carthaginians mounting the tops of the Houses that were round about (...)
Marketplace, cast down showers of Darts from thence, so that the Conspirators
(the place being altogether exposed to the Shot) were galled most grievously.
Whereupon in a (...) Body they forced their way through the narrow Passes, and
got into the New City, being plied and wounded with Darts and Arrows all along
as they came under the Houses. Then possessing themselves of a Hill, (the whole
City being now in Arms) the Carthaginians drew up their Camp in the face of the
Rebels. At length they sent some P. 756.
of the Ancientest and Gravest of their Citizens to them, and remitted what was
past, and so all things were peaceably composed. Toward all the rest indeed
they performed their Articles, and (because of the Cloud that hung over the
City,) passed by the Crimes committed; but without any regard had to their
Oaths, they most ignominiously tormented Bomilcar, and put him to death. And
thus the Carthaginians, when their Commonwealth was near upon the point of
expiring, recovered their Ancient Form of Government.

In the mean time Agathocles loaded all his Transport-Ships with Spoils, and
such of the Agathocles sends Spoils to Syracuse, most lost in a Storm.
Cyreneans as he found not fit and serviceable for the War, he put on board,
and sent them to Syracuse: But a fierce Tempest overtook them, in which some of
the Ships were lost, and others were cast upon the Pithecusian Islands
bordering upon Italy, so that very few arrived at Syracuse.

In Italy the Roman Consuls assisted the Marsilians (who were sorely pressed by
the Samnites,) Affairs of Italy.
and were Conquerors, killing great numbers of the Enemy upon the place. Then
they marched through the Country of the Umbri, and invaded Hetruria, then in
War with them, and took a Castle called Caprium by Storm. But the Inhabitants
sending their Ambassadors to Treat upon Terms of Peace, they made Peace with
the Tarquinians for Forty Years: But with the rest of the Hetrurians only for
one Year.

CHAP. III.
Demetrius frees all the Grecian Cities; takes the Pireum at Athens. Demetrius
Phalerius flies to Ptolemy. Honors given to Demetrius in Athens. He sails to
Cyprus; his Acts there; Besieges Salamis. His great Engines. Ptolemy sails to
Cyprus. Sea Fight between Ptolemy and Demetrius, wherein Ptolemy is routed.
Antigonus takes the Title of King, and the like do several other Captains.
Agathocles his Acts at Utica in Africa: Tied prisoners to a great Engine. The
sorts of People in Africa. Xenodocus routed in Sicily by Agathocles his
Captains. Agathocles his Acts in Sicily. What was done by Archagathus in
Africa. Maschala inhabited by some Greeks that came from Troy. Apes, their
Custom among the Pithecusce. The Carthaginians draw out Thirty thousand Men out
of Carthage Misfortunes to Agathocles his Captains in Africa. The Army blocked
up and almost starved: Agathocles beats the Carthaginians at Sea near Syracuse.
His Captain Leptines harasses the Agrigentines. Agathocles Feasts the
Syracusians. His jocund Temper. His Cruelty. Routed in Africa. Carthaginian
Camp burnt. The misfortune afterward to both Armies by one Cause. Agathocles in
Chains by his own Men. Steals out of Africa. The Soldiers kill his Two Sons.
They make Peace with the Carthaginians. Agathocles his exceeding Cruelty at
Aegista; and afterward at Syracuse.

AT the end of the Year, Anaxicrates was Created Chief Governor of Athens, and
Olymp. 118. 2. Ant. Chapter 305.
Appius Claudius, and Lucius Volutius Consuls at Rome. At this time Demetrius
the Son of Antigonus being furnished with Two strong Armies, one by Land, and
the other by Sea, and provided of Weapons and all other necessaries for the
War, set forth from Ephesus with full Orders and Instructions to set all the
Grecian Cities at liberty, and in the first place to free Athens, that was then
held by a Garrison of Cassander's. To this purpose he arrived at the Pireum with
his Fleet; and upon his first arrival caused the Edict to Demetrius set, all
the Cities in Greece free.
be proclaimed, and then assaulted the Pyreum on every side. But Dionysius the
Governor of the Fort, Mynichia, and Demetrius Phalerius, whom Cassander had
made President of the City, with a strong Body of Men beat off the Enemy from
the Walls; But some of Antigonus's Men forced their way near the Shore, and
scaled and got over the Walls; whereupon many within came in to them as their
Assistants, and in this manner was the Pyrcum taken. Dionysius the Governor
fled into Mynichia, and Demetrius Phalerius into the City. The next day he with
some others was sent by the City to Demetrius, and after he had treated with
him concerning the Liberty of the City, and his own preservation, Demetrius
Phalerius flies into Egypt.
he prevailed so far as to be dismissed with a safe Conduct, and so without any
further Care or Concern for Athens, he fled to Thebes, and thence to Ptolemy
into Egypt, And thus he who had Governed the City for the space of Ten Years,
was in this manner thrust out of his Country. The People of Athens being
hereupon restored to their Liberty, Ant. Chapter 305.
decreed public Honors to them that were the Authors of their Deliverance.
Demetrius forthwith brings up his Engines and Battering Rams, and Besieges
Munychia both P. 757.
by Sea and Land. But the Dionysians made a stout resistance, and by the
advantage and difficulty of the height of the places to be Assaulted, beat off
the Demetrians (for Munychia is not only strong by Nature, but by Art also,
defended by high Walls) though Demetrius indeed far exceeded the other in
number of Men, and Warlike preparations, At length, after the Assault had
continued for the space of Two Days together, many of those within being
wounded and killed by the Shot from the Engines, so as that there were not Men
enough left to defend the Place, the Garrison Soldiers began to Flag. In the
mean time the Demetrians who Assaulted by turns, and mutually relieved one
another with fresh Supplies, having cleared the Wall by their Shot, broke into
Munychia, and so forcing the Soldiers within to lay down their Arms, they took
the Governor prisoner. Having dispatched this Business in a few Days time,
Demetrius demolished Munychia, and entirely restored the People to their
Liberty, and entered with them into a League of Peace and Amity. Ant. Chapter 305.
The Athenians therefore made a Decree (which was written by Stratocles) that
Golden Statues of Antigonus and Demetrius should be set up and mounted upon a
Chariot, next to Harmodius and Two Brothers that killed the Tyrant Hyparchus in
Athens. Olymp. 66. Thucid. Hist. Honors of Demetrius in Athens.
Aristogiton; and that they should be both Adorned with Crowns of Gold of Two
hundred Talents weight apiece; and that an Altar should be erected in Honor of
them, called the Savior's Altar; And in further Honor to them, to the Ten
Tribes of Athens they added Two more, called the Antigonian and Demetrian. And
thus the People of Athens, after they had been stripped out of all their
Liberties by the Lamian War, after Fifteen Years were restored to their Ancient
Laws and Government. Magera was still under the curb of a Garrison; but
Demetrius likewise took this City, and restored the People to their former
Privileges; therefore he was highly Honored and richly presented by the
Inhabitants upon this Account. Moreover, when the Athenian Ambassador, who was
sent to Antigonus, presented to him the Decree, he understanding that they both
wanted Corn for necessary Provision, and Timber for building of Ships, sent
them a hundred and fifty Every Medimna. 18 Gallons
Medimna's of Wheat, and as much Timber as would build a hundred Ships. Then he
withdrew the Garrison out of Imbrus, and restored the City to the Inhabitants.
Afterward he writ to his Son Demetrius, and ordered him to call a Senate of
Members chosen out of all the Confederate Citys, in order to Consult concerning
what might be most conducing to the public Good of all Greece: And that he
himself with all speed should transport Forces into Cyprus, and there fight
Ptolemy's Captains. In Obedience to his Father's Commands, without any further
delay, he put over first into Caria, and moved the Rhodians to make War against
Ptolemy, who were slack Ant. Chapter 30^. Demetrius: Voyage into Cyprus.
and slow in the matter, willing rather to be Neuters, and keep in with all
sides; hence first grew the Heart-burnings between them and Antigonus. Thence
he sailed into Cilicia, and furnishing himself there with Shipping and Men, he
passed over into Cyprus with Fifteen thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse, and
a Fleet consisting of an Hundred and ten Ships of Three tire of Oars apiece, of
singular swiftness, and Fifty three not so swift as the other, but men of War
as they were; besides Transport Ships of all sorts, answer able to so great a
multitude of Men and Horses; Being landed, he first encamped near the Shore not
far from Carpasia, and drawing up his Ships to land, fenced them with a deep
Trench and Ramparts; and then he set upon the Cities next at hand, and took
Urania and Carpasia by Storm; and leaving a sufficient Guard to defend his
Trenches about the Fleet, he marched to Salamis.

Menelaus, appointed by Ptolemy chief Commander of the Isle, being then at
Salamis, Ptolemy's Brother.
and seeing the Enemy within forty Furlongs of the City, drew out of the
Garrisons adjoining, to the Number of Twelve thousand Foot, and Eight hundred
Horse, and went out to meet him; and fought a while; but not being able to
endure the Enemy's Charge, fled, and Demetrius pursuing him even to the Gates
of the City, took to the Number of Ant. Chapter 305.
Three thousand of his Men, and killed a Thousand upon the Place. The Prisoners
he P. 758.
Pardoned, and distributed them among his own Men: But finding they were ever
ready to fly over again to Menelaus, because their Wealth was in Ptolemy's
hands in Egypt, he Shipped them all away to Antigonus his Father.

Antigonus at that time was building a City in the Upper Syria near the River
Orontes, called by his own name Antigonia, laying out great Sums of Money upon
it, and taking in within the Walls seventy Furlongs of Ground. For the Place it
self was very opportune to lie as a Yoke both upon Babylon and the Upper
Provinces, and likewise upon the Lower, with the other Provinces, as far down
as to Egypt. But this City continued not long; for Seleucus razed it, and
transplanted the Inhabitants to another, built by himself, called Seleucia,
after his own Name. But we shall give an Account of these things when we come
to the Time proper for them.

But Menelaus, after he was thus routed in Cyprus, drew in all his Engines
within the Walls, and lined all the Bulwarks and Battlements with Soldiers, and
prepared for Fighting, observing at the same time that Demetrius was doing the
like. He dispatched likewise a Messenger to Ptolemy, to tell him what had
happened, and to desire more help, in regard the Affairs of Cyprus were in a
very low and dangerous Condition.

Demetrius seeing the City was in no contemptible Condition, and that it was
furnished with a great Number of Soldiers for its Defense, was resolved to
prepare Engines of an Extraordinary Bigness, and all sorts of Battering Rams,
and other Instruments of War, Demetrius his Engines.
that might in any sort terrify the Besieged. He sent likewise for Workmen out
of Asia, and for Iron, Timber, and every thing else that was necessary to be
made use of in the Ant. Chapter 305.
Works he designed. And now every thing being ready at hand, he built an
Engine, which he called Helepotis, from taking of Cities, Forty five Cubits
broad on every side, and Ninety in height, drawn with four strong Wheels, Eight
Cubits high; he made likewise two exceeding great Battering Rams, and Galleries
to support them. He put several great shot of Massy-Stones in the lowest Story
of the Helepolis, the greatest of which weighed three Talents; In the middle
were placed very great Machines to shoot Darts and Arrows; In the highest Part
were those that were less, and a great store of Stone-shot, and above Two
hundred Men, who knew the manner of managing all these Devices to the best
advantage.

Bringing up therefore his Engines to the Walls of the City, by showers of
shot, he there swept off the Turrets and Battlements; and battered down the
Walls by his Rams: But the Besieged made such obstinate Resistance, and
opposing Engines to Engines, that the Issue for some days was very doubtful,
and Toil, Labor, and Wounds were the mutual Lot and Portion of each Party. At
length the Wall tumbled down, and the City was even upon the Point of being
taken by Storm: But Night coming on, both sides drew off. Then Menelaus having
a diligent Eye for the Security of the City, lest it should be taken by some
fresh Stratagem, got a great deal of dry Stuff and Matter together, and cast it
in the Night from off the Walls upon the Engines, together with many light
Firebrands, Ant Chapter 305.
and burnt the Principal of them. Upon the mounting up of the Flame the
Demetrians came in to quench the Fire; but it was so quick and furious, that
the Engines were totally Consumed, and most of the Men that were in them.

However, Demetrius, though he was for the present disappointed in his Design,
yet desisted not in the least, but urged on the Siege still both by Sea and
Land, supposing that Time at last would Crown him with Victory.

But Ptolemy having received Intelligence how his Forces were routed, sets Sail
from Egypt, with an Army well furnished both for Sea Land; and arriving at
Paphos in Cyprus, Ptolemy falls to Cyprus. P. 759.
took Boats and went to Citium, Two hundred Furlongs from Salamis. His whole
Fleet consisted of an Hundred and forty Men of War.
Long Ships, the biggest whereof was of Five Tire of Oars, and the least of
Four; and these were attended with Two hundred Ships of Burden, carrying no
less than Ten thousand Soldiers. From thence Ptolemy dispatched away by Land,
some Messengers to Menelaus, to bid him with all speed to send him (if possibly
he could) those Ships that were then in the Port of Salamis, which were Sixty
Sail. For he was in hopes, that with this Addition, having made his Navy Two
hundred Sail, (if he should come to a Sea Fight) he should be Victorious. But
Demetrius foreseeing what might be in contriving, left part of his Army to
carry on the Siege, and Man's all his Vessels with the best of his Soldiers; and
places his Engines to shoot Stones, Arrows, Ant Chapter 3^^.
and Darts of three Spans in length, upon the Forecastles of his Ships. Then
with his Fleet, Top and Top-Gallant, ready prepared for Battle, he sailed about
to the City, and cast Anchor about a Dart's Cast from the Mouth of the Harbor,
and there lay all Night, both to prevent that Fleet in the Port from joining
with the other, and likewise waiting the coming up of the Enemy, being himself
then prepared to fight him.

On the other hand, Potlemy sets sail for Salamis; and in regard he had with
him in his Sea Fi^ht between Ptolemy and Demetrius.
Fleet a great Number of Tenders, his Navy seemed to be exceeding great:
Demetrius hearing of the Enemy's approach, left Antisthenes, the Admiral, with
Ten Ships of Five Tire of Oars, to keep in the Fleet that was in the Harbor.
And commanded the Horse to keep near the Seaside, to be ready to relieve those
that should swim to Land, in case any Misfortune should happen. He himself drew
up his Fleet in a Line of Battle, and made toward the Enemy, having not above
a Hundred and Eight Sail, with those taken in the Forts that were Deserted. The
greatest of which Ships were of Seven Tire of Oars, but the most of them were
of Five. In the Left Wing were Seven Phaenician Galleys of Seven Tire of Oars,
and Thirty Athenian Vessels of Four Tire of Oars, commanded by Medius as
Admiral. To support these, he drew up Ten Galleys of Six Tire of Ant. Chapter 305.
Oars, and as many of Five, conceiving it Prudence chiefly to guard that Wing
where he himself intended to Engage. In the middle Battle he placed the Least
Ships, under the Command of Themisus, the Samian, and Marsyas, the Writer of
the Affairs of Macedon. The Right Wing was commanded by Hegesippus of
Halicarnassus, and Pleisthias of Coos, who was Lord High Admiral of the whole
Fleet.

Ptolemy at the first, made with all the Sail he could in the Night time
toward Salamis, in hopes to enter the Port before the Enemy: But at break of
Day spying the Enemy's Fleet not far off ready Drawn-up, he likewise forthwith
prepared for Battle: And for this purpose ordered his Transport-Ships to lie
off at Sea, at a great distance, and drew up the rest in a Line: He himself
commanded in the Left Wing, where were the greatest of his Ships ready to
defend him. The Fleets being thus drawn up, both sides (according to ancient
Custom) called (by their Priests) upon their Gods, and the whole Army followed
the Noise and Cry of them that first began. But the Princes seeing now all
(both Lives and Fortunes) ready to be laid at Stake, were both in no small
concern. Demetrius now not a Quarter of a League distant from the Enemy, gave
the Sign of Battle which was before agreed upon, and that was the lifting up of
a Golden Target visible to the whole Fleet, one part after another. Ptolemy
doing the same, presently the Fleets joined, and the Trumpets sounded a Charge,
and both Armies setting up a great shout, to it they went in a dreadful and
terrible Manner. At first they made use of Bows, and P. 760.
Engines to shoot Arrows, Stones, and Darts, by which many on both sides were
grievously Ant. Chapter 305.
galled and wounded.

When the Ships came side to side, and fell foul with great Violence one upon
another; those upon the Decks fell to it with their Lances and Spears, and the
Rowers (encouraged by them that called out to them) plied their Oars with
extraordinary eagerness. And now the Vessels, with the Fierceness and Violence
of the Charge, were so pressed upon each side, that some brushed off the Oars
one of another, so that they could neither Fly nor Pursue; and by this means
disabled the Soldiers on board from making a vigorous Defense, by putting a
Check to the Force wherewith they might otherwise have born down upon their
Enemy; others so forced with the Beaks of their Ships upon one another's Poops,
that they (...)
Rowed a-Stern from time to time to repeat their strokes. In the mean time,
they upon the Hatches mutually wounded one another, every one having his Mark
near and plain before him. Some of the Captains of the Vessels struck the
Broad-sides of their Adversaries Ships with that Violence, that the Beaks stuck
fast in them, whereupon they boarded the Enemy's Ships, giving and receiving
Wounds and Blows on either side: Some catching hold upon the sides of Ships,
when they missed Footing, in their attempts to board the other, tumbled
Headlong into the Sea, and were forthwith run through with the Lances of them that
were next at hand Some who prevailed in the boarding of their Enemy, killed
some upon their first Entrance, and drove all the rest in rucks one upon
another, and flung them overboard. In fine, various and sudden were the Turns
and Changes of Fortune in this Battle; while they that were worsted now, were
presently Ant. Chapter 305.
after Conquerors by the height of their Ships over-topping their Adversaries;
and then the Conquerors again brought into Streights, by being driven into ill
Stations, and by other unaccountable Accidents, which frequently happen in
these Cases. For in Land-Fights Valor apparently carries the Day, when no
unusual Misfortune intervenes: But in Sea Fights there are many and various
Accidents often fall out, which sometimes on a sudden ruin them, whose Valor
otherwise would certainly and most justly have brought them off Victorious. Of
all the rest, Demetrius placing himself upon the Stern of his Gally of Seven
Tire of Oars, behaved himself with most Gallantry: For when he was surrounded
with Throngs of Enemies on every side, he so bestirred himself, that he strewn
the Decks with them; some by Darts at a Distance, and others by his Lance Hand
to Hand: Showers of Darts and other Weapons it is true were cast at him, but
some he nimbly declined, and others he received on his Target and other
defensive Arms that he then wore. In this Conflict there were Three that stuck
close to him as his Assistants, whereof one was run through and Slain with a
Lance, and the other two were both wounded. But at length, Demetrius repulsed
his Enemies, and put the Right Wing to a total Rout, and forthwith those that
were next to them.

On the other hand, Ptolemy who had with him the greatest Ships, and the best
Soldiers, easily broke that Party that opposed him, and put them to flight,
sinking some of Ant. Chapter 305.
their Ships, and taking others with the Men in them, and then returning from
the Pursuit, thought to have done the like with the rest: But when he came, he
found his Left Wing totally routed by Demetrius, and him in hot pursuit of
them; upon which he made back to Citium. But Demetrius now being Conqueror,
committed his Men of War to Neon and Burichus, with Orders to pursue the Enemy,
and to take up such as they found Swimming for their Lives. He himself with his
own Ships richly adorned, and those that were taken of the Enemies, towed along
after small Skiffs, returned to his own Camp and Port whence he set out.

Mean while, about the very time of the Fight at Sea, Menelaus, Governor of
Salamis, sent out to the Aid of Ptolemy the Sixty Ships completely Manned and
Armed, under the Command of Menetius, who Engaging with those Ships in the
Mouth of the Harbor, P. 671.
that were set to keep him in, Charged through them; whereupon they fled for
Safety to the Army that was at Land. But when the Menetians were in open Sea,
and perceived that they came too late, they returned back to Salamis. This
being the Issue of this Fight there were taken above a Hundred Transport Ships,
wherein there were almost Eight Thousand Soldiers: Of Ships of War he took
Forty, with the Men in them, and of those that were bilg'd in the Fight, about
Fourscore; which being almost full of Water in the Hold, they hawl'd to Land
under the Camp near the City. Demetrius had Twenty of his own Ships much
damnify'd in this Fight, which yet being Refitted and Rigged up again, proved
Serviceable as before.

Afterward, Ptolemy seeing no good to be done in Cyprus, returned in Egypt.
But Demetrius having taken in all the Towns and Cities of the Island,
distributed the Garrison Soldiers among his own Companies, to the Number of
Sixteen thousand Foot, and Six hundred Horse: And put Messengers on board the
Greatest Ship in the Fleet, and Ant. Chapter 305.
sent them to his Father, with an Account of the Victory he had gained.

As soon as Antigonus received the News, he was so transported with the
greatness of the Victory, as that he put a Diadem upon his Head, and from that
time assumed the Style and Title of a King, and allowed Demetrius to do the
same. And Ptolemy also, not Antigonus takes the Title of a King.
at all willing to hang the Head at his late ill Success, took the Crown and
Title of a King to himself likewise, and in all his Letters from that time
forward wrote himself King: And by their Example, other Governors of Provinces,
as Seleucus, who had lately subdued the Upper Provinces; and Lysimachus and
Cassander, who held the Provinces first allotted them, all proclaimed
themselves Kings.

Having now spoken sufficient concerning these Affairs, we shall proceed to
give a distinct Account of things further done in Africa and Sicily.

Agathocles, when he heard that the Governors of the Provinces beforementioned
had taken upon them the Dignity of Crowned Heads, judging himself no way
inferior to them, either as to the Strength and Power of their Arms, Largeness
of his Dominions, or Memorable Actions, took upon him likewise the Name and
Title of a King: But yet did not think fit to wear a Diadem: For from the very
time of his first aspiring to the Principality he wore a Crown after the manner
of a Priest, which he never laid aside all the time he was in Contest for the
Tyranny.

Some say, that he always wore this, because he wanted Hair. And now he made it
his business to do something worthy of the honorable Title he had assumed, and
therefore he led his Army against the Rebellious Uticans, and surprising them
on the sudden Ant. Chapter 305. Utica.
took Three hundred of them as they were abroad in the Fields. At the first he
pardoned them; and required the Surrender of the City: But those within
refusing so to do; he built an Engine, and hanged up all the Prisoners upon it,
living as they were, and so brought it up to the Walls. The Uticans, though
they pitied the miserable Creatures, yet they valued more their Common Liberty,
and therefore lined the Walls, and resolved to abide a Siege. Whereupon,
Agathocles furnished his Engine with shot, Slingers and Darters; and plying
them with shot from his Machine, began the Siege, and so terrified them, that
he even cauteriz'd the Spirits of the Besieged. Those that were upon the Walls
at first, scrupled to use their Darts and Arrows, having their own Citizens
placed before them as their Marks, amongst whom were some of the Chief
Nobility: But the Enemy still pressing on with more violence, they were forced
to endeavor to beat off them, that were placed in the Engine: And here it
happened that the Uticans fell into a sudden and unexpected misfortune through
an inevitable necessity. For the Greeks exposing the Prisoners they took abroad
in the Fields, to be Marks to their own fellow Citizens, they were constrained
either to fall into the Enemies hands, by sparing their Townsmen, or
unmercifully to kill a great number of miserable Creatures in defending of the
City; as in truth it happened. For while they repulsed the Enemy with all sorts
P. 762. Ant. Chapter 305.
of Darts and Arrows, and other Weapons, the same time as they wounded and
galled them that managed the Engine, at the same time they wounded the Citizens
that hung at it, shooting some through, and fastening others with their Darts
and Arrows as with Nails, to that part of the Machine toward which the Body
happened to move, so that their Ignominy and Misfortune resembled that of the
Cross. And thus some suffered (as Fortune ordered it) by the hands of their
near Relations and Friends; Extremity and Necessity not allowing any
Consideration of natural Relation.

Agathocles perceiving the Townsmen to defy all danger, and throw off all
Regard and Affection to their Countrymen, begirt the City round, and made a
violent Assault upon a part of the Wall where it was weakest, and there broke
through into the City; upon which, some fled into their Houses, and others into
the Temples: Agathocles being enraged, filled all places with Blood and
Slaughter: Some were killed in heat of Fight, others that were taken prisoners
were hanged up afterward; and those that fled to the Temples and Altars were
altogether frustrated of their hopes. After he had rifl'd and plundered the
Town, he left a Garrison in it, and marched to the Citadel called the
Horse-Castle, naturally defended by a Lough adjoining to it: But he took it by
Storm after a close Siege, and a sharp Fight with the Inhabitants upon the
Water with his Galleys. Thus having subu'd the Cities, he brought most of the
Sea Coasts, and those that inhabited Ant. Chapter 305.
in the heart of the Country, under his own Power; except the Numidians, part
of whom made Peace with him, and the rest were in continual expectation to
fight it out to the last.

Africa was at that time divided into four sorts of Inhabitants, That is to
say, The Poeni, Sorts of People in Africa
who inhabited Carthage. The Libyan Poeni who had many Cities upon the Tracts
lying to the Sea Shore; who being conjoined in Affinity by Marriages with the
Carthaginians, were called by this Name that imported the Denomination of both
People. The most Ancient Inhabitants, and most numerous of all the rest were
called Africans, who hated the Carthaginians to the death, by reason of the
severity of their Government. The last are the Numidians, who hold a vast Tract
of Lybia as far as to the very Deserts.

But Agathocles, though he was now, by the help of his Confederates, and the
Valor of his own Army, Conqueror over the Carthaginians, yet being much
concerned for the Affairs of Sicily, he built some open Vessels, and Skiffs,
rowed with Fifty Oars apiece, and put on board Two thousand Soldiers, and
loosed from Africa with his whole Fleet toward Sicily, leaving his Son
Archagathus Chief Commander and Governor of Lybia.

While these things were acting Xenodocus General of the Agrigentines having
freed Xenodocus routed in Sicily. Ant. Chapter 305.
many of the Cities, and raised the hopes of the Sicilians that they should all
be restored to their Ancient Liberties throughout the whole Island, led out his
Forces against Agathocles his Captains, having with him above Ten thousand
Foot, and almost a Thousand Horse. Leptines and Demophilus on the other hand,
having got together as great an Army as possibly they could out of Syracuse,
and the neighboring Garrisons, encamped against him with Eight thousand and
Two hundred Foot, and Twelve hundred Horse. At length there was a sharp
Engagement between the two Armies, in which Xenodocus was routed, and lost
Fifteen hundred of his Men, and was forced to fly to Agrigentum. The
Agrigentines weakened by this loss, left off their Honorable Design, and
frustrated the hopes wherewith they had filled the Hearts of the Confederates.
Presently after the Battle, Agathocles landed at Selinunt in Sicily, and
shortly forced the Heracleots, who had regained their Liberty, to stoop again
to his Government: Thence marching into another part of the Island he brought
under the Thermites, (whose City was held by a Carthaginian Garrison) and
received Hostages of them. Then he took Cephaloedium, and made Leptines P. 763.
Governor. Then marching up into the heart of the Country, he attempted to have
entered Centorippa in the night by the help of a Faction he had in the City:
But the Treachery being discovered the Garrison Soldiers fell in upon him and
drove him out of the Town, with the loss of above Five hundred of his Men.
After this, some of the Apolloniats sent to him, and promised to deliver up
their City; whereupon he forthwith made thither. But the Traitors being
apprehended and punished, he made nothing of it the Ant. Chapter 305.
first Day; but the next, after many hardships, and the loss of many of his
Men, he at length with much ado gained the place; and putting multitudes of the
Apelloniats to the Sword, he gave the Town up to the plunder of his Soldiers.
While Agathocles was thus employed, Dinocrates the Captain of the Exiles
revived the prosecution of the former design of the Agrigentines, and declared
himself Protector of the Common Liberty, and got together great numbers who
came flocking in to him from all parts. Some out of a natural love of Liberty,
and others out of fear of Agathocles, were at his Devotion. Having Agathocles
(...) in Sicily.
therefore now an Army of Twenty thousand Foot, and Fifteen hundred Horse (who
were all accustomed to the hadships and toils of Exiles) he took the Field, and
dared Agathocles to a Battle. But Agathocles being much inferior in number,
made a running Fight of it; but Dinocrates still pressing close at his heels,
often gained several advantages without D(...). Archagathus in Africa.
without any difficulty. From this time forward things began to go backwards
with Agathocles, not only in Sicily, but also in Africa. For Archagathus left
General there, after his Father was gone, sent a part of the Army into the
Upper Countries under the Command of Eumachus, and at first was successful; for
Eumachus took the great City Tocas, and subdued many of the neighboring
Numidians. Then he took another Town Ant. Chapter 305.
called Phellina, and subdued the bordering Inhabitants called Asphodelodians,
who are as black as the Aethiopians. He gained likewise Maschala, an exceeding
large City, anciently inhabited by the Greeks, that planted there in their
return from Troy, as we have before related in the Third Book. Afterward he
brought under the Citadel called the Troy.
Horse-Castle, formerly taken by Agathocles: The last Town he gained was Acris,
a Free City, the Plunder of which he gave to his Soldiers, and sold the
Inhabitants for Slaves; and so laden with spoil returned to Archagathus to the
Camp.

His Name being now up for a brave and valiant Man, he undertook another
Expedition into the Higher Africa; and passing by the places he had before
lately taken, he inconsiderately broke into the City called Mittines: But the
Barbarians coming upon him in a full Body in the Streets, they so far
prevailed, that unexpectedly they drove him out of the Town again, with the
loss of a great number of his Men. Thence he marched away over an high
Mountain, Two hundred Furlongs in length, full of Wild Cats; there no kind of
Birds bred, either in Trees, Holes, or elsewhere, because of the greedy nature
of these Beasts. Having passed over these Mountains, he entered into a Country
abounding with Apes, and came to Three Cities in the Greek Language called
Pithecusae. i. e. The Cities of Apes. P. 764. Ant. Chapter 305. Apes.
Pithecusae: But their Customs are far different from ours; for these Apes are
as familiar in the Houses as the Inhabitants themselves, and are worshipped as
Gods, as the Egyptians do Dogs. These Creatures come and take Meat out of the
Cellars and Butteries, when ever they are hungry, without any disturbance; and
Parents use to name their Children after these Apes, as we do after the Gods;
whoever kills any of them he is sure to die as a notorious Atheist: And
therefore it is a common Proverb amongst some of * See Erasmus Adag. (Simiae
Sanguinem profudisse. p. 492 referring to this place. Where this Proverb is
applied to those that die a violent death. The Carthaginians draw out Thirty
thousand Men out of Carthage.
them, If a Man carry himself haughtily and proudly, to say, Thou have drunk
the Blood of an Ape. Eumachus took one of these Cities by Storm, and razed it
to the ground; the other two submitted: But receiving Intelligence that the
bordering Barbarians were coming against him with a great Army, he hasted away
as fast as he could toward the Sea Coasts.

To this very time all things succeeded in Lybia according to Archagathus his
hearts desire. But afterward the Senate of Carthage upon more mature
deliberation ordered their Forces to be divided into Three Bodies, and to march
out of the City, one to the Towns upon the Sea Coasts, another into the heart
of the Country, and the third into the upper Africa. For by this means they
supposed they should free the City both from the Siege and the inconveniences
through scarcity of Provision at one and the same time. For being that all had
flockt to Carthage from every place round, the City was in very great want,
having now spent and eaten up all their Provision, so that they had nothing
left to subsist upon; they knew likewise that there was no danger that the City
should Ant. Chapter 305.
be taken by force, because it lay so close to the Sea, and was so well guarded
by the strength of the Walls, so that it was then even unaccessible: besides,
they concluded that if they had considerable Armies in the Field ready to
assist their Confederats upon occasion they would remain firm and constant in
their Alliance. And that which was of more weight than all the rest, they hoped
that by this means the Enemy would be forced to divide their Forces, and be
gone to other places far distant from Carthage. All which good Council was
afterward crowned with success in all these particulars. For sending Thirty
thousand Soldiers out of the City, there was not only Provision sufficient for
the Merchants that were left, but a glut and overplus more than they had
occasion to use; and those Consederats who before out of fear were forced to
join with the Enemy, now recollecting themselves, returned to them as their old
friends and Allies. Hereupon Archagathus perceiving that the Carthaginians
Armies were now in every corner of Africa, divided likewise his Army; part of
which he sent to the Sea Coasts, half of the rest he delivered to Eschrion, and
the other half he led himself, leaving a sufficient Garrison at Tunis. While
great Armies were thus marching to and fro all over the Country, and every one
expecting a sudden Revolution at hand, all were in a fear and amazment in
expectation of what would be the Event. Ant. Chapter 305.


Hanno who commanded that part of the Forces that marched up into the heart of
the Country, laid an Ambuscado for Eschrion, and surprising him on the sudden,
cut off above Four thousand of his Foot and Two hundred of his Horse, amongst
whom was the Eschrion b^aten by the Carthaginians. About 60 miles Eumachus
Eaten by the Carthaginians
General himself. Of the rest part of them were taken Prisoners, and the
remainder escaped to Archagathus who was Five hundred Furlongs from the place.
Imilcon General in the Higher Africa first possessed himself of a City near to
Eumachus, whose Army was over-loaden with spoils taken out of several Cities.
But the Grecians notwithstanding drew up in Battalia, and offered the
Carthaginian General Battle; whereupon he left a part of the Army ready drawn
up in the Town, with this Order, that as soon as they saw him fly, they should
sally out upon the pursuers. Marching therefore out with half of the Army, he
engaged the Enemy almost close under their Camp, and presently fled as if he
had been in a great fright; whereupon Eumachus his men, proud of their Victory,
pursued them in disorder, and in that confusion followed them close at the
heels; and presently on a sudden issued out from another part of the City, the
Body before drawn up in the P. 765.
Town, and at one word of Command set up a great shout, which struck the
pursuers in amaze and astonishment; and being the Barbarians fell upon the
other that were in Ant. Chapter 305.
disorder, and surprised beside, the Grecians presently fled: but the Enemy
having blockt up the passage to their Camp, the Eumachians were forced to turn
aside to the next Hill, where they wanted Water; which being set round by the
Carthaginians, they almost all there perished, some by Thirst and others by the
Sword; for of Eight thousand Foot, Thirty only escaped, and of Eight hundred
Horse only Forty.

Archagathus therefore being thus distressed, left Tunis, and recalled the rest
of the Soldiers Archagathus and his Army near (...).
(he had sent abroad) from all parts; and sent Messengers into Sicily to give
an account to his Father of what had happened, and to entreat him to hasten
over with assistance with all speed. Besides these misfortunes other
inconveniences and mischiefs overtook the Grecians; for all their Confederates
(except a very few) forsook them: And all their Enemies joined together, and
Incampt just in their teeth and were ready to swallow them up. For Imilco had
blockt up all the Passes and secured the Country from all inroads of the Enemy
for a Hundred Furlongs distant; and on the other side Atarbas had placed his
Camp Forty Furlongs from Tunis; so that the Greeks hemmed in both by Sea and
Land were near starved for want of Provision; and nothing but Terror and
Amazment filled every place. While they were in this sad and dreadful
condition, Agathocles receiving Ant. Chapter 305
intelligence of the destruction of his Men in Africa, had prepared Seventeen
Men of War for the assistance of Archagathus. But his Affairs in Sicily growing
every day worse and worse, and the Number of the Exiles with Dinocrates
increasing more and more, he left the managment of the War in the Island to
Leptines and his Captains; and he himself having Manned his Ships, waited only
for an opportunity how to get out, for that Thirty Carthaginian Ships lay in
the mouth of the Harbour-But at a time after when Eighteen Ships came in to his
assistance from Hetruria, who had passed by the Carthaginians in the night into
the Harbor, he took that occasion, and by a stratagem deluded the Enemy; for
he charged part of his Fleet to lie still for some time, while he by making out
of the Port should draw off the Carthaginians to pursue him. But therefore he
goes with seventeen Sail with all the wind he could make, whom the Enemies
Fleet forthwith pursued: But Agathocles as soon as he saw that the Hetrurians
were got out of the Harbor, presently Tackt about and fell upon the
Barbarians; upon which the Agathocles his Victory at Sea.
Carthaginians surpised with the unexpectedness of the thing, and now
surrounded with their Enemies Galleys, in a great terror made away and sled;
the Grecians then took Five of their Ships together with the Men in them; and
the Carthaginian Admiral (seeing the Ship he was in was upon the point of being
taken) killed himself, preferring death Ant. Chapter 305.
before Captivity, which then (as he thought) was just at hand. But he took no
right measures at that time; for the Ship Thy the help of a happy Gale of Wind
got off with the loss of the little Trinket Sail. hus Agathocles who never in
the least hoped to overcome the Carthaginians at Sea, unexpectedly beat them in
a Sea fight, and being thenceforth Master of the Port, he secured the Passage
for the benefit of the Merchants; so that the Syracusians having Provision
brought in from all parts, instead of their former P. ^66.
scarcity of every thing necessary, presently abounded in the plenty of all
things.

Agathocles lifted up with this success, sent Leptimes away to spoll and
harrass the Enemies Countries, and especially the Agrigentines: For Xenodocus
was in disgrace amongst his fellow Citizens, and blackened by his Adversaries
upon the account of his late overthrow, so that he was troubled with Mutinies
and Seditions: Therefore he commanded Leptines to make it his business to draw
him out to fight, if he could possibly; for that it was a very easy thing to
vanquish an Army that was in Divisions and Mutinies among themselves, and that
had been beaten but a little before; which afterward happened accordingly. For
Leptines making an inroad into the Territories of the Agrigentines harrass'd
and spoiled all before them: Xenodocus looking upon himself too weak, lay quiet
and still at first; but Leptines Routs the Agrigentines. Ant. Chapter 305.
being called a Coward by the Citizens, he marched out with an Army near as
many as the Enemy, but far inferior to them for Courage and Resolution; because
the Citizens had lived altogether in ease and idleness, and the other had been
used to lie in the open field, and continually inured to all manner of
hardships. A Battle therefore being fought between them, those with Leptines
presently put the Agrigentines to flight, and pursued them even to the Walls of
Agrigentum: There were killed of those thus Routed about Five hundred Foot and
Fifty Horse. The Agrigentines being grievously incensed with these losses one
after another, summoned Xenodocus to his Trial, as the occasion of Two
Overthrows and slaughters of the Citizens; who fearing the severity of the
Sentence he was like to fall under, fled to Gela.

Agathocles having conquered his Enemies both at Sea and Land in a few days
time, Agathocles Feasts.
sacrificed to the Gods and entertained his friends with sumptuous Feasts, and
Royal Banquettings. In the time of his feasting and quaffing he laid aside all
his Ensigns of Royalty, and Majesty, and appeared as one of the meanest among
them; and this he did in the first place to gain upon the good will of the
People, which he sought thus to purchase: And in the second, that by giving
every Man free liberty in their Cups to say what they pleased of him, he might
the better learn how every one stood affected toward him. For by the force of
Wine Truth often appears from behind the Hanging. He was naturally of a jocund
and jesting Temper, and would not sometimes lose his Jest Ant. Chapter 305.
even in public Assemblies, but would jeer the very Senators, and mock some of
them by his Apish imitations, in so much as he would often set the People a
laughing, as if they had seen some Jugler or Stageplaier. For he would go alone
to the public His jocund Temper.
Assemblies, attended only by the common People, much differing from the
practice of Dionysius the Tyrant; for he was so fearful of every body, that he
would let the Hair of his Head and Beard grow to excess, that the principal
parts of his Body might not be at the mercy of a Razor: And when ever he wanted
shaving, or polling, he burnt off the Hair; every one may hereby see, that the
only guard for Tyranny is Diffidence. Moreover, at this time of Revelling
Agathocles took up a great Golden Bowl, and vaunted that he never left off the
Potters Trade, before he had made Cups and Bowls exactly of that shape. For he
did not deny, but rather glory in his Trade, as a Foil that set off with more
luster that high state and dignity to which his own Valor had advanced him
from a mean and contemptible Calling.

Once when he besieged one of the Considerable Cities, the Soldiers from the
Walls called out to him, O (...)
Potter! (...) Ant. Chapter 305.
Sweep-Chimney! When will thou pay thy Soldiers? To whom he answered, When I
have taken and razed this Place.

When he had found out by the Craft of his carousing and festival Jollity who
were his Enemies, he invited them another time by themselves, together with
Five hundred other His Cruelty.
Syracusians, who were Men of brave and undaunted Spirits; and when they were
together, he surrounded them with his mercenary Soldiers, and murdered them
every Man: For he was terribly afraid, lest when he was gone into Africa, they
should recall Dinocrates and the Refugees, and abrogate his Government.

Having thus settled Affairs, in order to the establishing himself in the
Principality, he P. 767.
looses from Syracuse: When he landed in Africa, he found there in the Camp
nothing but Want and Desperation; therefore judging it most for his Advantage
to fight, he made it his Business to encourage the Soldiers to engage the
Enemy, and thereupon draws them ail out in Battalia, and offers the Barbarians
Battle. The remainder of the Foot then with him were at the most not above Six
thousand Grecians, and as many Celts, Samnites, and Hetrurians, and almost Ten
thousand Africans of those that stayed with him: These Africans are a
treacherous sort of Men, ever upon any Occasion running over from one Party to
another. Besides these, there were with him Fifteen hundred Horse, and above
Six thousand African Carriages: But the Carthaginians though they had the
Advantage of a high Ground, and of difficult access, yet they were not willing
to venture all at once with Men that were desperate, but by lying still in
their Camp (where they had plenty of Provision) and by protracting of Time,
they hoped to starve the Enemy, and so be Masters of their Camp without
fighting.

Agathocles therefore not being able to draw the Enemy forth to a Battle in the
open Field, and being necessitated by his present Circumstances to attempt
something, and Ant. Chapter 305.
enter upon some desperate Action, marches up with his whole Army close to the
Enemy's Camp: Thereupon the Carthaginians make out against him; and though they
had the advantage of Ground, and far exceeded him in number of Men, yet
Agathocles (pressed hard on every side) for some time resolutely bore up against
them: But his Mercenaries Agathocles routed in Africa.
and some others at length giving Ground, he was forced to retreat to his Camp.
The Barbarians pursued them close; but to gain the Good Will and Favor of the
Africans, they past by them without doing any execution: But the Greeks (whom
they knew by their Arms) they killed all along till they had driven the rest
into their Camp. There were slain of Agathocles his Men at that time Three
thousand.

The next night a sudden and unexpected Disaster fell upon both the Armies: For
the Carthaginians, when they were sacrificing the most eminent and considerable
Persons among their Prisoners, in Gratitude to their Gods for the Victory they
had gained, the Flame rising high that enwrapt the Bodies of the sacrificed
Captives, a fierce Wind on a Carthaginian Camp burns.
sudden carried the Flame to the Sacred Tabernacle near the Altar, where it
caught and burnt it down to the Ground; thence it proceeded to the General's
Pavilion, and the Officers Tents next adjoining: Upon which arose a mighty
Consternation, and Astonishment filled the whole Camp, while some endeavoring
to quench the Fire, others striving to carry away Arms and rich Furniture, were
consumed by the Flames. The Ant. Chapter 305
Tents were made of Reeds and Straw; and therefore the Fire (through the height
of the Wind) raged the more; so that that by its quickness, it prevented all
help and assistance that the Soldiers could any ways contribute. The whole Camp
being presently in a Flame, many in strait and narrow Passes were intercepted
by the Fire, and burnt to death. And thus they presently paid for their Cruelty
to the Captives, suffering the like Punishment as a Retaliation of their
Impiety. And others who tumultuously with woeful Cries got out of the Camp, were
pursued with another and greater Misfortune: For those Africans that were in
Agathocles his Army, to the number of Five thousand, deserted the Grecians, and
were flying to the Barbarians. When those that went out to scout, saw Their
farther Misfortune
those Deserters make toward the Carthaginians Camp, thinking the whole
Grecian Army were at hand ready to fall upon them, they forthwith gave
Intelligence to their own Party, that the Enemy's whole Army approached: Which
being noised abroad, Confusion and Dread of the Enemy's being just in the midst
of them, ran through the whole Camp: Whereupon every one placed his own Safety
in the Swiftness of his Heels; and P. 768.
in regard no Word of Command was given by any of the Officers, nor any Order
kept among the Soldiers, the Run-aways fell down one upon another; and some of
them through the Darkness of the Night, and others out of excess of Fear, fell
a fighting with their own Men, not knowing who they were. The Mistake still
continuing and increasing, Ant. Chapter 305.
a great Slaughter was made; and some were killed hand to hand, and others
running away with the loss of their Arms, in the height of a surprising Fear,
in their have, fell down steep and craggy Rocks, and were broken in pieces;
about Five thousand of them being destroyed, the rest at length got to
Carthage. The Citizens within the Town (deceived by the Report of their own
Men,) believed they were routed, and that the greatest part of the Army was cut
off; in this fright they opened the Gates, and received them with great Terror
and Amazement into the Town, fearing lest the Enemy should likewise break in at
the Heels of them. And though when it was full Day, they came to understand the
Truth of the matter, yet they could scarce allay the Fears they had been in, as
if the Evils were still even at their Doors.

About the same time, (through a vain Fear and foolish Imagination) Agathocles
fell into a Misfortune something of the same kind For the African Deserters,
after the burning of the Carthaginian Camp, and the Hurly-burly and Uproar that
followed thereupon, Misfortune to Agathocles his Camp.
durst not march forward, but made their way back to the place from whence they
came; whom some of the Greeks espying to make toward them, they took them to
be the Carthaginian Army, and thereupon gave Intelligence to Agathocles, that
the Ant. Chapter 305.
Enemy was near at hand. Upon which, by the King's Order, they cried out, Arms!
Arms! and forthwith the Soldiers came pouring out in great Tumult and Confusion
out of the Camp: And besides all this, when they saw the Flame in the Enemy's
Camp to mount up into the Air, and heard the Shouts and Cries of the
Carthaginians, they were the more confirmed in their Opinion, that the
Barbarians were making toward them with their whole Army.

But Excess of Fear leaving no room for due and serious Consideration, Horror
and Amazement filled the whole Camp, and all of them took to their Heels: And
the Africans being presently mixed among them, (the Night causing the Mistake)
every one opposed him that he met, as an Enemy, and being all the Night long
dispersed here and there, and wandering up and down in a Panick Fear, there
perished of them above Four thousand: The rest (with much ado at length coming
to understand the Mistake) returned safe to their Camp. And in this manner both
Armies deceived by the Vanity of War, (as the common Proverb is) fell into
miserable Disasters. After which Missortune, being now deserted by the
Africans, and having not sufficient Forces lest to contend with the
Carthaginians, he resolved to leave Africa: But he thought it impossible to
transport the Soldiers with him, because he both wanted Shipping, and heard
that the Carthaginians were Masters at Sea, and lay to intercept his Passage:
And he concluded, the Barbarians (whose Forces far exceeded his) would never
make Peace with him; but rather cut off every Man of them that first set
footing upon Africa, to deterr all others for the future from the like Attempt.
He determined therefore to slip away privately Ant. Chapter 305.
with a few, and take along with him his younger Son Heraclides; for he feared
lest his Son Archagathus, being a daring Man, and one that had been too
familiar with his Stepmother, would plot something against his Life: But
Archagathus smelling out his Design, resolved to discover the Matter to those
Captains and Officers as should be able to defeat him in his Contivance, and to
that purpose strictly observed his Motions: For he looked upon it as a base and
unworthy Thing, that he who had undergone a good part of the Toils and Hazards
of the War for the sake of his Father and Brother, should be now left alone as
a Prey to the Enemy, without all Hopes of Deliverance. He informed therefore
some of the Captains and most considerable Officers of the intended Departure
of Agathocles and his Companions the next night: Whereupon all the Body
forthwith made up to him, P. 769.
and not on^y put a stop to his Voyage, but acquainted the common Soldiers how
the Plot was laid; who being both grieved and enraged together, laid hold on
him and bound him, and so committed him to custody. An Anarchy following
hereupon, there was nothing Agathocles in Bonds by his own Men.
but Tumult and Confusion throughout all the Camp: And when Night came on, a
Rumor was spread over the Camp, that the Enemy was just falling in amongst
them: Upon which, all were so possessed with a Panick Fear, that having none to
Command them, every one was preparing to get away; at which very time, they
that had the Custody of the Prince, (in as great a Consternation as the rest,)
thought that some or Ant. Chapter 305.
other called them forth; who thereupon came out with Agathocles in his Chains
along with them; at which fight, the whole Army were so affected with Pity and
Compassion, that they cried out, Unloose him, let him go.

Being freed from his Chains, he presently after with a small Attendance stole
away, He steals out of Africa.
and took Shipping about At the setting of the Pleiades or Seven Stars.
the beginning of October, in the Night in Wintertime, and away he got. And
thus to preserve himself, forsook his Children; whom the Soldiers presently,
upon the News of their Father's Flight, knocked on the Head; and then chose
Captains from among themselves, and made Peace with the Carthaginians upon
these His 2 Sons killed by the Soldiers.
Conditions, viz. That the Greeks should receive Three hundred Talents, and
should restore all the Towns they then held, and that all that would, might
take up Arms Peace made with the Carthaginians.
with the Carthaginians, and receive the usual Pay. That the rest should be
transported to Sicily, and should have Selinunt for their Habitation. The
greatest part of the Soldiers, who were faithful to what they had agreed, had
all as faithfully performed to them: But those Cities and Towns that held out
in Hopes and Expectations of Relief from Agathocles, were all taken by force of
Arms; whose several Governors the Carthaginians crucified, and the rest they
bound in Chains, and employed them to Till, and Repair by their own Labors,
those Parts of the Country that they had before wasted and destroyed. And thus
the Carthaginians, after they had been harrass'd and vexed with a Four Years
War, recovered their former Peace and Liberty. Ant. Chapter 305.


In this Expedition of Agathocles into Africa, any one may observe most
remarkable Accidents, and the Divine Providence in the Punishment inflicted
upon his Sons. For being routed in Sicily, he lost the greatest part of his
Army: A little time after he overcame the Conquerors with a very inconsiderable
Body of Men in Africa. In Sicily, being thrown out of all the Cities, he was
cooped up by a close Siege within the Walls of Syracuse: In Africa, he gained
all the Towns, except Carthage, and closely besieged the Carthaginians in that
City; by which, Fortune seemed to make it her Business, to let every one see
what Power she had to retrieve those Things that seemed to be in a desperate
Condition. But after that Agathocles, in the height of his Prosperity, had
murdered Opellas, against all the Laws of Friendship and Hospitality; God made
it manifestly apparent that for that piece of Wickedness acted upon that Man,
whatever happened to him afterward was ordered and dispensed by his own hand.
For the very Month and Day of the Month that he killed Ophellas, and brought
over to him all his Army, the very Moral (...)(...).
same Day and Month he again lost both his Sons and his Army. And that which is
more especially to be observed, was, That God, as a just Lawgiver, inflicted
on him a double Ant Ch 305.
Punishment; for he who had most wickedly destroyed his Friend, was deprived of
two Sons together, even by the Hands of those that came along with Ophellas.
This Remark ought not to offend those, who slight and despise such Providence.

As for Agathocles, as soon as he landed in Sicily, by a hasty flight out of
Africa, he Agathocles (...) Aegista
sent for part of his Forces, and marched to the Consederate City of the
Aegestines: And being in want of Money, exacted the greatest part of the
Estates of those that were rich, in which Place were Ten thousand Inhabitants.
This many of them took very heinously, and met together in private Cabals: But
he finding out, that the (...) were plotting against him, he brought most
dreadful Calamity upon the City: For drawing out all the Poor out of the Town,
he cut all their Throats upon the Bank of the River Scamander: And all those
who seemed to be richer than the rest, he put to several P. 770.
Tortures, to force them to confess how much Money they had: For some he broke
upon the Wheel; others he bound to his Engines of Battery, and shot them away
like Stones. And of others, he cut out the Ankle-bones of their Feet, and by
his cruel and unmerciful Dealing, put them to most horrible Torments. He
invented likewise another sort of Ant. Chapter 305.
Punishment not much unlike the Phalerian Bull; for he made a Bed of Br^^s
exactly after the shape of a Man, wherein were several Openings and hollow
Places on every side: Those that he intended to torment, he put into this Bed,
and then put fire under it, and burnt them to Death. In this only this Engine
differed from the Bull. That those that perished, and were consumed in those
strait and narrow Holes, were exposed to the view of every one. He would
likewise break in pieces the Ankle-Bones of some of the rich Women with Iron
Pincers, and cut off the Breasts of others; and would sometimes lay a weight of
Tiles upon the Loins of Women with Child, till he forced the Child to leap, as
it were, forcibly out of the Womb. While the Tyrant was in this manner
endeavoring to find out all the Wealth every Body had, and the whole City was
in Terror and Astonishment, some burnt themselves and their Houses together,
and others hanged themselves. And thus Aegesta, in one black and doleful Day,
had the Prime and Flower of her Youth cut off. But the young Women and Children
the Tyrant transported into Italy, and sold them to the Brutii: And that the
very Name of the Place should be extinguished and forgotten, he called it
Dic(...)lis, and granted it for an Habitation to such Runagates as came over to
him.

When he heard of the Murder of his Sons, he was so enraged at them he had left
behind His Cruelty a(...) Syracuse.
him in Africa, that he sent some of his Friends to his Brother Antandrus at
Syracuse, with Oders, that he should cut the Throats of all the Kindred and
Relations of those that went over in the Carthaginian Expedition: Who thereupon
executing what he was Ant. Chapter (...).
commanded, committed such Slaughters and Murders, as were never at any time
before: For he not only hurried away to Destruction young Men in the prime of
their Age, as Brothers, Fathers, and Children; but even Grandfathers and
Great-Grandfathers, if they happened then to be living, though they had one Foot
even in the Grave, and could neither see nor hear through extremity of old Age:
Nay, even Infants carried in Arms, that were not sensible of any Harm designed
them before they felt it: They dragged away likewise to Execution, Women,
whether they were Servants or Kindred to them in Africa, and whoever else that
(by their Death) might be occasion of Grief and Sorrow to them: So that while a
vast number of Persons of all Ages and Sexes were haled away to Execution at
the Seashore, where the Butchers stood ready for them, Tears, earnest
Entreaties upon their Knees, and woe(...) Lamentations appeared every where,
both from them that were butchered, and from others; who so far compassionated
the sad Condition of their Neighbors, that their Hearts were as full of Grief,
as theirs who were just ready to die. And that which was the most grievous of
all was, That after so great a Slaughrer, and that the (...)lses lay cast forth
upon the Shore, neither Kinsman nor Friend durst bury them, lest any of them
should be thought Related to them that were dead. The Multitude of them that
were murdered upon the Shore was such, that the Sea was did with (...)od a long
way off, which presented to the Eye at a great distance the Horridness of that
barbarous Cruelty.

CHAP. IV.
Antigonus his March into Egypt. A Tempest near Raphia, where he lost some of
his Ships. He returns into Syria. Dinocrates prevails in Sicily. Agathocles is
willing to resign his Government; but Dinocrates stands off. What was done in
Italy. Antigonus his War with the Rhodians. Rhodes besieged by Demetrius.
Agathocles routs Dinocrates his great Army with a few Men. His Cruelty to those
that submitted upon Terms, where he butchers Seven thousand. Dinocrates in
Favor with Agathocles, and betrays all the Confederates. What was done in
Italy.

THE Year following Corybus was chief Magistrate at Athens, and Quintus Martius
Olymp. 118. 3. Ant. Chapter 304.
and Publius Cornelius were created Consuls at Rome. About that time King
Antigonus buried his youngest Son with Royal Pomp and Splendor; and calling
home Demetrius out of Cyprus, commanded his whole Army to meet at his new City
Antigonia, for he purposed to march from thence into Egypt: Wherefore leading
the Foot himself, he passed through Coelo-Syria, having an Army of Fourscore
thousand Foot, and above Eight Antigonus his March into Egypt. Ant. Chapter 304.
P. 771.
thousand Horse, and Fourscore and three Elephants: He made Demetrius Admiral
of his Fleet, giving him order to keep close to the Shore in sight of the
Land-Army, having in all a Hundred and fifty fighting Ships, and a Hundred more
of Burden, wherein was an infinite store of Arms of all sorts: And when the
Pilots told him, That they were to stay till the setting of the Seven Stars,
which would be the About the begin (...) of April.
Eighth Day from thence, he condemned them for being too Timorous. Coming to
Gaza, and purposing to fall upon Ptolemy before he was provided for him, he
commanded his Soldiers to take with them Ten Days Victual; and getting together
Camels out of Arabia, he loaded on them a Hundred and thirty thousand Bushels
of Wheat, and infinite store of Hay upon other Beasts 13 Myriads of Medimnas,
every Medimna 18 Galions.
of Carriage; and carrying his Munition on Carts, went through the Desert, not
without some Trouble to the Army; for that they met with sundry Fens and dirty
Places by the way, especially about the Place called Barathra. Demetrius
loosing from Gaza in the dead of Night, was for many Days together becalmed; so
that the lighter Ships were fain to tow the Ships of Burden after them with
Ropes. But after this, and as soon as the Seven Stars were set, a Northerly
Wind arose, and fell upon them, with which many of the Ships with four Tire of
Oars apiece were driven on shore near to the City Rhaphia, where was no
commodious Landing for them: But of those which carried the Artillery, some of
Tempest.
them were sunk, and the rest recovered Gaza again. Yet some of the best of
them bare up, and came under the Promontory of Cassius: That Foreland is not
far distant from the River Nile, but is no place fit for Shipping; especially
if any Tempest be, there is no coming near it: Wherefore every Ship dropping
two Anchors apiece, two Furlongs off from Land, were fain to ride it out in a
huge Sea in the midst of a Thousand Dangers; for the Fury of the Waves was
such, that the great Danger was, lest both Men and Ships should sink down
together; and because there was no fit Landing place, and likewise for Ant. Chapter
304.
that the Shore was guarded by the Enemy, the Vessels could neither make to
Land, nor any swim out without extreme Hazard: But that which was most
grievous, was, That they had spent all their fresh Water, and were Reduced to
that extremity of Want, that had the Tempest lasted but one day longer, they
must all necessarily have perished for very Thirst. But in this great Extremity
of theirs, and when they expected nothing but Death, the Storm ceased;
Antigonus with his Army coming to the place, there encamped, and the
weather-beaten Men came ashore and refreshed themselves in the Camp, and waited
for the Ships that were separated from them by the Storm. Nevertheless there
were lost in this Tempest Three Ships of Five Tires of Oars apiece, out of
which some Men escaped alive to Land. For hence Antigonus removed, and sat
down with his Army Two Furlongs off from the River Nile. But Ptolemy having
Manned all the Bank of the River with strong Garrisons, sent some in
River-Boats, with Commands, that going as near the further Bank as safely they
could, they should there proclaim, That if any of Antigonus his Army would come
to him, he would give him, if a common Soldier Two Pounds, i. e. 6l. 5s. of
ours.
Two Minas, if a Captain a Talent. No sooner was this Proclamation made, but a
Multitude of Antigonus his Men, which served him for Pay, grew very desirous to
be gone; yea, and some of his Captains too, for that and some other Reasons,
had a mind to go also. But when Antigonus perceived, that a multitude of his
Men were flying away from him, he disposed Archers and Slingers, and other
Engines of War upon the Shore, to keep them from flying over the Water in
Boats; and some he lighted on that ran away, and Ant. Chapter 304.
those he put to horrible Torments, to deter others from the like.

Antigonus gathering together his Ships that came in after the Tempest, though
late to him, went to a Place called Pseudostomon, thinking there to have Landed
some of his Men: But he found a strong Garrison, and was beaten off with Bows
and Slings, and other Engines P. 772.
of War: The Night therefore drawing on, he went his way, giving Order to the
Masters of every Ship, to follow the Admiral's Lanthorn, and to make to the
Mouth of the River Nile, which is called Phagneticum: But the next Morning,
finding that many of his Ships had lost their way, he was forced to come to
Anchor there, and to send away the swiftest Ships he had to seek them out.

The time thus spent and protracted, Ptolemy being advertised of the approach
of the Enemy, came in speedily to the Relief of his Men, and ranged his Army
all along the Shore. Whereupon, Demetrius finding no possibility of Landing
here neither, and being informed that the Country adjoining was naturally
fenced with Fens and Moorish Grounds, set sail and returned. But as he was
going, the Wind struck up to the North, and with a mighty Tempest drove three
of his Ships of Four Tire of Oars, and some others of his Transport Ships upon
the Shore, all which came into Ptolemy's hand; the rest with much ado recovered
Antigonus his Camp. Now Ptolemy had placed strong Garrisons at every one of the
Mouths of the River Nile, and had an infinite Number of River-Boats every Ant.
Chapter 304.
where ready, stored with Darts and Slings, and Men which knew well how to use
them, which greatly vexed and troubled Antigonus: For the Mouth of the River at
Pelusium being strongly guarded by Ptolemy, he could make no use of his Ships
at all; and for the Land Forces, they were not able to do any thing, because of
the height of the River; and that which was worse, with his long Lying, both
Food for Men, and Fodder for Cattle began to grow low. Wherefore Antigonus
seeing his Army to hang the Head, Antigonus returns into Syria.
called them all together, and propounded it to the Captains, Whether of the
two were best, to stay and Fight it out now, or to return into Syria for the
present, and to return again better provided, and when the Waters should be
lower? And when every Man's Voice was to be gone, he had his Soldiers truss up
their Trinkets, and so with his Navy keeping still along the Shore by them, he
returned into Syria.

Ptolemy growing glad at heart that the Enemy was thus gone, offered Sacrifice
to his Gods for this great Deliverance; and made withal a most magnificent
Feast for his Nobles, and wrote away Letters to Seleucus, Lysimachus, and
Cassander, of his prosperous Success, informing them likewise, how a Multitude
of Antigonus his Men had fled over to him. This was 19 Years from the Death of
Alexder.
And now having rescued as it were Egypt a second time, and gotten it by his
Sword, judging therefore he might lawfully reckon it as his own, he returned to
Alexandria.

While these things thus passed in Egypt, See Aelian. Var. Hister L 9. C. 13.
the Fatness of this Man. Ant. Chapter 304.
Dionysius, the Tyrant of Heraclca in Pontus, died, having reigned Thirty two
Years: And his Sons Zathras and Clearchus succeeding him reigned Seventeen
years.

In the mean time, Agathocles visited all the Cities in Sicily that were under
his Command, filling them with Garrisons, and poling them for Money: For the Man
was in a terrible Fright, lest when he should fall under a Cloud, they should
recover their Liberty by Force of Arms.

About that time, Pasiphilus, the General, hearing of the Death of Agathocles
his Sons, Dinocrates prevails in Sicily.
and the rout of his Forces in Lybia, had the Tyrant in Contempt: And falling
off to Dinocrates, joined in Confederacy with him; and being possessed of the
Cities which were before committed to his Care and Trust, he enticed and drew
off the Army (then under his Command) from the Tyrant, by fair Promises, and
hopes of mighty things.

Agathocles therefore being now every where disappointed and frustrated of his
Hopes, was so far dejected, that he sent an Agent to Dinocrates, and offered to
make Peace with P. 773.
him upon these Conditions, viz. That he would lay down his Sovereignty, and
restore Syracuse to the Citizens; and that Dinocrates should be no longer in
Exile, so that he would deliver up two Castles, Tharma and Cepaloedium,
together with their adjoining Territories, to Agathocles. Here some may justly
admire how it came to pass, that Agathocles, who was at all other times, and in
all other things Resolute and Obstinate, and never in the least discouraged
when his Condition was most Desperate, should be now so dastardly, as to be
willing to give up all into the Enemy's hands, without striking a stroke for
the obtaining and compassing of which he had fought so many and great Battles:
And that which is Ant. Chapter 304.
the strangest of all, was, that he who was yet Lord of Syracuse, and of many
other Cities, and had a considerable Navy at Sea, and an Army at Land, should
become so Weakheaded, as not to remember any thing of that which happened to
Dionysius; for when he was reduced to most miserable Streights, and to that
degree of fear of those Mischiefs that hung over his Head, as that he was
altogether hopeless of retaining his Principality, and was upon the very Point
of mounting his Horse, and ^lying away from Syracuse; Heloris, one of the
ancientest of his Noblemen (to put a stop to his Carreer) said to him, The
Sepulcher of a King is honorable. And the like to this is what his
Father-in-Law, Megacles, said to him, that He who is deprived of a Kingdom,
should part with it so, as if forced from between his very Thighs, and not as
one making a voluntary Abdication. By which serious admonitions, Dionysius was
so encouraged, that he went through all courageously, though they seemed never
so terrible; and afterward mightily enlarged his Dominion; and continued in
this height of Prosperity till he was old, leaving the greatest Principality in
Europe to his Children.

But Agathocles not in the least encouraged by any of these Considerations, nor
considering the vanity of Humane Confidence and Expectations by what he had
learnt by his own Experience, set to Sale so great a Principality for a trifle:
But yet the Proposals took no effect; for though Agathocles would willingly
have had them confirmed, yet the Ambition of Dinocrates rejected them; for he
affected an absolute Monarchy, and therefore Ant. Ch 304. Dinocrates st^nds of
from A(...)nt with Agathocles.
hated the Syracusian Democracy, and was better pleased with the Command (as
General of the Army) which he then enjoyed: For he had at that time under his
Command above Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse, and many of the
largest and chiefest Cities; so, that though he was called only General of the
Exiles, yet in truth he had the Majesty and Authority of a King; the chief and
absolute Power of every thing being in his hands; for if he returned to
Syracuse, he concluded he must of necessity be no more than a private Man, and
be reputed but one of the many (for Liberty loves Equality) and subject to be
undermined and degraded by the suffrage of every Demagogue in the public
Assemblies; for the common People are ever Enemies to those that are rising
Men, and speak their Minds most freely. And therefore a Man may justly say,
that Agathocles voluntarily Lowered his Sails; and that Dinocrates was the only
cause of what ever Good was done by this Prince at any time afterward. For
Agathecles often sent Agents to him to Solicit and Treat about the Conditions
of Peace, still insisting upon having the Two Castles for his Subsistence, and
he as often contrived some specious pretense or another, to dash and break all
in pieces; sometimes requiring that he should depart wholly out of Sicily, and
at others, that he should give up his Children as Hostages.

Agathocles therefore smelling out his Design, sent Agents to the Exiles to
accuse Dinocrates of the Project he was carrying on, to obstruct the
Restitution of their ancient Liberties. Ant. Chapter 304.
He sent likewise an Ambassador to the Carthaginians, and made Peace with them
upon the following Conditions, viz. That all the Cities the Carthaginians
formerly enjoyed, should be forthwith surrendered to them: For which he
received of the Carthaginians Three P. 774.
hundred Talents of Gold, according to the Account and Value of Silver: But as
Timaeus says, a Hundred and Fifty Talents, and Two hundred Thousand Every
Medi(...) is 18 (...)ns, and Eight Gallons make a Bushel; so that 200 Thousand
Medimnas make 500 Thousand (...) is.
Medimnas of Wheat. Thus stood the Affairs of Sicily at that time.

In Italy the Samnites took Sora and Atia, (two Confederate Cities of the
Romans) by Storm, and sold all the Captives for Slaves: Upon which, the Consuls
broke in with mighty Forces into Japygia, and sat down before the City Sylvia,
a Garrison of the Samnites, which the Romans took by Assault after a few days
Siege, and carried away above Five thousand Prisoners, and abundance of rich
Spoil and Booty. Then they harrass'd the Country of the Samnites, cutting down
all the Trees, and making havoc and spoil wherever they came. For Rome
having for many years been in contest with this Nation for the supreme Command,
hoped at length, that the Enemy being stripped out of all they had all over the
Country, would be forc^d to sloop to the Stronger; and to that end they
continued Spoiling and Wasting the Country Five Months together, within which
time they burnt down to the Ground almost all the Towns, and rooted up every
Plant and Tree, and whatever other thing that might yield any Fruit for Daily
Food. After this the Anagnite, or Anagnini in ^^aly, a City of the Hernicori.
Aeginetes proclaimed War for the Injuries done them, and took Frutinum. Olymp.
118. 4. Ant. Chapter 303. Antigonus at War with Rhodes.
Fr(...) by Assault, and Sold the Territories belonging to it.

After the End of this Year, Xenippus Governed at Athens, and Lucius
Posthumous, and Tiberius Minucius, bore the Office of Consuls at Rome. About
this time the Rhedians were at War with Antigonus upon the accounts following.
The City of Rhodes was very strong in Shipping, and the best Governed of any
City among the Greeks, and therefore all the Kings and Petty Princes strove
which should gain the greatest Interest in the Citizens, every one endeavoring
to have her for their Confederate. But foreseeing afar off, what would be most
for her Advantage, she secretly made Peace with all, but would not meddle with
any of the Wars wherein the Princes were engaged one against another; so that
she was courted and richly presented by every one of them, and grew exceeding
rich by the enjoyment of a long Peace. For she became so potent, that in the
Pyrattick War. Ant. Chapter 303.
undertaken for the Common good of all Greece, she scowr'd the Seas and freed
them from Pirates at her own charge.

Alexander the most potent Prince of any that is recorded, honored this City
above all others; for there he laid up his last Will concerning the disposal of
his whole Kingdom, and honoring her in other respects, advanced her to the
state of a Royal City. The Rhodians thus in amity with all the Princes, kept
themselves (with all the Art they could) from giving any just offense by
outward appearance; though in their hearts they most favored Ptolemy: for they
were most inricht by the Merchants which traded thence into Egypt; and the
whole City was maintained and supported by the Wealth of that Kingdom: which
being understood by Antigonus, he did all he could to draw them off from siding
with Ptolemy: And therefore at first when he was engaged in a War against
Ptolemy for the Island of Cyprus, he sent Ambassadors thither to solicit them
them to send Aid and shipping to Demetrius; which they denying, he commanded
one his Admirals to sail away with his Fleet against them, and intercept and
rifle all the Ships that made out of the Port at Rhodes for Egypt. But the
Rhodians beating the Admiral, he charged them to be the Aggressors and
beginners of an unjust War, and threatened to besiege their City with the
strength of his whole Army: upon which the Rhodians decreed him great Honors;
and sent Ambassadors to him to entreat him that he would not force them to
engage in a War against Ptolemy, contrary to the League they had made with him:
But the King hereat growing more enraged, sent Demetrius with the Army and all
manner of Engines, for a Siege against them, who were thereupon so terrified
with the mighty power of the King, that at first they signified to Demetrius by
their Ambassadors that they would assist Antigonus against Ptolemy: But
afterward when he required a P. 775.
Hundred of the Nobility for Hostages, and that his Fleet might be admitted
into the Harbor; they concluded that he designed to surprise the City, and
therefore they prepared for War.

Demetrius on the other hand Rendesvouz'd all his Fleet in the Port at
Elorymna, and put all in readiness for an Expedition to Rhodes. He had with him
Two hundred Men of War of several dimensions; a Hundred and seventy Ships of
burden, in which were carried about Forty thousand Soldiers, together with
Horse and Auxiliaries from the Pirates, Besides there were on Board abundance of
all sorts of Darts, Arrows, and other Engines, fit for the carrying on of an
Assault. And along with all these there followed almost a Thousand Vessels,
belonging to private Men, full of Wares and Merchandise. And whereas the
Country of the Rhodians had been free from all devastations for many years
together, a vast multitude of men that had inricht themselves by the losses of
others in the War, flockt thither from all places. Demetrius therefore drawing
up his Fleet in a line of Battle, as ready prepared for a Sea sight, commanded
his Men of War Ant. Chapter 303.
(which carried Engines upon their Fore Castles to cast Darts and Arrows of
three spans long) to sail before: and the Transport Ships and such as had
Horses on board, they that rowed in lesser Vessels towed after them by Cable
Ropes. In the Rear came the Pirates Vessels, and a numerous Company (as is
before said) of Merchants Ships laden with Corn and other Provisions; so that
all the Sea between them and the Island and opposite shore seemed to be covered
over with Ships, which struck a great Terror and Amazement into those that had
the prospect from the City. For the Rhodian Soldiers who were placed upon the
Walls there, waited for the Enemies approach: the old Men and Women likewise
had a prospect of them from the tops of their Houses; (for the City was in its
situation like a Theater) and all being amazed and terrified with the greatness
of the Fleet, and glittering of the Arms, were in no small perplexity; for all
they had in this World was now lying at stake.

Demetrius now at last arrived at the Island, and Landed his Men, and then
encampt Rhodes bes(...) by Demetrius.
near the City, but not within the Cast of a Dart: which done he forthwith sent
out some of the Pirates, and others fit for the purpose to spoil and pillage all
before them, both by Sea and Land. He cut down also all the Trees of the
Country next adjoining, and razed the Towns; and with the Timber and materials
from thence he fortified his Camp, drawing round it a treble Trench, and many
great and strong Ramparts; so that by the misery and losses of the Enemy he
effectually provided for his Armies security. Then by the labor of his whole
Army and the Seamen that came along with him, in a few days he took in with a
Rampart of Earth all that part of Ground lying between his Landing place and
the City, and enlarged the Haven for the more commodious Ant. Chapter 300.
riding of his Ships.

In the mean time the Rhodians sent Ambassadors to him, entreating him he would
not do any thing that might be irreparable: But when they perceived he would
not hearken to any Terms (laying aside all hopes of composing matters) they
sent Messengers to Ptolemy Lysimachus, and Cassander praying their assistance,
because that War was made upon them upon their account. Both Inhabitants (that
were not Free of the City) and Foreigners (lately come in) were admitted to
take up Arms, if they thought fit, for defense of the place; the rest of the
Rabble tha were useless they put forth out of the City, both to prevent
scarcity of Provision, and lest any uneasy under the present Circumstances
they were in, should betray the Town. Then taking an account of the number of
them in Arms, they found there were of the Citizens Six thousand; of
Inhabitants and strangers One thousand. They made likewise a Decree, that all
Servants that had approved themselves honest and faithful in all hazards and
dangers, P. 776.
should be bought off from their Masters and set free, and enrolled into the
number of the Citizens: Then a Proclamation was made, that whosoever di'd in
the War should be buried at the public charge, and that his Parents and
Children should be maintained out of the City Treasury; that Portions should be
given to the Daughters out of the public stock, and that the Sons when they
were grown up should be crowned, and adorned in the Theater at the time of the
Festivals of Bacchus with all sorts of Arms and Armor. With these promises all
were presently excited to stand to it to the last and Ant. Chapter 303.
endure the utmost extremity; and then they made it their business (as far as
it was possible) to provide all other things that were necessary; for all being
unanimous, the Rich brought in their Money, and the Smiths and other workmen
earnestly set themselves to the making of Arms, and all were so intent upon
their business, that every one strove to exceed each other. Some therefore
imploi'd themselves in making Engines, to cast Darts, and shoot stones, and
others in making and preparing other things; same repaired the Walls where they
were defective; and many loaded men with stones to carry to the Walls. They
sent out likewise Three swift sailing Vessels against the Enemy, and the
Merchants that brought them in Provision: These setting on them upon a sudden
sunk many of the Merchant Ships, who were gone ashore to rob and spoil the
Country, and burnt no few that were driven up to land; and what they received
for the Redemption of Captives they brought with them back into the City: For
the Rhodians had agreed with Demetrius what the value of Redemption on both
sides should be; that is, for every Freeman a Thousand Drams, and for every
Servant and Bondsman, Five hundred. Demetrius being furnished with plenty of all
things necessary for the making of Engines, began to make two, called
Testudo's; the one against the Engines Ant. Chapter 303.
that cast stones, and the other against those that shot Darts and Arrows;
these they placed upon the Foredecks of two Transport Ships, which moved from
place to place and were chained close together: He likewise made two Towers
four stories high apiece, higher than those Turrets belonging to the Town in
the Harbor; both which likewise were placed upon two Ships of equal height and
joined one to another, that both might be equally ballast when they were forced
forward. He built likewise a Rampart upon a Fore footed piece of Timber nailed
together, to float upon the Water, in order to beat off the Enemy in any Attack
they might make upon the Ships where the Engines were placed. At the same time
while he was making these, he got together a Number of the strongest Water
Boats and fenced them with Boards and Planks round; and made Loop-holes in the
sides (to shut at pleasure) and in these he placed Engines (to shoot Darts and
Arrows of three spans long at a great distance) together with such Soldiers as
knew very well how to make use of them, and with them some Cretian Archers.
Coming up therefore with his Ships within the Cast of a Dart, he sorely galled
the Townsmen with his Darts and Arrows, being the Engines in the Ships were
higher, than the Walls next to the Harbor. The Rhodians on the other hand
understanding that Demetrius made it his main business to gain the Port, were
as earnest in providing all things necessary for its defense: To this end they
mounted two Engines upon a Rampart, and put on Board Three others upon two
Transport Ships, and lay with them at the mouth of the little Harbor; and in
these they put great Numbers of Engines for the shooting of Stones, Darts and
Arrows of all sizes, that by the help of these they might repulse the Enemy, if
he either attempted to land Men, or make up with his Engines. Besides all this
they Ant. Chapter 303.
had contrived convenient places and apartments in the Transport Ships which
then lay in the Harbor, wherein to place their Engines and Darts as they had
occasion. Both sides being now thus ready prepared, and Demetrius just upon the
point of moving into the Harbors with his Machines was prevented by a fierce
and violent Storm that then arose. But being calm all the night afterward, he
Sails up secretly, and seises upon the highest Rampart of the great Harbor,
and forthwith draws a Mud-wall about it, and fences it with stones and planks
of Timber: Then he landed Four hundred of his Men, and placed them there with
all sorts of Darts and Weapons; the Fort was * Five Plethras Every Plethra a
handred foot. P. 777.
distant from the Walls. As soon as it was light they came up with the Engines
into the Port, with shouting and sound of Trumpet, then with their small shot
which did execution at a great distance, they beat off those that were building
the Wall in the Port, and with their battering Engines broke in pieces the
Enemies Machines, and shak'd the the Wall near the Rampart in one part, and
battered it down in another. For it was but low and weak at that time; the
Citizens stoutly defended themselves, and spent all that day in wounding and
receiving wounds from their Enemies: but night drawing on, Demetrius towed his
Ships Cables ti'd to smaller Vessels and got often his Engines out of the reach
of the Enemies Artillery. But the Rhodians took fire along with them, and in
Boats filled with combustible matter pursued their Enemies, and coming up with
the Engines put Ant. Chapter 303.
fire to the matter in the Boats; but being presently beaten off by Darts and
Arrows from the floating Rampart, they were forced to Tack about and so retire;
but the Flame raged to that degree, that some few only having extinguished the
fire returned in the Boats; and the greatest part of them having had their
Vessels burnt down to the Water, by swimming only saved their lives.

The next day Demetrius in the same manner made his Attack from the Sea, and
ordered an Assault with shouting and sound of Trumpet should be made on every
side from the Land, that he might strike the greater Terror into the Rhodians,
while innumerable dangers, surrounded and distracted them on every hand; he
continued thus assaulting the Town for the space of Eight days together,
shooting from his Engines upon the Rampart, stones of the weight of a Talent,
and battered down the middle walls between the Towers, together with the Towers
themselves: the Soldiers likewise possessed themselves of part of the wall
that faced the Harbors. Upon which the Rhodians all flockt to that place, and
there they sharply fell to it, and engaged the Enemy; and over-powering them in
number, with the slaughter of some of them, forced the rest to draw off. The
uneasy rough and uneven passage to the place (by reason of many heaps of great
and massy stones which were laid before the walls on the outside) was of great
advantage to the besieged: many of the Enemies Vessels (in the midst of this
hurly burly) manned with Soldiers coming up, the Rhodians presently tore off
the Beaks of the Ships, and by combustible matter and Firebrands thrown in
among them, burnt the Ships themselves. While the besieged were thus hurried
and distracted in defending Ant. Chapter 303
themselves; the Demetrians coming in with their Vessels on every side, set
Scaling Ladders to the Walls, and pressed on with the greater resolution, being
assisted in all parts by the Soldiers at Land; who together with them in the
Ships mutually repeated their shouts and acclamations. And now many boldly and
resolutely in contempt of danger pressed forward, and in great Bodies mounted
the Walls; upon which followed a sharp Engagement, the assailant's forcing on
with great resolution from without, and the besieged with as much courage
flocking together to defend themselves within. At length the Rhodians after a
brave Resistance beat off the Assailants, killing some, and taking others
Prisoners that were wounded, amongst whom were some of the chiefest Commanders.
The Besiegers being thus baffled, Demetrius draws off his Engines into his own
Port, and then sets upon repairing both them and his Ships.

In the mean time the Rhodians bury their dead, and dedicated to their Gods
their Enemies Arms and the Beaks of their Ships, and repaired those parts of
their walls, as were beaten down by the Engines.

Demetrius however, after seven days time spent in refitting his battering
Engines, and repairing his Shipping, having now all things in readiness, enters
the Harbor again. For he made it his main business to be absolute Lord of this,
and to intercept all Provision that might be brought in to the relief of the
City; when he came within the cast of a Dart, he threw Firebrands (of which he
had a great number) into the Rhodians Ships which lay scattered here and there,
and shook and battered the Walls with his Engines, and wounded and galled with
his Darts and Arrows whoever appeared in view. The Assault thus continuing to
the great terror and amazement of the Inhabitants, the Rhodian Pilots (in great
fear and concern for the Shipping) extinguished the Firebrands; and the
Magistrates of the City (whom they call Prytanes) seeing that the Port was now
even upon the point of being taken, earnestly entreated all the Citizens, both
high and low without distinction, resolutely to put to their helping hands for
the common preservation and security of the whole City. Whereupon, many readily
came in, and manned three of their strongest Vessels with the best of their
Men, giving them Orders to do the utmost they could with the Beaks of their
Ships to sink the Enemies Vessels that carried their Engines: Those thus sent
out (though they were plied with showers of Darts and Arrows) yet by the
violence of their Charge broke in pieces the The st(...)ing Rampart.
Rampart that was fenced with (...), and so shattered their Ships with one
stroke after another, that they filled them with Water, and dismounted two of
their Engines; Whereupon the Demetrians towing back the Third with Cables, the
Rhodians encouraged by their Success, pressed on still with more Boldness than
Prudence; and therefore being pierced and shattered by Ant. Chapter 303.
the Beaks of many great Ships that surrounded them, Execestus the Admiral, and
the Captain of the Galleys, and some others (being ill wounded) were taken
prisoners; the rest by (...)ing got to their own Men; only one Ship was taken
by the Demetrians, and the rest escaped the danger. After this conflict,
Demetrius made another Engine, which was thrice as big as the former, both in
height and breadth. And now being just upon (...)ing into Port, arose a violent
South Wind, which burst out of a Cloud on the sudden, and sun^ the Ships which
were advancing, and overturned the Engine. Upon which, the R(...) taking the
advantage of the present opportunity, at the very nick of time flung op^n their
Gates, and made a Sally upon them that entered the Port: upon which there was a
sharp Dispute for a long time together, and being that Demetrians could not
come up to the assistance of his Men, by reason of the Storm, the Rhodians
still fell upon 'em with fresh Parties one after another, so that the
Demetrians, to the number of Four hundred, were forced to throw down their Arms
and submit. After this Victory gained by the Rhodians, there arrived to their
aid and assistance a Hundred and fifty G(...), and Five hundred Men sent by
Ptolemy, amongst whom were some Rhodians that were Soldiers under the King's
Pay. And thus stood matters in the Siege at Rhodes at that time.

In S(...) (...) not being able to compose Matters with Dinocrates and the
Exiles, marched one with what Forces he had against them, looking upon it
absolutely necessary Ant. Chapter 303
to hazard his Person, and resolutely to fight it out, and gain all or lose
all: He had not with him above Five thousand Foot and Eight hundred Horse.

Dinocrates with the Exiles seeing the Enemy to come boldly on, went out with
as much earnestness and resolution to fight them, for that he was far superior
to the Agathocleans Agathocles routs Dinocrates.
in number; being above Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand
Horse. Both Armies fate down one against another at a place called Gorgius: At
length they drew up in Battalia, and fell to it; and the Fight was very sharp
for a while, by reason of the heat and resolution of both parties: But after a
little time some deserted Dinocrates (to the number of Two thousand,) and went
over to the Tyrant, which was the ruin of the Exiles. For the Agathocleans
were thereupon much more encouraged and hearten'd; but those with Dinocrates
were as much amazed and dejected, and thinking there were many more went off
than did, they all took to their heels. Agathocles pursued them a little way,
but then called off his Men from the Slaughter; and sent to the broken Troops
proposals, that all differences being at length laid aside, every one should
have free liberty to return into their own Country: For they found by
experience, that they were never able to overcome him by force of Arms, being
even now routed when they P. 779.
had an Army far Superior to his in number: The Horse indeed all escaped to the
Castle of Ambicas; and some of the Foot the Night following got away: The
greatest part Ant. Chapter 303.
possessed themselves of a Hill, but despairing to prevail by force of Arms,
(and desirous to return to their Kindred, Friends, Estates and Country,) made
Peace with Agathocles. Having therefore plighted his Faith to them, and
thereupon all of them being come down from the Hill (which was a natural
Fortification) he first disarmed them, then hemmed them in with his Forces, and
put them every Man to the Sword, to the number of Seven thousand (as Timaeus
says,) but as others have writ, Four thousand. For this Tyrant never in the
least valued either his Word or Oath, and increased his Power not so much by
the greatness of his Forces, as by the weakness of his Subjects, fearing more
his Confederates than his Enemies. Having thus cut off his Enemy's Army, he
received the rest of the Exiles into his Protection, and receiving Dinocrates
into Grace Dinocrates in favor with Agathocles.
and Favor, made him General of part of the Army, and entrusted him ever after
in his most weighty Affairs. At which every Man may justly wonder, that he who
was so jealous and suspicious of every one, as that he would never confide in
any, should to the last maintain a firm friendship only with Dinocrates, who
having thus betrayed his Confederates, seized upon Pasiphilus at Gela, and
there murdered him, and delivered up all the Castles and Cities to Agathocles,
bringing all his Enemies under his Feet in Two years Ant. Chapter 303
time.

In Italy the Romans subdued the Palinians, and took their Country from 'em,
and some Italy.
that were Students at Rome they made free of the City. Afterward the Consuls
marched out against the Samnites, who had wasted and harrass'd Phaleria, and in
a Battle routed them; wherein they took Twenty Standards, and Two thousand
Prisoners: And after they had taken the City Bola by Assault, presently appears
Caius Gellius General of the Samnites with Six thousand Men; upon which there
was then another sharp engagement, in which Gellius himself was taken, and many
of the other Samnites slain and taken prisoners. The Consuls being thus
successful, recovered Sora Harpina and Serenia, Cities of their Allies, which
had been before taken from them.

CHAP, V.
The Siege of Rhodes continued: The Acts of the Sea Captains of the Rhodians.
Peace made with the Rhodians. The Acts of Agathocles in the Lipari Islands. The
Acts of Demetrius in Greece. The War between the Tarentines and Lucanians. The
Acts of Cleonymus the Spartan. Cassander sends to Antigonus to make Peace, who
refuses. Lysimachus joins with Cassander, and so does Ptolemy and Seleucus
against Antigonus: He marches against Lysimachus. Demetrius's further Acts in
Greece. The Armies of Cassander and Demetrius. Demetrius leaves Greece and goes
with his Army to his Father in Asia, after Peace made with Cassander. The
misfortunes of Pleistarchus at Sea. Ptolemy besieges Sidon, but returns to
Egypt upon a false Report. Seleucus marches from Babylon with a great Army.

AFter the former Year had run its course, Pherecles was made chief Governor of
Olymp. 119. 1. Ant. Chapter 3^^.
Athens, and Publius Sempronius and Publius Sulpicius were invested with the
Consular Dignity at Rome: At the same time was solemnized the Hundred and
nineteenth Olympiad, in which Andromenes the Corinthian bore away the Prize.
About this time Demetrius, who lay still before Rhodes, seeing things did not
succeed as to his attempts made at S(...) of Rhodes. The City taken.
Sea, resolved to Assault the City by Land. To that end he made preparation of
Plenty of all sort of Timber, and framed the Engine called Helepolis, far
bigger than any of the former. Its Basis was four square; every side was almost
in length Fifty Cubits, made up of four square pieces of Timber, bound together
by Plates of Iron. In the middle part he placed strong Planks of Timber a Cubit
distance one from another, for those that forced the Engine forward, to stand
upon. The whole was moved upon Eight strong and large Wheels; whose Felloes
were Two Cubit thick, covered with strong Iron Plates: Thwart over the Spokes
were contrived Instruments to turn the Engine. P. 780.
Antist^^pta's to turn about the Engine in a trice when ever they pleased. At
every corner of the Machine were Pillars raised, little less than a hundred
Cubits high, every one of an equal length, so compacted together, as that the
whole Machine was Nine Stories high. In the first were Three and forty Beds,
and in the highest Nine: The three sides of the Engine were lined on the
outside with Iron Plates fastn'd with Nails, to prevent all damage from Fire
that might be shot or cast from the City. In every Story at the Front were made
Loop-holes, proportionable, and in shape, to the nature of the Artillery that
was thence to be discharged. To these were Shutters (fastn'd to the Engine) to
draw up, for the better defense of them within that threw the Darts; for they
were lined with Skins stuffed with Wool to deaden the force of the Stone-shot.
Every Story was furnished with two Ant. Chapter 30^.
large Ladders, that whatever was necessary might be brought in to them, at one
and the same time by one, while others were going down upon other occasions by
the other, that so every thing might be dispatched without tumult and confusion.
There were chosen out of the whole Army the strongest Men (to the number of
Three thousand and four hundred) to move the Engine forward; of whom some from
within, and others placed behind, so forced it forward, that Art and Strength
together much facilitated the motion. He mad also Artificial Covers over Men's
Heads, made of strong Timber covered over with raw S(...).
Testudo's, by some to fill up Trenches and Ditches, and with others to bring
up Battering Rams: He made likewise Galleries, through which they that were
employed might pass and repass with safety at their pleasure. By the help and
assistance likewise of the Seamen, he plained and laid even all the way along
which the Engines were to be brought up, to the space of Four Furlongs, so that
the breadth of the Work faced as much of the City-Wall as consisted of Six
Divisions between the Turrets, and of Seven of the Turrets themselves The
multitude of Artificers and Workmen that were got together, were no less than
Thirty thousand Men. Every thing therefore (through multitude of hands) being
perfected and completed sooner than could be imagined, Demetrius became a
Terror to the Rhodians; for not only the greatness of the Engines, and the
multitude of Men, but the Valor and Diligence of the King in carrying on of
Sieges amazed them: Ant. Chapter 302.
for he was extraordinary ingenious in invention, and contrived many things
beyond all the Art and Industry of the Artificers; whence he got the Name of
Poliorches (...).
Poliorches: for he was so fierce and violent in his Assaults, that no Wall
seemed to be so strong as to be a sufficient Defense to the Besieged against
him. And besides, he was so Tall and Beautiful, that he looked like a Demi God;
insomuch as those who came to him but as Guests and Strangers, and saw his
Gracely Mien clothed with Royal Majesty, they were struck with Admiration, and
would often attend upon him in his Expeditions, merely to have the satisfaction
in looking at him. Moreover, he was of an high and noble Spirit, that scorned
not only to stoop to the common sort, but even to Princes themselves. And that
which was most strange and peculiar only to himself was, in times of Peace he
was given to Drukenness and Banqueting, to Dancing and Rioting; and would
imitate even the Manners of Bacchus himself, such (as is fabulously reported)
he used to practice when he was upon Earth: But in times of War he was very
active and serious, insomuch as he went beyond all the rest, both as to his
Head and Hand, when any thing was to be done. For in his time, and by his
contrivance, were made the greatest Darts, and such sort of Engines as far
exceeded all other Nations in the World: And after this Siege and his Father's
Death, he launched forth the greatest Ships that ever were before seen. In the
mean time the Rhodians perceiving how the Enemy's Works went on, built another
Wall within, answerable to that which was now presently to be Assaulted; and to
this purpose they used the Stones that Walled in the Theater, and pulled down
some neighboring Houses, and some Temples for the same purpose, vowing to the
Gods to build larger and fairer, Ant. Chapter 302. P. 781. The Acts of the Rhodian
Sea-Captains.
if the City were preserved. They sent out likewise Nine Ships, and commanded
the Captains that infesting every part, and surprising what Ships they could,
they should sink some of those they took, and bring in others into the City
Harbor. These Captains divided their Squadron into three parts; Damophilus
with the Ships which the Rhodians called Guard Ships
Phalacidae sailed to Carpathus, an Island between Rhodes and Creete now
Scarpanto.
Carpathus, were surprising many of Demetrius's Fleet, he sunk some, and burnt
others that were drawn up upon the Shore, making choice of such Prisoners as
might be most useful and serviceable; and many Ships that were carrying Corn
and other Fruits out of the Island, he brought away with him into his own
Country.

Menedemus who commanded three small (...) ^ (...).
Galleys betwixt two and three Tire of Oars, made for Patara and Lycia, and
there found a Ship at Anchor, and burnt her; all her Men being before gone off
to Land: He took likewise many of the Enemies Transport Ships which carried
Provisions to their Camp, and sent them to Rhodes: He took also a Ship of Four
Tire of Oars coming out of Cilicia, which carried a Royal Robe, and other rich
Furniture which Phila Demetrius his Wife had curiously wrought, and had sent as
a Present to her Husband. He ordered the Garments to be conveyed into Egypt,
for they were Purple Robes fit for none to wear but Kings; but the Ship he took
away with him, and sold all the Seamen he had taken both out of the Galley of
four Tire of Oars, and other Vessels. Amyntas who commanded the other Ships
sailed to the Islands, and Ant. Chapter 302.
falling in with some of the Enemy, that were conveying away something of use
for the Engines, he sunk some of the Ships, and brought in others to the City;
in which were taken Eleven famous Artificers, most expert Artists in making of
Darts and Engines.

After this was called a General Assembly, wherein it was proposed that the
Statues of Antigonus and Demetrius should be pulled down; affirming, that it
was a thing intolerable that Enemies and Besiegers of the City should have the
same Honors as those that were Friends and Benefactors: But the People were
much incensed at this motion, and and checked them that proposed it as those
that did ill: and would not suffer any thing in diminution to the Honor of
Antigonus, thereby, wisely consulting both their own Reputation and Advantage:
For this greatness of Mind, and soundness of Judgment in a Democratical
Government redounded amongst all to the praise of the Besieged, and softened and
melted the Spirits of the Besiegers: For they that had set at liberty the Greek
Cities, who had testified nothing of their good Will toward them as their
Benefactors, now seemed to go about to enslave that City, who had given a clear
and evident Demonstration of the firmness and constancy of their Gratitude.
This Resolution likewise might reasonably be concluded to be of singular
Advantage to them in the worst of Fortune; for if the City were taken, the
remembrance of their Kindness might plead and prevail for their Pardon: It Is
clear therefore that the Rhodians manifested singular Prudence in the
Management of this Affair.

Demetrius had even now undermined the City, when a Deserter very opportunely
came in and informed the City, that the Miners were approached almost within
the Walls: Ant. Chapter 302.
Upon which, the Rhodians drew a deep Trench all along the Wall that was now
ready to be tumbled down, and forthwith fell to Countermining; and at length
met the Enemy under Ground, and so prevented the Mine from proceeding any
further: And while both Parties guarded the Mines, some of Demetrius his
Soldiers with Money bribed Athenagoras, the Captain of the Guard for the
Rhodians: He was a Milesian, sent thither by Ptolemy, and Captain of the
Mercenaries, who having promised to betray the City, appointed a Day on which
Demetrius should send some one of the chiefest of his Commanders, P. 782.
who should enter in the Night through the Mines into the City, and find out a
Place fit and convenient to receive the Soldiers. Athenagoras having now raised
up the Hopes and Expectations of the Demetrians, discovers the whole Intrigue
to the Senate. The King, according to the Compact, sends one of his Noblemen,
Alexander a Macedonian: But the Rhodians seized him as soon as he peeped up out
of the Mine; but crowned Athenagoras with a Crown of Gold, and for a Reward,
gave him Five Talents of Silver; and then made it their Business to engage the
rest of the Mercenaties and Strangers to be faithful to the People all the ways
they could. However,

Demetrius having now finished all his Engines, and plained and laid even every
place under the Walls, brought up his The great Engine.
Helepolis in the middle, and so ordered his Testudoes for filling up of
Trenches and Ditches, (which were Eight in Number,) that he placed Four on each
side of the Helepolis. To each of these was adjoin'd a Gallery, that they who
went in and out might execute what was commanded without any Danger. He had
likewise two other Testudoes that bore Battering Rams, far larger than the
rest; for both of them were a Hundred and twenty Cubits long, strongly armed
with Iron, and their Ant. Chapter 30^
The Rams Heads.
Heads resembled the Beak of a Ship, and were easily moved forward by the help
of Wheels; but to do effectual Execution, they were forced on by a Thousand Men
at least.

Being ready to bring up his Engines to the Walls, he filled every Story in the
Helepolis with as many Engines for shooting of Stones, Arrows, and Darts, as
each would hold. Then he sent his Sea-Forces to the Haven and the Places
adjoining, and ordered his Land-Army to the rest of the Wall where any approach
could possibly be made. At length, at one Signal and Word of Command all set up
a shout together, and with great Violence stormed the City on every side: And
at the very time that the Walls were shaking and trembling with the Strokes of
the Battering Rams, and Stones shot from the Engines, in came Ambassadors from
Cnidus, and entreated him to forbear all further Proceedings by force of Arms,
and promised, that they would persuade the Rhodians to submit (as far as it was
possible) to his Commands. The King hereupon remitted his Heat, and Ambassadors
were sent from both sides, who banded Matters to and fro, but could not come to
any Agreement. Whereupon he resolutely renewed the Assault, and battered down
one of the strongest Towers built of Apiece Stone, and so shook the whole
space between Ant Chapter 302.
the Towers, that the Besieged could not pass that way to the Bulwarks.

But at this time, King Ptolemy sent a great Fleet with Provision to the
Rhodians; in which were Three hundred thousand A Persian Measure, something
larger than a Medimna, which is 18 Gallons
Artabans of Corn, Beans, and Pease: These making a straight course for Rhodes,
Demetrius sent Shipping after them, in order to seize the Provision for the use
of his own Camp: But the Ptolemeans, (hoising up all their Sails,) by the
favor of a fair Gale of Wind arrived safe at their Port, and so those that
were sent after them by Demetrius, returned as they went. Cassander likewise
sent Ten thousand Medimnas of Barley to the Rhodians, and Lysimachus Forty
thousand of Wheat, and as much of Barley.

The Town thus supplied with Plenty of Provision, their languishing Spirits now
revived; and thereupon judging it much to their Advantage if they could ruin
the Enemies Engines, they got together abundance of Fireballs, and other
Engines for shooting of Fire, and placed them and all their other Artillery
upon the Walls; and the next Night, about the second Watch, on a sudden they
played continually upon the Enemies Guard with their Shot of Arrows, Darts,
Stones, and other Weapons; and making use also of all sorts of Fire-Engines,
they grievously wounded and galled all that came flocking into that Part:
Hereupon the Demetrians (who were altogether surpised by so sudden and
unexpected an Attack) being mightily concerned for their Engines and their
other Works, ran all in a Body together to defend them. The Night being very
dark, no Moon appearing, P. 783.
Firebrands flying about with great violence, gave Light to the Night; and
Darts and Stones from the Engines to shoot Darts and Arrows.
Catapults and Engines to shoot great Stones. Ant. Chapter 302.
Ballistas (not discerned when they were shot) wounded and galled many of the
Combatants, who could not see how to avoid them. And now at this very time some
of the Iron Plates fell off from the great Engine, and the Firebrands had the
good Fortune to fall upon that part that was bare: Upon which Demetrius was in
a great Fright lest the Engine should be totally consumed as the Fire
increased; and therefore endeavored to prevent it with all the speed possible,
and to quench the raging Flame by the Water before prepared, and ready in the
Apartments of the Engine for such Accidents. At length he called together by
sound of Trumpet those that were to move the Engines, and by their Help,
brought them off out of the reach of the Darts. When it was day, he ordered the
Boys and Pages in the Army to gather all the Darts and Arrows shot by the
Rhodians; because he had a desire by numbering of these, to make a Conjecture
how the Citizens were furnished and provided. These Boys performing what they
were commanded, there were in number of Firebrarnds and other Vehicles for Fire
of several sizes, above Eight Hundred, of Darts no fewer than Fifteen hundred
This vast number of Darts, Arrows, Firebrands, and Balls, shot in in so little
a portion of the Night, caused him to admire the Store and Provision of the
City in their Ammunition; and likewise their great Charge and Expense in
providing them. Then he set about repairing of his Engines, burying the Dead,
and curing those that were Wounded: During which time, the Citizens (having a
Respite from the Assaults and Batteries of the Engines) built a third Wall in
the shape of an Half Moon, which compassed in all that part of the Wall that
lay most open and obnoxious to the Enemies Batteries: And besides this, they
drew a deep Trench round that part of the Wall which Ant. Chapter 302.
was ready to fall, that the King might not enter on a sudden at the first
Push. They sent out likewise some Ships (that were swift Sailers) under the
Command of Amyntas; who made over to the Continent in Asia, and there set upon
some Privateers that were Commissioned by Demetrius: They had three open
Vessels, and were reputed the stoutest Men the King had in his Fleet. After a
short Fight, the Rhodians took both the Ships and Men together, among whom were
Timocles, the chief of the Pirates: They fell likewise upon some Merchant
Ships, and took some light Vessels laden with Corn, and with these and the
Pirates open Vessels they secretly passed by the Enemy, and got into Rhodes.

Demetrius having repaired his Machines, brings them up again to the Walls, and
with showers of Darts and Arrows forced the Besieged off from the Bulwarks, and
battering the Place adjoining with his Rams, beat down two Spaces between the
Towers. In the heat of this Action the Besieged with all their Might defended
the middle Tower, and were continually pressed upon with strong Parties of
fresh Men one after another, so that Aminias their chief Commander
(courageously behaving himself) was there slain, with many other of the common
Soldiers.

While these Things were doing, King Ptolemy sent to the Rhodians as much Corn
and other Provision as he had done before; and Fifteen Hundred Soldiers
besides, under the Command of Antigonus a Macedonian. About the same time there
came to Demetrius above Fifty Ambassadors from Athens, and other Cities of
Greece, all soliciting the King to compose Matters, and strike up a Peace with
the Rhodians: Whereupon there was a Ant. Chapter 302.
Cessation of Arms, and many Harangues were now made to the People, and then
again to Demetrius, but they could not agree upon any Terms; and therefore the
Ambassadors went away without effecting any thing.

Demetrius afterward was contriving to make an Attack upon the City in the
Night, at that part of the Wall that was fallen down; to this end he picked out
the best of his Soldiers, P. 784.
and some others fit for the Purpose, in all to the number of Fifteen Hundred,
whom he commanded to approach the Walls secretly about the second Watch. He
himself stood ready with the rest of the Army, and gave Orders to the Officers
of every Regiment, upon a Signal given to set up a Shout, and forthwith to make
an Assault upon the City both by Sea and Land; who all executed his Commands
accordingly; and presently one Party made to the Ruins, and killing the Watch
at the Trench, broke into the City, and possessed themselves of all the Places
round the Theater. The Rhodians seeing all the City in an Uproar upon the
knowledge of what had happened, commanded them that guarded the Port and the
Walls, every one to keep their several Posts, and endeavor to beat off the
Enemy that attempted to enter. They in the Town with the stoutest of the
Citizens, and those Soldiers then lately come from Alexandria, set upon Ant.
Chapter 302.
them that were broke in within the Walls: But as soon as it was Day, Demetrius
lifted up the Standard.
Signal, at which both they that had made an Attack upon the Port, and those
round the Walls, set up a Shout all together, to encourage their Men that had
entered, and were about the Theater. The poor Women and Children throughout the
whole City were in terrible Frights and Lamentations, as if the Town had been
then certainly taken by Storm.

However, a sharp Encounter there was between them that had entered within the
Walls and the Rhodians; and though many fell on both sides, yet neither of them
at first gave the least Ground: But after a while, when many more of the
Rhodians came flocking in, resolved to endure the greatest Extremity, as now to
fight for their Country, and for all that was dear to them in the World, the
King's Party were overborn; and Alcimus and Mantias, the Commanders of the
Party, (after many Wounds received,) were there slain; most of the rest were
either killed upon the Spot, or taken Prisoners; but some few made their
escape, and got to the King. Many likewise of the Rhodians were slain at the
same time, amongst whom was Damotetis, (...) (...), Pre(...) or Chief
Magistrate.
President of the Council, a Man most Renowned for his Valor. Demetrius
(although he judged, that Fortune had, as it were, wrung the City out of his
Hands, yet) prepared for another Assault; But his Father writing to him to make
Peace with the Rhodians upon such Terms and Conditions as he could get, he
watched for the most convenient opportunity, which might afford him a Ant. Chapter
302.
colorable Pretense for an Agreement and Composure of Matters between them.
Ptolemy likewise, though he had before writ to the Rhodians to acquaint them
that he intended to send them a great quantity of Corn, and Three thousand Men,
yet afterward advising them to Treat and Agree with Antigonus upon any
reasonable Conditions, they all inclined to Peace. At the same time likewise
the Aetolian Commonwealth sent Ambassadors to Negociate a Pacification. The
Rhodians therefore at length struck up a Peace with Peace made with the
Rhodians.
Demetrius upon the Conditions following; viz. That the City should Govern
according to their own Laws, and should be without a Garrison: That they should
Enjoy their own Estates and Revenues: That they should join with Antigonus in
his Wars against all Persons, except Ptolemy: And that they should deliver a
Hundred Citizens for Hostages, such as Demetrius should make Choice of, except
such as were Magistrates. And thus the Rhodians (after a whole Year's Siege)
put an end to the War, honoring those with just Rewards, who had approved
themselves honest and faithful to their Country; and such Slaves as had behaved
themselves stoutly and valiantly, they set free, and enrolled them as Members
of the City: They set up likewise the Statues of the Kings, Ptolemy, Cassander,
and Lysimachus, and of some others inferior to them, yet who had contributed
much to the Preservation of the Place. But that they might express their
Gratitude Ant. Chapter 302.
and Thankfulness to Ptolemy above all the rest, they sent some of their
Priests to consult the Oracles of Ammon, whether they should worship Ptolemy as
a God, or no: And being answered, That they should; they consecrated to him a
Apiece Grove in their P. 785.
City; building on every side thereof a Gallery of a Furlong in length, and
called it Ptolemeum, or Ptolemy's Gallery. They repaired also the Theater, and
the Parts of the Walls that were thrown down, and made them, and all the other
Places that had been ruined, far more Beautiful and Glorious than they were
before.

Demetrius having ratified the Peace with the Rhodians, (according to his
Father's Commands,) loosed from thence with his whole Army, and passing by the
Islands, he arrived at Aulis in Boeotia, minding with all speed to set the
Grecians at Liberty; for Cassander and Polysperchon grown bold through the
absence of the Enemy, had not long before wasted and harrass'd many Parts of
Greece. And first of all he freed the City of the Calcideans from a Garrison of
the Boeotians, and forced the Boeotians (out of fear of him) to fall off from
their League with Cassander. Afterward confederating with the Aetolians, he
prepared to make War upon Polysperchon and Cassander.

During these Transactions, Eumelus, the King of Bospherus Cimmerius, having
now reigned Vid. antea Olymp. 17. 3. how he di'd. Ant. Chapter 302.
Six Years, ended his Days; after whom succeeded Sparticus his Son, who reigned
Twenty Years.

Having now given an Account of the Affairs of Greece and Asia, we shall pass
over to other Parts of the World.

In Sicily, Agathocles on a sudden, and without any Provocation, invaded the
Inhabitants Agathocles robs the Liparians.
of the Lipari Islands, being then in full and perfect Peace and Security, and
exacted from them Fifty Talents of Silver. At which time, many thought that
'twas then spoken from a Divine Spirit, when 'twas said, That God would
remarkably pursue him for his Wickedness: The Liparians then desired him, that
he would give some time to make up the Money that was short, declaring that to
that time they never made use of the Dedicated Treasure: But Agathocles forced
him to give him the Money that was in the In the Prytaneum.
Sacred Treasury. Upon some of which was stamped the Image of Aeolus, and upon
others Vulcan; and when he had got it, he set sail and away he went: But there
arose a Storm that broke in pieces Eleven of the Ships that carried the Money:
Which gave occasion to many to conclude, that Aeolus (who is said to have
Command of the Winds in those Parts) executed Vengeance upon him at his first
setting forth. And that Vulcan at his latter end punished the Tyrant in his own
Country, according to the just Desert of his Wickedness, burning him alive with
hot Coals: For it was one and the same Justice and Divine Will that forbore and
passed over those that saved and preserved their Parents at the Foot of Mount
Aetna; and that exerted his Power in punishing those that had impiously
profaned the Deity. But what is now said concerning the Return and Misfortunes
of Agathocles, shall be further Ant. Chapter 302.
confirmed when we come to the Time proper for that Relation; but now we must
apply our selves to what was done in those Parts of Italy that lay bordering
one upon another.

The Romans and Samnites, after a War of Two and twenty Years and Six Months
continuance, by their mutual Ambassadors at length made Peace one with another.
But Sempronius, one of the Consuls, broke into the Country of the Aequi, and
took Forty Towns in Forty Days time at the most; and bringing the whole Country
into absolute Subjection to the Roman Yoke, returned home, and most worthily
and gloriously triumphed. But the Romans enter into a League with the Marsi,
Peligni, and Marrycini.

When the former Year was ended, Leostratus was chosen Chief Magistrate of
Athens for this succeeding, and Servius Cornelius and Lucius Genucius were
created consuls at Rome. Olymp. 119. 2. Ant. Chapter 301.
In the time of whose Governments, Demetrius resolved to make War upon
Cassander, and to restore Liberty to the Grecians; and above all other
Concerns, to put the Affairs of Demetrius (...) the Cities in Greece at Liberty.
Greece into a good and happy Condition; because he hoped by the Liberty
granted, thereby both to advance his own Reputation, as also to break those
Captains of Cassander's as were joined with Prepalaus, and that by falling upon
Cassander, he should gain the Sovereign Power to himself. The City of Sicyon
was then held by a Garrison of Ptolemy the King, of which, Philip, a brave and
gallant Man, was Governor; upon this Place Demetrius P. 786.
made a sudden Attack in the Night, and broke in within the Walls; whereupon
the Garrison Soldiers presently hurried into the Castle. Demetrius being now
possessed of the Town, posted himself between the Houses and the Citadel; and
being just upon the point of bringing up his Engines, they within were so
terrified, that they surrendered upon Terms, and then sailed away into Egypt.
Afterward having prevailed with the Sicyons to remove and settle themselves
within the Castle, he laid that part of the City that adjoin'd to the Haven
even to the Ground, which was a Place before every way strongly fortified: Then
joining with the Inhabitants, and helping them to build In the Citadel.
Houses, and restoring them to their former Liberty, he was honored by these
he had thus obliged as a Demi-God; for they called the City Demetriades, and
appointed Sacrifices, Festivals and Sports, with other Honors, to be Yearly
celebrated and offered in Memory of him as the Builder of their City. But Time
and Turns of Fortune put an end to these Solemnities.

The Sicyons therefore being fixed in a far better Place than they were before,
have continued there from that very time to this day: For the Site of the
Citadel is large and Plain, compassed in on every side with inaccessible Rocks,
so as no Engine can possibly approach or come near it: It Is furnished likewise
with plenty of Water, by which the Inhabitants greatly enrich their Gardens and
Orchards: And therefore all approved the Wisdom and ingenious Contrivance of
the King, that had provided for them every Ant. Chapter 301.
thing conducing to their Pleasure in time of Peace, and to their Protection
and Security in time of War. Having settled all Things at Sicyon, he marched
thence with his whole Army to Corinth, which Prepalaus, Cassander's General,
then held with a strong Garrison; where being presently let in by the Citizens
in the Night, (through a little Sally-Port.) he gained the City, together with
the Havens-The Soldiers in Garrison hereupon fled, some of them into the Palace.
Sisyphium, (as it is called,) others into the Citadel: Whereupon the Engines
being brought up to the Fortifications, after much much Toil and Labor he took
Sisyphium by Storm: The Besieged had (before he entered) all fled to them that
were in the Citadel; but he so terrified them also, that he forced them to
surrender; for this King in Assaults was not to be resisted; and in inventing
of Engines for the assaulting of Places, was extraordinary Ingenious.

And now although he restored the Corinthians to their Liberty, yet he put a
Garrison into the Acro Corintho.
Citadel; because the Citizens desired to continue under the Antigonus his
Protection, who had assumed the Title of King, as is said before. Ant. Chapter 301.
King's Protection, until he had subdued Cassander: And so Prepelaus having
thus poorly lost Corinth, went to Cassander.

Then Demetrius marched into Achaia, and took Buta by Assault; and within a few
days after, he had Scyrus delivered up to him, and expelled the Garrison thence:
Moving forward, he freed all the rest of the Cities of Achaia. Then encamping
at Aegeum, he lay with his Army round the Walls; and upon a Parley with
Strombichus the Governor, demanded the Surrender of the Town: But he not only
refused, but railed against Demetrius from the Walls, and gave him base
Language; whereupon the King brought up the Engines, battered down the Wall,
and took the City by Storm; and there crucified Strombicus (who was placed
there as Governor by Polysperchon) and about Fourscore more that were his
inveterate Enemies) before the Walls of the Town. And from among the Prisoners
he picked out 2000 Mercenaries, and intermixed them amongst his own Regiments.

After the taking of this City, they who held the neighboring Forts and
Castles, thought it to no purpose to oppose the King; and therefore all
surrendered their Garrisons. And all the Governors of Cities (seeing that
Cassander and Polysperchon sent them no Assistance, and that Demetrius with a
potent Army, and with Engines (the greatest that P. 787.
ever came into the Field) was ready to fall upon them, surrendered all up to
him. And thus stood the Affairs of Demetrius.

In Italy the Tarentines (being at War with the Lucanians and the Romans) sent
Ambassadors The War between the Lucanians and Tarentines. Ant. Chapter 301.
Cleonymus the Spartan.
to Sparta desiring Aid, and that Cleonymus might be sent them for their
General. The Lacedaemonians readily granted the General that was desired; and
the Tarentines sent Ships and Money, wherewith Cleonymus raised Five thousand
Men, and mustered them at Tenarus in Laconia; and thence by a short Cut sailed
to Tarentum, where he hired as many Mercenaries as the former, and listed some
of the Citizens: In the whole he raised above Twenty thousand Foot and two
thousand Horse. He joined to his Army likewise many Greeks of Italy, together
with the Messapians; whereupon the Lucanians being terrified with the greatness
of his Army, made Peace with the Tarentines: Only the Metapontians stood off;
and therefore he required the Lucanians to join with him in spoiling and
harassing their Country; and accordingly making use of a fit Opportunity, he
broke in upon them, and put them into a terrible fright: And though he
enter'dinto the Metapontum.
City as a Friend, yet he trapann'd the Citizens out of Six thousand Talents of
Silver, and upwards, and took away Two hundred young Ladies of the best Quality
for Hostages; not so much to secure the Performance of the League, as to
gratify his own brutish Lusts; for he threw off his Laconick Habit, and gave
up himself to all manner of Voluptuousness; and brought them into Bondage and
Slavery, who had committed themselves to his Care and Protection. For though he
had so great an Army, and so well provided, yet he did noting worthy the Name
of a Spartan. He determined indeed to make an Expedition into Sicily, under
color to overturn the Tyranny of Agathocles, and to restore the Sicilians to
Ant. Chapter 301
their ancient Laws and Liberties; but omitting that for the present, he sailed
to Corcyra, and having taken the City, got there a vast Treasure, and Garrisoned
the Place, designing to make use of that as a Town and Citadel of War, and
thence to manage all the Affairs of Greece. Forthwith Ambassadors came to him
from Demetrius, Poliorches, and Cassander severally, to solicit him to join
with them as Confederates; but he joined with neither.

Afterward, hearing that the Tarentines and some others had deserted him, and
revolted, he left a sufficient Garrison at Corcyra, and with the rest of his
Forces sailed in a great Heat into Italy, with a Resolution to execute
exemplary Punishment upon those that had rebelled. Arriving at the very Place
where the Barbarians kept Guard, he took the City, and after he had sold the
Men for Slaves, he spoiled and harassed all the Country. He took also a Town
called Triopius by Assault, and carried thence Three thousand Captives: But
about this time the Barbarians got into a Body, and set upon his Camp in the
night, and killed above two hundred of his Soldiers, and took about a Thousand
Prisoners; and together with this Misfortune, at the very same time arose a
violent Storm, and broke in pieces 20 of his Ships, as they lay at Anchor near
to his Camp.

Being plagued with these Losses and Misfortunes falling one upon the neck of
another, Cleonymus sailed back with his Forces to Corcyra.

The former Year being now past, this Year Nicocles executed the Office of Lord
Chancellor Olymp. 119. 3. Ant. Chapter 300. Cassander sends to make Peace with
Antigonus.
of Athens, and Marcus Livius and Marcus Aemilius succeeded Consuls at Rome: At
which time Cassander King of Macedon seeing the Armies of his Enemies to
increase, and that the Storm was impending and ready to fall with all its
weight upon him, was in a great Consternation concerning the Issue and Event:
He sent therefore Ambassadors into Asia to Antigonus, to entreat him to be
reconciled and strike up a Peace with him; who fiercely and roughly answered,
That he would own no Peace that should be made Antigonus his proud Answer. P.
788.
with him, unless Cassander would deliver up all into his hands. At which
Answer he was greatly terrified; and sent for Lysimachus out of Thrace, to
venture all in a Common Lot both together: For ever in his greatest Straits his
manner was to have recourse to him for Relief, both upon the account of his
Valor, and for that his Kingdom bordered upon Macedonia. These two Kings
therefore (consulting together how to manage their Affairs to the best
Advantage of them both) sent Ambassadors to Ptolemy King of Egypt, and to
Seleucus Prince of the Higher Provinces, giving them an account of the proud
Answer of Antigonus; telling them, That they were all in equal Danger by this
War; for if Antigonus gained Macedonia, he would presently swallow up the rest;
and that he had upon several occasions given a clear Discovery of his
Covetousness and Ambition; and that he would have none to be Sharers with him
in any Part of the Empire; and therefore that it was very fit and expedient,
that they should all join together against him. Ant. Chapter 300.


Ptolemy and Seleucus (judging what was said to be certainly true) readily came
into the League, and raised numerous Forces to be assistant in the War.
However, Cassander judged it not prudent to suffer the Enemy first to break in
upon him, but that it was rather for his Advantage to be beforehand with them,
and fall first upon them: To that end he delivered part of the Army to
Lysimachus, and sent a General along with them; and he himself marched with the
rest into Thessaly, to fight with Demetrius and the other Grecians.

Lysimachus with his Army passed over out of Europe into Asia, and set free the
Inhabitants of Lampsacus and Paros, who had sided with him upon their own
accord: But taking Lysimachus goes ^ver into Asia.
Sigaeum by Assault, he put a Garrison into it; and then committed Six thousand
Foot and a Thousand Horse to the Charge of Prepelaus, and sent him to take in
the Cities in Aeolia and Ionia: But he himself in the first place designed to
besiege Abydos, and carried along with him Darts, Battering Rams, and other
Engines for that purpose. But a great number of Soldiers being sent by Sea from
Demetrius for the defense of the City, he left off his Design; and having taken
in Hellespont and Phrygia, he went on and besieged the City Synada, where the
Antigonus
King's Magazine lay, and at the same time drew over Docimus, a Commander of
Antigonus his Party, to stand for the Common Cause; and by his help took both
Synada and other Forts where the King's Treasures were laid up.

In the mean time, Prepelaus, who was sent to make War upon Aeolia and Ionia,
by the way took Adramittium, and besieged Ephesus; and so terrified the
Inhabitants, that they submitted; and finding there the Hostages which the
Rhodians had given, he sent them all Ant. Chapter 300.
home again to their Friends, and did no hurt to any of the Ephesians in their
Persons; but set on fire all the Ships which he found in their Harbor, because
the Enemy Commanded as yet all at Sea, and for that the Issue of the War was
hitherto uncertain. Afterthis, he joined to him the Teians and Coplohonians.
But as for Erythrae and Clazomene, they had Succor sent unto them by Sea, and
therefore he could not take them; but having wasted their Territories, he
departed and went for Sardis; and there he drew over by fair Words Phoenix and
Docimus, two of Antigonus his Captains, and took the City it self, all but the
Antigonus marches against Lysimachus. Antigonia.
Castle into his Protection. As for the Castle, Philippus (a Friend of
Antigonus's) kept, and would not betray the Trust which he had reposed in him.
Antigonus was at that time wholly taken up in making Sports and Feasts at
Antigonia, and had proclaimed great Prizes for such as would put in for them,
and huge Wages to all cunning Artificers that could be gotten.

But when he heard how Lysimachus was come into Asia, and by what Multitudes
his Soldiers revolted to him, he brake off his Sports, and yet disburs'd among
the Wrestlers and Artificers P. 789.
no less than Two hundred Talents; and then taking his Army with him, marched
away out of Syria, and by long Journies hastened to meet the Enemy. As soon as
he came to Tarsus in Cilicia, he there, out of the Moneys which he took with
him out of the City of Quindi, gave his Army Three Months Pay beforehand; and
besides this, brought Three thousand Talents along with him, to the end he
might not be to seek for Money, if need should be. Then passing the Taurus, he
hasted into Cappadoci, and reduced such as in the Ant. Chapter 300.
Upper Phrygia and Lacaonia had revolted from him; and so these served him in
the Wars as they did before.

Then Lysimachus hearing of the Enemy's approach, fell to consult with his
Council in this imminent Danger, what was fittest to be done; and their Advice
was, by no means to hazard a Battle till Seleucus came down from the Upper
Provinces; but to possess himself of the surest Places, and to Entrench himself
in the strongest manner that possibly he could, with Ramparts, Palissadoes, and
Stakes, and there expect the coming of the Enemy. Lysimachus having heard this
Advice, put it seriously in Execution: And Antigonus, on the other side, as
soon as he came near his Camp, drew out in Battalia, and provoked (...) to
fight; but seeing he would not, he went and kept all the Passages by which any
Victual might come unto the Camp: Whereupon, Lysimachus fearing lest he should
fall into the hands of the Enemy forwant of Provision, removed by Night, and
having marched Four hundred Furlongs came to Doryleum, and there Encamped; for
that in those Parts there was sto^e of Corn, and other Provisions in abundance,
having a River at the back of him as a Defense to his Camp. Wherefore having
raised a Work, and enclosed it with an exceeding deep Trench, and Pallisado'd
it with three Rows of Stakes, he made all, as he thought, sure: But Antigonus
finding the Enemy gone, pursued after him with all speed; and coming near to
the Place where he lay, entrenched, and seeing no disposition in him to fight,
he presently fell to work, and drew another Trench round about his Camp to
besiege him there; and to that purpose caused Darts, Arrows, and Catapults, to
be brought thither to him: And though many Skirmishes were Ant. Chapter 300.
made about the Trenches, because Lysimachus his Men endeavored by their Darts
and Arrows to drive the Enemy from their Works, yet Antigonus his Party had
still the better of it in every Encounter. For in time, Antigonus his Works
came to be almost finished; but Lysimachus his Provision began to fail; who
therefore taking the Advantage of a tempestuous Night, made away with his Army,
and through Mountainous Countries came to his Winter Quarters. But when
Antigonus the next Morning saw that the Enemy was gone, he also marched after
him through the Champain Country; but by reason there fell great store of Rain
and the Ways were Foul and Deep, he lost many of his Carriages, and some of his
Men also in that Journey; and the whole Army was in great distress: Wherefore
both to spare his Army, and because the Winter Quarter came on, he gave off his
pursuit; and casting about for the fittest Places, he distributed his Army into
Winter Quarters: But receiving intelligence that Seleucus was marching down
from the Higher Provinces with a numerous Army, he sent one of his Friends into
Greece to Demetrius, Commanding him with all speed to come to him with his
Forces. For he was in an extraordinary Fright, lest all the Kings joining
together should force him to fight (and so lay all at stake) before the Forces
out of Europe could join him.

Lysimachus in the like manner sent his Army to be quartered in the Country of
Salmonia, P. 790.
having made large Provision for them out of Heraclea, for that he had alliance
with them of that City: For he had married Amestris, the Daughter of Oxyartes,
Niece to the late King Darius (whom Alexander gave to Craterus to be his Wife)
and now at this time Governess of Ant. Chapter 300.
the City. And thus stood the Affairs of Asia at that time.

But as to the Affairs of Greece, Demetrius being at Athens, greatly desired to
be initiated Demetrius initiated.
into the Sacred Mysteries of Ceres at Eleusina: But in regard the time
appointed by the Law, and commonly spent by the Athenians in performing the
Ceremonies of this Solemnity, was very long and tedious, he entreated the
People that (in return of his former kindness to them) they would alter their
ancient Custom, which they agreed unto: Whereupon, he committed his Person
unarmed into the Hands of the Priests; and so being His Acts in Greece.
initiated before the Legal Day, he departed from Athens; and then rendezvous'd
both his Fleet and Land-Army at Chalcis in Baeotia; but hearing that Cassander
had blocked up all the Passes, he looked upon it not feasible to go by Land
into Thessaly, and therefore sailed with the Army into the Haven of Larissa,
and there landed his Men, upon which the City was forthwith surrendered to him;
but the Citadel he took by Force of Arms, and bound all the Soldiers of the
Garrison in Chains, and so committed them close Prisoners, and restored the
Larisseans to their ancient Laws and Liberties: Then he took in Prona and
Pteleum. Cassander had commanded the Inhabitants of Cities in Thessaly.
Dion and Orchomenon to remove and settle at Thebes; but Demetrius put a stop
to this Transplanting of the Cities. Cassander, when he saw that every thing
went as Demetrius would have it, strengthened the Garrisons in Phera and Thebes;
and rendezvous'd his Forces in the Face of the Demetrians: His whole Army
consisted of Nine and twenty thousand Foot, and Two Armies of Demetrius and
Cassander.
thousand Horse. Those who followed Demetrius amounted to Fifteen hundred
Horse, at least Eight thousand Macedonian Foot, and Fifteen thousand
Mercenaries; and out of the Cities of Greece Five and twenty thousand; besides
several Regiments of Light-armed Men, Ant Chapter 300
and a disorderly Rabble of fordid Fellows out of all Nations, to the Number of
Eight thousand at the least, such as are used to follow Camps, only to Rob and
Plunder wherever they come: So that the whole Land-Army consisted of Six and
Fifty thousand Men.

The Armies had now lay'n one over against the other many days, and though they
were drawn up in Battalia on both sides, yet neither attempted to sight,
solicitously expecting to hear how things went in Asia. At that time, Demetrius
entered with part of his Army into the City of Pherea, being invited thither by
the Inhabitants; and took the Citadel, and dismissed all Cassander's Soldiers,
upon the Terms agreed upon, and restored the Phereans to their former
Liberties. While these Things were acting in T(...), the Messengers from
Antigonus came to Demetrius, who delivered his Father's Commands, and ordered
him to transport his Forces over into Asia, with all the speed imaginable.

Whereupon, he looking upon it as a thing of absolute Necessity to obey his
Father, forthwith struck up a Peace with Cassander, upon Condition, that his
Father would approve Demetrius makes Peace with Cassander.
of it; not in the least doubting, but that he would make all void, who he knew
had resolved to put an end to the War, by no other ways than by force of Arms.
However he was willing to manage his Business so, as that his leaving of Greece
should look with a fair Face, and not resemble a Flight: For among other
things, he took care to have it inserted into the Articles of Peace, That all
the Greek Cities, both in Greece and Asia, should enjoy their ancient Laws and
Liberties. At length, having got Ships together to P. 791. Ant. Chapter 300.
Demetrius go^s to his Father.
transport his Army and the Carriages, he set sail with his whole Fleet, and
steering a right Course through the Islands, (of the Aegean Sea) came to
Ephesus, and there landing his Army, Encamped before it, and reduced it to its
former Obedience, and suffered the Garrison which Prepalaus had put there,
safely to depart: Then putting a strong Garrison of his own into the Castle
there, marched away with the rest of his Army as far as the Hellespont, where
he reduced the Lampsacenians and Parians, and other revolted Cities to his
Subjection: And from thence going to the Mouth of Pentus, Encamped near the
Temple of the Chalcedentans, and there fortisy'd; which done, he left there
Three thousand Foot, and Thirty Sail of good Ships to keep the Port, and sent
the rest of his Army to Quarter for that Winter in several Places thereabouts.

About this time, Mithridates, who was subject to Antigonus, being suspected of
favoring Cassander's Party, was slain at Cius, in the Country of Mysia; of
which, and of Arthinas he had been Prince Thirty five years. His Son, called
also Mithridates, succeeded him in his Principality, and added to his Dominions
Cappadocia and Paphlagonia, and held them Thirty six years.

In these days Cassander, after the departure of Demetrius, recovered all the
Cities lying upon the Sea Coasts, and sent Pleistarchus into Asia, with an Army
of Twelve thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse to assist Lysimachus. But
Pleistarchus coming to the Mouth Ant. Chapter 300.
of Pontus, found that Straight kept by the Enemy: And thereupon, despairing of
any Passage that way, went to Odessus, which lies between Apollonia and
Galatia, over against The Misfortunes of Pleistarchus Cassander's General at
Sea.
Heraclea, where a Part of Lysimachus his Army lay: But having not Shipping
enough for the Transportation of all his Forces at that Place, he divided his
Army into three Parts: The first part that set out, landed safely at Heraclea:
The second was defeated by the Enemy's Ships which lay to keep the Straight at
Pontus: The third, wherein Pleistarchus himself was, was so overset by a
violent Tempest, that the greatest part of the Ships, and Men in them perished:
And among the rest the Ship wherein he was, being a Vessel of Six Tire of Oars;
and of all the Men in her, which could not be less than Five hundred, only
Three and thirty escaped, of whom Pleistarchus himself was one, who getting
upon a Plank of the Ship when it split, was cast on Shore half dead; yet being
a little recovered, was carried to Heraclea, and there growing strong again,
went to Lysunachus in his Winter Quarters, having lost the greatest part of his
Army by the way.

About the same time, Ptolemy coming with an excellently well-appointed Army
out of Egypt, reduced all the Cities of Caelosyria to his Obedience; but when
he lay in Siege before Sidon, there came a false Rumor to his Ear, that a
Battle had been sought, wherein Lysimachus and Seleucus were routed and fled to
Heraclea, and that Antigonus thereupon was hasting into Syria with his
Victorious Army.

Ptolemy giving overlight credit to this Report, made a Truce with the
Sidonians for five Months, and putting Garrisons into other Cities which he had
taken in those Parts, returned into Egypt.

While these things thus passed, Two thousand Autariats, and about Eight
hundred Lycians and Pamphilians of Lysunachus his Soldiers, fled over to
Antigonus out of their Winter Quarters, and Antigonus entertained them very
courteously, furnishing them with such Pay, as they said Lysimachus owed them,
and gave them also for a Reward large Sums of Money over and above.

About the same time also, Seleucus, with a great Army came down out of the
Upper Provinces into Cappadocia, and Wintered his Army in Tents which he
brought ready made Seleucus. P. 792.
for them. His Army consisted of Twenty thousand Foot, and about Twelve
thousand Horse, (reckoning in with them his Archers on Horseback) and Four
hundred and fourscore Elephants, and an Hundred Iron Chariots: Thus these Kings
joined their Forces, resolving the next Summer to decide the Controversy by
the Sword. But we shall give an Account of the Wars among these Princes in the
Beginning of the next Book, according as we first designed.

FINIS.
THE FRAGMENTS OF Diodorus Siculus. OUT OF Some of his BOOKS that are Lost.



LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for A. and J. Churchill at the Black-Swan in
Paternoster Row: 1699.

To the READER.
THE last Twenty Books of Diodorus Siculus are entirely lost, (except some
Ecclogues or Fragments in Photius his Bibliotheca and others, recovered by Hoes
Chelius, and published by Laurentius Rhodomannus,) which contained an Account
of Affairs for the space of 244 Years, or there abouts; i. e. from the End of
the 119th Olympiad, (when Antigonus and Demetrius Poliorcetes were routed by
Ptolemeus Lagus and the other Confederates, An. M. 3650.) to the End of the
180th Olympiad, at which time Julius Caesar made his first Expedition into
Britain, which was in the 693d Year of the City, as Eutropius accounts, Lib. 6.

The Reader is desired to observe, That these being but Fragments, or Pieces of
Diodorus, recovered out of the Rubbish (as it were) of Antiquity, the Relations
are often broken, and new Matter sometimes begun that has no Coherence with
what went before. Where they are broken, they are Noted generally thus, -- The
new Matter is easily discerned by Observation.

A Fragment out of the Sixth Book of the Bibliotheca of Diodorus Siculus, taken
out of Eusebius Pamphilus, Book II. Evang. Preparation.
THese therefore are the most remarkable Things that are recorded among the
Atlantides concerning the Gods; and they say, the Grecians use the same Rites
and Ceremonies. The same things Diodorus says in the 3d Book of his History:
And the same Diodorus confirms the same Theology in his 6th Book, from the
History of Euemerus the Messenian, where these are his words -- The Ancients
therefore held two Opinions (which are brought down to Posterity) concerning
the Gods: Some they say are Immortal and Incorruptible, as the Sun, Moon, and
rest of the Stars; and likewise the Winds, and other Things of the like Nature,
for none of these have either Beginning, or End. But there are others, they
say, that are Earthly Gods, but for their good Deeds to the benefit of Mankind,
have attained to the highest pitch of Honor and Glory; and such were Hercules,
Dionysius or Bacchus Aristaeus, and such like. Of these Terrestrial Gods, many
and various Stories are related by Historians, and Poets.
Mythologists. Among the Historians, Euemerus has composed a Sacred History,
and written peculiarly of these Deities. Among the Mythologists or Poets,
Homer, Hesiod, Orpheus, and others of that kind, have seign'd most prodigious
Stories of the Gods. We shall endeavor in short to run over what has been writ
by both, observing a Mean. Euemerus, a special Friend of King Cassander, being
forced to undertake some great and weighty Affairs, and long and tedious
Voyages for the King, they say, was driven far away through the Ocean,
Southward; and loosing from Arabia Faelix, after many days sail, arrived at
certain Islands situated in the midst of the Ocean; the greatest of which was
one called Panchaia, in which he saw the Panchaians very zealous and eminent
for Religion, who adored the Gods with magnificent and pompous Sacrifices, and
rich Gifts both of Gold and Silver. They say moreover, that the Island is
consecrated to the Gods, and that there were many other Things in it that were
admirable, both for their Antiquity and Excellency of Workmanship; of which, we
have given a particular Account in the precedent Books. That there is likewise
in it, upon the top of an high Mountain, a Temple dedicated to Jupiter
Tryphylius, built by him when he conversed here with Men, and governed the
whole World; in which Temple there is a Golden Pillar, whereon are distinctly
described in Panchaian Letters, the Acts of Coelum, Heaven.
Vranus, Saturn, and Jupiter. Afterward he says, That the first King was
Vranus, a just and good Man, and very skilful in Astrology: And that he was the
first that adored the Heavenly Gods, and therefore was called In Greek,
signifies Heaven.
Vranus: And that he begat on his Wife Vesta two Sons, Pan and Saturn, and two
Daughters, Rhea and Ceres. He says moreover, that Saturn reigned after Vranus,
and married Rhea, and begat Jupiter, Juno, and Neptune; and that Jupiter
succeeding Saturn, married Juno, Ceres, and Themis: Of the first of which he
begat the Curetes, Proserpina of the second, and Minerva of the third; and that
afterward coming to Babylon, he was Belus his Guest. And that from thence
arriving at the Island Panchaia, he erected an Altar to Vranus his Grandfather;
and then passing through Syria, he came to Prince Cassius, from whom the
Mountain M^un: Cassius.
was called Mount Cassius. Then traveling into Cilicia, he overcame Cilix, the
Lord of the Country; and having at last passed through several other Nations,
was highly honored by all, and styled a God. When he had delivered these and
suchlike Things concerning the Gods, as of mortal Men, he subjoins this; Let
this therefore suffice in reference to Euemerus, who writ the Sacred History.
And as to what the Greeks sabulously report concerning the Gods, we shall
endeavor to give as succinct an Account as we can, tracing the Steps of Homer,
Hesiod, and Orpheus.

George Monachus, or the Monk, who writ in Greek a Chronical History: Out of
the History of Diodorus, concerning the Corinthian Kingdom.
HAving given an Account of these Things, it remains we should now speak of
Corinth and Sicyon, how they were planted and inhabited by the Doreans; for
almost all the Nations in Peloponnesus, except the Arcadians, were removed from
their ancient Seats at the time of the return of the Heraclidae; who leaving
out Corinth in the Division, sent Messengers to Aletes, and gave him the said
Province, together with the neighboring Territory. This Man became very
famous, and enlarged Corinth, where he reigned 38 years. After his Death, the
eldest and next of Kin ever succeeded in the Kingdom, down to the Reign of
Cypsellus, 427 years after the return of the Heraclidae. The first that reigned
at Corinth after Aletes was Ixion, who held the Kingdom 38 years. After whom,
Agesilaus reigned 37 years; and after them, Prumnes 35 years, and his Son
Bacches as long, who was the most famous and renowned of any of his Ancestors,
so that those that reigned after him were not called Heraclidae, but Bacchidae.
After Bacches, Agelas enjoyed the Throne 30 years; Eudamus 25; Aristomedes 35,
who after his Death left behind him a Son called Telestes, a little Child, who
was deprived of his Father's Kingdom by Agemon, his Uncle and Guardian, who
reigned 16 years: After him, Alexander came to the Crown, and enjoyed it 25
years, and was then killed by Telestes, who had been before deprived of the
Kingdom of his Ancestors, which he now regained, and possessed it 12 years, and
then was murdered by some of his own Kindred, and Automenes reigned in his
stead One year; after which, the Bacchidae, the Posterity of Hercules, enjoyed
the Kingdom for above 200 years, and all governed together with equal
Authority; but every year they created one among themselves Prytanis, who had
the Power of a Monarch for 90 years, till the time of the Reign of Cypsellus,
who put an end to that sort of Government. These therefore are the Kings of
Corinth. Bacches reigned 35 years.

The same George of the Original of the Romans; A Fragment out of the 7th Book
of Diodorus Siculus.
SOme Writers have erroniously held, that Romulus, who built Rome, was the Son
of Aeneas: But this cannot possibly be true, since there were many Kings that
reigned in course between Aeneas and Romulus; the City being built the 2d Year
of the 7th Olympiad, which was above 430 years after the Trojan War. For Aeneas
gained the Kingdom of the Latins 3 years after the Destruction of Troy, and
reigned only 3 years, and after his Death was adored as a God. Ascanius, his
Son, succeeded him, and built Alba, called at this day Longa. He gave the City
this Name from the River which was then called Alba, and now Tiber: But Fabius,
who writ an History of the Roman Affairs, speaks otherwise of the naming of
this City. For he tells a Story, how Aeneas was foretold by the Oracle, that a
Four-footed Beast should show him the way to the Place where a new City should
be built; which came thus to pass: Being about to sacrifice a Alba is White.
White Sow then big with Young, made her escape, and ran away to a Hill,
whither she was pursued, and there she brought forth 30 Pigs. Aeneas wondering
at the Accident, and calling to mind the Answer of the Oracle, forthwith went
about to settle Inhabitants in the Place; but being warned by a Vision in the
Night to desist, and not to build till after 30 years then next ensuing, he
left off his Design till the number of Years was completed.

The Eclogs or Fragments of Diodorus Siculus, out of the 21st, 22d, 23d, 24th,
25th, and 26th Books that are now lost.
Out of the 21st Book.
1. ALL Vice is to be avoided by every Wise Man, but especially Covetousness.
For this (through hopes and desire of Gain) prompts many to acts of Injustice,
and so becomes the occasion of the greatest Mischiefs to Mankind. For being
(...) Olymp. 119. 4. Ant. Chapter 299.
in the (...).
very highest Sphere of Wickedness, it involves not only mean Men, but even
Kings themselves in extreme Calamities, For Antigonus King of Asia, as an
Example of this Truth, out of his insatiable desire, beginning a War against
Four other Kings (who joined against him) viz. Ptolemy Lagus King of Egypt,
Seleucus King of Babylon, Lysimachus of Thrace, and Cassander the Son of
Antipater King of Macedonia, perished in Battle At Issus: in Phrygia. Plut. in
Pyrrhus Anian. lib. 7.
being shot through the Body with Multitudes of Darts and Arrows, (though
afterward Buried in a Royal manner) and his Son Demetrius, with his Mother
Stratonice (who were then in Cilicia) were forced to sail away with all the
Wealth they had to Salamis in Cyprus, that remaining still in the hands of
Demetrius.

2. Agathocles King of Sicily, burnt all the Macedonian Fleet, and so freed
Corcyra when Agathocles frees Corcyra.
it was Besieged by Cassander, both by Sea and Land, and very near and likely
to be taken. Oh the many uncertainties of War! For Folly and Fraud many times
effect as great things as true Valor and Courage.

3. Agathocles being returned to the rest of his Army from Corcyra, when he
heard that the Ligurians and Tyrrhenians (who were his Mercenary Soldiers) had
assisted those Agathocles King of Sicily puts 2000 Mercenaries to the Sword.
who killed his Son Archagathus in his absence, put them all to the Sword, to
the number of Two thousand: Upon which Account the Brutii deserting him, he
resolved to Besiege their City called Aetini, People of Sicily. Agathocles
takes Crotona in Italy.
Aethas. But the Barbarians in great numbers falling upon him suddenly in the
Night, cut off Four thousand of his Men, and so he returned to Syracuse.

4. Agathocles rigged out a great Fleet, and sailed into Italy; and having a
design to march his Army to Crotona, he sent a Messenger before to Menedemus,
King of Crotona (who was his particular Friend) not to be afraid of his Motion;
which was merely to deceive him; and purposing to Besiege the Place, he gave
out that he was sending away his Daughter Lanassa with a Royal Fleet to Epirus
to Marry her: And by this Fraud he came upon them when they were unprovided,
and never suspected him. Thereupon, applying himself with all earnestness to
the Siege, he blocked up the Place by a Wall drawn from Sea to Sea. And having
by his Mines and Batteries ruined the greatest House of the Town, the
Crotoneans out of fear opened their Gates and received his Army into the City,
who breaking in like a Flood, first rifl'd all the Houses, and then put all the
Men to the Sword. He likewise made a League with the neighboring Barbarians,
the Japygians, and Peucetians, furnishing them with Ships for Piracy, and
shared with them in the Robbery. At length having p^t a Garrison into Crotona,
he sailed back to Syracuse.

5. Diallus the Athenian Writer composed a General History in Twenty six Books.
And Psaon of Platea anoth^r in Thirty Books.

6. In the War against the Hetruscians, Gauls and Samnites, and their
Confederates, the Romans destroyed (when Fabius was Consul) an Hundred thousand
Men, as Daris relates.

7. Antipater out of Envy, killed his own Mother. Alexander his Brother was
likewise Olymp. 121. Ant. Chapter 296.
killed by Demetrius, whom Alexander had sent for to his assistance. Antipater
the Murderer of his Mother was also served the same Sauce by Demetrius,
unwilling to have a partner in the Kingdom.

8. Agathocles raised an Army and sailed over into Italy with 30000 Foot and
Agathocles again invades Italy.
2000 Horse. And ^ving the Command of the Fleet to Stilpo, he ordered him to
wast and spoil the C^untry of the Brutii: While he was harassing the
Seacoasts, he lost many of his Ships in a Storm. But Agathocles, by the help
of his battering Engines took the City Hipponium: which so terrified the
Brutii, that they sent Ambassadors to treat with him upon ter^^ of Peace: Upon
which he put in a Garrison and carried away with ^im Six hundred ^ostages, and
returned to Syracuse. But the Brutii made slight of their Oath, and with the
whole power of the City, fell upon the Garrison and flew every His Garrison all
M^rd^red.
Man, and afterward recovered their Hostages, and freed themselves from the
Yoke of Agathocles. Lenity is to be preferred before Revenge.

9. Most Generals of Armies when they are brought into Straits and
Difficulties, (out of Fear) do generally humor the Multitude.

10. When the Thebans made a Second defection, Demetrius battered down their
Walls, and took the City by Storm, and put only Ten Men to Death, who were the
Ringleaders Demetrius takes Thebes.
of the Rebellion.

11. Agathocles sent his Son Agathocles to Demetrius to enter into a League
with him, Offensive and Defensive. The King kindly received the young Man, and
bestowed on him a Royal Robe, and many other Rich and Princely gifts: And sent
along with him Oxythemes his special Friend, under color to confirm the
League, but in truth to be a Spy in Sicily.

12. King Agathocles after a long Peace between him and the Carthaginians, at
length Agathocles Riggs a Fleet against Carthage.
Rigged out a great Fleet. For he designed to transport an Army into Lybia, and
with his Navy to hinder the Exportation of all Corn and Provision, from
Sardinia, and Sicily to the Carthaginians, who by the last War had gained the
Dominion of the Sea, and thereby had secured their Country from Invasions. And
though Agathocles had a well furnished Fleet, to the number of Two hundred
Galleys of four and six Tire of Oars, yet he failed in his design, by reason of
what shortly happened. For there was one Menon an Agestone, a beautiful Captive
then Servant to the King, who for some time conformed himself to a strict
compliance to the Kings humor, so that he was taken into the number of his
(...) His Catamite. Menon, his Catami^e.
beloved and intimate Friends. But because of the ruin of his Country and the
dishonorable abuse of his own Person, he bore a secret hatred to the King, and
watched an opportunity to be revenged. The King because he was old, entrusted
Archagathus with the Command of the Army: he was the Son of Archagathus who was
killed in Lybia, and so was King Agathocles's Granchild, he was a Man of a
strong Body, and of a brave and generous Spirit, far above all the rest of his
Family. When he was Encamped with the Army near Aetna, the King had a desire to
promote his Son Agathocles to be his Successor in the Kingdom, and to that end
recommended the young Man to the Syracusians, and declared his purpose and
design to have him Succeed. Afterward he sent him to the Camp, with Letters to
Archagathus, which ordered him to deliver up the Command of all the Forces both
by Sea and Land to his Son; Upon which Archagathus perceiving that the Kingdom
was designed for another, contrived the destruction of them both: And to that
end sent a Messenger to Menon of Aegista, who persuaded him to poison the King:
Archagathus The son of Agathocles Murdered.
He himself celebrating a Sacrifice in a certain Island, where Agathocles then
lay with the Fleet, Invited him to the Festival; and in the Night (when he was
dead drunk) cut his throat, and threw his Body into the Sea, which being
afterward cast up by the Violence of the Waves, was known by the Inhabitants,
and carried to Syracuse. And whereas it was the King's Custom always after
Supper to pick his Teeth with a Quill, now rising from the Table, he called to
Menon for his Toothpicker: Who having dipped the end of it in Poison, delivered
it to the King; who never suspecting any thing, plied all his Teeth with that
care and earnestness, that none of his Guns escaped the touch of the Poison.
Upon ths the Kingbegan by little and The manner of his Death.
little to be very ill, which was succeeded by violent Torments in his Body
every Day. Then an incurable putrefaction and rottenness covered hs Gums and
Teeth, and now drawing near to his end, he called a Senate, where he complained
of the wickedness of Archagathus, and incited the People to take revenge of him
for his Villainies, declaring that he would forthwith restore them to their
Democracy. Afterward when he was in the very height of his Extremity,
Oxythemes (that had been there a little before, sent by King Demetrius) hurried
him to the Funeral Pile, and ^urnt him while he was yet alive, and not able to
speak by reason of the foulness and filthness of his Mouth through the Poison.
And thus Agathocles for the many Slaughters and Murders of his Reign, and
Olymp. 123. 4. A. M. 3798. His Life is notorious. vide Justin lib. 22. 23. his
end otherwise rela^^d.
Cruelties toward his own Subjects, and Impieties against the ^ods came to an
end, such as he justly deserved for his former wickednesses, after he hd
Reigned Twenty eight Years, and lived Seventy two, as Timeus the Syracusian
relates, and Callias another Syracusian (who writ Two and twenty Books) and
Antander likewise the Brother of Agathocles an Historian. The Syracusians
having now Regained there Democratical Government Consiscated all the Goods and
Estate of Agathocles, and book down all his Statues. Menon in the mean time
(who had Plotted and Executed the T^ason) was at the Camp with Archagathus,
having fled thither from Syracuse: And now beginning to look very big upon it
(as being the Man that had ruined the Monarchy) ^e secretly Murders
Archagathus, and with fair Words, and winning Carriage brought over the Army to
his Interest, and determined to force Syracuse to Obedience, and gain the
Principality. Hereupon the Syracusians created Hicetas General against Menon,
he continued the War for some time: Menon all along seeking to avoid Fighting,
and could by no means be brought to engage. But when the Carthaginians joined
with Menon (by which he became far stronger than the Syracusians) they were
forced to agree with the Carthaginians, and deliver Four hundred Hostages for
further Security of the Peace, and to restore all the Exiles. However, when the
Mercenary Soldiers were denied their right to give their Votes for the choosing
of the Magistrates, the City was presently in an uproar: And both Syracusians
and Mercenaries ran to their Arms: But some of the better sort interposed, and
by much Intercession prevailed with both parties to agree upon this Condition,
That the Soldiers should depart out of Sicily by such a time, and take all
their Goods along with them: Hereupon the Foreign Soldiers Marched away from
Syracuse, and came to Messina, where they were received into the City as
Friends and Confederates, The Mercenaries murder the Messinians in the Night.
and being kindly entertained in their Houses, in the Night they Massacred all
their Hosts, and Marrying their Wives, Seized upon the City, which they called
Mamertina from Mars, which in their own Campania.
Country Language they call Mamers.

13. For they that are not Members of the Democratical Government, are not
admitted by the Tribune of the People to give their Suffrage amongst them that
are.

14. It Is a commendable thing to be ever Terrible to an Enemy, and always kind
and courteous to a Friend.

15. Since that at that time, when you knew not what was best or fittest to be
done, you were caught with fair and enticeing Words: And now when you see
Calamity upon the Country indeed, you are taught another Lesson. For to be
Ignorant sometimes of things that may fall out in this Life, is natural to
Mankind: But to be deceived twice in the same thing, argues a Man to be a Fool.
And the oftener we are so deceived, the greater punishment we deserve. Some of
the Citizens are grown to that height of Covetousness that they would fain
raise up the glory of their Families by the ruin of their Country. For they
that have so wickedly acted in assisting others, pray! how have they been used
by them.

16. Offenses are to be forgiven, and Peace to be kept for the time to come.

17. Not they that offend; but they that repent not of their offenses, ought to
be severely punished.

18. Mercy and Kindness amongst Men, is more Ancient than Wrath and Revenge.

19. It Is a commendable and desirable thing to lay aside all Animosities. and
instead thereof to return to Friendship and Amity. For when a Man is reduced to
Poverty and Straits, he presently (at the first Nod as it were) runs to his
Friends.

20. Covetousness being naturally Ingrafted into Men, no Man can be wholly free
from this Vice. Pride, and a Tyrant's Robes ought to be left at home. For he
that enters into a free City, ought to conform himself to the Laws of the
Place. He that is of a Princely Family, and comes to a Kingdom by Hereditary
descent, is desirous likewise to succeed in the Glory and Reputation of his
Ancestors. For it is a Base and Dishonorable thing to carry the Name of Pyrrhus
the Son of Achilles, and yet in Actions to imitate A^ filthy ugly fellow killed
by Achilles for his saucines by a box on the Ear. Hom. 2. lib. Iliad.
Thersites. For the more honor and reputation any Person has gained, so much
the more the regard and respect will he have for them who were the Instruments
of his Advancement and happy Successes. Therefore what may be honorably and
deservedly obtained, should not be used unjustly and disgracefully, when it is
enjoyed. It is therefore (Gentlemen) a commendable thing, by the example of
other Men's Harms and Mistakes, Wisely to provide for our own Security.

21. It does not become any Man to have more regard to Strangers, than his own
kindred, and to be more fearful to exasperate an Enemy, than careful to
preserve the good Will and Opinion of his Allies.

Out of the 22d Book.
1. IT IS the natural Property of the Epirots not only to fight for their
Country, but to run all hazards likewise for the Defense of their Friends and
Allies.

2. Decius the Roman Tribune Governor of Rhegium, to revenge his Country of
King About the 125, or 126. Olympiad. Ant. Chapter 278.
Pyrrhus, killed all the Inhabitants save the Women, whom he sold for Slaves,
and seized upon all the Goods and Estates of them that were slain. These were
Campanians, who acted the same Cruelty here as the Mamertines did when they
Massacred all the Messinians. Decius puts all the Rhegians to death.
Afterward, because he made not an equal distribution of the Prey, and Plunder
taken from those miserable People, he was Banished Rhegium by his own Country
men the Campanians. The Mamertines themselves assisted in this Butchery: And
with the Money that was left hired him to be their Captain, and Chief
Commander. Afterward a distemper falling into his Eyes, he advised with a
skilful Physician, who to revenge the Injuries and Cruelties done to his
Country, prescribed an application of Cantharides which wholly deprived him of
his sight: And the Physician himself took Care to withdraw from Decius made
blind by Cantharides.
Messina. In Sicily, in the mean time there were these Princes, Hicetas at
Syracuse, Phintias at Agrigentam, Tyndarus at Tauromenium, and some others in
the lesser Cities. Phintias and Hicetas were at War one with another, and
sought a Battle at Hibleum in which Hicetas Petty Princes in Sicily, at War one
with another.
was Conqueror. Afterward making several Incursions one upon another, and
Robbing and Spoiling every where, the Country by this means lay untilled.
Hicetas puffed up with his Victory, engaged with the Carthaginians at the River
Teria, where he was beaten with the loss of a great number of his Men. At that
time Phintias built Phintia, and planted there the Geleons who were driven out
of their Country. It is Situated at the Seaside: For both the Houses and
Walls of Gela being utterly demolished; after he had walled Phintia and made a
stately Market place, and built Temples for the Service of the Gods, he
Transplanted the People of Gela thither. When he had committed the Murder, he
was hated by all the Cities under his Government, who drove out all the
Garrisons, among whom the first were the Agyrineans.

3. King Ptolemy was Killed by the Gaus, and the whole Macedonian Army utterly
destroyed Olymp. 129. 3. 4. Ant. Chapter 360.
and cut off.

4. A Cadmean Victory is a Proverb, meant when the Conquerors have lost
abundance of Men, and the Conquered are little the worse, because of the
largeness of their Empire.

5. Phintias the Builder of Phintia, and Tyrant of Agrigentum, in a Dream had a
representation pointing out to him his own Death. He thought he saw, as he was
Hunting the Bore, that a Sow fiercely made up upon him, and struck him on the
side with her Teeth, which so pierced him that he Died.

6. Hicetas after he had Reigned nine Years at Syracuse, was deprived of his
Kingdom by Thynion the Son of Mameus.

7. Thynion and Softratus the Successors of Hicetas, sent again for King Pyrrus
into Sicily.

8. The Mamertines who treacherously Murdered the Messinians, having entered
into a League with the Carthaginians, in a Senate decreed to hinder Pyrrhus
from Landing in The War between the Romans and Pyrrhus, b^gan the 124 Olym. 4.
Ant. Chapter 279.
Sicily. But Tyndarion, Tyrant of Tauromenia sided with him, and was ready to
receive into the City those Forces that joined with him.

9. The Carthaginians entered into a League with the Romans, and took a-board
500 Men into their own Ships, and Sailed over to Rhegium, and began to assault
the Place, but at length raised their Siege, and having set on fire all the
Timber and other Materials, there prepared for Shipping, they made to Sea, and
there lay to observe the motion of Pyrrhus.

When Thynio had the Command of the * Island, and Sostratus lorded it over the
Syracusians, having each an Army of 10000 Men, they broke out into War one
against another, This Island was part of the City Syracuse.
but being tired out, they both sent Ambassadors to Pyrrhus.

11. Pyrrhus Warred in Italy 2 Years and 4 Months, and whilst he was preparing
for his departure, the Carthaginians closely besieged the Syracusians both by
Sea and Land. They had a Fleet of 100 Sail that lay in the great Haven; and a
Land Army of 50000 Men that Encamped near the Walls, and with these they penned
up the Syracusians, within the City, and Wasting and Harrassing the Country
round about, they even turned it into a desolate Wilderness. The Syracusians
therefore wearied out with the War, depended only upon Pyrrhus, in regard he
had Married Lanassa the Daughter of Agathocles, of whom he had begotten
Alexander: Upon which account they sent every Day one Messenger after another
to him; whereupon Shipping his Men, Elephants and other Provisions, he loosed
from Tarentum, and arrived the 10th Day at Locris: Thence he Sailed after his
Landing in S^^lly, to Tauromenium; and there being joined with Tyndario Prince
of that Py^^hus comes into Sicily.
City, and Enforced by him with more Soldiers, he made from thence and came to
Catana, where being Magnificently received by the Inhabitants, and laden with
golden Crowns, he landed his Men, with which he Marched straight toward
Syracuse: His Marches to Syracuse.
Fleet ready prepared for an Engagement, Sailing with him all along upon the
Coast. When he came near to Syracuse the Carthaginians (because they had sent
away 30 of their Vessels for necessary Provisions) durst not venture a Battle
with those that remained, so that Pyrrhus came to Syracuse without any
opposition: The Part of the (...).
Island being kept by Thynio and the rest of the City by the Syracusians and
Sosistrates. For he had under his Command Agrigentum, and many other Cities,
and above 10000 Soldiers. And having then reconciled Thynio and Sosistratas,
and the Syracusians, and brought them all to a right understanding among
themselves, he was thereupon highly Esteemed and Applauded. The King received
Weapons, Engines, and other Furniture and Provisions which was in the City, and
120 Decked Ships, and 20 open Vessels * But the Palace belonged to Enneres.
Something here wanting, for it seems to have no coherence with what is
precedent or subsequent.
The whole Navy therefore (with those he brought along with him) consisted of
200 Sail. Whilst he was thus employed, Ambassadors came from the Leontines
(sent to him from Heraclidas the Governor) with promise to deliver up the City
into his hands, with the Garrisons and 4000 Foot, and 500 Horse. There were then
many others at Syracuse, who promised to deliver up their Cities to Pyrrhus,
and to join with him in the War: He received them all Graciously, and sent them
back to their several Countries, hoping now shortly to be Lord of Lybia.

12 The Port of Corinth is called Lechoeum.

13. Brennus King of the Gauls made an inroad into Macedonia with an Hundred
and forty thousand Targateers, and Ten thousand Horse, and with a great
multitude of other foreign Rabble, and many Merchants, together with Two
thousand Carts and Carriages. He made great havoc and slaughter with a design
to ruin them utterly; at last he broke About (...) (...)cond Olymp 125. Ant.
Ch 279. Vid. Justin. lib. 24. C. 6, 7, 8. The Gauls make an inroad into
Macedonia.
into Greece, and fully proposed to rifle the Temple at Delphos. By frequent
Engagements he lost A Myriad is Ten thousand. Brennus kill. himself. The Gauls
all perish. The Acts of Pyrrhus in Sicily.
Myriads of his Men, and he himself received Three desperate wounds. Being near
his end, he called his Army together, and made a Speech to the Gauls, and
advised them to kill both him and all the rest of the wounded Men, and to burn
all their Carriages, and return home with all speed, and make Cichorius their
King. Brennus at length after he had swill'd down abundance of Wine, ran
himself through the Body. Cichorius (as soon as he had buried Brennus) knocked
all the wounded Men on the Head, that were like to be starved with Hunger, and
perish by the Cold, to the number of Twenty thousand, and returned with the
rest the same way they came: But the Grecians that lay in ambush in the strait
and narrow passages, cut off all their Rear, and took all their Bag and
Baggage; marching forward to Thermopilae, they left there behind them Twenty
thousand more for want of Food: at length as they were passing through the
Country of the Dardanians, they all perished, and not one Man returned to his
own Country.

14. But Pyrrhus when he had settled all things in Syracuse and Leontinum,
marched with his Army toward Agrigentum, and while he was in his March, he was
told by some that came off Shipboard, that they had driven out the Carthaginian
Garrison, that Phintias might not Govern them, and promised they would deliver
the City into his hands, and join with him as Confederates in the War. Having
therefore received the Forces, he marched straight to Agrigentum, and received
the City and Soldiers from Sosistratus, to the number of 8000 Foot and 800
Horse, nothing inferior to the Epirots. And now he took into his protection 30
Cities which were under the Command of Sosistratus. Afterward he sent to
Syracuse for the Engines of Battery, and all the Arms and Darts, and when they
were brought to him, he marched into the Territories of the Carthaginians,
having an Army with him of 30000 Foot and 1500 Horse, and some Elephants. And
First he took in Heraclea a Carthaginian Garrison: Then Azones, after they of
Selinunte came in to the King, with the Halicyens Aegestines, and many other
Cities. Aeryx at that time had in it a very strong Carthaginian Garrison, and
was beside naturally fortified and difficult to approach. Pyrrhus was resolved
to storm this place, and to that end brought his battering Rams to the Walls:
After a strong defense made for a long time, the King desirous to make his Name
Famous (in imitation of Hercules) was the first that entered within the Walls,
and fought with that Courage and Resolution, that he dispatched all those
Carthaginians that came within his reach; at length Succors coming in to him,
he Aeryx taken by Storm by Pyrrhus.
took the Town by Storm; then leaving there a strong Carrison he marched to
Eginera, a very strong place, and pleasantly situated near Panormus. They of
Eginera surrendered the City; and thence he forthwith made for Panormus, which
had the best Harbor of any City in Sicily, from whence this City was so called;
He took it likewise by Storm. Then taking in the Fort at Ercte, he gained all
that belonged to the Carthaginians, except Panormus taken by S(...)m.
Lilibeum. This City was built by the Carthaginians after Dionysius the Tyrant
had ruined Motya. For those that were left alive after that slaughter, the
Carthaginians settled in Lilibeum. Just as Pyrrhus was ready to besiege this
place, a great Army landed there out of Africa, having the advantage of being
Masters at Sea, and brought with them abundance of Corn, and an innumerable
number of Engines and Weapons of War. And because the greatest part of the City
lay near to the Sea, they were most careful to guard that part toward the main
Land, and to that end raised many Bulwarks and high Towers, ^il. b^um (...)
and drew a large Trench to prevent an approach on that side. Then they sent
Ambassadors to the King to treat upon terms of Peace, and to offer him a great
sum of Money; But the King refusing the Money, they desired that he would
permit the Carthaginians to keep only Lilybeum. But the Confederates that were
then assembled in Senate, and the Representatives of the several Cities, sent
to him, and earnestly entreated him, he would not upon any terms whatsoever
permit the Barbarians to have any footing in Sicily, but drive the
Carthaginians wholly out of the Island; and limit their Power at Sea. Upon this
the King encampt near the Walls; and at first made several Assaults one upon
the neck of another; But the Carthaginians being well furnished both with Men
and other necessaries, beat him off. For they had so vast a number of Engines
that cast Darts and Stones, that the Wall could scarcely contain them: which
being all plied against the Assailants, they were so galled and cut off, that
Pyrrhus was forced to draw off his Men. Then he began to contrive other Engines
(besides those he had from Syracuse) and did all he could to undermine the
Walls. But the Carthaginians making a stout resistance, and the place being all
of Rock, he was now out of all hopes to take it by force, and therefore (after
Two Months lying before it) he raised his Siege. And now he designed to bend
his Force elsewhere, and to that end to furnish himself with a great Fleet, in
order to be Master of the Sea. and to Transport a great Army into Africa.

15. When the Mamertines in Messina grew strong, they fortified many Castles,
and put Garrisons into them. And came presently with an Army (they had ordered
to be in readiness) to the relief of Messina. But Hiero leaving the Enemies
Country took Myla by Storm, and brought under his Command 1500 Soldiers, and
then marched toward Myla and Amesalus tataken by Storm by Hiero.
Amesalus (which lies between the Centoripines and the Agyreans) and though it
was a strong Place and had many Soldiers in it, yet he took it by Assault and
razed it to the ground, but he pardoned all the Garrisoned Soldiers, and joined
them to his own Army. The Territory he gave to the Or Centuripians. vid. postea.
Centorippines and the Agyreans. Afterward Hiero (having a great Army) marched
against the Mamertines, and wan Alesa; and being readily received of the
Abacaenes and Tyndarites, he gained their Cities also; and so penned up the
Mamertines into a strait and narrow corner. For on that side toward the
Sicilian Sea, he was Agyreans the City Agurius.
Lord of Tauromenium a City near Messina, and toward the Hetrurian Sea, he
commanded the Tyndarites. And now making an incursion into the Territories of
Messina, he encamped at the River Lotanus, having with him in his Army 10000
Foot and 1500 Horse. The Mamertines encamped over against him with 8000 Foot
and but Seems to be mistaken.
40. Horse, under the Command of Cios, who called the Augures together to
consult the issue of the Battle by the view of the Sacrifices; who answered,
That by the Intralls the Gods foretold that he must lodge that Night in the
Enemies Camp: Upon this he was Transported with Joy to think he should be
Master of the King's Camp. Hereupon he forthwith attempted to pass the River
with his Forces drawn up in Battalia. Hiero on the other side, Commands 200
Exiles of Messina (who were stout and noted Men for their Valor, with whom he
joined 400 others of his best Soldiers) to compass an Hill called Thorax there
near at hand, and so to come round upon the back of the Enemy, and he himself
in order of Battle met them in the Front. Whereupon the Armies Engaged both
Horse and Foot (the King having gained a Rising Ground near the River much to
his advantage) The issue was doubtful for some time: but they that were ordered
to the Hill, on a sudden fell upon the Mamertines, who (being but raw Men and
tired out) were easily vanquished. At length, being hemmed in on every side,
they took to their Heels: But The Mamertines routed by Hiero King of Syracuse.
the Syracusians pursued them so close with their whole Army, that they cut
them off every Man, save the General, who fighting with great Valor, at length
fainted by the many wounds he received, and was taken prisoner, and brought
half dead into the King's Camp, and committed to the care of the Surgeons;
thus being brought to spend the Night according to the prediction of the
Augures in the Enemies Camp. When the King was very earnest to have Cion being
Cured, some came to the King with Horses they had taken in the Fight; Upon
which, when Cion saw his Son's Horse among the rest, he concluded he was
killed; whereupon he was so Transported with Passion, that he tore in pieces
all the Bands and Ligatures of his Wounds, that by his own death he might
Honor his Sons. The Mamertines hearing that both their General Cion and their
whole Army was destroyed, resolved to go and humble themselves to the King, as
Suppliants. However, Fortune suffered not the Mamertines to be altogether lost
and undone. For it happened that at that time Hannibal the Carthaginian General
lay at the Island Lipara, who as soon as he heard of this slaughter, went to
the King with all speed, seemingly to congratulate his Victory, but in truth by
some stratagem to circumvent him. And the King trusting to the Carthaginian's
word, lay still. But Hannibal going to Messina, and finding the Mamertines
ready to deliver up their City he diswaded them, and making a League with them,
put Mistaken I co(...), (...) before Fol. Precedent.
40 Soldiers more into the City. Thus the Mamertines (even now in despair by
reason of their great slaughter) were by this means secured from present
danger. As for Hiero (being thus cheated by the Carthaginian General, and so
discouraged from besieging of Messina) he returned to Syracuse after his many
Successes. Afterward when the Carthaginians as well as Hiero had thus lost
Messina, they had an interview, and upon second thoughts entered into a
Confederacy, to besiege the City with their joint Forces.

Out of the 23d BOOK.
Fragm. 1. SIcily is one of the bravest Islands in the World, conducing much by
its power to the gaining and increase of a larger Dominion.

2. Hanno the Son of Hannibal, as soon as he arrived in Sicily, Rendezvouz'd
his Forces Olymp. 129. 1. Ant. Chapter 262. The b^ginning of the first Punick War.
at Lilibeum, and thence Marched as far as Selinunte, where he left his Army
Encamped near the City; but he himself went forward to Agrigentum, and
fortified the Citadel. Then he brought over the People to the Interest of the
Carthaginians, and so engaged them to be their Confederates. After he returned
to his Camp, Ambassadors came to him from Hiero, to consult concerning the
public Good of Sicily: for they had made a League and Agreement one with
another to make War upon the Romans, if they would not forthwith withdraw all
their Forces out of Sicily. In execution of which they both Marched with their
Armies to Messina: Where Hiero Encamped in the Hill called Chalchidicus: The
Carthaginians lay with theirs near the * Monuments, and possessed themselves
Called (...), Cubiles or Lodging places. Appius Cladius sent into Sicily.
Messina besieged by the Carthaginians and Hiero.
of the Arsenal called Pelotias, and both presently laid close Siege to
Messina. As soon as the News was brought to Rome, they sent away Appias
Cladius, one of the Consuls, with a great Army, who came to Rhegium with all
speed; and from thence sent Ambassadors to Hiero and the Carthaginians to raise
their Siege, and promised in a general Assembly not to make any Incursion into
the Territories of Hiero. To which Hiero answered that the Mamertines for their
razing and ruining of Gela and Camarina, and their cruelty and wickedness in
getting the possession of Messina were most justly Besieged: And that it did
not become the Romans who are so cried up in every place for their Justice and
Faithfulness, to protect such bloody Villains, who had contemptuously broken
all the Ties and Bonds of Faith and Truth amongst Men. And if notwithstanding,
they begin a War in the defense of such notoriously wicked Men, it will be
evident and apparent to all Mankind, That succor to them that are in
destress, is but a mere pretense to cover their Covetousness, whereas in truth
their Aim is to gain Sicily.

3. The Romans at first bore four square shields, but afterward, when they
observed the Tyrrheneans to carry brazen shields, they got the like, and
Conquered them.

4. When the Consul Landed at Messina; Hiero suspecting that the Carthaginians
had made way for him, fled himself to Syracuse. The Carthaginians being at
length subdued, the Consul besieged Aegista, and after the loss of a great
number of his Men returned to Messina.

5. When both Consuls arrived in Sicily, they besieged the City Adranita, and
took it by storm. And while they were besieging the * Centorippians, and lay
Encamped at the brazen Or Centurippians, their Town called Centuripinum The
People now called Centoruans. Peace made between Hiero and the Romans. Olymp.
129. Ant. Chapter 261. A Drac^ma is 7 pence farthing
Halls or Palaces; first Ambassadors came from them of Laessina: Afterward
other Cities that were terrified with the Roman Armies, sent Ambassadors for
terms of Peace, with promise to deliver up all their Towns into the hands of
the Romans to the number of 67. From all which places they Marched to Syracuse
to besiege Hiero, who seeing the uneasiness of the Syracusians at this
preparation against them, sent Ambassadors to the Consuls to Negotiate for
Peace. Who readily agreed to the Conditions, designing chiefly the War against
the Carthaginians. A Peace therefore was concluded for 14 Years: And the Romans
were to receive 140000 * Drachmas. And after he had released all the Prisoners
to them, they agreed that Syracuse and all the Cities under his Jurisdiction,
viz. Era, Leontinum, Megara, Aelora, Neatina, and Tauromenum should remain in
the hands of Hiero In the mean time Hannibal was come as far as Xiphonia to the
Aid of the King; but hearing what was done, Marched back.

6. The Romans after they had besieged the Towns called Adrones, and Macella
for a long time together, at length raised their Sieges without effecting any
thing.

7. The Aegestines who were the first brought under the power of the
Carthaginians, revolted to the Romans. The Alieneans did the like. But they
took H^larius Tyrit^us and Ascelu^ by force. The Tyndar(...)s seeing themselves
deserted (through Fear) designed to deliver up themselves as the rest had done:
but the Carthaginians suspecting their design, took the chiefest of the
Citizens for Hostages, and carried them and the Corn and Wine, and all the rest
of the Provision that was in the Town to Lilibeum.

Philemon the Comedian writ 97 (...). Olymp. 129 4. Ant. Chapter 259.
Comedies; he lived 99.. The Romans that besieged Agrigentum, and that made the
Trenches, and cast up the Works, were 100000. At length, after a stout
resistance the Carthaginians delivered up Agrigentum to the Romans.

8. After the siege of Agrigentum, Hanno the Elder brought over a great Army
out of Africa into Sicily, of 50000 Foot, and 6000 Horse, and 60 Elephants.
Philinus the Historian of Agrigentum sets forth this Expedition. Hanno with all
these Forces Marched from Lilybeum to Heraclea. About this time some came and
offered to deliver up Erbesus. H^nno in Prosecution of the War lost in two
Battles 3000 Foot, and 200 Horse, and 4000. -- that were taken Prisoners. In
the mean time, 30 of his Elephants died, and 3 were wounded.

9. There was likewise the City Entellina -- Hanno therefore by his prudent
management by one Stratagem, cut off both his open and secret Enemies at
onetime. And after they had lain thus before it for the space of 6 Months,
Agrigentum was at length delivered up to them; and they carried away above
24000 as Slaves. But the Romans lost 30000 Foot, and 540 Horse. But the
Carthaginians Fined Hanno in 6000 Pieces of Gold, and took away his Commission,
and sent Amilcar General into Sicily, in (...), what value.
his Room. The Romans then Besieged Mystratus, and for that purpose devised
many Engines: But after 7 Months time they raised their Siege, with the loss of
a great number of their Men. But Amilcar fought with the Romans at Thermas, and
routed them, killing 6000 upon the place; and it was not far from, but the
whole Army -- The Castle Mazaron was likewise taken by the Romans. Then
Camarina was betrayed into the hands of Amilcar the Carthaginian, and not long
after Enna in the same manner. There he Walled in Drapanum upon the Promontory,
Drapanum near Erix.
Drapanum, and made it a Town of defense, and after he had Transplanted the
Inhabitants of Eryx thither, he razed the City to the Ground, except that part
which surrounded the Temple. But the Romans took Mystratus, now Besieged the 3d
time, and levelled it to the Ground, and sold the Inhabitants for Slaves. The
Consul afterward Marched to Camarina, and laid Siege to it, but could not
reduce it. But at length by the help of some Engines of Battery and other
Instruments of War, sent to him from Hiero, he wan the Place, and sold most of
the Camarineans for Slaves. Presently after, he became Master of Enna by
Treachery, where he put the Garrison to the Sword, save some that made their
escape out of the Town and fled to their Confederates. Thence he Marched to
Satana, and took it by Storm. Then placing Garrisons in other Cities, he made
for (...)cus, a Castle belonging to the Agrigentines, which was also betrayed
and delivered up to him, and there he placed a Garrison. About this time Erbesus
was deserted by its Inhabitants. -- But the River Alycus, and the last of all
the other. --

10. A prudent Man ought either to resolve to Conquer, or else to submit to
those that are Stronger than he.

11. All men in time of Adversity are apt to be more Religious, and more
frequent in Devotion than at other times: But in times of Prosperity and
Success, they make slight of the Gods as so many Fables and Romances. And when
they are again brought into Troubles, then they run again to their natural
Shelter. --

12. It Is much more easy to get the advantage of an Enemy when a Man will be
advised, and be willing upon all occasions to rectify his own mistakes. And it
often happens that they who are carried away to the same --

Many are stirred up to Virtue through the Credit and Reputation that attend
upon them, that employ themselves in good and commendable studies, and
exercises. --

For not being able to bear, as an over heavy burden the Successes of Fortune
heaped upon him, he deprived himself of most of the glory of his Actions, and
involved his Country in great Calamities -- Moreover, when the Romans had
Transported a great Army into Africa, under the Command of Attilias the Consul,
they at first prevailed over the Carthaginians, and took many of their Towns
and Castles, and destroyed great numbers of their Soldiers: But as soon as An.
M. 3694. This was Attilius Regulus, that was routed and taken, with 15000 Men,
and 30000 slain. Eutrop. Urb. Condit. 477. Chapter 255. lib. 2. Olym. 131. 2. Ant.
Chapter 255.
Panthippus the Spartan (whom they had hired to be their General) came out of
Greece, the Carthaginians totally routed the Romans, and destroyed a numerous
Army. Afterward they Fought several Sea Fights, wherein the Romans lost many
Ships, and abundance of Men, to the number of 100000. -- The honor he had
gained before, highly aggravated the disgrace and contempt; and by his own
Example, he instructed others to carry humbly and modestly when they are in the
greatest Power and Authority. And that which stung him most, was that he was
made the Scorn, and brought into the power of those whom he had before proudly
trampled upon in disdain: And now had deprived himself of all Pity and
Commiseration, commonly showed to Men in Misery and Distress. --

For those that before were Conquerors in all, he now altogether Conquered: And
those that before (through the slaughter made amongst them) expected nothing
but utter Destruction. Now, (by the greatness of the Victory by them on the
other hand obtained) he caused to slight and contemn their Enemies. -- For its
no wonder if the Prudence and Experience of a General effect those things which
seem to others impossible: for all things are easy and possible to Ingenuity
and Diligence, supported by skill, acquired by Experience. -- For as the Body
is the servant of the Soul, so great Armies are governed by the Prudence of
their Generals. -- The Senate ordering all things for the public good. --
Philistus then writ his History. -- But the Romans who had passed over into
Africa, and fought with the Carthaginians a Battle at Sea, and beaten them, and
taken 24 of their Ships, after they had taken aboard those Romans that were A
S^^pwrack of the Romans.
left of the Land Army, (as they were Sailing to Sicily) were all Shipwrackt
near Camerina, and lost 340 Men of War, besides Vessels for Transporting of
Horses, and other Transport Ships to the number of 300: So that all the Coasts
from Camerina to Pachynum, were filled with the Carcasses of Men and Horses,
and Wrecks of Ships. Hiero courteously entertained those that escaped, and
supplying them with Meat and Drink, Clothes and other necessaries, conveyed
them safe to Messina. Carthalo the Carthaginian after the Shipwreck, of the
Romans, Besieged Agrigentum, took it and burnt the Town, and demolished the
Walls; and those that were left, fled to Olympius. The Romans after the
Shipwarck Equipped out another Fleet of 250 Sail, and came to Cephaledium,
which was delivered up to them by Treachery. Thence they Marched to Drapanus,
and began to Besiege it, but upon Succors brought in by Carthalo, they drew
off, and Sailed to Panormus: There they cast Anchor in the Harbor even under
the Walls, and landed their Army, and then drew a Wall and Trench round the
City. And the Country being very woody, even up to the City Gates, they had
the advantage to raise Mounts and Bulwarks all along from Sea to Sea. Then the
Romans by continual assaults and batteries beat down the Walls, and entering the
outward Forts, put many to the Sword, the rest fled into the old City, and sent
out Commissioners to the Consul to treat for the sparing of their lives. The
Conditions were agreed unto; That every Person that paid 2 Minas for his head,
should be free: Hereupon the Romans entered, and 40000 were set free for the
Ransom agreed upon, the rest to the number of 30000 were sold for Slaves,
together with the Spoils. But they of Jetina, drove out the Carthaginian
Garrison and delivered up the Town to the Romans: The like did the Seluntines,
Petrineans, Enaterineans and Tyndarites. Then the Consuls leaving a Garrison in
Panormus Marched away to Messina. The Year following the Romans designed
another Descent into Lybia, but being prevented from landing by the
Carthaginians they returned to Panormus. Thence in their return to R^^e, by
another Tempest they lost 150 Ships of War, besides Transport Ships with all
their Loading and Provision. About this time the Governor of Therme being
abroad about some necessary occasions, was taken Prisoner by the Roman Army:
and during his Confinement he Treated by Messengers with the General to open
the Gates of the City to him in the Night if he might be released: The time was
agreed upon, and he was ordered to be discharged, and 1000 Men were sent
thither in the Night, who came there at the time appointed, whereupon he opened
the Gates, and the chiefest Persons of Quality only entered, giving a strict
charge to the Guard, to shut the Gates and suffer none other to enter; and this
they did to the end that none but themselves might have the plunder and pillage
of the City; but they were all presently knocked on the Head, a just reward for
their Covetousness. But at another time Therme and Lipara were given up into
the hands of the Romans. Yet they failed of their purpose at the Castle of
Er(...), though they besieged it with 40000 Foot, and 1000 Horse. --

Asdrubal the Carthaginian General being ill spoken of by his Soldiers for not
sighting, Marched away with the whole Army, and came to Panormus through the
straits of Selinuntia, and passing over the River near the Town, he Encamped
close to the Walls without Fortifying himself, in Contempt of the Enemy. And
now again plenty of Wine being brought into the Camp by the Merchants, the
Celte made themselves drunk, and Olymp. 132. 1. Ant Ch 249. Caecilius routs the
Carth^ginians.
while they were roaring and tearing and filling all places with disorder and
confusion, (...) Long Ships-(...).
Caecilius the Consul broke in upon them, and totally routed them, and sent 60
Elephants then taken in the Fight, to Rome, which were the admiration of the
Romans.

Out of the 24th BOOK.
Eclog. 1. THE Carthaginians, after they had razed the City Selinunte,
transplanted the Citizens to Lilybeum. But the R^mans sailed with 240 long
Galleys, and 60 Lil^beum resi^g'd by the Romans.
round Vessels, and all other sorts of Shipping to Panormus, and thence to
Lilybeum, which now they began to besiege; and fortified themselves by a Trench
drawn all along from Sea to Sea. Then they prepared them (...).
Engines to cast Stones, battering Rams and Called by the Romans, Testudines.
Engines not only to batter, but pluck the Stones by violence out of the Walls,
and all other things necessary for the raising of Mounts and Bulwarks. Then
they filled 15 of their round Vessels with Stones, and cast them into the Mouth
of the Harbor to choke it up. The Roman Army amounted to the number of 110000
Men, of whom 60000 Foot and 700 Horse were ordered to carry on the Siege. But
4000 Men with Corn and Provision were sent from Carthage to the Besieged, which
greatly heartned them and Adherbal.
Atarbus their Governor. When the Romans understood that Relief was got into
the City, they filled up the Mouth of the Harbor a second time, and made a
Bomb with Anchors and great Pieces of Timber; but the Wind which then blew
high, and the violent Surges of the Sea, broke all asunder. The Romans likewise
made another (...).
Engine to cast mighty Stones; but the Carthaginians raised another Wall
within, and the Romans filled up the City Trench with Earth, which was 60
Cubits broad, and 40 deep. And whilst a Skirmish was fought on that side of the
Walls toward the Sea, the R^mans placed an Ambush on the other side, and the
Soldiers within making Sallies out of the Town to help them that were engaged
at the Seaside, those that lay in Ambush (having Scaling-Ladders ready
mounted) gained the first Wall; which being known, the Carthaginian Commander
fell furiously upon them, and killed 10000 upon the Place, and put the rest to
flight, and burnt all the Roman Engines, battering Rams, Instruments to cast
Stones, and all their Works and Fortifications. After this, the Carthaginians
seeing that their Horse was of no use to them in the strait and narrow
Passages, sent them away to Drapanum. Then presently came in strong Recruits to
the Carthaginians; but the Romans (by the burning of their Engines, and through
want of Provision, and the breaking out of the Plague amongst them,) were
reduced to great Straits, (for only the Romans and their Confederates eat
Flesh,) and so a great Distemper seized them, that in a very few days there
died 10000, so that they were very earnest to breast up the Siege; but Hiero,
King of Syracuse, sent them a great quantity of Corn, which again encouraged
them to continue. Afterward the Romans chose another Consul, and gave the
Command of the Army to Claudius the Consul, the Son of Appius, who taking
charge of the Army, stopped up the Mouth of the Port as his Predecessor had
done, but the Sea bore down and carried all away again. Moreover Claudius
thinking himself able to do great Things, furnished out 210 of the best Ships,
and arrived at Drapanum, and there engaged with the Carthaginians in a
Sea Fight, and was beaten, and lost 117 of his Ships, and 20000 Men. There
never happened so great a Fight at Sea, and so absolute a Victory, either among
The Romans beaten at Sea by the Carthaginians.
the Carthaginians, or any other about these times; and that which was more to
be admired was, That though the Carthaginians were in so great Danger, and had
only 90 Sail, yet they lost not one Man, and had but a very few wounded. --
With 30 Sail, Note: Not one Man lost in a great Sea Fight.
which intercepted the Corn and Provision belonging to the Romans, and carried
it to Drapanum, and taking thence what remained that was useful, they came to
Lilybeum, and loaded the Besieged with all kind of Provision. And now Carthalo
the General came from Carthage with 70 long Ships or Men of War, and as many
laden with Corn, who also set upon the Romans and sunk some of their Vessels,
and carried off four others that lay at Anchor. But after he heard that the
Roman Fleet was set forth from Syracuse, having called a Council of War, he
went out to Sea against them with 220 Sail of the best Ships he had. When the
Fleets came in sight one of another near the Coasts of Gela, the Romans (struck
with a Pannick Fear) attacked about and hasted to Phintiades, leaving all their
Transport Ships laden with Provision, and other Vessels, behind them. But the
Carthaginians making a swift Pursuit after them, there happened a fierce
Engagement; In which, the Carthaginians sunk 50 of their great Men of War, and
60 other long Galleys, The Romans beaten again at Sea.
and disabled 13. After the Fight, the Carthaginians sailed to the River
Alycus, and there took care of their wounded Men. In the mean time, Junius the
Consul not knowing what was done, loosed from Messina with 36 long Galleys and
many Ships of Burden, and having passed Pachynus, and gained the Port of
Phintiades, upon Intelligence of what had happened he was amazed; and the
Carthaginians making up upon him with their whole Navy, he burnt 12 of the most
useless of his own Ships, and sailed with the rest toward Syracuse, hoping to
be secured by Hiero. But near Camarina a Storm arose, which drove him upon the
Shallows and Rocks, the Winds being very fierce and boistrous: But the
Carthaginians having recovered Pachynus, anchored in a safe and secure Harbor.
The Romans being thus distressed, lost all their Transport Sips of Corn and
Provision, and A Storm upon the Romans, who lost 105 Galleys, and all their
Transport-Ships.
105 long Galleys, so that there were only two that escaped, and most of their
Men perished. Junius with those two, and those Men that were preserved, came to
the Camp at Now called Marsala.
Lilybeum: He surpised Erix in the night, and walled Aegothalus, which is now
called Acellus, and put in there a Garrison of 800 Men. But when Carthalo had
intelligence, that the Places about Eryx were possessed by the Enemy, he wasted
thither a considerable Body of Men in the night, and assaulted the Garrison of
Agothalus and took the Castle, and so succeeding in his Design; some he put to
the Sword, and the rest fled to Eryx, where was a Garrison of 3000 Men. In the
first Sea Fight the Romans lost 35000 Men, and as many were taken Prisoners.

11. In the Territory of Catana there was a Castle called Italium, which was
assaulted by Barcas the Carthaginian. -- For the Counsels and Stratagems of the
Commanders being communicated to their Friends, were discovered by some
Deserters to the Enemy, which terrified the Soldiers, and possessed them with
an expectation of some imminent Danger. But Barcas arriving there in the night,
landed his Men, and was the first that led them to Eryx (which was 30 Stages
distant) and took the City, and put most of them to the Sword, and those that
survived he removed to Now called Trapano.
Drapanum. -- Always and in every Concern it is known by Experience, that the
Observance of good Rule and Order has produced many good and great Effects. --

12. But Calatinus the Consul sailed into Sicily with 300 long Galleys, and
other Shipping, to the number of 1000 in the whole, and cast Anchor at the
Mart-Town of the Eryceans. Hanno likewise arrived Hieronesus, Polyb. l. 1. one
of the Lypari Islands near Sicily, dedicated to Aeolus and Vulcan.
in the Sacred Island from Carthage with 250 long Galleys, and other Ships of
Burden; thence he came to Eryx. -- The Romans fell on, and a sharp and
obstinate Engagement there was on both sides, in which the Carthaginians lost
117 Ships, and among those 20 with all their Men. But the Romans -- 80, 30
(...).
for their own Charge and Expense, and 50 to divide for Spoil, and 6000
Prisoners, (as Philinus reports,) but as others 4040; the rest of the Fleet got
safe with a fair Wind to Carthage. -- For Valor signified nothing, when the
Fleet was so dispersed, that it had no body to fly unto, but was by the Sea (as
it were) delivered up into the hands of the Enemy. So * (...).
that after the War had continued between the Romans and the Carthaginians for
the space of 24 years, and Lilybeum had been besieged 10 years, a Peace was
concluded. The end of the first Punick War, Olymp. 134. Ant. Chapter 240.


Out of the 25th BOOK.
1. EPicurus the Philosopher, in his Book called Maximus, says, That a
Righteous Life is void of all Trouble and Disturbance; but an Unrighteous,
nothing but Trouble and Sorrow. * (...).
It contains much Matter in brief and certain Sentences, tending greatly to the
Reformation of the Manners and Lives of Men: For Injustice is the greatest of
all Evils, involving not only private Men, but (that we may sum up all at once)
Nations, Kings and Kingdoms, in most miserable Calamities. -- For the Spaniards
gall them of the Baleary Islands, Africans, Carthaginians, and Ligureans,
joined with them of Carthage. And This was the great Rebellion in Africa
against Carthage, and Matho and Spendius, which War continued three year. Vid.
Polyb. l. 1.
the Slaves, whose Parents were Grecians, on one side, who also rebelled. --
Then it was perfectly learnt by Experience, how far the Diligence of an expert
Commander excelled the blind and heady Vulgar, and the rash and ignorant
Conduct of a rude Common Soldier. -- So excellent a thing is Modesty in
Commanding, that it enjoins nothing beyond the Power of Men. -- But after their
departure out of Sicily, the Carthaginian Mercenaries rose up in Arms against
them for these Reasons. -- They were unreasonable and excessive in their
Demands for the Horses and Men which they had lost in Sicily. -- And they were
in War one with another 4 Years, and as many Months. But at length they were
put to Death by Barcas the General, who had likewise performed notable Service
in Sicily against the Romans.

2. But Amilcar the Carthaginian General in a short time enlarged the Bounds of
his Country; for he advanced with his Fleet as far as to the Pillars of
Hercules and the Now Cadiz or Cales, in the Streights.
Gades. This City is a Colony of the Phenicians, lying in the farthest Corner
of the Earth on the Sea side, and has an Haven. Having subdued the Iberians
and the Tartesians with Istolotius Tarseites, of Tarseium; A City near Hercules
Pillars in the Streights, now not in being.
the General of the Celtae, and his Brother, he put most of them to the Sword,
amongst Amilcar overcomes Indortes the Prince of ^he Celtae. These Celtae a
People of Spain. Indortes Crucified.
whom were the Two Brothers, and several other Honorable Persons: And he
received into his own Army 3000 of them that were prisoners. But Endort^s got
again together 50000 Men, but fled before he engaged, and betook himself to an
high Hill: where being beset and blockt up by Amilcar, he fled away again in
the night, and most of his Army were cut off. Indortes himself at length fell
into the Enemies hands, and Amilcar put out his Eyes, and then with many Scoffs
and Scorns Crucified him. But he discharged above 10000 other prisoners, and
took in many Cities, some by f^ir Promises and persuasions: and others by
force. Then Asdrubal the Son of Amilcar being sent by his Father-in-law to
Carthage against the Numidians (who had rebelled against the Carthaginians)
killed 8000, and took 2000 prisoners: The rest were subdued and brought under
Tribute. In the mean time Amilcar having gained many Cities in Spain, built a
very large Town, which from its situation he called Acra Leuca; having
afterward besieged the City Acra Leuca now St. Leucar. probable. r.
Helice, he sent away the greatest part of his Army, and Elephants into their
Winter Quarters to the City he had lately built, and continued with the rest at
the Siege. But Orisso the King (under pretense of coming in as a Friend to join
with Amilcar) sucour'd the Besieged, and forced Amilcar to fly and raise his
Siege; his Sons now not in being.
and Friends he ordered for their safety, to take one way by themselves, and he
himself passed another, and being hotly pursued by the King, in taking a great
River he was forced off his Horse by the violence of the Stream, and so
drowned: But Hanniball and Asdruball his Sons got safe to Acra Leuca, or the
White Citadell, -- -- And though Amilcar Amilcar drowned in Spain.
died many Ages before our time, yet History has left an Epitaph and
Commemoration of his due praise. But Asdrubal his Son-in-law as soon as he
heard of his Fatherin law's death, forthwith marched away, and came to Acra
with above 100 Elephants. Being chosen General by the Army, and the
Carthaginians, he picked out 50000 Foot of old experienced Soldiers, 6000 Horse,
and 200 Elephants. In the first place he ruined and broke in pieces King
Orisso, then he put to the Sword all that were the occasion of Amilcar's Gr.
flight, and got possession of Twelve Cities: and at length all the Cities of
Spain. And having now celebrated a new Marriage, and taken the Daughter of the
King of Spain to Wife, he was invested with full Power in the Government, by
all the Spaniards. He afterward built a City by the Seaside which he called
Carthage, and after this another, and aspired to exceed Amilcar in Power and
Greatness. He had in his Army 60000 Asdrubal Assassinated in Spain.
Foot, 8000 Horse, and 200 Elephants. But at length he was assassinated by one
of his own Household, having been General Nine Years.

3. The Celtae with the Gauls entering into a War against the Romans, raised an
Army Olymp. 138. 4. Ant. Chapter 223. A War between the Celtae and the Romans.
of 200000 Men; and in the First Battle were victorious; and likewise in the
Second, wherein one of the Roman Consuls were killed: though the Romans had an
Army of 70000 Foot and 7000 Horse. However, though they were worsted in the Two
First Battles, yet in the Third they gained a signal Victory, killing 40000
upon the place, and taking the rest prisoners -- So that the greatest of their
Kings cut his own Throat: but the other was taken alive. After this brave
Exploit, Aemilius being made Consul, wasted the Country of the Gauls and
Celtae, and took in many Cities and Castles, and filled the City of Rome with
Spoils.

4. Hiero King of Syracuse supplied the Romans with Corn in the Celtick War,
and was paid for it when the War was ended.

5. The Army wanting a General after Asdrubal was slain, the Charthaginians
unanimously Hanniball.
chose Hannibal the Eldest Son of Amilcar to be their General -- While the City
Seguntum was Besieged by Hanniball, the Citizens got together all the Riches in
the The beginning of the Second Punick War which continued 17 Years. Olymp.
1140. 3. Ant. Chapter 216. Seguntum taken in Spain.
Temples, and all the Silver and Gold in the Houses, nay, till it came to the
Jewels in the Women's Ears, and laid them on an heap, and melted them down,
mixing Brass and Lead with the Gold and Silver to make them useless and
invaluable: and having so done, they all valiantly made a Sally, and fought it
out to the last Man, and all died upon the place, not without a great slaughter
first made of their Enemies. The Mothers likewise first killed their own
Children, and then stifled themselves by the smoke of the Furnaces. And so
Hanniball gained the Town without any benefit of Plunder: whom when the Romans
demanded to be brought to Trial for his breach of the League, and could not
prevail, they began the War called the Hannibal War.

Out of the 26th BOOK.
Eclog. 1. THere was never any Poet or Historian, or any Learned Man of what
Science Plin. lib. 35. C. 8. Praxitiles. Plin. lib. 36. C. 5. Plin. 35. 10.
Appelles and Parrasius.
soever, that could please all their Readers in every thing. Neither can any
thing that is mortal, though it attain its end and design, gain the general
approbation of all, so as to be wholly free from Exception and Censure. For
neither * Phidias who was so admired for his Ivory Images: Nor * Praxiles that
excellent Stone-cutter: Nor Appelles or Parrasius, who attained to the highest
pitch of Art and Skill in Limning and Painting, could ever reach to that degree
of Happiness, as to exhibit any piece of their several Arts, that was not in
some respect capable of Censure. For who was a more Famous Poet than Homer; or
an Orator than Demosthenes? Who more Just than Aristides and Solon? yet joined
as a Flaw to all their Excellencies there is an Oration that carps at them, and
makes them as if they were all ignorant Fellows. For indeed being but Men,
although they attained to eminent Perfection in their several Accomplishments,
yet through Human Frailty, they failed and mistook in many things. However,
some Men there are who discover both their Envy and Folly, who wilfully omit to
give an account of what is commendable and praiseworthy; but where they have
any color to find fault, there they fix, and are unwilling ever to leave it,
endeavoring by blackning another, to set forth the more their own Worth and
Excellencies; not considering that every Art and peculiar Accomplishment is
more to be judged of by enquiry into the thing it self, than by making
conclusions from the partial and peevish Passion of another, But any would
admire this industrious Folly of Detraction, whereby a person by blackening
another, in truth loses his own Reputation. -- There are some things that by
(...). The folly of Nature.
a blind instinct, are naturally hurtful, as Frost, and Snow burn and blast the
fairest and most pleasant Fruits; and the resplendent Whiteness of the Snow so
dazles the Eyes, that it almost deprives them of their Sight: and so some Men
that have neither Wit nor Will to do any thing that is commendable themselves,
yet have Malice and Folly enough naturally, to judge and condemn the Actions of
others: But it is the part of a prudent and understanding Man, always to
attribute due praise to them, who by their Industry have prosecuted virtuous
Designs: And where any have not been so successful as they desired, not to
taunt at the infirmity of Humane Nature; But so much of these envious Men.

2. For as a brave Champion after he has spent much time in anointing himself,
at length descends into the Lists -- Having gained great Experience and an
Habit.

3. Menodotus the Corinthian writ the Affairs of Greece in 14 Books. And
Sosilus the A People in the Island of Corcyra., or Corfu. What a Lagi^n is.
Ilian the Acts of Hannibal in Seven.

4. Among the Romans a Legion consists of 5000 Men.

5. Men naturally flock to them that are in prosperity, but insult over those
that are brought into Distress. -- For the Soul presently to undergo a mere
contrary Change, which is in its own nature unchangeable.

6. The City of Rhodes being ruined by a great Earthquake, Hiero the Syracusian
bestowed Earthquake: in Rhodes.
Six Talents of Silver toward the repairing of the Walls, and Silver Cauldrons
of great value, besides Money: And let them have Corn to Transport free from
Custom.

7. That which is now called Philopolis, was heretofore called Phiotis of
Thebes, over all Thessaly.

8, For sost Beds, constant delicate Fare, and the use of all sorts of precious
Ointments, unfitted them for toil and hardship. -- For both their Bodies and
Minds were habituated to Effeminacy and Luxuriousness. -- For Men naturally can
hardly brook Toil and Pains, and low Diet; but delight in Idleness and Luxury.
For Hannibal with much Toil and Care gained Cities both from the Romans and
Brutians, and took Crotona, and Besieged Rhegium. For from Hercules Pillars in
the West to Crotona, he overran all the Roman Territories.

Fragments out of the Books of Diodorus the Sicilian [that are lost] as they
are in Photius his Bibliotheca.
Out of the 31st BOOK.
1. While these things were doing, Ambassadors came to Rome from Rhodes, to
beg pardon for what they had done. For in the War against Perseus they had
seemed to favor the King, and to break their League with the Romans. But not
being able to accomplish any thing for which they were sent, they were greatly
dejected, and solicited with Tears the great and principal Men of the City:
Whereupon being introduced into the Senate by Antonius, one of the Tribunes of
the People, Philophron was the first that opened the matter, and business of
their Embassy. And after him Astimedes; when they had made many Arguments and
apt Discourses to prevail with the Senate, and at last according to the (...).
Sung the Swans Song.
Proverb, had with the Swan concluded their mournful Ditty, they received an
answer which presently freed from their fears: However they were sharply
reproved, and fined for their Offenses. So that it is evident how the most
noble among the Romans (by whom the greatest Affairs are managed) strive which
shall be most generous, and upon that account gain most Honor and Reputation.
For in the Administration of public Affairs elsewhere, one envies another. But
the Romans praise and commend one another. So that while all endeavor to
advance the public Good, great and glorious things are Achieved: but as to
others, while they aim only at their own vain Glory, and envy the Successes one
of another, they ruin their Country.

2. At length Aemilius took Perseus the last King of Macedonia, who had often
entered Olymp. 154. 1. The miserable condition of Perseus King of Macedon.
into a League with the Romans, and as often appeared in the Field with great
Armies against them. And after the Victory Aemilius Triumphed gloriously. And
though Perseus was brought into so great miseries and calamities, as that the
ruins and destructions which he suffered, can scarce be paralleled by any
Romance, yet was he not willing to part with his Life. For before the Senate
had determined any thing relating to his punishment, One of the City Praetors.
one of the chief Officers of the City cast both him and his Children into the
Goal Albinus. This Prison is a deep Dungeon of the bigness of a Chamber,
capable of 9 Beds at the most: Dark and full of all sorts of filth and
nastiness, by reason of the multitude of Men Condemned for capital Offenses,
that from time to time were thrust down there; and generally most of such
Malefactors were put into this Place. So that many being shut up together in so
strait a place, those miserable Creatures were even turned into Beasts: And in
regard the Meat, Drink, and other necessaries which were brought them, were
jumbled together into one Chaos and heap of Confusion, there arose thence such
a stench that none that came near, were able to endure. In a most miserable
Condition Perseus continued here for the space of 7 Days, insomuch that he
begged relief, and some share of the Food of those strangers in Prison, who had
only a stinted allowance. They out of compassion to this miserable Man, with
great humanity and tears in their Eyes, gave him part of that small pittance
they had, and withal offered him a Sword and a Rope, to use which of them he
would at his pleasure, for the putting an end to his Life, Yet nothing seems so
sweet as Life, even to the miserable; though they suffer what is equivalent to
death it self in the mean time. To conclude, he had certainly ended his days in
this extreme misery, if Marcus Aemilius President of the Court (out of respect
to the dignity of his Person, moved by the natural and innate humanity of the
Romans) had not with some indignation moved the Senate on his behalf, putting
them in mind, that though they feared not Men, yet they should bear some awe and
reverence to (...) of (...).
Nemesis, who will take vengeance on them that use their power with Pride and
Insolency. Upon this he was committed to a more moderate Confinement, and while
he was seeding himself with fresh hopes, he ended his days agreeable to the
former misfortunes of his Life: for after he had lived 2 Years in this ^ (...)
The death of P(...)s. ^ the Cappadocian Kings.
fond love of Life, having displeased his barbarous Keepers they would not
suffer him to sleep, and so he died.

3. The Kings of Cappadocia say that they came from Cyrus King of Persia. They
affirm likewise that they are descended from one of those Seven Persians that
killed Magus. And they drew down their Pedigree from Cyrus thus: That Atossa
was the Sister of Cambyses, and Daughter of Cyrus: That Gallus was the Son of
Atossa and Pharnaces King of Cappadocia, Smerdis the Son of Gallus, and Artames
the Son of Smerdis, and Artames had issue Anaphas (a brave and valian: Man) who
was the Father of one of the Seven Persians. In this manner therefore Cr.
do they make out their Consanguinity both to Cyrus and to Anaphas, who it is
said For (...); Valor, others say it should be (...); Cowardice.
was of so stout a Spirit, that before he would pay Tribute to the Persians, he
abdicated his Government of Capadocia. After his death Anaphas his Son Reigned
in his stead, who dying, left his two Sons, Ditamus and Arimneus, and that
Ditamus took upon him the Government, (a Warlike Prince, and in all respects
accomplished for the Kingdom) who joining Battle with the Persians, and
behaving himself with great Gallantry and Resolution, was killed in the Fight,
and his Son Ariamnes succeeded him in the Kingdom. To whom were born two Sons,
Ariarathes and Holophernes: And after he had Reigned 50 Years, he dyed
Holofernes.
having done nothing memorable, and the Elder of his Sons Ariarathes succeeded
him, who it is said bore so great and tender a Love to his Brother, that he
advanced him to the highest degree of Honor and Preferment. And sent him to
join with the Persians in the War against the Egyptians, who after returned
laden with many and large marks of Honor conferred upon him by Ochus, for his
Valor, and died in his own Country, leaving behind him two Sons, Ariarathes
and Arysses. And that his Brother the King of Cappadocia ( Gr. having no legal
Issue.
having no legal Issue) adopted Ariarathes his Brother's Eldest Son. About this
time Alexander the Macedonian King ruined the Persian Empire, and presently
after died. But Perdiccas who had the chief Command, sent Eumenes as General
into Cappadocia, who subdued and killed Ariarathes and brought Cappadocia and
all the bordering Territories into the the power of the Macedonians. But
Ariarathes, the adopted Son of the former King, despairing for the present to
regain the Kingdom, with a few followers fled into Armenia. But Eumenes and
Berdiccas both dying not long after, and Antigonus and Seleucus imbroil'd in
War one with another, Ariarathes with the help of Arcloathus King of Armenia
(who furnished him with forces) routed and killed Amyntas the Macedonian
General, and presently drove all the Macedonians out of the Country, and
recovered his Kingdom. He had 3 Sons, the Eldest of which, Ariamnes succeeded
him, who joined in affinity with Antiochus Theos, and Married his Eldest Son
Ariarathes to Stratonice, Antiochus his Daughter. And for the great love he had
to him above all his Children, ^e set the Diadem upon his Head, and made him
Co-parther with him in the Kingdom: and after the death of his Father he
reigned alone. Then he dying, Ariarathes his Son, of a very tender Age,
succeeded. He Married Antiochide (the Daughter of Antiochus the great) a very
subtle Woman: Who because she bore no Children, to make up that defect,
contrived (unknown to her Husband) a suppositious Birth, as if she had Born two
Sons, which were called Ariarathes and Holofernes. But not long after, she
conceived in reality, and unexpectedly was delivered of two Daughters and one
Son called Mithridates. Upon this she acquainted her Husband with the
Imposture, and so wrought with him that she prevailed with him to send away the
Eldest of the two Sons with a small Sum of Money to Rome, and the other into
Ionia, lest they should challenge the Kingdom from him that was lawful Heir to
the Crown; who after he came to Man's Estate (its said) was called Ariarathes,
and was Educated in all the learning of Greece, and was a Person accomplished
with all manner of Virtuous Endowments. That the Father (who was wonderfully
beloved by the Son) strove all he could to repay his Son's love again: And
their mutual endeared affections one toward another went so far, that the
Father would have given up the whole Kingdom into the Hands of the Son, but the
Son on the other side told him, he could not possibly accept of so great an
advantage from living Parents. After therefore his Father died he succeeded,
spending the rest of his life very virtuously and in the study of Philosophy:
So that Cappadocia which was before little known to the Grecians, was now a
desirable place of Residence for all learned Men: He renewed the League of
Peace and Friendship with the Romans. And in this manner is the Pedigree of
those that have hitherto reigned in Cappadocia, brought down from Cyrus.

4. For Statues are made of such Romans as are of noble Families, in near
resemblance of the Persons, and according to the whole proportion of their
Bodies. For all their life long, they have some, who observe their Mien and
Deportment, and the special remarks of every part exactly. Likewise every Man's
Ancestor (...).
stands in that Habit, and in those Ornaments, (and is so clearly represented)
that every one knows the Person as soon as he looks upon him, and to what
degree of Honor every one was advanced, and what Share and Interest they had
in the Commonwealth.

5. Rather Fulvius. Olymp. 156, 4. Ant. Chapter 151.
Memmius was sent General with an Army into Spain. But the Lusitanians. now
Portugals.
Lusitanians just upon his Landing, fell upon him, and routed him, and cut off
most of his Army. When this success of the Iberians was noised abroad, the
Araucians (who looked upon themselves to be far better Soldiers than the
Iberians) slighted and contemned the Enemy, and upon this ground and
confidence, chiefly it was that in their general Council they determined to
make War upon the Romans. * Araucians, now of Aurang


Out of the 32d. BOOK.
Fragment 1. ALexander fled out of the Fight with 500 Men to a City in Arabia,
called This was Alexander Epiphanes King of Syria, and this Battle was with
Ptolometor, near Antioch. Olymp. 158. 3. Ant. Chapter 144. See Mac. 1. Mac. 10. c.
Joseph. lib. 13. c. 8.
Abas, to Diocles the Prince there; with whom he had before entrusted his Son
Antiochus, a Child of very tender Age. Afterward the Chief Commanders who were
about Heliades (and had been with Alexander) plotting to assassinate Alexander,
sent away some Messengers privately from among themselves, promising secretly
to Murder him. Demetrius consenting to what they proposed, they became both
Traitors and Murderers of their Prince. We might be justly condemned if we
should pass in silence that which happened before the death of Alexander, though
for the strangeness of the thing it be scarce credible. King Alexander a little
before these times, consulted with the Oracle in Silicia, where they say is the
Temple of Apollo of Sarpedon: and it is reported that the Oracle made Answer,
that he should take heed of that place which should bring forth a God of two
shapes. This Divine Hint was then taken for a Riddle: but after the King was
dead, the Truth was discovered in this manner. For in Abas a City of Arabia
dwelt one Diophantus a Macedonian. This Man Married an Arabian Woman, by whom
he had a Strange Stories of Hermaphrodites. Heraides became a Man.
Son, called after his own Name, and a Daughter called Heraides: His Son died
while he was young: But he gave a Portion to his Daughter when she was grown
up, and Married her to one Semiades, who, after he had lived with his Bride one
year, undertook a long Journey: In the mean time (it is reported) that Heraides
fell into a strange and wonderful distemper, such as is scarce credible. For
she had a vehement Inflammation, and a great Swelling at the bottom of her
Belly, which increased to that degree, that it brought her into a violent
Fever. The Physicians conceived that it was an Ulcer about the neck of the
Matrix; Refrigerating Medicines and Plasters therefore were applied to bring
down and cool those hot burning Tumors; upon the Seventh day the Humor burst,
and out started from the Privy Parts of Heraides, a Man's Yard with the
Testicles complete. This happened when neither Physician nor any other Stranger
was present, but only the Mother and Two Servants: who with the strangeness of
the thing, were struck into a Maze. However, they made it their Care and
Business to cure her, and kept all private to themselves. And when she was
recovered, she still wore a Woman's Habit, and managed the Affairs of the House
as Wives use to do. But those who were privy to what had happened, suspected her
to be an Hermaphrodite. And so, though formerly in carnal Embraces with her
Husband, there might be no natural copulation, yet she had been seen frequently
to have the carnal knowledge of Women. In the mean time while all things were
kept secret, Semiades returns and demands his Wife, (as was very fit and
reasonable.) And being continually urgent and pressing for the society of his
Wife, the Father refused, and yet was ashamed to declare the reason, which
occasioned great dissension, so far as that the Husband resolved to sue the
Father for his Wife: So that this wonder was exposed to the public view, like
a Play upon the Stage, by the means of a criminal Accusation. The Person
contended for was present in Court when the Matter was Banded to and fro, on
either parties behalf; Upon which, the Judges were in doubt whether the Power
and Authority of the Husband over the Wife, should be preferred before that of
the Father over the Daughter. At length, when they were ready to give Sentence
that the Wife should abide with her Husband, she discovered the truth of the
whole matter, and with great boldness and assurance of Mind threw off her
feigned Habit, and discovered her self to be a Man to all that were there
present, and in a surly manner uttered these words. Can any compel one Man to
Marry another? Upon which all were amazed, and set up a shout of Admiration at
the strangeness of the thing. Heraides being now discovered, afterward (as is
reported) changed her Woman's Attire and put on the Habit of a young Man. And
it is likewise said, that the Physicians when they saw those parts of the Woman,
judged that the nature of the Male lay hid in the Womb of the Female (in a
place in shape like an Egg) and that in the thin skarf or skin, that wrapped
about the Yard, was an unusual hole, through which the Urine passed. And that
therefore they declared that the place first being pierced and made like an
hollow pipe, should be turned into a green Wound, and at length brought to a
Scab, and when the Yard was reduced to it is proper shape, that suitable Remedies
should be applied for the cure of the Patient. Heraides was afterward called
Diophantus, and served in the King's Camp in a Regiment of Horse, and then
resided with the King at Abas. At that time therefore was Alexander' s Camp.
the meaning of the Oracle understood, which was before dark and obscure; when
the King came to Abbas, where this Hermaphrodite was Born. It Is reported that
Semiades at length (through love he bore to her) upon the account of their
former familiarity (and through shame of his unnatural Marriage) was able to
bear up no longer, but after he had left all his Goods to Diophantus, and made
him his Heir, broke his Heart and died. So she that had been a Woman, carried
it with the courage of a Man, and he that was ever a Man, appeared to be more
pusillanimous than any Woman. The like to this fell out about 30 Years after in
the City of In Peloponnesus.
Epidaurus. There was a young Maid in Epidaurus (as the report goes) an Orphan,
whose name was Callo. This Maid had no passage in her privy parts, but about
the Pecten there was a place like an issue through which the Urine passed ever
from the time of her Birth. When she came to a mature Age, she was Married to
one of the Citizens with whom she lived two Years, and though she was not capable
of natural Embraces as a Woman, yet she was forced to endure those that were
preternatural, or besides nature. But afterward a Tumor arose near the Pecten
which put her to exceeding torment, so that many Physicians were sent for to
consult together, and all despaired of Curing her: But an Apothecary undertook
the Cure, and made an incision in the place, whence came forth a Man's Yard with
Testicles, but solid without any passage. And when all were amazed at the
strangeness of the thing, the Apothecary supplied the parts with what was
deficient. First he made an incision into the end of the Yard, and pierced it
even to the Uretor, and thrusting down a small silver Probe.
Instrument, brought away the Urin and other excrementitious humors: But the
place where the Issue was, he first turned into a green Wound, and then healed
it up. Having performed this extraordinary Cure, he demanded a double reward;
For he said he had undertaken to Cure a sick Woman, and had now set right a
young Man. Callo hereupon laid aside her Wheel and other effeminate
Employments, and took upon her the Name of Callon, adding only the last Letter
N to her former Name. Some say, that before her Transformation, she was the
Priestess of Ceres, and because she showed to Men those things that were not to
be seen, this judgment fell upon her for her Profaneness. They report that at
Naples and several other places the like has happened; not that the two Sexes
of Man and Woman are really formed by Nature in two several shapes (for that is
impossible) but that Nature is deceived in fashioning the Members of the Body
to the amazement and deceit of -- the beholders. We have therefore judged these
strange Events which are brought down to us both by Writings and Traditions,
worthy to be taken notice of, in respect both of their pleasure and profit to
the readers. For many looking upon such things as these, as Monsters in Nature,
are thereby infected with a kind of Superstition: Not only private Men but
whole Cities and Nations. For it is reported that a little before the beginning
of the Martian War, there dwelt an Italian near Rome, who having Married such a
one (as is before described) complained to the Senate, upon which, they out of
a fond Superstition, and persuaded thereunto by the Truscan Augures, ordered
the Hermaphrodite to be burnt. And thus (they say) this poor Creature was most
unjustly doomed to destruction; and was ignorantly judged a Monster, because
she had some resemblance of both Sexes. And not long after there happened the
like at Athens; where the thing not being understood, (they say) the Man was
burnt alive. Some there are that tell idle stories how that there are Hyaene
(for so they call such as are both Men and Women) who have Carnal copulation
one with another, according to each Sex by turns every other Year: When in
truth there is no such thing. For although both Sexes have a peculiar and
distinct nature without participation one with another, yet by a false
formation the inconsiderate spectator may be imposed upon. For to the Female
(which is naturally such) is joined something like unto a Man's Yard, and so on
the other hand to the natural Male, something like to the privy parts of a
Woman. The same reason holds in all kind of living Creatures, there being many
and various sorts of prodigious Births; but such as never receive any
nourishment, nor can ever come to any perfection. But what has been said, may
suffice for the reforming this superstition.

Frag. 2. They say that the Walls of Carthage were 40 Cubits high, and 22 broad
But though they were so, yet the Roman Valor and Engines were too strong for all
their Defenses and Fortifications, for the City was taken and razed to the
ground.

Frag. 3. Manasses (called Masinissa by the Latins) who Reigned in Africa, and
was always a Friend to the Roman, lived Ninety years in strength, and firm
health, and left Ten Sons behind him when he died, whom he committed to the
Care and Guardianship of the Romans. He was of a strong Body, and from a Child
inured to hardship: Olymp. 158^. Ant. Chapter 146. Massinissa hit strength.
in what ever business he was engaged, he would keep close to it all the day
immovable; he would never rise from his seat till night, spending the whole
day in laborious Projects and Contrivances. When he was once on Horseback he
would ride continually night and day, and never be weary. A great instance of
the health and strength of his Body, was, That when he was almost 90 years of
age, he had a Son but 4 years old, yet of a very strong Body. He was so
extraordinarily given to Husbandry, that he left to every one of his Sons 10000
Every Plethrum is an hundred Foot: some make it the same with an Acre.
Plethras of Land, Adorned with all manner of delightful Improvements, and
Instruments necessary for that purpose. He Reigned with great commendation 60
years.

Fragment 4, Nicomedes after he had routed his Father Prusias, and forced him
to fly to the Temple of Jupiter for shelter, there killed him, and by that
wicked and bloody Murder got possession of the Kingdom of Bythinia.

Fragment 5, The Portugals.
Lusitanians at first not having an expert General, were easily vanquished by
the Romans; but after Viriathus became their General, they did them much
mischief. He was of them that inhabited the Seacoasts, a Shepherd upon the
Mountains from his Childhood; By nature of an healthful Constitution, in
strength and agility of Body far exceeding all the Iberians. For he had inured
himself to a sparing Diet, much Labor and Toil, and to no more sleep than was
absolutely necessary. He likewise continually carried Iron weapons, and was
famous for his Conflicts both with wild Beasts and Robbers, and at length was
made General; upon which a whole drove of Thieves and Rogues on the sudden
flocked about him. Being very successful in many Battles, he was not only
admired for his other Excellencies, but likewise for his Military Conduct.
Besides, in distribution of the spoils he was very just, allotting to every Man
proportionable to his Merits and Deserts. Still proceeding and prospering he
approved himself to be a Prince, rather than a Thief and a Robber. He fought
several Battles with the Olymp. 158. 4. Ant. Chapter 143.
Romans and came off Conqueror, insomuch as he routed Vitilius the Roman
General, broke his Army and took him prisoner, and then put him to death. And
many other brave Exploits he performed, till Fabius was appointed to go out as
General against him, and from that time he began to decline. But not long after
rallying his Men, and bravely managing the matter against Fabius, he forced him
to Terms dishonorable to the Roman Name, But Coepio who was afterward General
against Viriathus, slighted all the former Conditions as of no effect, and
often routed Viriathus, whom (now being reduced to those straits, as that he
su'd for terms of Peace) he caused to be treacherously assassinated by some of
his own Servants: and striking a Terror into Tantalus his Successor, and all
his Army, he imposed what Terms and Conditions he pleased upon them, and in the
conclusion gave them the City and Land about for their Habitation.

Out of the 34th. Book.
Fragm. 1. KIng * Antiochus Besieged Jerusalem. But the Jews stood it out for
some time: But when all their Provision was spent, they were forced to send
Antiochus Sedates. Olymp 126. 2. Strange stories of the Jews.
Ambassadors to him, to treat upon Terms. Many of his Friends persuaded him to
Storm the City, and to root out the whole Nation of the Jews; For that they
only of all People, hated to Converse with any of another Nation, and treated
them all as Enemies: And they suggested to him that their Ancestors were driven
out of Egypt, as impious and hateful to the Gods: For their Bodies being
overspread, and infected with the Itch and Leprosy, (by way of expiation) they
got them together, and as profane and wicked wretches, expelled them out of
their Coasts: And that those who were thus expelled, seated themselves about
Jerusalem, and being after imbodyed into one Nation (called the Nation of the
Jews) their hatred of all other Men descended with their Blood to Posterity.
And therefore they made strange Laws, and quite different from other People:
Never will Eat or Drink with any of another Nation, or wish them any
prosperity. For said they, Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes having subdued the
Jews, entered into the Temple of God, into which none was to enter by their Law
but the Priest; in which when he found the Image of a Man with a long Beard,
carved in Stone sitting upon an Ass, he took it to be Moses who built
Jerusalem, and settled the Nation, and established by Law all their wicked
Customs and Practices, abounding in hatred and enmity to all other Men.
Antiochus therefore abhorring this their contrariety to all other People, used
his utmost endeavor to abrogate their Laws. To that end he sacrificed a great
Swine at the Image of Moses, and at the Altar of God that stood in the outward
Court, and sprinkled them with the blood of the Sacrifice. He commanded
likewise that the Sacred Books, whereby they were taught to hate all other
Nations, should be besprinkled with the Broth made of the Swines flesh: And he
put out the Lamp (called by them Immortal) which was ever burning in the
Temple. Lastly he forced the high Priest and the other Jews to eat Swines flesh
When Antiochus his Friends had debated and considered of these things, they
were very earnest with him to root out the whole Nation, or at least that he
would abrogate their Laws, and compel them to change their former manner of
living and conversation. But the King being of a generous Spirit, and mild
disposition received Hostages, and pardoned the Jews: But demolished the Walls
of Jerusalem, and took the Tribute that was due.

2. The Affairs of Sicily after the overthrow of -- Carthage -- having
continued succesful Olymp. 161. 2. Ant. Chapter 133. The Servile War in Sicily.
and prosperous for the space of 60 Years; at length broke out the servile War
upon the following occasions. The Sicilians (through the enjoyment of a long
Peace) being grown very Rich, brought up abundance of Slaves; who being driven
in Droves like so many Herds of Cattle from the several places where they were
Bred and brought up, were stigmatized with certain Marks burnt into their
Bodies: Those that were Young, they used for Shepherds, others for such
services as they had occasion. But their Masters were very rigid and severe
with them, and took no care to provide either necessary food, or raiment for
them, insomuch as that most of them were forced to Rob and Steal, to get
necessaries: So that all places were full of slaughters and murders, as if an
Army of Thieves and Robbers had been dispersed all over the Island. The
Governors of the Provinces (to say the truth) did what they could to suppress
them: But because they durst not punish them, in regard their Masters (who had
the sole Command and Power over their Servants) were Rich, and Men in
Authority, every Governor in his several Province was forced to connive at the
thefts and rapines that were committed. For many of the Masters being Roman
Knights, and Judges of the accusations (brought before the Praetors) were a
Terror even to the Governors themselves. The Slaves therefore being in this
distress, and vilely beaten and scourged beyond all reason, were now resolved
not to bear any longer. Therefore meeting together from time to time as they
had opportunity, they consulted how to free themselves from the Yoke of
Servitude they lay under, till at length they really executed what they had
before agreed upon. There was a Syrian a Servant of Antigenes of Enna, born in
the City of * Apanea a Magitian and Conjurer: He pretended to tell future
Events (or Fortunes) discovered to him as he said by the Gods in his Dreams,
and imposed upon many by this kind of practice. Then he proceeded further, and
not only foretold things to come, revealed to him in Dreams, but pretended that
he saw the Gods when he was awake, and they declared to him what was to come to
pass. And though he thus juggled, and played the fool, yet by chance many things
afterward proved true. And whereas those things which never happened, were by
none censured, but those which did come to pass were every where applauded, he
grew more and more into esteem. At length by some trick of Art or other, he
would breath flames of Fire out at his Mouth as from a burning Lamp, and so
would prophecy as if he had been at that time inspired by Apollo. For he put
Fire with some combustible marter to feed it, into a Nut-shell or some such
thing bored through on both sides, then putting it into his Mouth, and forcing
his Breath, upon it there would issue out both sparks and flames of Fire. G:
Before the defection, this Juggler boasted that the Goddess Syria had appeared
to him, and told him that he should Reign, and this he declared not only to
others but often to his own Master. The thing being become a common jest and
subject of laughter, Antigenes was so taken with this jest, and ridiculous
conceit of the Man, he took Eunus (for so he was called) with him to Feasts and
Repasts, and several questions being put to him concerning the Kingdom, he was
asked how he would deal with every one that was there present at the Table: He
readily went on with his story, and told them that he would be very kind to his
Masters, and like a Conjurer using many monstrous Magical terms, and
expressions, he set all the Guests a laughing, upon which some of them as a
reward gave him large Messes from the Table, desiring him to remember their
kindness when he came to his Kingdom: But all this jesting came at length
really to end in the advancing of him to the Kingdom; and all those who at the
Feasts by way of ridicule had been kind to him, he rewarded in earnest.

But the beginning of the defection was in this manner, There was one
Damophilus of Enna, a Man by reason of his Wealth, of a great Spirit, but of a
proud and haughty disposition. This Man above all measure was cruel and severe
to his Servants; and his Wife Megallis strove to exceed her Husband in all kind
of cruelty and inhumanity toward the Slaves. Upon this, they that had been
thus cruelly used, were enraged like wild Beasts, and plotted together to rise
in Arms and cut the Throats of their Masters. To this end they applied
themselves to Eunus, and desired to know of him whether the Gods would succeed
them in their design. He encouraging them declared that they should prosper in
what they had in hand, using (according to his former manner) Conjuring words
and expressions, and charging them to be speedy in their Execution. Whereupon
they forthwith raised a Body of 400 Slaves, and upon the first opportunity (oh
a sudden) broke in Armed into the City Enna, led by their Captain Eunus, by his
juggling tricks, flaming out Fire at his Mouth. Then entering the Houses, they
made so great a slaughter, as that they spared not even the sucking Children,
but plucked them violently from their The cruelty of the Slaves.
Mothers Breasts and dashed them against the Ground: It cannot be expressed how
vilely and filthily (for the satisfying of their Lusts) they used Men's Wives in
the very presence of their Husbands. With these Villains joined a multitude of
Slaves that were in the City, and first executed their rage and cruelty upon
their Masters, and then fell a murdering others.

In the mean time Eunus heard that Damophilus and his Wife were in some
Orchards near the City, he sent therefore some of his rabble thither, who
brought them with their Hands tied upon their Backs, loading them all along the
Way as they past with scoffs and scorns; only they declared that they would be
kind in every respect to his Daughter, for her pity and compassion toward the
Servants, and her readiness always to be helpful to them. They that were sent
for Damophilus and Megallis his Wife to the City, brought them into the
Theater, whither all the Rabble that made a defection flockt. There Damophilus
pleading earnestly for his Life, and moving many with what he said, Hermias and
Zexis loaded him with many bitter accusations, and called him a Cheat and
Dissembler; and not waiting what would be determined by the People concerning
him, the one ran him through with a Sword, and the other cut of his Head with
an Ax. Then they made Damophilus cruelly murdered.
Eunus King, not for his Valor or Skill in Martial affairs, but upon the
account of his extraordinary Art in Juggling, and that he was the Head and
Author of the Defection, and for that his Name seemed to portend and to be a
good Omen, that he would be Eunus, signifying in Greek, kind.
kind to his Subjects. Being therefore made General (with absolute Power) to
order and dispose of all things as he pleased, an Assembly was called, and he
put all the Prisoners to death except such as were skilful in making of Arms,
whom he forth with set on Work; as for Megallis he delivered her up to the will
of the Women Slaves, to take their revenge of Megallis murdered
her as they thought fit: Who after they had whipped and tormented her, threw
her down a steep precipice. And Eunus himself killed his own Master Antigenes
and Pytho. At length putting the Crown upon his Head, and graced with all the
Ensigns of Royalty, he caused his Wife (who was a Syrian, and of the same City)
to be owned as Queen, and chose such as he judged to be most prudent to be of
his privy Council. Amongst whom was one Achaeus by Name, and an Achaean by
Nation, a wise Man and a good Soldier: Having therefore got together in the
space of Three days above 6000 Men, Armed with what they could by any ways or
means lay their Hands upon, and being joined with others, who were all
surnish'd either with Axes, Hatchets, Slings, Bills, or Stakes sharppen'd and
burnt at one End, or with Spits, he ravaged and made spioil all over the
Country. And being at length joined with an infinite number of Slaves, they
grew to that height and boldness as to engage in a War with the Roman Generals:
And often in several Battles got the Victory, by overpowr'ing them with Number;
having now with him above 10000 Men.

In the mean time, one Cleon a Cilicean was the Author of another desection of
the Slaves, and now all were in hopes that this unruly Rabble would fall
together by the Another defection of the Slaves.
Ears one with another, and so Sicily would be rid of them through the mutual
slaughters and destructions amongst themselves. But contrary to all Men's hopes
and expectations, they joined Forces together; and Cleon was observant in every
thing to the Commands of Eunus, and served General under him as his Prince,
having 5000 Men of his own Soldiers. Thirty days were now expired since the
first beginning of this Rebellion: And presently after a Battle was fought with
Lucius Hypsius (who coming from Rome Commanded 8000 Sicilians) in which Fight
the Rebels got the day, who were then 20000, and in a very short time after,
their Army increased to 200000 Men. And although they fought with the Romans
themselves, yet they often came off Conquerors, and were very seldom beaten.
This being noised abroad, a defection began at Rome by 150 Slaves that
conspired against the Government. The like in Attica by 1000, the like at Delos
and many other Places. But those in the several Places (who had entrusted their
Concerns in their Hands) to prevent the mischief from growing further, made a
quick dispatch, and fell upon them on the sudden, and put them all to death,
and so those that remained and were ready to break out into Rebellion, were
reduced to more sound and sober thoughts.

But in Sicily the disorders more and more increased: For Cities were taken,
and Gr. Olymp. 162. Ant. Chapter 130.
their Inhabitants made Slaves, and many Armies were cut off by the Rebels,
until such time as Rupilius the Roman General recovered Tauromenium, after the
Besieged had been reduced to that extremity of Famine (by a sharp and close
Siege) as that they began to eat their own Children, and the Men their Wives;
and at length Butchered one another for Food. There he took Comanus the Brother
of Cleon, who was endeavoring to escape out of the City while it was besieged.
At last Sarapion a Syrian, having betrayed the Citadel, all the Fugitives fell
into his hands, whom having first scourged, he afterward crucified. Thence he
marched to Enna, and by a long Siege reduced them into such straits, as that
there was no hopes left to escape. Afterward having slain Cleon their General
(who had made a Sally out of the City and fought lik a Hero) he exposed his
Body to open view; and not long after this City likewise was betrayed into his
Hands, which otherwise could never have been taken by force, by reason of the
natural Strength of the Place. And as for Eunus, he like a Coward fled with 600
of his Guards to the tops of certain high Rocks, where those that were with him
(foreseeing their inevitabe ruin, for Rupilius pursued them close) cut one
another Throats. But Eunus the juggling King (out of fear) hid himself in some
Caves, he had found out for that purpose; whence he was plucked out with four
others of his Gang, viz. his Cook, his Barber, he that rubbed him in the Bath,
and he that in the midst of his Cups was his Jester. To conclude he was thrown
into the Goal, and there eaten up of Lice, and so ended his days at *
Morgantina by a death worthy the former wickedness of his Life. Rupilius
afterward with a In Sicily.
small body of Men, (marching all over Sicily) presently cleared the Country of
Thieves and Robbers. This Eunus King of the Robbers called himself Antiochus,
and all his followers Syrians.

Out of the 36th. BOOK.
ABout the time that Marius in a great Battle routed Bocchus and Jugurtha, the
African Olymp. 168. 4. Ant. Chapter 193.
Kings, and slew many thousands of the Africans, and afterward took Jugurtha
himself (delivered up to him by Bocchus, to gain favor and pardon from the
Romans for his making War upon them,) the Romans themselves were in great
perplexity by reason of the many losses they had sustained by the Cimbrians,
who then ravaged and harrass'd all the Country of New France.
Gall. And in further aggravation of what they suffered, at the very same time
came some out of Sicily, who gave an account of many thousand Slaves that were
there risen up in Arms. Whereupon the whole Roman Commonwealth was in such
straits, Rebellion in Sicily, Olymp. 161. 2. Ant. Chapter 133.
that they knew not which way to turn themselves, having lost 60000 Men in
Gall, in the War against the Cimbrians, and they had not then Soldiers
sufficient for a new Expedition. And besides, (before the Rebellion of the
Slaves in Sicily) there were Defections that disturbed -- the State in Italy;
but they were short and inconsiderable, as if God had appointed these for Omens
and Presages of the great Rebellion in Sicily. The first rising was at In
Campania in Italy Nine Miles from the Sea. Minutius a Roman Knight head of a
Rebellion of the Slaves in Italy. 1309l. 10^. Sterling
Nusiaeria, where 30. Servants entered into a Conspiracy, but they were
presently executed. The second was at Capua where 200 were got up in Arms, but
they were likewise in a short time suppressed. The third happened after a strange
manner, which was thus, there was one Titus Minutius a Roman Knight, who had a
very rich Man to his Father, he chanced to fall in Love with another Man's
Servant who was very beautiful, and having enjoyed her, he was the more
wonderfully inflamed, and even to Madness, insomuch as he would needs buy her
of her Master; who being with much ado prevailed with to part with her, the
Lover at length bought her for Seven * Attick Talents, and limited a certain
time for the payment of the Money, to which time the greatness of his Fathers
Estate procured him Credit: But now, when the day of payment was come, he had
not the Money then ready, but prayed forbearance for 30 days longer. That time
being run up, the Creditor demanded then his Money, but the Lover knew not how
to perform his Word, and yet his Love continued still as hot as ever. At length
a wicked design came into his Head, which put him on to lay a trap for them
that demanded the Money, and to that end to take upon him the state and dignity
of a Monarch. To which purpose he bought 500 Arms of all sorts, and appointed a
day for payment; and being trusted, withdrawing himself privately into a
certain Field, he stirred up his own Slaves to a defection to the number of
400; and putting on the Diadem and Purple, and assuming all the other Badges
and Ensigns of Royalty, declared himself King, the deliverer of the Slaves. In
the first place he caused all those who demanded the Money he had given for the
young Woman to be scourged, and then cut off their Heads. Then he entered the
next Towns with his armed Slaves, and those that came readily to join with him,
he furnished with Arms, and killed all that opposed him. Having in a short time
got together above 700, he divided them into (...). Company consisting of 100
(...) of which the Captain was called a (...).
Companies; and then Fortifying and Intrenching himself, he received all the
Slaves that ran away from their Masters. The Rebellion being noised at Rome,
the Senate (by the help of prudent advice) gave a stop to the mischief, and
happily suppressed it.

The care and management of the business for the reducing and punishing of the
fugitive Slaves was committed to Lucius Lucullus, who was the only General that
was then in the City, who raised 600 Men in Rome, and with them the same day
marched to Capua, where he listed 4000 Foot, and 400 Horse. When Minutius heard
with what speed Lucullus was making toward him, he possessed himself of a
strong Hill, having with him 3500 Men. In the first Engagement the Fugitives by
the advantage of the higher Ground got the better, afterward Lucullus bribed
Apollonius Minutius his General, to betray his Confederates; withal promising
him upon the security of the public Faith, that he should have his pardon.
Whereupon he set upon the Work, and seizing of Minutius, he (to avoid the
punishment he feared for his Rebellion) ran himself through the Body; the rest
were all presently cut off except Apellonius: And these were Prologues to that
great Defection in Sicily, whose beginning was thus occasioned: In the
expedition of Marius against the Cimbrians, the Senate had given a Commission
to raise Men out of the Countries beyond the Seas; to which end Marius sent
Ambassadors to Nicomedes King of Bithynia to help him with some Men. But he
returned answer that most of the Bithynians were violently taken away for
Slaves by the Publicans, and were dispersed here and there through the
Provinces. Upon which the Senate decreed, That no Freeman belonging to any of
the Roman Allies should in any Province be forced to be Servants or Slaves, and
that the Proconsuls should take care to see them all set free. In pursuance of
this Order Licinius Nerva then Praetor in Sicily (having first consulted with
the Judges) manumitted so many, as that in a few days above 800 were set at
Liberty. So that all the Slaves in Sicily were hereby presently encouraged, and
grew high Crested in hopes of liberty. The Magistrates therefore addressed
themselves to the Praetor or Proconsul, and desired him to forbear making any
more free. Hereupon he (whether bribed or to curry favor) laid aside the
former determination of the Judges, and with checks and foul words, sent them
that came to him to be made free back to their Masters. Upon this the Servants
entered into a Conspiracy; and after they came from Syracuse, and were got
together at the grove of Palicum, they consulted concerning their intended
Rebellion. This boldness of the Slaves began to make a noise in many places of
the Island: Amongst others 30 Servants of two rich Brothers in the Country of
the Anycillians were the first that appeared for their liberty, whose Leader
was one Varius. These in the first place killed their Masters, when they were
asleep in their Beds. Then away they went to the next Towns, and Varius the
beginner of another defection in Sicily.
stirred up all the Servants and Slaves there to appear for the gaining of
their liberty, of whom came in flocking to them in that one Night, to the
number of 120 and upwards. Upon this they possessed themselves of a place
naturally strong of it self, which they endeavored to make stronger by art and
labor, where 80 more well armed came in to them. Licinius Nerva hastens out
against them with a purpose to put a stop to their Ravages, but all his labor
was in vain. Seeing therefore that the Place was not to be taken by force, he
sought how to gain it by Treachery: For he had private Correspondence with one
Caius Titinius sirnam'd Gadaeus, whom he wrought upon to be the Instrument of
accomplishing his design, promising him safety and protection. This Man had
been condemned to dye two Years before, but had made an escape, and had Robbed
and Murdered many Freemen in that Province, but never in the least injured any
Servant. Titinius with a great Body of Slaves came to this Fort where the
Rebels had posted themselves, as if he designed to join with them in making War
upon the Romans: Who being willingly and kindly received by them, and for his
Valor made their General, he at length betrayed the Fort, upon which some of
the Rebels were killed in Fight, and the lest out of fear of what they should
suffer, if they were taken Prisoners, threw themselves down headlong from the
top of the Rock. And in this manner was the first rising of the Slaves suppressed.

But the Soldiers were no sooner got to their Quarters, but news was brought
that about 80 Slaves had caused a Tumult to be raised, and had cut the Throat
of Publius Clonius a Roman Knight, and that now their number was much
increased. And to aggravate the matter the Praetor being ill advised, had
disbanded most of his Army, by reason whereof he was so slow, that he gave time
to the Rebels the more to strengthen themselves. However he marched out against
them, with those he then had. As soon as he passed the River Alba he turned
aside from the Fugitives, who were then lodged upon Mount Caprianus, and
arrived at Heraclea. Upon this, a Report being spread of the Cowardice of the
General as if he durst not attack them, very many Slaves were encouraged to
join in the Defection: Many therefore flocking in (furnishing themselves as
well as they could for a Battle) there were above 800 in Seven days time that
took up Arms. And presently after they amounted to 2000. But the General at
Heraclea being informed that their number was increasing, sent Marcus Titinius
as chief Commander against them, enforcing him with 600 Men out of the Forts at
Enna. This Titinius fought the Rebels, who (having the advantage both of Place
and Number) routed him and killed many of his Men, and the rest threw away
their Arms, and with much difficulty saved themselves by flight. By this means
the Runagades on a sudden got such a great number of Arms, that they were more
firmly resolved to persist in their Rebellion, so that now most of the Slaves
were in Arms. The Defection every day increasing, the Number amounted in a
short time so high, as none ever suspected it could, insomuch that within a few
Days they were above 6000; who having now called a Council of War, and debated
Matters in reference to the Management of Affairs, in the first place they
chose a King called Salvius, a Fortune Tellers, and one that in the Women's
Sports and Shows with his Pipes, acted the Part of a Fool and Madman. But
having now gained a Kingdom, he waved living in Cities, as being the Nurseries
of Sloth and Effeminateness. After, he divided the Army into three Bodies; over
each of which he appointed a Captain, and ordered them to make Inroads up and
down in the Country, and at a certain Time and Place all to join again in one
Body. By these Depredations they were so full of Horses and other Cattle, that
in a short time they had above 2000 Horse, and no less than 20000 Foot, but Men
very Raw and Ignorant in Martial Affairs. Among other attempts they fell upon
Morgantina with great Fury (which was a strong and well-fortify'd City) and
made many fierce and continual Assaults upon it.

The Roman General marching out in the Night as if he would relieve the City
(having with him about 10000 Men out of Italy and Sicily) surpised the Rebels
(busily employed in the Siege) on a sudden; and breaking into their Camp, found
but slender Guards but a great number of Prisoners, and abundance of Plunder of
all sorts, and with great ease made himself Master of all, and when he had
rifled the Camp he marched away toward Morgantina: But the Rebels turning back
upon him with great Fury, and having the advantage of the higher Ground, soon
routed him, and put all his Army to flight. Whereupon the Rebels King
commanded Proclamation to be made, That none should be killed who threw away
their Arms: Upon which most cast them away and fled. By this means Salvius both
recovered what he had lost in his Camp, and gained a glorious Victory and much
Spoil; but there were not killed of the Italians and Sicilians above 600 (which
was occasioned by the Moderation of the King) but 4000 were taken Prisoners.
Upon this Victory many coming in flocking to Salvius, his Army became double to
what it was before, and he was now absolute Master of the Field, so that he
again sat down before Morgantina, and proclaimed Liberty to all the Servants
that were there. But their Masters promising the same to them, if they would be
Faithful and join with them in the Defense of the Place, they chose rather to
accept of what was offered by their Masters, and fought with that Resolution,
that they forced the Enemy to raise their Siege. But the General afterward
making void all that was promised (as to manumitting of the Servants)
occasioned many to run away to the Rebels. After this all the Slaves and
Servants Olymp. 169. 1. Ant. Chapter 103. Florus lib. 3. c. 19.
in the Territories of Aegista Lilybaeum were likewise infected with this Itch
of Rebellion, whose Leader was one Athenio, a Valiant Man and a Cilicean. This
Man having the Charge and Management of the Concerns of two rich Brothers, and
being an Excellent Astrologer; He first wrought upon those to join with him,
over whom he had some sort of Command, to the Number of 200; afterward those
that were bordering round about, so that in Five days time there were got
together above 1000 who made him King, and placed the Diadem upon his Head.
This Man resolved to order Matters and Affairs so as never any did before him:
For he received not all promiscuously that came in to him, but only such as
were of strong and healthful Bodies to bear Arms; the rest he forced to
continue in the Stations they were in, and every one in his place diligently to
apply himself to the Duty incumbent upon him. By which means those that were
with him had plentiful Provision. He pretended that by the Stars the Gods
foretold, That he should gain the whole Kingdom of Sicily: And therefore he was
to spare spoiling of the Country, destruction of the Cattle and Fruits of the
Earth, as being all his own. At length having now got together above 10000 Men,
he was so daring as to besiege Lilybeum, a City for strength looked upon to be
impregnable. But finding it a vain thing to proceed, he desisted from his
Design, pretending he did it by Command from the Gods, by whom he was told,
That if they continued the Siege, they would certainly fall into some sudden
Misfortune.

Accordingly, while he was preparing to draw off from the City, a Fleet of
Moors entered the Harbor, who were sent to the Assistance of them of Lilybeum,
under the Command of one called Gomon, who in the Night surprising Athenio's
Army, (now marching off and leaving the Siege) killed a great number of them,
and wounded as many, and so got into the Town. This was the occasion that his
former Prediction was highly admired and cried up by the Rebels.

At the same time great Disorders, (...). A Proverb, for all Kinds of Miseries.
and all sorts of Calamities overspread all Sicily. For not only Servants but
Freemen that were reduced to Poverty, committed all sorts of Rapines and acts
of Wickedness: For they shamefully killed all before them, whether Bond or
Free, that none might be left to tell Tales; so that they that were in the
Cities scarce enjoyed any thing that was their own, though it were with them
within the Walls: But as for that which was without, all was swallowed up and
violently seized on, as a Prey taken from a Common Enemy. Many other things
against all the Laws of Humanity were impudently committed by many throughout
all Sicily.

Salvius likewise, he who had besieged Morgantina, after he had harrass'd all
the Country, as far as to the Territories of Leontium, there mustered his Army,
consisting of above 30000 Fighting Men. Then Sacrificing to the Heroes of
Italy, he Dedicated one of the Royal Purple Robes, in gratitude for his
Victories. And now he caused himself to be proclaimed King, and was called by
the Rebels Or Trophon, rather an ancient Soothsayer, who lived in a Cave, into
which whosoever descended, he never laughed afterward.
Tryphon; having a design to possess himself of Tricala, and there to build a
Palace, he sent to Athenio, and as King commanded him as General to repair to
him. Every Man then thought that Athenio would endeavor to gain the
Sovereignty for himself, and by that means the Rebels would be divided, and so
a speedy period would be put to the War. But Fortune so ordered the Matter,
that the Armies of the Fugitives being thus increased, the two Generals were
Unanimous, and agreed very well one with another. For Tryphon marched speedily
with his Army to Tricala, and Athenio came thither to him with 3000 Men, in
every thing observing the Commands of Tryphon as his King. Athenio had sent the
rest abroad to harrass and spoil the Country, and to bring over as many as they
could to join with them in the Defection. But not long after, Tryphon suspected
that Athenio had a design to supplant him, and therefore he caused him to be
seized betime. The The Castle at Tricala.
Castle that was well fortified before, he made more strong, and adorned it
likewise with many stately Buildings. After which (they say) it was called
(...).
Tricala, because it was Remarkable and Famous for three things, First for
Springs of excellent sweet Water. Secondly for Vineyards, and Olive yards, and
rich Lands for Tillage. And Thirdly, That it was a Place impregnable, built
upon an high and inaccessible Rock. After he had drawn a Line of eight Stages
round about it for the building of a City, and had compassed it in with a deep
Trench, he made it the Seat-Royal, being a Place abounding in Plenty and
Fatness of all things necessary for Man's Life. He likewise built there a
stately Palace and a Marketplace, capable to receive a vast Number of Men. He
chose likewise a competent Number of the most prudent Men to be of his Council,
and made use of them for Administration of Justice. Moreover, whenever he sat
in the Courts of Justice, he put on a The Roman Toga Praetexta, which was White.
long Gown edged with Purple, and a The Coat was the Roman Tunick, Embroidred
with large Studs of Gold or Purple, called Nails, and the Garment Tunica
laticlevia. Olymp. 169. 3. Ant. Chapter 102.
Coat powdered with large Studds of Purple. Lastly, He appointed Lictors with
Rods and Axes to go before him, and took care that all other Ensigns and Badges
of Royalty should be observed.

At length Lucius Licinius Lucullus was chosen General by the Senate at Rome to
go against the Rebels, who had with him 14000 Romans and Italians, 1800
Bithynians, Thessalians, and Acharnans; and out of Lucania 600 under the
Command of one Cleptius, an Expert and Valiant Soldier, and 600 from other
Places, in the whole amounting to 17000. With this Army he entered Sicily. Upon
this Tryphon released Athenio, and advised with him how to manage the War
against the Romans. Tryphon was of Opinion, that it was the safest way to
continue in Tricala, and there expect the Enemy: But Athenio advised rather to
draw out and fight in the open Field, than to suffer themselves to be besieged;
whose Counsel prevailing, they marched out and Encamped near Scirthaea, with no
fewer than 40000 Men, twelve Furlongs distant from the Roman Camp. At first the
Armies employed themselves every day in light Skirmishes; but at length they
Engaged, and while Victory seemed to incline sometime to one side, and sometime
to another, and many fell on both sides. Athenio came on with 200 choice Horse,
and covered the Ground round about him with the Bodies of his Enemies. But
being wounded in both his Knees, and then receiving a Third, he was wholly
disabled for Fight, which so discouraged the Rebels, that they fled outright.
Athenio lay concealed, as if he were Dead, and feigned himself so till Night
came, and then stole away. The Romans having now gained a glorious Victory,
forced Tryphoh himself to take to his heels, and in the pursuit killed at least
20000 Men. The rest by the advantage of the Night got to Tricala, though the
General might easily have cut them all off, if he would have continued the
Pursuit. Upon this rout they were now all so discouraged, that it was moved
amongst them that they should return to their Masters, and submit themselves
wholly to their Power and Pleasure: But those who advised to stand it out to
the last, and not to give up their Lives to the Lusts of their Enemies,
prevailed above the other.

Nine days after the Roman General besieged Tricala, but after several
slaughters on both sides he was forced to draw off and leave the Place. Upon
this the Rebels got heart, and the General on the other side (either through
Sloth and Negligence, or Corrupted by Bribes) minded nothing to the Discharge
of his Duty, for which afterward he gave an account to the Romans. Neither did
Caius Servilius, who succeeded Lucullus, do any thing worth remembering, and
therefore he was brought to Judgment (as Lucullus was before) and banished. In
the mean time Tryphon died, and Athenio enjoyed the Kingdom. And what with
taking of Cities, and wasting and spoiling the Country (without Control or any
Opposition from Servilius) he got together a great deal of rich Booty and
Plunder. But the year after Caius Marius being chosen at Rome the Fifth time
Consul, and with him Marcus Aquilius.
Caius Aquillius; Aquillius was made General against the Rebels, and his Valor
so far advanced his Success, that he wholly overcame them in a great Battle:
And like an Hero fought Hand to Hand with Athenio the King of the Rebels, and
killed him, but received himself a wound in the Head. And now he resolved to
prosecute the War against the rest that remained who were about 10000, who
though they fled to their Defenses, (as not being able to stand before him) yet
Aquillius slackened not his Resolution in the least, but pursued his design
till he had wholly broke them. There remained now only 1000 led by Satyrus,
whom at first he determined to reduce by Force: But when they made their
Submission by their Commissioners, for the present he remitted their Faults,
but after they were brought Prisoners to Rome he ordered them to fight with
wild Beasts, where it is reported that they ended their Lives with great
gallantry and nobleness of Mind, for they scorned to fight with Beasts, but
thrust one another through at the public Altars: And after all were dead,
Satyrus being the last, with an Heroic Spirit killed himself. And this was the
Tragical End of the Servants War, after it had continued almost Four years.

Out of the same BOOK.
Eclog. 2. ONE Battaces, Priest of the Goddess This Rhea is said to be the
Mother of the Gods.
Rhea (they say) came to Rome from Pesinunte a City of Phrygia; who declared he
came thither by the Command of the Goddess; and told the Magistrates and
Senate, that their Temple was profaned, and that a public Expiation ought to
be made in the name of the Romans. His Habit and other Ornaments of his Body
was very strange, and altogether unusual at Rome; for he wore a Crown or Mitre
of a vast Bigness, and a Flowered Gown imbroider'd with Gold, representing the
State and Dignity of a King. After he had spoken to the People from the Bench,
and instructed them in the Matters of Religion, he was honored with public
Entertainments, and large Gifts and Presents: But he was forbid to wear a Crown
by Aulus Pompeius a Tribune of the People. However, being brought by another
Tribune to the Desk, and being asked how the Expiatory Sacrifices should be
made; his Answers were stuffed with nothing but Superstitious Rites and
Ceremonies. At length things were so managed that he was driven out by Pompeius
his Faction, with many Scorns and Affronts; upon which he went to his Inn and
never after appeared abroad: But only told them, that not only he was
disgraced, but the Goddess was reproached and dishonored. Presently after
Pompeius fell into an high Fever, and then a (...). Cynanchino Morbo, Or a
Dog's Disease.
Quinsie which took away his Speech, and he died the Third day. Upon which it
was the common Discourse and Sentiment amongst the ordinary sort, that he was
thus punished by a Divine Hand, for his profane and impious abuse of the
Goddess and her Priest. For the Romans are addicted to Superstition much above
many other Nations: And therefore Battaces being honored with many Presents,
and Liberty granted to him to wear his Sacred Vestments, with all their
Ornaments, the day he had designed for his departure, he was conducted by
multitudes both of Men and Women out of the City.

Out of the same Book.
Eclog. 3. IT was a Custom amongst the Roman Soldiers, That if any Commander of
an Army fought a Battle and killed above 6000 of the Enemy, he was termed (...).
Emperor, which is the same with (...).
King among the Grecians.

Fragment, Lib. 37. Ecloga Prima.
THE Marsian War took its name from the Authors of the Defection, though the
Italians The Confederate War of the Marsi. Olymp. 172. 2. Ant. Chapter 89.
generally made this War upon the Romans. It Is said the first occasion of this
arose from the profuseness and luxury the Romans were fallen into, who were
formerly frugal and sparing in their way of living. This alteration caused
great Heart-burnings between the Commonalty and the Senate. For when the Senate
prevailed with the Italians to supply the City with Provisions, and upon their
frequent Addresses had promised to enfranchise them, and make them Freemen of
Rome, and to ratify it by a Law, and the Italians saw nothing performed that
was promised; these were the sparks that at length broke forth into a flame at
the time when Lucius Martius, Philippus and Julius Caesar Gr. 170. Olymp.
Others say 172.
Sextus Julius were Consuls in the 117th Olympiad.

Many were the Slaughters, Sieges, and Sacking of Towns on both sides during
this War, Victory hovering sometimes here and sometimes there, as uncertain
where to fall, giving no assurance to either party, which of them she favored.
But at length after the shedding of much Blood, the Romans (with much ado) got
the better, and regained their former Power and Sovereignty. There were engaged
against them in this War the Samnites, the Asculans, Lucanans, Picentians, them
of Still being 14 Miles from Naples.
Nola, and other Cities and Nations. Amongst which was Cortinium in Italy a
City of the Peligni, now called Pienza under the Duke of Florence.
Cortinum a large and famous City greatly frequented, in which the Italians had
a little before planted a Colony. Here were all things necessary for the
support and defense of so great a City, and the maintenance of the Government;
particularly a large Marketplace and Courthouse, with a vast Treasure, and
plentiful Provisions of all sorts. They had likewise a Senate consisting of 500
Men. Out of which were chosen those reputed fit to execute the highest places
of Magistracy, and to manage the weighty Affairs of the Commonwealth. These
therefore they entrusted with the management of the War, and put the absolute
power of the disposing of all their concerns into the hands of the Senators,
who made a Law that Two Consuls should be chosen every year, and Twelve
Generals. At which time Quintus Pompoedius Silo a Marsian, (a Man of chiefest
quality in his Country,) and Caius Aponius Motulus (famous for his noble Acts
above the rest of his own Nation.) were chosen Consuls. They divided all Italy
into Two Parts, and took either of their equal shares for the executing of
their Consular Authority. They allotted the Region or Tract from the Cercoli
(so called) to the Adriatic Sea, which lay to the North and West to
Pompaedius, to six of the Generals. The rest which lay to the South and East
the Italians assigned to Motulus, with as many more of the Military Officers.
Having put all things into this good Order, and (to sum up all) having ordered
all things according to the ancient Model of the Roman Government, they set
themselves more intently and earnestly to the prosecuting of the War, and
called the City it self Italy. And they were so successful, that they came off
Conquerors for the most part, till Cneius Pompeius was made Consul and General,
Pompey.
who with Sylla (deputed by Cato the other Consul) often routed them, and
reduced them to those straits, that at length their Power was broken in pieces.
However they An Isthmus in Italy called Calabria.
still continued the War, but were often worsted by Caius Cossinius General in
* Japygia. Being therefore distressed and harassed with so many and great
mischiefs one upon the neck of another (and the Marsians and other Nations
falling to the Romans) they forsook their new City, and transplanted themselves
to Aesernia a City of the Samnites, under the conduct of Five Generals; of whom
they made Quintus Pompoedius Chief, for his Valor and prudent management of
the War, who with the consent of all the other Captains, raised a great Army,
which with the old Soldiers amounted to the number of 30000. And besides, he
got together at least 20000 Foot, and 1000 Horse of manumitted Slaves, and
Armed them as well as the time would allow. And coming to an Engagement with
the Romans, whose General was Mamercus; he killed a few of them, but lost above
6000 of his own Men.

About the same time Metellus took the famous City Venusia in Apulia, which had
in it a great number of Soldiers, and carried away above 3000 prisoners. And
now the Romans prevailed every day more and more against their Enemies: So that
the Italians sent Ambassadors to Mithridates King of Pontus (who had then a
brave and well appointed Army) to entreat him to march into Italy with his Army
to oppose the Romans, by which means (they told him) that their Power would be
easily broken: Mithridates answered, that he would march into Italy as soon as
he had subdued Asia, in order to which he was then engaged. The Rebels
therefore being now frustrated in their hopes of Assistance, and of supplies of
Money, were greatly discouraged. For there were but a few of the Samnites
remaining: and the Sabellians kept themselves close within Nola, and the like
did Lamponius and Cleptius, who commanded those that were left of the Lucanians.

The Marsian War being now almost at an end, there arose again a great Sedition
in Rome, by reason of the contentious Ambition of many of the Roman Nobility,
every one striving which should be General in the Expedition against
Mithridates, stirred up thereunto with the Greatness of the Rewards and Riches
to be reaped by that War. For Caius Julius, and Caius Marius who had been Six
times Consul, opposed one another, and the People on that occasion were
divided, some for one and some for the other. There were likewise other
disturbances about the same time. For Sylla the Consul went from Rome to the
Forces that lay near unto Nola, and so terrified many of the bordering
Territories, with their Cities, that he forced them to the obedience of the
Romans. But when Sylla was engaged in the War in Asia against Mithridates, and
Rome was filled with slaughters and intestine broils, Marcus Aponius and
Tiberius Cleptius Generals of those Italians that were left continuing in
Brutia (not being able to take the strong City Aesias, after a long time they
had lain before it) left part of their Army to maintain the Siege, and with the
rest fiercely assaulted Rhegium, in hopes that if they gained this place, they
might with ease transport their Army into Sicily, and so become Masters of the
richest Island under the Sun. But Caius Urbanus the Governor of Rhegium so
terrified the Italiots with the greatness of his Army, and his vast
preparations, that they drew off from the Siege, and so the Rhegians were
delivered. And afterward when the Civil Wars broke forth between Marius and
Sylla, part of them sided with Marius and the rest with Scylla, and most of
them were killed in the War, and those that survived all joined with the
Conqueror Scylla. And thus ended the Marsian War, and the greatest homebred
Sedition of any that was ever before among the Romans.

Eclog. 2. And now that the Marsian War was at an end, a Second great Sedition
was raised The War between Sylia and Marius. Olymp. 174. Ant. Chapter 80. Or rather
Aphroditus. Beautiful.
in Rome, stirred up by Sylla, and Caius Marius a young Man, the Son of Marius
who had been Seven times Consul. In this Commotion many thousands of Men
perished: At length Sylla prevailed, and being created Dictator, he called
himself Epaphroditus; which vain glorious Title did not altogether deceive him,
for he prosper'd all his life long, and died a natural death after all his
Victories. But Marius, although he behaved himself with great Gallantry in the
War against Sylla, being at length routed, fled with 15000 Men to Proeneste,
where he was Besieged a long time; at length all having forsaken him, and
seeing no way how to escape, he earnestly entreated one of his faithful
Servants to afford him his helping hand for the extricating him out of the
present dangers and mischiefs that surrounded him. After much persuasion the
Servant at one stroke put an end to his Masters Life, and then immediately
killed himself. And so at length ended this Civil War. However, some relics of
it still gave Scylla disturbance for some time till those that pursued it, with
some others, were suppressed.

But after these were all ruined and destroyed, there broke out such a flame of
Discord The War between Caesar and Pompey, which continued Four years, Olymp.
182. Ant. Chapter 47.
between Julius Caesar and Pompey who (for the great and eminent Services he
had done for the Romans, partly by the Conduct of Sylla, and partly by his own
Valor) was sirnam'd the Great, that the Romans were again involved in
intestine Slaughters and Butcheries. And as soon as Pompey had lost all his
Army in a great Battle, he himself was afterward Murdered near Alexandria:
and the unbounded power of the Consuls, being at length restrained and limited,
fell wholly into the hands of Caesar himself, and so ended the Sedition.

But when he was murdered, another Civil War broke forth against Brutus and
Cassius his Murderers, which was managed by the Consuls Lepidus Antonius, and
Octavius Augustus. When this War was ended by dint of Sword, and the deaths of
Cassius and Brutus, not long after the secret and private grudges and quarrels
between Augustus and Anthony for the Supreme Power, broke out into an open War:
And after much Blood spilt on both sides, Augustus gained the Empire, which he
held during his Life, having now waved Augustus Emperor.
his Consular Power and Dignity.

Out of the 38th. BOOK.
CINNA and Marius, calling together a Council of the Chiefest of the Officers
This was long before in time, and therefore comes in here with relation to some
other Matter before related, but now lost. For this Sedition was in 173. Olymp.
Ant. Chapter 86
consulted what ways and methods were best to take for the better settling and
confirming of the Peace. At length they resolved to put to death the greatest
persons of quality that were their Enemies, and who were most capable to make a
disturbance and overturn all their Affairs, that so the Factious Party being
purged out from among them, they and their Friends might Govern all things for
the future with more security, according to their own Will and Pleasure. Upon
this forthwith all regard to former Leagues and Articles were wholly laid
aside: Persons were proscribed and butchered in every place, without being
heard. At that time Quintus Lutatus Catullus who had had a glorious Triumph for
his Victory over the Danes.
Cimbri, and had more than an ordinary share in the Affections of the People,
was accused by a Tribune of the People for a Capital Offense, who fearing the
imminent hazard of the Calumny, made his application to Marius, to entreat him
to interpose for his deliverance (for he had been his Friend formerly, but
through some suspicion he then had of him he was become his Enemy;) But he
answered him thus, Die you must. Upon this, Catullus perceiving there was no
hopes of his preservation, studied how to dye without disgrace; to which end he
destroyed himself by a strange and unusual way: For he shut himself up in a
House new plastered, and caused a Fire to be kindled, by the smoke of which,
and the moist vapors from the Lime, he was there stifled to death.

Out of the 40th BOOK.
WE being about to write of the War against the Jews, we take it to be part of
our Province, before we proceed further; First, in short to Declare the
Original The Nation of the Jews.
of this Nation, and their Laws. In Ancient times there happened a great Plague
in Egypt, and many ascribed the cause of it to GOD, who was offended with
them. For there being multitudes of Strangers of several Nations who inhabited
there, who used their Foreign Rites and Ceremonies in the Administration of the
Public Sacrifices, the Ancient manner of worshipping of the Gods, used by the
Ancestors of the Egyptians, was quite lost and forgotten. Hence it was that
the natural Inhabitants concluded, that unless all the Strangers were driven
out, they should never be freed from their Miseries. Upon which they were all
expelled, and the most Valiant and Noble among them, under the Conduct of
skilful Commanders (as some relate) after many great hardships came into Greece
and other places, of whom amongst other Leaders, the most famous and remarkable
were Danaus and Cadinus. But the greatest part of the People came into that
Country, which is now called Judea, not far from Egypt, and at that time
altogether Desert and uninhabited. The Leader of this Colony was one Moses, a
very wise and valiant Man, who after he had possessed himself of the Country,
amongst other Cities built that now most Famous City Jerusalem; and the Temple
there, which is so greatly Reverenced among them. He then instituted the manner
of GOD's Worship, and the Holy Rites and Ceremonies: and made Laws for the
Government of the Commonwealth, and reduced them into a methodical Order. He
divided the People into Twelve Tribes, as the most perfect number, as he
conceived; because answering the Twelve Months, which make up the whole Year:
But he made no Representation or Image of the Gods, because he judged nothing
of an Human Shape was applicable to GOD: But that this Heaven, which compassed
the Earth round, only was GOD, and that all things were in its power. But he so
ordered the Rites and Ceremonies of the Sacrifices, and the manner and Rule of
their Conversations, as that they should be wholly different from all other
Nations. For (by reason of the Expulsion of his People) he commanded a most
inhumane and unsociable Conversation. He picked out likewise the greatest
Persons of quality who were best able to Rule and Govern the People (then
embodied into one Nation,) and them he created Priests; whose Duty and Office
was continually to attend the Temple, and employ themselves in the public
Worship and Service of God. He constituted them likewise to be Judges for the
decision of the most weighty Causes, and committed to their Care the keeping
and preservation of the Laws. Therefore they say that the Jews never had any
King: but that the Care and Authority of Governing the People was always given
to him, who excelled the rest of the Priests in Prudence and Virtue, whom they
call the Chief Priest: and him they always took to be the Messenger, and
Interpreter to them of the Mind and Commands of GOD. And they say that he in
all their Public Assemblies and other Meetings, declares what he has in
Command, and that upon that account the Jews are so observant, that forthwith
they prostrate themselves upon the ground, and Adore him as the High Priest,
and Interpreter to them of the Oracles of GOD. But in the close of the Laws
this is subjoined, Moses the Or who heard these thing from God.
Messenger of God thus says to the Jews. This Lawgiver likewise laid down
many prudent and excellent Rules and Instructions for Martial Affairs, and
inured the Youth to endure hardship and difficulties, and to exercise Patience
in all Miseries and Distresses. Moreover, he undertook many Wars against the
neighboring Nations, and gained many large Territories by force of Arms, and
gave them as an Inheritance to his Countrymen, in such manner, as that every
one shared alike, saving the Priests who had a larger proportion than the rest,
that having more, they might continualy attend upon the public Worship of GOD
without distraction. Neither was it lawful for any Man to sell his Inheritance
allotted him, lest by the Covetousness of them that buy, others should become
poor, and so the Nation should be depopulated. He ordered likewise the
Inhabitants to be careful in the Educating of their Children, who are brought
up with very little Cost and Charge, and by that means the Jewish Nation was
always populous. Lastly, as to their Marriages and Funerals, he appointed them
Laws much different from all other People. But under the Empires that have
risen up in these latter Ages, especially in the Fourth Monarchy of the
Persians, and in the time of the Macedonian Empire, which overturned the
former: (through mixture with Foreign Nations) many of the Ancient Laws and
Customs among the Jews, have been changed and grown obsolete.

Henry Valesius HIS FRAGMENTS OUT OF The 6th, 21st, 22d, 23d, 24th, 25th, 26th,
34th, 36th, and 37th lost Books OF Diodorus Siculus, By him Published in the
Year MDCXXXIV.

Now Translated, and Compared with the Greek.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for A. and J. Churchill at the Black-Swan in
Paternoster Row: 1699.

To the READER.
THese Fragments of Diodorus the Sicilian, were first Collected by Constantine
the Seventh, one of the Eastern Emperors, the Son of Leo the Sixth. He began to
Reign about the Year of our Lord 911. He got together from all parts, Books of
all sorts of Learning, in order to make up a complete Library. Out of the
several Authors he Collected such Observations as were most remarkable, and
Marshalled each of them that concerned one and the same subject, under their
several and proper Heads. The Heads or common Places of his Historical
Collections were Fifty three in Number; and made up a Hundred and Six Volumns.
For every Head, he divided into two Books; in the first of which was contained
what was said of that particular subject by the most Ancient Authors, or such
as writ Universal Histories from the beginning of Time: In the second are
Collections out of those Authors that writ of the Acts and Affairs past, in the
time of the Caesar's. That common Place wherein are these Fragments of Diodorus,
is one of the Fifty three, and is Titled thus, viz. (...).
Of Virtues and Vices. It was brought out of Cyprus to Paris by Nicholas
Fabricius, not long before the Fragments were Published by Valesius, as appears
in his Epistle dedicated to Fabricius himself, and in that to the Reader. The
rest of the Fifty three Heads of this Emperor, are lost, save only one, which
is Entitled thus, viz. Of Embassies, divided into two Volumns. The De
Legationibus.
first published by Fulvius Ursinus, where Collections are again made out of
Diodorus the Sicilian, and the other by David Hoeschelius. This account of the
preservation of these Fragments, and how they came to light, I conceived was
needful to satisfy the Reader, to the end he may be assured, he is not imposed
upon by any thing in this Kind that is Fictitious and Spurious.

Fragments out of the History of Diodorus the Sicilian, published by Henry
Valesius.
The 6th Book.
CAstor and Pollux, who were also called Dioscuri, are said to be Eminent above
others for Valor, and remarkable in their Assistance in the Expedition with
the Argonauts, Castor and Pollux, two of the Captains, with the Argonauts An.
M. 2714. in the time of Abimelech.
and afforded considerable help to them that were but otherwise very weak; and
to speak all in sum, they gained in all places exceeding honor and reputation
for their Valor, Justice, Piety and Martial skill and discipline, and were
ready in all hazards with them that were most forward, and therefore for the
eminency of their Valor, were reputed the Sons of Jupiter, and after their
deaths, were honored with Divine honors.

Epopeus King of Sicyon, challenging the Gods to a Combat, to that end
destroyed their Temples and Altars.

3 Sicyphus is said for craft and subtilty to excel all others, and by looking
into the intrals of Beasts, declared future Events.

4 King of Elis.
Salmoneus was Proud and Profane, contemned the Gods, and preferred his own,
above the acts of Jupiter himself, and therefore out of an A brazen Bridge,
over which he drove a Chariot to imitate Thunder. Virg. Ened. Lib. 6.
Engine which sent forth a mighty sound, he used to Thunder, and never offered
any Sacrifices, or observed any solemn Festivals to the Gods.

5 Tyro (they say) was Salmeneus his Daughter, who was so called from her
Beauty and Comeliness of her Person.

6 Admetus for his Justice and Piety, was so approved and beloved of the Gods,
that when Apollo fell into the displeasure of Jupiter, he was ordered to be a
Servant to Admetus. They say likewise, that Alcestes the Daughter of Pelias,
who was the only Daughter that was Innocent, as to the Murder of her Father,
for her Piety was Married to Admetus.

7 Melampus was beloved by Apollo, for his eminent Virtues and Piety.

8. When Troy was entered and taken, Aeneas with some other of the Citizens
possessed Aeneas, An. M. 2764. Helv, in time of Ebzan, 7 Jud. 12. 9. The
destruction of Troy. Ush. Ann. says in 2820, in the time of Jeptha was next
before Ebzan, before Chapter 1184. 408 Years before the first Olymp. Romulus
Silvius.
himself of part of the City, and defended it bravely and valiantly against the
assaults of the Enemy. When the Greeks upon the terms made, agreed that each of
them should carry away with them as much of their Goods as they could, all of
them but Aeneas, took away Gold and Silver, and what ever else of such kind was
esteemed precious and valuable; but he carried away only his old Father upon
his shoulders: At which the Grecians did so admire, that they gave him liberty
to make choice of what part of his Wealth, and his household Goods he pleased;
upon which, taking only his household Gods; the Virtue and Piety of the Man
caused them to admire much more than before; for they perceived that in the
height of his dangers and troubles, his chiefest care was to discharge his duty
to his Father, and his due and pious regards to the Gods: And therefore they
say that both he, and the rest of the Trojans that remained, had liberty given
them, with all assurance of safe passage to go from Troy, to what place soever
they pleased.

9. Romulus Silvius was exceeding Proud all the days of his Life, and a
contemner of the Gods. When Jupiter thundered, he used to Command his Soldiers
upon a sign given, all at once to strike upon their shields with their Swords,
and vaunted that it was a greater noise than the other, and therefore he was
struck dead with a Thunderbolt.

10. About this time, one Malachus became King of the City Cuma, by
ingratiating Malachus.
himself with the common People, and accusing and calumniating great Men: For
afterward putting to death, the richest of the Citizens, he seized their
Estates, and with the Wealth thus got, hired strong Guards, and struck a Dread
and Terror into all the Cumeans.

11. Such was the eminent Virtue of Lycurgus, that once when he came to
Delphos, the Oracle Lycurgus, before Chapter 884. In the time of Jehu.
saluted him with these Verses. Seek in the Fragments of Sentences.

While the Lacedaemonians observed the Laws of Lycurgus, from a mean and low
condition, they grew very Potent, and held the Sovereignty of Greece for above
400 Years: But when by degrees they slighted and disregarded one Law after
another, and fell to Sloth and Voluptuousness, and began to heap up Money and
Wealth, they lost their sovereign Authority.

12. Whereas the Eleans were full of strong and youthful Men, and had a well
governed Commonwealth, the Lacedaemonians jealous of the increase of their
power, endeavored Eleans.
all they: could to make them Sacred, that so being at Peace, they might gain
no experience in matters of War; to that end, with the consent of all the
Grecians they devoted them to Jupiter, and therefore neither when Xerxes broke
into Greece, were they compelled to raise any Soldiers, but as the Priests of
Jupiter, and overseers of the Games were free: Nor in the Civil Wars of the
Greeks did any molest them, all endeavoring to preserve their Country as a
City Sacred and Inviolable: But in after times, the Eleans betook themselves to
Arms of their own accord.

The two Brothers, Romulus and Remus being thus exposed in a Cradle, when they
Romulus Remus.
grew up to Men's Estate, far excelled their equals in strength and comeliness
of their Persons; and secured all the Shepherds and their flocks, by freeing
them from the Thieves, that used to make a prey of them, killing some in their
attempts upon the flocks, and taking others alive: And besides the honor they
wan by their Valor, they were greatly beloved by the neighboring Shepherds,
both for their familiar converse, and their civil and courteous behavior to
all that made their addresses to them. The security Polychares. Eucephnus. This
was one of the occasions of the first Messenian War. See Sir Walter Rawley's
His of the World. Lib. 2. 1 part, Cap. 27. Sect. 4 Began the 9. Olympiad. 2.
end d 14 Olymp. 5 began and ended in the time of Hezekiah Before Christ, 741.
Justin, lib. 3. Paus. lib. 4. c. 4.
therefore of them all, being lodged in them, most submitted to them of their
own accord, and were observant to their Commands, and went wheresoever they
were ordered by them.

Polychares the Messenian, a Man of noble Birth, and very rich, entered into a
strict band of familiarity and friendship with Eucephnus the Spartan, who
taking upon him the care and protection of the Flocks and Shepherds, began to
covet what they had, but his treachery was soon discovered; for having sold
some Oxen together with the Herdsmen themselves, to foreign Merchants, and
pretending that Robbers carried them away by force, it came to pass that the
Merchants Sailing by the Coasts of Pelopponnesus toward Sicily, by a sudden
Storm, were cast upon the Land. Hereupon the Herdsmen taking advantage of the
Night, got off Shipboard, and being well acquainted with the Place, fled and
made their escapes, and when they came to Messena, declared the whole business
to their Master, whereupon Polychares hid the Herdsmen, and sent for Eucephnus
from L(...)demon; who, when he came, swore, and impudently stood to it, that
the Shepherds and be^dsmen were some of them forcibly carried away by Robbers,
and the rest were killed, upon which Polychares forthwith brought forth the
Herdsmen: At which Eucephnus was amazed, and thus plainly convicted of
falsehood, presently began to beg pardon, and promised to restore all the
Cattle, and used many words to regain his Favor. Polychares therefore out of
regard to the Sacred ties of Friendship, concealed the Fact, and sent his Son
with Eucephnus to Lacedaemon to recover the Cattle: But Eucephnus disregardful
of his Promises, murdered the Young man that was sent along with him to
Sparta. Polychares enraged at this bloody Act, required the Spartans to deliver
up the Murderer But the Lacedaemonians, not willing to comply with his
Demands, sent the Son of Eucephnus with Letters to Messena, wherein Polychares
was ordered to come to Sparta, and there to abide the Judgment of the Ephori
and the Kings, concerning the Matters whereof he complained; but Polychares by
way of (...) Instead of ((...)) Not obtaining Justice as some say. Vid. Notes
upon Paus. L. 4. c. 4. Archias. Actaeon. This was a little before the first
Messenian War. Ant. Chapter 741. So Petavius de Rac. Tempor. c. 12.
Retaliation, killed the Son of Eucephnus, and drove away a Prey of Cattle out
of the Country of Sparta.

15. Archias the Corinthian falling in Love with Actaeon, first courted the
Youth with Presents and fair Promises; but being not able to prevail by reason
of the Honesty of the Boy's Father, and the Sobriety and Modesty of the Young
man himself, he got a Company of his Friends together, resolved to do that by
Force which he could not obtain by Entreaty and fair Means: Having therefore
made himself drunk with those he had brought along with him, he was hurried on
to that degree by his Love-passion, that he broke forceably into the House of
Melissus, and took away the Boy by force; but his Father with his Household
Servants laying hold of his Son to detain him, and both parties earnestly
striving to get him one from the other, the poor Child among them was pulled in
pieces, so that the sufferings of the Child, and the manner of it, occasioned
both Grief and Admiration, at one and the same time: For the Youth came to the
like end with him Actaeon was torn in pieces by his own Dogs. Agathocles.
that bore the same Name, both of them being destroyed much in the same manner
by those that came in to their assistance.

16. Agathocles to whom was committed the care of building of a Temple to
Minerva, laid out the Money out of his own Purse; but he picked out the best
and largest of the Stones, and built for himself a sumptuous and stately House:
But the Power of the Goddess made it self evident, in destroying Agathocles
with a Thunderbolt, and burning his House; and the Geomorians confiscated his
Goods, although his Heirs made it clear and evident that he had not imbezill'd
any of the Sacred Treasure. They consecrated likewise the Carcass of his House,
and made it a Place inaccessable, which is now called Embrontaeum.

17. Pompilius King of Rome, lived peaceably all his Days, and some say he was
a hearer Numa Pompilius. Ant. Chapter 712. 15 Tear of Hezek. Deioces.
of Pythagoras, and that he had his Laws concerning Religion from him, and many
other things which much advanced his Reputation, and therefore though he was a
Stranger, he was sent for to take upon him the Crown.

18. Deioces King of the Medes, when all sorts of Wickedness abounded, was
eminent for Justice and all other Virtues.

19. The Sybarites were addicted to Gluttony and Voluptuousness, and such was
their Siberites.
strife and study to be Luxurious, that they loved the Ionians and Thuscans
above all other Strangers, because those among the Greeks, and these among the
Barbarians, were most Luxurious and Effeminate. It Is said; that Mindyrides was
the most Voluptuous of any of the Sybarites; for when Clisthenes King of Sicyon
was Victor in the Race with Chariots drawn with four Horses, and had proclaimed
by the Crier, That whosoever would Marry his Daughter (a most beautiful Lady)
should come to Sicyon at a certain Day appointed, this Mindyrides loosed from
Sibaris in a Vessel of above Fifty Oars on a side, and furnished Myndirites.
it with Rowers out of his own Family, of whom some were Fishermen, and the
rest were Or Faulkners.
Fowlers; and when he came into the Haven at Sicyon, that he not only far
surpassed all his Rivals for State and Grandeur, but likewise the King himself,
although the whole City for Vainglory most profusely contributed their Wealth
to Clisthenes: And being after his arrival presently entertained at Supper, and
asked by one who should sit next to him, by the Voice of an Herald he caused it
to be proclaimed, That he would sit next to the Bride, or by himself alone.

20. Hippomenes, Archon of Athens, when his *Daughter had played the Whore,
punished Hippomenes. Her name was Limone. See Ovid. Epist. in Ibis. Solaque
Limone paenam ne senserit illam; Et tua dente ferox, viscera carpit equus. Time
of Heze. 6th Year.
her after a most cruel and inhumane Manner; for he shut her up in a Stable
with a Horse for some days kept without Meat, which through want of Food at
length eat up the miserable and unfortunate Lady.

21. Arcesilaus King of Cyrene being grievously afflicted with many pressing
Calamities, consulted the Oracle at Delphos; to whom Apollo answered, That the
Gods were angry for that none of the succeeding Kings since Battus governed so
Justly and Righteously as he did, for he reigned mildly and gently, content
only with the Name of a King; and that which was most commendable of all was
that he carefully kept and maintained the Worship of the Gods; but his
Successors always (ever since have reigned Tyrannically, and converted the
public Treasure to their own private Use, and neglected the Service of
Arcesilaus.
the Gods.

22. Demonax of Mantinea, was the Arbitrator to allay the Sedition among the
Cyrenians, Demonax.
a Person in great Honor and Esteem for his Wisdom and Justice. When he
arrived * A City in Arcadia.
at Cyrene all their differences were referred to him, and he reconciled the
Cities one to another: upon these Terms and Conditions --

23. Lucius Tarquinius King of the Romans, being carefully educated from a
Child, and Lucius Tarquinius.
much addicted to the Liberal Sciences, was much admired for his virtuous
Qualifications by all; and therefore when he attained to Man's Estate, he was
in great favor and much esteem with Ancus Martius then King of Rome, and
together with the King, ordered and managed many of the weighty Affairs of the
Kingdom. Being very Rich himself he liberally supplied the wants of others, and
was Courteous and Obliging to all, and therefore cried up greatly for his
Wisdom.

24. Solon was the Son of Execestides; heb was an Athenian, and his Ancestors
Inhabitants of the Island Salamis, for Wisdom and Learning he far excelled all
of his time; being Virtuously Solon. Before Christ 622. In the time of Josias
King of Judah.
inclined from his Youth, he applied himself to the Study of the best Arts and
Sciences: And having long inured himself to all sorts of Learning, he became
the Great Master and Champion of every Virtue. For being under the care of the
best Tutors from a Child, when he grew up to Man's estate he associated with
such as were esteemed the greatest Philosophers; upon the account of which
Converse, he was esteemed one of the Seven Wise Men, and was not only preferred
before all the rest, but likewise before all others that were Eminent for their
Wisdom. He was in great honor for making of Laws, and admired by all for his
singular Prndence in his private Discourses and Answers, and giving of Counsel
and Advice. When the Athenians grew Ionians in their Manners, and became in a
high degree Luxurious and Effeminate, Solon by degrees gained them to the love
of Virtue and Honorable Actions: For Hermodus and Aristogo, principled and
instructed by his Laws and Discipline, overturned the Tyranny of Pisistratus.

25. There was one Myso of Malea living i a Town called Chenae, who lay most
commonly Myso.
in the Fields, obscure, unknown almost to every body, upon the Expelling of
Periander the Corinthian for his Tyranny and Cruelty, was taken into the
Society of one of the Seven Wise Men.

26. Chilo lived according to his Doctrine, which is a thing rare to be found:
For we may see many Philosophers in our Age, who talk at a great rate, yet
their Manners and Chilo, Wise Man.
Course of Life are Filthy and Abominable, who look and speak like grave and
wise Men, yet by their actions give themselves the Lie. But Chilo, besides his
virtuous Life all his Days, conceived and uttered many excellent things worthy
of Remark.

27. Pittacus of Mytelene was a Man not only to be admired for his Wisdom, but
was such Pittacus, Wise Man. Flourished about the 42 Olympiad.
a Citizen as Lesbos never before produced the like, nor ever like to be (as I
think) any such after him* till it produce plenty of sweet Wine. For he was an
excellent Lawmakers, and Civil and Courteous toward all his Fellow-Citizens in
all their Meetings and public Assemblies, and freed his Country from three
most grievous Calamities, Tyranny, Sedition, and War. He was a most prudent and
courteous Man, ever ready to excuse other * Which will never be.
Men's faults; and therefore seemed to be a Person perfectly Virtuous in every
respect; for in making of Laws he was Prudent and Politic, Faithful to his
Word, Valiant in War, and one that scorned corrupt Lucre and Gain.

28. The Prieneans say, That Bias having redeemed from the hands of Robbers
some Captive Messenian Virgins, Persons of considerable Quality, he took them
into his own House, Bias, Wise Man.
and honorably entertained them as his own Daughters: And when their Relations
and Kinsdolk came to Perene to seek after them, he restored them to their
Friends without taking any thing either for their Diet or Redemption, but on
the contrary presented them with many Gifts out of his own Estate: And
therefore the Ladies loved him as their own Father both for his noble
Entertainment, and the largeness of his Bounty; so that when they returned home
they were still mindful of his Kindness to them: And therefore when the
Fishermen of Messenac drew up with their Nets nothing but a Brazen Tripode,
whereon was inscribed these Words. (...).
To the Wisest, they procured it to be given to Bias. He was the most
Rhetorical and Eloquent Man in his time; but far different from all others in
the use he made of his Eloquence; for he was not Mercenary, or aimed at Gain,
but used it for the Relief of Men indistress, which is rare now to be found.

29. Cyrus the Son of Cambysis and Mandana Nephew to Astyagis King of the
Medes, for Valor, Cyrus.
Prudence, and other Virtues, excelled all others in the age wherein he lived:
for his Father gave him Royal Education, encouraging him to every thing that
was high and brave: And even while he was a Boy he gave evident Tokens of his
attempting great things at one time or other; his Virtue and Valor appearing
now before hand so evidently while he was but a Child.

30. Astyages King of the Medes, being beaten in a Battle, and forced to a
dishonorable Astyages.
Flight, was enraged at his Soldiers, and disbanded all his Officers, and
placed others in their rooms; but as for those that were the occasion of the
flight, he picked 'em out of all his Troops, and put 'em to death, thinking by
this Example to make the rest more careful in the discharge of their Duty when
they came to fight. For he was naturally cruel and implacable: but his Soldiers
were so far from being terrified by his Severity, that in hatred of his Cruelty
and Inhumanity, every one of them were ready to revolt, and to that end began
to meet together in great companies, and talk Treason, stirring up one another
to revenge the deaths of their fellow Soldiers.

31. Cyrus (they say) was not only valiant against an Enemy, but mild and
gentle toward Cyrus.
his Subjects, therefore the Persians call him their Father.

32. One Adrastus a Phrygian by casting a Dart at a Boar in Hunting,
accidentally killed Adrastus.
Atys the Son of Croesus the King of Lydia, and though he slew him against his
Will, yet he said that he himself who killed him was not worthy to live, and
therefore entreated Croesus not to spare him, but forthwith to cut his Throat
at his Son's Sepulcher. Craesus indeed at the first was in a rage at Adrastus
for the death of his Son, and threatened to burn him alive: but when he
perceived that the young Man did not seek to avoid punishment, but rather
voluntarily offered his Life as a Sacrifice to the dead; his Anger was
appeased, and he pardoned him, complaining of his own misfortune, and not of
any purpose or design in the young Man: However, Adrastus went privately to
Atys his Sepulcher and there killed himself.

33. Croesus King of Lydia pretending to send Eurybatus the Ephesian to
Delphos, sent him in Croesus.
truth with a great Sum of Money into Peloponnesus to hire Soldiers; but
Eurybatus fled to Cyrus King of Persia, and discovered to him all Craesus his
designs: and therefore this Treachery of Eurybatus was so remarkable among the
Grecians, that when they would upbraid any Man with a base Action, they call
him Eurybatus.

34. Cyrus believing that Croesus was a Religious Man, because a sudden storm
of Rain from Heaven extinguished the Fire in the Pile whereon he was burnt, and
calling to mind the saying of Solon; carried Croesus along with him, using him
with all Honor and Respect, and made him one of his Privy Council, conceiving
him to be a prudent Man, who had familiarly conversed with so many and such
eminent Persons for Wisdom.

35. Servius Tullius King of Rome Reigned 44 years, and out of his own virtuous
disposition Servius Tullius.
ordered many things for the good of the Commonwealth.

36. When Thericles was chief Magistrate at Athens in the 61 Olympiad,
Pythagoras the Philosopher Olymp. 61. Pythagoras.
flourished, having attained to the highest pitch of Wisdom; a Man worthy to
have his Memory Eternized, if ever any other Philosopher deserved it; he was
born a Samos, though some say at Tyrrhenum. His Speeches were uttered with so
much Grace, and force of persuasion that almost the whole City daily gazed upon
him, as if some God had been before them, and a great concourse of People came
from all parts to hear him. And he was not only eminently eloquent, but very
sober and grave, and was a wonderful Example for young Men to imitate in the
course of their Lives in that respect: and all that he conversed with he
dissuaded from vain Pomp and Luxury; all the Inhabitants of that Country
(through plenty and fullness of all things among them) being given to effeminacy
and filthiness both of Body and Mind.

This Pythagoras when he heard that Pherycides, once his Master, was very sick
in the Island Delos, he forthwith sailed out of Italy thither, where after he
had for some time cherished the Old Man, and had used his utmost endeavor to
restore him to health, at length, through Old Age and the violence of his
distemper he died, and Pythagoras carefully buried him; and so having performed
the Office and Duty of a Son, as to a Father, he returned into Italy.

37. The Pythagoreans (if any of their Society fall into decay) divide and
contribute The Pythagorians. Love and Kindness one to another.
proportions of their Goods to him that is so in want, as if he were their
Brother; and this they do, not only as to them that are daily conversant with
them, but likewise to all others of the same Sect and Profession wherever they
be. And therefore one Clineas of Tarentum when he understood that Prorus a
Cyrenian and a Pythagorean, by some misfortune or other had lost all his
Estate, and was become exceeding poor, he past over out of Italy to Cyrene with
a considerable sum of Money, and made up the loss of his Patrimony, though he had
never seen him before, but only understood by hearsay, that he was a
Pythagorian. And it is reported that many others have done the like And they
have not only supplied their Companions with Moneys in their wants, but have
hazarded their Persons with them in the most dangerous times. For in the Reign
of Dionysius the Tyrant it is reported that one Phintias a Pythagorean, when by
the contrivance of the Tyrant he was to be led to execution, desired of
Dionysius but a few days to settle his Household Affairs, and promised that in
the mean time he would leave one of his friends to suffer in his stead, if he
returned not. Dionysius hereupon wondering whether any such friend could be
found, who would be willing to be cast into Goal for his friend, Phintias
presently called for one of his Scholars called Damon a Pythagorean, who
forthwith without Phintias and Damon willing to dye one for another.
any budging became his Hostage to dye in his room.

Many there were that commended this singular demonstration of Love and
Kindness to his Friend, others condemned it as a foolish and rash Act. But at
the day appointed all the People flocked together very earnest to see whether
he that left his pledge would perform his word. But the day drawing near to an
end, every body began to despair, and Damon was led forth to execution, and
then on a sudden at the very last moment of the day, Phintias came running in.
This wonderful Friendship and Kindness one for another was admired by all; and
Dionysius pardoned the condemned Person, and desired that he himself might be
taken into the Society.

38. The Pythagoreans had a great Art in improving their Memories, and to that
end employed their utmost Care and Diligence. For the first thing they did
constantly after they rose out of their Beds in a Morning, was to recollect and
call to mind every thing they had done the day before from the Morning to the
Evening, and if they had time and leisure they would go back to examine the
Actions of the Second, Third and Fourth day, and sometimes further, conceiving
it very helpful and advantageous for the improving of Memory, and increase of
Knowledge.

39. These Philosophers inured themselves to abstinence by this means. They
prepare all sorts of Delicacies and Rarities, such as Tables are furnished with
at Solemn Feasts, after they have gazed upon them for a considerable time, on
purpose to whet their Appetite, which naturally desires in such cases to be
gratified, on a sudden the Table is ordered to be whip'd-away, and they
themselves thereupon withdrew without tasting any of the Dainties.

40. Pythagoras commanded his Disciples to forbear taking an Oath as much as
they Oath.
could, but when they had once taken it, to be careful to keep it. Having
likewise regard to what was convenient, even in the Acts of Venus, he advised
to abstain from Women in Summer time, and to be moderate and sparing in Winter:
for he looked upon all carnal Copulation to be hurtful; but if it were frequent
(he said) it impaired the strength and was destructive.

He advised likewise, that the Sacrificers should not make their Addresses to
the Gods in rich and gaudy Habits, but only in white and clean Robes, and
should not only bring before them Bodies free from gross and outward
wickednesses, but pure and undefiled Souls. Commanding these and many such like
things, and stirring Men up to Sobriety, Valor and Constancy, and all other
Virtues, he was Adored by the Crotonians as if he had been a God.

41. One Cylo of Crotonia, the most wealthy and eminent Man of all the
Citizens, desiring to be received into the Society of the Pythagoreans, was
rejected, because he was Cylo.
naturally a fierce and stubborn Man, Seditious and Ambitious. At which he was
so enraged, that he gat together a number of Factious Persons against the
Pythagoreans, and began to rail and do all the mischief he could against them.

42 Lysis the Pythagorean going to Thebes in Baeotia, became Tutor to
Epaminondas, Lysis.
and instructed him in all the ways of Virtue, and by reason of his excellent
Endowments adopted him to be his Son; And Epaminondas from those sparks of
Knowledge, he had gained from the Pythagorean Philosophy, excelled not only the
Thebans, but all the rest of the Grecians of his time in Patience, Frugality,
and all other Virtues.

43. To write the Lives of Persons in former Ages is indeed a difficult and
troublesome task to the Historians, but very profitable to others for their
direction in the course of their Lives. For this kind of History, by recording
good and bad Actions, does grace the Memory of the Good, and fix a Stain upon
the name of the Wicked, by sharing out Praise and Disgrace to each of them
according as they do deserve it. For Praise is as a certain Reward of Virtue
without Cost; and Disgrace is the punishment of Vice without a Wound. And
therefore it is very fit all should understand, that according to the course of
Life Men lead here, such will be the account and remembrance of them afterward;
when they are dead, so that they need not employ all their Thoughts upon Marble
Mo^^ments, which are set up only in a little corner, and decayed and gone in
process of time; but rather apply their Minds to Learning, and other virtuous
Qualifications, which would make their Names famous over all the World.

For time, which consumes all other things, preserves these to perpetual
Generations, and the elder they grow, the more fresh and flourishing it
presents them: for they that are gone long ago, are still in every Man's Mouth,
as if they were now at this very day alive.

44. Cambyses was naturally furious and even a Madman, and the more fierce and
insolent Cambyses.
upon the account of his large Dominion.

Cambyses the Persian puffed up with the success of his Arms, after the taking of
Memphis and Pelusium, insolently demolished the Sepulcher of Amasis, an Ancient
King of Egypt; Cambyses.
and finding his Body embalmed with odoriferous Spices, basely and inhumanly
cudgel'd it and abused it with all manner of Contempt, and after ordered it to
be burnt to Ashes. For being the Egyptians never burn their dead Bodies, he
thought by this means he revenged himself sufficiently of the Man that was dead
long before.

Cambyses when he prepared for his Expedition against the Aethiopians, sent
part of his Army against the Ammonians; and commanded his Officers to rob the
Temple of Cambyses.
Jupiter Ammon, and set it on fire, and make all the Inhabitants round Captives.

45. Certain Lydians flying away to avoid the Tyrannical Government of Oroetes,
the Polycrates.
Governor of the Province fled to Samus with a vast Treasure of Gold, and
humbly Addressed themselves to Polycrates for relief: who at first courteously
Entertained them; but not long after cut all their Throats, and robbed them of
their Money.

46 Thessalus the Son of Pisistratus a Wise and Prudent Man, voluntarily
abdicated the Sovereignty, and acted only as a private Man, contented only to
share in the common Rights and Liberties with the rest of the Citizens, for
which he was in high Esteem and Reputation.

But his Brothers Hipparchus and Hippias, being rigid and cruel, Ruled
Tyrannically over their Citizens. After they had for some time grievously
oppressed the Athenians, Hipparchus falling in Love with a beautiful Boy, plunged
himself into perilous circumstances. For Harmodius and Aristogiton joined in a
Conspiracy against the Tyrant, in order to free their Country from Slavery; but
Aristogiton was the chief Man for a brave and resolute Spirit, in enduring all
sorts of Torments with patience and constancy, who in the most perilous times,
carefully preserved two things especially, Faithfulness to his to his Friends,
and just Revenge for his Enemies.

47 Zeno of Elis, being seized upon for a Conspiracy against Nearchus, who
tyrannically Zeno and Nearchus. This is cited in Valesius his Notes upon
Ammianus Marcellin. lib. 14. c. 9 p. 46. The new Edition.
oppressed the Country, was put upon the Rack. When the Tyrant asked him, who were
his fellow Conspirators; I would to God (said he) I had as much Command of the
rest of my Body, as I have of my Tongue.

Hereupon the Tyrant scruing him up, and tormenting him the more, Zeno for some
time courageously endured the tormenting Rack, but afterward to free himself,
and be revenged on the Tyrant, he had this contrivance. The Rack being extended
to the utmost, he feigned as if he could no longer bear it, and therefore cried
out to release him, and he would discover all, the Rack being thereupon loosed,
he desired the Tyrant would come to him himself, for he had many things to
discover, which required Secrecy: Upon which he came readily to him, and put
his Face close to Zeno's Ear, upon which he took fast hold of the Tyrants Ear
with his Teeth; whereupon the Guard came running in, and racking him to the
utmost they could to force him to leave his hold, he fastened his Teeth the more
fiercely, so that the Guard not being able to baffle the resolution of the Man,
they were forced to entreat him to let go; and by this trick, he was released
from his torments, with a revenge upon the Tyrant.

48. Sextus the Son of Lucinius Tarquinius, King of the Romans, took a Journey
to the Sextus Tarquinius. Lucretia. Olymp. 66. 3. An. M^n. 3436 Ant. Chapter 512.
T^mpore D^rij Hystaspis.
City Coilatia, and there Lodged at the House of Lucius Tarquinius the King's
Nephew, whose Wife was called Lucretia, a most beautiful Lady and renowned for
her Chastity. Sextus rose up in the Night and broke down her Chamber Door, when
she was in Bed, and attempted to force her, (her Husband at that time being in
the Camp at Ardea) and with his drawn Sword in his Hand, threatened to kill her,
unless she yielded, and told her he had a Slave ready, whom he would lay naked
in Bed with her, and kill them both, that it might be said, she was justly
killed in the act of Adultery, and that he had done it in revenge of the injury
done to his Kinsman. And therefore it was better for her quietly to gratify
him in what he desired, promising her likewise many great and rich rewards, and
to Marry her, and so from a private Condition, she should be advanced to the
State and Dignity of a Queen. Lucretia amazed with the strangeness and
suddenness of the thing, and fearful lest it should be thought she was killed
really for an act of Adultery, was quiet at that time. The next day when Sextus
was gone, she presently sent for all her Servants and Household, and desired
they would not suffer the Wickedness of the Man to go unpunished, who had
violated all the Laws of Friendship and Hospitality: And that for her self (she
said) it was not Honorable longer to survive the violation of her Chastity:
and having said this, she stabbed her self into the Breast with a Dagger, and
so breathed her last.

49. Hippocrates King of Gela, after his Victory over the Syracusians, when he
Encampt Hippocrates.
near the Temple of Jupiter, took the Chief Priests, and some of the principal
Citizens of Syracuse, who had spoiled the Temple of the Consecrated golden
Vessels, and carried away other things, especially Jupiter's Cloak, which was
made of Massy and Solid Gold, sharply rebuked them as sacrilegious Persons, and
commanded them forthwith to return to the City. He himself touched none of the
things devoted, both to buoy up the Credit and Reputation of his own Name, as
likewise judging it unfit for him, who had undertaken so great a War, to act so
high a piece of Impiety against the Gods. Besides, he conceived by this means
he should stir up the People against the Governors of Syracuse, who ruled the
Commonwealth with rigor, beyond all bounds of moderation and Equity.

50. Thero of Arge^^um, for Wealth and Nobility of Birth, and his courteous
Carriage, Thero.
toward the meanest Man, was not only highly honored among the Citizens, but
even among all the Sicilians.

51. Cimon the Son of Miltiades, when his Father died in the Common Goal,
because he was not able to pay the Fine imposed upon him, gave up himself into
Custody, to abide in Prison for his Fathers Mulct, that he might have the Body
of his Parent to bury it.

52. Cimen was very Eminent, when he was a Civil Magistrate, and afterward
became a famous General in the Wars and performed such Actions by his Valor,
as are worthy of an everlasting Remembrance.

53. Those at Thermopyle died fighting courageously, whose Valor, etc. --
Which are published in the 11th Book of Diodorus his History, P. 9. What after
follows in the Manuscript, because they are extant in Diodorus his History, I
have purposely omitted, 12 Folio's.

Out of the 21st Book.
1. Antigonus, from a private Man advanced to the State and Dignity of a King,
was the most potent Prince of any in his time, but not contented with his
Condition, without the least color of Right, was prompted by his Ambition to
grasp at the Dominions of other Princes, and by that means At the Battle of
Issus Olymp. 119. 4. Before Chapter 302. Plut. in Demetrius.
both lost his own, and his Life Cimon.
together.

2. When Agathocles heard how the Ligurians and Tyrrhenians had mutinously
fallen upon his Son Agatharchus, in his absence, for their Pay, he put them all
to the Sword, to the number almost of 2000.

3. The Thracians who had taken in a Battle Agathocles, the Son of King
Lysimachus, sent him back to his Father with several gifts; by this means
hoping, in case of misfortunes, to shelter themselves under his protection, and
hereby likewise to induce him freely to restore their Territory, which he then
possessed. For they were out of all hopes of Victory, seeing so many potent
Kings, Confederates with Lysimachus.

4. Dromichoetes King of Thrace, having taken Lysimachus Prisoner, used him
with all kind of Civility; and kissed and embraced him, calling him his Father,
and brought him with his Children into the City Helis. And when the Thracians
came in a Body together, and crying out demanded, that the Captive King should
be brought forth, and put to death, for that it was but just and equal that
they that had adventured their lives, should dispose as they thought fit of the
Captives; Dromichoetes making a Speech against putting the King to death, told
the Soldiers that it was for the public good to preserve the King: For if they
killed him forthwith, some others would take possession of his Kingdom, who
perhaps might become more formidable to them, than Lysimachus: But on the other
Hand, if they preserved him, that favor might work so much, as in gratitude to
gain a favorable respect to the Thracians, and to procure without running any
hazard a Restitution of all those Forts and Castles, that formerly belonged to
the Thracians.

The Army then agreeing to what he said; he brought forth all the Friends and
Servants of Lysimachus, that he could find amongst the Captives, and delivered
them to him. Afterward when he offered a solemn Sacrifice to the Gods, he
invited Lysimachus and all his Friends, with the Chief Officers and Commanders
of the Thracians to Supper: And having prepared Two Apartments, he covered the
Beds whereon Lysimachus and his Friends were to sit, with rich Carpets, part of
the spoils taken in the Battle; but for himself and the rest of the Thracians,
the Coverings were but poor and mean. He prepared likewise Two sorts of
Suppers; That for Lysimachus and his Friends, consist'd of all sorts of
Rarities and noble Dishes, set upon Silver Tables: But for the Thracians he
ordered Herbs and Flesh meanly Dressed, to be set upon a Table uncovered, in
wooden Platters. To conclude, the first were served with Wine in Gold and
Silver Bowls: But for himself and his Thracians, he ordered Cups of Wood and
Horn, after the manner of the Getes: Afterward in the height of the Feast, he
filled up the greatest Horn with Wine, and calling Lysimachus Father, asked him
whether of the two seemed to him more Princely, a Thracian, or a Macedonian
Supper? When Lysimachus answered a Macedonian -- See the rest in the Fragments
of Sentences.

5. King Demetrius, after he had forced the rest of the Cities to a submission,
carried himself nobly toward the Baetians: For besides the 14 Persons that
were the Heads of the defection, he pardoned all the rest.

6. Agatharcus was Valorous and Courageous, above his Age For he was very young.

7 Timaeus was a bitter Censurer of former Historians, yet in other parts of
his History, Timaeus.
very careful to declare the Truth, but his hatred of Agathocles was such, that
he forged many things in relation to his actions; for being Banished by
Agathocles out of the Island, he could not be revenged of the Tyrant while he
lived: but after his death he loaded him with Reproaches in his History, to
make his Memory odious to all Posterity. For besides the Vices this King was
really guilty of, he imputed many others to him, invented of his own Head, and
always lessened his prosperous successes, and aggravated his misfortunes which
were really casual, and turned them upon himself, as the cause of them through
his own miscarriages. For whereas all know that Agathocles was a prudent and
expert Soldier and Commander, and was Bold and Courageous in the greatest
Difficulties, he all along in his History is continually calling him a weak
headed Coward. And yet who is there that is ignorant, that none were ever under
meaner Circumstances, that afterward attained to such a Degree of Sovereignty
and Dominion? For his Poverty and mean Birth was such, that from his Childhood
he was but a mean A Potters Son.
Artificer: But afterward by his Valor, he not only gained the Sovereign
Power over all Sicily, but Conquered a great part of Italy and Africa. And any
one may justly wonder at the Vanity of Timaeus, who almost in every Page extols
the Valor of the Syracusians, and yet affirms him, who Conquered them, to be
the greatest Coward of any Man living. From these contradictions and
inconsistencies it is clear and manifest that out of a private Pique and Disgust
he betrayed the Trust of a faithful Historian: And therefore his last five
Books, wherein are set forth the acts of Agathocles, for very good reason, were
never approved by any.

8. Callias likewise the Syracusian deserves as much to be Censured as the
other, who being enriched and advanced by Agathocles, never leaves off praising
him far above his Callias.
desert, and so dishonouring History, which should be the Herald of Truth. For
whereas Agathocles in many things violated both the Laws of God and Man, he
cries him up as the most Pious and Righteous Man in the World. To conclude, as
Agathocles by force took away the Citizens Goods, and most injuriously bestowed
them upon this Writer; so this admirable Historiographer in way of requital,
loads him in his History with Praises of all sorts and sizes. But in my opinion
it were no difficult Task, by way of grateful Return, to repay favors received
from Princes, by moderate and due Praises and Commendations.

9. After the * Mercenary Soldiers had agreed with the Syracusians, they
Marched away, The Mamettines.
and were received by the Messenians, as Friends and Confederates: and being
thus kindly entertained by the Citizens, in the Night they Murdered all their
Landlords, and took their Wives as their own, and possessed themselves of the
City.

10 When Demetrius was a Prisoner at Pella, Lysimachus sent an Ambassador to
Seleucus to Caution him, not to suffer him upon any Terms to get out of his
Hands, being (as he Demetrius.
said) an insatiably ambitious Man, and one continually plotting against all
the Kings; and promised he would give him 2000 Talents, if he would put
Demetrius to death: But Seleucus the King, sharply rebuked the Ambassadors, for
persuading him not only to violate his Faith, but to commit so horrid a piece
of Wickedness against one so near related to him: But he writ a Letter to his
Son Antiochus, who was then in Media, to ask his Advice what should be done
with Demetrius; for he had resolved to release him and restore him hononourably
to his Kingdom; but was willing likewise to have the Favor acknowledged by his
Son Antiochus Soter.
Antiochus, who had married Stratonices the Daughter of Demetrius, and had
several Children by her.

Out of the 22d BOOK.
1. WHen a Garrison was put into Rhegium by the Romans, Decius a Campanian, a
covetous and impudent Fellow, acted the Base and Treacherous Part of the
Mamertines; Decius.
for as they were received as Friends by the Messenians, and seized upon their
City, and cut the Throats of all the Messenians their Landlords, in their own
Houses, and married their Wives, and possessed themselves of the Estates of
them they had murdered; so the Campanian Soldiers to whom with Decius the
Garrison of Rhegium was committed by the Romans, with the like Perfidiousness
killed all the Rhegians, and dividing their Goods amongst themselves, possessed
themselves of the City. But Decius the Governor after he had sold the Goods of
these miserable People, and shared the Money he had treacherously raised, was
expelled from Rhegium by the Campanians, his Copartners in this wicked Fact.
But every one of these perfidious Villains at length met with their just
Reward: For Decius being seized with a grievous pain in his Eyes sent for an
Eminent Physician of Rhegium, who to revenge the Wrong done to his Country,
anointed Decius his Eyes with Cantharides, and by this means having made him
stark blind, forthwith fled out of Messena.

2. Phintias having tyrannically oppressed his Citizens, and put to death many
of the Wealthy Men of the City, began to be hated by his Subjects for his
Cruelty; and therefore Phintias.
all being upon the point ready for a General Defection, and he himself reduced
to great streights, on a sudden changed his former Course, and ruling more
moderately, kept his Subjects within the bounds of their Duty and Obedience.

3. Ptolomy King of Macedonia, being indeed very Young, and altogether unexpert
in Military Affairs, and naturally Rash and weak Headed, made no provision for
any thing Ptolemy Ceraunus. Vid. Justin. lib. 17. and 25. Olymp 125. Ant. Chapter
279. Ush. Ann. Apollodorus.
as he ought: And therefore when he was advised by his Friends to stay for the
Auxiliary Forces who were not as yet come up to him, he disregarded their
Council.

4. Apollodorus affecting the Sovereign Power, and minding to confirm the
Conspirators in whhat they had undertaken, sent for a young Man, one of his
Friends, under color of coming to Sacrifice, and when he came he offered him
up to the Gods, and gave his Intrails to be eaten by the Conspirators, and
drunk to them in his Blood mixed with Wine.

5. The same Apollodorus armed some Gauls, and engaged them with large Gifts,
and made use of them for his Lifeguard, because they were naturally Cruel, and
ready to Apollodorus King of Cassandria in Macedonia.
execute any Villainy. He raised likewise a great Sum of Money, by Confiscating
and exposing to public Sale the Goods of the Wealthy Citizens. He grew very
potent in a short time, by increasing the Soldiers Pay, and distributing Money
among the Poorer sort.

Being wholly given up to Cruelty and Covetousness, he squeezed Money from the
Citizens, and forced both Men and Women with Racks and Torments to bring forth
all their Gold and Silver; for he made use of one Calliphon a Sicilian for his
adviser, an Arts master in Tyranny, who had been long bred up a Courtier among
many of the Tyrants in Sicily.

6. When Pyrrhus had plundered Aegeas, the Seat-Royal of the Kings of
Macedonia, he left there a Garrison of Gauls, who being informed by some that
there were great Treasures Pyrrhus cited by Ush. An. 353. Before Christ 273.
(according to ancient Custom) hid in the Sepulchers of the Kings, dug up all
the Tombs, and divided the Wealth amongst themselves, but scattered abroad the
Bones and Ashes of the Dead.

However, Pyrrhus though he was railed at for this piece of Inhumanity, yet he
punished not the Barbarians, because he made use of their assistance in his
Wars.

Out of the 23d BOOK.
1. I Look upon it the Duty of an Historian diligently to observe the
Stratagems and Management of Affairs by Generals on both sides: For by laying
open and taxing of other Men's Faults the like Miscarriage may be prevented in
them that come after, and on the other side, by commending of things that are
done well, others are stirred up to Virtuous actions. For who can but utterly
condemn the Pride, Folly, Madness and Insolency of Attilius Regulus. Olymp.
131. 1. Ant. Chapter 254. First Punick War. Polyb. lib. 1.
Attilius? Who not able to bear the weight of his prosperous Fortune, both lost
his own Reputation, and brought many great Mischiefs and Calamities upon his
Country. For when he might have struck up a Peace with the Carthaginians,
Honorable and Advantageous to the Romans, but Base and Dishonorable to the
other, and his Name might have been for ever renowned amongst all Men for his
Clemency and Humanity, he had no regard to any of these things: But proudly
insulting over the Distresses of the Afflicted, stood upon such Terms as both
provoked the Gods to Anger, and forced the Conquered by reason of those
unreasonable Conditions, to stand it out resolutely to the utmost Extremity; so
that the face of Affairs was changed on a sudden, insomuch as the Carthaginians
who but a little before were in great Terror and Amazement, by reason of their
late Rout, and despaired of all Relief, gathered Courage, and routed and cut
off their Enemies Army; and upon this Misfortune, such was the Distress and
Amazement of the City of Rome, that they who were before looked upon to be the
best Soldiers at Land in the World, durst not engage the Enemy in that kind any
more; and therefore this was the longest War of any we read of in former times,
and the matter was now to be decided by Sea Fights, in which a vast Number of
Ships both of the Romans and their Confederates were destroyed, and 100000 Men
perished with those that were killed in Fights at Sea: And it is easy to
believe how vast a Treasure must be expended, sufficient to maintain so great a
Fleet for the continuance of a War for Fifteen Years. But he that was the
Author and Occasion of so many Miseries, had himself no small share in the
Calamity, since his present Dishonor and Disgrace did far overbalance his
former Glory and Reputation; and by his Misfortune others are taught not to be
proud in Prosperity. And that which was most cutting and grievous was, that he
was now forced to endure the Scoffs and Scorns of those over whom he had before
insulted in the time of their Calamity; having justly debarred himself from
that Pity and Commiseration which is wont to be showed toward them that are in
affliction. But as for Xanthippus he not only delivered the Carthaginians from
the present Evils that hung over them, but altogether changed the Scene of
Affairs; for he utterly routed the Romans who were but even now Conquerors, and
after a sad slaughter lifted up the Carthaginians to such a height of
Prosperity, (who were expecting their last doom) that for the future they
slighted and contemned their Enemy.

The noise of this famous Action being spread almost all the World over, every
one admired the Valor of this General. For it looked like a Wonder to every
body, that there should be such a sudden change of Affairs, by one Man only
joining with the Carthaginians, and that they who were but lately closely
besieged, should on a sudden besiege the Enemy: And that they who by their
Valor were a little before Lords both of Sea and Land, should be now cooped up
in a small Town, expecting every day to be a Prey to their Enemies; but it is
not to be wondered at, since the Prudence and Wisdom of the General overcame
all difficulties.

2. Hamilear the Carthaginian, called Barca, and Hannibal his Son the great
Carthaginian Generals, are reputed the greatest Captains of any that ever were
either before or after them, and by their Victories greatly enlarged the
Dominion of the Carthaginians.

Out of the 24th BOOK.
CLodius coming into Sicily, as soon as he had received the Charge of the Army,
who Publius Clodius.
then straightly besieged Lilybaeum, called the Soldiers together, began bitterly
to inveigh against the Consuls from whom he received the Legions, declaring
they had negligently managed the War, giving themselves up to Wine, Luxury, and
Voluptuousness, and that they were more really besieged than the Enemy: But
this Man being naturally Hot and Fiery, and something Crack-brain'd, acted many
things Rashly and like a Madman. For in the first Place, imitating the
indiscreet Actions of those he had before censured, he attempted to raise up a
Mole in the Sea and block up the Haven, with so much the more Imprudence, as
the Fault is the greater not to learn to do better, by seeing before the
Mistakes and Miscarriages of another, than to run into an Error upon the first
Attempt. Being likewise naturally Cruel and Severe in inflicting Punishment,
after the manner of his Ancestors he was inexorable in punishing the Soldiers,
and scourged the Roman Confederates with Rods. To conclude, He was so swelled
with Pride upon the account of the Nobility of his Birth, and the Renown of his
Ancestors, that he despised every body else.

2. Hamilcar before he was chosen General was noted to be a Man of a
magnanimous Spirit, and after he was advanced to that Honor he deceived not
their Expectation, but behaved himself as a Noble Carthaginian, in every thing
aiming at Fame and Renown and despising Dangers. He was both Prudent, Valiant,
and Industrious, the Best King and the most Valiant General.

3. Hanno was naturally of an aspiring Spirit and thirsting after Glory, and
having a Hanno.
great Army that lay idle, hoped by this Expedition both to Train and Exercise
the Soldiers, and likewise to maintain them, and by that means to ease the City
of a great Charge, and over and besides, to perform some considerable Service
that might prove both Honorable and Profitable to the Commonwealth.

4. When Hanno had taken Hecatompylus, a City in Thebes in Egypt.
Hecatompylus, and the Elders of the City addressed themselves Hanno.
to him, and begged and entreated him to show them Pity and Compassion, being
something Vainglorious at this time he preferred Mercy before Severity, and
took 3000 Hostages, and preserved the City and the Estates of the Citizens
entire and untouched, for which he was highly honored by the poor People, and
the Soldiers were splendidly and liberally Entertained by the Inhabitants with
all manner of rich Provision.

5. But the * Mother of the Young Men grievously laid to heart the Death of her
Husband, The Wife of Attalus her Cruelty.
and conceiving that through their Carlesness and Neglect he had lost his Life,
she stirred up her Sons to use the Captives most Cruelly and Inhumanely, for
they were thrust into a little close Room, and by reason of the straitness of
the Place were forced to throng one upon another like Beasts, and after they
had been kept without Meat for five Days * Bostar through vexation of Mind and
Famine together died. But Hamilcar being a Man of a great Spirit held out
still, though he saw no hopes of Relief. But told her Gr. Bodostor.
how careful he had been of her Husband, and entreated her with Tears to
Compassion; but she was so far from being touched with the least sense of
Humanity, that this cruel Woman shut up the Carcass with him for five Days
together in that close Hole, and gave him meat only to keep him alive, that he
might be the longer sensible of his miserable Condition. Hamilcar therefore now
despiaring by entreating or begging to move her to Pity, began to call upon
Jupiter, and cry out to the rest of the Gods, who took care of Mankind, to
revenge him upon the Woman, and repay her with just and due Punishment.

However, in the midst of all these Torments he was kept alive, till through
the Mercy of the Gods, or some good Fortune, he was wonderfully and
unexpectedly delivered. For even when he was upon the Point of Death, through
the stench of the dead Body, and other Miseries he lay under, some of the
meaner Servants belonging to the House told it some others abroad, who in
indignation to such a piece of Cruelty and Wickedness, forthwith informed the
Tribunes of the People of this horrid Fact. Whereupon, when it was discovered,
the Magistrates sent for the Attillii, who for branding the Roman Name with
such a dishonorable Mark of barbarous Cruelty, escaped very narrowly being put
to Death; but the Magistrates threatened the Attillii severely to punish them if
they did not for the future use their Prisoners civilly, and take due care of
them. They imputed most that was done to their Mother, and burning the Body of
Bostar, sent the Ashes back to his own Country, and freed Amilcar from the
Distress and Calamity he had groaned under.

Out of the 25th BOOK.
THE Carthaginians who had been at War with the Romans for the possession of
Sicily, now Four and Twenty Years, suffered not so much by that War as they did
The War with the Mercenaries by the Carthaginians.
by their Mercenary Soldiers whom they had injured: For designing to defraud
them of their Pay, they were in a fair way of losing both their Sovereign
Authority and their Country together, for the Mercenaries resented the Injury
to that degree, that they forthwith revolted, and brought the Carthaginians
into miserable Distresses.

2. The Carthaginians sent a Trumpet to the Revolters, to desire liberty to
bury them Mercenaries Cruelty.
that were slain in the Battle. But Spondius, and the rest of the Captains of
the Revolters, with barbarous Cruelty, not only denied that, but warned them
upon their Peril not to send any more Messengers to them upon any account
whatsoever, for if they did, they should suffer the same Punishment. And they
then made an Order, that every Carthaginian they took Prisoner should be put to
Death in the same manner as they before mentioned were, and that their
Confederates which should be taken should have their Hands cut off, and so sent
back to Carthage. This Cruelty of Spondius was the reason that Hamilcar was
forced to cast off his former Lenity, and retaliate the same Cruelty upon the
Prisoners taken by the Carthaginians: And therefore after he had first Racked
and Tormented the Captives, he then cast them to the Elephants, who trod and
trampled them under-foot, so as they died most miserably.

3. The Hippacrineans and Uticans revolted from the Carthaginians, and killed
the Carthaginian Uticans Revolt.
Garrison, and threw them over the Walls, and would not suffer them to be
buried, though it was desired by the Carthaginians.

Hamilcar, Sirnam'd Barca, performed many great and excellent Services to the
advantage Hamilcar* Barca.
of his Country, both against the Romans in Sicily, and in Africa against the
Mercenaries and the Lybians, who revolted from the Carthaginians, and
straightly besieged Carthage it self. For in both these Wars he performed noble
Actions with great Valor and Prudence, and therefore was highly honored by
all the Citizens. But after the War was ended in Africa, he got together a Body
of Lewd Fellow; and having enriched himself with the Spoils of his Enemies, and
by his Actions gained a great Interest and the Love of the People, he prevailed
so far as that he was created Generalissimo of all Lybia for a little time.

Out of the 26th BOOK.
1. HAnnibal was naturally of a warlike Spirit, and Trained up in Martial
Affairs from Hannibal.
a Child; and having been for many years together in several Expeditions with
the greatest Captains, he learnt a great deal of Experience in matters of War,
so that being by Nature prompt to Feats of Arms, and improved likewise by daily
Exercise for a long time in the Wars, he looked very big upon it, in
expectation of doing great things.

2. Minucius being overcome by Hannibal, it was evident by the Event that he
ruined all by his Imprudence and Unskilfulness; but Fabius by his Valor and
Policy preserved the Commonwealth.

3. Dorimarchus the Provincial Governor of the Aetolians committed a most
impious Dorimarchus.
Fact; for he robbed the Famous Temple of Jupiter Dodonaeus, and afterward
burnt the whole except the Treasury.

4. Hannibal's Army having for a long time together glutted themselves with the
Riches Hannibal.
and Pleasures of Campania, became wholly degenerated; for their Luxury, Soft
Beds, Ointments, and all sorts of delicate Fare, took away their Courage, and
made them unfit to endure hardship, and caused both their Bodies and Souls to
degenerate into Effeminacy.

5. When Hannibal had spoken much against the cruelty and malice of the Romans,
or rather their pride and arrogance, he put to the Sword the Senators Sons, and
their Relations Hannibal
(which he picked out of the rest of the Captives,) in this manner revenging
himself upon the Senate.

6. Hannibal being possessed with an implacable Hatred against the Romans,
picked out from amongst the Captives such as he thought fittest for single
Combat, and matched them one with another, and commanded them to fight Brothers
with Brothers, Fathers with Children, and Kinsmen with Kinsmen. In this
barbarous Injunction, who cannot but justly abhor the cruelty of the
Carthaginians, and admire the Piety, Patience and Constancy of the Romans, in
the midst of their most grievous Sufferings! For though they were tormented with
Fire-Goads and cruel stripes, yet none would be brought to lift up their hands
against their Friends and Relations, but all unmovable died in the Anguish of
their Sufferings, keeping themselves pure and unspotted from the Guilt of
destroying one another.

7. When Gelo and Hiero Kings of Sicily were dead in Syracuse, and Hieronymus,
who was very raw and young, succeeded, the Kingdom was but ill supplied with a
Governor; for being flattered and soothed up by his Friends, he fell into
Luxury, Debauchery, and Tyrannical Cruelty. For he Ravished many Men's Wives,
Murdered his Friends that advised him; confiscated the Goods of many without
hearing them, and gave their Estates Hieronymus King of Syracuse Murdered by
his Subjects.
to the flattering Informers; which first stirred up the hatred of the People
against him, then put them upon Plotting, which broke out at last and ended in
his destruction; the common Lot of Tyrants in such cases.

8. When Hiero was killed, the Syracusians called a Senate, where it was
decreed that all the Kindred of the Tyrant should be put to death, both Man and
Woman, and that Hieronymus.
none of his Race or Family should be left alive.

9. When the dead Body of Semprenius Gracchus was sent by Mago to Hannibal, the
Soldiers seeing it lie upon the ground, cried out to have it cut in pieces, and
to be hurled away piece by piece out of Slings. But Hannibal having an Object
before his Eyes to instruct him in the uncertainty and unconstancy of Fortune,
and honoring and admiring likewise the Valor of the Man, said it was an
unworthy thing to wreak a Man's Anger upon a speechless Carcass; and afterward
celebrated his Funeral with all the marks of Honor and Respect, and civilly
sent his Bones and Ashes in an Urn to the Roman Camp.

9. When Syracuse was taken, all the Citizens went forth to meet Marcellus with
Olive-branches Marcellus.
in their hands; and he told them he would spare all the Lives of those that
were Freemen of the City, but all their Goods should be a prey for his Soldiers.

10. The Carthaginians after they had made an end of the Libyck War, severely
punished Cruelty of the Carthaginians.
the Micatanian Numidians, with their Wives and Children; for they crucified
all their Captives, insomuch as their posterity ever since remembering the
Cruelty executed upon their Forefathers, are most implacable Enemies to the
Carthaginians.

11. But the Valor of Hasdruball is not to be passed over in silence. For he
was the Son of Amilcar Barca, the bravest Captain of his Age, who in the
Sicilian War was the only General that often overcame the Romans, and having
put an happy end to the Civil War, was the first that past over with an Army
into Spain; and this Hasdrubal approved himself a Son not unworthy the Honor
and Dignity of such a Father. For he was generally owned to be the best
Soldier, (next to Hannibal his Brother) of all the Carthaginian Commanders, and
therefore he was left General of all the Forces in Spain by Hannibal, where he
fought many Battles, and freeing his Army many times from the Straits they were
in, he often ran himself into many great Dangers: and being at ^ength forced up
into the heart of the Country, far from the Sea, upon the account of his Valor
he got together a mighty Army, and at last came unexpectedly into Italy.

12. Nabis King of Lacedemon Murdered P^l^ps, the Son of ^^curg^^ the former
King, Nabis.
when he was but a very Child; for he was afraid when he was grown up to Man's
Estate, he would seek to free and rescue his Country, upon the account of his
being of the Blood Royal. And for this reason he put to death the Nobility of
Sparta, and hired the basest and most abject Fellows, wherever he could find
'em, to be his Life guard, and protect him in his Dominion: So that Robbers of
Temples, Thieves, Highway-men, and Condemned Persons flocked from all places to
Sparta. For stepping up into the Throne by wickedness, he had no hopes to keep
what he had so wickedly got, but only by the help of such Profane and Impious
Fellows.

13. The Cretians Rigged out Seven Ships for Piracy, and robbed many Passengers
at Cretian Pirates.
Sea, whereupon the Merchants being altogether discouraged, the Rhodians
looking upon it to belong to them to redress this Mischief, proclaimed War
against the Cretians.

14. Pleminius was left Governor of Locris by Scipio; and being a p^ofliga^^
wretch, he forced open the Treasury of Proserpina, and carried away all the
Sacred Treasure. Pleminius robs Proserpina's Temple.
The Locrians enraged at the Fact, Addressed themselves to the People of Rome,
and entreated their Relief according to their usual Faith; whereupon, Two
Military Tribunes seem much offended with the Impious Fact committed, and
sharply rebuked Pleminius; not that they were really angry at what was done,
but because they themselves had no part of the Money. But in a short time
after, the Goddess paid them all home for their Impiety. For this was reported
to be the most Famous Temple of all that were in Italy, and in all Ages before
that time (through the care of the Inhabitants) had remained safe and
unviolated. For at the time when Pyrrhus transported his Forces out of Sicily
to Locris, and his Soldiers were pressing upon him for Pay, he was forced to
make use of this Sacred Treasure: but in returning back (they say) he suffered
much, his whole Fleet being dispersed, shattered and torn in pieces by a ^ierce
and violent Tempest, and therefore Pyrrhus himself, out of a Religious
Reverence to the Goddess, endeavored to pacify her, and restored every penny
of the Money before he left the Country. But the Tribunes before mentioned
pretending to abhor the Sacrilege, sided with the Locrians, and rebuking
Pleminius for his Crime, threatened severely to punish him. The Quarrel growing
hotter and hotter, it came at length to blows, and the Tribunes threw Pliminius
upon the ground, and bit off his Ears and Nose, and sliced off both his Lips;
but afterward Pliminius caused the Tribunes to be seized, and whipped them to
death with Rods. In the mean time the Senate and People of Rome, through a
Religious awe of the Gods, were in great concern about this Sacrilegious Act;
and upon this occasion the Enemies of Publius Scipio having got an opportunity
to cast Dirt upon him, accused him as if he had been the Adviser of Pliminius,
and that he had done all by his Order and Command. Whereupon by a Decree of the
Senate, two Tribunes of the People and an Aedilis were sent into Sicily with
Orders to bring Scipio forthwith to Rome, if they found that the Sacrilege was
committed by his Command or Connivance; but if they could not discover any such
thing, that then they should suffer him to Transport the Forces over into
Africa. While they were upon their Journey Scipio sent for Pliminius and cast
him into Goal; and every day with great care and diligence exercised the
Soldiers; at which the Tribunes of the People did so admire, that they highly
commended him. But Pliminius being brought bound to Rome, the Senate forthwith
committed him to prison, and a short time after he died there in custody. His
Goods were all Devoted to Proserpina, and what they fell short to make
satisfaction, was decreed by the Senate to be supplied out of the public
Treasury, and that it should be death for any Soldier not to restore what Goods
or Money soever he had in his hand, that were taken out of the Treasury of
Proserpina's Temple, and further decreed that the Locrians should be free.

15. Scipio when he saw Syphax among other prisoners led up to him in Chains,
at the first fell a weeping, to consider the former Royal State and Dignity of
the Person; resolving therefore to use his fortunate success with moderation
and humanity, Commanded that Syphax should be freed from his Chains, and gave
up his Tent to him for the reception of him and his Royal Family; and keeping
him as a prisoner (yet with all the liberty imaginable) often courteously
conversed with him, and entertained him at his Table.

16. Sophonisba (who was first the Wife of Masinissa, and afterward of Syphax,
but being Sophonisba.
taken prisoner was gained again by Masinissa) was a Woman of an admirable
Beauty, and by her cunning tricks and charming devices could obtain whatever
she pleased: and being confederated with the Carthaginians her Countrymen,
plied her Husband every day to fall off from the Romans; which when Syphax was
assured of, he acquainted Scipio with the design, and cautioned him to have a
special care of that Woman; all which being confirmed likewise by Laelius,
Scipio commanded the Lady to be brought to him, which Masinissa refusing, he
threatened him severely; at which Masinissa was so concerned, that he ordered
that some should be sent from Scipio to fetch her away: but in the mean time he
went into his Tent, and forced Sophonisba to drink off a Cup of Poison.

17. Scipio through his Clemency and Compassion toward all the prisoners he
took, for ever after was secure of Masinissa as a faithful and constant
Confederate.

18. Hannibal called together his Confederates, and told them that he must of
necessity pass over into Africa, and that he had provided shipping for all
those that were willing to Hannibal's Cruelty.
go along with him; Some agreed to the thing; but as to those that chose rather
to continue in Italy, he compassed round with his Army, and gave his Soldiers
liberty to pick out as many of them as they pleased, to be their Captives; and
the rest, to the number of Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand Horse he
put to the Sword, together with a vast number of Cattle.

19 Four thousand Horse of those that went over to Masinissa after the Rout of
Syphax, Hannibal.
deserted him and came in to Hannibal: But he enraged at them, encompassed them
round with his Army, and shot them all to death with Darts and Arrows, and
divided their Horses amongst his Soldiers.

20. Scipio sent Ambassadors to Carthage, but the common People were on the
point to have knocked them all on the head: But the sober Men of the City
preserved them from Scipio.
that imminent danger, and got 'em a Shipboard, in order to send them back to
Scipio's Camp: But those that were popular, and sided with the People in
Carthage, ordered the Master of the Vessel, that when the Ship wherein the
Ambassadors were, began to Sail, he should throw all overboard, which he
performed accordingly.

However, the Ambassadors swam to land and got safe to Scipio; But the Gods
within a short time after, by a remarkable Instance; evidenced their Power to
punish those that designed so wicked a Fact. For it happn'd about that time the
Carthaginian Ambassadors were returning from Rome, and were driven by a Storm
into the midst of the Roman Fleet, and brought to Scipio; and when all cried
out to retaliate the wickdness of the other upon the Heads of the Ambassadors
that were then taken, Scipio utterly refused, saying, That they themselves
ought not to do that, for which they blamed the Carthaginians. They were
therefore all discharged, and came safe to Carthage, and highly extolled the
Piety of the Romans.

21. Philip King of Macedon persuaded Dicaeardus the Aetolian, a daring Man, to
act the Pirate at Sea, and to that end delivered to him Twenty Ships, with
order to exact Tribute Philip King of Macedon This was Philip the Father of
Perseus the last King of Macedon. Philip King of Macedon. The same Philip.
from the Islands, and assist the Cretians against Rhodes; Hereupon, according
to his Orders, he robbed and spoiled the Merchants, and wasting the Islands,
screwed abundance of Money from them.

22. Philip the Macedonian King had with him one Heraclides a Tarrentine a
wicked fellow, that in private was always buzzing him in the Ears with
Calumnies and false Accusations against Philip's best Friends, and egged him on
at length to that height of Impiety, that he put to death five of the Senators;
so that King Philip's Affairs by degrees declined and went worse and worse: For
undertaking Wars frivolously and unnecessarily, he was in danger to have lost
his whole Kingdom to the Romans: for none of his Friends durst speak any more
freely to him, or advise him, all fearing his stubborn and haughty Humor. He
made War likewise upon the Dardanians without the least provocation given him,
and killed 10000 of them in a Battle.

23. This Philip King of Macedon, besides his rooted Covetousness, was so
lifted up with his prosperous Successes, that he put his friends to death
without any legal Trial or just Cause, and robbed and spoiled the Temples and
Sepulchers. In like manner Antiochus attempting to rob the Temple of Jupiter in
Aelymais In Persia. See this Story in 1 Mac. c. 6. v. 1, 2, 3.
there received a just Overthrow with the loss of his Life and Ruin of his
whole Army; And both of them conceiting their Armies were Unconquerable, lost
all in one Battle, and were forced to receive Laws imposed upon them by others;
and imputed their Misfortunes to their own Miscarriages, and acknowledged
themselves beholding to the Humanity and Generosity of the Victors, for the
pardon of their Offenses; and according to the desert of their own wicked
Actions, they saw their Kingdoms, through the Anger of the Gods, grievously
plagued and aflicted. But the Romans then, and ever after, beginning no Wars
but upon just and Honorable Terms, and having a Sacred Regard to their Leagues
and Oaths, were always deservedly assisted in all their Councils and Designs by
the Gods.

24. The same Philip being in extreme want of Provision, continually wasted and
spoiled Philip King of Macedon.
the Country of Attalus, up to the very Gates of Or Pergamus, one of the Seven
Churches of Asia.
of Pergamena. He ruined likewise the Temples in the Suburbs of Pergamus,
especially Nicephorus that was exceeding Rich. Besides several other sumptuous
Fabrics; for out of hatred against Attalus, because he could not catch him, he
executed his Rage upon these places.

25. Philip entering into Attica encamped at Cynosarges, and afterward burnt
Acadamia, demolisht the Sepulchers, and robbed the Temples of the Gods, and
gratifying his Rage and Philip.
Fury, as if he had been only incensed against the People of Athens, and not
against the Gods themselves, as he was spoke ill of before, so he was now hated
of all, and in a short time he was overtaken by the Vengeance of the Gods, for
he was near being ruined by his own imprudence, but preserved by the Clemency
of the Romans.

26. Philip discerning he was hated by almost all the Macedonians, for his
kindness to Philip.
Heraclides, put him in Prison. This Heraclides was a Tarrentine, a notorious
wicked fellow, who from a mild and gentle Prince, changed Philip into a fierce
and cruel Tyrant, and therefore * he was exceedingly hated by all the Grecians,
as well as the Heraclides.
Macedonians.

27. The Name and Fame of Hannibal, was noised over all the World, and
therefore Hannibal.
in every City and Town where ever he came, they came in great Multitudes to
look at him. Ptolemy.


28. Ptolemy King of Egypt, for some time Reigned with great Commendation: But
afterward corrupted by Parasites, he began to have an evil Eye toward his
Tutor Ush. An. 374. Before Chapter 202. Ush. An. 403.
Aristomenes, for his freedom in telling him of his faults, who had all along
managed every thing with great prudence, and whose advice Philip had before
followed as his Father; but at length he sent him out of the World, by forcing
him to drink off a Cup of Hemlock.
Poison. From that time growing more and more fierce, and raging, (...).
making use of Tyrannical cruelty, and not of Regal Authority, he was hated by
the Egyptians, and not far off from the loss of his Kingdom.

29. There Is a Temple not far off from Chalcis, called. Delium; * where a
considerable number of Roman Soldiers, that were securely walking up and down,
to satisfy their Antiochus Magnus.
Curiosity, were on a sudden cut off by Antiochus, in a time of Peace, and
before any War was Proclaimed. For which the King was greatly condemned and
censured by the Grecians, as occasioning by this wicked Fact, a War with the
Romans. And therefore Titus Flaminius.
Titus Flaminius who was then at Corinth, called Gods and Men to Witness, that
the King was the first that began the War.

30. Antiochus Wintered at In Thessaly
Demetrias, where he laid aside all care of Warlike Affairs, Antiochus
being then above Fifty Years of Age: But he fell in Love with a Of Chalcis,
Daughter of Cleoptolemus Ush. An. 386 before Chapter 193.
young Lady, and Married her, and set forth most magnificent Shows, and public
Games; by which means he not only weakened his own Body, and effeminated his
Mind, but infeebled the Courage of his Army; and therefore his Soldiers, who
had passed the Winter in Luxury and Voluptuousness, after they were drawn out
of their Winter Quarters, could neither endure hunger nor thirst, or any other
hardship, but some of them fell Sick, and others straggled about here and there
far from their Colors.

31. King Antiochus seeing the Cities of Thessaly inclining to the Romans, and
the slow Antiochus
Motion of the Forces he expected out of Asia, and the carelessness and sloth
of the Aetolians, continually framing and and pretending one excuse after
another, was in great strait, and very uneasy; so that he was highly incensed
at those that advised him to begin the War, when he was unprepared, and had no
Confederates, but only the Aetolians: But he greatly admired Hannibal for his
Prudence; who diswaded him to the contrary, and therefore now reposed all his
Confidence in him; and whereas before he suspected him, ^e now made use of him
as his most trusty Friend and Councellor.

32. Antiochus wholly discouraged by his late Rout, determined to leave Europe,
and Antiochus.
only be on the Defensive part in Asia, and ordered all the Lysimachians to
forsake the Lysimachia in the Hellespont.
City, and pass over into Asia: For which every Body censured him as for a very
imprudent Act, whereby without a stroke struck, he gave up into the Enemies
hands, a City so advantageously situated, as might have given a Stop to the
Enemies passage out of Europe into Asia, as afterward by experience was found
true; for Scipio seizing upon Lysimachia thus deserted, made great advantage of
it for the transporting of his Army.

33. Marcus Fulvius the Chief Justice, or Governor of a Province, or Chief
Commander in an Army.
Praetor, was deservedly punished for his abuse of the Roman Confederates in
Liguria: For he disarmed the Cinomani, who received him as a Friend, and an
Allie, although he could find nothing against them; which thing coming to the
Consul's Ears, he ordered him to restore their Arms, and imposed a Mulct upon
him.

34. King Antiochus being in want of Money, and hearing there were vast
Treasures Antiochus. 1 Mac. c* 6. r. 1, 2, 3.
of Gold and Silver and other precious Jewels, of offerings made in the Temple
of Jupiter Belus, in Elymais, resolved to rifle it. Coming therefore into the
Province of Elymais, and pretending that the Inhabitants of that Place had
raised a War against him; he robbed the Temple, and got together a great Sum of
Money, but in a short time after, the Gods executed vengeance upon him for his
Sacrilege.

35. Philopemenes Governor of Achaia, was both an excellent Soldier and a
Statesman, Philopemenes.
who all his Life long was of a blameless Conversation, and had been frequently
Praetor; and having governed the Commonwealth for Forty Years together, much
advanc*d the affairs of Achaia, and was always affable and courteous to the
meanest, and for his virtue was admired both by the Grecians and Romans, and
yet came at last to an unfortunate End: but by a Divine Providence his unhappy
Exit was recompensed after his death with Divine Honors, for besides what was
publicly decreed by the Achaians in honor of him, the Citizens built a Temple
in remembrance of him, and appointed a Bull for a yearly Sacrifice to him, and
ordered young Men to sing Hymns in praise and commendation of his noble Acts.

36. Hannibal was the most expert General, and performed the greatest
Enterprises of any of the Carthaginians; he was never troubled with any
Mutinies in his Army, but by his prudent Conduct, kept them in their duty and
orderly discipline, though they differed as much one from another in their
several humors, as they did in their various Languages.

For whereas those of his own Nation were used commonly upon every slight
occasion, to desert and fly to the Enemy, none under him durst ever attempt any
such thing.

And though he Marched from place to place with very great Armies, yet he never
wanted either Money or Provision. And that which is most remarkable is, that
the Foreigners and Mercenary Soldiers loved him as well, if not more, than they
did who were his own Country Men. Keeping therefore his Army in exact
discipline, he performed the greater and more renowned Actions. For he made War
upon the most potent Nations, and wasted and harrass'd almost all Italy, for
the space of Seventeen years. He was, so Victorious in every Battle he Fought,
and made such terrible Slaughters among them that were reputed the Lords of the
World, that by reason of the Multitudes that were cut off by him, none durst
look him in the Face, to Engage him in Battle.

He laid likewise many Cities in Ashes, which he took by Storm, and almost
depopulated Italy that was before full of People: all which as they were
accomplished by the Strength and Wealth of his own fellow Citizens, so likewise
by great numbers of Foreign Auxiliaries and Confederates, those that by their
Unanimousness were unconquerable, he overcame by Policy and Warlike Stratagems;
and so made it evident, that as the Soal governs the Actions of the Body, so a
General rules and directs all to a right end, in an Army.

37. P. Scipio, when he was but very young, performed great and wonderful
things in Spain, beyond all Men's expectations, and having beaten the
Carthaginians, delivered his Scipio.
Country from imminent Perils, and compelled Hannibal, who was not to be
overcome by force of Arms, to leave Italy without fighting a stroke, and at
last by his Valor and Military Conduct overcame Hannibal in a great Battle,
and brought Carthage to stoop to the Roman Yoke.

38. Leocritus General of King Pharnaces, after he had often assaulted the City
Pius, at Leocritus, Pharnaces his General.
length forced the Mercenary Soldiers who defended the place, to surrender the
Town upon Condition, That they should be safely conducted to what place soever
they pleased to go; who when they were marched out of the City, and brought on
their way according * Pius, rather Teios. Ush. An. 403. before Chapter 180.
to the Capitulation, Leocritus (who was ordered by Pharnaces to put them all
to the Sword, because they had formerly incensed him) against the Faith of the
Articles, as they were upon their march, fell upon them, and with Darts slew
them every Man.

39. Seleucus having raised a great Army, and on his march to assist Pharnaces,
was Seleucus.
now ready to pass over Mount Taurus, but recollecting and calling to mind the
League the Romans had made with his Father, by which it was not lawful --

40. But they who had committed such a notorious Wicked Fact, and had Murdered
Demetrius, escaped not Divine Vengeance. For those who contrived the false
Accusations Demetrius the Son of Philip King of Macedon, the Father of Perseus.
See Livy, lib. 40. This Cruelty of the Father upon his Son by his Brother
Perseus his Contrivance. Olymp. 149 Tiberius Gracchus. Paulus Aemilius.
from Rome, within a while after incurred the Displeasure of the King, and were
put to Death; and for Philip himself, he was restless all the days of his Life,
and so much troubled in Conscience for the Murder of so hopeful a Son, that he
lived not two years after, but pined away with extremity of Grief. And Perseus,
the Author and Contriver of the whole, being conquered by the Romans, and
flying to Samothracia, by reason of the wickedness of the Fact executed by him
in the Murder of his Brother, could find no sanctuary in that holy Temple.

41. Tiberius Gracchus being sent Lieutenant General into Spain, vigorously
managed the War: for though he was very young, yet for Valor and Prudence he
excelled his equals in age, and gave such evident signs of doing great things,
that he was admired by all.

42. Paulus Aemilius, the Consul and Patron of the Macedonians, was a Man
Eminent for Nobleness of Birth, Prudence and Comeliness of Person, and therefore
all Marks of Honor were conferred upon him by the Romans his Countrymen.
Every one echoed forth his Praise while he was alive, and after his Death his
Fame and Renown, together with Profit and Advantage by his Valor procured to
the Commonwealth, survived him.

43. Antiochus now newly advanced to the Throne of Syria, began a new Course of
Life unusual with other Kings and Princes. For first he would privately steal
out of his Antiochus the Third.
Palace unknown to any of his Attendants, and walk up and down in the City,
calling one or another to him where he came as he thought fit; Then he took a
Pride in being Familiar and drinking with Ordinary Fellows and Mean and Poor
Travelers and Strangers; and if perchance he discerned any young Men were met
together at a set time to celebrate a Festival, he would presently clap himself
down amongst them with his Cup in his Hand, and be one of the Quire; so that
many were often so startled with the strangeness of the thing that they would
run away, and others through fear struck into amaze, not able to say a Word.
Lastly, he would lay aside his Royal Robes, and put on a Roman Called Tebenna.
Gown; and in imitation of the Candidates at Rome that were seeking for
Preferments, would salute and hug every Ordinary Fellow he met in the Street,
and sometime desiring they would make choice of him to be Aedile, and other
times to be a Tribune of the People.

Having at length obtained the Office he desired, he would seat himself upon an
Ivory Tribunal, and after the Roman manner hear Causes, and was so earnest and
diligent in the Decision of Controversies, both between Foreigners and
Citizens, that the most Prudent and Serious amongst them knew not what to think
of him, what he aimed at or designed; for some gave a favorable Construction
of it, others accounted it Folly, and some no other than downright Madness.

44. After Eumenes was waylaid, and news came to Pergamus that he was dead;
Atta Eumenes Attalus. Ush. An 412.
lus something too rashly, hand over head, on a sudden Married the Queen; but
Eumenes returning a little time after, took no notice of it, but embraced his
Brother, and carried with the same Respect toward him, as he did before.

45. Cotys, King of Thrace, was Valiant in War, and Prudent in his Counsels,
and highly Cotys.
to be commended for his Care and Diligence in all other Respects; besides all
which he was of singular Temperance and Sobriety; and that which was most
remarkable for his Honor and Commendation was, That he was altogether free
from the Natural Vices of the Thracians.

46. Perseus having taken Chalestrus by Storm, put all that were able to bear
Arms to Perseus.
the Sword; and whereas Five hundred of the Garrison Soldiers got into a Fort,
and Treated for their Lives, the King upon laying down their Arms gave them
Quarter, and liberty to be gone. But when they were out of the Town, and on
their way, according to the Terms granted them, the Macedonians (whether of
their own heads, or by order from the King is uncertain) pursued them and flew
them every Man.

47. Charopus the Epiros and This is omitted in the Greek.
Son of that Charopus who in the War against Philip, sent (...). Charopus.
a Guide to Titus Flaminius to direct him through the Strait and difficult
Passes in the Mountains, by which means the Romans unexpectedly passing those
places, possessed themselves of the Straits; this Charopus I say being bred up
at Rome, upon the account of the good Services of his Grandfather to the
Romans, had great Interest with the most Eminent Persons of Quality, and being
a fellow of extraordinary Malice and Impudence, was ever and anon at Rome
accusing and slandering the chiefest Persons of Quality in Epirus, so that by
terrifying all that were in a Capacity to oppose him, he became as it were
absolute Lord and Master of all Epirus. Phacion or Phacus, a Town in Thessaly.
Cephalus therefore, and others that were oppressed by his Calumnies, were
forced to Confederate with Perseus, and to that end, sent Messengers to him
into Macedonia, and by them promised to deliver up Epirus into his hands.

48. King Eumenes being out of all hopes of taking Abdera which he he had then
besieged, Eumenes Pytho.
dealt underhand with one Pytho, a chief Man among the Abderites, who by his
Servants and Freemen, to the number of 200, Guarded the strongest part of the
City; this Man being corrupted with Bribes, and won with fair promises, let him
in at the Gates, and so Eumenes gained the City. But Pytho receiving but a poor
and mean Reward for his Treason, and seeing before his Eyes the utter Ruin and
Destruction of his Country, repented of what he had done, and pined away for
Grief.

49. When an Opportunity was put into the hand of Perseus, to cut off the whole
Army, he loyter'd not far off, about Dius in Macedonia, careless and negligent
in the very nick of time, wherein only by a Shout and sound of Trumpet, he
might have surpised and taken all the Enemies Forces, who were then shut up
and enclosed within steep and craggy Rocks: And as the King was Negligent, so
the Macedonian Guards that were placed upon the tops of the Mountains, were in
like manner as Careless in their Watch, in their several Posts.

50. Perseus looking upon all to be lost, and altogether discouraged, commanded
Nico his Lord Treasurer, to throw all the Money and Treasure at In Thessaly.
Phacis into the Sea.

He sent away likewise Andronicus the Squire of his Body to Thessalonica, with
orders forthwith to burn his whole Fleet; who came accordingly to Thessalonica,
but with a purpose to Act more prudently; for he forbore to execute his Orders,
hoping by preserving the Shipping, to ingratiate himself with the Romans.

51. Perseus in the mean time pulling down all the golden Statues at In
Macedonia.
Dion, ordered all the Inhabitants with their Wives and Children to remove
along with him to Cydoniats their Cruelty.
Pydna, than which (a Man may justly say) nothing was more Imprudently done by
Perseus, during this War.

52. At this time the The Inhabitants of Cydonia, an Island near Lesbos.
Cydoniates committed a most Impious Fact against all the Laws and Ush. An 418.
before Chapter 169.
Customs of Greece; for being received by the Apollonia, a City in Asia upon
the Sea Coasts, another in Thrace. This Apollonia is in Creet.
Apolloniats into the City, as Friends in time of Peace, they seized upon the
Place, and put all the Men to the Sword, and divided their Wives and Children
among themselves, and took possession of the whole Territory.

53. King Antiochus, when he had routed the Egyptians, and might have cut them
off every Man, rid about and called out to his Men to forbear killing them, but
rather to take them Prisoners; from which Council he reaped considerable
Advantage in a short time; Ush An 418. Before Chapter 169.
for upon the account of this Humanity, he presently gained Pelusium, and not
long after all Egypt.

54. But we cannot (observing the method we have proposed to our selves) pass
by the Cowardice of Ptolemy, for who can but judge him of a most effeminate
Spirit, that would without a stroke struck, give up so great and rich a
Kingdom, when there was Ptolemy Pholometor. Ush. An. 420. Before Chapter 169.
not the least danger at hand, and the Enemy at so great a distance from him.
Which Effeminateness if it had been Natural, would perhaps have been more
excusable: But being it was apparent from the things he afterward did, that he
was a Prince inferior to none for Industry and Resolution, this Sloth must
needs be imputed to his Education under the Eulaius.
Euuuch, who breeding him up from his Childhood in Pleasures, and Womanish
Recreations, Emasculated the vigor of his Spirit.

55. King Antiochus seemed to all to be a prudent and active Prince, and worthy
of the Kindom in every respect, excepting that one miscarriage at Pelusium.

56. When Perseus understood that a choice Body of Gauls had passed the River
Ister, Perseus his Covetousness.
in order to assist him, he greatly rejoiced, and sent Messengers into A
Province of Thrace near Macedo; i 1.
Maedica to hasten their March with all speed. But the General of the Galls
demanded present Pay, according to the Agreement, to the value of about 500
Talents, which Perseus through his natural Covetousness, refusing to pay, though
he had before promised it, the Gauls returned back into their own Country.

57. Paulus Aemilius, as soon as he had received the Legions, called them
together, and put Life and Spirit into the Hearts of his Soldiers; for he was
now above 60 Years of Paulus Aemilius.
Age, and a Man of great Repute and Authority among the Romans, for his noble
Services to the State: And he had invented many new and subtle Stratagems in
that War, and by his Valor and Policy, had overcome the Macedonians.

58. Perseus desirous to have many to go along with him, when he fled by Sea,
brought out to them Money and rich Furniture, to the value of 60 Talents, to
take and carry away with them. Afterward when he arrived at Galepsus, he told
his Companions that some of those things that he had suffered them to carry
away, were formerly the Goods of The Great.
Alexander, and desired they would forthwith restore them to them, and he would
repay them to the value in Money: To which all readily consented, and he
received every thing back again, but never made good his promise.

59. Alexander was of a far different temper from Perseus, for the former was
of a brave and noble Spirit, and gained an Empire like to the greatness of his
Mind. On the Alexander.
contrary, the other through his sordid Covetousness, lost the Assistance of
the Galls, and by such like gross miscarriages, utterly ruined an Ancient
flourishing Kingdom.

60. After the flight of Perseus, Lucius Aemilius began to seek for his younger
Son Publius Scipio.
Africanas, who was the natural Son of Aemilius, but the adopted Son of Scipio,
who Publius Africanus.
overcame Hannibal. At that time he was a youth about Seventeen years of Age,
and under the Care and Tutorage of his Father, in that great and perilous War,
so that afterward he became as famous a General as his Father. Being at length
found out, and brought safe into the Camp, the Consul was at rest, and freed
from that anxiety of Mind he labored under; for he loved him with a more than
a Paternal Affection.

61. Aemilius by his Civil and Courteous usage of Perseus, entertaining him at
his Table, Aemilius.
and receiving him into all public Councils, gave evident Demonstrations, that
as he was a terror to his Enemies in the open Field, so he was Mild and
Merciful to them that were Subdued: Which course being followed by others, Rome
became Mistress of the World, without Envy, and so continued as long as it made
use of such noble Generals.

62. For in former times when the Romans had overcome those two potent Kings
Antiochus The Generosity of the Romans.
and Philip, they not only forbore inflicting punishment, but restored them to
their Kingdoms, and took them into the number of their Allies. And in these
later times, after many Battles sought with Perseus, and overcoming many great
hazards and difficulties, and after they had possessed themselves of all
Macedonia, beyond all Men's hopes and expectations, they proclaimed liberty to
all the Cities; which favor neither the Macedonians nor any Body else could
ever expect should have been granted by the Romans, because they were very
Conscious to themselves how much they had injured the Roman State. For they
judged (and that most justly) that there was no room left for mercy, being that
they had before been pardoned former Wrongs and Injuries.

But the Senate forgot all that was past, and carried themselves toward them
with great Clemency and Generosity. For they suffered Perseus to go at large,
only with a keeper; a punishment less than his demerit, who against the Faith
of his League, and the Obligation of his Kindred and Alliance to the Romans,
had most unjustly made War upon them; and they set Free all the People of
Macedonia, (whom by the Law of Arms they might have made perpetual Slaves,) and
with that readiness and nobleness of Mind, beyond all that the Conquered
themselves could have desired. The Illyrians likewise whom they had Subdued,
they suffered to use their own Laws; for they made it more their concern to do
what became the Majesty and Grandeur of the Romans, in carrying it Nobly
toward others, without Pride and Insolency in Prosperity, than that they
looked upon the Barbarians any way worthy of such Favor.

63. The Senate decreed the Macedonians and Illyrians to be free, and that they
should pay but half of that Tribute to Romans, which they paid to their own
Kings.

64. Perseus thus thrown into the Goal, miserably ended his days in such sad
and uncomfortable Circumstances.

The rest is to be found in the Fragments, Book 31. in Photius his Bibliotheca,
at the end of Diodorus Siculus. Fragm. 2.

65. The General of the Gauls being returned from the pursuit of the Enemy,
gathered the Captives together, and committed a most horrid piece of
Wickedness; for he picked out the Choicest and Strongest young Men amongst them,
and Sacrificed them to the Gods, as if the Immortal Dieties are pleased with
such Sacrifices. The rest he shot to death with Darts, (most of whom of Ancient
acquaintance) he well knew; however former Friendship was no Argument to spare
a Man of them. Thus are Barbarians puffed up with prosperous Successes.

66. Eumenes far different from Perseus, not only paid his Soldiers what was
their due Pay, but bestowed on them several Gifts besides, with promises of
more afterward, whereby he gained all their Hearts, and held them fast to his
Interest. But Perseus when 20000 Galls were near at hand ready to assist him,
through his niggardliness refused their aid and assistance; but Aeumenes, though
he was nothing near so rich as the other, obliged his Mercenaries and all
others that might be helpful to him by his Bounty and Liberality And therefore
Perseus sinking below the Generosity of a King, and enslaving himself to a
covetous and sordid Parsimony, lived to see all the Wealth he had heaped up
together, with his whole Kingdom fall into the hands of the Conqueror. But the
other, preferring Victory before any thing else, not only freed his own Kingdom
from the imminent dangers it labored under, but brought the whole Nation of
the Gauls into subjection.

67. Some of the Councils and Acts of Antiochus were both Princely, and
admirable, others Antiochus Epiphanes.
so poor and mean, that they were justly despised and ridiculed. For when he
celebrated public Games, he first acted contrary to the manner and practice of
all other Kings: for they when they were strengthening themselves all they
could with Men and Money, it was their greatest care to keep all private and
secret, out of fear of the Roman Greatness: But he on the contrary invited to
his Sports the most eminent Persons from all parts of the World, and most
Magnificently Adorned every part of his Palace; and thus bringing together all
the Riches of his Kingdom into one place to be exposed, as it wereupon a Stage,
to the view of all, he occasioned every thing he did to be known and blazed
abroad.

68. And in the State, Grandeur, and variety of those famous Games, Antiochus
far excelled Antiochus Epiphanes Ant. Chapter 173. about the time of Judas
Macchabaeus. Ush. An. 438. Before Chapter 164.
all the Princes that ever were before him: But that part which he himself
acted in those Maygames, was very despicable and contemptible. For he would
ride up and down among all that Solemn Assembly upon a little Nag, meanly
accoutred, bidding some go on, others to stop, and Commanding this and that, as
best pleased his own fancy; so that if his Diadem had been off, none would have
believed him to have been a King, who scarce represented the Garb and Mien of a
common A Lictor.
Officer. All the time of the public Entertainment he stood at the Door, and
introduced some, and ordered others to sit down, and Ushered in the Servants
that brought in the Dishes. Some times also he would go to some one of the
Guests, and sit down by him, and at othertimes lay himself along on the floor;
and then would start up on a sudden and hop up and down, sometimes placing
dishes of Meat upon the Table, and other times washing the drinking Cups, and
diligently observing every thing round the Room, would pledge those that drank
to him standing, sporting and jesting with those that were merrily disposed.
When it drew toward Evening, and most were gone, he was wrapped up in Linen and
brought in by the Anticks and laid upon the ground; and presently after (as if
he were called) he started up on a sudden naked, and in a jocund Humor, danced
in most ridiculous Gestures with the Mimicks and Stage Players; insomuch as all
being dashed out of countenance through shame withdrew and left the place. Every
one indeed that came to the Solemnity, as often as they cast their Eyes upon
the sumptuous Furniture, and the Stately and Magnificent Order and Disposal of
the whole, in the Celebration of the Sports and Games, admired both the King
and the Riches of his Kingdom; but when they looked upon the King himself, and
his Irregular Actions, they scarce believed it was possible there could so many
Vices and Virtues be found to Concenter in one and the same Person.

69. When the Solemnity was ended Tiberius Gracchus arrived as an Ambassador
sent to inspect into the Affairs of Syria, whom the King received and
entertained with so much Ush. An. 438. Before Chapter 164.
Kindness and Civility, that Gracchus did not in the least suspect any ill
Designs in the King, nor discerned that he took any thing amiss in relation to
what was done in Egypt. But Antiochus in truth was far from such a Temper, but
was altogether a Mortal Enemy to the Romans.

70 Ptolemy being driven out of his Kingdom, and on his Journey to Rome by
land, it was made known to Demetrius the Son of Seleucus, who surpised with
his misfortune, gave Ptolemy Philometor.
an instance of his Royal and Generous disposition. For forthwith, attended
with his Servants, and taking with him a Royal Robe, a Diadem, and a Horse
Adorned with Trappings of Gold, he went to meet Ptolemy, and came up to him at
the * 26th. Stone distant from the City, whom (after he had courteously
embraced him) he advised to put Every Stone was a Mile; Two hundred Furlongs.
on the Royal Robes, and to make use of the other Ensigns of Royalty, and so
enter into the City as became the Dignity of his Person, left he should be
despised: Ptolemy was much taken with him for his extraordinary Kindness; but
was so far from accepting what was offered, that he entreated Demetrius he
might rather stop, and take up his Lodgings at some small Village in the way.

71. Antipater having breathed out his last in the midst of these Torments,
they bring Antipater.
Asclepiades Governor of the City, crying out that Timotheus was the Contriver
of the whole Scene of this mischief, and that it was through his persuasions
that the young Man so impiously and unjustly put his Brother to death. Hereupon
when all the Great Men and Commanders began to smell out the whole Design and
Contrivance, and to commiserate the sad condition of those that suffered such
cruel Torments; Timotheus was in a great fright, and loosed the rest that were
condemned from their Torments, and afterward put them privately to death.

72. Philopater sirnam'd Ariarathes being now come to the Crown after the death
of Ariarathes King of Thrace
his Father, the first thing he did was the Celebrating his Father's Funeral in
great Pomp and State; afterward caressing his Friends, Great Officers and
Commanders, and the rest of his Subjects, he gained the good Will of all sorts.

73. When A Country in Asia bordering upon the Greater Armenia. Ush. An. 458.
Before Chapter 161. The death of Paulus Aemilius.
Ariarathes had restored Mithrobuzanes to his Father's Kingdom, Artaxias
Ariarathes Mithrobuzanes one of the Sons of Zadriades King of the lesser
Armenia.
King of Armenia still infected with his old vice of Covetousness, sent an
Ambassador to Ariarathes to solicit him to join with him and kill one of the
Brothers that were then in his hands, and divide Iberia.
Sophene between them. But Ariarathes greatly abhorred such a piece of Cruelty
and Treachery, and smartly rebuked the Ambassadors, and writ a Letter to
Artaxias, wherein he advised him to forbear such wicked practices; which
Carriage of Ariarathes much advanced his Fame and Reputation; and Mithrobuzanes
through the faithfulness and integrity of him to whom he fled for shelter,
regained his Father's Kingdom.

74. Lucius Aemilius who conquered Perseus, and was a Consul and Censor, and
the bravest Man of his Age of all the Romans, died about this time; whose death
when it was generally known, especially at the time of his Funeral, caused such
a general Sorrow and Lamentation, that not only Artificers and other sorts of
common People flocked together, but the Senate and all the Magistrates of the
City prepared every thing that was necessary for the Gracing of his Funeral.
And all Persons of the Free Towns and Cities bordering upon Rome, that could
posibly attend at the day, came in flocking together, both to see and honor
the Solemnity.

75. Such as Aemilius was reported for his Wealth while he lived, such he
appeared to be when he was dead. For though he was the only Person in his time
that enricht the Treasury at Rome with plenty of Gold, brought with him out of
Portions.
Spain, and had the Command of all the Riches of Macedonia, and was clothed
with absolute Authority in all those places; yet he was so far from converting
any thing to his private use, that when his two adopted Sons, after his death,
possessed themselves of his Estate; out of all his Goods they were not able to
raise so much as would be sufficient to satisfy his Wife her just Dowry,
without selling some of his Land,; and therefore some have preferred him for
his Abstemiousness and freedom from Covetousness before Aristides and
Epaminondas that were so famous and eminent among the Grecians upon that
account. For they only refused Money that was offered them by such as thereby
designed and aimed at their own advantage; but this Man meddled not with any
thing where he had possession of all, and might have taken to his use as much
as he pleased.

And if any look upon this as a thing incredible, let such consider that they
must not judge of the Sobriety and Moderation of the Ancient Romans, by the
griping Covetousness of those at this day. For in truth in this our Age the
Romans exceed all other Nations in their Insatiableness after Riches. But since
we now revive the memory of so excellent a Person, we shall briefly say
something of Scipio his Son, he that afterward razed Numantia, lest ignorance
of his Care and Diligence in the Study of the most excellent, and commendable
Arts and Sciences, should occasion Incredulity, that he should attain to such
an Eminency in all virtuous Qualifications. Publius Scipio therefore was the
natural Son of Lucius Aemilius who conquered Perseus, as we have before
declared; but was the Adopted Son of Scipio that conquered Hannibal, and the
Carthaginians, and so by Adoption Scipio Africanus the most Eminent of all the
Romans that ever were before him, was his Grandfather.

Scipio thus Nobly descended and taken into so famous a Family, approved
himself not the least unworthy the Glory and Renown of his Ancestors. For he
was brought up and instructed from his Childhood in the Learning of the Greeks;
and when he was 18 years of age, applied himself to the study of Philosophy
under the Inspection of Polybius of Megalopolis the Historian his Tutor, with
whom he continued a considerable time; and increasing in all manner of Virtue,
he not only excelled his equals in years, but those far elder than himself, in
Sobriety, Affableness, Generosity, and all other virtnous qualifications. But
before he fell to the study of Philosophy, it was every bodies Opinion that he
was but dull and blockish, very unworthy to be Heir to so great a Family. In
the first place he made it his chief Care and Business to be Sober, as
conducing much to the commendation of his youthful age, which was then at his
years a very difficult Task. For the Youth at that time were hurried away by
filthy Lusts, and an Excess of intemperance, with an impetuous Current, some to
Sodomy, others to Whores, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like
Luxurious and Voluptuous Courses: For the Romans presently learnt the
Effeminate Manners of the Greeks in this kind, through the long continuance of
the Persian War; and besides, having gained abundance of Wealth, they were
plentifully supplied with Fuel to seed their Luxury.

76. But Scipio following another course of Life, and combating with all his
natural corrupt Lusts, as with so many wild Beasts, within the space of Five
years attained to a fixed and habitual state of Sobriety and Temperance. To
which all giving their Testimony, and generally crying him up upon that
account, he then put forth himself in acts of Bounty, Generosity, and
Liberality in distributing his Money for the good of others: For which sort of
Virtue he had an Example in his Father Aemilius, under whose instruction he was
long bred up, and now exhibited, as it were, a perfect Copy of his Virtue: But
Fortune likewise presented him an Eminent occasion of expressing his
Liberality. For when Aemilia the Wife of Great Scipio, the Sister of Aemilius
who conquered Perseus, died, and left a great Estate behind her, of which
Scipio was Heir; he first gave an instance of his generous disposition upon
this occasion. For his Mother Papiria being cast off long before the death of
his Father, had lived a considerable time separate from her Husband, in a far
meaner condition than became one of her Noble Birth: But Aemilia the Mother of
his adopted Father leaving behind her a great Inheritance, besides other
Riches, had a rich Robe and Woman's Gown, together with a splendid Retinue of
Houshold-Servants, as being the Wife of the Great Scipio, and so Sharer with
him in his Estate and Fortune: All these Scipio Nobly bestowed upon his Mother;
in which stately Habit, when she appeared in public amongst the Ladies of
Quality, the Bounty and Generosity of the young Man, and his Piety toward his
Mother was highly applauded, First among the Women, and then among all
Companies and Societies of Men, throughout the whole City. This piece of
Liberality was looked upon by the whole City, not only as a thing commendable,
but even wonderful, especially at Rome, in which City none easily parts with
any thing they have to another. After this, there being a great sum of Money
owing to the Daughters of the Great Scipio, as their Portions.
Dowries; and whereas by the Roman Laws the Party that was to pay such
Portions, had liberty to pay them in Three years time, by a certain proportion
every year, he paid the whole down at once. Afterward when his natural Father
Aemilius was dead, and he and his Brother Fabius were constituted joint Heirs
of his Estate, Scipio did another Honorable Act, well worthy to be remembered.
For when he knew that his Brother had far less than himself, he freely bestowed
upon him his own share of the Inheritance, amounting to above Sixty Talents,
and so made his Brother as rich as himself; which Act being generally cried up,
he did that which was further remarkable: For when Fabius was resolved to
exhibit single Combats by Gladiators at the Funeral of his Father, yet was not
well able to bear the great Charge it would require, Scipio bore half of the
Cost and Expense out of his own Purse. A little time after, when his Mother
died, he was so far from taking again what he had before bestowed on her, that
he gave not only them, but all the rest of his Mother's Inheritance to his
Sisters, although no part of her Estate by the Laws, belonged to them. Thus
Scipio being cried up by the unanimous Consent of all Persons, for his
generosity, he grew every day more and more famous and renowned, which he
attained unto, not so much by greatness of Expense, as by choice of fit
opportunities to express his Kindnesses, and an Art in Conferring of his Gifts
and Benefits, upon proper Objects.

He gained likewise a just Reputation for his Chastity without any Cost or
Charge, but only by his Moderation and Sobriety, from whence likewise he reapt
the great Benefit of Health and Strength of Body, and following this Course all
his life long, he enjoyed a Reward of his Temperance with great pleasure and
delight. And as for all the parts of Valor, which is a Virtue absolutely
necessary every where, especially among the Romans, he was not in the least
wanting or negligent, in that respect Fortune affording him a special
opportunity to approve himself; for the Macedonian Kings being much given to
Hunting, Scipio by far surpassed them all.

77. After that the Romans had Conquered Ptolemy Philometer.
Perseus, they put some of them to death Charopus.
who had sided with the Macedonians, and others they sent to Rome. But Charopus
being clothed with an absolute Power and Authority in Epirus, because he seemed
to be a great favourer of the Romans, at first dealt with the Epirots something
gently and mildly, but afterward growing every day more proud and insolent, he
turned every thing in Epirus upside down. For by false Accusations against the
richest Men he banished some, put others to death and Confiscated their Goods:
And he not only squeezed Money from Men, but from Women, by the help of his
Mother Philota; who was more than a Woman in Cruelty and Wickedness. Many
likewise who were accused to be plotting against the Romans, he gave up into
the Hands of the People, who were all Condemned to die.

78. Orofernes having deposed his Brother Ariarathes, when he ought to have
managed Orofernes, King of Capadocia. Ush. An. 460. Before Chapter 160.
his Affairs with the greatest prudence imaginable, and ingratiated himself
into the Hearts of his People by Kindness and Acts of Grace and Favor,
intended no such Matter: But being wholly intent on scraping up Money together,
he wickedly put many to death; he gave to Timotheus Fifty, and King Demetrius
Seventy Talents, and promised in a short time to pay other 400 Talents, and
besides to add to them 600 more: At which, discerning that the Cappadocians
were greatly incensed, he began to Rob and Spoil every Body, and Confiscate the
Goods of the Nobility; and having Treasured up a vast Sum of Money, he
entrusted 400 Talents with the Pirenians, to serve him at a Turn, and Change of
Fortune, which were afterward faithfully repaid him.

79. Ptolemy the Elder, having presently by the multitude of his Forces penned
up his Euergetes.
Brother, by a In the City Ladithus. Ush. An. 465. Before Chapter 159.
close Siege, and reduced them to the utmost Extremity, yet pardoned him;
induced thereunto, both by his natural Clemency, and the nearness of Relation,
and his awe and fear of the Romans: And he did not only pardon him, but entered
into a League with him, according to which, he was to be content as the younger
Brother with Cyrene, and with a certain proportion of Wheat every Year. And
thus a War between Brothers, which had wholly alienated their Affections one
from another, and was continued to the utmost hazard of them both, was on a
sudden ended upon moderate Terms and Conditions.

80. When Orofernes discerned that his Affairs declined much to the worse, he
resolved to Orofernes. Ush. An. ib. Before Chapter 159.
satisfy his Mercenary Soldiers as soon as he could, lest they should Mutiny,
for want of their Pay: But being at present straitn'd through scarcity of
Money, he was necessitated to rifle Jupiter's Temple, situated at the Foot of
Mount Ariadne, which before had been ever preserved Sacred and Inviolable, and
by this means he paid his Soldiers all their Arrears.

81. Prusias King of Bithynia, being altogether disappointed in his Design of
taking Attalus, destroyed and laid waste the Sacred Grove called Nicheporius,
which lay under Prusias.
the Walls of the Pergamus.
City, and rifled the Temple it self, and took away the Statues, and the Images
of the Gods, and among the rest, the famous Statue of Aesculapius, said to be
one of the curious Pieces of Phipomachus, and robbed the Place of all its
sacred and consecrated Goods and Treasure. For which sacrilege, the Gods in a
short time after, inflicted upon him deserved punishment: For most of his Land
Army perished by the Bloody Flux; and the like Calamity happened to his Naval
Forces, for by a sudden Storm in the Propontis, most of his Ships with their
Soldiers and Rowers together were Sunk; and some few were cast upon the Land,
and Shipwrackt. And these were the first punishments inflicted upon Prusias for
his Impiety.

82. The Cretians arriving at Siphnus, besieged the City, and the Inhabitants
partly A City in one of the Cyclides, called Syphus. now hear Crete.
through fear, and partly through feigned and and deceitful promises admitted
them into the City; the Cretians first promising that none of the Inhabitants
should receive the least prejudice; but when they were entered, according to
the usual Treachery and Perfidiousness of the Cretians, they both carried them
all away Captives, and rifled and robbed all the Temples of the Gods, and so
loaded with spoil hois'd up Sail, and made back for Crete. But in a short time
after, they paid Dear for this Treachery, the Gods presently executing
Vengeance upon them for their Impiety; for out of fear of some Enemies that
overpowr'd them in Shipping, they were forced to loose out of Harbor in the
Night, and most of their Ships by a sudden Storm were sunk at Sea, and others
were cast upon Land, and dashed in pieces upon the Rocks, where all in them
miserably perished; some few that consented not to this perfidious dealing
escaped.

83. Philip the Son of Amyntas, coming to a Kingdom then Subject and Tributary
to the Illyrians by his Arms and skill in Martial Affairs, restored it to its
former Liberty, Philip.
and by his mild and gentle Usage of those he subdued, he enlarged his Kingdom
above any that was in Europe. For having beaten the Athenians in a great Battle
(who contended with him for the Principality of Greece,) he buried all their
dead that fell in the Fight, whom they had left in the open Field, and sent
back above 2000 Prisoners to their own Country, without any Redemption: So that
they who before had contended with him, hearing of his generous Usage of their
fellow Citizens, voluntarily yielded up to him the Sovereignty of Greece, and
so what he could not accomplish by so many Battles and Hazards, merely by his
Mildness and Humanity he obtained with the free and unanimous Consent of his
Enemies. But what he had got, he afterward maintained, by striking a Fear and
Terror into the Hearts of his Enemies, for he razed the Populous City of
Olynthus to the Ground. In the same manner his Son Alexander, by the Ruin of
Thebes, deterred the Lacedaemonians and Athenians (who were plotting against
him) from their designed Revolt. And his Civil and generous Usage of the
Prisoners in the Persian War, was such, that he gained the Hearts of the
Asiaticks, not so much by his Valor, as his Mildness and Humanity. But in
later times, the Romans thirsting after a Universal Monarchy, in a great
measure obtained their ends, by the force of their Arms, but their Clemency
toward such as they had Conquered, added much to the increase and enlargement
of their Conquests. For they were so far from Cruelty, or being Rigorous in
executing punishment upon those they had Subdued, that they seemed to carry it
toward them rather as Friends, than as Enemies. For when the Conquered
expected the utmost severity of Revenge from the Conquerors, they left no room
for any others to exceed them in Humanity, and Clemency: For some they made
Free of the City, with others they joined in Affinity by Marriages, others they
set Free to Govern according to their own Laws; and to sum up all, none
underwent any severity by being Conquered, farther than what was fit. And
therefore upon the account of this extraordinary Clemency, Kings, Cities and
Countries, generally sheltred themselves under the Protection of the Romans.
But when they were Lords almost of the whole World. then they strengthened and
confirmed themselves in their Dominions, by severity, and razing of Towns and
Cities, to strike a Terror into their Enemies. For they utterly destroyed
Corinth in Achaiah, Carthage in Africa, Numantia in Spain, and rooted up the
Kingdom of Macedonia, in the Ruin of Perseus, and became a Terror to many.

84. The Romans make it their great Care, that the Wars they begin, be upon
just grounds, and therefore never resolve upon any thing rashly, or
inconsiderately.

85. Publius Scipio (who was afterward surnamed Africanus, and was then a
Colonel. (...).
Tribune, when almost all the rest of the Romans made light of their Terms and
Articles made with Scipio.
their Enemies, though confirmed by solemn Oaths;) most Religiously observed and
kept his promises with the Besieged, and used them with all Humanity and
Clemency when they fell into his hands. His Faith and Integrity therefore being
noised abroad all over Africa, none surrendered up themselves into the hands of
the Romans, unless Scipio, joined in signing of the Articles.

86. When there were only three Romans killed in the Skirmish, and were left
lying upon the Ground unbury'd, all were very much troubled and concerned at
it. But Scipio with the Consent of the Consul writ a Letter to Hasdrubal, to
desire him to bury those Romans; who presently ordered the thing to be done,
and when all was performed sent their Ashes to the Consul, which added much to
the Honor of Scipio, as one whose Authority was prevalent even with the
Enemies themselves.

87. The Counterfeit Philip, having beaten the Romans in a great Battle, became
Proud, Cruel and Tyrannical; there was not a Wealthy Person which he put not
Pseudophilippus, called Andriscus. Live. Book 50. Flor. Hist. lib. 2. c. 14.
Orosius lib. 4. c. 22. Ush. An. 469. Before Chapter 149. P. Scipio.
most wickedly to death, upon false Accusations: He spared not his own intimate
Friends, but dispatched many of them out of the Way; for he was naturally
Fierce and Cruel, Proud and Haughty in all his Familiar intercourses, and at
last deeply engaged in Covetousness, and all manner of Vice.

88. The Romans had such a kindness for Publius Scipio, that though neither his
Age nor the Laws did qualify him, yet they endeavored with all their might to
Elect him Consul.

89. Calpurnius the Consul, after he had some Towns delivered up to him upon
Articles, contrary to the Terms agreed upon, and against his Faith and
Engagements, razed them * Lucius Calpurnius, Piso.
to the ground, and therefore in all his Designs and Contrivances afterward,
he was disappointed as a Faithless and Treacherous Person, as if some Deity set
himself against him; for he attempted many things, but was never able to effect
any thing,

90. King Prusias being both of an ugly Visage, and a mean and effeminate
Presence, was mortally hated by the Bythinians.

91. After the taking of Carthage, Scipio gave Liberty to the Sicilian
Ambassadors to search among the Spoils, and ordered every one to carry back
into their several Cities Scipio.
such things as had formerly been taken away from them by the Carthaginians:
Upon which were found many Statues and Pictures of famous Men, of exquisite
Workmanship, besides many things Devoted and Consecrated to the Gods, some of
Silver and others of Gold; among which, was the famous Phalarian Bull of
Agrigentum, made by Perilaus, for the Tyrant Phalaris, who caused the Artificer
himself to make the first experiment of his own Art, by executing that sort of
punishment upon him, which he had invented for the Torturing of others.

92. In our time Caius Julius Caesar, surnamed for the greatness of his Actions
Divine. Julius Caesar, rebuilt Corinth.
Divus, when almost a hundred Years after he saw the Ruins and Rubbish of
Corinth, was so compassionately Affected, and withal desirous to make himself
glorious, that he put forth himself to the utmost to rebuild the City. And
therefore it is but just that the Humanity and Clemency that was eminently in
this Man, should be allowed its just and due praises, and that his Virtues
should be Recorded in History, for an everlasting remembrance to his eternal
Praise and Honor. For when his Ancestors were Extreme in their severity
against this City, he rectified their Excesses by his own Lenity and
Moderation, preferring Mercy before Cruelty. Besides, he far excelled all that
were ever before him in the Greatness of his Actions, and upon the account of
his Virtuous Qualifications, was surnamed Divus. To conclude, this Man was the
most Famous and Renowned for Eminency of Birth, Fluency of Tongue, the Art of
War, and Contempt of Riches, of any whatsoever that was in his Age.

93. Viriathus of Lusitania, the Captain of the Robbers, was just and exact in
distributing the Spoil, and those who had valiantly behaved themselves in
Battle, he would A part of Spain now Portugal.
liberally reward according to their several Merits, and he never converted any
of the public Moneys to his own private use, and therefore the Lusitanians
never shrunk or drew back from any hazardous undertaking, when he Commanded
them, and was their Leader, honoring him as the Common Benefactor and Savior
of their Country.

94. Plautius the Roman Praetor greatly misgovern'd his Province, being
therefore Condemned by the People, because he had dishonored his Government,
he fled from Rome. C. Plautius.


95. In Syria, King Alexander, being far unfit for so high a Station, by reason
of his Sloth and Meanness of Spirit, gave up the Government of Antioch to
Hierax and Diodotus. Vid. Live lib. 40. Alexander of Syria, called Alexander
Belas a Counterfeit Son of Antiochus Epiphanes. See Joseph. lib. 13. c. 8.
Ush. An. 470. Before Chapter 140.

96. The Kingdom of In the Greek it is Egypt, but mistaken I conceive.
Demetrius Nicanor, Son of Demetrius Soter. Josephus ib. 1 Mac. 11. Olymp. 158.
An. 1.
Syria, being now brought low, and Demetrius being only the surviving Branch of
the Royal Stock, believing himself to be out of all Danger, disregarded the
Deportment of the former Kings, who studied to ingratiate themselves into the
good Opinion of their People, by their affable and courteous Behavior: But he
growing every day more and more unsufferable, fell at length to downright
Cruelty, and all sorts of heinous Enormities. The cause of all which is not
only to be attributed to his own corrupt Disposition, but to one of his
Friends, who had the Management of all the Affairs of the Kingdom: For being a
Wicked and Rash Fellow, he incited by his Flattery, the young Man to all manner
of Wickedness. At first therefore, he put to death all that had sided against
him in the War, with unusual sorts of Punishments. Afterward, when the
Antiochians Taunted and Jear'd at him, as they were wont to do, * One
Lastlienes.
he got together a Company of Mercenary Soldiers against them, and commanded
that they should be disarmed, but the Antiochians refusing to deliver them;
some he killed as they fell into his hands, others he Murdered in their own
Houses, together with their Wives and Children; upon which a great Uproar being
raised in the City, he burnt down most of the Town to the Ground, and many that
were accused to be Heads of this Commotion, were put to death, and their
Estates Confiscated, and brought into the Kings Exchequer: And therefore many
of the Citizens, both out of Fear and Hatred of Demetrius, Fled Ush. An. 475.
Before Chapter 145.
out of the City, and wandered up and down all Syria, watching for a fit time
and opportunity to be revenged. In the mean time, Demetrius hated of every
Body, raged notwithstanding in Slaughters, Banishments, and Confiscations, far
exceeding his Father in Cruelty: For he was far from Royal Clemency and
Kindness, but exercising a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Power, oppressed his
Subjects with most grievous and unsufferable Calamities, in so much as the Kings
of this Family, for their oppressions, were hated by all, and those of the Of
Alexander Balas, who pretended to be the Son of Antiochus Epiphanes. Josephus
lib. 13. c. 3. 1 Mac. 101. Ush. An. 465.
other, as much beloved for their Moderation and Clemency; so that through the
mutual Plots and circumventing Contrivances of the Heads of both these
Families, one against another, Syria was continually full of Stirs and
Commotions: and the common People themselves, through the Flattery and fair
Promises of those Kings that sought to succeed the other, were so led aside, as
that they still delighted in Change.

97. The Of Aradus Island.
Aradians growing high Crested and Insolent, abused the Of Marathum in
Phaenicia. Ush. An. 471. Before Chapter 140. Diodor. Sicul. Legate. 29. Strabo lib.
16. P. 753.
Marathenian Ambassadors, who crying out against their Impiety, challenged the
Sacred regard that ought to be had to Suppliants, and the Security and
Protection due to Ambassadors, upon which, some of the audacious young Fellows,
presently knocked them on the Head. Then these Murderers and their Copartners
got together in a general Assembly, and adding one piece of Wickedness to
another, contrived an Impious and Vile design against the Marathenians; for
taking the Rings off the Fingers of them that were Murdered, they writ Letters
to the Marathenians, as from the Ambassadors, by which they informed them, that
the Aradians would within a short time send them Aid, to the end that the
Marathenians might receive the Aradian Soldiers into their City, and so be
Surpised, thinking they were really, and without Fraud, sent to them as
Auxiliaries. But the Aradians failed in their wicked Design, for when they had
laid an Embargo upon all the Ships, that none might discover their Treachery to
the Marathenians, a certain Seamen, a Neigbour to the Marathenians
commiserating their Condition, and being acustom'd to Sail in the Neighboring
Sea, took a Ship, and in the Night passed over that narrow Cut, about Eight
Furlongs in Breadth, and discovered the Fraud of the Aradians, to the
Marathenians; the Aradians therefore, when they understood their Plot was
discovered, forbore sending the Letters.

98. Ptolemy Physcon, the Brother of Philometer, began his Reign most wickedly;
for Ptolemy Physco. Valesius Fragm. cited by Ush. An. 493. c. 475. His
Mercenaries set his Palace on Fire. Justin Lib. 38. Orosius lib. 5. c. 10.
charging many with Plots against his Life, he put them all to death, with most
cruel Torments, others for pretended Crimes invented by himself, he Banished
and Confiscated their Estates: by which cruelties, in a short time, his
Subjects were so enraged, that they all hated him Mortally; however he Reigned
Fifteen Years.

99. Viriathus, when at his Marriage many Gold and Silver Cups, and all sorts
of rich Carpets of exquisite Workmanship, were set forth to grace the
Solemnity, he held them all upon the point of a Lance, not with admiration of
such rich and splendid Furniture, but rather in scorn and contempt. After, when
he had upon this occasion spoken many things, with much Wisdom and Prudence, he
concluded with many Emphatical expressions, and with this one, very remarkable
Here Is something wanting.
for by this saying, he signified, that it was the greatest Imprudence
imaginable, to trust in Goods of Fortune, which are so uncertain; especially,
since it was then apparent, that all those highly esteemed riches of his Father
in Law, were liable to be a prey to him, that might carry them away upon his
Spears point; further he added, that his Father in Law ought rather to thank
him, for that nothing of his own was given by his Father in Law, to him who was
Lord and owner of all. Virathus therefore at that time, neither washed nor sat
down, although he was earnestly entreated so to do. And whereas the Table was
plentifully furnished with rich Dishes of Meat, he only distributed some Bread
and Flesh amongst them that came along with him. After he had a little more
than tasted the Meat himself, he ordered his Bride to be brought to him, and
having Sacrificed after the manner of the Spaniards, he mounted her on
Horseback, and forthwith carried her away to his Appartments in the Mountains:
For he accounted Sobriety and Temperance the greatest Riches, and the Liberty
of his Country gained by Valor, the surest Possession. In his Leagues and
Treaties he was very careful and exactly faithful to his Word, and spoke
plainly and sincerely what he intended, instructed therein (without any other
Arts) by his own natural Principles of honesty and fair dealing.

100. Demetrius, while he staid at Laodicea, spent his time in Banqueting, and
such Demetrius Nicator. Ush. An. 476. Before Chapter 144.
like Luxury; and yet exercised his Tyranny upon many in the mean time, not at
all bettered by his Afflictions.

101. The Cnotians contended for the Sovereignty of the Island, which they
alleged, belonged to them, both upon the account of the Ancient Dignity of the
City, and the Glory and Renown of their Ancestors in the Heroic times. For
some say that Jupiter was brought up amongst them, and that Minos, who had the
Dominion of the Seas, was bred up by Jupiter, at Cnossius, and excelled all
other Men in Virtuous Accomplishments.

102. But in Egypt, King Ptolemy for his Cruelty, was hated of all his
Subjects: For his Manners were not to be compared with his Brother
Philometer's; for he was of a mild Ptolemy Physco.
and gentle Nature, but the other fierce and cruel; and therefore the People
longed for a Change, and earnestly waited for a fit opportunity to Revolt.

103. At the time when Ptolemy (after the Solemn manner of the Egyptians) was
Enthroned at Memphis, his Queen Cleopatra was delivered of a Son, at which he
exceedingly Ptolemy.
rejoiced, and called him Memphites, because he was Born in the City Memphis,
at the time of his Solemn Inauguration. But while he was Celebrating his Son's
Birth day, he forgot not his usual Cruelty, for he ordered some of Cyrene (who
had brought him into Egypt) to be put to death, because they rebuked him
something too freely, upon the account of the Strumpet Irene.

104. After Diegylis King of Thrace, came to the Throne, he was so puffed up with
his prosperity, that he began to Rule over his People not as his Subjects and
Friends, but to Diegylis his Cruelty.
Domineer over them, as so many Slaves and Bondmen: For he put many good and
honest Thracians by Tortures to death, and abused with the highest marks of
disgracemany others: For he spared neither Woman nor Boy that were handsome and
beautiful, and stuck not at stripping Men out of all they had, by force and and
strong hand, but filled all his Dominions with Rapine and Violence. He
plundered and spoiled likewise the Cities of Greece that bordered upon him, and
abused some of the Captives, and put others to death with exquisite Torments.
After he had taken the City Lysimachia (which belonged to Attalus) he burnt it
down to the Ground, and picked out the greatest Persons of Quality from amongst
the Captives, and put them to death with strange and unheard of Tortures: For
he cut off the Heads, Hands, and Feet of their Children, and hung them about
their Parents Necks, and exchanged the Members of Men and Women one from
another. Of some he cut off their Hands, and clove them down the small of the
Back, and sometimes would cause the Members to be carried about upon the top of
their Spears, so that he far exceeded Phalaris himself, and Apollodorus the
Tyrant of the Cassandrians. His Barbarity is more evident in this one Instance
following. When he was celebrating his Nuptials, after the Ancient manner of
the Thracians, he caught up Two young Men of Greece that were Traveling, who
were Subjects to Attalus, and were Brothers, both very beautiful. The one was
fully attained to Man's Estate, and the other was near bordering upon it;
Diegylis caused them both to be introduced Crowned with Garlands, after the
manner of the Victims: The younger being laid along and extended at length by
the Officer, as one ready to cut him off at the Middle, the Tyrant cried out,
that Kings and private Men, were not to offer the like Sacrifices; hereupon the
Elder making great lamentation, out of endeared Love to his Brother, interposed
himself between him and the Sword, upon which Diegylis commanded he should be
likewise laid along, and then doubling his Cruelty, at one stroke dispatched
them both, the Spectators all applauding so noble a piece of Dexterity. Many
such like wicked acts were committed by him.

105. When Attalus understood that Diegylis was hated by all his Subjects for
his Cruelty and Covetousness, he took a quite contrary Course: And therefore
when he had taken many Thracian Prisoners Captive, and freely Released them
all, there were many that spread abroad his Fame for his Generosity and
Clemency: And when many of the Thracian Nobility out of hatred to Diegulis,
fled to him, and were kindly received, and the thing came to be known, Diegulis
tortured the Hostages of them that were fled with most Diegulis ki^ Cruelty.
grievous Torments. Many of whom that were very Young, and of tender Age, he
pulled in pieces, Limb from Limb, and of others he cut of their Hands, Feet and
Heads; some he crucified and others he hung upon Trees, many Women likewise who
were Persons of Quality) he stigmatized before they were put to death, and
prostituted them to the Lust of every vile Fellow, in a most Barbarous manner
giving up himself to all manner of Filthiness. Which as it clearly evidenced
his unparall'ld Cruelty, so it moved many of the Spectators, who had but the
least sense of Humanity, with pity and commiseration.

106. When Pompey was preparing to Besiege the City Lagnus, the Numantines
willing Quintus Pompey.
to assist their Countrymen, sent to them in the Night 400 Soldiers; whom the
Lagnetians at first readily received, and bountifully rewarded as their
Saviors. But in a few * Lagnetum in Africa.
days after, dreading a Siege, they Treated with Pompey, to deliver up the Town
upon Terms, insisting only upon sparing their Lives. But when Pompey would
admit of no Conditions, unless the Numantians were delivered up to him, the
Lagnetians at first shrunk at the thoughts of such a wicked Act against their
Benefactors, and therefore resolved to stand it out to the utmost: But being
afterward reduced to the utmost extremity, they sent to Pompey to acquaint him
they were ready to Redeem their own Lives by the Destruction of their
Confederates; which the Numantians coming to understand, they set upon the
Citizens unexpectedly in the Night, and made a grievous Slaughter amongst 'em.
Pompey having Intelligence of this Tumult and Bustle in the Town, forthwith set
scaling Ladders to the Walls, and took the City, and put all the Lagnetians to
the Sword, but generously discharged all the Numantian Auxiliaries, to the
Number of 100; both pitying the Men that were so unworthily brought into such
extremity and distress, as likewise hereby designing to to gain the Goodwill
and opinion of the Numantians toward the Romans. Afterward he Razed the City
to the Ground.

107. Arsases King of the Parthians being a Mild and Gracious Prince, was
exceeding Arsases.
prosperous and successful, and greatly enlarged the bounds of his Empire; for
he Conquered all before him, as far as to India (where Porus Reigned formerly)
with a great deal Ush. An. 480. before Chapter 142.
of ease: And though he was advanced to that degree of Power and Authority, yet
he inclined not in the least to Pride and Luxury, as is common with Princes in
such cases, but was Kind to his Subjects, and Valiant in the Field against his
Enemies: and having subdued several Nations, gathered together a System out of
the best of their Laws, and Ush. An. 481.
imparted them to his Parthians.

108. Viriathus was Buried by the Lusitanians with great Pomp and State; for
Two hundred Gladiators were matched singly with as many more, and sought Duels
at his Sepulcher, in honor of the remarkable Valor of this Man. For he was
(as is agreed by all) Valiant in Dangers, Prudent and Careful in providing
whatever was necessary, and that which was most of all considerable was, that
whilst he Commanded he was more beloved than ever any was before him: For in
dividing the spoil he never served himself with any thing above any of the
rest; and of those things which fell to his share, he often rewarded them that
had behaved themselves valiantly, and relieved those Soldiers that were most in
want. He was likewise of incredible Sobriety and Vigilance, not sparing any
Labor, or drawing back from any hazard, not to be overcome in the least by
Ease or Pleasures. The Arguments of his virtuous Qualifications are evident and
demonstrable: For being General of the Lusitanians for the space of Eleven
years, during all that time his Soldiers were not only peaceable without any
Mutinies, but remained unconquerable: But after his death the Forces of the
Lusitanians in a short time after were broken and dispersed, being deprived of
such a General.

109. Ptolemy for his Cruelty, Murders, filthy Lusts, and deformed Body
(whence he was Ptolemy.
called Physco) was hated by all. But Hierax his General being an expert
Soldier, and Popular in all General Assemblies, and a Man of a great Spirit,
took upon him the Government: For when Ptolemy wanted Money, and the Soldiers
for want of Pay were ready to Revolt to Galaestes, he put a stop to their
Mutiny by paying off their Arrears out of his own Purse.

110. The Egyptians altogether contemned Ptolemy when they saw him so childish
in his Speeches, drowned in filthy Lusts, and his Body Emasculated by his
Intemperance.

111. Physco, Nastiness. Ush. An. 483.
Aemilius the Consul being of an heavy and unweildy Body, by reason of his
bulk, Mareus Aemllius.
and too much pampering of himself, was very unfit for Martial Affairs.

Out of the 34th BOOK.
1. ABout this time there arose so great a Mutiny and Sedition of the Slaves in
Sicily, Olymp. 161. Ant. Chapter 133. The servile War by Eunus. vid Frag. Diodor.
in Photius lib. 34. in my Translation. f. 57. Orosius. Lib. 5. c. 9.
as no Age before could ever parallel, in which many Cities suffered, were
miserably ransackt, and innumerable multitudes both of Men, Women and Children
fell into most grievous Calamities; and the whole Island was now upon the point
of falling into the hands of the Slaves, who designed no other bounds should be
put to their exorbitant Power, than the absolute Destruction of their Masters.

And these things fell out when none in the least suspected them; but those who
were accustomed to pierce deep into the Grounds and Causes of all Events,
concluded that this was not a thing that happened merely by chance. For the
Inhabitants of this rich Island growing wanton with too much plenty, fell into
Luxury and Voluptuousness, and then into Pride and Insolence. For those reasons
the Cruelty of the Masters toward their Servants, and the Hatred of the
Servants to their Masters raging and increasing more and more every day, at
length (a fit opportunity offering it self) their Hatred broke forth, and many
Thousand Slaves on a sudden (without any sign or appearance of any such thing
before) got in a Body together to cut the Throats of their Masters.

And the same thing happened in Asia, almost about the same time. For when Base
Brother to Attalus King of Pergamus. Velleius Paterc. Lib. 2. c. 4. Luc. Fl.
Lib. 2. c. ult. vid. Ush An 489. Wanting.
Aristonicus, without any color of Right, sought to gain the Kingdom of Asia,
all the Slaves, by reason of the Cruelty of their Masters, joined with him, and
filled many Towns and Cities with Blood and Slaughter.

2. In like manner those that had large Possessions in Sicily bought up whole
Goals to till their Lands -- Some they shackled, others they overcharged with
hard Labor, and branded and stigmatized every one of them: So that such a
multitude of Slaves, even like a Deluge, overflowed all Sicily, that the
excessive number may seem incredible to all that hear of it; for all the rich
Men of Sicily vied with the Italians for Pride, Covetousness, and vicious
Practices; For many of the Italians who had great numbers of Servants,
accustomed their Shepherds to that degree of Rapine and Licentiousness, as that
they suffered them to Rob and Steal for want of necessary subsistence from them
themselves. Which Liberty being once Granted to those Men who had strength of
Body, sufficient to enable 'em readily to execute any Villainy, together with
Time and Leisure, and through want of Subsistence were reduced to the utmost
Extremity of attempting any thing for their Supply; these unruly Fellows in a
short time were ripe and complete in wickedness. At first they used to Murder
Travelers upon the Highway, when only One or Two were together: Afterward
they would in Bodies enter into little Villages, in the Night, and pillage poor
Men's Houses, and forcibly carry away whatever they found, and kill all that
opposed them. At length growing every day more and more Audacious, there was
neither Security in the Roads in Sicily for Travelers in the Night, nor Safety
in their Houses for them that dwelt in the Country, but all places were full of
Rapine, Robberies and Murders. And because the Shepherds and Herdsmen were
furnished with Arms, and inured to lie Night and Day in the open Fields, they
every Day grew bold and daring: For carrying Clubs and Lances and long Staves,
and covered with the Skins of Wolves and Wild Boars, they looked with a most
dreadful and terrible Aspect as the Children of Mars. Besides, every one had a
Guard of great Mastiff Dogs to attend them, and guzling down Milk, and glutting
themselves with Flesh, and all sorts of other Food and Provision, they
resembled Beasts both in Souls and Bodies. So that the whole Island seemed as
if it had been full of Soldiers roving up and down in every place, or as if all
the daring Slaves were let loose by their Masters to act the parts of raging
Mad men. It Is true indeed that the Roman Praetors and Governors did what they
could to suppress this Insolency of the Slaves; but because they durst not
punish them, by reason of the Potency of their Masters, they were forced to
suffer the Country to be infested with Robberies; for whereas most of their
Masters were Roman Knights, who had Judicial Authority at Rome, and were used
to choose Judges out of the Aequestrian Order in the Causes of the Praetors and
the Proconsuls, who were summoned to appear before them after their Provincial
Authority was determined, the Magistrates were upon good grounds afraid of them.

3. The Italians, who had large Possessions in Sicily, and therefore bought
many Slaves, Damopilus his Luxury and Cruelty to his Servants.
every one of whom they stigmatized with marks on their Cheeks, and oppressed
them with hard Labor, and yet defrauded them of their Wages and Subsistence.

4. There was one Damophilus of Aenna a wealthy Man, but very proud and
arrogant; this Man Tilled a large compass of Land, and had a vast Stock of
Cattle, initiated the Luxury and Cruelty of the Italians toward their Slaves.
For being carried in a Coach drawn with stately Horses, he traversed the
Country up and down, guarded with a company of Armed Slaves; he carried
likewise about with him continually many beautiful Boys, Flatterers and
Parasites; and in the City and Villages had his Silver Vessels curiously
wrought, and all sorts of Purple Carpets of very great value; and made
Magnificent Feasts and Entertainments, after the State and Grandeur of a King,
in Pomp and Expense far surpassing the Persian Luxury, and as much as all other
Men in Pride and Arrogance. For being rude, and never bred up with Learning, or
any liberal Education, and having heaped up a great deal of Wealth, and himself
left to a licentious Liberty, without control; he first from fullness and
plenty became insolent, and at last was a plague to himself, and occasion of
bringing many Miseries and Calamities upon the Country. For having bought many
Slaves, he abused them in the highest degree; And those that were Free born in
their own Country, and taken Captives in War, he stigmatized in their Cheeks
with the sharp points of Iron Pins, some of which he sent bound in Fetters to
the Goals, and to others that were ordered to look after the Cattle in the
Fields, he neither allowed Clothes, nor Food sufficient to satisfy Nature.

5. The Barbarity and Cruelty of this Damophilus was such, that never a day
passed Damophilus.
wherein he scourged not his Slaves, without the least cause or occasion. And
his Wife Megallis was as cruel as himself, toward the Maidservants, and other
Slaves that fell into her Hands. The Slaves therefore being thus provoked by
the cruelty of their Master and Mistress, concluding they could not be brought
into a worse condition than they then were, rose up all on a sudden.

6. In Sicily Demophilus had a young Daughter of a very gentle and courteous
Disposition, Demophilus
who made it her business to relieve and heal those Slaves that had been abused
and scourged by her Parents, and to bring Meat to them that were in prison; so
that she was wonderfully beloved by all the Servants, insomuch, as in
remembrance of her former Kindness, all had compassion of her, and were so far
from offering any violence or injury to the young Maid, that every one of them
made it their business to preserve her Chastity unviolated; and chose some out
of their own company, the most expeditious amongst them to conduct her to
Catana to some of her Friends.

7. After Eunus was declared King, he put many to death, and spared only those
that Eunus.
for the sake of his Prophecies commended him at their Feasts, to which his
Master Antigenes used to bring him to make sport; those likewise that were so
kind as in a jest to give him part of the Dainties with them, he preserved; so
that the strange turn of Fortune was to be admired, and that Kindness showed to
such mean and inconsiderable Persons should occasion so great Favor and
Respect, at a time when it was so welcome and seasonable.

8. About the same time broke out another Rebellion of the Slaves; one Cleon a
Sicilian Cleon a Slave raises a commotion in Sicily.
near Mount Taurus inured to Robberies from a Boy, being appointed to look to
the Horses in their Pastures in Sicily, beset the High Ways, and committed
heinous Murders up and down the Country. This Fellow hearing of the good
Fortune of Eunus and his Followers, having persuaded some of the neighboring
Slaves to join with him, on a sudden Revolted, Wasted and Spoiled the City
Agrigentum, and all the neighboring Country round about.

9. In Asia, Attalus being newly come to the Crown, began to manage Affairs in
a way Attalus ki^ Cruelty.
far different from all the former Kings; for they by their Clemency and
Kindness to their Subjects, Reigned prosperously and Happily themselves, and
were a Blessing to the Kingdom; but this Prince being of a Cruel and Bloody
Disposition, oppressed his Subjects with many Slaughters, and grievous
Calamities: Suspecting that some of his own Relations that were Potent, and Men
of Interest, were Plotting against him, he resolved to rid himself of them; to
that end he picked out some of the most Covetous and Bloody Fellows from among
his Barbarian Mercenary Soldiers, and hid them in certain Vaults in the Palace;
and then sending for such of his Friends and Kindred as he was most jealous of,
when he had them there, he cut all their Throats by those bloody Executioners
of his Cruelty, and forthwith ordered their Wives and Children to be put to
death after the same manner.

The rest of his Father's Friends that either had Command in the Army, or were
Governors of Cities, he either caused to be treacherously Assassinated, or
seizing them, Murdered them and their Families together. Being therefore hated
not only by his Subjects, but by all the neighboring Nations, all within his
Dominions, endeavored as much as they could to bring about a Revolution and
Change of Government.

10. Tiberius Gracchus was the Son of Tiberius who had been twice Consul, and a
Man Tiberius Gracchus.
very famous, both as to the Sword and Gown. He was likewise the Grandchild of
Publius Scipio by his Daughter, that Scipio who conquered Hannibal and the
Carthaginians. Being Nobly Born on both sides, he excelled all his equals in
Age, in sound Judgment and Elocution, and indeed in all manner of Learning, so
that he was not afraid to enter the Lists with any that dared to oppose him.

11. The Syrian Slaves cut off the Hands of those they took prisoners, not at
the Syrian Slaves.
Wrists, but Hands and Arms together.

12. The Senate dreading the Anger of the Gods, consulted the Sibyl's Books,
and The Senate of Rome send Ambassadors to Sicily.
sent Ambassadors into Sicily, who passed through the whole Island, erected
Altars to Jupiter Aetneus, and offered solemn Sacrifices to him, enclosing the
Altars round with Stone Walls to exclude all but those of the several Cities,
who, after the Customs of their own Country, were used to offer Sacrifices to
him.

13. Gorgus was of * Morgantium surnamed Cambalus, a Principal Man for Wealth
and Now Georgeto in the Kingdom of Naples.
Authority in the City. Going abroad to Hunt, and falling in amongst a company
of Robbers, he took to his Heels to get into the Town, who being by chance met
by Gorgus his Father on Horseback, the Father forthwith leapt off his Horse,
and desired his The Love of a Father and a Son.
Son to Mount, and make away with all speed into the City; but as the Son was
not willing to prefer his own preservation before that of his Father's, so the
Father could not bear the death of his Son by avoiding the Danger himself. And
thus while they were with Tears entreating one another, and striving to exceed
each other in endearing natural Affections, the Love of the Father in contest
with the Love of the Son, they were overtaken by the Thieves, and both killed
upon the place.

14. Zibelmius the Son of Diegylis following his Father's steps in Cruelty,
enraged at Zibelmius his Cruelty.
what the Thracians had done, proceeded to that degree of implacable Severity,
and height of Wickedness, that he put to death all that had displeased him,
with their whole Families, and upon most slight and frivolous occasions cut
some in pieces Limb from Limb, Crucified others, and Sawed several asunder. He
killed likewise little Children before their Parents Faces, and Infants at
their Mothers Breasts, and having cut them in pieces, disht up their Members as
Curiosities for their Kindred to Feast upon, reviving as it were those Ancient
Repasts and Entertainments of Tereus a King of Thrace. See the Story of Tereus
Progne and Philomela, Ovid, Met. Lib. 6. His punishment by his own Subjects.
Tereus and Thyestes Feasted by his Brother Atreus King of Mycena, with his own
Sons begotten upon Atreus his Wife. Ovid. Met.
Thyestes. At length the Thracians seized upon his Person; but it was scarce
possible to punish him according to his Deserts. For how could one body suffer
the punishment justly due for the Cruelties and Injuries committed against a
whole Nation? However to the utmost of their Power they repaid him with all the
Scorn and Contempt, and extremity of Torture upon his Body, they could invent.

15. Ptolemy Physcon when he saw his Sister Cleopatra was so great an Enemy to
him, and Ptolemy Physco his barbarous Cruelty. Justin. c. 8. 39. Livy. Olymp.
162. 4. Ant. Chapter 130. Val. Max. lib. 9. c. 2. This of Vales. Prag. cited by
Ush. An. 494. Atheneus cited by Ush. Ant. Chapter 128. Hegelocus Marsyas. See Ush.
An. 495. Valesius his Fragments cited Ant. Chapter 139.
could not revenge himself otherwise upon her, contrived a most notorious piece
of Villainy for that purpose. For he imitated the Cruelty of Medea, Murdering
her Son Memphites, Begotten by himself, who was then in Cyprus, and a very
young Boy: And not content with this, he committed a far more wicked Act: For
cutting off the Child's Limbs, he put them in a Chest, and delivered them to
one of his Guard to be conveyed to Alexandria; and whereas Cleopatra's
Birthday was then near at hand, he commanded that in the Night next before
that day, he should set down the Chest at the Palace Gates; which being
accordingly executed, Cleopatra made great lamentation, and all the People were
in a great Rage against Ptolemy.

16. Atheneus Antiochus his General in a short time met with a just and due
Reward for his Insolences and Abuses in all places wherever he Quartered in
his March: For being the first that fled, and forsook Antiochus in the heat of
the Fight, coming to some of the Towns where he had abused his Quarters, all
shut their Doors upon him, and every one refused to help him, either with Meat
or Drink, so that he wandered up and down the Country, till at length he was
famished to death.

17. Hegelochus General of Ptolemy Physco sent against Marsyas the Alexandrian
General, took him prisoner, and cut off all his Army. When Marsyas was brought
before the King, and all concluded that he would forthwith put him to some
cruel death, Ptolemy pardoned him beyond all Men's expectation: For now he began
to repent of his former Cruelties, and endeavored to regain the Peoples Love
and Favor by acts of Clemency.

18. Euemerus King of Parthia Born in Hyrcania, exceeding all other Princes in
Cruelty, Euemerus.
omitted no sorts of Torments he could invent. For many of the Babylonians,
upon slight grounds, with their whole Families, he made Slaves and sent them
into Media to be Sold. He burnt likewise to the ground the Marketplace, and
some of the Temples in Babylon, and razed the fairest and most beautiful parts
of the City.

19. Alexander sirnam'd Zabinas, when those Renowned Captains Antipater,
Ponius, and Alexander Zabinas cited Ush. An. 498. Ant. Chapter 124.
Aeropus Revolted from him to Seleucus Demetrius, Son of Nicanor. Caius Sextius.
Revolted from him, and seized upon Laodicea; he at length took the City:
However, he Generously spared them all. For he was of a mild and gentle
Disposition, and pleasing Temper, and of a wonderful Affability in his Converse
or Discourse, and was therefore greatly Beloved of every Body.

20. When Caius Sextius had Taken the City of the Gauls, and Sold the
Inhabitants for Slaves, One Crato who was led in Chains with the rest, came up
to the Consul, as he sat upon the Tribunal, and told him, He had ever been a
Friend to the Romans, and for that reason had suffered many Injuries, and had
undergone many Stripes and Scourgings from his fellow Citizens: Upon which,
Sextius forthwith, with all the demonstration of Kindness, as of a Kinsman,
Released him from his Bonds, and Restored him his Goods; And for his Good Will
to the Romans, gave him Power to set free 900 of the Citizens, such as he
himself thought fit. For the Consul was more Generous and Bountiful to Crato
than he expected, to the end the Gauls might see how exactly Just the Romans
were, both in their Punishments and Rewards.

21. Alexander not being very confident of the multitude, both in regard of
their Rawness Alexander Ush. An. 498. this cited.
in Martial Affairs, and their natural Inconstancy, and hankring after
Innovations would not adventure upon a pitched Field; but having got together as
much Money as he could, out of the Public Treasuries, and pillaged the
Temples, resolved by Night to steal away into Greece. But whilst he attempted,
by the help of some of his Barbarians, to plunder Jupiter's Temple, he was
seized upon, and himself and whole Army had like to have been cut off: but he
soon escaped out of their hands and made toward Seleucia: But the Seleucians
having heard beforehand, the Brute of his Sacrilege shut their Gates against
him; Failing there of his purpose he went to Pisidium, and never after departed
from the Seacoast.

22. After Caius Gracchus was killed by the hands of his own Servant, Lucius
Lucius Vitellius his Treachery to his Friend. C. Gracchus.
Vitellius who had been one of his particular Friends, was the first that got
his Body; and was so far from being troubled at his death, that he cut off his
Head, and carried it to his own House, thereby giving a remarkable Instance of
his Cruelty and Covetousness. For when Lucius Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 33. c.
3.
Opinius the Consul by Proclamation promised to Reward him that should bring to
him Gracchus his Head, with the weight of it in Gold, Vitellius bored a hole in
the Neck, and drawing out the Brains, poured in melted Lead in the room. Then
he brought the Head to Opinius, and returned with the promised Reward, but was
afterward hated by all to the day of his death, as a Betrayer of his Friend.
The Flacci were also all put to death.

23. In Lybia the two Kings drew up their Armies one against another, and
Jugurtha Jugurtha and Adherbal Two Brothers Kings at War.
routed the Numidians in a great Battle, slaying many of them; whereupon
Adherbal his Brother fled to Cirta, where being straightly Besieged he sent
Ambassadors to Rome to entreat them not to suffer a King that was their Friend
and Ally to be utterly ruined: Whereupon the Senate forthwith sent Messengers
into Numidia with Orders to Jugurtha to raise his Siege: which he disregarding,
they sent another Embassy vested with Power and Authority; but that was as
fruitless as the other; and at length Jugurtha straightly blocking up the City
round, through extremity of Famine forced it to a Surrender, and most
unnaturally slew his Brother as he was going out of the City with his Children,
and leaving the Kingdom, beseeching him only to spare his Life, neither
regarding the Laws of Nature and Consanguinity, nor of Arms, in sparing those
that beg for Quarter: He likewise scourged all the Italians to death that sided
with his Brother.

24. Publius Scipio Nasica the Consul, was a Man renowned both for his Virtue
and Nobleness Scipio Nascica his Commendation.
of Birth; for he was of the same Family with Africanus, and Hispanicus; of
whom the first Conquered Africa, the other Asia, and the third Spain; and from
thence gained the several Sirnames before mentioned: And besides the Eminency
of his Birth, his Father and Grandfather were the most Eminent Men of the City;
for both of them were Chairmen or Speakers.
Presidents of the Senate; and the first that gave their Votes, and delivered
their Opinions in all public Matters, to the time of their Deaths. His
Grandfather upon an Occasion was judged by the Senate the Best Man of all the
Roman Citizens. For it being found written in the Sibyls Books, That the Romans
should build a Temple in honor of the great Mother of the Gods, and should
bring her Image from Pessinunt in Asia, and meet it out of the City with all
the Orders and Degrees of the Citizens in solemn Pomp and State, and that the
Best Man should lead the Men, and the Best Woman be at the head of the Women,
when they received the Image of the Goddess: The Senate performing all that was
prescribed by the Sibyls writings, judged Publius Nasica to be the Best Man,
and Valeria the Best Woman. For he was not only eminent for his Piety toward
the Gods, but of singular Prudence in governing and ordering matters of State,
and of a piercing Judgment. For when Marcus Cato who was Sirnam'd Demosthenes,
in delivering his Opinion in the Senate, was ever and anon affirming, That
Carthage must be razed, though nothing was in debate concerning it, but the
Senate was consulting of other Matters; Publius Nasica was ever of a contrary
Opinion, that Carthage was to be preserved; In which difference of Opinions it
seemed a matter of great Difficulty to the Senate which of the Two was most
advisable; but those that were accounted the best Statesmen amongst them,
preferred the Opinion of Nasica. For they conceived, that the Power and
Grandeur of the Romans was not to be judged of by the Ruin and Destruction of
other Cities, but rather by its Sovereign Power and Authority over such as are
accounted the most Potent. Besides, if Carthage stood, out of fear of that City
the Romans would be kept within the bounds of their Duty, and in Peace and
Concord among themselves, and the Commonwealth would be forced to carry it
toward their Subjects with more Moderation and Clemency; which things usually
strengthen and enlarge all sorts of Governments: But if Carthage the Rival City
be once destroyed, what can be expected but Civil Wars among the Romans
themselves, and the hatred likewise of all their Allies for the Pride and
Covetousness of the Roman Magistrates; all which accordingly happened to the
Romans after the Destruction of Carthage. For turbulent Factions, Agrarian
Laws, grievous Revolts of Confederates, continual and destructive Civil Wars,
and all the other Mischiefs which Publius Scipio foretold, came to pass: His
Son Nasica afterward, when he was well in years, ordering the Senate to follow
him, killed Tiberius Gracchus with his own hands, when he was contriving to set
up himself and take upon him the Government. At the Commission of which Fact,
the Commons being in an Uproar and Exasperated against the Authors of the
Murder, and the Tribunes of the People asking every one of the Senators Man by
Man, being brought before them, Who it was that killed Gracchus? Every one out
of fear of the Rage of the People, denied the Fact, and made use of shifting
and impertinent Answers: But when it came to Nasica, he owned, that he killed
him with his own Hand; and further declared, That the designs of Gracchus in
aspiring to be absolute Monarch, was a Secret to all other Persons, but very
well known to him and the Senate. Whereupon the People, though they were much
troubled at the Fact, yet being moved by the Boldness and Authority of the Man,
from thenceforth rested quiet and said no more: This Scipio Nasica likewise,
(Son of the former Nasica) who died Consul this Year, was of an unspotted
Conversation all his Days, never tainted or corrupted with Bribes: And being
endowed with Philosophical Principles, he was not only a Philosopher in Words,
but in Truth; so that he inherited both the Glory and Virtues of his Ancestors.

25. Antiochus Cyzicenus as soon as he got into Possession of the Kingdom,
applied himself Antiochus Cyzicenus, cited by Ush. An. 500.
to Revellings and Luxury, and Courses altogether unbeseeming Kings. For being
extremely Addicted to Anticks, Stage Players, and all sorts of Juglers, he
learned their Arts with a great deal of Vehemence; He applied himself also to
Puppit-playing, and placed his chiefest Delight in making the Images of living
Creatures in bulk Five Cubits, (covered over with Gold and Silver,) to move of
themselves, and other Engines of that Nature. But as for Warlike Engines and
Testudoes, called Helepoles, whose Preparations and Magnificence belonged to
Princes, and were commonly of great use, he was altogether wanting in them.
Moreover, he was much addicted to unseasonable Huntings, and oftentimes would
steal out privately by Night, with a Servant or two, to hunt Boars, Lions and
Leopards; so that many times he was in danger of his Life by his rash
encountering of these wild Beasts.

26. Mecipsa, Son of Massinissa King of Numidia, had many Children; but above
them all he loved Adherball his Eldest, and Hiempsales and Micipsa; the last of
which was the Mecipsa, a King of Numidia; a mild and learned Prince.
mildest Prince of all the Kings of Numidia, and sent for the Learned Men out
of Greece he could hear of, and spending his time with them in improving
himself in all sorts of Liberal Sciences, and especially in Philosophy, he
enjoyed his Kingdom, together with his Study of Philosophy to his Old Age.

27. Contoniatus, the Petit Prince of Jentora in Gaul, was eminent for his
Prudence and Contoniatus.
Skill in Martial Affairs: He was a Friend and an Ally of the Romans, being
formerly brought up in Rome, and so seasoned with Virtue and Civility; by the
help of the Romans he gained that Principality in Gaul.

28. Caius Marius, one of the Ambassadors, was slighted by the Proconsul, as
one of the Caius Marius.
Meanest of them. The rest who were of eminent Birth, and in high Place, were
Honored and Respected by the Proconsul. But as for the other who was said to
have been but a Publican, and had much ado to get into the lowest Form amongst
the The Proconsul.
Magistrates, Metellus made no account of him: Though in truth, all the rest
loved their Ease and avoided the Camp, but Marius having been often employed in
the Wars in desperate Adventures, seemed highly to resent the Injury and
Affront. But addicting himself with great application of Mind to Martial
Affairs, he became a most expert Soldier; and being naturally of a warlike
Spirit, in a short time he grew very Famous; and for his Generosity and
courteous Deportment, and his affable Carriage in all Meetings toward all that
were under his Command, he gained the Hearts of all the Soldiers, who studying
to make grateful returns for his Kindness, fought the more Cheerfully and
Courageously, to the end they might advance the Honor and Reputation of their
General: And if any other at any time happened to be sent to command them, the
Soldiers on purpose in the very height of the Battle would fight more
carelessly; so that most commonly things miscarried and came to naught when any
other commanded the Army; but when Marius was General the Romans were ever
Conquerors.

Out of the 36th BOOK.
1. THE Rebellious Slaves did not only waste and destroy Sioily, but those that
were The Slaves in Scicily and others, their Cruelties.
free, who had neither Lands nor Goods) betook themselves to Rapine and
Robberies, and ravaged up and down in the Country in Flocks and Droves; they
drove away whole Herds of Cattle; Robbed the Barns in the Towns and Villages,
and carried away the Corn and other Fruits of the Earth, and killed every one
they met, without distinction of either Bond or Free, that none might be left
to tell tales of their Murders and Cruelties. For being there was at this time
an Anarchy in Sicily, having no Roman Praetor that exercised any Jurisdiction,
all ran headlong and committed many and great Enormities with impunity; so that
all Places were full of Rapines and Robberies, and the Goods of the Rich made a
Prey to Force and Violence: and they who a little before were Noted and Eminent
amongst their fellow Citizens for their Wealth, by a sudden change of Fortune,
were not only with the greatest Contempt and Scorn imaginable, Robbed of all
they had by their Slaves, but were forced to bear unsufferable Abuses from them
that were Freemen of the same Country. And therefore none could scarcely call
any thing his own within the City Gates; but what was without, they looked upon
as quite lost, and to be an irrecoverable Prey to the Robbers. To conclude,
Confusion and utter Subversion of Law and Justice, raged throughout all the
Cities and Towns in the Country. For the Rebels after they had wasted the
Country, out of Hatred to their Masters, and insatiable Covetousness, beset the
High Ways and made them impassable. And those Slaves that were yet within the
Cities Sick, but in their Hearts longing for an opportunity to Rebel, were a
dread and terror to their Masters.

2. Saturninus the Tribune being a Man of a profuse Life, and Quaestor in the
Province of Ostia, ordering all the Corn to be carried away to Rome, for his
Male Administration Saturninus.
of the Government was Rebuked by the Senate, and divested of his Authority,
and the Province committed to the Care of another. But afterward leaving off
his former Luxurious course of Life, and growing Sober in his Conversation, he
was chosen Tribune of the People.

3. Whereas for Two years together in every Public Assembly Q Metellus his
restoring from Banishment was taken into Debate -- His Son traversing the
Marketplace with his Beard and Hair overgrown, and in a nasty Garment, with
Tears in his Eyes, prostrated himself at the Feet of every Citizen, entreating
them to recall his Father. But the People, though they were very backward to
make a President for Exiles for the time to come to hope for Return against the
Laws; yet in Compassion to the Young Man, and being moved with importunity of
his Entreaty, they recalled Metellus from Banishment, and sirnam'd the Son Pius
for his singular Affection and Care he had of his Father.

4. The Romans formerly being governed by good and wholesome Laws and
Constitutions, by degrees grew to that height of Power, that at length they
gained the greatest The Roman Manners degenerated.
Empire of any that ever any History makes mention of. But of later times,
after they had conquered many Nations, and had so long nuzzl'd themselves in
the Enjoyment of an unterrupted Peace, they declined from their Ancient
manners, to wicked and destructive Courses. For the young Men, enjoying Rest
and Ease from War, with Plenty of all things to be Fuel to their Lusts, gave
themselves up to Luxury and Intemperance; for in the City, Prodigality was
preferred before Frugality, and living at Ease, before the Service of the Camp:
And he that Wasted all his time in Voluptuousness, and not he that was of a
virtuous and sober conversation, was accounted by all to be the only happy Man.
And therefore sumptuous Feasts, most fragrant Ointments, flowr'd and
embroidered Carpets, rich and stately Furniture, for their Banqueting Rooms,
curiously wrought with Gold, Silver, Ivory, and such like Materials were then
cried up every where. Wine that was but of an ordinary Gusto, would not be
touched, but only Of Falerinus in Campania, in the Kingdom of Naples, now called
Terra di Lavaro.
Falernian and Chian, and such like pleasant Wines: the choicest Fish likewise,
and every thing of the best sort, was provided to gratify their shameless
Luxury. The young Gallants likewise, wore Garments of the finest and softest
Wool, Woven so fine, as that they were even transparent, and for their slender
Webb, altogether like unto Women's Gowns. All these things serving to nourish
Luxury, and Voluptuousness (to their Ruin and destruction) being generally
coveted by all, in a short time grew to excessive Rates; for a Hogshead of
Falernian Wine was sold for a 100 Every Dram Seven pence halfpenny, so 100
Drachmas is 3l. 2s. 6d.
Drachmas, and a Hogshead of Salted Fish from the Pontick Sea, for 400. Skilful
Cooks were sold for Four Talents a-piece, and delicate and beautiful Boys, for
many Talents. And whereas all with full swing gave up themselves to this
luxurious course of Life, some of the Governors in the Provinces, used their
utmost endeavor to reform these Enormities, and to that end, being in high
Places, and so most observable, by reason of the Eminency of their Stations,
they framed their own Lives so, as to be Examples of Virtue, and liberal
Education to others.

5. Quintus Mucius Scoevola, used his utmost endeavor to reform other Men's
corrupt Mucius Scaevola, his Virtues. Ush. An. 509. Cited.
Manners, by his own Virtuous Example. For when he was sent Proconsul into
Asia, he made choice of Quintus Rutilius his most intimat Friend for his
Legate, and ever took his Advice in the management of his Government, and
making of Laws: All the Costs and expenses both of himself and his Retinue, he
ordered to be defrayed out of his own Publius Rutilius Rufus.
Purse; and by his moderation and frugality, together with his just and upright
dealing, he freed the Province from its former Miseries and Oppressions. For
the Proconsuls of Asia that were before him, confederated with the Publicans
(in whose hands at that time, was the administration of Justice at Rome) and
filled the whole Province with the Pressures of their illegal Exactions.

6. Mucius Scoevola managing his Government with all possible Diligence and
Integrity, did not only suppress all false Accusations, but restrained the
Injuries and Oppressions Mucius Scaevola. Ush. An. cited 509.
committed by the Publicans. For as often as any who had been pinched by those
Toll-gatherers made their address to him, he Commissionated upright Judges, by
whom he Condemned them wheresoever he came, and forced them to pay the Mulct
imposed upon them to the Persons they had injured, but for Offenses that
deserved death, he gave sentence of death. One of the chief of these Publicans
that had contracted with his Master for his Freedom, for a great Sum of Money,
before he was manumitted, he condemned to die and crucified him.

7. Those that were condemned by the Judges, he delivered over to the Persons
injured, to be by them carried away to Prison, so that they who before through
their insolency Mucius Scaevola. Ush. An. ibid.
and covetousness committed all manner of Injustice, were unexpectedly hurried
away to the Goal by them that they had injured. Moreover by discharging his own
Expenses and the Expenses of his Retinue out of his own private Purse, he soon
inclined the Hearts of all the Province toward the People of Rome.

8. Lucius Asellius (whose Father was a Quaestor) being sent Praetor into
Sicily, finding Lucius Asellius. a prudent Governor of Sicily.
in the Province great Havoc and Devastation, by his prudent management of
things in a short time restored it to its former state and condition. For after
the Example of Scoevola, he made choice of his intimate Friend Caius Sempronius
Longus for his Legate, and joined with him Publius, the famous Roman Knight for
his Counselor, who then resided at Syracuse, and besides the goods of Fortune,
was eminent for the Virtues of his Mind; his Piety toward the Gods is
sufficiently testified by his Sacrifices, Gifts, and Adorning of the Temples.
And the quick and lively use of all his Senses to the last moment of his Life
was an evident Argument of his Sobriety and Temperance: And his Learning, and
courteous Disposition are apparent from the great Value and Esteem he ever had
of learned Men, and his Bounty and Liberality out of his own Purse toward them
that applied themselves to the study of the Liberal Arts and Sciences.
Assellius assisted with the advice of those two Men, who continued with him
under the same Roof, and sat with him in Judgment upon the Bench, made it his
daily care to reform and set all things right again in the Province.

9. In the Courts of Justice, he aimed at the Public Good, and cleared the
Court of all Asilius.
Sycophants, and false Accusers; and it was his chief care to relieve the
poorest Man, and those that were less able to help themselves; for whereas the
other Praetors committed the care of Orphans and Widows, that were destitute of
Friends, to Tutors and Guardians that were Strangers, he looked after them
himself, and decided their Causes with all the care and diligence imaginable,
and was a great Relief to the Oppressed. And as long as he was Governor of
Sicily, continually using his utmost endeavor to Suppress both private and
public Injuries, he at length settled the Province in its former State of
happiness and prosperity.

10. Marcus Livius Drusus, though he was very young, yet was adorned with
whatever M. Livius Drusus.
was commendable either in reference to his Body or Mind: For he was the Son of
a renowned Father, who was singularly beloved of the People of Rome, both upon
the account of his noble Birth, and virtuous Qualifications. And he himself for
Eloquence excelled all his equals in Age, and all his fellow Citizens in Wealth
and Riches: And upon the account of his Faithfulness to his Word, he gained a
very great Interest and Authority among the Citizens, and being likewise of a
great Spirit, seemed to be the only Patron of the Senate.

Out of the 37th BOOK.
1. POmpoedius General of the Marsians, attempted indeed a Great, but a most
Rash and inconsiderate Act; for he picked out 10000 Soldiers from amongst them,
that Pompaedius, General of the Martians, his atempt upon Rome.
were afraid of suffering due punishment for their Offenses, and commanding
them to hide their Swords under their Coats, Marched with them toward Rome,
with a design to beset the Senate round with this Rabble, and to demand the
Freedom of the City, and if he could not prevail, to lay the City Wast with
Fire and Sword. Being by chance met * A People in Italy.
upon the Road by Caius Domitius, he asked him, whither go thou Pompedius
with so great a Company? Who answered, to Rome, for that he was sent for by the
Tribunes of the People, to be received into the Freedom of the City. But
Domitius replied, saying, Thou may obtain what thou seek'st for, with far
more ease and much more honesty, if thou did not make up to the Senate in a
Hostile manner; for the Senate will not be compelled, but entreated and
petitioned to bestow that Grace and Favor upon the Latins, that are their
Allies and Confederates. The Man being taken with this, as with a Divine
Admonition from Heaven, and over-perswaded with what Domitius had said,
forthwith returned home. And thus Domitius by his seasonable and prudent
advice, delivered his Country from dreadful Mischiefs that threatened it,
addressing himself to Pompaedius, much better than Servilius the Proconsul did
to the Picentians. For he spoke not to them as to Freemen and Allies, but as to
Slaves, and insulted over them with the greatest scorn and contempt imaginable,
and threatened and terrified them to that Degree, that he stirred up the
Confederates, to the Ruin and Destruction both of himself and others. But
Domitius on the contrary, by his Mild and calm Discourse, allayed the Fury and
Violence of the Enraged Multitude.

2. There was one Agamemnon a Cilician, for his many wicked pranks and
slaughters of the Confederates, was committed to Prison in A City in A pulia,
in Italy.
Asculum by the Romans. This Man being Released by the Picentians, in gratitude
for the kindness showed him, Fought resolutely on their side: And being enured
to Robberies from a Boy, joining with others of the like Gang, he Wasted and
Spoiled the Enemies Country.

3. The Inhabitants of the City In Italy
Pinna, for their constant Fidelity to the Romans, fell into most dreadful
calamities, for being obstinately resolved not to desert the Romans (without
any touch or Sense of Natural affection) were forced to see their Children
knocked on the Head before their Eyes.

4. Lucius Suila bravely and gallantly performed most noble Actions, and his
Fame and Renown was Blazoned all over the City: And the People of Rome judged
him worthy of Lucius Suila.
the Consulship, looking upon him as a Man Eminent, both for Valor and Conduct
in Martial affairs: To conclude, it was apparent, he was likely to arrive at
the highest pitch of Glory.

5. Mithridates having conquered the Roman Generals in Asia, and taken many
Prisoners, Mithridates, cit^d by Ush An 515.
sent them all home Clothed, and with provision in their Snapsacks. This mild
Passage was cried up every where, that all the Cities generally came flocking
in to him; insomuch that Ambassadors came to him from all Cities, inviting him
by their public Decrees to come in to them, calling him their God, and
Deliverer. And upon notice of the Kings approach, the People came hudling out
of the several Cities in white Garments, to to Salute him, and received him
with great joy and acclamation.

6. Mithridates his Party sweeping all before them in Asia, as they went
without Control, all the Cities strangely Revolted from the Romans: And as for
the Lesbians, they resolved not only to yield up themselves to the King, but to
deliver up Aquilius also, Mithridates; cited by Ush. An. ibidem.
who flew away to Mitilene, and lay there to be Cured of a Disease. Whereupon
they sent to his Lodgings a Company of choice Youths, Stout and Resolute, who
came rushing into the Room where Aquilius was, and took him and bound him,
supposing he would be a most rare Present, and very acceptable to Mithridates:
But Aquilius though he was but as yet a Youth, performed a most Noble and Heroic
Act; for preferring Death before Disgrace, and the punishments of a Slave, he
prevented them that were ready to hurry him away, and killed himself. With
which desperate Act, those that came to take him along with them, were so
Terrified, that they durst not approach him. But Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 33 c. 3.
says Mithridates, poured melted Gold down his Throat, for his Covetousness.
Ush. An. 518. Ant. Chapter 88. This was in the War between Mithridates and tue
Romans.
His Valor and Resolution therefore was cried up every where, who by the
putting an end to his own Life, had rescued himself with an undaunted Courage
from the Torments designed to be Executed upon him.

7. In order to a Sea Fight, the Rhodians were overmatcht in nothing, but in
the number of Ships, and in all other respects they were far Superior, as
being the better Pilots, knew better how to order their Ships, ply the Oars,
had the more sprightly Soldiers, and the more expert Commanders; whereas on the
contrary, the Cappadocians were but Fresh water Soldiers, seldom exercised at
Sea Fights, and, which commonly proves the Bane of all, did all Tumultuously
and without any Order. It Is true indeed, they were as cheerful and ready to
Engage as the Rhodians, because they were to Fight just under the King's Eye,
and therefore desired to approve their Loyalty and Affection to him; and in
regard they only overpowr'd their Enemies in number of Ships, they used all the
Arts and Contrivances they could devise, to Surround and Hem them in.

8. Caius Marius was the most renowned Person of any of his time, when he was
young; he was ambitious of Honor and Glory, free from Covetousness, and
performed many Caius Marius, occasioned great troubles in Rome.
noble Acts, both in Europe and Africa, so that his Name was famous, and cried
up in all Places. But when he grew old, and coveted the Riches of King
Mithridates, and the Wealth of the Cities of Asia, and sought against the Laws
to have the Province which was allotted to Cornelius Sulla, to be transferred
to him, he fell justly into many Calamities; for he not only missed those
Riches which he Coveted, but lost all that were his own; the Quaestors by
reason of his extraordinary Covetousness being sent, to seize upon all his
Goods for the public Use. He was moreover by the Judgment of the People
condemned to die, but escaped that punishment by flight, and wandered
Solitarily and alone, up and down Italy, and at length got into Numidia, poor
and destitute of all things Afterward when the Civil Wars broke out in Rome,
he joined with those that were judged Enemies to the Romans, and being
Victorious, he was not contented with his Return into his own Country, but
raised great Commotions in the Commonwealth; But at length having gained the
Seventh Consulship, and by his own Misfortunes, learned the inconstancy of
Fortune, he was unwilling to put things to a hazard any more: And therefore
foreseeing the dreadful War Sylla was bringing upon his Country, he Murdered
himself; but leaving behind him the Seeds of a most grievous War, he involved
his Son and Country in most dreadful Calamities: For his Son being forced to
contest with an Enemy more Potent than himself, he most miserably perished (upon
taking of the City) in a Vault, whither he fled to hide himself. And the People
of Rome, and Cities of Italy, having been now long engaged in a cruel War, fell
under most dreadful Calamities. For two principal Men of the City, Scaevola and
Crassus, without any Course of Legal proceedings, were Murdered in the Senate;
whose cruel Murder plainly evidenced the greatness of those Miseries that then
threatened both the City and all Italy. For the greatest part of the Senate, and
the most eminent Men of the City were slaughtered by Sylla, and no less than
100000 Soldiers were slain, either in Mutinies or Battles; and all these
Miseries were at first occasioned by the Covetousness only of Marius.

9. Lucius Cornelius Merula, who was chosen Consul in the room of Cinna; when
Cinna agreed to Peace, upon Condition he might be restored to the Consulship,
approved himself a good Citizen, and evidenced his extraordinary love to his
Country. For addressing himself to the Senate and People, and Discoursing
concerning what might most tend to the public good, he promised he would be
the Procurer of Peace; and whereas he was chosen Consul much against his Will,
he declared he would now freely of his own accord give up his Authority into
the hands to Cinna; upon which he forthwith surrendered his Consulship, and
became a private Man. The Senate hereupon sent Ambassadors to Cinna, and having
agreed with him upon the Terms of Peace, introduced him into the City.

10. Lucius Sylla being greatly straightened for want of Money, rifled Three
Temples Lucius Sylla.
that were full of devoted Gold and Silver, that is the Temple of Apollo at
Delphos, of Aesculapius at Epidaurus, and the famous Temple of Jupiter at
Olympus, out of which last, he carried away a vast Treasure; for that it had
never been before violated. But as to the Temple at Delphos, the Phocians in
the time of the sacred War, had drained it of its Wealth. When Sylla therefore
had thus heaped up a mighty mass of Gold and Silver, and other Treasure, he was
sufficiently furnished with Money to carry on the War in Italy. But having
without all Fear or Sense of Religion, thus robbed the Temples, he consecrated
a piece of Land to the Gods, for the maintaining of yearly Sacrifices, in lieu
of the Money: And would often in a Joke and Jest say, That he was sure to be
Victorious in all Encounters, who had the Gods for his Assistants, and for that
end, had helped him with Money.

11. Fimbria having out-ran Flaccus, and gotten a long way before him in his
March, Fimbria his Soldiers spoil the Country by License Cited, Ush. An. 522,
523.
thought he had now gained a most convenient opportunity for some Commotion or
other; and therefore that he might indear the Soldiery to him, he permitted
them to make incursions into the Countries of their Allies, and make what
havoc they pleased therein, and to take Captive every one they met withal. The
Soldiers very readily embraced the License, so that within few days, they had
scrambl'd together abundance of Wealth by their plundering. But those that had
been spoiled of their Goods, went to meet the Consul, and made bitter
complaints to him of the Injuries they had received, who being much troubled at
the business, commanded them to follow him, and he himself would see
restitution made to every one that had suffered; and accordingly with Threats
he commanded Fimbria to return forthwith to the Owners, whatsoever had been
taken away from them. But Fimbria laid all the blame upon the Soldiers, who did
this without any Commission from him; but covertly he advised them, not to
regard the Consul's Command, nor suffer that to be taken from them which they
had got by the Law of Arms: Upon this, when Flaccus commanded restitution to be
made of their Rapine, adding threatening to his commands, the Soldiers refused
to Obey, so that there followed a great Mutiny in the Camp.

12. Fimbria having again crossed the Hellespont, animated his Soldiers to
Rapines and Fimbri. Ush. An. 524.
all kind of Villainies, exacted Moneys from the Cities, and divided it amongst
the Soldiers, who having obtained an uncontrolled License, did what they
listed, and allured moreover with the hopes of a large Income, loved Fimbria as
one who had deserved extremely well of the whole Army. Moreover those Cities
that had stood out against him, when he had taken 'em, he gave them to the
plunder of his Soldiers, and so he dealt Ush. An. ibi.
with * Nicomedia.

13. The same Fimbria being admitted into Cizicum, professing himself a Friend
to the Fimbria. Ush. An. 523. Ant. Chapter 85.
Place, as soon as he was got in, began to Impeach all the wealthiest of them,
and charge them with some Crime or other: Two of these, the principal Men of
the City, after he had passed Sentence on them, he caused to be whipped with
Rods, to terrify the rest, and afterward struck off their Heads, and set
their Goods to Sale, and forced others out of Fear, to give him all they had,
as a Ransom for their Lives.

14. Cn. Pompeius addicted himself to Martial Affairs, and inured himself to
the hardships and Fatigues of War, so that in a short time he became very
expert in Military Matters: For casting off all Sloth and Effeminateness, he
was always Night and Day doing something or other that was useful and
advantageous for matters relating to War: For he was very sparing in his Diet,
eat his Meat sitting, and altogether forbore Baths, and such like delights. He
allotted but a few Hours of the Night for Sleep, and spent the rest in the
Cares of a General, relating to what he was to put in Execution the next Day;
so that by his constant forethoughts of the uncertain Events of War, he became
a most expert Commander. And therefore, whereas another could scarce in the
same time sit himself to take upon him the Charge of an Army already raised, in
that time, and much less he Raised them, Trained, and Disciplined them. And
when the News of his famous Exploits was brought to Rome, every Body at first
reflecting upon his youth, more than thinking upon his Valor, slighted him,
supposing the Messengers stretched in their Relations, and made things look
bigger, than in truth they were. But when the certain Event confirmed the
former Report, the Senate sent out Junius Brutus.
Junius against him, whom he routed and put to Flight.

15. Lucius Scipio's Army being corrupted, Revolted, and went over to Sylla;
Scipio Lucius Scipio.
now looking upon himself as a lost Man, Sylla sent to him a Party of Horse to
conduct him whithersoever he pleased. Being therefore forced in a Moment to lay
aside the Ensigns of his Authority, he was forthwith by the courtesy of Sylla,
brought in a private Habit to the Place he desired. But presently after he
resumed the Ensigns of his Authority, and again Marched forth with a
considerable Army.

16. In the mean time the Persons of the greatest Quality at Rome, by false
accusations, were put to death, amongst whom Quintus Mucius Scaevola, the chief
Priest, a most honorable and virtuous Person, came to an unworthy End, only
the Romans were fortunate in this, that the High Priest died not in the most
Sacred Place: For the cruelty of the Murderers was such, that they laid him
upon the very Of Vesta.
Altar, and there cut his Throat, so that by his own Blood, he extinguished
that Fire that out of a Religious Devotion, from Ancient times was ever kept
Burning.

17. The Names of those that were proscribed, being fixed up in the
Marketplace, on Proscriptions, Live. Epitom. lib. 89. A remarkable Instance of
one proscribed, who gloried over others.
a sudden a Multitude of People came flocking in to read it, of whom very many
pitied those that were thus Condemned to die. But one amongst the rest a most
malicious and insolent Fellow, gloried over the miserable Condition of the
afflicted, and bawled out most spiteful words against them, whom some incensed
Deity forthwith repaid with a just Revenge. For by chance reading his own Name,
as one proscribed at the bottom of the Roll, he presently threw his Gown over
his Head, and began to fly through the thickest of the People, but being known
to one that stood next to him, who discovered him to be one condemned, he was
instantly surrounded and seized, and then put to death to the great joy of all
that heard of it.

18. Cneius Pompeius being a long time Praetor in Sicily, applied himself to
the business Cn. Pompeius
of the Courts of Justice, and deciding both public and private Controversies,
discharged his Office with so much diligence and integrity, that none ever
merited more Commendation. For though he was but Two and twenty years of Age, a
time which might have drawn him off by foolish youthful Lusts, yet he carried
himself with so much gravity and sobriety all the while he was in Sicily, that
the Virtue of the young Man was much admired by all the Sicilians.

FRAGMENTS OUT OF The Lost Histories OF Diodorus Siculus, CONCERNING EMBASSIES.

Published by Fulvius Ursinus.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for A. and J. Churchill at the Black-Swan in
Paternoster Row: 1699.

To the READER.
THese few Fragments, together with those of Polybius, Dionysius Halicarnassus,
Dion Casseus, and Appian were Published in the Year of Our Lord 1581. By
Fulvius Ursinus a Roman Born, and Eminently Learned; But for a further and more
particular Account of 'em, I refer the Reader to the Epistle to the Fragments
of Valerius placed next before these. And therefore have now no further to add,
but an acknowledgment of Thanks due to a Learned Person in Oxford, through
whose Candor the Book out of which the Translation of these Fragments was made,
was brought to hand for perusal.

I. IN the Reign of Tullus Hostilius King of the Romans, the Albans, jealous of
the Olymp. 27. Ant. Chapter 669. About the 31 of Manasses. King of Judah.
growth of the Roman Power, pretended that the Romans committed Thefts and
Robberies in their Country, and therefore sent Ambassadors to Rome to demand
Justice, with Instructions, that if they did not hearken to them, to denounce
War against 'em; Hostilius the King of Rome understanding that they sought
occasion to pick a Quarrel, and begin a War, Commanded his Friends and Officers
to Entertain the Ambassadors courteously, and persuade them to Peace and Amity.
But the King not willing hastily to give 'em Audience, sent some in the mean
time to the Albans with Orders and Instructions like to those of the Albans to
him; ordering this, as prompted thereunto by Livy lib. 1. Dionys. lib. 3.
that Ancient Custom, according to which the Old Romans studied nothing more
than that their Wars should be Just and Warrantable: For he was very cautious
lest not being able to find out the First Authors of the Depredations, or such
as were to be delivered up to the Demands of Justice, he should be thought to
be the first Fomenter of an unjust War. But it falling out that the Ambassadors
that were sent to Alba were first denied Justice; upon the 30th. day they
denounced War against the Albans. (...)
The Albane Ambassadors, according to their desires received Answer, That they
being the first that denied doing Justice, the Romans were they that now
denounced War against them. And these were the Reasons that the People, who
were before Allied by Marriages, and at mutual Here seems something to be
defective, to be supplied by Livy, lib. 1.
Amity one with another, now became Enemies, and Alienated one from another.

II. When Cambyses King of Persia was Lord of all Egypt, the Lybians and
Cyrenians confederating with the Egyptians, sent Presents, and promised entire
Obedience and Subjection to their Commands.

III. The Ambassadors that were sent from Nabis and Titus Quintus Flamininus,
not Flaminius as Plutarch says; for Flamininus was of the Patrician, but
Flaminius of the Plebeian. See Livy. lib. 32. Ant. Chapter 189.
Flamininus to Rome concerning the terms of Peace, after they had opened to the
Senate the Matters given them in Charge; the Senate decreed the Articles to be
confirmed, and that all their Garrisons should be removed, and their Forces
drawn out of all parts of Greece. When Flamininus heard of the Senate's Decree,
he Summoned all the Nobility of Greece from all parts, to meet in a General
Council, where he rehearsed to 'em the great Kindnesses and Good will of the
Romans toward the Grecians, and Apologiz'd for the matter relating to Nabis,
because they did in that Affair, as far as they were able. He told them
likewise, that according to their Desire all the Inhabitants of Greece should
be free and eased of all their Garrisons, and above all, be Governed by their
own Laws. But he begged the Greeks would so far Gratify him, as to enquire
what Italian Servants were among 'em, and to discharge them within Thirty Days;
which was done accordingly.

IV. The Senate again gave Audience to the Grecian Ambassadors, and Caressed
'em with very fair words, desirous to have them earnest and forward in the
prosecution of the War against The Great.
Antiochus, which they suddenly expected. They gave Answer likewise to the
Ambassadors of King of Macedon.
Philip, that because he maintained his Fidelity they would free him from
Tribute, and discharge his Son Who was a Hostage. Live. lib. 34. See Livy Decad.
4. lib. 4.
Demetrius. And to those that came from Antiochus they appointed Ten of the
Senate to hear what they said they had in charge from the King. When the
Commissioners sat, one of the Ambassadors named Menippus, President of the
Embassy, Declared, that they came to make up a League of Friendship and
Confederacy between the Romans and Antiochus. But he said that the King greatly
wondered for what manner of reason the Romans should lay their Commands upon
him, what parts of Europe he should make his Concern; What Cities he should not
meddle with, nor collect the Tributes of some that were in Arrear; that it was
not usual for those that are making a Treaty upon equal Terms, but for the
Conquerors, to Impose in such a manner; And that their Ambassadors that were
sent to him to Lysimachia, imperiously charged him with these things: That
Antiochus had no War with the Romans, and if they have a mind to enter into an
Alliance and League with him, he was ready. Flamininus Answered, there were two
things propounded by the Senate, let him choose which of them he would; and that
is, If he would relinquish all his Pretenses in Europe, the Romans would not
meddle with his Concerns in Asia: And if this did not please him, then they
were to let the King know that the Romans would assist their Friends and Allies
when oppressed. The Ambassadors replied, They could not agree to any thing that
might impair the King's Sovereignty. The next day the Senate told the Grecians,
That if Antiochus did busy himself, and intermeddle with any thing in Europe,
the Romans would with all their Care and Diligence imaginable set free all the
Greeks that were in Asia. The Grecian Ambassadors hereupon approved of all by
an Applause, but the King's Ambassadors entreated the Senate that they would
consider into what Dangers and Miseries both Parties would be brought, and not
to be rash in their Resolves, but that they would give the King time to
consult, and themselves to be better advised about these things.

V. As to the Aetolian Ambassadors that sought for Peace, the Senate decreed,
that they should either give up all their Country to the Romans, or forthwith
pay to them a Live. lib. 37.
Thousand Talents of Silver, upon this severe Answer (never suspecting any such
thing would have been enjoined) they were seized with great Fear, and being
that they had adhered to the Philip of Macedon.
King they fell into inextricable streights and perplexities, not having any
means left, or way open to escape utter Ruin.

VI. Antiochus hearing that the Romans had passed over into Asia, sent
Heraclides of Byzantium to Treat with the Consul about a Peace, with offers to
bear half of the Charges Antiochus the Great. Ant. Chapter 187. Livy. lib. 37.
Polyb. Leg. 23.
of the War; to give up Lampsacus, Smyrna, and Alexandria, upon the account of
which Cities he conceived the War broke forth: For those were the first of all
the Greek Cities of Asia that by their Ambassadors to the Senate, prayed the
Assistance of the Romans for the regaining of their Liberty.

VII. Antiochus promised Publius Scipio the President of the Council to release
his Son Ant. Chapter 189. Justin. lib. 34. c. 7. Polyp. Leg. 23.
without Ransom, whom he had taken prisoner when he lay about the Island
Eubaea: and besides this, that he would give him a great Sum of Money upon the
obtaining of a Peace. Scipio answered that he would return the King Thanks for
the Release of his Son, but that he did not want those Sums; and in requital of
so remarkable a Kindness, he advised him as a Friend not to withstand the
Pomans, of whose Valor he had had Experience. But Antiochus judging those
terms to be harder than were fit to be complied with, rejected his Advice.

VIII. In Rome before the overthrow of Antiochus, the Ambassadors from the
Aetolians being brought into the Senate, and not in the least excusing the
Faults, but setting forth the great Services the Aetolians had performed to the
Roman State; one of the Senate rose up and asked the Ambassadors whether the
Aetolians had given up themselves to the Protection of the Romans? The
Ambassadors being hereupon silent and dumb, the Senate suspecting that the
Aetolians fixed their hopes in Antiochus, sent them back into Greece with a
fruitless Embassy.

IX. Antiochus laying aside all thoughts of War, sent Ambassadors to the Consul
to ask Ant. Chapter 187.
Pardon for his Miscarriages, and to procure a Peace upon any terms that
possibly might be had. The Consul keeping close to the Moderation and Clemency
of his Country, and advised likewise by his Brother P. Scipio. Vid. Live. lib.
38. Polyb. Leg. 35. Live. lib. 37. Just. lib. 31. c. 8.
Publius, agreed to a Peace upon these Conditions; That the King should leave
all Europe to the Romans, and part likewise with all the Countries and Cities
lying on this side the Taurus; That he should give up all his Elephants and
long Ships, and pay all the Charges and Expenses occasioned by the War, which
were computed to Fifteen thousand Eubaean Talents. That he should deliver up
into their Hands Hannibal the Carthaginian, and Thoas the Aetolian, and some
others, and give Twenty Hostages, such as the Romans should nominate. Antiochus
out of a longing desire of Peace having accepted these Conditions was freed
from the War.

X. After the overthrow of Antiochus there came Ambassadors from all the Cities
and Live. lib. 37. 38. Polyb. Leg. 25. 36.
States of Asia, some concerning the Freedom of their Cities, others relating
to Congratulations for the good Services they had done for Rome, in joining in
the War against Antiochus. To all which the Senate gave great Encouragement,
and said they would send Ten Commissioners into Asia, who with the Praetors.
Generals should bring all Orders with them. When the Ambassadors were returned
into their own Countries, the Ten Commissioners with Scipio and Aemilius met in
Council together, and decreed that the Regions on this side T(...)us should be
given to Eumenes, and the Elephants. But Caria and Lycia they assigned to the
Rhodians. They ordered likewise that such Cities as paid Tribute to Eumenes
should be subject to him; but that such as were Tributary to Antiochus should
be freed from all Tribute whatsoever.

XI. When the Gallogreeks.
Galatian Ambassadors came to Cncius Manlius the Proconsul to Treat for Peace,
he answered he would come to terms of Peace with them when their Kings came to
him.

XII. The same coming into Lycaonia brought Wheat.
Corn that was due from Antiochus, and the yearly Tribute of a Thousand Talents
according to the Articles of Peace.

XIII. The General Assembly of the Achaians coming together in Peloponnesus,
the Roman Commissioners met them, and Declared that the Senate was much
displeased at the Ant. Chapter 186.
demolishing of the Walls of Lacedemon, which was done by the States of Achaia
when they were Lords of Sparta, and had brought the Lacedaemonians as Members
into the same Commonwealth. To this Assembly came the Ambassadors of Eumenes,
and brought along with them a Polyb. Leg. 41. 120. Talents.
Present of Twenty Talents; out of which the King intended the Charge of such
as were Members of the Achaian Senate should be defraid. But the Achaians
disliking the disposal of the Money refused the Gift. Thither likewise came
Ambassadors from Seleucus, to renew the League formerly made between the
Achaians and Antiochus, which League they renewed and accepted the Present sent
from him.

XIV. Ambassadors coming to Rome from the Kings and Princes of Asia, those
Princes with Attalus had a Noble Reception, for they were met with great State.
and Pomp, and Presented with Rich Gifts, and other extraordinary marks of
Respect and Favor; for for these Princes were fast Friends to the Romans, and
observant in every thing to the Senate; and besides, having courteously
Entertained above all others those Romans that came to visit the Stratonice
upon the news of Eumenes her Husband being dead. See Live. lib. 42.
Queen, they were judged worthy of the most Honorable Recption. For these
Reasons the Senate having heard all the Ambassadors, and especially desirous to
gratify the Princes that belonged to Eumenes, returned them a Gracious Answer;
For they signified that they would send Delegates from the Senate to put a full
end to the War with Pharnaces.

XV. The defrauding of Creditors in Thessaly, setting all in a Flame among the
Aetolians, and every City being filled with Seditions, and Tumults; the Senate
suspected that all this Confusion was caused by King of Macedon. Vid. Live. lib.
42.
Perseus, and Declared to his Ambassadors that they would acquit him of other
Crimes whereof he was accused: But as to his ejecting of Abrupolis King of
Thrace out of his Kingdom; they commanded Perseus, to To'mend his manners.
rectify what he had done.

XVI. When Arpalus Perseus's Ambassador was silent, the Senate so far Honored
Eumenes as to present him with an Ivory Chair of State.
Chariot, and conferred upon him other Honors, and with special Favor and
Respect sent him away into Asia.

XVII. The same day the Senate decreed the War against Perseus, and declared it
to the Ambassadors, but returned no Answer; and Commanded the Consuls expressly
to reject Perseus's Ambassadors.
them in the Assemblies, and ordered that the Ambassadors and all the
Macedonians should that very day depart out of Rome, and within Thirty Days out
of Italy.

XVIII. Ptolemy Philometor.
Ptolemy King of Egypt knowing that his Ancestors had been formerly Lords of
Caelo Syria made great preparations to gain that justly, even by the Law of
Nations that was before lost by an unjust War. Antiochus Epiphanes. Ant. Chapter
166.
Antiochus having intelligence of these preparations, sent Ambassadors to
Rome, Commanding them to acquaint the Senate, that Ptolemy had begun an unjust
War against him; But he before named, sent Ambassadors to make his Defense, and
to inform the Senate how Antiochus against all Right and Justice Lorded it over
Caelo Syria, being Ptolemy's own Inheritance, descended to him from his
Ancestors. But he ordered them to renew Friendship with the Romans, and to
endeavor to Polyb. Leg. 72.
put an end to the War against Perseus,

XIX. Ambassadors came to Rome from Rhodes to clear themselves of those Crimes
that were charged against 'em; For in the War against Perseus they seemed in
their Hearts to lean to the King, and to be loose in their Friendship toward
the Romans;) But perceiving the aversion and displeasure of the Senate against
'em, they were greatly dejected; Ant. Chapter 193.
and when one of the Marcus Juvhntiu^. Thalna. Live. lib. 45.
Praetors (who had called together an Assembly) stirred up the People to a War
against the Rhodians, they were exceedingly afraid upon the Account of their
Country, and fell into that Consternation, that they put on Mourning Habits,
not any longer making their Demands, or Soliciting after the usual freedom of
Friends, but Deprecating with Tears, that nothing that was Remediless might be
decreed against 'em. But one of the Marcus Antonius, Live. lib. 45.
Tribunes introducing them into the Senate, and violently plucking down the
Praetor from the Desks, who was stirring them up to the War, he caused them to
speak, who saying many things in a way of humble Supplication, received such an
Answer as altogether freed them from their excessive Fears; But for some of
their Crimes they were sharply rebuked.

XX. About this time came Ambassadors to Rome from all parts to Congratnlate
their Victories; the Senate courteously received them all, and returning them
Gracious Answers, presently sent them back into their own Country.

XXI. About this time there being many Ambassadors arrived, the Senate first
dispatched those that came along with Attalus. For the Romans were jealous of
Eumenes, by reason of some Letters that were intercepted, by which it appeared
that he had confederated with Perseus against the Romans, being likewise
accused by many Ambassadors that came out of Asia, and especially by those that
were sent from King King of Bythynia.
Prusias, and the Gallo-Greeks; those with Attalus readily answered to every
Article of the Charge, and not only cleared themselves of all the Crimes, but
returned home with much Honor and Reputation. However, the Senate did not
altogether lay aside the Suspicion of Eumenes: but pitching upon Caius, sent
him away strictly to observe his Affairs and Motions.

XXII. Prusias became unworthy of the Royal Dignity, spent his days basely and
sordidly in flattering his Superiors; and when the Roman Ambassadors came to
him, he threw aside the Ensigns of Royalty the Diadem and the Purple, and
imitating exactly the Garb of the Roman Libertines, met the Ambassadors with
his Head shaven, and wearing a White Cap, and having on the Gown and * Shoes
of a Manumitted Slave, so Saluted the Ambassadors, Declaring himself to be a A
Manumitted Slave.
Libertine of the Romans, then The Purple Robe.
which it is no easy matter to find a more dishonorable Title; and many other
such mean things he had done before. And when he came to the Portico of the
Senate House, standing at the Door straight over against the Senators, he fell
down prostrate upon both Polyb. Leg. ^7.
Hands, kissing the Threshold, and cried out with a loud voice to them as they
sat, All Health! Ye Gods! The Saviors! not sparing any high-soaring
Compliments of unmanly Flattery and Effeminacy. And moreover, making a Speech
in the Senate agreeable to his sordid Deportment, he proceeded so far as is a
shame for me to write. But the Senate being offended at many things he said,
returned him Answer suitable to his Flatteries. For the Romans are eager
chiefly to conquer a Stout and Courageous Enemy.

XXIII. Ambassadors came to Rome both from the younger and the elder Ptolemy.
An Account of Affairs being given to those in the Assembly, the Senate upon
hearing of Polyb. Leg. 117.
part decreed, that the Ambassadors from the Ptolemy Philometor.
elder Ptolemy should depart out of Italy within Five Days at most, and the
Confederacy be broken off. But that Ambassadors should be sent to the Ptolemy
Euergetes.
younger Ptolemy to Declare to him the Good Will of the Senate, and those
things that had been signified to his Brother.

XXIV. About the 155 Olympiad, Ambassadors came from Ariarathes King of
Capadocca. Ant. Chapter 158. Polyb. Leg. 119. 121. See Just. lib. 35. c. 1.
Ariarathes bringing a Crown of the value of 10000 pieces of Gold, signifying
the Good Will the King bore to the Romans, and that upon their account he had
prohibited Marriage and Amity with Demetrius; which was attested and confirmed
by the Ambassadors from Greece. The Senate commended Ariarathes and accepted
the Crown, and sent back to him such A Staff and an Ivory Chariot, or Chair of
State. Polyb. Leg. 121.
Presents as were of greatest Esteem among the Romans.

XXV. At the same time Ambassadors came from Demetrius bringing likewise a
Crown of the value of 10000 pieces of Gold, and those prisoners that were
guilty of the Murder of Octavus: But the Senate had a long Debate what was
best and most advisable to do in these Concerns; at last they accepted the
Crown, but would not receive Isocrates the Gramarian. defended it. Polyb. Leg.
122. 114.
Isocrates and Leptinus stabbed Cneius Octavius the Roman Legate at Laodicea.
Leptinas that were offered to be delivered up to them.

XXVI. The Celtiberians Spaniards.
Celtiberians after the Victory, wisely foreseeing what would follow, sent
Ambassadors to the Consul to Treat of Peace, but he looking upon it necessary
to keep up the Grandeur and Magnanimity of his Country, made Answer, That they
must either give up all to the Romans, or else be Victors in the War.

XXVII. When the Romans were at War with the Carthaginians, the Carthaginians
hearing that they were sailing to Lilybaeum, and not in the least making a
Descent upon them, sent Ambassadors to Rome, and by them delivered up both
themselves, and all the Concerns of their Country to the Romans. The Senate
accepting the Surrender of their Country, gave this Answer; Since the
Carthaginians are so well advised, the Senate returns them their Country, their
Laws, their Temples, their Sepulchers, their Liberties and their Estates; (not
at all mentioning their City Carthage, for that was concealed under these kind
Concessions) if they would give Three hundred Sons of the Senators Hostages,
and obey the Consuls Commands. They thinking hereby to be free from the War To.
Lilybaeum.
sent the Hostages not without great Lamentation. Afterward Consuls came to
Utica. See Eutrop. lib. 4. (...) lor. lib 2. c. 15. Livy. Epitom. lib. 49.
they came to Utica; and the Carthaginians again sent Ambassadors to ask what
further commands the Romans would lay upon 'em; when the Consuls told them they
must deliver up their Arms and Engines without fraud, they at first (because of
the War against Asdrubal, their General.
Asdrubal) took it heavily, however they brought in 200000 Arms of all sorts,
and 2000 Engines. Afterward the Romans sent again to the Carthaginians
Commands, to send some Persons of their Senate to whom they would declare their
further Commands, and accordingly they sent Thirty of the Noblest. Manilius the
Senior Consul told 'em that it was the Senates Pleasure they should leave the
City they Inhabited, and build another Engines to shoot Stones or Arrows.
Eighty Furlongs distant from the Sea: But the Ambassadors crying out for Mercy
and Compassion, all of them cast themselves to the Ground, uttering many
lamentable Complaints with Tears, upon which great confusion was raised in the
Assembly: And when the Carthaginians were a little recovered out of their
Consternation, one only, Named Blannus * About Ten Miles.
delivering himself in the natural Language of the Auditory, Debated the matter
with great Heat and Earnestness, attended with an undaunted Presence of Mind,
which moved the Auditors to Pity and Commiseration.

28. The Romans being unmovable in their Decrees, as to the Razing of Carthage,
the Senate commanded them forthwith to depart to Carthage, and to declare to
the Ant. Chapter 14
Citizens what things were Decreed; but some of the Ambassadors refusing to
return to their Country, fled each of them where ever they could; the rest
choosing rather to return, went home, having thus finished a doleful Embassy.
When the People came thronging together to meet 'em, they gave 'em never a
Word, but beating their heads, and stretching out their hands, and invocating
their Gods, they went on to the Court, and informed the Senate what things were
commanded.

29. The Arradians supposing they had got an opportunity to destroy those of
Marathum, sent privately to Ammonius Of Syria, under Alexander Bala. Olymp, 157.
Viceroy of the Kingdom, and with a Bribe of 300 Talents, prevailed with him to
deliver up A City of Phaenicia. Ant. Chapter 150.
Marathum, whereupon Ammonius sent Isadore to the Marathonians, who by his
speech was to pretend some other matters, but in truth went to seize upon the
City, and to deliver it up to the Arradians. The Marathonians being ignorant
that they were designed for Destruction, yet observing how that the Arradians
were higher in the Kings Favor than themselves, refused the Kings Soldiers
Entrance into their City, and resolved to make their Addresses as Supplicants
to the Arradians. They forthwith therefore sent Ten of the most Eminent of
their eldest Citizens, as Ambassadors to Arradus, who brought with them a
humble Address and Supplication, * An Island over against Phaenicia.
and the oldest Images of their Gods, which they had in their City, hoping that
upon the account of their kindred, and moved with Reverence to their Gods, the
Arradians would be appeased, and their anger diverted. As soon as they landed
according to the Sea Vales. Fram. of Diodorus Siculus, 349, 3^^.
Commands given, they addressed themselves as Supplicants to the People: But
the Arradians Blood being up, they slighted the usual and common Laws of
Supplicants, and cast off all Reverence of their kindreds Images, and their
Gods, and therefore broke the Images, and trampled them most shamefully under
their Feet, and attempted to Stone the Ambassadors; but some of the Senators
interposing themselves between 'em and the rage of the People (scarce
restrained from stoning them, notwithstanding the Reverence they owed the
Senators) commanded 'em to be conveyed to Prison. --

The Numantia i^ Spain.
Numantines and Germissum in Spain. See Patetcul. lib. 2. c. 4. Ant. Chapter 130.
See Eutropius. lib. 4.
Termisians sent Ambassadors to the Romans, to treat of a Peace, which was
granted to them upon these Conditions, that they should deliver up each their
Cities to the Romans, 300 Hostages, 900 Soldiers Coats, 300 Hides, 800
War-Horses, and all their Arms, and they should be Friends and Allies to the
Romans. There being a day appointed for the performance of these Conditions by
the Cities, all was done according to the Articles, but when at last it came to
the delivering up of their Arms, there a rose a certain Generous Regret and
Lamentation, and a courageous Resolution in the Populacy to regain their
Liberties. Therefore they were angry one at another they should ever consent,
that they should like Women strip themselves of their Arms. Wherefore repenting
of those things that were decreed, the Fathers accused their Sons, Children
their Parents, and Women their Husbands, and so coming to themselves again,
resolving not to deliver up their Arms, they renewed the War against the Romans.

31. Called Diodotus, one of Alexander Bala's Commanders King of Syria. 1 Mac^.
11. 39 c. 13. v 31, 32. Live. l^^ ^2. ^5.
Tryphon, of a private Man being made King, hasted all he could to establish
the Government in himself, by a decree of the Senate: Wherefore preparing a
golden Medal of Victory weighing 10000 Crowns, he sent Ambassadors to Rome, to
present it to the People, not doubting but that he should obtain from them the
Compellation of King, considering the Present which he sent was not only very
rich in it self, but such whose Name carried along with it the happy
Prognostication of Victory. But he found the Senate far more Subtle than
himself, whose Prudence prompt'd them to a Dislike of those that Ant. Chapter 183.
deceitfully circumvent others: For they received the Present, and the good
Omen, together with the profit, but instead of Grifon's Name, the Senate
Decreed that the Title of the King that was treacherously Murdered, should be
Engraven upon it; and thus doing they approved themselves haters of his
wickedness in Murdering of the Child, and such as would not accept of the
presents of wicked Men.

32. There came with Scipio Africanus other Ambassadors to Alexandria, to view
the whole Kingdom. Antiochus Theos, Alexander Bala's Son, whose Guardian
Tryphon was. See Justin, lib. 36. c. 1.
Ptolemy met them in Pomp and State, with a great Retinue, and Feasted them
Sumptuously, and going about with them, showed them his Palace and Treasury.
But Ptolemy Euergeres, the second surnamed Physeon.
they being Persons Eminent in Virtue, contented themselves with a spare Diet,
and such as was wholesome, scorning that rich Provision, as prejudicial both to
Mind and Body. As for those things which the King esteemed as Rarities and
Admirable, they only Glanced their Eyes upon 'em, and looked on 'em as things
of no Value: But what was really worth their Eying, those things they viewed
most exactly; as the Situation of the City and its Capacity, and particularly
the P. Scipio Africanus. Spurius Mummius. L. Metellus, See Cicero in Somnio
Scip.
Pharos, and what belonged thereunto: Thence likewise they Sailed to Memphis,
and took notice of the goodness of the Country, the conveniences of the River
Nile, the number of the Cities, the infinite Thousands of Inhabitants, the The
Pharos at Alexandria, that gave light to Seamen in the Night.
Fortification of Egypt, and the excellency of the Country, how well it was
provided, both as to the Security, and Extent of an Empire: And having admired
both the Populousness of Egypt, and the Convenience of the Places therein, they
were of opinion that the Kingdom of Egypt would easily swell into a vast
Empire, if it once had Masters answerable. After the Ambassadors had well
viewed Egypt, they went to Cyprus, and from thence into Syria. In short, they
past through most parts of the World: And carrying themselves Soberly, to
Admiration in all Places wherever they came, they gained exceeding Honor and
Reputation; and Traveling through most parts of the World, with the general
Applause of all, they returned home. For those that were at difference, they
reconciled one to another; others they persuaded to do Right and Justice, to
those that complained against them; those that were impudently Obstinate, they
were Ant Ch 128.
necessitated to Curb and Restrain by Force; such Causes as were Difficult to
be Determined, they transmitted to the Senate. Conferring both with Kings and
their People, and renewing all former Leagues, they increased the love of all
sorts to the Roman Government, and so all applying themselves in their several
Countries to choose fit Persons, they sent Ambassadors to Rome, and highly
applauded the Delegates with Scipio, and the Senate for employing of such Men.

33. Bocchus, King of Lybia, having sharply rebuked those that would have
persuaded him to make War upon the Romans, sent Commissioners to Marius,
craving pardon for for his Crimes, and desiring to enter into a League, made
many promises to be serviceable to the Romans for the time to come. But Marius
ordering him to send Ambassadors to the Ant. Chapter 108.
Senate, to Treat of these matters, the King observed his directions, and sent
accordingly. Upon which the Senate answered, that Bocchus should in every
respect be received into Grace and Favor, if he could prevail with Marius.
Marius desirous to have Natural Fortification. See Livy. Epit lib. 59.
Jugurtha, the King his Prisoner, Bocchus willing to serve him, sends for King
of Numidia, Father in Law of Bocchus. See Live. Epit. lib. 62, 64, 65. 66. Flor.
lib. 3. c. 1.
Jugurtha, as if he would discourse with him about Business of concern to them
both, and by this means seizes him, and delivers him Bound to Lucius Sylla the
Quaestor, who was sent out for that purpose; and so by the misfortune of this
Prince, he bought his own Safety, and escaped Punishment from the Romans.

34. Ambassadors came from King Mithridates to Rome, with a great sum of Money,
with hopes by that to corrupt the Senate. L. Apuleus Saturninus, a Tribune of
the People, hated the Senate upon former grudges. See Flor. lib. 3. c. 16. Livy
Epitom. lib. 69. Ant. Chapter 99.
Saturnius thinking now he had an advantage against the Senate, reproached and
bespattered the Embassy at a great rate; the Senators instigated the
Ambassadors, and promised to assist them, who thereupon called Saturnius in
question for this abuse. There being then raised a mighty popular Tumult by
reason of the violation of the Ambassadors, and of that constant Abhorrence the
Romans have of such notorious Affronts, Saturnius (who was now condemned to
die, by the Senate his proper Judges in such Cases) fell into most racking
Fears and Perplexities; and because of the great Stirs and Tumults that were
raised, in a Consternation he betook himself for Shelter to the Pity those
commonly find that are Unfortunate.
cast out of all; throwing therefore off his rich Apparel, and putting on a
mean and sordid Habit; suffering his Beard to grow, he ran up and down to the
Tumultuous throngs of People throughout the City, falling. down upon his Knees
to some, catching others fast by the Hands, begging with Tears that they would
assist him in his present Calamities, declaring he was Factiously oppressed by
the Senate against all Right and Justice, and suffered all this for his
Good Will he bore to the People; that the Senators were his Enemies, Accusers
and Judges. The Mobb hereupon being all in an uproar, (affected by his Prayers
and Entreaties) many Thousands of 'em run to the Tribunal, and unexpectedly for
that time rescued him, and with the assistance of the People, he was again
declared Tribune.

35. Mark Anthony made a Peace with the Cretians, which they kept for some
time; but afterward calling together a General Council to consider what was
most advisable for them to do in order to their advantage; the more Ancient and
Prudent amongst them Counseled to send Ambassadors to Rome, to make Defense
against those The Father of Mark Anthony, who Married Cleopatra See Live. Epit.
lib. 97. was routed at Sea by the Cretians
Accusations that were brought against them, and by fair Words and Entreaties,
to work upon the Senate to a Reconciliation. To this end they dispatched away
Thirty chosen out of the most Eminent Men, for Ambassadors, who privately
Visiting the Senators at their several Houses, and courting them with fine
Words, secured those that made up the Assembly: and being Introduced into the
Senate, they made their Defense against the matters objected against them with
great Prudence, exactly setting forth their good Services, and their
Associations with the Senate, desiring that they might be Restored to their
former Amity, and Confederacy: The Senate pleased with what they said, gave
forth a Decree, * The Senate had decreed Was against 'em because they assisted
Mithridates by their Piraces Appian leg. 30 Dio. leg. 37.
by which they not only acquitted the Cretians, of the Crimes laid to their
charge, but declared them Confederates and Friends to the State. But Lentulus
sirnam'd Spinther, got the Decree reversed, however the Cretians were
dismissed. But the Senate had often Debates concerning the Cretians, alleging,
and at length concluding that they joined with the Pirates, and were Sharers in
the Robberies; and therefore they decreed the Cretians should send in all their
Ships to Rome, even to a Skiff of Four Oars, and resign the 300 Those they had
of the Romans See Dion. leg. 37.
famous Hostages, and send away Lasthenes had fought with Antonius.
Lasthenes and Paneres, and amongst them pay 4000 Talents of Silver. The
Cretians hearing what was Decreed, went into a Consult about these Commands
imposed upon them, the more Prudent amongst 'em, advised to be observant in all
things to what was enjoined them: But those that were of Last thenes's party,
and guilty of the same Crimes, and fearing lest being sent for to Rome, they
should be there punished for their Offenses, stirred up the People to a
Sedition, advising them to maintain those liberties that they had ever, time
out of Mind enjoyed.

THE SUPPLEMENT Referred unto in the XVIIth. BOOK of DIODORUS, (Page 557.)
1. How Alexander marching through a dry Country, for want of Water lost many
of his Soldiers. Curtius, lib. VII. c. 5.
ALexander himself, with a Band of Light-armed Men, marching all the Night,
entered the Deserts of Mistaken by Curtius for the Deserts of Sogdiana.
Susitana. The total want of Water, with the Thoughts of their desperate
Condition (as is before declared) enflamed their Thirst before they had a reald
esire to drink; for, sor the space of About 50 Miles.
400 Furlongs, not the least Lake, or any thing that was moist, appeared. The
scorching Sun fired the Sands, which when inflamed, burnt up all round about
like a raging Fire; hence, through the excessive Heat of the Earth, arose a
Mist which obscured the Light, and all the Champaigne seemed no other than if
it had been the vast Ocean.

Their March in the Night was tolerable, because their Bodies were refreshed by
the Dew and Coldness of the Air, before the rising of the Sun; but when Light
appeared, the Heat began, and Drought dried up all their natural Moisture, and
both their Mouths and their very Intrails were altogether parched up with
scorching Heat; and therefore first their Spirits and then their Bodies began
to faint. It was grievous to 'em both to stand still and go forward: Some few
of 'em, by the help of them that knew the Country, had got Water, which
quenched their Thirst for a little while; but the Heat increasing, their desire
of Drink was again the more enflamed; and therefore whoever had any Wine or
Oil, it was presently guzzl'd down, and the present Pleasure of Drinking was so
great, that it banished all fear of Thirst for the future. Those that had thus
swelled themselves with immoderate Drinking, could neither carry their Arms,
nor march forward; and those seemed to be in a far better condition that wanted
Water, than they who by pouring it down to excess, were forced to vomit it up
again. Those that were about the King seeing him grieved and much perplexed
with these Misfortunes, entreated him to mind and take care of himself; for his
Courage was the only Life and Relief of his drooping Army. While they were thus
advising him, two of those that were sent before to mark out a convenient Place
where to encamp, came with Water in their Vessels for the use of their Children
who were in the Army, and whom they knew were not able to hold out without
Drink: These meeting the King, one of 'em opened his Vessel, and filled a Cup
which he had with him, and offered it to the King, who received it; but asked
him for whom the Water was brought, who answered, That it was for his Children.
Upon which. returning the Cup full as it was, I cannot find in my Heart (says
he) to drink it alone; and it is to be divided amongst them all; away therefore
with all speed, and give it your Children, for whom it was brought. At length
he came to the River Oxus about evening, but a great part of the Army were left
behind: He commanded therefore Fires to be kindled upon a high Mountain, that
those that followed slowly after might know they were not far from the Camp. He
commanded likewise those that were in the Van (having sufficiently refreshed
themselves both with Meat and Drink) to fill all sorts of Vessels wherein Water
might be carried, and help their Companions that were behind. But those that
drank immoderately, quenched their natural Heat by Surfeit, and died presently,
by which means he lost far more Men than he had done before in any Battle.

2. How Alexander destroyed all the Branchidans (as Traitors to the Grecians)
whom anciently the Persians forced to remove from their own Habitations to the
furthest Part of the Kingdom. Curtius, lib. VII. c. 6.
HE came to a little Town where the Branchidans inhabited, who heretofore
removed from Miletus, by the Command of Xerxes when he returned out of Greece,
and settled themselves in this place: They were they that Gave Xerxes the
Riches that were in it, Strabo, lib. 14.
violated the Temple called Did^^eus, to ingratiate themselves with Xerxes. The
Customs and Manners of their Country were not as yet wholly laid aside, but
they spoke a kind of broken Language, neither perfect Greek nor Barbarian. They
received therefore the King very joyfully, and gave up themselves and their
City into his hands. He thereupon called together the Milesians that were in
his Army, who bore an old Grudge and inveterate Hatred against the Branchidans,
he left it therefore to these Milesians, whose Ancestors had been betrayed by
'em, to do with them what they thought fit either to remember the Injury, and
so revenge themselves, or the Original of the Branchidans, who were so their
Countrymen, and upon that account to spare them. When they could not agree
amongst themselves what to resolve upon, the King told 'em he himself would
take time to consider what was fittest to be done. The next day the Branchidans
meeting him, he ordered 'em to go along with him; and when he came to the City,
he entered the Gate with a select Detachment, having in the mean time ordered
the Phalanx to surround the Walls, and upon a Sign given to raze the City to
the Ground, that had been a Nest for the Traitors, and to put them all to the
Sword, Man, Woman, and Child. Hereupon being all disarmed, they were knocked on
the head in every place up and down, and no stop could be put to their Cruelty
by nearness of Language, or the Prayers and Tears of the poor and miserable
People.

At length they razed the Walls to the very bottom of the Foundation, that
there might not remain so much as the least sign where it had once stood.
Neither stopped they here, for they not only cut down, but rooted up the Sacred
Groves, that they might leave all a vast and solitary Desert, barren, without
so much as a Root in the Ground; which Executions, had they been inflicted upon
the first Actors of the Treason, might have been judged a just Revenge, and not
the Effects of Cruelty, as they seemed to be; sor now the Posterity, who never
so much as ever saw Miletus (and therefore could not betray it to Xerxes)
suffered for the Faults of their Ancestors. --.

3. How the King led his Army against the Sogdians and Scythians. Arrianus,
lib. 4.
IN the mean time the Barbarians that bordered next to the River, surpised the
Macedonians that were placed in Garrisons in Scythia, and put them all to the
Sword, and fortified the Cities for their greater Security. Many of the
Sogdians joined with him in the Defection, being solicited thereunto by them
that had seized upon Bessus, who likewise drew away after them some of the
Bactrians, either because they were afraid of Alexander, or for that (as they
gave the reason for their Rebellion) Alexander had summoned a Senate of the
Governors of the Province to meet at Zariaspa, the greatest City there, from
which Convention they saw no ground to hope for any good to themselves. When
Intelligence was brought to Alexander of these things, he forthwith commanded
his Foot in every Regiment to prepare Scaling Ladders; and he himself marched
away with his Army to a City called Gaza, which was next to the Camp, and lay
first in his way; for it was said the Barbarians had fled into seven Towns of
that Country. Craterus he sent to Cyropolis, the greatest of all the Cities,
and in which a very great number of the Barbarians had sheltered themselves.
The King commanded him to encamp near the City, and to fortify his Camp with a
Trench and Wall drawn round, and place such Engines upon his Bulwarks as he saw
occasion to use, that the Townsmen being busy in assaulting, Craterus might
have no leisure to come in to the assistance of other Cities. The King himself,
as soon as he came to Gaza, forthwith at the first approach commanded his Men
to set Scaling-Ladders round the Walls, which were but of Earth, and not very
high. Upon which, the Slingers, Darters, and Archers, together with the Foot,
made an Assault, plied and galled them that defended the Walls with their
Darts, and shot out of the Engines, so that by Showers of Darts and Arrows the
Wall was presently cleared of its Defendants, and the Scaling-Ladders in a
trice were set to the Walls, and the Macedonians entered, and put all the Men
to the Sword (for so Alexander had commanded) but the Women and Children, with
the rest of the Prey, they carried away. Thence the King forthwith marched to
another City (fortified much like unto Gaza) which he took much after the same
manner the very same day, and dealt with the Prisoners after the same manner as
with them at Gaza. After this, he made to a third City, which he took the next
day upon the first Assualt.

In the mean time, while he was reducing these Cities with his Foot, he sent
away his Horse to two other neighboring Cities, with Orders to watch 'em, lest
the Inhabitants hearing of the taking of the Cities bordering upon 'em, and o^
the King's near approach, should fly and leave the Cities, so as he should not
be able to pursue with any hopes to overtake 'em. And indeed it fell out as he
thought, which evidenced the sending forth of the Horse to be necessary: For
the Barbarians, who still were possessed of two other Cities, seeing the Smoke
of the City which was burnt, and was over against 'em (besides some who escaped
out of the Overthrow, brought them news of the City being taken) with all speed
in whole droves fled out of the Cities, and fell in among the Horse that were
sent forth, and multitudes of 'em were knocked on the Head.

The King having taken and razed these five Towns in the space of two days,
marched away to Cyropolis, the greatest of their Cities: The Walls of this City
were higher than any of the rest, the Town being built by Cyrus. And forasmuch
as there were many stout Men and good Soldiers, the Inhabitants of the Country
were got together into this place; the Macedonians could not easily (like to
the other places) take it at the first Assault, and therefore Alexander
ordered, that with the Battering-Rams and other Engines they should batter the
Walls, and wherever any Breach was made, there forthwith to make an Assault.
But the King observing the Channel of the River (which ran through the City
like a little Brook) to be then dry, and not contiguous or near the Walls, but
affording a direct Passage for his Soldiers into the City, he took with him his
Guard Targateers, Archers, and the Agrians (the Barbarians then busy in
observing the Engines and those that managed 'em) and secretly with few at
first entered through the Channel into the City, and broke down the Gates that
were in that part, and readily let in the rest of the Soldiers: Upon which, the
Barbarians perceiving the City to be entered, however set upon Alexander's
Soldiers, and fought and resolutely, in which Conflict Alexander received a
Blow on his Head and Neck with a Stone. Craterus and many others were wounded
with Darts and Arrows; but at length the Barbarians were driven out of the
Marketplace. In the mean time, those that assaulted the Walls entered, all
being clear of those that should have defended them. In the first Conflict at
the entering of the City, there were slain of the Enemy about eight thousand,
the rest (for they were eighteen thousand that had there put in themselves)
fled into the Castle, who after one day's siege for want of Water surrendered
themselves. The seventh City the King took at the first Assault: Ptolemy indeed
says that it was surrendered; but Aristobulus relates that it was taken by
storm, and that all in it were put to the Sword. Ptolemy writes, that all the
Prisoners were distributed in the Army, and ordered to be kept bound till the
King left the Country, lest any one of 'em that revolted should be left behind.

While these things were on foot, the Army of the Asian Scythians came to the
Banks of the River Not Genais, near the Lake Meotis, but another called
Iaxartes. See Pl. N. Hist. l. 6. c. 16.
Ganais, because they heard that some of the Barbarians inhabiting beyond the
River had revolted from Alexander; and their aim therefore was, that if there
were any considerable Defection, they likewise might act their part in falling
upon the Macedonians. At the same time Intelligence was brought, that
Spitamenes had besieged those that were left in Garrison in the Castle of
Patachades. Alexander therefore sent Andromachus, Medemenus, and Caranus
against Spitamenes, with sixty Horse of the Social Band, and eight hundred of
the Mercenaries, who were under the Command of Caranus: But of Foot there were
Fifteen hundred Mercenaries; with them the King joined in Commission one
Pharnuches for an Interpreter, a Lycian by Nation, who was well skilled in the
Language of the Barbarians, and therefore was judged a fit Person to transact
matters with them.

The King having in the space of 20 days Walled the Called Alexandria, upon the
Banks of Iaxartes called Tanais.
City he had before designed to build, gave it the Greek Mercenaries to be
Inhabited by them, and to such neighboring Barbarians as had a mind to remove
their Habitations and dwell there, and to some of the Macedonians that were
Disabled, and unfit to bear Arms.

Afterward having Sacrificed to the Gods after the manner of his Country, and
exhibited the Gymnick Sports, and Horse-Courses, finding that the Scythians did
not March back and leave the River, but threw their Darts over, (for it was
there very narrow) and after their Barbarous manner, gave out most opprobious
and railing Language against Alexander, as that he durst not fight with the
Scythians, and if he did, he should find by experience, how great a difference
there was between the Scythians and the Barbarous Asiaticks: The King being
provoked with these things, resolved to pass the River and fall upon 'em, and
commanded Leather Boats to be made ready for that purpose. Having therefore
Sacrificed for his good Success, the Intrails of the Beasts promised nothing
that was Prosperous, which made him very uneasy, but he bore it very
patiently, and staid there. The Scythians still continuing their slight and
contemptuous Language, he again Sacrificed, and when Aristander the Soothsayer
declared that danger was portended, Alexander answered, it was better to
undergo the extremest hazard, than for him who had Conquered all Asia to be a
Scorn, a Mocki^g-Stock to the Scythians, as Darius the Father of Xerxes was
heretofore. Aristander, on the other side replied, that he would not declare
any thing to the King, but what was portended by the Gods, though Alexander had
rather hear other things. However Alexander's Boats being now ready, and his
Army standing all in Arms at the Rivers Brink, he ordered that upon a Sign
given, they should Discharge the Engines against the Scythians that Rid over
against them, on the other side; which done, some of them were wounded with the
Darts, and one of them especially was pierced with a Dart througli his Buckler
and Breast Plate, and fell down dead from his Horse. But the Barbarians being
terrified with Darts that wounded them at so great a distance, and with the
fall of that Valiant Man, by degrees drew off further from the Bank of the
River. Alexander discerning 'em to be in disorder by the strokes of the Darts,
with sound of Trumpet passed over the River at the head of his Army; and the
Archers and Slingers being first sent over, he Commanded them to ply the
Scythians with their Slings and Arrows least they should fall in upon the
Phalanx as they were passing over, before all his Body of Horse had recovered
the other-side. When all had now gained the further Bank of the River, he first
fell upon the Scythians with one of the Squadrons of the Social Regiment, and
Four Regiments of those that were armed with Saralles, whose Shock the
Scythians bravely bore up against, and surrounded 'em with their Horse, so that
many overpowring them, that were but few, they easily kept themselves whole and
entire. Alexander thereupon mixing his Archers and Agrians, and other select
Troops (over whom Balacrus had the Command) fell in upon the Scythians, and
being now on both sides mixed together, the King ordered three Squadrons of
Horse of the Social Band, and all his Horse that were Darters, to Charge in
upon the Scythians; and he himself at the Head of the rest of the Horse made
straight upon 'em, so that now they were not able any longer to keep their
Horse in a Ring as before; for the Horse pressed sore upon 'em, at the same time,
and the light armed Men being mixed with the Horse, they suffered not the Enemy
with any safety to Wheel about with their Horse to surround 'em. Upon which the
Scythians were put to a Total Flight, and about a Thousand killed, and an
Hundred and fifty taken Prisoners, amongst whom was Satrices one of their two
Generals.

4. How the Sogdian Noblemen being led forth to be put to Death, were
unexpectedly preserved. Curtius lib. VII. c. 10.
SOme of the Prisoners of the Sogdians of Noble Birth, and Proper Handsome Men
were brought before the King; who as soon as they understood by an Interpreter
that they were to die, they began to Sing, Skip and Dance as Men transported
with joy, using many Lascivious gestures of their Bodies. The King admining the
greatness of their Courage, at the approach of Death, commanded them to be
brought to him, and as^t them why they were so Excessively m^^y, when Death was
even before their Eyes? who answered, that if they had been put to death by any
others Command, they should have, been as Sad at the apprehension of death as
other Men; but since they were sent out of the World by so great a King as was
Conqueror of the World, they Celebrated their honorable death (which all
valiant Men wish for) with Songs of Mirth and Jollity, after the Custom and
Manner of their Country: The King wondering at their Courage asked them, whether
they would not be his Enemies, if he was so kind and generous as to suffer them
to live. They answered, they never were his Enemies, but as Invaded, Opposed
him to defend themselves, and if any made trial of 'em by fair means, and not
by Force and Injury, they would lay out themselves to the utmost, that none
should exceed 'em in grateful Offices of respect. Then he asked 'em what pledges
they would give of Loyalty. They replied, their lives which they had received
from him, and which they would give him up again upon his demand. Nor did they
sail him by Breach of promise: For they that returned into their own Counrey,
kept their Countrymen in due Obedience, Four of them which he kept for Squires
of his Body, proved as true and faithful to the King, as any of the Macedonians.

5. How Alexander punished the Bactrians, and subdued the Sogdians a Second
time, and built Cities in convenient Places to punish the Revolters. Arrianus
lib. IV.
ALexander himself Marched again to the River Oxus; for he resolved to make
against the Sogdians, for he heard that many of them put themselves into Forts
and Castles, and refused to obey the Provincial Governors the King had placed
over them. At the time he was encampt near the River Oxus, two Springs rose out
of the Earth near to Alexander's Pavilion, the one of Water, and the other of
Oil: Of which prodigy (...) Curt lib. 7.
Pt^lemy Lagus forthwith informed the King as soon as he heard of it, whereupon
Alexander without delay, at the command of the Priest, Sacrificed; Aristander
the Priest told the King that the Fountain of Oil portended Labor, but Victory
at last, the fruit of Toil and Pain: Marching therefore away with part of his
Army against the Sogdians, he left in Bactria, Polyspercon, Attalus, Gorgias,
and Meleager to be a Guard in that Country, both to keep them in Obedience that
were Reduced, and to Subdue the others that had fallen off from their
Allegiance; having divided his Army into Five parts, he gave the Command of
Three of them to Hephestion; a Fourth part to Caenus and Artabazus: He himself
with the Fifth entr'd the Country leading toward Maracanda. The rest entered
wherever each of them could, and stormed the Forts of them that had possessed
themselves of them, and others they took in upon Surrender. After all, the
Forces (having first ran over the greatest part of the Country) joined together
at Maracanda, he sent forth Hephestion to bring in Colonies into the Cities of
the Sogdians: Coenus and Artabazus he ordered against the Scythians, because he
heard Spitamenes was fled to 'em. He himself with the rest of the Army entering
into Sogdiana, easily reduced the rest of the Towns that had revolted.

6. How the Sogdians revolted the Third time, and how they were taken that
betook themselves to the top of the Rock. Arrianus lib. IV.
Afterward at the beginning of the Spring, he Marched to a Rock to which he
heard many of the Sogdians fled; and here it was said that the Wife and
Daughters of Curtius calls him Arimares lib. 7. c. 11. ^or by Strabo, Oxyartes
had placed his (...) in S^^mithres Rich in Bactria where Alexander Married
^^xana, one of (...) Strabo (...) 11^ 517.
Oxyartes had sheltred themselves. For Oxyartes placed them here as in a Hold
that was Inexpugnable, he himself being one that had revolted from Alexander.
And the King was the more earnest for that this Rock being taken, there
appeared no Fort left in Sogdia that could encourage them to a Defection. When
he came to the Rock, he found it steep and inaccessable on every side, and that
the Barbarians had brought in Provision for a long Siege, and that the depth of
the Snow, as it made the Approach of the Mace^^mians more difficult, so it
furnished the Barbarians with plenty of Water. However Alexander resolved to
assault the Rock. The Proud and Contemptuous answer likewise of the Barbarians
stirred up Rage and Ambition in Alexander at one and the same time. For whereas
at a Parley with them, he promised them that if they would Surrender, they
should all have liberty to return safely home; they barbarously scoffed at him,
and bid him seek some Soldiers that had Wings, who might so take the Rock, for
they feared no other Mortals. Upon which Alexander commanded Proclamation to be
made by an Herald, that he would bestow 12 Talents as a reward upon him that
should first mount the Rock, and so the second and the third, in their due
order should every one receive a reward till it came to the last that ascended
the Rock, who should receive 300 Daricks; the hopes of which reward stirred up
the Macedonians, who were eager before to fall upon them of their own accord.
Three hundred therefore of those that were accustomed to climb Rocks, being
drawn out, they furnished themselves with Cramp-Irons (wherewith they fastened
their Tents) that they might fix them in the Snow where it was hard Frozen, and
in other parts of the Rock where there was no Snow, and to them they tied
strong Cords, and in the Night made to that part of the Rock that was steepest
and highest, and therefore (as they conceived) least guarded; and with the
Cramps, some fastened in the Rock, and others in the Snow that was frozen, they
scrambled up from place to place 'till they gained the Top: But of these, 30
perished in endeavoring to get up, so that their Bodies could not be found to
be buried, being lost in the depth of the Snow; the rest about break of day
recovered the top, and by shaking of the Linen Clothes gave notice to the Army
that they had gained the place, for that sign Alexander had commanded them:
Upon which a Trumpeter was forthwith sent out with command to the Barbarians
that they should without any further delay surrender themselves, for that he
had now found Soldiers that had Wings, who had possessed themselves of the top
of the Rock; and at the same time the Soldiers that had gained the Rock,
presented themselves in view to the Barbarians, who being amazed at such an
unexpected sight, supposing them to be more, and better armed than indeed they
were, gave up themselves; the sight of a few Macedonians was so terrible to
'em. There were there taken Prisoners many of the Wives and Children of the
Barbarians, and amongst them the Wife and Daughters of Oxyartes. Oxyartes's Son
likewise was about the Age of Nine Years.

7. Of the Hunting in Basistis, and the multitude of Wild Beasts there.
Curtius, lib. VII. c. 1.
HAving given a gracious Audience to the Ambassadors, he there stayed waiting
for Hephestion and Artabazus, who being afterward joined him, he came into the
Country called Bazaria. Of the riches of the Barbarians in those Places, there
can be no greater argument, than the multitude of stately wild Beasts that
range in large Woods and Forests in that Country. They frequent spacious Woods
pleasantly watered with many refreshing springs. They are Walled round, in
which are built Towers for Stands to view the hunting of the Beasts. One of
these Chases had remained free and untouched for the space of Four generations,
which Alexander entering with his Army, he commanded the Game in all parts as he
came to be roused; amongst which when a Lion of a vast Bigness met and set upon
the King, L^simachus (who afterward was o^ Thra^^
King) happening to be next to Alexander offered to make at the Beast with his
hunting Spear, the King put him by, and bid him be gone adding that the Lion
might be killed by himself as well as by Lysimachus. This Lysimachus had before
in a hunting in Syria killed an exceeding great Lion with his own hand, but he
had been even at the point of Death, his lest shoulder having been (in that
Encounter) rent and torn even to the very Bone. The King twitting him with
this, showed more of Valor afterward in action than he did before in this
expression; for he not only stood the Beast, but killed him at one blow. The
story that was foolishly spread abroad that the King gave up Lysimachus to be
devoured by a Lion, rose (I believe) from this accident before related. But the
Macedonians (though the King was thus happily delivered) yet according to the
Custom of their Country, established a Decree that he should not hunt on Foot
without a Guard of his Captains and Friends. The King having killed Four
thousand brave wild Beasts, feasted with his whole Army in the Forest.

1. Of his Offense against Bacchus, and the Murder of Clitus in his Cups.
Arrianus, lib. IV.
TO declare in this place the death of Clitus, and the foul act of Alexander in
that matter (though it happned some little time after) yet I judge it not
altogether out of course. The Macedonians (its said) have a certain day sacred
to Bacchus, and Alexander was accustomed to sacrifice to Bacchus every year
upon that day; but at that time he neglected Bacchus, and sacrificed to Custor
and Pollux; and from that time he appointed Sacrifice to them, with Feasting
always at that day. And whereas now the Company had been a considerable time
quaffing and carouzing (for Alexander had now learned to imitate the Barbarians
in his Cups) and all were heated with Wine, a discourse happned concerning the
Castor and Pollux.
Discorides how to derive their Original from Jupiter, and set aside that of
Tyndarus; some who were present to flatter the King (which sort of Creatures
are ever Pernicious both to the Persons and Concerns of Kings, and are ever at
hand) delivered their Judgment that Castor and Pollux were not in the least
respect to be compared to Alexander, and his brave and noble Actions: Others in
their Cups did not spare Hercules himself; but said that Envy was the cause
that debarred Mortals from these Honors that were due to them from those among
whom they conversed. But Clitus who ever heretofore hated Alexander's imitation
of the Manners of the Barbarians, and the discourses of his Flatterers, having
now his Spirits something raised with Wine, was not able to bear those
Contempts cast upon the Gods, nor that by undervaluing those Acts of the
ancient Heroes, so thankless a piece of service should be paid to the King. And
declared that Alexander had neither done such wonderful things as they cried
him up for, neither did he do any of them himself alone, but the Praise of a
great part of 'em was due to the Valor of the Macedonians. But Alexander was
much enraged at these words of Clitus; neither indeed, can I commend him in
what he said, for I am of opinion it had been much more prudent for him in this
time of carouzing to have held his peace, as well as to forbear joining with
others in this sordid Vice of Flattery: And whereas some called to mind the
Acts of Philip, and did all they could most unjustly to bear down and make
slight of all he did as nothing at all memorable (in the mean time caressing
and extolling of Alexander) Clitus now not himself, began to advance the the
actions of Philip, and vilify Alexander and his Atchievments: And cast it in
the King's Teeth (now raging like a Madman) amongst other things, how he had at
the River Granicus in the Charge, in the Horse Engagement preserved him, and
impudently stretching out his right Hand, cried out, This Hand O Alexander,
preserved thy Life in that Battle: Alexander not being able longer to endure
the unbridled Passion of Clitus, or his base language, nor his reproaches cast
upon him, in a rage leapt out toward him, but was held back by them that were
round about him; on the other hand Clitus let fly all the reproachful words he
could devise, surpassing all bounds. The King with a loud voice called out for
Argyraspides, and no Man regarding him, he cried out again that he was now in
the same Condition Darius was in, when he was seized and led away by Ressus and
his Accomplices, and that there was nothing left him but the Name of a King.
His Friends then could not hold him any longer, but springing from them, some
say he snatched a Lance out of the hands of one of his Guards, and with that
run Clitus through, and killed him; others report it was with a Macedonian
Lance.
Sarissa delivered to him by one of the Guard; Aristobulus gives no account
whence this mad Fit of Alexander's arose; but says all the fault was wholly in
Clitus; for that when Alexander in a rage rush't up and made at him to kill
him, he at a back Door shifted out of the way, and got quite out of the
Trenches into the Fort to Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, a Squire of the Body, yet
could not contain himself but must needs come back again; and lighting upon
Alexander when he was calling out for Clitus, Here Is Clitus, Alexander, said
he, upon which the King ran him through with a Sarissa: As I cannot but greatly
blame Clitus for his Insolency to the King, so I am troubled for Alexander on
the other side, because at that time he exposed himself as guilty of Two Vices
together, Anger and Drunkenness; to be overtaken with either of which, did not
in the least become a sober Man. But yet again I must praise Alexander upon
another account, that presently he repented of the soul Fact he had committed.
For some who write of the Affairs of Alexander, say, that he set the end of the
Spear against the Wall, and attempted to run himself upon the point, because
his Life seemed hateful to him, having through his Drunkenness destroyed his
Friend. But many Writers do not mention this. But when he was upon his Bed he
lay lamenting, calling and repeating still the name of Clitus. Lanices the
Daughter of Dropidus, who had brought up Alexander, received from him now he
was a Man a large reward for his Education: she had lost Two Sons in the War,
fighting for the King, and had her Brother now killed by his own Hand: He cried
out he was the Murderer of his Friends, and would neither eat nor drink for
Three days space, nor take any care of himself what became of him. Some of
Bacchus's Priests told him that these Misfortunes befell him because he had
neglected to Sacrifice to Bacchus. His Friends had much ado to persuade him to
eat or drink any thing to refresh him. But at last he sacrificed to Bacchus;
since it was not displeasing to him that that misfortune should be imputed
rather to the Anger of the God, than to his own wickedness.

9. Of the Death of Calisthenes. Arrianus, lib. IV.
AS to the Adoration of Alexander, how Calisthenes opposed him, and what
relates to it, it is reported, That it was agreed between Alexander and the
Sophisters, and some of the Nobility of the Medes and Persians that attended
upon him, that in the time of their Feasting a Discourse should be started
concerning this matter. Anaxarchus was the Person that began, and declared,
That Alexander had more right to be accounted a God than either Bacchus or
Hercules, not only for the greatness of his Noble Actions, but because Bacchus
was a Theban, a mere Stranger, having no Communication with the Macedonians;
and Hercules was of Argos, as much a Stranger as the other, save that Alexander
was of the same Stock, for he was from the Heraclides; and it is far more just
and equal for the Macedonians to adore their own King with Divine Honors than
any other. And no doubt (he said) was to be made but they would pay to him
Divine Honors when he was dead; therefore it is much better to adore him as a
God while he was alive, than when he was dead, when their Divine Worship of him
would be of no advantage to him. When these and other things to the same
purpose were said by Anaxarchus, those who were of the same Pack praised all
that was spoken, and declared they would forthwith This Ador^tion was by Pro;
stration.
Adore him: But many of the Macedonians, who condemned Anaxarchus's Speech,
held their peace. But Calisthenes in the midst of the Silence spoke thus:

Indeed, Anaxarchus, I count not Alexander unworthy of any Honor (how great
soever it be) that is fit to be ascribed to Men; but there are prescribed
Differences amongst Men between Divine and Human Honors, amongst many others
in the Building of Temples and Erecting of Statues; for to the Gods we
consecrate Oratories, offer Sacrifices and drink Offerings: To the Gods are
sung Hymns; Men are praised, but not adored: Kisses in Salutations are given to
Men, but the Gods are placed on high, and it is not lawful to touch 'em; and
therefore they are worshipped with Adoration. Solemn Times of Dancings are
performed to the Gods, and Paeans sung to them. Neither is it to be wondered
at, inasmuch as the Honors given to the Gods are various; some sort of Honors
given to one, and others to another (especially those Honors of later time.)
Nay; those Honors given to some of the Hero's differ from Divine Honors. It Is
not therefore fit to confound these things, nor to advance Men above themselves
and all Mankind besides, and to degrade the Gods, by Worshipping them with the
same Worship wherewith we adore Men. Alexander himself would not suffer any
private Man to usurp the Regal Dignity and Honors due to himself, though he
gained 'em by the unjust Suffrages of the People; much more justly therefore
may the Gods be angry if any mortal Man assume to himself Divine Honors, or
accept of them from others. However, let Alexander be esteemed (as in truth he
is) by many degrees the most Valiant of them that are Valiant, the greatest
King amongst all other Kings, and amongst Generals the most Worthy to Command.
But as for thee, Anaxarchus, it is thy Duty above any other to instruct
Alexander in these things that have been spoken, and to d^ter him from the
contrary; for thy Conversation he daily makes use of, in order to improve in
Wisdom and Learning. Neither does it become thee to be the beginner of this
Discourse, but rather to remember that thou art not advising Cambyses or
Xerxes, but the Son of Philip, descended from Hercules and Achilles, whose
Ancestors came out of Argos into Macedonia, and maintained their Empire not by
Arbitrary Power, but by Ruling according to the Laws and Customs of the
Macedonians. But Divine Houours were not confevr'd upon Hercules himself by the
Grecians while he was living, nay nor when he was dead, before the Oracle at
Delphos commanded that he should be worshipped as a God. But if there be but
few that are in the Country of the Barbarians, we ought to entertain the same
Sentiments with them. And I earnestly entreat thee, Alexander, to remember
Greece, for whose sake this Expedition was undertaken by thee, in order to add
Asia to Greece: And now consider whether when you return thither, you can be
able to compel the free People of Greece to adore you as a God, or (excepting
them of Greece) you can impose this Dishonor and Slavery upon the Macedonians
only, or whether it be fit that quite different Honors be there allowed you;
being the Grecians confer only those that are Human, according to the Custom
and Manner of the Greeks, when at the same time only the Barbarians worship you
as a God after the manner of Barbarians. But if it be objected, That Cyrus Son
of Cambyses was the first of all mortal Men that was adored by Men as a God,
ana that since that time this Adoration has continued amongst the Medes and
Persians; yet you are to consider how his Pride was curbed by the Scythians, a
poor and indigent People. And how other Scythians again reduced Darius to more
sober Thoughts of himself, and the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, Xerxes and
Clearchus, and Xenophon, Artaxerxes, only with Ten thousand Men; and Darius now
overcome by Alexander, when at that time no Divine Honors were decreed to him.

When Calisthenes had spoken these and other things to the same purpose,
Alexander took it very heinously; but what he said was very grateful and
acceptable to the Macedonians; which being known, Alexander sent some to urge
the Macedonians to remember the Adoration of the King; upon which there being a
great silence, those among the Persians that were most Eminent for Birth and
Honorable for Age, all rose up together, and Prostrated themselves.
adored him. But Leonatus, one of Alexander's Friends, when he saw one of the
Perfians sordidly prostrating himself, he fell a laughing at the poor and mean
Gesture of the Persian; at which Alexander was at the first very angry, but was
afterward pacified. Some write, that the King drank in a golden Bowl to them
with whom he had made the Compact to adore him in a Ring as they sat, and that
the first that pledged him, presently arose and By P^ystrat^^.
adored him, and then kissed him, and so in order the rest did the same, one
after another. But when it came to Calisthenes's turn, he rose up, and drank
off the Bowl, and when he had done (without adoring him) drew near to the King
to kiss him. Alexander was then accidentally discoursing with Hephestion, and
therefore did not mind whether he omitted the Adoration or not. But Demetrius
the Son of Pythonax, one of Alexander's Friends, observing when Calisthenes
approached to kiss Alexander, informed him that Calisthenes had not adored him,
upon which the King turned away from him; and thereupon Calisthenes said, he
must now be discarded with the Loss of a Kiss.

I cannot indeed praise either any of these things that tended to Alexander's
Dishonor, or the Moroseness of Calisthenes; for I conceive it had been enough
for him modestly to have carried himself, and for him who would serve the King,
to promote his Affairs to the best advantage, as far as ever he was able: And
therefore I am of Opinion, that Calisthenes was not without just cause hated by
Alexander, by reason of the unseasonable liberty of his Speech and foolish
Malepertness. For which reason (I believe) Credit was more easily given
afterward to his Accusers, by whom he was charged to be in the Conspiracy with
the Pages against the King's Life, and to others who affirmed that they were
put on to it by him.

The Conspiracy was thus: There was an Order formerly made by Philip, that from
among the Sons of the Macedonian Nobility, when they grew up to Men's estate,
choice should be made of some from time to time to attend upon the King, both
to be Squires of his Body, and Gentlemen of his Bedchamber: These Youths, when
the King was about to ride, received the Horses from the Querries, and led them
to the King, and after the Persian manner helped him to mount, and waited upon
him whenever he went forth a Hunting: Among these, there was one Hermolaus, the
Son of Sopolides, who studied Philosophy, and was Scholar to Calisthenes: The
Report is, That a wild Boar in the course of Hunting meeting Alexander, this
Hermolaus prevented the King (who was aiming at him) and killed the Boar. The
King hereupon being in a rage to have the Opportunity of killing the Boar
snatched out of his hand, commanded that the Youth should be whipped in the
presence of all the other Pages, and have his Horse taken from him: Which
Disgrace he not being able to bear, opened his Mind to Sostrates, the Son of
Amyntas, one of his Companions, of the same Quality, and his Bosom Friend, and
declared to him that his Life would be but a Burden to him, unless he could
revenge the Injury done him upon Alexander; and it was no difficult matter to
persuade Sostrates (being his special Friend) to join with him in this
Traitorous Conspiracy. Antipater likewise, the Son of Asclep^odorus (Lord
Lieutenant of Syria) Epimenes the Son of Arseus, and Anticles the Son of
Theocritus, together with Philotas the Son of Carsides the Thracian, were all
brought in by him to join in the same Treason. The Night that it came to
Antipater's turn to wait in the Bedchamber, was the time pitched upon to kill
Alexander when he was asleep. But it happened (as some write) that Alexander that
very Night sat up Drinking till Morning. But Aristobulus says, That a certain
Woman of Syria pretending to be divinely inspired, still followed Alexander
from place to place, whom Alexander and his Courtiers at first ridiculed; but
when what she had foretold was still verified by the Event, she was no longer
despised by Alexander, but was freely admitted to the King both by night and by
day, and often was in his Bedchamber when he was asleep. It Is said at that
time this Prophetess by chance met the King as he came from his Cups, and
entreated him to return to his Companions, and spend the whole Night in
Drinking. Alexander judging it might be a Divine Warning, returned, and by that
means disappointed the Traitorous Designs of the Pages.

The next day, Epimenes the Son of Arseus, one of the Conspirators, discovered
the whole matter to his Friend Caricles the Son of Menander, Caricles to
Eurylochus the Brother of Epimeues; Eurylochus going into Alexander's Tent;
revealed all to Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, the Esquire of the King's Body, and
he to Alexander, who forthwith ordered all that Eurylochus had named to be
seized; who being apprehended, upon their Examination confessed their Treason,
and discovered some others.

Aristobulus indeed says, that they declared Calisthenes stirred 'em up to
undertake this piece of Villainy, which Ptolemy likewise confirms: But there are
some others that give another account of this matter, viz. That Alexander
perfectly hated Calisthenes, and because there was a great Intimacy between him
and Hermolaus, he was easily wrought up on by the Informers to suspect
Calisthenes.

Some likewise say, That Hermolaus being brought beforethe Macedonians,
confessed that he himself plotted the Treason, and that it was not in the Power
of any freeborn Man to endure the Disgrace and Dishonor Alexander had brought
upon him; and then reckoned up all that Alexander in that kind had done; to
wit, the unjust Death of Philotas, and with far more Injustice his putting to
death Parmenio, Philotas's Father, and the rest that were then killed; the
Murder of Clitus through his Drunkenness, his assuming the Habit of the Medes,
the Edict for his Adoration, not yet recalled, his carousing and drunken
Dozing; which vile Courses he not able further to endure, he was earnest to
regain Liberty both to himself and the rest of the Macedonians. Hereupon
Hermolaus and the rest that were seized were stoned to death by the
Standers-by. But Aristobulus says, That Calisthenes was carried about with the
Army in Chains, and died. Ptolemy says he was first racked, and afterward
hanged. So that these Authors, though of great Credit and Repute, and who were
themselves present in the Army, and attending upon Alexander at the very time
when these things were acted, yet cannot agree about a matter, whereof there
could be no doubt at all at the time when it was done.

10. The King's Expedition against those called Nauticans, or Naurans; and the
Destruction of many of his Army by a great Snow. Curtius, lib. VIII. c. 4.
THese things being thus set in order, the third Month he marched From Naura,
or Nautica.
out of his Winter Quarters toward a Country called In Sogdiana
Gabaza. The first day he had an easy March; the next day was not as yet
stormy or gloomy, but something darker than the day before, not without some
threatening of a Storm at hand. The third day the whole heaven flashed with
Lightning, sometimes light, then presently dark, which not only amazed the
Eyes, but terrified the Hearts of the distracted Army. The Air resounded with
continual Thunder, and Thunderbolts up and down seemed to be shot from the
Clouds; the Army, even struck deaf with the Thunder, as Men astonished, durst
neither march nor stand still. Then on a sudden fell down a Storm of Hail like
a violent Torrent. At first they covered themselves with their Shields, but
presently their henumb'd and frozen Hands let fall their Arms, neither did they
know toward what Place or Country to move themselves, the Violence of the
Storm being greater than could possibly be avoided, turn themselves, which way
soever they would. Their Ranks and Order therefore being broke, they wandered
through the O^r Forest.
Wood in Parties as they could; and many fainting rather with Fear than through
Weariness, fell down upon the Ground, although the Fierceness of the Cold had
frozen the Hail; others leaned themselves to the Bodies of Trees, which was to
many both a Support and Defense. Neither were they deceived in choosing out a
place to die in, when their natural Heat, overcome by the Cold, left them
immovable.

But it was a grateful Sloth to them that were tired out, neither did they
count it i^ksome to find Rest by Death; for the Cold was not only vehement, but
also not likely to abate, and the dark Shades of the Wood, besides the Storm
(which was as the Night) suppressed and kept out the Light, that common Comfort
and Refreshment. The King only was patient under this sad Misforttune, and
walked round his Camp, and brought together the dispersed, and lifted up them
that were down, showing them the Smoke that came from Chimneys afar off,
advising every one to take the highest Refuge. Neither did any thing conduce
more to their Safety, than to see the King, who had taken more Pains than they,
yet most unwearied of any, and therefore were ashamed to leave him. But
Necessity, more forcible than Reason in their Distresses, found out a Remedy
for the Cold: For hewing down the Trees with their Axes, they set the Heaps of
Wood up and down on fire, so that you would have thought all the Wood had been
on a ^lame, and scarce any place left for the Army to lodge. This Heat
presently enlivened their benumbed Limbs, and by degrees their Spirits, which
the Cold had even closed up, began freely to pass Some were entertained in the
Houses of the Barbarians which hid from them in the late Wood; but now their
Necessity had discovered others lodged in their Tents, which though wet, yet
were more tolerable, the Fury of the Storm being something abated. This unhappy
Accident swept away a thousand Soldiers and other mean Scullions, Horse-boys,
etc.
Attendants upon the Camp. It Is reported, that some were found standing at the
side of the Trees, and seemed not only as if they had been alive, but as if
they had been discoursing one with another in the same posture as they were in
when they died.

11. How Alexander falling in Love with Roxana, married her, and induced many
of his Friends to marry the Daughters of the Chief Men among the Barbarians.
Arrianus, lib. IV.
Roxana, the Daughter of Oxyartes, was there likewise, a Virgin ripe for
Marriage, * In the Rock before mentioned Sogdiana; but Strabo says it was at
the Rick in Bactria. See before.
whom Alexander's Fellow Soldiers judged to be the most Beautiful Lady of all
Asia next to the Wife of Darius; upon sight of her, Alexander fell deeply in
Love, yet would not by any means use her dishonourably as a Captive; neither
did he disdain to take her for his Wife. Which Act of Alexander (I conceive)
was more worthy of Praise than Reprehension. And for Darius's Wife (who was
esteemed the most Beautiful Lady of all Asia) he neither was tainted so much as
with an unlawful Desire toward her, or as a domineering Lord commanded her to
his Bed, though he was then in the Heat of his Youth, and the highest pitch of
Worldly Prosperity; which two Conditions are apt greatly to provoke Men to be
very injurious to others: But he, out of a Reverence to her Person, spared her;
herein evidencing his great Continency, and prompted likewise thereunto by a
desire of his own Honor and Reputation.

12. His breaking into India, and his putting all to the Sword in the first
Country he entered, to be a Terror to the rest. Arrianus, lib. IV.
IN the middle of the Spring, Alexander removed with his Army out of Bactria
toward India, and left Amyntas there with three thousand five hundred Horse,
and ten thousand Foot. Having passed the Caucasus, in ten days he came to
Alexandria, which he had built in Paropanisus at his first Expedition into
Bactria, and put out the Governor here for his ill Behavior in the Place, and
then Peopled the City with more Inhabitants out of the Neighboring Countries,
and such of his Macedonians as were grown unser ^ceable for the War, and made
Nicanor, one of his Associates, Governor of the City;-but appointed Tyriaspes
Commander of the whole Region of Paropanisus, and of all that Territory or
Province as far as the River Cophene. Thence he went to the City of Nicea, and
there offered Sacrifice to Minerva, and then marched to the River Cophene, and
sending an Herald, commanded Taxiles and the rest of the Governors of the
Countries lying beyond the River to come to him. Taxiles and other petty
Princes came first and met him, bringing him large Presents, such as were most
esteemed in India, promising likewise to send him five and twenty Elephants. He
there divided his Army, and sent Hephestion and Perdiccas into the Country
called Peucelaotis toward the River Indus, together with the Troops of
Georgias, Clitus, and Meleager, and half the Horse of the Social Band, and all
the Mercenary Horse, commanding them to take in by fair means or foul all the
Towns which lay in their way, and that when they came to the Bank of the River
Indus, they should prepare all things that were necessary to pass over. And
with them was sent Taxiles and other Commanders of those Parts, to put in
execution, when they came to the River Indus, what Alexander had commanded.

Astes, the Governor of the Country of Peucelaotis, offering to revolt, lost
both himself and the City which he put himself into; for Hephestion came and
besieged it, and after thirty days time took it, and killing Astes, made one
Sangaeus Governor of it, who a little before forsaking Astes, had fled over to
Taxiles, which made Alexander the more confide in him ever after.

Alexander with his Band of Silver Targeteers, and the Horse of his Fellow
Cavallers that went not with Hephestion, and the Troop of Horse called
Asseteri, together with his Archers, Agrians, and Horse-Lancers, marched into
the Country of the Aspians and Phyraeans, and Arosacans; and going on his way
to the River Choes (which was for the most part mountainous and rocky) and
having at last past that River, he commanded Craterus to come after him fair
and softly with the Foot; and himself taking with him the whole Body of his
Horse, and eight hundred Macedonian Foot-Targeteers on Horseback, he marched
away at a great rate, because he heard that the People of the Country were
fled, some to the Mountains, others to fenced Cities, and all to make head
against him. Having set upon the first of these Cities that lay in his way,
those which came forth to oppose him, he routed at the first Charge, and drove
them back into the Town, but was himself wounded with a Dart in the Shoulder,
which pierced through his Breast Plate; but the Wound was but slight, the
Breast Plate repelling the force of the Dart. Ptolemy, Lagus, and Leonatus were
likewise wounded. Then Alexander observing what part of the Wall was fittest to
pitch upon for an Assault, encamped close to the City, just against that part.
The next day early in the morning the Macedonians took the outward Wall with
little ado, for the City was doubly walled. At the inner Wall the Inhabitants
made some resistance; but when the Macedonians had once scaled the Walls, and
the Townsmen felt the Arrows showing down about their ears, not being able
longer to endure, the Soldiers within brake out of the Gates, and ran every Man
his way to the Mountains, many of whom the Macedonians killed in the pursuit;
and all the Prisoners (being in a rage because the King was wounded) they put
to the Sword. Many escaped to the Mountains, which were not far off from the
City. Having laid the City level with the Ground, he marched away with his Army
to Andaca another City.

13. Of his Kindness to the City Nysa, upon the account of his Descent from
Bacchus. Arrianus, lib. IV.
IN this Region, into which Alexander entered, lying between the Rivers Cophone
and Indus, is situated Nysa, a City built (as is reported) by Bacchus.
Dionysius, at that time when he Commanded in India; who this Dionysius was,
and when, or from whence he brought in his Armies against the Indians, I cannot
conjecture: Whether it was the T^eban from Thebes, or he from Tmolus in Lydia,
that led an Army from thence against the Indians. But though he passed into so
many Warlike Nations, at that time altogether unknown to the Greeks, yet he
subdued none of them but the Indians. This only I am satisfied in, That those
Fables that the Ancients have writ concerning the Gods, are not too curiously
to be pried into; for such Writings as do not otherwise deserve much Credit,
yet when they happen to speak of the Gods, they seem not to be altogether
incredible.

As soon as Alexander came with his Army to Nysa, they sent Acuphis, the Chief
Man of the City to him, with thirty others of the Leading Men of the Place,
entreating him to leave the City free to the God Bacchus. When the Ambassadors
were introduced into the King's Pavilion, and saw him as yet dusty with his
March, clad with all his Armor, and his Helmet upon his Head, and his Lance in
his Hand; amazed at the sight of him, they fell flat upon the Ground, and were
silent a long time together: But after that Alexander had commanded them to
rise, and cheer up, Acuphis thus began: -- The Nysaeans entreat, O King, That
in reverence to Bacchus you would leave the City free, and the Inhabitants to
Govern by their own Laws: For Dionysius, after he had conquered the Indians,
and was about to return to the Grecian Sea, built this City for those Soldiers
who were unserviceable for War (being of Bacchus' s Family) as a perpetual
Monument to Posterity of his Expedition and Victory; as your Majesty has built
Alexandria at Mount Caucasus, and another in Egypt, and many others, some
finished, and others now in building, having now performed much more than our
Dionysius did: And he called the City Nysa, from his Nurse so named, and the
Country Nysaea; and the Mountain which hangs over the City, he was pleased to
call Meros (which is a Thigh) because according to the Fables he was cherished
in Jupiter' s Thigh. Since that time we have dwelt in Nysa as a free City, and
have lived at ease under the Use of our own Laws. And that this Place was built
by Bacchus, this one thing may be a Demonstration, That Ivy grows no where in
India but in this City. This Speech of Acuphis was very pleasing to Alexander;
for he had a great desire those things should be believed that were related
concerning Bacchus's Peregrination, and would have none to doubt but that Nysa
was built by Bacchus, because that he himself was now come as far as Bacchus
ever came, and was still desirous to go further than he ever did. And he was of
Opinion, that the Macedonians, out of Emulation to the Acts of Bacchus, would
willingly with himself undergo further Toils and Labors. He granted therefore
Liberty to the Nysaeans, and that they should Govern according to their own
Laws And when he understood what their Laws were, and how they were under the
Government of an Aristocracy, he commended their Constitution, and commanded
'em to furnish him with three hundred Horsemen, and send him a hundred of them
that were of the Aristocracy (who were three hundred in all) such as he would
choose. Acuphis was one of the Number of them that were picked out, whom the
King had made Governor of the whole Province of Nysaea. It Is reported, that
Acuphis smiled at these Demands, and that Alexander asking him why he laughed,
Acuphis answered, How is it possible, O King, for the City to be well Governed,
when it is stripped of an hundred good Men all at once! But if your Majesty have a
Kindness for the City, be pleased to accept of three hundred Horsemen (and more
if you think fit;) but as for an hundred of the best Men of the City which you
desire, be pleased to be content with two hundred of the worst, that whenever
you return hither again, you may find that the City has maintained and kept up
her ancient State and Grandeur. With these Words, because he judged them
prudently spoken) Alexander was persuaded, and commanded only the three hundred
Horsemen to be sent him; and for the three hundred of the Chief of the City, he
neither desired them, nor any others in their stead. But Acuphis his Son, and
his Nephew by his Sister, were sent to Alexander.

Afterward Alexander had a longing desire to see that City, in which the
Nysaeans boast there are some Monuments of Dionysius; and to go likewise,
accompanied with some Horse of his Friends, and a Regiment of Foot, to the
Mountain Meros, that he might see the Hill grown over with Ivy and Laurel, and
the shady Groves, that abounded with all sorts of wild Beasts. The Ivy was a
very pleasant Sight to the Macedonians, having not seen any of a long time; for
India bears no Ivy, neither those Places where Vines grow. Of the Ivy they wore
Garlands on their Heads, singing Praise to Bacchus, with all his Titles and
Appellations. Alexander there sacrificed to Bacchus, and feasted with his
Friends.

14. How having taken a strong City called Massaga, he put to the Sword all the
Mercenary Soldiers that had fought Valiantly. Arrianus, lib. IV.
WHen the Barbarians heard of Alexander's coming, they durst not abide him in a
Body, but brake up their Army, and dispersed themselves every one as they could
into several Cities, purposing there to stand upon their Guard.

Alexander marched first with his Army to Mazaga.
Massaga, the greatest City of that The Country of the Assacenians.
Country; approaching therefore with his Army close to the City; the Barbarians
having got into the Town for their assistance seven thousand Mercenary Indians
from the inner parts of India made a fierce Sally upon the Macedonians as they
lay Encampt. Alexander perceiving that the Fight was likely to be under the
City Walls, designed to draw off the Enemy at a further distance, lest when
they fled (which he clearly foresaw they would) they might with ease (being so
very near) get into the Town and so escape, perceiving therefore the Barbarians
pouring out upon them, he forthwith commanded his Macedonians to wheel about
and make to a Hill about seven furlongs distant from the River Guraeus, where
he had purposed to Encamp. The Enemy hereupon emboldned (the Macedonians
seeming to give back) in great confusion and disorder hotly pursued them, But
when they were got within the cast of a dart, upon a sign given by Alexander,
the Phalanx furiously turned upon 'em. But first indeed the Horse that were
darters, the Agrians and Archers made an excursion, and engaged with the
Barbarians, But Alexander led the Phalanx (in Battalia) himself. The Indians
amazed at the sudden and unexpected turn, when it came to the Swords point fled
back into the City. Two hundred of 'em were killed in the pursuit, but the rest
got within the Walls.

Alexander presently drew up his main Battle of Macedons before the Walls, and
from thence was slightly wounded by an Arrow struck into his Heel. The next day
the Engines (...). Curtius, l. 8. c. 10. says the Calf of the Leg.
being brought up to the Walls, part of 'em were easily batterr'd down, upon
which (the Macedonians endeavoring to force their way through the Ruins) the
Indians stoutly withstood them, so far as that Alexander for that day sounded a
retreat, and called off his Men. But the next day the Macedonians renewed the
Assault with greater vigor, bringing up a wooden Tower to the Walls, out of
which the Archers pouring showers of Darts and Arrows grievously galled the
Indians. But yet with all these devices they were not able to enter. The Third
day the main Body of the Macedonians being again led up to the Walls, a Bridge
was cast out of the Wooden Tower over that part of the Wall that was broken
down, upon which Bridge the King ordered the Agyraspides who had before taken
Tire after the same manner; but when with great Courage and Resolution they had
got upon it with too much Weight, it yielded and broke, and it and the
Macedonians tumbled down together. The Barbarians rejoicing at the Accident,
set up a great shout, and plied the Macedonians with Stones, and all sorts of
Darts and Arrows, or whatever was at hand, or they could come at; and others
issuing out through narrow Sally-ports that were placed between the Turrets,
knocked them in that Disorder and Confusion on the head. Alexander sent Alcetas
with a Party to take care of the wounded Men, and to call the Besiegers off
into the Camp. The 4th day he cast another Bridge with other Devices upon the
Walls; but the Indians (as long as the Governor of the place was alive)
valiantly repulsed the Macedonians: But when he was killed by a Dart from the
Engines, and many of their Men lost by continual Assaults, and others wounded
and become thereby unserviceable, they sent to Alexander, who was very ready
and willing to spare such stout and valiant Men. He agreed therefore with the
mercenary Indians, that they should take up Arms with him, and join themselves
to his Army. Hereupon they marched out of the City by themselves, and encamped
upon an Hill opposite to the Macedonians, with a design to fly away in the
night to their own Country, because they would not fight against the other
Indians. When Alexander was informed hereof, the same night he surrounded the
Hill with his Forces, and put 'em every one to the Sword, and took the City
(now without these that should defend it) by storm, and in it the Mother and
Daughter of Assacenus. On Alexander's side there were only five and twenty
killed during the whole Siege.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF The Principal Matters In the First Five BOOKS of Diodorus the
Sicilian: Containing his MYTHOLOGIES.
Note: The First Figures of this Table refer to the Pages of this Book; and the
Last Figures with r. before them, refer to the Pages of Rhodomannus's Edition
placed in the Margin of this Book.

A.
ACteon; Torn in pieces by Dogs, and Occasion, Page 171 r. 195 Adoption; the
Rites of it among the Barbarians, 147 r. 170 Adulteresses; an innumerable
Company burnt in Egypt, 31 r. 30 Aeacus; His Genealogy, 166 r. 183 Aegestines;
Their War with the Selinuntines, 297 r. 103 Egypt; Its Shape, Greatness, etc.
14 r. 19 -- All living Creatures first there, 3 r. 3 -- One Sea, 86 r. 101 --
Other Matters of Egypt, 12, 13, 22, 36, 40, 41, etc. r. 17, 42, 43, 51, 61 --
Divided into three Parts; for the Priests, Kings, and Soldiers, 38 r. 46 --
Three other Classes, 39 r. 47 -- Their Gods most ancient, 3 r. 7 -- Many
Colonies from hence; as Babylonians, Argives, Colchians, Jews, and Athenians,
13 r. 17 -- The Number of their Judges and Salaries, 39 r. 48 -- Their Kings,
etc. p. 36 r. 43, 45, 46. -- Their Burials, 38 r. 57, 58 Aeolus, 164 r. 188 --
The Entertainer of Ulysses, 179 r. 202 Aequinoctial; Under the Aequinox, the
most temperate Air, and the State of the Days and Shadows, 82 r. 97 Air; Airy
Bodies seen in some Parts of Africa, 109 r. 128 Aesculapius; His Original, 166
r. 189 -- Accused by Pluto, ibid. r. ibid. Age; An Age accounted 30 Years with
the Grecians, 81 r. 96 Aethiopians; Boast they were the first Men; p. 85 r. 100
-- Religious, 86 r. ibid Aetna; Vomits Fire, 138. r. 159 Africa; Where Tilled,
and where Desert, p. 108 r. 138 -- Freed from wild Beasts by Hercules, p. 136
r. 157 -- The nature of the Fruits of the African Palm Tree, 81 r. 95
Alexandria; Built by Alexander the Great; p. 26 r. 32, 33 Amalthea; Amalthea's
Horn in Africa, p. 145 r. 141 -- In Aetolia, what? 120 r. 168 Amazons of
Africa, 110 r. 129 -- Their Seats, Arms, etc. 111, 112 r. 130 The Scythian
Amazons, 76 r. 90 -- Their Wars with Hercules, p. 77, 135 r. 91, 156 -- Their
Irruption into Attica, and Overthrow by Theseus, 141 r. 163 Ammon King of
Lybia, the Husband of Rhea, 120 r. 141 -- Overcome by Saturn, 122 r. 142
Amphiraus, General of the Argives at Thebes; a Conjurer Betrayed by his Wife,
and Revenged by his Son, 163 r. 186, 188 Apis Consecrated to Osiris, 9 r. 13 --
Its Worship, 44, 45 r. 54, 55 Apollo; the Son of Jupiter, r. 9 -- Found out the
Laurel, 7 r. 10 -- His several Names, 211 r. 237 -- His good Acts, 209 r. 255
-- His Contest with Marsyas, and his Cruelty toward him, 114, 115 r. 134
Apries; King of Egypt, 35 r. 42 -- Strangled, ibid. Aquaduct; a Stately
Aquaduct made by Semiramis at Ecbatana, 58 32 Arabia; its Description,
Situation, People, etc. p. 78 r. 29, 92 -- The Happy; its Fruitfulness, Spices,
etc. p. 79 r. 93 -- The Tree as Cedar, Juniper, etc. ibid. -- Gold pure,
Cattle, Wild Beasts, Precious Stones, 80 r. 94 -- A description of both Shoars
in the Red Sea, 102, etc. r. 120, 122, 124 Arbaces the Mede, his Conspiracy
against Sardanapalus, 66, 67 r. 78, 80 Argives; their War with the Thebans, 163
r. 186 -- The Destruction of the Seven Captains at Thebes, ibid. Argonauts; the
Expedition of the Argonauts, 148, etc. r. 178, 181, 160 -- Explanation of the
Fable, 151 r. 174 Ariadna; Ariadna's Crown in the Heavens, 160 r. 184 Arts; one
Man using several Trades not allowed in Egypt, 39 r. 46 Asphaltes; the Lake
Asphaltes, and its Brimstone or Pitch, 78 r. 92 Assyrians; their Kings do not
suffer Themselves to be openly seen, 64 r. 76 -- They sent Aid to the Trojans
under Memnon, 65 r. 77 Astrology; the Egyptians excellent Astrologers, 26, 36
r. 32, 44 -- So the Caldeans, 70 r. 83 -- Atlas, Hercules, 141 r. 163 --
Hyperion, 141 r. 131 -- The Heliadae in Rhodes, 200 r. 227 Astyages; the last
King of the Medes; overcome by Cyrus, 72 r. 85 Atalanta; Beloved by Meleager,
Intrapt by the Thestiadae, 145 r. 167 Athens; how their Commonwealth was
divided, 13 r. 17 Atlantides; their Country in Africa, 115 r. 137 -- The Names
of the Atlantides and their Offspring, ibid. Atlas; his Kingdom, and chief
Study, 115 r. 125 -- Why he is said to Carry the Heavens upon his Shoulders,
ibid. Avernus; a Description of the Lake Avernus, 138 r. 159 Amber; where it is
produced, 185, 186 r. 209
B.
Babylon; built by Semiramis, 57 r. 80 -- Its Walls, Towers, Lake, Passage
under Water, Hanging Gardens, 57 r. 69 Bacchus; how many there were, 116 to 119
r. 137, 148 -- His Acts, 120 to 122 r. ibid. 141, etc. -- The Indian Bacchus
the most Ancient, 126, 127 r. 147 -- Why he was of a double Shape, 129 r. 149
-- The natural meaning of Bacchus, 117 r. 147 Bactra; 55, 56 r. 66 -- Besieged
by Ninus, 57 r. 67 Baleares; a Description of the Baliary Islands, 183 r. 206
Balm; the Place and Usefulness, 79 r. 93 Bards; Ancient Poets among the Gauls,
189 r. 213 Belus; his Temple, 58 r. 69 -- His Statue, ibid. r. 70 Beasts;
Worshipped in Egypt, 43, 44 r. 52, 54 Brimstone; how it Rises up in the Lake
Asphaltes, 79 r. 93 -- The Plenty of it about Babylon, 59 r. 73 Britain; The
Description of the Island, 185 r. 203 -- Their Laws, Manners, etc 185 r. 209 --
Their Traffic with Tin there, r. ibid. -- The Island Discovered by Julius
Caesar, ibid. r. 120 Busiris; the Ground of the Story of his killing all
Passengers that landed in Egypt. 46 r. 55 Burials; the manner of Embalming in
Egypt 47 r. 57 Bull; a dreadful wild Bull, 100 r. 117 -- The Marathonian Bull,
159 r. 182
C.
Cadmus; Built Thebes, his Wife, Children, etc. 127, 197 r. 147, 223 -- Was the
First that taught the Greeks Letters, and brought them into Greece, 201, 120 r.
140, 227 Cadusians; their perpetual War with the Medes, 71 r. 84 Caesar; Julius
Caesar first Discovered the Northen Parts to the Romans, 185 r. 120 --
Conquered Britain, ibid. Calydonia; the Calydonian Boar, the Hunting of him,
145 r. 167 Camels; Wild Camels, 105 r. 123 Camels; Leopards of Arabia, their
Shape, 80 r. 94 Camps; the Great Monster, killed by Bacchus, 122 r. 143
Carbuncles; where they are Found, 111 r. 120 Cat; Worshipped in Egypt, 47 r. 53
Chastity; a Trial of Conjugal Chastity, 31 r. 38 Celtiberians; their
Description, Customs, etc. 190 r. 214 Centaurs; their Original, 165 r. 189 --
Their Conflict with Hercules, 133 r. 153 -- And War with the Lapithae, 165 r.
189 -- Eurytion the Centaur killed by Hercules, 144 r. 166 Cerberus; Drawn out
of Hell by Hercules, 139, 140 c. 161 Ceres; is the Earth, 5, 117 r. 8, 137 --
The same with Isis, as the Egyptians say, 206 r. 230 -- Her Acts, 177 r. 200 --
Obscene Speech in her Feasts, ibid. r. 101 Chaldeans; their Astrology, Augurs,
69, 70 r. 51, 82, 83 -- Their Priests, 66 r. 78 Chemmis King of Egypt, his
Pyramid, 32 r. 39 Chius; the Ancient Inhabitants of Chius, r. 238, 239 Circes;
her History, 150 r. 173 Circumcision; the Troglodites Cicumcis'd, 98 r. 115
Caelus King of the Atlantides, his Sons, 113, 115 r. 133, 135 Corsica; its
Situation, Cities, ancient Inhabitants, etc. 181 r. 205 -- Bitter Honey, 182 r.
ibid. Corybantes; the Sons of the Mother of the Gods, 170 r. 194 -- Their
Sacreds, 198 r. 223 Crete; the Antiquities, 116, 122, 135, 204, 211 r. 136,
142, 230, 157, 238 -- Its Name, whence, 122, r. 142 Crocodile; its Description,
16 r. 24 -- The Hunting of it, 16, 17 r. 23 Crueltty of Hecates, 151, 152 r.
173, 151 Cyaxares; the first Monarch of the Medes, 71 r. 84 Cybele; her Name,
whence, 114 r. 134 -- The several Stories of the Atlantides and Phrygians
concerning her, 114, 115 r. 133, 134 Cyrus transferred the Empire from the
Medes, to the Persians, 72 r. 85 -- Crucified by the Scythian Queen, 76 r. 90
D.
Dactyli Judaei, 204 r. 230 Daedalus; his Monument in Egypt, 170 r. 61 -- His
Statues, 168 r. 192 -- His Works in Crete, 159 r. 183 -- In Sicily, r. ibid. --
His Wings, r. ibid. 182 -- In Sardinia, 170 r. 194 Daphne the Daughter of
Tiresias, her Oracles, 164 r. 187 -- Her History, 173 r. 179 Delphos; the
Temple Rifl'd by the Gauls, 189 r. 214 Derceto; the Syrian Goddess, the Mother
of Semiramis, 55 r. 95 Description of pleasant Places, 121, 173, 176, 194, 195
r. 141, 197, 199, 220 Diana; why the Nurse of Children, 208 r. 234, 235 -- What
Places Dedicated to Her in Sicily, 117 r. 200 Deluge; by the Eruption of the
Pontick Sea, 197 r. 223 -- In Boetia, 136 r. 158 -- Rhodes, 200 r. 220 -- In
Samo-Thracia, 197 r. 223 -- Deucalion, 3 r. 7 Diomedon; his Mares devour Men,
135 r. 155 Dogs; Men with Dogs Heads, 100 r. 117 -- Why Worshipped in Egypt, 7
r. 11 Doreans; their War with the Lapithae, 146 r. 169 -- Expuls'd by the
Theban Exiles, 164 r. 187 Dragon at Cholchos, what, r. 162 Druids; Poets of the
Gauls, Philosophers, and Divines, 189 r. 213 Dromenaries, 106 r. 125
E.
Ecbatana; a Famous Aquaduct there, and the City Beautified by Semiramis, 60 r.
72 -- The Palace of Arbaces, 68 r. 81 Effeminacy; a Remarkable Example of
Effeminacy in Sardanapalus, 65 r. 78 Elephants; the manner of Hunting them by
the Ethiopians, 96 r. 112 -- How they are destroyed by Serpents, 89 r. 104 --
Their Fight with the Rhinoceros, 99 r. 117 -- Their manner of Generation,
bringing forth their Young, etc. 75 r. 89 Epitaphs of Isis, r. 16 -- Of Osiris
of Osimanduas, 12 r. 31 Ergamenes; King of Ethiopia, abolished the cruel Custom
of forcing the Kings to kill Themselves, 87 r. 102 Erycina; the Temple of Venus
Erycina, 172 r. 196 Eteocles; his cruel War with his Brother about the Kingdom
of Thebes, 162 r. 186 Euphrates; a Famous River, 67 r. 70 Eurydices; the Wife
of Orpheus, brought back out of Hell by Orpheus, 140 r. 162 Eurystheus; imposes
Labors upon Hercules, 132 r. 153 -- His Death, 158 r. 181 Expiation; the
strange manner of Expiation among the Ethiopians, 81 r. 96
F.
Famine all the World over, but in Egypt, 13 r. 17 Fire; its Irruption, 138,
179 r. 159, 202 Fortunate Islands of Arabia, 108 r. 127 -- In the Atlantic
Ocean, 183 r. 207 Fruits; Two Harvests in the Year in India, 72 r. 85 -- The
Fruitfulness of Taprobane. Corn first found out by Ceres in Sicily, 176, 177,
206 r. 199, 200, 232 Funerals; the Funeral Rites among the Egyptians, 38 r. 57
-- The Pompous Burials of their Kings, 30 r. 46
G.
Ganges, a famous River, 73 Gades or Cadiz, by whom built, 184 r. 208 Gauls;
186 r. 210 -- The Extreme Cold, their Rivers, etc. ibid. r. 214 -- The
Description, 187, 188, 189 r. 211 to 214 Geometry; first found out in Egypt, 36
r. 44 -- The Usefulness of it, 42 r. 51 Giants; Egyptian Giants, 10, 11 r. 16
-- Their Triple War with Jupiter, 207 r. 234 -- Overcome by the Gods, 121 r.
142 Giants of Phlegraea, overcome by Hercules, 138 r. 159 -- Why said to be
Born of the Earth, r. ibid. Gods; the History of the Gods of Egypt, 23, 50 r.
61 -- Their Worship by the Cretians, Ethiopians, 210, 86 100, 237 -- The God
Jao of the Hebrews, 49 r. 59 Gold; the Laborious way of making of Gold, in the
Confines of Egypt, 89, 90 r. 105, 106 -- The Gold Mines in Ethiopia, ibid. --
Gold changed for Brass or Iron, 106 r. 125 -- The History of the Golden Fleece,
157 r. 174 -- A River that flows down Gold, r.
H.
Hecates; her History, 151 r. 173 Helen; carried away by Theseus, 162 r. 185
Heliopolis; by whom built, 50 r. 29 Helius; the Son of Hypericon and Bazilia,
metamorphos'd into the Sun, 113, 114 r. 133 Hellespont; whence the Name
derived, 151 r. 174 Heraclidae; Banished out of all Greece, 158 r. 181 --
Depart out of Peloponnesus for 50 Years, by Agreement, 158 r. 182 Hercules;
there were three, 124 r. 145 -- The Egyptian, Gelai, and him of Alcmena, ibid.
-- The Acts of Hercules the Cretan, 210 r. 236 -- The Genealogy of the last,
his Acts, 131 r. 152 -- His Sickness and Madness, 156 r. 154 -- His further
Acts, r. 156, 163 -- His Labors, 132, etc. r. 153 -- His Expedition into
Spain, 153 r. 156 -- The Institutor of the Olympic Games, 134 r. 155 -- Is
worshipped by the Agyrineans, 139 -- Overcomes the Trojans, 152 r. 176 -- His
Sickness, r. 169 -- He burns himself, 147 r. 176 Hermophrodites; their
prodigious Originals, 129 r. 150 Hermes; the Egyptian Hermes, 6 r. 10 -- His
Inventions, ibid. -- First finder out of Arts, 23 r. 28 Herodotus; the time he
Flourished, 71 r. 83 Hesion; exposed to be devoured by a Whale, 149 r. 171 --
Delivered by Hercules, ibid. Hesperides; diverse Opinions of the Hesperian
Apples, 141 r. 162 Hippolytus; his Stepmother falls in love with him, 161 r.
184 -- Is falsely Accused; Killed by his Chariot, ibid. Homer; the most ancient
of the Poets, 86 r. 100 -- His Works, 152, 164 r. 8, 176, 187 -- Imitates
Orpheus, 50 r. 61 -- The Place of his Birth, ibid. Honey; bitter Honey, 182 r.
205
I.
Jambulus; his strange Voyage and Travels, 81, 84 r. 96, 99 Jason; Captain of
the Argonauts, his Acts, 148, 149 r. 170, 171 -- Goes to Corinth, cast of
Medea, and marries Glauces, 145, 146 r. 179 -- His Death, ibid. Iberians; their
Gold Mines, 191 r. 162 Ibis; the Usefulness of this Bird, 45 r. 55 Ichneumenon;
the Enemy of the Crocodile, 17 r. 22, 55 Ichthyophagi; not affected with any
thing, 91 r. 108 -- The manner of their Burials, 93 r. 109 Jehovah called Jao,
49 r. 59 Indians; their Seven Tribes, 74, 75 r. 88, 89 -- Their War with
Semiramis, 62, 63 r. 47 India; the Description, 72, 73 r. 85, 87 Indus River,
73 Jocasta; the Acts of Jocasta, r. 202 -- The Mother of Oedipus, 162 r. 185
Iolaus; one of the Thespidae brings a Colony into Sardinia, 142 r. 163, 164
Iris or Ireland, an Island of Britain, a fierce People, 189 r. 213 Isis; the
same with Ceres, 6 r. 9 Jews; a Colony of Egypt, 10 r. 17 -- Why they are
Circumcised, 28 r. 35 Judges; the Proceedings in Judicature in Egypt, 39, 40 r.
48 Jupiter; the Ancient Jupiter, was the Brother of Coelus, and King of Crete,
whose Daughters were the Curetes: the other was Lord of the World, the Son of
Saturn, 116 r. 16, 136 -- The Kingdom of the Cretan Jupiter after Ammon and
Bacchus, 123 r. 145 -- More, 204 r. 231, 233 Ixion attempts to Ravish Juno, is
tormented upon a Wheel, 165 r. 189
K.
Kings; draw a Chariot r. 57 -- The strange way of living of the Kings of
Egypt, 36 r. 44 -- Death to the Sabaean Kings to stir abroad, 107 r. 126
Kingdoms; formerly bestowed upon such as had done good Public Service, 23 r.
28
L.
Lakes; a wonderful Lake in Ethiopia, 60 r. 72 -- A Description of the Lake of
Myris, 26, 27 33, 34 -- In Sicily, 139 161 Lapithae; their War with the
Centaurs, 165 r. 189 -- With the Doreans and Hercules, 146 r. 169 Laws; Of the
Egyptians, r. 48 -- Of the Ethiopians, 87 r. 102 Liparae Islands; their
fruitfullness, etc. 180 r. 203 Letters; Two Sorts in Egypt, 86 r. 101 --
Hieroglyphics of Egypt and Ethiopia, what, ibid. -- Greek Letters, why called
Pelasgian, and Phaenician, 120 r. 140 Letters in Tabrobanana, vii Figures, 83
r. 48 Locusts; Eaten, and lived upon by the Ethiopians, 97 r. 114 Lotus; of
Egypt, what, r. 21 -- Tall Trees of Lotus, 105 r. 123
M.
Macarian Islands; why so called, 213 r. 239 Megabarean Ethiopians; their
manner of Burial, 98 r. 115 -- Their voluntary Deaths, 99 r. 116 Marathon; the
Marathonian Bull, 159 r. 182 Maraneans of Arabia; how destroyed, and rooted out
by the Garyndaneans, 105 r. 123 Marsyas: His Contest with Apollo in Music; his
Death, 114, 115 r. 134 Mars; his Inventions and Acts, 209 r. 235 Medea; assists
the Argonauts with her Advice, and makes an Agreement with Jason, 151, 152 r.
173, 174 -- Her wonderful Witcheraft in the Palace of Pelias, 153, 154 r. 176,
177 -- Forsaken by Jason, and cruel Revenge upon her own Children, 156 r. 179
Media; a Catalogue of the Kings, 71 r. 84 Meleager; his sad Destiny, 145 r. 167
Malta Island; its Description, 181 r. 204 Menas; the first King of Egypt, how
preserved by a Crocodile, 46 r. 56 Mercury; the Egyptian Mercury, his Invention
of Arts, Eloquence, Music, etc. 6, 23 r. 10, 28 -- Conductor of Souls, 50 r.
60 Meroes; Islands in Nile, their Description, r. 19, 20 Minerva; the Place of
her Birth, 208 r. 214 -- Her Inventions, 209 r. 235 Minos the first, Son of
Jupiter, 160 r. 183 -- The second, of Lycasta, ibid. -- His Cities, Laws, etc.
211 r. 237 -- His Death in Sicily, 170 r. 194 Minotaur; Killed by Theseus, 160
r. 183 -- How born, 169 r. 193 Money; the Punishment of those that
counterfeited Money in Egypt, 41 r. 50 Moses; the first that put Laws in
writing, 49 r. 59 -- His Praise, ibid. Mice; Bred in Egypt out of the Mud or
Slime, 2 r. 1 Muses; Accompany Bacchus, 127, 128 r. 148 -- And Osiris, 8 r. 10
-- Why, Virgins, 130 r. 150 -- Their Names, ibid. r. 235 Miris, King of Egypt;
his Lake, 26, 27 r. 33, 34 -- His Pyramid and Sepulcher in the Lake, 27 r. 33
Myrrh; A Description of Myrrh, 194 r. 220
N.
Nabathean Arabians, 78, 105 r. 92, 130 -- Thieves, never Conquered, ibid.
Naxus; the History of Naxus, 198, 199 r. 184, 224, 225 Nemean; a Description of
the Nemean Lion, his Place, Death, etc. 132 r. 153 Neptune; his Inventions,
good Deeds, why accounted God of the Sea, 207 r. 233 Nile; the Islands in it,
15 r. 19, 20 -- The Cattracts, Mouths, ibid. -- Beasts, Fishes, etc. 16, 17 r.
20, 21 -- Flow its Decrease is observed, and the different Opinions of the
Inundations of Nile, 18, etc. r. 23, etc. Ninus, King of Assyria; his Acts, 54,
55, 56 r. 64, 65, 66 -- His Death and Sepulcher, 57 r. 67 Nineveh; Built, 55,
r. 65 -- Its Shape, Compass, etc. ibid. -- Its Siege, and taking by Arbaces,
66, 67, 68 r. 80 Ninyas; the Son of Ninus, 64 r. 67 Niobe; her Pride and
Punishment, 167 r. 167 Nysa; the pleasant Situation of the City the Birthplace
of Bacchus, 120, 121 r. 141 -- The Cave of Nysa, a most pleasant Place, 127 r.
147
O.
Obscenity; Obscene Speech used in the Feasts of Ceres, 177 201 Obelisks; the
Obelisks of Semiramis, one of the seven Wonders of the World, 59 r. 71 Oedipus;
his Birth, Casting forth, his Acts, Marriage, etc. 162 r. 180, 185 Olympicks;
the Years: The Olympicks were distant one from another, r. 44 -- Invented by
Hercules Dactylus, 204 r. 230 -- Instituted by Hercules, 134, 155 r. 155, 178
Orion; the Story of Orion, 173 r. 197 Osymanduas; King of Egypt, 24 r. 30 --
His stately Pyramid, ibid. -- His Epitaph, 25 r. 31 Orpheus; why said to draw
Beasts after him, 139, 140 r. 162 -- His History, 140 r. ibid. -- His Verses,
45 r. 28 -- Rites of Bacchus brought into Greece by him, 50 r. 60 Osiris; his
Expedition throughout the whole World, and Acts, 5, 6, 7, 8 r. 9, 10 --
Deify'd; Death, Burial, and Epitaph, 9, 12 r. 9, 12
P.
Palestina, 104, 105 r. 123 Palm Trees; a full Description of the Palm Trees in
Arabia, and the Province of Babylon, 81 r. 95 Palmetum; a pleasant Place of
Palms, and other Delights in Arabia, 104, 105 r. 123 Panchaian Islands; their
Descriptian, 195 r. 220, 221 -- Genius and Customs of the Inhabitants, 196
Paradise; the Earthly Paradise in India, 121 r. 141 Parents; the Honor given
to dead Parents in Egypt, 48 r. 58 Pasiphae; the Wife of Minos, 160 -- Her
Carnal knowledge of a Bull, 169 r. 183, 193 Patricides, 162 r. 628, 185 -- How
Patricides are punished, 40 r. 49 Pelias; King of Colchos; his strange Death by
his own Daughters, through the Witchcrafts of Medea, 154, 155 r. 177, 178
Penthesilea; the Amazon Queen, assists the Trojans, 77 r. 91 Perjury; the
punishment of Perjury, 40 r. 49 Persians; the Persians record their Antiquities
in Rolls of Parchment, or Skins, 71 r. 83 Plague; a great Plague in Rhodes, and
the Cause, 213 r. 239 Phaeton; the Story of Phaeton, 186 r. 210 Phineus; a
Prince in Thrace: his Cruelty toward his two Sons, 149 r. 170 Phaenicians
brought Letters into Greece, 209 r. 235 -- Eminent for getting of Wealth, 191
r. 211 -- Their Colonies, 184 r. 208 Perithous; the History of Perithous, the
Rape of Helen, 161, 162 r. 184, 185 Pillars; Hercules Pillars, 135, 136 r. 157
Pityusa; Islands Described, r. 106 Pleiades; their Names, 115 r. 135 Pluto; his
Genealogy, Invention, 211 r. 237, -- Why called the God of the Dead, 207 r. 233
Punishment of various Crimes in Egypt, 40 r. 49 Polynices; his War with his
Brother, 163 r. 186 Pontus, or the Pontick Sea; once but a Lake, 197 r. 213 --
Of its Breach, 148 r. 170 Priamus; King of Troy, 168 r. 192 -- Placed in the
Kingdom by Hercules, 152 r. 175 Priapus; what, 129 r. 149 Promotheus; the
Explication of the Fable, of his stealing of Fire, 205 r. 231 -- His Eagle,
what, r. 11 -- Loosed from his Chains by Hercules, 135 r. 155 Proserpina; her
Rape, 176, 177 r. 199 -- Places in Sicily dedicated to her, 177 r. 290 Proteus;
King of Egypt, 32 r. 39 -- Why he was said to have several Shapes, ibid.
Pyramids; the Pyramid of Chemmis, one of the seven Wonders of the World, 32 r.
39 -- Mountains like Pyramids, 106 Pythagoras; What be learnt from Egypt, 51 r.
62 -- His Opinion of the Metempsychosis among the Gauls, 187, 188 r. 212
R.
Religion: The Neglect of Religion punished; the Calydonian Boar, 145 r. 167
Remphis; the Egyptian King, exceeding Covetous, 32 r. 39 Rhadamanthus; his
Justice, Acts, Sons, 211 r. 228 -- His Parents, 211 r. 237 -- The Lawmaker in
Crete, 160 r. 183 Rhinoceros, 99 r. 117 -- His Fight with an Elephant, ibid.
Rhodes; divided into three Parts, 158 r. 182 -- The great Deluge there, 200 r.
226 -- Why so called, ibid. Rome; taken by the Gauls, 189 r. 214 -- Built by
Romulus, 137 r. 159
S.
Sabaean Arabians, 107 r. 125 -- The Kings, Riches, etc. 107, 108 r. 126
Samothracia; The Name, Inhabitants, Deluge, Mysteries, Temple, etc. 197, 198 r.
200, 223 Sands; Mountains of Sand, 106 r. 124 -- The sandy Deserts of Arabia,
81 r. 96 Sardanapalus; his Effeminacy, Luxury, Deposition, Death, 65, etc. r.
78, 79, 81 Saturn, King of Egypt, 5 r. 9 -- Saturn one of the Titans, 204, 205
r. 231 -- Killed his Children, 207 r. 233 -- Overcome by Bacchus, 122, r. 143
-- Saturn the Brother of Atlas, 116 r. 136 -- His Impiety, etc. ibid. -- The
Golden Age of Saturn, r. 23 Satyrs; the Companions of Bacchus, 129 r. 149 -- Of
Osyris, r. 11 -- Why they are worshipped, 45 r. 55 Scorpions; where they
abound, 97, 91 r. 114 Semele; her Adultery with Jupiter, and how she was
consumed, 117, 118 r. 137, 138 Semiramis; her History, 55, 56 r. 65, 66 -- Her
Journey into Bactria, r. 67 -- Builds Babylon, 57 r. 68 -- Her Expedition into
India, and other Actions, 60, etc. r. 73, etc. Serbon; The Lake of Serbon very
dangerous, 14 r. 18 Serpents; vast Serpents in Ethiopia, 100, 101 r. 118 --
Destroy Elephants, 89, 102 r. 104 -- The great Serpent taken, and brought to
Alexandria, 101 r. 119 -- How taken, fed and made tame, ibid. -- Serpents
infest Khodes, 201 r. 227 Sesostris; King of Egypt, 27, 28 r. 30, 31 -- Travels
through the World, his famous Acts, 29, 30 r. 34, 35, etc. -- Sesostris the
Second, how cured of his Blindness, 31 r. 38 Sicily; its ancient Names, 176 r.
199 -- Its Circuit, Princes, etc. 178, 179 r. 202 -- Once a Peninsula, 173 r.
197 Silla, a wonderful River, 73 Silenus; the first King of Nysa, 122 r. 143 --
Tutor of Bacchus, 128 r. 148 Sun; in what Shape it rises among the Arabians,
108 r. 127 -- Its Circuit and Course, 51 r. 62 -- India directly subject to the
Tropic of Capricorn, 72 r. 85 Spectra's; in the Air among the Lybians, 109 r.
128 -- The natural Reason of them, 110 r. 129 Sphinx, 162 Spouses; in the
Baliaries prostituted at the Nuptial Feasts to all the Guests, 183 r. 207
Suatues, 168 r. 192 -- As if they were living Men, ibid. Stratagems;
Mock-Elephants made by Semiramis, 62 r. 73 Stymphalia; the devouring Birds of
Stymphalick Lake destroyed by Herculess 133 r. 154
T.
Tantalus; his History in short, 167 r. 191 Taprobana; a Description of the
Island, and of the Inhabitants and their Manners, 90, 97, 98, 99 r. 81, 82,
etc. Thebes; in Egypt built by Osiris, 6 r. 9 Thebans in Greece; their War with
the Argives, 162, etc. r. 186, 187. Theseus; his Original, Acts, Wives, etc.
159, etc. r. 182, 183 Thespiadae; their Original, 142 r. 163 -- Driven out of
Sardinia, settle about Cuma, 182 r. 206 Titans; in Africa, 113 r. 133 -- Assist
Saturn, 116 r. 136 -- Are rooted out by Bacchus, 123 r. 144 -- The Titans in
Crete, their Parents, Sisters, etc. 204, 205 r. 231 Troglodites; their Manners,
18, 98, 99, 100 r. 115, 117, 120 Troy; taken by Hercules, 143, 144 r. 165, 166,
175 -- The Pedigree of the Kings, 167, 168 r. 191 Typhon; the Giant in Phrygia,
127, r. 234 Trees; how Sinnis destroyed Men by binding Trees together, r. 182
-- Them that sleep in Trees, 159 r. 183
V.
Uchoreus; King of Egypt, built Memphis, 26 r. 32, 33 Venus; the Daughter of
Saturn, 5 r. 9 -- Her Office, 208 r. 234 -- Her several Names, 211 r. 237 --
Her magnificent Temple in Sicily, 172 r. 196 Vesuvius; Mount Vesuvius in
Campania vomits Fire, 138 r. 159 Virgin; a monstrous Virgin in Scythia, 76 r.
89 Vulcan; the Inventer of Fire, 5 r. 8 -- Where he is worshipped, 209 r. 235
W.
Writing; from the top of the Leaf downward, in Tapribana, 83 r. 98 Wine; made
of Barley, found out by Osiris, 8 r. 10
X.
Xerxes; his innumerable Army, 56 r. 66
Y.
Years; an Account of the Egyptian Year, 26 r. 32 -- The Greeks Great Year, 78
r. 92 -- The Lunar Year of 30 Days, 12 r. 15 -- The Year of 4 Months, ibid.
Z.
Zythus; a Drink of Barley, 127 r. 147
A TABLE OF The Principal Matters In the Last Ten BOOKS of Diodorus the
Sicilian: Containing his MYTHOLOGIES.
Note: The First Figures of this Table refer to the Pages of this Book; and the
Last Figures with r. before them, refer to the Pages of Rhodomannus's Edition
placed in the Margin of this Book.

A.
A Gathocles his Butcheries in Sicily, 687 r. 770 Abderites; almost all cut off
by the Treballians, 423 r. 476 -- Delivered by Chabrias, ibid. Acarnanians;
their War with the Ambrociats, 287 r. 317 Achaians; assist Phayllus, 494 r. 529
-- Demetrius restores Liberty to their Cities, 494 r. 786 Acimnestus; his
unfortunate aspiring to the Government at Enna, 364 r. 402 Agrigentines; their
War with the Syracusians, and their Rout, 243 r. 269 Ada; Princess of Caria
Restored by Alexander the Great, 531 r. 574 Adranum; in Sicily built, 375 r.
416 Aeacides; King of Epirus endeavors to restore his Sister Olympias to the
Kingdom of Macedon, 612 r. 676 -- But in Vain, 624 r. 690 -- Is expelled his
Kingdom, ibid. -- Restored, and afterward killed in a Battle, 642 r. 712
Aegestines; their War with the Lilybaeans, 259 r. 286 -- With the Selinuntians,
297 r. 328 -- Burn the Tents of Dionysius, 382 r. 425 -- The Cruelties Executed
upon them by Agathocles, 686 r. 769 Aegesta; wholly Destroyed and Razed, 687 r.
770 Aegineans; are Subdued by the Athenians, 256 r. 283 -- Expelled by the
Athenians, 281 r. 309 Aegium; taken and razed by Aristodemus, 637 r. 707
Aegppt; their Defection from the Persians, 252 r. 279 -- The two Persian
Expeditions against them, 254, 255 r. 280, 281, 282 -- They assist Evagoras
against Artaxerxes Mnemon, 410 r. 460 -- King Acovis leagues with Gaius against
the Perseans, 413 462 -- King Tachus his War with Artaxerxes, 473 r. 504 --
They revolt from Tachus, and Tachus restored by Agesilaus, 474 r. 506 -- Revolt
from Artaxerxes Ocus, 496 r. 531 -- Gained by Alexander M. 542 r. 588 --
Ptolemys Province, 591 r. 628, 648 Aequi Conquered by the Romans, 289 r. 319,
786 Aetna; the City Aetna first called Eunesia, 254 r. 281 Aetolians; overcome
the Athenians, and Besieged Naupactus in vain, 287 r. 317 -- Rebel against
Alexander the Great, 522 r. 563 -- Oppose Alexander's Edict, 577 r. 632 --
Their War with Antipater, 584 r. 641 -- Their Treachery against the Agrineans,
638 r. 708 Africa; dry and full of Serpents, 674 r. 754 -- The Africans rebel
against the Carthaginians, 391 r. 437 -- Divided into four Sorts, 681 r. 762
Agathocles; his Original, Increase, and Cruelty, 607 r. 670 -- Becomes King,
610 r. 673 -- His Cruelty at Gela, 655 r. 739 -- His Fight with the
Carthaginians at Ecnomus unsuccessfull, 655 r. 729 -- His Preparations for an
Expedition into Africa, 658 r. 734 -- Burns his Ships in Africa, Beats the
Africans, 660, etc. r. 738, 739, 740 -- His further Acts there, 670 r. 749, r.
750, 752 -- His treachery against Ophellas, 673 etc. r. 753, 754 -- Takes
Utica, 680 r. 761 -- Flies back into Sicily, 681 r. 762 -- His Acts there, 682,
683, etc. r. 764, r. 765, 766 -- Returns into Africa and is worsted by the
Africans, 685 r. 767 -- A mutiny in his Camp, ibid. -- Flies out of Africa, his
Sons murdered, and his Army dispersed, and all made Slaves, 686, 687 r. 769 --
His Cruelty upon the Aegestines, 687 r. 769 -- And the Syracusians, idid. --
His Sacrilege and Death, 699 r. 785 Agesilaus; General against the Persians,
392 r. 438 -- His Praise, 421 r. 473 -- His Acts in Egyyt, 474, 475 r. 505, 506
-- His Death, 475 r. 506 Agis; King of Lacedemon, 277 r. 306 -- Accused for
making Peace wiuh the Argives, 295 r. 326 -- His Valor at the Battle of
Mantinea, 295 r. 326 -- General against Antipater, 547 r. 595 -- His Heroical
Death, ibid. Agrigentines; overcome by the Syracusians, 243 r. 269 -- A famous
Pond there, and other Works, 228 r. 256 -- Their ancient Grandeur, 340 r. 374
-- Besieged, 341 r. 377 -- The Miserable destruction of the City, 343 r. 379 --
They afterward seek to free all the Cities of Sicily, 670, 681 r. 748, 762
Agrinium; a City of Acarnania, the Cities put to the Sword by the Aetolians
against terms agreed, 638 r. 708 Alcetas; Brother of Perdiccas overcome by
Antigonus, 593 r. 651 -- Betrayed by the Pisidians; kills himself, 594 r. 652
Alcibiades sent by the Athenians to Argos, against the Lacedaemonians, 296 r.
327 -- His Praise, 297 r. 329 -- Accused to be the ^^thor cutting off the Nead
of Mercury's Statues, 301 r. 332 -- Is Condemned in his absence, 301 r. 333 --
Flies to Sparta, ibid. -- Restored to favor of the People, 333 r. 367, 368 --
Banishes himself, 336 r. 370 -- Treacherously murdered by Pharnabazus, 362 r.
400 Alesa; built by Archonides in Sicily, 364 r. 403 Alexander the Son of
Amyntas King of Macedon, 433 r. 488 -- His Acts against Alexander Phereus, 434
r. 489 -- Killed by Ptolemy Alorites, 478 r. 510 Alexander M. a short History
of him, 521 r. 562 -- The Fight at Chaeronea, 516 r. 555 -- His besieging and
razing of Thebes, 524 527 r. 568 -- His design against Persia, his Passage into
Asia, and mustering of his Army, 528 r. 570 -- The Battle at Granicum, 529 r.
571, r. 572, 573 -- His Acts in the lesser Asia, 529, 530 r. 574, 576 -- His
desperate Sickness, 534 r. 578 -- The Battle at Issus, 535 r. 579 -- Besieges
Tire, 538 r. 583 -- Takes Gaza, 541 r. 588 -- Gains Egypt, ibid. -- Goes to
Jupiter Hammon's Temple, 542 r. 589 -- The Battle at Arbela, 546 r. 591 --
Enters Susa, 551 r. 598 -- His kindness to the Greeks maimed by the Persians,
550 r. 597 Persepolis burnt by him, 552 r. 599 Thalestris, Queen of the
Amazons, 554 r. 603 -- His other Acts in Persia, 555, 556, etc, r. 604, 605,
606 -- His Expedition into India, 558 r. 608 -- His Acts there, 560, etc. r.
610, 612, 613 -- His War with the Oxydracans, 563 r. 613 -- His desperate Case
and Hazard there, ibid. -- Marries Statira, 567 r. 619 -- Enters into Babylon,
570 r. 622 -- Prodigies before his Death, 572 r. 624 -- His Intemperance,
Sickness, and Death, ibid. -- The Division of his Conquests among his Captains,
574, 591 r. 628, 648 -- A Description of his Funeral Chariot, 586 r. 642 --
The Captains join with Eumenes, and presently fall from him, 617 r. 682 -- The
magnificent Feast of the Captains and Great Commanders in Persia, 617 r. 682 --
The third division of the Provinces, 628 r. 696 -- All the Captains join
against Antigonus, 633 r. 701 -- Great Captains take upon them the Style of
Kings, 654, 680 r. 728, 761 Alexander King of Epirus, 510 r. 548 Alexander Son
of Alexander the Great, together with his Mother murdered by Cassander, 654 r.
728 -- The Family of Alexander the Great Extinct, 672 r. 752 Alexandria; in
Egypt, built by Alexander the Great, 543 r. 589 -- Another beyond Caucasus, 568
r. 606 -- Another in India, 556 r. 617 Alexander Pheraeus; his War with the
Thessalians and Macedonians, 434, 438 r. 489, 494 -- His Cruelty, 440 a. 466 --
His other Acts, 442, 475 r. 499, 507 -- Is murdered by his Wife, 483 r. 517
Alexander Polysperchon; his Acts, 602, 623, 632, 636, etc. r. 662, 689, 700,
706 etc. Amazons; the Queen lies with Alexander the Great, r. 663 Amilcar; the
Carthaginian General besieges Himera, 226 r. 253 -- His Death, 227 r. 254
Amilcar; the Carthaginian General against Agathocles 654 r. 728 -- Is taken
attempting to surprise Syracuse in the night, and his Punishment, 669 r. 747,
748 Amhictyons; their decrees against the Spartans, 491 r. 525 -- Against the
Phocians, 505 r. 542 Amphipolis; an Athenian Colony, their Slaughters, 252,
276, r. 278, 304, 279 -- Their various Changes, 290 r. 321 Amyntas; King of
Macedon, 283 r. 312 -- Driven out of his Kingdom, 397 r. 444 -- His War with
the Olynthians, 416 r. 467 -- His Death, 433 r. 488 Andromachus; the builder of
Tauromenium in Sicily, 480 r. 513 Antigenes; Colonel of the Argyraspides, 601
r. 661 -- Burnt alive by Antigonus, 626 r. 694 Antigonus; his share in the
Provinces, 574 r. 628 -- Most Active of all Alexanders Captains, 584 r. 640 --
Joins with others against Perdiccas, ibid. -- His first Expedition against
Eumenes, 591 r. 649 -- His other Acts, 592, 593, etc. r. 650 r. 651, 654, 655,
656, 661, 666 -- His second Expedition against Eumenes, 605, 614, 615 r, 666,
679, 680 -- His other Expedition against Eumenes, 618 r. 683 -- A Battle
between him and Eumenes, 620 r. 686 -- His last Battle with Eumenes, and his
Victory, 626 r. 693 -- He robs the Treasuries at Susa, 629 r. 697 -- His
Quarrel with Seleucus, 633 r. 701 -- Besieges Tire, and takes it, 635 r. 704 --
His other Acts, 639, 641, 643, 648 r. 709, 712, 714, 720 -- His Expedition
against the Nabathaeans, 649 r. 722 -- Builds Antigonia, 677 r. 758 -- His
Expedition into Egypt, unsuccessfull, 688 r. 770 -- His War with the Rhodians,
690 r. 774 Antipater; Macedonia allotted to him, 574 r. 628 -- The Lamian War
with the Athenians, 578 r. 633 -- Conquers the Athenians, and changes their
Government, 581 r. 637 Aorni; the Rocks of Aornus described, 558 r. 607 Apes;
the Indian Apes, 610 r. 562 -- Worshipped in Africa, 635 r. 704 Apollonides
forced to abdicate the Government of Agrigentum by Timoleon, 514 r. 553 Apollo;
the besieged Tyrians bind Apollo in Golden Chains, 541 r. 587 -- Alexander M.
releases him, ibid. Apology; Eumenes his story or parable of the Lion wooing a
Virgin, 618 r. 684 Apothegms; of Agesilaus, 448 r. 506 -- Of Alcibiades, 277,
544 r. 306, 591 -- Of Antipater, 612 r. 676 -- Of the Athenians to Mardonius,
230 r. 257 -- To them that fled from the Battle at Syracuse, 307 r. 339 -- Of
the Mother of Brasidias, 293 r. 324 -- Of Callicratides, 348 r. 384 -- Of
Charonidas, 270 r. 299 Of Demades, 516 r. 555 -- Of Demaratus, 218 r. 245 -- Of
Diomedon, 360 r, 386 -- Of Dionysius, 479 r. 512 -- His Apothegmatick Letter to
the sacrilegious Athenians, 504 r. 541 -- Of Dionysius his Friends, in
persuading him not to leave the Government, 689 r. 773 -- Of Epaminondas, 430,
445, 618 r. 485, 503, 684 -- Of Gellias, 340 r. 375 -- Of the Greeks, 216 r.
243 -- Of Heloris, 360 r. 399 -- Of Hephestion, 571 r. 623 -- Of Hermocrates,
519 r. 559 -- Of the Lacedemonian Ambassadors, 288 r. 318 -- Of Leonidas, 217
r. 244, 245 -- Of Megaclis, 689 r. 773 -- Of Myronidas, 257 r. 284 -- Of
Pharnabazus, 425 r. 478 -- Of Philoxenus, of Dionysius his Verses, 411 r. 461
-- Of Proxenus, 369 r. 409 -- Of Ptolemy, 647 r. 718 -- Of Socrates, the
General of Cyrus, 369 r. 410 -- Of Sophilus, 368 r. 409 -- Of Thessalion, 497
r. 533 -- Of Thrasibulus to the 30 Tyrants, 373 r. 414 Appius Claudius, his
Works, 672 r 571 Arbela; the Battle at Arbela, by Alexander with Darius, 545,
548 r. 592, 596 Arcadians their Sedition, and War with the Exiles and
Lacedaemonians, r. 488 -- Their other Acts, 434, 436, 443, 524 r. 489, 492, 500,
563 -- Their other War with the Lacedaemonians, and Rout, 410 r. 459 -- Their
War with the Eleans, 440 r. 497 Archenactidae; Kings of the Cimmerian
Bosphorus, 275 r. 303 Archagathus; Son of Agathocles kills Lyciscus in Africa,
670 r. 749 -- The Mutiny that arose thereupon, ibid. -- Against Agathocles, 684
r. 768 -- Archagathus killed by the Soldiers with his Brother, 686 r. 769
Archelaus; King of Macedon, 323 r. 356 -- His Death, 374 r. 416 Archidamus
King; of his Prudence in the Earthquake, and the War, 248 r. 274 -- His Acts,
280, 282, 284 r. 308, 311, 313 Archidamus Son of Agesilaus his Acts, 488, 508
r. 523, 545 Archeus King of Macedonia, 397, 474 r. 444, 550 Arginusae, 348 r.
384 -- The Sea Fight at the Islands of Arginusae, between the Athenians and the
Spartans, ibid. Argivi; their War with the Mycenians, 249 r. 275 -- With the
Lacedaemonians, 319 r. 352 -- The lamentable Sedition at Argos, 296 r. 327 --
Another dreadful Sedition at Argos, called the Scytalisme, 432 r. 487 --
Another War with the Lacedaemonians, 493 r. 528 -- Another Sedition. 635 r. 705
Argyraspides; their age, and Valor, 625, 626 r. 693, 694 -- Their treachery
toward Eumenes, and their just Punishment, 628, 629 r. 696, 697 Aristides; the
Athenian General at Platea, against Mardonius, 231 r. 258 -- His eminent
Justice, 239 r 266 Aristophanes; his Verses of Pericles, 274 r. 307
Aristotiles; the Philosopher, one of the Learned Grecians, 263 r. 291
Armenia; r. 330 -- The Snowy Mountains, the danger of the Grecians there, 370
r. 411 Arridaeus; made King in the room of Alexander M. is murdered by
Olympias, 612 r. 676 -- His royal Burial, 630 r. 699 Arses King of Persia
murdered by Bagoas, together with his Children, 603 r. 564 Artabanus murders
Xerxes, 251 r. 278 -- Is killed, upon his Attempt to murder Artaxerxes, ibid.
Artabazus; the Persian General against Datames, 447 r. 505 -- Rebels against
the Persian King, 462 r. 527 -- Is restored to the Kings favor by Mentor, 502
r. 538 Artaxerxes succeeds Xerxes, 251 r. 278 -- His War with the Egyptians,
253, etc. r. 280, 281, 282 -- With the Athenians at Cyprus, 265 r. 292 -- His
other Acts, 266 r. 293 -- His Peace with the Lacedaemonians, 273 r. 301 -- His
Death, 289 r. 319 Artaxerxes II. Mnemon, succeeded Darius the second, 353 r.
389 -- His War with the King of Egypt, and the Grecians, 446 r. 504 -- War with
his Brother Cyrus, 365, 367 368 r. 405, 407, 408 -- His War with Evagoras, 399,
410 r. 447, 459 -- His Death, 482 r. 506 Asia; the Description, 575 r. 629
Astrology; Meton's Circle of 19 years, called Enneadeceterides, 277 r. 305
Asphaltes; the Lake Asphaltes, 651 r. 724 -- The Description of Pitch, and how
it is gathered, 652 r. 725 Atalanta; Vid. Island. Athenians; their City burnt by
Xerxes, 223 r. 250 -- Their Walls rebuilt by the Policy of Themistocles, 236 r.
263 -- Gain the Dominion of the Sea, 239 r. 266 -- Aid the Rebels in Egypt, and
overcome the Persians, 252, 253 r. 279, 280 -- Their War with the Corinthians
and Egeans, 253, 255 r. 282, 283 -- Their remarkable Victory at Tanagra, over
the Thebans, 257 r. 284 -- Their flourishing Condition after the War with
Xerxes, 263, 264 r. 291, 292 -- The Peloponnesian War, 277 r. 305, etc. --
Their Expedition into Sicily, 284, 285 r. 313, 314 -- Their Fight and Rout in
the Battle with the Beotians, 290 r. 321 -- Their Expedition into Thrace,
against Brasidias, 292 r. 323 Their Cruelty with the Scyonians, ibid. -- Their
second Expedition into Sicily, 300 227 r. 328, 332 -- They besiege Syracuse,
302 r. 334 -- Their Victory at Sea, 303 r. 335 -- Beaten at Sea, 307 r. 339 --
Their Ruin in Sicily, 307 r. 340 -- And their misery there, 314 r. 347 The
Government of 400 in Athens, 315 r. 348 -- Are overcome by the Lacedaemonians,
ibid. -- Their Victory against Callicratides, 349 r. 385 -- Their unjust
Judgment against their Captains, 350 r. 386 -- Their Ruin at Egos Potamos, 352
r. 388 -- The taking of their City by Lysander, 353 r. 389 -- The Thirty
Tyrants of Athens, 357 r. 396 r. 397 -- The War with the Tyrants, 373 r. 414 --
Their Ejection, ibid -- Ten others set up in their room prove as as bad as
they, 374 r. 415 -- Athens walled again, 393 r. 442 -- They stir up the Cities
against Sparta, 419 r. 471, 471 -- The Beotian War, and their Expedition into
Beotia, 420 r. 472 -- How the league with Sparta is broken after the Peace of
Antilcida, ibid. -- A new War with Sparta. The first Victory (after their loss
at Egos-Potamos) against the Spartans at Naxos in a Sea Fight, 422 r. 475 --
Their Expedition into Corcyra, and Victory over the Spartans, -- They assist
the Spartans, their implacable Enemies, against the Thebans by Iphicrates, 435,
437 r. 490, 493 -- Are routed by Philip, 478 r. 511 -- Their Acts in the Social
War, 485 r. 521 -- Their War with Philip, 503 r. 539 -- The Battle at
Chaeronea, where they are overcome by Philip, 516 r. 555 -- Their War with
Antipater, 578 r. 633, etc. -- Their City given up to Antipater, and garrisoned
by him, 581 r. 637 -- Their Democracy restored, 602 r. 662 -- Antigonus and
Demetrius honored by them, 677 r. 757 Athenae; a University for the Liberal
Arts and Sciences, 311 r. 344 Attica; wasted by Xerxes, 223 r. 250 -- By
Mardonius, 230 r. 257 -- By the Spartans, 280, 284 r. 308, 309, r. 313, 314
Atho; Mount Atho dug through by Xerxes's Army, 310 r. 343 Augurs; a
superstitious Observation of Augurs, the occasion of the Ruin of the Athenians
in Sicily, 305 r. 337 -- Showed to Philomelus, 489 r. 524 -- Portending the
death of Alexander M. 571 r. 623 Axiotheca; the Wife of Nicocles murders her
self and her whole Family, 665 r. 743
B.
Babylon; Alexander M. his first Entry into Babylon, 548 r. 596 -- His second
and last, where he died, 570 r. 622 Babylonia; the Province of Arcon, 574 r.
628 -- Its Situation, 576 r. 630 -- Antipater allotted it to Seleucus, 590 r.
648 Bactria; Conquered by Alexander M. The Province of Philip, 574 r. 628 --
The Situation, 576 r. 630 Bagistama; a fruitful Country, r. 621 Bagoas the
Eunuch, colleague with Mentor in Egypt, 499, 500 r. 535, 536 -- Destroys Ochus
and all his Family, 501 r. 537 -- How he was punished, 502 r. 564 Belus; his
Sepulcher, repaired by Alexander M. 570 r. 622 Bessus; treacherously murders
Darius, and stirs up the Bactrians against Alexander M. 552 r. 601 -- Punished
by Alexander M. 556 r. 606 Beotians; whence so called, r. 696 -- Their War with
the Plateans, 280 r. 308 -- With the Athenians, 290 321 -- With the Phoceans,
and Lacedaemonians, 393, 394, 395 r. 439, 441, 442 -- The Beotian War against
the Lacedaemonians to the end, 414 r. 465, 466 -- Overcome by Philomelus, 491 r.
526 -- By Onomarchus, 493 r. 528 -- They overcome Phayllus at Orchomenus,
Cephissus, and Chaeronea, 504 r. 541 -- Overcome by Leosthenes, 578 r. 633 --
Join with Antigonus, 642 r. 713 Boeotarchs, 431 r. 485 Bomilcar; his Ambition,
661 r. 737 -- Invades the Sovereignty over the Carthaginians, 674 r. 754 -- His
Conflict with the Citizens, 675 r. 755 -- His punishment, 676 (...). 756
Bucephalus; Alexander M. his Horse, his properties, 554 r. 603 -- Is taken,
ibid. -- Built a City in India called Bucephala, in memory of his Horse, 564 r.
612 Bura and Helice drowned, two Cities in Greece, 428 r. 481 Buildings;
Stately Buildings in Sicily, 514 r. 553 Burial; the remarkable love of a Wife
to her Husband at his Funeral, 622 r. 689 Bees make their Honey Combs in the
Hipps of Agathocles his Statue, 607 r. 671 Byzantians, their Expedition into
Bithynia, and Cruelty, 297 r. 328 -- The City taken by the Athenians by
Treachery, but not without Blows, 331 r. 366
C.
Cadmus; the first King of Thebes, 271 r. 300 Cadmea; the Citadel of Thebes
taken by the Spartans, 416 r. 467 -- Recovered, 418 r. 470 Callantineans; their
War with Lysimachus, 640 r. 711 Callicrates; his Sea Fight with the Athenians,
305, 349 r. 373, 385 Camillus; overcomes the Volsci, Equi, and the Gauls, 406
r. 456 Campanians; assist Dionysius in Sicily, 330 r. 364 -- Are Rooted out of
Sicily by Timoleon, 514 r. 553 Cappadocia; the Province of Eumenes, 574 r. 628
-- Its Situation, 576 r. 630 Carducians; the hardships of the Grecians through
their Country, 370 r. 411 -- The Mountains there, ibid. Caria; its Situation,
576 r. 630 -- The Province of Cassander, 574 r. 628 Carmania; the Province of
Tlepolimus, 574 r. 628 -- Its Situation, 576 r. 630 Carrhae; Villages in
Mesopotamia, 569 r. 621 Carthaginians; their numerous Forces brought into
Sicily as Confederats with Xerxes, 225 r. 252 -- Their miserable slaughter at
Himera, by Gelo, 227 r. 254 -- Their Cruelty and Impiety in the Sacking of
Selinunt, 327 r. 361 -- And after, of Himera, 330 r. 364 -- Their War with
Dionysius, 376 r. 418 -- Are overcome by the Syracusians, 385 r. 430 -- Their
Navy damaged by Dionysius, 391 r. 434 -- A grievous Plague amongst them, ibid.
-- The burning of their Fleet, 390 r. 435 -- Another Expedition into Sicily,
against Dionysius, 398 r. 445 -- Another War with him, 414 r. 465 -- Plague and
Pannick fears, 418 r. 469 -- The last War with Dionysius, 439 r. 495 -- Another
Expedition against Timoleon, 508, 512 r. 545, 550 -- Overcome by Timoleon, 513
r. 551 -- Their Expedition against Agathocles, and their Shipwreck, 654 r. 728
-- The manner of the public Mourning, ibid. -- Their Victory at Ecnomon, 656
r. 730 -- The Terror amongst the Carthaginians, upon the landing of Agathocles
in Africa, 660 r. 737 -- Human sacrifices in Africa, 662 r. 739 -- Towns taken
by Agathocles in Africa, 664 r. 741 -- Their miserable Slaughter in Assaulting
Syracuse, 668 r. 747 -- They overcome Agathocles in Africa, 684 r. 767 -- The
Tents of the Carthaginians burnt by chance, cause a great terror, ibid.
Cassander; his War with Olympias, 622 r. 689 -- He builds Cassandra, and
repairs Thebes, 630 r. 699 -- Uses Rhoxana and her Son very ill, ibid. -- His
Expedition into Peloponnesus, 630 r. 699 -- Confederates against Antigonus, 632
r. 701 -- Another Expedition into Peloponnesus, 635 r. 705 -- Into Illyrium,
and his happy success there, ibid. -- Into Cario against Antigonus, and his
good success there, 641 r. 712 -- His War with the Apolloniats, 648 r. 719 --
Wickedly murders the Son of Alexander and his Mother, 654 r. 728 -- Assumes the
Kingdom, 680 r. 761 -- His Expedition against Antigonus, 702 r. 788 Caulonia
Besieged and razed, 401, 403 r. 449, 451 Cerberus; how he was pulled out of
Hell by Hercules, 372 r. 413 Chabrias; the Athenian General defends Corinth
against the Thebans, 437 r. 493 -- Their General in Sicily, 285 r. 314 -- His
Victory at Sea over Pollides the Spartan 422 r. 475 -- His Death, 423 r. 476
Charonaea; Philip gains a great Victory over the Athenians at Charonaea, 516
555 Chaldaeans; their Opinion of the Prodigies in the Heavens, 429 r. 483 --
The Nature of their Divinations, 570 r. 622 Chares; the Athenian General
overcomes the Argives, 440 r. 496 -- His Acts in the Social War, 480, 486 r.
514, 521 Charonidas; His Laws, 267 r. 295 Cilicia; The Province of Philotas,
its Situation, 578 r. 630 Cimon; His Acts in Thrace, Asia, and Victories both
by Sea and Land, 246, 247, 248, 264 r. 272, 273, 274, 292 -- His Death, 265 r.
293 Clearchus, the Peloponnesian General; his Acts, 324, 362, 366, 368, 369 r.
357, 401, 406, 408, 409 Cleombrotus, King of Sparta, 430 r. 484 -- His Acts and
Death at the Battle of Leuctra, 432 r. 486 Cleomenes, King of Sparta, reigned
60 years 10 months, 668 r. 747 Cleon; his Cruelty, 285 r. 314 -- His Death, 292
r. 323 Cleopatra, the Sister of Alexander M. married to Alexander, King of
Epirus, 517 r. 557 -- Murdered by Cassander, 673 r. 753 Concubines; how they
were used to be conveyed to the Persian Kings, 247 r. 271 Conon; the Athenian
General in Corcyra, 323 r. 356 -- His Sea Fight with the Spartans, 337, 375,
392, 394 r. 372, 417, 438, 441 -- He builds the Walls of Athens, and is cast
into Prison, 395 r. 442 Corcyrians; their War with the Corinthians, and
Victory, 275 r. 303 -- A dreadful Sedition amongst them, 322 r. 355 -- Their
other Acts, 643, 701 r. 714, 787 Corinthians; their unhappy War with the Me
gareans, 256 r. 283 -- With the Corcyreans, 275 r. 303 -- Their Sedition, 395
r. 442 -- Another Sedition, ibid. -- Another Sedition, 424 r. 477 -- They help
Dion the Syracusian, 513 r. 480 -- The Assembly of the Greeks at Corinth about
the Persian War, ibid. Cheronea; A great Battle there between the Athenians and
the Thebans, 265 r. 293 Craterus, Alexander M. his special Friend, 570 r. 622
-- Assists Antipater at Lamia, 581 r. 636 -- Against the Etolians, 585 r. 641
-- His Expedition against Eumenes, 578 r. 633 -- His Death, 587 r. 644 -- His
Burial, 634 r. 703 Crotoniats; they destroy the Sybarites, 266 r. 294 -- Their
War against Dionysius, 397 r. 444 Crucifixion; Daimenes crucified by Dionysius,
382 r. 425 Cruelty; prevented by a prudent Speech, 286 r. 315 -- Of the
Spartans upon the Plataeans, ibid. -- Of the Carthaginians in the Sacking of
Selinunt, 327 r. 361 -- Of the Persians toward the Grecians, 550 r. 599 -- Of
Antigonus upon the dead Body of Alcetas, -- Of Olympias upon Arrhidaeus and
Eurydices, 612 r. 676 Ctesias the Historian; Where he ends his History, 379 r.
421 Cyprus; the War with Evagoras by the Persians, 399 r. 447 -- The War
between Demetrius and Ptolemy for this Island, 675 r. 757 -- Recovered by
Demetrius, 680 r. 761 Cyreneans; a lamentable Sedition at Cyrene, 374 r. 415 --
Their War with Thimbro, 582 r. 638 -- Are reduced by Ptolemy's General, 644 r.
715 -- March to assist Agathocles, 673 r. 753 Cyrus the Elder; his courteous
Behavior, 308 r. 341 Cyrus the Younger; his War against his Brother
Artaxerxes, 362, 365, 366, r. 401, 405, 406 -- His Battle with the Persians,
and Death, 368 r. 408 -- The Valor of his Captains after his Death, 361 r. 400
D.
Darius; his Warlike Preparations against the Grecians, 215 r. 242 Darius, the
Son of Xerxes, murdered by his Brother, 251 r. 278 Darius, King of Persia, 291
r. 322 Darius; the last made King by Bagoas, 522 r 564, 565 -- His Preparations
against Alexander M. ibid. -- The Battle at Granicum, 530 r. 573 -- His first
Expedition against Alexander M. 534 r. 578 -- His second Expedition, 544 r. 590
-- The Fight at Arbela, 545 r. 592 -- Killed by Bissus, 552 r. 601 -- Alexander
M. marries his Daughter, 568 r. 618 Decalia; The Decalian War, 303 r. 335
Delphos; How the Oracle was first discovered, 488 r. 523 -- Why an old Woman
was Priestess, ibid. -- The vast Sum robbed out of the Temple, 402 r. 450 --
The Robbers punished by the Gods, 505 r. 542 Demetrius, Governor of Syria, by
his Father Antigonus, 636 r. 709 -- His Expedition against Ptolemy, 644 r. 715
-- His War with Ptolemy and Seleucus; Fight, and Flight, 646 r. 717 -- His
Beauty, 644 r. 715 -- His Expedition against the Nabathaeans, 652 r. 725 --
Into Babylonia, 644 r. 715 -- Honored at Athens, 646 r. 757 -- His Expedition
against Cyprus. 677 r. 757 -- His great Engines in Cyprus, 677 r. 758 -- His
Preparations to fight Ptolemy, 678 r. 759 -- His Victory, 679 r. 760 -- The
great Damage of his Fleet at Gaza, 640 r. 711 -- His War with the Rhodians,
690, 691 r. 774, 775 -- A Description of his Engine Helepolis, 694 r. 779 --
His War with Cassander, 699 r. 785 -- His Acts in Asia, 704 r. 791 Demosthenes,
the Athenian General; his Acts, 287, 290, 291 r. 317, 321, 322 -- General in
Sicily, 304 r. 336 -- Is taken, 308 r. 341 -- Put to Death, 314 r. 347
Demosthenes, the Orator, 503, 515. r. 539, 554 -- Stirs up the Athenians
against Philip, ibid. -- His Banishment, 579 r. 634 Deucetius; the Sicilian
General, 254 r. 281 -- Builds Menaeus. -- His War with the Agragentines and
Syracusians, 353 r. 389 -- Builds Callatina, 274 r. 302 Dimnus; a Plotter to
kill Alexander M. Killed by the King's own hand, 554 r. 604 Diocles. Vid. Laws.
Diodorus the Sicilian; his History: How many it comprehended from the Ruin of
Troy to Agathocles, 607 r. 670 -- And to the Death of Antigonus, 657 r. 733
Diomedon, the Athenian General; his Speech when he was most unjustly led to
Execution, 305 r. 386 Dion; his Preparations for War with Dionysius, 479, 480,
481 r. 512, 513, 515 -- His Fight with Dionysius, 482 r. 516 -- His Honors at
Syracuse, 485 r. 520, 521 Dionysius, the Tyrant of Sicily; his Rise, 344, 345,
346 r. 380, 381, 382 -- Declares himself Monarch, 347 r. 383 -- His Horsemen
rebel, spoil the Palace, and abuse his Wife, 355 r. 392 -- Opposed by the
Syracusians, 359 r. 398 -- Dissuaded from Abdicating the Government, 360 r. 399
-- Restored to his Government in Syracuse, 361, r. 400 -- Walls Epipole with
wonderful Dispatch, 365, 366 r. 404, 405 -- His Prepartions for the War against
the Carthaginians, 376, 378 r. 418, 420 -- Theodorus his Speech against
Dionysius, in his presence before the Syracusian Assembly, 386 r. 431 -- His
attempt upon Rhegium, 397, 400 r. 444, 448 -- A new War with the Carthaginians,
399 r. 446 -- His Poems exploded at the Olympic Games, 404 r. 452 -- His
Cruelty to the Rhegians, 405 r. 453 -- He sells Plato, 411 r. 461 -- His other
Acts, 413, 414, 415, 437 r. 464, 465, 466, 493 -- Dies of a Surfeit, 439, 440
r. 495, 496 -- His Letter to the sacrilegious Athenians, 504 r. 541 Dionysius;
the younger his War with Dion, 481, 532 r. 515, 576 -- Is Conquered, ibid. --
Reigns again in Syracuse, 509 r. 546 -- Abdicates the Government, and lives a
private life, ibid. Dioxippus the Athenian; his famous Victory in a Duel, over
Charogus the Macedonian, his sad Misfortune and miserable Death, 566 r. 615
Drangina; Conquered by Alexander M. 554 r. 704 -- The Province of Stasanor, 574
r. 628 Duel; between Coragus the Macedonian, and Dioxippus the Athenian, 566,
568 r. 615, 618 -- Of Darius with Cadusius,
E.
Erygius's Combat with Sartibarzenes, 556 r. 606 -- Eumenes with Neoptolemus,
587 r. 644 Earthquakes at Sparta, 244 r. 270 -- At Rhages, 627 r. 695 -- God
the Cause of Earthquakes, 418 r. 48^ Eleans; their Commigration, 243 r. 269 --
Their War with the Lacedaemonians, 365 r. 404 -- With the Arcadians, and
Pisatae, 440 r. 497 -- Join with the Athenians in the Lamian War, 578 r. 633 --
Elis Conquered by Telephorus, 648 r. 719 Epaminondas; his Praise, 424 r. 477 --
The Theban General, 430 r. 484 -- His Valor in the Battle at Leuctra, 435 r.
490 -- Rebuilds Messina, 435 r. 491 -- Besieges Corinth, 436 r. 493 --
Preserves the Army, 437 r. 494 -- His Acts in Peloponnesus, -- His other Acts,
441, 443, 362 r. 498, 500, 401 -- His Valor at Mantinea, and Deaths wound, 445
r. 503 -- Was a Pythagorean, and Fellow-Schollar with Philip King of Macedon,
477 r. 510 -- Regardless of Auguries, 430 r. 484, 485 -- His Sayings at the
time he lay a dying, 445 r. 503 Ephori; the Great Court at Sparta that
overruled the Kings, 639 r. 709 Epidamnus; The sedition there, 275 r. 303
Evagoras endeavors to recover all Cyprus, 399 r. 447 -- His War with
Artaxerxes, 411 r. 460 -- Killed by Nieucoles, 428 r. 482 Euboea; Subdued by
Xerxes, 222 r. 249 -- The intestine War, 480 r. 513 Eumelus; King of Bosphoros,
his War with his Brother for the Kingdom, 665 r. 743 -- Overcomes his Brother
Prytanis, 667 r. 744 -- Killed by his Horses running away with his Chariot, 667
r. 745 Eumenes; Governor of Cappadocia, 581 r. 635 -- His Expedition against
Antipater, 587 r. 643 -- His Battle with Craterus and Neoptolemus, and Victory,
587 r. 644 -- Is overcome by Antigonus, and besieged, 591 r. 649 -- His
Exercise of his Horses in the Siege, 589 r. 649 -- His various Fortunes, 596 r.
655 -- His other Acts, 598, etc. r. 653, 659 -- His danger at Euphrates, 604 r.
667 -- His Expedition against Seleucus, 612 r. 677 -- His danger at Tigris,
ibid. -- His other Acts, 613, 614, 616, 617, etc. r. 678, 680, 682, 683, etc.
-- His last Battle with Antigonus, 625 r. 693 -- Delivered up to Antigonus and
put so death 626 r. 694 Euripides; His death, 351 r. 387 Eurydice; The Wife of
Archidaeus, 590 r. 648 -- Hangs herself, 612 r. 676 Eloquence. See Gorgias.
F.
Fabii; Three Hundred of the Family killed together in one Battle 243 r. 269
Famine; At Athens in a Siege, 353 r. 389 -- At Rhegium, 320 r. 353 -- At Pydna,
where Olympias was besieged 629 r. 697 Feast; By Alexander M. before his
Persian Expedition, 527 r. 570 Fountain; at the Temple of Jupiter Hammon of a
Wonderful Nature, 543 r. 589 Fortune; hates the Proud and Cruel, 308 r. 341 --
The wonderful Turns in Eumenes, 5^6 r. 655 -- In Agathocles, 662, 670, 678 r.
739, 749, 759 -- In the Carthaginians, 662, 668 r. 739, 746 -- Of a Gardner
makes a King, 541 r. 587 Funeral; the sumptuous Funeral of Hephestion 571 r.
623 -- Far more pompous of Alexander M. 586 r. 642 -- Burnt with their dead
Husbands in India, 562 r. 610 -- A Contest between two Wives which should be
burnt with the dead Husband, 622 r. 689
G.
Gauls; Take Rome, 406 r. 455 -- Are almost all cut of by Camillus, 407 r. 456
Geloans; they leave the City Gela and go to Syracuse, 264 r. 292 -- Then to the
Leontines, 358 r. 397 Gela besieged by the Syracusians, 609 r. 672 -- The
Cruelty of Agathocles at Gela, 655 r. 729 Gellias the Agragentine; his Wealth,
Hospitality, Beauty, etc. 340 r. 375 -- His Wine-Cellar, 341 r. 376 -- His
Death, 343 r. 379 Gelo; overcomes the Carthaginians at Himera, 227 r. 253 --
His Praise, ibid. -- His Victory, and the Death of Leonidas, fall out both on
the same day 227 r. 255 -- Inriches Sicily with the Spoils of his Enemies,
ibid. -- His Death, Burial, etc. 235, 249 r. 262, 276 God; God defends the
Greeks against Xerxes, 222 r. 249 -- His Anger the Cause of all public
Calamities, as Earthquakes, etc. 428 r. 482 -- His Revenge of Sacrilege, 505,
506, 508 r. 542, 543, 545 -- Remarks of Divine Providence, 508, 514, r. 545,
553, 769 Gorgias; the Leontine his Eloquence and invented Rhetoric, 284 r. 313
Grecians; their Assembly and Decree at the Isthmus against the Persians, 216 r.
243 -- Their Valor at Thermopyle, 219 r. 246 -- The Sea Fight and Victory at
Artemesia over the Persians, 222 r. 249 -- At Salamis; 223 r. 250 -- Their
Expedition against Mardonis and their Fight with him 231 r. 258 -- The Grecian
Auxiliaries against Artaxerxes for Cyrus his Brother are Victors, 368 r. 408 --
The Grecian Captains that were prisoners all put to Death, 369 r. 410 -- Their
troublesome passage out of Persia back into their own Country, 370, 371, 471 r.
411, 412, 413 -- The Grecian Cities confederate against the Lacedaemonians in
the Theban War, 419 r. 471 -- The Grecians advised to Peace amongst themselves
by Artaxerxes, 438 r. 494 -- Peace after the Battle at Mantinea, 446 r. 504 --
Their War at Lamia with Antipater, 496 r. 631 Gylippus; his severe Speech
against the Athenian Prisoners in Sicily. See Speech. Gold; the Sacred Hunger
of Gold, 492 r. 527 -- Rich Mines at Philippi, 480 r. 514 Gulf; a deep Gulf
covered with Sand in Egypt, 498 r. 534
H.
Halicarnassus; Taken by Alexander M. 531, 532 r. 574, 576 Hammon; the Temple
of Hammon, 542, 543 r. 588, 589 Hannibal; the Carthaginian General against the
Syracusians, 319 r. 352 -- Razes Selinunt, 327 r. 361 -- Dies of the Plague,
341 r. 377 Harpalas; his Luxury and Rapes, 569 r. 619 Helepolis; an Engine of
Battery used by Demetrius described, 677, 694 r. 758, 779 Helice and Bura; two
Cities drowned, 428 r. 482 Hephestion dies at Ecbatana: His Funeral, 623 r. 571
Hercules; the ancient Hercules: His Acts, 557, 564 r. 607, 613 Hermocrates; his
Acts in Sicily, 330 r. 364 -- Is slain, ibid. Hicetas, Prince of Syracuse,
ejected by Dionysius Junior, 508 r. 545 -- Overcomes Dionysius, is routed by
Timoleon, 509, 511 r. 546, 548 Hiero, King of Syracuse, 235 r. 262 -- His Acts,
240, 241, 243 r. 267, 268, 269 -- Builds Catana, 240 r. 267 Hilotes; their War
with Sparta, 248, 290 r. 274, 320 Himera; razed to the Ground by Hannibal, 328
r. 362 Historians; who are to be Blamed, and who Excusable, 244 r. 380 -- Who
end with the Battle at Mantinea, 446 r. 504 -- Unpleasant, when broken off with
many Speeches, 657 r. 733 -- The Profit of History, 583 r. 639 Honey in
Colchis; makes Men mad, 371 r. 412 Horses; how exercised by Eumenes when he
besieged in a strait Place. See Exercise.
I.
Japygians; Overcome the Tarentines, 241 r. 268 Jason, the Pherean; his Acts,
420, 432, 433 r. 472, 487, 488 Ida; the Mountain Ida described, 524 r. 565 --
The Wonders there, ibid. Illyrians; Overcome the Macedonians, 478 r. 510 --
Conquered by Philip, 479, 486 r. 512, 522 Imilco; the Carthaginian General in
Sicily: his Acts, 380, 382, 383 r. 423, 426, 427 -- His Sacrileges, 385 r. 430
-- Looses his Fleet, Army, etc. 391 r. 436 -- His extreme Misery in his own
Country, ibid. -- Dies for want, ibid. Isaurians; burn themselves in Pisidia,
584. 640 India; the Description, 576 r. 630 -- By a Law among the Indians, the
Wives burn themselves with their dead Husbands, 622 r. 688 Inundations; fearful
Inundations in Peloponnesus, 428 r. 482 -- And in other Parts of Greece, 286 r.
316 -- At Rhodes, 627 r. 695 Iphicrates; the Athenian General in Egypt, 425 r.
478 -- His Acts in Egypt, 426 r. 479 -- His other Acts, 397, 435, 486 r. 444,
490, 521 -- His Praise, 516 r. 555 Issus; the Battle at Issus by Alexander M.
with the Persians, 535 r. 579 Judges in Persia are flayed alive, 411, 412 r.
462, 463
L.
Lacedemon; the Earthquakes at Sparta, 244 r. 270 -- Take Athens, 353 r. 389 --
Their Quarrels with the Eleans, 365 r. 404 -- Assist Cyrus against his Brother,
ib. 367 r. 405, 407 -- Lose their Dominion at Sea, 394, r. 441 -- Overcome by
the Athenians in a Sea Fight at Naxus, 422 r. 475 -- Their War with the
Argives, 493 r. 528 Lamia; the Story of Lamia, 674 r. 754 Lamia; the Beginning
and Cause of the Lamian War, 490, 576 r. 525, 631 Laws; Laws of Charondas 267
r. 295 -- Of Zeleucus, 269 r. 298 -- Of Diocles the Syracusian, and his
Tragical End, 314 r. 347 -- Of the Twelve Tables of Rome, 271, 272 r. 300, 301
-- Confirmed by the Death of the Legislator, 270, 314 r. 290, 347 Leonides; the
Spartan General at Thermopyle, 217 r. 244 -- His Heroic Death there, 220 r.
247 Leosthines; the Athenian General in the Lamian War, 569 r. 621 -- Overcomes
Antipater, 579 r. 634 -- His Death, and Praise, ibid. Lesbians; subdued by the
Athenians, 286 r. 315 Libanus; a Description of Mount Libanus, 367 r. 407 Long
Life of Democritus, 362 r. 401 Lucanians; their War with the Thurians, and
remarkable Victory, 400 r. 448 -- With Dionysius the younger, 479 r. 512 --
With the Tarentines, 701 r. 787 Lycaonia; the Situation, 576 r. 630 Lydia; the
Province of Meleager, 574 r. 628 -- The Situation, 576 r. 630 Lysander; the
Spartan General against the Athenians, 333 r. 368 -- His Victory over the
Athenians at Aegos Potamos, 352 r. 388 -- His Death, 393 r. 439 Lysimachus; one
of Alexander M. his Commanders. -- Thrace his Province, 574 r. 628 -- Relieves
the Rhodians with Provision, r. 782 -- Assists Cassander, 702 r. 788 -- Stoops
to Antigonus, ibid. Lysimachia built, 667 r. 746
M.
Macedonians; the Parricides amongst the Macedonian Kings, 477 r. 510 -- Rout
the Greeks at Charonea, 516 r. 555 Mago, the Carthaginian General, fights with
Dionysius, and is killed, 414 r. 465 Mantineans; overcome by the Lacedaemonians,
295 r. 326 -- The City Mantinea besieged, and taken by the Spartans, 411, 413
r. 460, 464 -- The Battle with the Tageans described, 445 r. 502, 503 -- Their
War with the Megalopolites, 449 r. 507 Marathon; the Slaughter of the Persians
there, r. 242 Marmarensians; being besieged, burn their Houses, Parents, and
Friends, 532 r. 576 Megalopolis built, 439 r. 495 -- Their War with the
Mantineans, 449 r. 507 -- With the Spartans, 495 r. 530 Megara; the Acts of the
Megareans, 231, 256, 265 r. 258, 283, 293 -- Their Sedition, r. 478 Mentor, the
Rhodian, betrays the Sidonians, 496 r. 532 -- His other Acts, 500, etc. r. 536,
etc. Mesopotamia; the Province of Arcesilas, 574 r. 628 -- The Situation, 576
r. 630 Messenians; their War with the Spartans, 248 r. 274 -- Are routed out of
Greece by the Spartans, 374 r. 415 -- Their Increase in Sicily, 392 r. 438 --
The City Messina in Sicily sacked by the Carthaginians, 382, 383, r. 426, 427
-- Repaired by Dionysius, 392 r. 437 -- They assist Dion, 481 r. 515 -- The
City gained by Agathocles, 652 r. 726 -- Messina in Peloponnesus rebuilt by
Epaminondas, 435 r. 491 Meteors; an Astrological account of them, 429 r. 483
Methon; a City in Thrace Sacked by Philip, 493 r. 528 Meton; the Circle of 19
years called Enneadeceterides, 227 r. 305 Miletum; their War with the Samians,
273 r. 301 -- Their bloody Sedition, 352 r. 388 Mitylene; taken by the
Athenians, 285, 286 r. 314, 315 -- Their Goods sold, ibid. -- The Port, 340 r.
375 Motya; a City of Sicily, r. 359 -- Taken by Dionysius, 373, 379 r. 414, 422
-- Recovered by the Carthaginians, 382 r. 426 Munychia; Razed by Demetrius, 676
r. 756 Muses; the Games of the Muses in Macedonia, 527 r. 570 Mycale; a
Description of the battle at Mycale, 234 r. 261 Mycenas Razed to the ground by
the Argives, 249 r. 276
N.
Nabathaeans; Arabians, their Laws and Manners, 650 r. 722 -- Their War with
Demetrius, 651 r. 724 Naxus; Razed by Dionysius, 480 r. 513 Nectanabus; King of
Egypt, his War with Artaxerxes, 425 r. 478 Nectanabus; revolts from his Father
Tachos King of Egypt, and is overcome by Agesilaus, 448 r. 506 -- Rebels
against Ochus, 496 r. 531 Neptune; the Causer of all Earthquakes and
Innundations, 429 r. 483 -- Priests drowned in the Sea offered to him, 305 r.
377 Niceas; the Athenian General his Acts, 485 r. 519 -- His Expedition into
Peloponnesus, 290 r. 320 -- His great misfortunes and lamentable Condition in
Sicily 307, 308, 311, 312 r. 340, 341, 344, 345 -- Is put to death, 314 r. 347
Nicocles; the Cyprian, the Tragical end of him and his whole Family, 665 r. 743
Nicolaus the Syracusian; his brave Speech for the saving the Athenian Captives
from being put to death, 200 r. 241
O.
Ocean; the Wonders found in it, 568, 569 r. 618, 619 Ochus; King of Persia
succceeds Artaxerxes, 448 r. 506 -- His Expedition against Egypt, 491 r. 531 --
His Acts, 498 534 -- Is destroyed with his whole Family, 413 r. 564 Olympias;
the Mother of Alexander M. 598 r. 658 -- Her Return out of Epirus into
Macedonia, and Cruelty toward Archidoeus and Eurydice and others, 612 r. 676
-- The terrible Famine in the Siege of Pydna, 621 r. 697 -- Her Accusation and
Death, 629, 630 r. 698, 699 Olympus; the Temple of Jupiter Olympus, at
Agrigentum, 340 r. 375 -- Another at Syracuse 301, 514 r. 333, 553 Olynthians;
their War with Amyntas King of Macedon, 416 r. 467 -- Demand their Land again,
397. r. 444 -- War with the Lacedaemonians, 417 r. 468 Ophellas; Subdues the
Cyrenians, 583 r. 639 -- Joins with Agathocles in Africa, 673 r. 753 -- He with
his Auxiliaries perfidiously slain by Agathocles, 674 r. 754 -- His Cruelty,
ibid. Oracle of Dodona, 439 r. 495 -- Of Hammon, 543 r. 589 Oracles delivered
to Alexander M. at Hammon, ibid. -- To the Clazomeans and Cumeans, concerning
Leuca, -- To Dionysius of his death, 440 r. 496 -- To Eumelus King of Bosphoros
of his death, 667 r. 745 -- To the Helicenses, 428 r. 482 -- To the Ionians,
ibid. -- To the Lacedaemonians of expiating the murder of Pausanias, 239 r. 266
-- To the Messinians in Sicily, 399 r. 447 -- To Philip before his death, 517
r. 557 -- To Philomelus, 489 r. 524 -- To Satyrus King of Bosphorus, of the
manner of his death, 667 r. 745 -- To Seleucus by the Caldeans, 632, 649 r.
701, 720 -- To the Spartans of the Victory of the Thebans, 241, 430 r. 268, 485
-- To the Thebans of the Victory at Leuctra, -- Of their ruin, 524 r. 566 -- To
Timoleon of his success in Sicily from Ceres, 508 r. 545 Orchomenos; Razed by
the Thebans, 441 r. 498 -- The Thebans their old Enemies, ibid. Ostracism; the
Law and manner of it at Athens, 244 r. 270
P.
Pallica; a City in Sicily; built by Ducetius, 261 r. 288 -- Its Growth and
Destruction, ibid -- The strange boiling Pots called Craters in the Earth
there, ibid. Pamphilia; the Province of Antigonus, 574 r. 628 -- The Situation,
576 r. 630 Paphlagonia with Cappadocia, 574 628 -- The Provinces of Eumenes,
581 r. 636 Parmenio; his Acts in Phrygia, 540 r. 586 -- Suspected of Treason,
and put to death, 554 r. 604 Pausanias; the Lacedemonian General at Platea
against Mardonius 231 r. 258 -- His Treason against his Country, 237238 r.
264, 265 -- Discovered how, and punished, ibid. Passes difficult Passes in
Thermopyle, 219 r. 246 -- In Uxiana 549 r. 597 -- In the Rock Aornus, 557 r.
667 Peace; Peace all over the World, 273 r. 301 Pelopidas; the Theban General,
434 r. 489 -- Taken by Alexander Prince of Pherea, 438 r. 494 -- Delivered, 440
r. 496 -- His Acts and Death, and Praise, 442 r. 499 Peloponnesus; Peloponnesus
liable to Earthquakes, 429 r. 483 -- The Peloponnesian War, the Causes, Renual
etc. 271, 280, 303 r. 300, 308, 325 Perdiccas; One of Alexander M. Commanders
547 r. 592 -- At Arbela, ibid. -- Divides the Conquered Provinces, 574 r. 628
-- His other Acts, 575, 576, 581, 583 r. 629, 631, 636, 639 -- The Captains
conspire against him, 585 r. 641 -- His Expedition into Egypt, 588 r. 645
Pericles; His Acts in Peloponnesus, 259, 260 r. 286, 287 -- His other Acts,
273, 274 r. 301, 302 -- His Arrears the public Cause of the Peloponesian War,
277 r. 306 -- His hot Speech, 273 r. 301 -- His second Expedition into
Peloponnesus, 281 r. 310 -- His Death, ibid. Persepolis; Taken and burnt (by
the instigation of a Strumpet,) by Alexander M, 550 r. 599 Persia; The Province
of Peucestas, 574 r. 628 -- The description of a pleasant Tract there, 616 r.
682 Petalisme, 259 r. 286 Phalaecus; The General of the Phoceans, 495 r. 530 --
His Sacrilegious Covetousness, 503 r. 540 -- Punished by the Gods, 505 r. 542
Pharnabasus; The Persian General, 316 r. 349 -- Helps sometimes the Athenians
and sometimes the Lacedemonions, 321, 324, 375 r. 354, 357, 416 -- General of
the War against the Egyptians, 446 r. 504 Phialensians; Their seditian, 424 r.
477 Philip, King of Macedon; The Epitome of his History, 477 r. 510 -- His Acts
and Wars, 477 to 516 r. 510 to 556 -- His Feast and stately Games; and ominous
Verses, 518 r. 558 -- The Plot against his life, and the Cause ibid. -- His
Murder. etc, 519 r. 559 Philocles; The Athenian General at Aegos-Potamos, 352
r. 388 -- Is put to Death ibid. Philomelus; stirs up the Phoceans, 486 r. 522
-- Robs the Temple at Delphos, 491 r. 526 -- Casts himself down from the top of
a Rock, ibid Phoceans; Their War with the Doreans and Spartans, 256 r. 283 --
With the Boetians, 393 r. 439 -- With the Thebans, 432 r. 487 -- They spoil the
Temple at Delphos, 488, 491 r. 523, 526 -- Their Fight with the Thebans, 503 r.
539 -- Are burnt in the Temple, 504 r. 541 Phocio; the Athenian General, 496 r.
532 -- The sentence upon him and his punishment, 602 r. 663 Phoenicia; the
Situation, 576 r. 630 Phrygia the Less, the Situation, ibid. -- The Greater,
ibid. Pindar; When he flourished, 200 r. 226 Pisidia; The situation, 576 r.
630 Plague; Grievous amongst the Carthaginians, 418 r. 469 -- The first Plague
at Athens, 281 r. 310 -- The second, 286 r. 316 -- And the Causes, ibid -- In
the Camp of Hanniball in Sicily, for his Impiety, 341 r. 377 -- In the Camp of
Imilco, and the Cause, 389 r. 434 -- In Africa, 358 r. 397 Plateans; the Battle
at Platea with the Persians, 231 r. 258 -- Are besieged by the Spartans, all
put to Death and the City razed, 282, 286 r. 311, 315 -- Their other
misfortunes, 427 r. 481 Plato; Sold by Dionysius, 411 r. 461 -- The most
learned of the Greeks, 263 r. 291 Porus; His War with Alexander M. 561 r. 608
-- His Valor and Stature, 562 r. 609 Princes strengthen themselves more with
Gentleness than Arms, 309 r. 342 -- Their Vices most notorious, ^57 r. 395
Prodigies; to Alexander M. before his Death, 572 r. 624 -- To the Athenians
before irreparable slaughter in Sicily, 305 r. 337 -- To Epaminondas before his
Victory at Leuctra, 428, 430, r. 482, 484 -- To Hannibal after the violation of
the Sepulchers in Sicily, 341 r, 377 -- To Pelopidas before his Death, 442 r.
499 -- To the Spartans before their slaughter at Leuctra, 428, 430 r. 482, 484
-- To the Thebans before the Sacking of their City, 604 r. 566 -- To Timoleon
before his Expedition into Sicily, 508 r. 545 -- Before his Fight with the
Carthaginians, 513 r. 551 Ptolemy Alorites, King of Macedonia, kills his
Brother, and was killed by his Brother, 440, 477 r, 497, 550 Ptolomaeus Lagus
was cured by a divine Power, 567 r. 617 -- Governor of Egypt, 574 r. 628 --
His stately preparations for the buying of Alexander M. 587 r. 643 -- Confirmed
in the Government of Egypt, 590 r. 648 -- Subdues Phoenicia, 592 r. 650 --
Opposes Antigonus in diverse places, -- His Expedition into Cyprus, Silicia, and
Syria, and his Successes, 98 r. 115 -- His Battle and Victory, 646, 647 r. 717,
718 -- His War with Antigonus, 664 r. 742 -- His Sea. Fight with Demetrius at
Cyprus, 678 r. 759 -- Is worsted, and returns into Egypt, 680 r. 761 --
Recovers Coelo-Syria, 704 r. 791 Pylae; the Gates or Entry into Cilicia, 366 r.
406 Pyrrhus; the famous Enemy to the Romans, 623 r. 690 Pythagorean
Philosopher; the Master to Epaminondas, and Philip King of Macedon, 478 510 --
The last of his Sect, when they lived, 440 r. 497 Pythia; why the Priestesses
were no longer Virgins, 489 r. 524
Q.
Quinda; a strong Castle where Alexander M. Treasures were laid up, and carried
away by Antigonus, 633 r. 702 Quinquiremes; or five Oars on a Bank, when first
used, 376, 377 r. 418, 419
R.
Race; a Horse overrun by a Man, 362 r. 401 Rhegion; a pleasant and fruitful
Country in Africa, 659 r. 736 Religion; Zeleucus his Law concerning it, 270 r.
299 -- The Violation of Religion punished by public Calamities, 286, 391, 392,
428 r. 316, 436, 437, 482 Rhodes; the miserable Inundation at Rhodes, 627 r.
695 -- Their War with Demetrius, 691 r. 775 -- Staightly Besieged, 692 r. 776
-- Their Fight with Demetrius and Victory, 693 r. 777, 778 -- The repairing of
the City, 699 r. 785 Rhoxana, Wife of Alexander M. murdered with her son, by
Cassander, 654 r. 728 Romans; the first time they paid Wages to their Soldiers,
364 r. 403 -- The first time the People disobeyed the Senate, 404 r. 452 --
Their sad Overthrow by the Gauls at Allia, 406 r. 454 -- Defend the Capital,
406, 407 r. 455 456 -- Their Wars with the Samnites, 611, 640, 641, 642, 652,
675, 710, 711, 713, 726 -- With the Marsians and Hetrurians, 676 r. 756
S.
Sacrifice; a Butcherly Sacrifice of Captives, punished by God, 684 r. 767
Sacrilege; in diverse manners punished by the Gods, 504, 505, 506, 490, 494, 698
r. 541, 542, 543, 526, 529, 784 -- Causes a War, 443 r. 500 -- Checked by an
Earthquake, 503 r. 540 -- Cast in the Teeth of the Athenians by a Tyrant, ibid.
Salamis; the Sea Fight at Salamis between the Grecians and Persians, and the
remarkable Victory of the Greeks, 224, 225 r. 251, 252 Saturn; a Boy offered up
to him: The Idol at Carthage, 341, 663 r. 377, 740 Sciones; besieged and taken
by Storm, and most cruelly dealt with by the Athenians, 291, 292, 294 r. 322,
323, 325 Stytalisme; amongst the Argives what it is, 432 r. 487 Sedition: Of
the Arcadians, 433 r. 488 -- Of the Argives, ibid. -- Of Alexander M. his
Soldiers, 568 r. 620 -- The most bloody Sedition of the Corcyrians, 322 r. 355
-- Of the Corinthians, 424 r. 477 -- Of Dionysius his Horsemen, 355 r. 392 --
Of Megareans, 425 r. 478 -- Phialeans, 424 r. 477 -- Of the Phliasians, 425 r.
478 -- Against Timoleon, 513, 514 r. 551, 553 -- Of the Syracusians, 253 r. 280
-- Of the Zacynthians, 426 r. 480 Seleucus, Governor of the Province of
Babylon, so made by Antipater, 590 r. 648 -- His Acts, 613, 632, 634, 635, 646
r. 677, 701, 703, 705, 717 -- Recovers Babylon, 649 r. 720 -- Wears a Diadem,
680 r. 761 Serpents; the Serpents of India, the Greatest and the most Venomeus,
562 r. 610 -- Of Africa, 674 r. 754 Sicilians; their War with Hannibal, 339 r.
374 -- With Imilcar, 341 r. 377 -- With Imilco, 380 r. 423 -- With Hanno, 312
r. 545 -- With Amilcar, 654 r. 728 -- Assists Dion, 481 r. 515 -- Recover their
Liberty by the help of Timoleon, 511 r. 548 Sidonians; their Revolt from Ochus,
King of Persia, 496 531 -- Are betrayed by Mentor the Rhodian, 497, etc. r.
532, etc. -- Their miserable Destruction, 498 r. 533 Socrates; His
Condemnation, 374 r. 416 Sogdiana; Its Situation, 576 r. 630 Sophocles; the
Athenian General in Sicily, 285 r. 314 -- The wonderful Death of the Poet, 351
r. 387 -- His Son likewise a Tragic Poet, 382 r. 425 Soul; the Immortality,
574 r. 627 -- The Cure of the Soul more excellent than the body, 268 r. 296
Spartans; the praise of them that were killed at Thermopyle, ^^0 r. 247 --
Sparta first b^sieg'd by the Thebans, 435 r. 490 Speech; Gyiipus the
Lacedemonian his severe Speech against the Athenian Captives in Sicily, 312 r.
345 -- Nicolaus his brave Speech to save their lives, 308, etc. r. 341, etc.
Stratagems; of the Aegestines against the Athenians of Agathocles against the
Geloans, 609, 655 r. 672, 729 -- Against the Carthaginians, 656, 659, 660, 661,
664, 671, 683 r. 730, 735, 736, 738, r. 741, 750, 705 -- Against Sosistratus,
602 r. 672 -- Of Alcibiades in persuading Ducetius to to fortify Sparta, 303 r.
335 -- Of Alexander M. in Burning his Fleet, 530 r. 573, etc. Susa delivered up
to Alexander M. 548 r. 596 -- The Situation, 576 r. 630 Sybrarites; Sybaris
razed by the Crotoniats, 266 r. 294 -- Repaired, 267 r. 295 -- Again erected,
261, 267, 271 r. 288, 295, 300 Syracusians; Besi^g'd by the Athenians, 302 r.
334 -- Overcome the Athenians in several Sea Fights, 305 r. 337 -- Their
Cruelty upon the Athenian Captives, 314 r. 347 -- Their many Wars with the
Carthaginians, 319, 320, 339, 341 r. 352, 353, 374, 377 -- With Dionysius 359
r. 398 -- They beat Imilco in a Sea Fight, 385 r. 430 -- How they were freed
from the Tyranny of the Dionysiates, 481, 510 r. 515, 547 Dion received, ibid
-- The City plundered by the Dionysians, 485 r. 520 -- Delivered from slavery
by the assistance of the Corinthians under Timoleon, 507, 509, 510 r. 544. 546,
547 -- The City sadly plundered by the Soldiers of Agathocles, 609 r. 673 --
His cruel punishment of the Citizens, 687 r. 770 -- And his butchery of the
Fugitives, 693 r. 777 Syria, the Province of Laomedon, 574 r. 628 -- The
Situation, 576 r. 630 -- Subdued by Ptolemy, 592 r. 650
T.
Tarrentines; Their unfortunate War with the Japygians, 241 r. 268 -- They help
the Sicilians against Agathocles, 640 r. 710 -- Antigonus against Eumenes; 620
r. 686 -- Their War with the Lucanians, 701 r. 787 Tauromenum; When built, 480
r. 513 Tegeans; Their War with the Mantineans, 477 r. 510 Teribazus, the
Persian Governor of Armenia, allows quiet Passage to the Greeks returning out
of Persia, 378 r. 411 -- Is accused by Orontes, and acquitted, 411, 412 r. 462,
463 Thais, the Strumpet, persuades Alexander M. to burn Persepolis, 511 r. 600
Thalestris, the Amazon Queen, comes to Alexander M. to have Issue by him, 554
r. 603 Thebans; their War with the Athenians, 257, 280, 286, 300 r. 284, 308,
319, 322 -- Their Citadel Cadmea seized by the Spartans against the League,
417, 421 r. 468, 474 -- They refuse to join in the General Peace, 424, 429 r.
477, 483 -- Their great War with the Lacedaemonians, ibid. -- The Prodigies that
appeared before the War, ibid. -- Their Victory at Leuctra, 407 r. 456 -- Their
other Acts, 408, 434, 436 r. 457, 489, 492 -- Their Expedition into
Peloponnesus, 437 r. 493 -- Another Expedition into Peloponnesus, 440 r. 496 --
Some Battles with the Lacedaemonians, 495 r. 530 -- They raze Phocis, 496 r. 531
-- Their Fight with the Phoceans, 503 r. 539 Thebes Garrisoned by Philip, and
afterward driven out, 516, 521 r. 556, 563 -- Rebel against Alexander M. 524,
525 r. 566, 567 -- The miserable destruction of their City and Inhabitants by
Alexander M, 526, 527 r. 568, 569 -- The City rebuilt by Cassander, 630 r. 699
-- Its various Changes, 631 r. 700 Themistocles the Athenian General, 216 r.
243 -- His wise Counsels at Artemesium, and at Salamis, 222, 223 r. 249, 250 --
His Stratagems, 224, 225 r. 251, 252 -- His banishment 243 r. 269 -- Flies to
Xerxes, 244 r. 270 -- His last Stratagem whereby he deceived Xerxes, 245 r. 271
-- His Death and praise, 245, 246 r. 271, 272 Theodorus; His brave Speech to
the Syracusians to preserve their Liberties, 386 r. 431 Thermopyle; defended
bravely by the Greeks against Xerxes, 217, 219 r. 244, 246 Thrace; The Province
of Lysimachus, 574 r. 628 -- They waste Chersonesus, 375 r. 417 -- Treacherous
to the Abderites, 423 r. 476 -- Their War with Lysimachus, 640 r. 711
Thucydides; where he begins and ends his History, 319, 377 r. 306, 352 Tigris;
The Course of the River Tigris, 549 r. 597 -- Joined with a Bridge by
Antigonus, 614 r. 680 Timoleon; The Corinthian General into Sicily: A short
Account of his Acts, 507, etc. 513 r. 544, etc. 551 -- Causes Peace and Plenty
all over Sicily, 513, 514 r. 552, 553 -- His Death, and pompous Funeral at
Syracuse, 516 r. 556 Tissaphernes, the Persian General, fights bravely with
Cyrus, 368 r. 408 -- Treacherously cuts off the Grecian Commanders, 369 r. 410
-- His War with Agesilaus in the Lesser Asia, 392 r. 438 -- Overcome by
Agesilaus, 393 r. 439 -- And afterward Beheaded, ibid. Trees; Trees distilling
of Honey, 553 r. 602 Tribunes; Military Tribunes, when first Created at Rome,
251, 271, 272, 277 r. 278, 300, 301, 306 Tripolis; a City in Phoenicia, 496 r.
531 Tunis; taken by Agathocles, 501 r. 737 Tyrants; the Thirty Tyrants at
Athens, 357, 358, etc. r. 395, etc. -- Their Cruelties, ibid. 372 r. ibid. 413
-- A Tyrant distracts every body, 675 r. 755 -- How Tyrants are to be dealt
with, 411 r. 461 Tire; besieged by Alexander M. 537, etc. r. 583, etc. -- Made
a Peninsula, ibid. -- Is taken, 431 r. 486 -- An ancient City is had been, but
then destroyed, 537 r. 583 -- Afterward rebuilt, 541 r. 587
V.
Virginia; killed by her own Father at Rome, to prevent her being a Slave to a
Villain that had sworn, she was his Slave Servant, 271 r. 300 Virtue; we hate
when it is present, but desire it earnestly when it is lost, and taken from us,
221, 566 r. 248, 615 Utica; the memorable Siege and Defense at Utica in Africa
by Agathocles, 680 r. 761 -- The Captives of Utica hung at the Engines alive to
be shot at by the Townsmen, ibid.
W.
Wine-Cellars; the stately Wine-Cellars of Gellias in Agrigentum, 341 r. 376
X.
Xenophon the Historian; where he begins and ends his History, 319, 446 r. 352,
504 -- Is created General over the Greeks that returned out of Persia, 374 r.
416 Xerxes; his Expedition, Armies, etc. into Greece, 213, 216, 218 r. 242,
243, 245 -- The Sea Fight at Artemisium, 222 r. 249 -- The Fight with Leonidas
at Thermopylae, 218, 219 r. 245, 246 -- The Sea Fight at Salamis, 224, 225 r.
251, 252 -- His Flight to Ecbatana, 234 r. 261 -- Is Assassinated, 258 r. 278
Z.
Zacynthus; the Sedition and War at Zacynthus, 416 r. 480 Zaleucus; his Laws at
Thurium in Italy, 270 r. 299
A TABLE OF THE Eclogues or Fragments.
Note: The Letter b in the Fragments stands for Book, and the Letter e for
Eclogue or Excerpt; Likewise the Letter l stands for Lib. and the Letter s for
Section.

The ECLOGUES or FRAGMENTS out of the First Six Books after the Twentieth of
Diodorus the Sicilian.
A.
ACra Leuca, built in Spain by Amilcar, Hannibal's Father, Book 25. Eclogue 2.
Page 720 Aemilius, the Consul, wast the Country of the Celte Galls, b. 25. e.
3. ibid. Agathocles, King of Syracuse, his Acts and Death, b. 21. e. 2, 3, 4,
8, 11, 12. 709 Alexander, the Son of Cassander, murdered by Demetrius, b. 21.
e. 7. ibid. Amesalus razed by Hiero, b. 22. e. 15. 714 Amilcar, his Acts in
Sicily against the Romans, b. 23. e. 9. 716 -- His Death, b. 25. e. 2. 719
Antander, the Sicilian Historian, b. 21. e. 12. 710 Antigonus his Death, b. 21.
e. 1. 709 Appius Claudius his Acts in Sicily, b. 23. e. 2. 715 Ar^s; none can
please all in any Arts, b. 26. e. 1. 721 Asdrubal unsuccessful in Sicily, b.
25. e. 2. 719
B.
Barcas, the Carthaginian General, his Acts in Sicily, b. 24. e. 2. 719
Brennus, the Gall, his Inroad into Macedonia, the Slaughter of his Army, and
his Death, b. 22. e. 13. 713 Brutii; they rout Agathocles, b. 21. e. 3. 709 --
He wastes their Country, e. 8. ibid. Cadmean Victory, what, b. 22. e. 4. 712
Calatinus routs the Carthaginians at Sea, b. 24. e. 12. 719 Cantharides blinds
the Sight, b. 22. e. 2. 712 Carthaginians; their War with Pyrrhus in Sicily, b.
22. e. 11, 14. 712, 713 -- With the Romans, b. 23. 715 -- Overcome by Appius
Claudius, b. 23. e. 4. 715 -- Their War with their Confederates, b. 25. e. 1.
719 Carthalo, his Successes in Sicily against the Romans, b. 24. e. 1. 719
Celte, routed in Sicily through their Intemperance, b. 23. e. 12. 717 --
Slaughtered in Spain by Amilcar, b. 25. e. 2. 720 Cios, the General of the
Mamertines, routed by Hiero, kills himself, b. 22. e. 15. 715 Covetousness; the
Evil of it, b. 21. e. 1. 709
D.
Demetrius his Acts, b 21. e 1, 7, 10, 11. 709, 710 Decius, his Cru(...) at
Rhegium; his Sight lost by a Physician wilfully, by the use of Cantharides, b
22. e 2. 712
E.
Enna taken by the Romans, b 23. e 9. 716 Eryx in Sicily taken by Pyrrhus, b
22. e 14. 713 -- Razed by the Carthaginians, b 22. e 9. 712
F.
Fabius, the Roman Consul, slaughters the Hetruscans, Galls, and Samnites, b
21. e 6. 702
G.
Gades, b 25. e 2. 719 Galls; their Inroad into Greece, b 22. e 13. 713 --
Their miserable Return, ibid.
H.
Hannibal; his Acts in Sicily, b 22. e 15. 714 Hannibal, Son of Amilcar, chosen
General in Spain by the Army, b 25. e 5. 720 -- His taking of Sagunthum, b 25.
e 5. ibid. Hanno; his Acts in Sicily, b 23. e 2. 715 Hiero; his Acts, b 22. e
15. b 23. e 2, 4, 5, 12. b 24. e 1. b 25. e 4. b 26. e 6. 714, 715, 718, 720,
721
I.
Indortes, the General of the Iberians, taken and killed by Amilcar, b 25. e 2.
720 Istolatius, General of the Celte, taken by Amilcar, b 26. e 2. ibid. Julius
the Consul is Shipwrecked, b 24. e 1. 719
L.
Leontines receive Pyrrhus, 713 Lilybeurn in Sicily besieged by Pyrrhus, b 22.
e 14. ibid. -- When built, ibid. -- Besieged by the Romans, b 24. e 1, 3. 718
M.
Maenon poisons his Master Agathocles, b 21. e 12. 710 -- His other Acts, b 21.
e 13. 711 Mamertines, their Cruelty at Messina, b 21. e 12. ibid. Messina
besieged by Hiero, and the Carthaginians relieved by the Romans, b 22. e 15.
714
N.
Numidians Rebelling against the Carthaginians, are destroyed by Asdrubal, b
25. e 2. 720
O.
Orissus, King of the Iberians, routed by Asdrubal, 720
P.
Phintias, Prince of Agragentum, overcome of Hicetas, b 22. e 2. 712 -- His
Dream of his End, e 5. ibid. Ptolemeus Ceraunus killed of the Galls, e 3. ibid.
Pyrrhus his Acts in Sicily, e 10, 11, 14. ibid.
R.
Regulus the Proconsul, his Successes in Africa, b 23. e 12. 716 Rhodes torn by
an Earthquake. Romans, their Slaughters of the Hetruscians, Galls, etc. b 21. e
6. 709 -- Their ancient Shields, and new, b 23. e 3. 715 -- Their Acts in
Sicily, b 23. e 2. ibid. -- Their Shipwrecks, b 23. e 12. 719 -- Are beaten at
Sea by Cathalo, b 24. e 1. 718
S.
Sagunthum besieged, b 25. e 5. 720 -- Their Heroic Acts, ibid. -- The Women
kill both themselves and their Children, ibid. Sicily the bravest of Islands, b
23. e 1. 715 Stilpo, Agathocles his General, Shipwrecked, b 21. e 8. 709
T.
Thebes taken by Demetrius, and demolished, b 21. e 10. 710
X.
Xanthippus the Spartan overcomes Regulus, the Roman General, in Africa, b 23.
e 12. 716
The FRAGMENTS out of the Lost Books of Diodorus the Sicilian, gathered by
Photius.
A.
ALexander Epiphanes, King of Syria, murdered by his Subjects, Book 32. Eclogue
1. Page 724 Antiochis Queen of Cappadocia, cozens her Husband with a
supposititious Birth, b 31 e 3. 723 Antiochus Epiphanes prophanes the Temple at
Jerusalem, b 34. e 1. 726 Antiochus Eupator, his War with the Jews, b 34. e 1.
ibid Ariamnes II. King of Cappadocia his great love to his Son, and his Son to
him, b 31. e 3. 723 Ariarathes I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Kings of Cappadocia, and
the last a favourer of Learning, b 31. e 3. -- And the pedigree of those Kings,
ibid. Athenio the Captain of the slaves in Sicily, and that servile War, b 36.
e 1. 731
B.
Battaces; the Priest of Cybele in Phrygia, comes in a strange Habit to Rome, b
36. e 2. 733 Bocchus, King of Africa overcome by Marius, b 36. e 1. 729
C.
Cadmus; b 40. e 1. 736 Caesar; his War with Pompey, b 37. e 2. 735 -- His
Murder, ibid. Callo, a young Wife, afterward she became a Man, b 32. e 1. 724
Capadocia; The Genealogy of their Kings, b 31. e 3. 722 Carthage; height of its
Walls, b 32. e 2. 725 Cattulus murders himself by the Fumes of Lime, b 38. e 2.
736
D.
Demetrius, King of Syria, overcomes Alexander, b 32. e 1. 724
E.
Enna taken, and plundered by the Slaves, b 34. e 2. 727 Eunus the Juggler, and
Captain of the Slaves in Sicily, ibid.
H.
Heraris. a young Wife, becomes a Man, b 32 e 1. 724 Hermaphrodites; strange
Relations of Hermaphrodites, ibid.
I.
Jerusalem; the Temple by Antiochus Epiphanes taken by Antiochus Eupator, b 34.
e 1. 726 Jews, hated of all: An Heathenish Relation of their Coming out of
Egypt, b 34. e 1. b 40. e 1. 726, 736 -- Their Laws by Moses, ibid. Jugurtha,
King of Numidia, brought Prisoner to Rome, b 36. e 1. 729
M.
Marsian War, b 37. e 1. 734 Masinissa, his Srength and Age, b 32. e 3. 325
Megallis, the wife of Demophilus of Enna, thrown down a Rock by the Women
Slaves, for her former Cruelty, b 34. e 2. 327 Titus Minutius buys a Slave, he
fell in Love with, for a great Sum of Money, and stirs up the Servile War in
Italy; at length betrayed by his own men, b 36. e 1. 729 Moses his Acts, b 34.
e 1. b 40. e 1. 726, 736
N.
Nerva manages the War against the Slaves in Sicily; slothful, b 36. e 1. 730
P.
Persius, King of Macedonia, his extreme Misery b 31. e 2. 722 Pompey, his
Death, b 37. e 2. 734 Prusias, King of Bithynia, murdered by his Son, b 32. e
4. 726
R.
Romans; their superstition, b 36. e 2 733 -- Their Statues of their Ancestors,
b 31. e 4. 723 -- Their Degeneracy from their former Frugality, b 37. e 1. 734
S.
Salvius a Piper, Captain of the Slaves in Sicily, is made King, and called
Tripho, b 36. e 1. 731 Sicily; Its lamentable Condition in the time of the
servile Wars, b 36. e 1. 729 Sylla; His War with Marius, his remarkable Death,
b 37. e 2. 735
T.
Titinius betrays the S(...)s in Sicily, b 36 e 1. 731
V.
Varius, Captain of the Slaves in Sicily, b 36. e 1. ibid. Viriathus, General
of the Lusitanians, once a Captain of Thieves, his Successes against the
Romans, b 32. e 5. 726
W.
War; The War of the Slaves among the Romans, b 34. e 2. 727 -- And in Attica,
ibid. -- At Nucera, Capua, and by Minutius, b 36. e 1. 729 -- The Servile Wars
in Sicily, under Eunus, Varius, Salvius, and Athenio. b 34. e 2. b 36. e 1.
727, 729
The FRAGMENTS out of the History of Diodorus the Sicilian, Published by H.
Valesius.
A.
ACtaeon pulled in pieces between those that strove for him. See Archias, Lib.
6. Sect. 15. Page 743 Agathocles; Killed with a Thunderbolt, l 6. s 16. ibid.
-- His Revenge upon his Soldiers that killed his Son, l 2^. s 2. 748 Archias
his vile love to Actaeon a virtuous young Boy, l 6. s 15. 743 Astyages King of
the Medes his Cruelty toward his subjects, l 6. s 30. 745 Adrastus by Chance
killed Atys the Son of Croesus; Kills himself for it, l 6. s 32 ibid. Atys. See
Adrastus, ibid. Aeneas his Care of his Father when Troy was taken, l 6. s 8.
742 Aristogon; his praise l 6. s 46. 747 Antigonus; one a private Man Killed
through his Ambition, l 21. s 1. 748 Apollodorus, King of Cassandria in
Macedonia, his Cruelty, l 22. s 5. 750 Attilius Regulus, the Roman General, his
Misfortunes at Carthage, routed by Xanthippus, l 23. s 1. 751 Antiochus the
Great, his Acts, l 26. s 28 to 33. 757 -- His strange familiarity with ordinary
fellows l 26. s 43. 758 -- Epiphanes his foolish and light Carriage at Sports
and in Feasts, ibid. s 67, 68, 69. 761 Antiochus Cyzienus addicted to
Puppit-Plays etc. hunting wild Beasts in the night, l 34. s 25. 774 Aradians
slew the Ambassadors, sent to them from the Marathenians, l 26. s 97. 767
Arsases, King of Parthia, his praise, l 26. s 107. 769 Attalus his cruelty, l
34. s 9. 771 Athenaeus, Antiochus's General, abusive in his Quarters,
afterward was famished to Death because none would relieve him by reason of
his former abuses, l 34. s 16. 722 Asellus; See Lucius Asellus, 776
B.
Bias, one of the Seven Wise Men, His noble Entertainment and Redemption of
Captive-Virgins, l 6. s 28. 744
C.
Castor and Pollux, l 6. s 1. 741 Chilo, one of the Seven wise Men, l 6. s 26.
744 Cyrus; his Praise, l 6. s 29, 31, 34. 744 Croesus, Cyrus his Kindness to
him, l 6. s 33, 34. 745 Cambyses, l 6. s 44. 747 Cimon, his love to his Dead
Father, l 6. s 51. -- His Praise, 52. 748 Carthaginians; their War with the
Mercenaries. See War. 752 -- Their Cruelty toward the Micatanian Revolters, l
26. s 10. 754 Cretians; their Treachery to the Citizens of Siphnus, Corinth;
Rebuilt by Julius Caesar, l 26. s 92. 766 Caius Gracchus; his Head sold by his
tr(...)rous Friend Lucius Metellius for its Weight in Gold, l 34. s 22. 773 --
Drew out the Brains, and poured in Lead to make it weigh heavier. ibid. Caius
Marius, one of the Ambassadors sent to Metellus, despised by him, but beloved
by the Soldiers, l 34. s 28. 775 Caius Domitius; See Pompaedius.
D.
Dromichares King of Thrace, his kind Usage of Lysimachus and his Son when he
had them prisoners. Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria his Cruelty l 26. Demetrius
Son of Philip King of Macedon murdered by his Father through the instigation of
his Brother Perseus, l 26. s 39. 758 Decius, Treacherously killed all the
Rheglans, l 22. s 1. 750 -- His end, ibid Diegulis King of Thrace his
cruelties, l 26. s 104, 105. 769
E.
Eleans, Consecrated to Jupiter by the Policy of the Lacedaemonians, l 6. s 12.
742 Eucephus, his Treachery concerning Polychares his Cattle, and his Cruelty,
l 6. s 14. 742 Eumenes; his Kindness to his Brother Attalus, though he had
married his Queen in his absence, upon news of his death, l 26. s 44. 759 --
His other Acts, s 48. ibid. -- His Praise, s. 66. 761 Eumenes King of Parthia
his Cruelty, razed a great part of Babylon.
F.
Fimbria; encouraged his Soldiers to plunder, l 37. s 11, 12. -- His Cruelties,
s 13. 779
G.
Gauls; their Cruelty, l 26. s 65. 761 Gorgus Father and Son, their remarkable
love one to another.
H.
Hippomenes, caused his own Daughter to be eaten up by a Horse, l 6. s 20. 743
Hamilcar; his cruel usage by the Sons of Attalus, l 24. s 5. 752 Hannibal, his
Acts, l 26. s 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9. 753 -- His Praise, s 36. 757 Hieronymus King
of Syracuse murdered by his Subjects, l 26. s 7, 8. 754 Hasdrubal; his
Commendation, l 26. s 11. 754
I.
Julius Caesar his praise, l 26. s 92. 766 -- Rebuilt Corinth, ibid. Jugurtha
Besieged his Brother Adherball in Cinna, took the place, and unnaturally slew
his Brother, l 34. s 23. 77^
L.
Lycurgus, l 6. s 11. 742 Lucius Tarquinius King of the Romans his praise, l 6.
s 23. 744 Lucretia, her story, l 6. s 48. 747 Lysimachus kindly used by the
Thracians, when he was prisoner, l 21. s 3, 4. 74^ -- Sent to Seleucus to have
Demetrius killed s 10. 749 Lucius Asellius, a prudent Governor of Sicily, his
praises, l 36. s 8, 9. 776
M.
Mynderidyes the Syberite, his state and grandeur, l 6. s 19. 743 Myso, one of
the seven wise Men, l 6. s 25. 744 Messina; the Citizens murdered by the
Mamertines, received as Friends, l 21. s 9. 749 Metellus Quintus; Son of
Metellus, his great love to his Father, and care to have him restored from
banishment, l 36. s 3. 775 Mucius Scaevola, see Scevola, 776 Mithridates; his
Clemency toward the Roman Soldiers, and his successes in Asia, l 37. s 5, 6.
777 -- His War with the Rhodians, ib. 778
N.
Numa Pompilius, l 6. s 17. 743 Nearchus the Tyrant of Elis, how he was used by
Zeno see Zeno, 747 Nabis King of Lacedemon, his murder of Pelops the Son of
Lycurgus, and his other Cruelties, l 26. s 12. 754
P.
Paulus Emilius, his praise, l 26. s 42, 57, 61. 758 -- His death and praise, l
26. s 61. 760 Pittachus, one of the seven wise Men, l 6. s 27, 28. 744
Pleminius King of Thrace, his beastly Cruelties, l 26. s 14. 754 Polychares;
see Eucephnus, 742 Pythagoras, l 6. s 36. 745 -- The (...)dness of the
Pythagorians one to another, l 6. s 37. -- Other matters concerning them, l 6.
s 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Polycrates King of Samos, his cruelty toward the Lydians
that fled to him, l 6. s 54. 747 Pyrrhus plundered Egeas in Macedonia, his
Soldiers rifl'd the Sepulchers of the former Kings, l 22. s 6. 750 Proserpina;
her Temple robbed by Pleminius the Roman Governor of Locris, l 26. s 14. 754 --
The effect of it, ibid. Philip King of Macedon, his Acts, l 26. s 21, 22, 23,
24, 25. 756 Perseus, Son of Philip King of Macedon, procures his Brother
Demetrius to be murdered by his Father. See Demetrius, 758 -- His Cruelty, s
46. 759 -- His other Acts, s 56, 58. -- His Covetousness, s 59. 760 Ptolemy
Philometer driven out of his Kingdom; fled to Rome, l 26. s 70. 762 -- Met
kindly by Demetrius, ibid. Prusias, King of Bythinnia robbed the Temple of
Pergamus, l 26. s 81. 764 -- The punishment of his Army both by Sea and Land,
ibid. -- Hated by his Subjects, l 26. s 90. 766 Philip Father of Alexander, his
Acts, l 26. s 83. 765 Pumpeius Quintus his Acts, at the Siege of Lagnetum, l
26. s 106. 769 Ptolemy Phiscon; his cruelty to his Wife and Sister Cleopatra,
in murdering her, and his Son Memphites, l 26. s 103. 768 Pompaedius General of
the Martians, his rash design to beset the Senate House with 10 Thousand Men, l
37. s 1. 734 -- Diswaded by Caius Domitius, ibid. Pompeius Cn. the Great, his
Commendation, l 37. s 14, 18. 779 Poscriptions in Rome; an Instance of a
remarkable Example in the punishment of one that gloried over others, and at
last read his own name in the List, l 37. s 17. 778
R.
Romulus Silvius, killed by a Thunderbolt, l 6. s 9. 742 Romulus and Remus, l
6. s 13. ibid. Rhegium; the People there all killed by Decius, and his Garrison
of Campanians, l 22. s 1. 750 Romans; their Clemency toward the Conquered, l
26. s 62. 760 -- The degeneration of their Manners, l ^6. s 4. 775
S.
Sylla, his Commondation, l 37. s (...) 777 -- The murders and slaughters in
Rome by Syll^, l 37. s 8, 16. 778, 780 -- Robbed the Temples to carry on the
War in Italy, s 10. 779 Salmoneus defied Jupiter, l 6. s 4. 741 Syberites;
their Luxury, l 6. s 19. 743 Solon, l 6. s 24. 744 Servius Tullius; his Praise
reigned 44 years, l 6. s 35. 745 Sicily; P. Clodius his Acts in Sicily, l 24. s
1. 752 -- Hieronymus King of Sicily, murdered by his Subjects, l 26. s 7. 754
-- The Servile War, l 34. s 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11. 770 -- The Cruelty of
the slaves, l 36. s 1. 775 Scipio; his humanity to Syphax King of Numidia his
prisoner, and his other Acts, l 26 s 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 755 -- His Praise,
Scipio the Son of Paulus Aemilius, his Praise and noble Acts, l 26. s 76. 763
Scipio Africanus; his faithfullness in his performance of Articles with his
Enemies, l 26. s 85. 765 -- Takes Carthage, and restored the Phalerian Bull,
and other things to the Sicilians, l 26. s 91. 766 Scipio Nasica; his
Commendation, l 34. s 24. 773 Scaevola his Virtues, l 36. s 5, 6, 7. 676
T.
Thessalus abdicated the Government of Athens, Tiberius Gracchus; his Praise, l
34. s 10. 772
V.
Viriathus General in Spain against the Romans; his Justice in dividing the
Spoil, wheen he was Captain of the Robbers, l 26. s 93. 766 -- His Contempt of
Wealth, s 99. 767 -- His Death and Burial, s 108. 769
W.
-- War; the Mercenary War with the Carthaginians, l 25 s 1, 2, 3, 4. 752 --
The Servile War in Sicily. See Sicily, 77^
Z.
Z^no; how he used the Tyrant Nearchus, when he was upon the Back, l 6. s 47.
747
The FRAGMENTS out of the Lost Histories of Diodorus the Sicilian, Published by
F. Vrsinus.
A.
A Chaians refused the Gift of Eumenes, s 13. Page 779 -- Accept Seleucus's
Present, ibid. Aetolians in great Fear, s 5. 783 -- Their fruitless Embassy, s
8. ibid. Albans and Romans became Enemies to one another, s 1. 783 Ambassadors
come from Rome to Rhodes, s 29. 779 Ambassadors come to Rome from all parts, s
20. 780 Antiochus the Great, s 6. 783 -- Rejects Scipio's Advice, s 7. ibid. --
Freed from War, s 9. ibid, Ariarathes commended by the Senate, s 24. ibid.
Arradians, s 29. 773 Asia; Princes of Asia fast Friends to the Romans, s 14.
782
B.
Bocchus King of Lybia, s 33. 782 -- Sends Commissioners to Marius to crave
Pardon for his Crimes, ibid. -- Seizes Jugurtha, and delivers him bound, and by
that means bought his safety, ibid
C.
Caria assigned to the Rhodians, s 10. 779 Carthaginians deliver themselves and
Country to the Romans, s 27. 780 -- They are in great Consternation, ibid.
Celtiberians treat for Peace, s 26. ibid. Cretians declared Friends to the
Senate, s 35 783 -- They are commanded to send in all their Ships, ibid. -- Are
divided about it, and stir up the People to sedition, ibid.
D.
Demetrius sends the Senate a Crown of great Value, s 25. 780
E.
Egypt an Excellent Country. s 32. 782 Eumenes presented with an Ivory
Chariot, s 16. 779
F.
Flamininus sent to Rome, discharges the Italian Servants, s 3. 782 -- He
treats with Antiochus his Ambassador, s 4. ibid.
G.
Gallatians or Gallogreeks, send Ambassadors to treat for Peace, and are
refused, s 11. 779
H.
Heraclides sent to Treat about a Peace, s 6. 783
I.
Jugurtha sent for and seized, s 33. 782
M.
Marathum delivered up, s 28. 773 Mark Anthony makes Peace with the Cretians, s
35 783 Mi(...)idates endeavors to corrupt the Senate, s 34. 782
N.
Numantines treat with the Romans for a Peace, s 3. 773 -- They renew the War
with the Romans, ibid.
P.
Perseus; War decreed against him by the Senate, s 17. 779 -- Commanded to mend
his manners, s 15 779 Philip freed from Tribute, and his Son Demetrius
discharged, s 4 783 Prusias; his base and shameful Catriage, s 22. 780 Ptolemy
endeavors to gain Caelo-Syria, s 18. ibid. -- Ptolemy the Elder; his
Ambassadors rejected, f 23 780 Ptolemy the younger in favor with the Senate,
ibid. Ptolemy Euergetes meets the Ambassadors in Pomp and State, s 32. 782 --
Shows them his Palace and Treasure, ibid.
R.
Rhodians exceedingly afraid, s 19 779 -- Delivered from their Fears, 780
Romans jealous of Eumenes, s 21 780 -- Roman Ambassadors slight Ptolemy's
Rarities and fins Things, s 32. 782 -- Admire the Populousness and Situation of
his Country, ibid. -- Travel through the World, ibid. -- Return highly
applauded, ibid.
S.
Saturnius after condemned to die, rescued by the People and declared Tribune,
s 34. 782 Scipio and his Delegates highly applauded, s 32. 782
T.
Termisian Ambassadors, s 30. 773 Tryphon of a private Man made King, s 31. 773
FINIS.

