DIRECTORIVM COSMETICVM: OR, A Directory for the Female-Sex: BEING A Father's
Advice to his Daughter: Wherein all Young Ones (especially those of that Sex)
are directed how they may obtain the greatest Beauty, and Adorn themselves with
a Holy Conversation.
DEar child, These words which briefly I declare,
Let them not hang like Jewels in thine Ear;
But in the Secret Closet of thy Heart
Lock them up safe, that they may never depart.
Give first to God the flower of thy Youth.
Take Scripture for thy Guide, that word of Truth:
Adorn thy Soul with Grace; prize Wisdom more
Then all the Pearls upon the Indian Shore.
Think not to live still free from Grief and Sorrow;
That man that laughs to day, may weep to morrow.
Nor dream of Joys unmixed, here below;
No Roses here, but what on Thorns do grow.
Scorn this deluding World, that most bewitches;
And place thy hopes in Everlasting Riches.
Make room for Christ; Let not so base a Guest
As Earth, have any Lodging in thy Breast.
Bad Company (as deadly Poison) shun;
Thousands by that are Ruined and Undone.
The giddy Multitude still goes astray;
Turn from the Road, and choose the Narrow way.
Keep Death and Judgment always in thine Eye;
None's fit to live, but who are fit to die,
Make use of present time, because thou must
Shortly take up thy Lodging in the Dust:
It Is dreadful to behold the Setting Sun,
And Night approaching, ere our work be done.
Let not thy winged days be spent in vain;
When gone, no Gold will call them back again.
Strive to subdue thy sin, when first beginning;
Custom ( when once confirmed) is strangely winning
Be much in Prayer; it is the begging Trade
By which true Christians are the Richest made.
Of Meditation get the blessed art;
And often search thy own deceitful heart.
Fret not with Envy at thy Neighbors Wealth,
Preferment, Learning, Beauty, Strength, or Health.
Abhor the Lying Tongue: vile Fraud detest;
Plain-hearted men by Providence are blessed.
Take heed of Idleness, the cursed Nurse
And Mother of all Vice: There Is nothing worse.
And fly from Pride: High Hills are barren found;
But lowly Valleys with choice Fruits are crowned.
Short sinful Pleasures and Delights, eschew;
Eternal Torment is their Wages due.
The Rules of Temperance observe and keep;
That thou offend not in Meat Drink, or Sleep.
Nor costly Garments wear; Let men admire
Thy Person, rather then thy rich Attire.
Get a good Treasure laid up in thy heart,
Which by discourse thou wisely may impart
To profit others: Holy Thoughts within
Will guide thy Tongue, and guard thy Lips from sin?
Learn to distinguish between faithful Friends,
And fawning Flatterers; which for base Ends
Will speak thee fair, in words as soft as Oil,
And make a show of Friendship, to beguile.
The Secrets of thy Friend do not disclose;
Lest by so doing, thou resemble those
Whose Ears are leaking Vessels; which contain
Nothing but what poured in, runs out again
Straight at their mouths, proclaiming them unfit
For any Trust, and to be void of Wit.
If thou resolve to change a single Life,
And have a Purpose to become a Wife;
Then choose thy Husband not for worldly gain,
Nor for his comely Shape, nor Beauty vain:
If Money make the Match, or Lust impure,
Both Bride and Bridegroom shall to weep be sure:
But if the fear of God most excellent,
Be chiefly minded, look for true Content.
Cast off all needless and distrustful Care:
A little is enough; too much, a Snare.
Our Journey from our Cradle to our Grave,
Can be but short; no large Provision crave.
For such Conven'encies as must be had,
Trust in that God who has so richly clad
The laughing Meadows with fresh silver showers,
Sent down to nurse up tender Plants and Flowers:
He for each chirping Bird provides a Nest,
And gives all Creatures that which feeds them best.
To Him give thanks for Mercy which before
Thou have received, and that makes way for more.
For Faults, before his Face reprove thy Friend;
But all good Deeds behind his Back commend.
Labor for Peace; choose to contend with None;
Let Reason, with sweet Calmness, keep the Throne;
Treading fierce Wrath and lawless Passion down:
The Grace of Meekness is a Woman's Crown.
Be Loving, Patient, Courteous and Kind;
So doing thou shall Praise and Honor sind
Here upon Earth; and when All-conqu'ring Death
Thy Body shall Dissolve, and stop thy Breath;
Upon the Golden Wings of Faith and Love,
Thy Soul shall fly to Paradise above;
(Where Sin and Sorrow shall for ever cease)
And there be crowned with Endless Joy and Peace
Entered according to Order.

London, Printed by George Larkin, at the lower End of Broadstreet, next to
London-Wall. 1684.


