PROVE all things, HOLD FAST that which is good; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.

Handled In two Sermons at S. Mary's in Cambridge, the first on the
Commencement-Sabbath, July 1. 1655. the other since.

By WILLIAM DILLINGHAM D. D. Master of Emmanuel College in Cambridge.

PRUDENTER CREED; Nec tarde, nec temere, nec titubanter. (...) CAMBRIDGE:
Printed by John Field, Printer to the University. And are to be sold by William
Morden. 1656.

Imprimatur, Febr. 12. 1656.

Theophil. Dillingham, Procan. Richard Minshull. John Arrowsmith. Anthony
Tuckney.


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Mr. FRANCIS ASH, of the City of London, Merchant,
and Master of the Moscovia-Company there.
Honored Sir;
WHat you were pleased to desire might be published; I desire you would be
pleased to accept this dedication of; both as an acknowledgement of the power
you have to command me, and as a testimony of my thankfulness to you for your
many favors to my self, and your transcendent beneficence unto the College
whereunto I stand related: The particulars whereof I should have displayed, but
that I know that this were the ready way to unbespeak your acceptance; nor
indeed can I hope that this poor paper will ever be able to out-wing that Fame
which is already gone forth; or to come into the hands of any, whose ears have
not been already filled with the report of so noble, so pious, and so
seasonable a gift. For, the perfume of this box of costly ointment, which you
have expended to further the preaching and propagation of the Gospel, has
already filled the whole house of the present age, and shall make your name
become as an ointment poured forth, embalming it to all succeeding generations:
For, this which you have done shall hereafter be told for a memorial of you;
yea, wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached by those who shall have been bred
up here by your bounty, even there shall the souls of many have cause to bless
and glorify God on your behalf. But I may go no farther, lest I should
transgress and break truce with your humility.

As for the subject of this discourse, it is none other than what has been
often insisted upon at large by many of our learned and judicious Divines,
whose books I am not worthy, and whose works I am not able to carry after them.
But I do not at all fear that it will be any whit the less acceptable unto
your self, who love the good old way of sober truth, however many now a days
do thirst after novelty; a good account (I think) may be given of both from
that of our Savior, Luke 5. 39. No man having drunk old wine straightway
desires new; for, he says the old is better; nor yet will it, I hope, be
altogether useless unto others, seeing S. Peter thought good in both his
Epistles, to stir up the pure minds of believers by way of remembrance, 2
Pet.3. 1. and we therefore endeavor to understand truths, that we may be able
to call them to mind in the time of our need: So that what wants novelty to
recommend it to our fancies and understandings, may yet prove welcome unto our
consciences, and may be both profitable and acceptable, because seasonable.

And indeed, Sir, that which first made me pitch my thoughts upon this subject,
was the sad consideration of that giddiness and drunkenness of spirit in
matters of Religion, which so many in these our days are distempered withal,
running to and fro, and staggering like a drunken man, out of one opinion into
another; and yet after all their seekings, they are still to seek for the
truth, the way whereof they have not known. Many causes hereof might be
assigned; two I shall desire your leave here to remember and make mention of.

And First, I do impute and charge this Vertigo and Megrime in religion, this
unfaithfulness to truth, upon the account of newfanglednesse, that pica of our
nature, the unreasonable desire and love of novelty, which is so very much
predominant in these our times, as if S. Paul's prophecy were now fulfilled in
the ears of many, (2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.) For, the time will come when they will not
endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves
teachers, having itching ears, And they shall turn away their ears from the
truth, and shall be turned unto fables. Let a man that is a setter-forth of new
opinions but open his shop, and how does the multitude throng about him! like
those Athenians that took S. Paul to be such a one, Acts 17.19. Saying, may we
know what this new doctrine, which thou speak, is? for, thou bring
certain strange things to our ears; we would know therefore what these things
mean. For, (we must know that) all the Athenians and strangers, which were
there, spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or hear some new
thing). But such as desire news only because it is news, will not much care
whether it be true or false; and those that judge of truth by the newness of
it, may fall into ten errors e're they light upon one truth; Antiquiry is no
sufficient mark of truth, (witness the Gibeonites, who had old shoes on their
feet, and moldy bread in their hands, and yet at the same time brought a lie
in their mouths) much less is novelty; for, Truth is of the elder house; and
as for those that entertain truth only because it is new, though it be truth
which they entertain, yet are they not like to keep it long; for, it will not
be long new. It is much if a news-book be read over twice: The Athenian
news-mongers made account they favored S. Paul highly, when they promised to
hear him tell his story over again a second time, Acts 17. 32. A second-hand
truth? away with it to the brokers. Thus children and fools were ever admirers
of new clothes; and that which was always the praise of an Almanac, is now
become with these men the only taking qualification of doctrine and opinions.
That luxury went high that had every day a new suite, and these can scarce
think themselves right dressed, unless they have daily new changes of opinions.
But since the Devil knows their humor so well, they shall want for no news, so
long as his invention can afford it; and when that fails, the old serpent knows
how to slip his skin, and that which is old in it self will be new to them;
blanch but an old Arrian, and out comes a Socinian spick and span new. And
indeed, what are most of our new-lights, but old-heresies, the Devils old cards
played over again, and the pieces of the old Serpent crawling to find one
another from under the Anathema's of foregoing ages?

But a second cause to which I think the unsettlednesse of many men may be
justly imputed, is their not being well-grounded in the first principles of
Religion. Some never were catechized at all, but have been nursed up in gross
and palpable ignorance; no wonder if such as have no ballast at all in them, be
made the sport and pastime of every wind of doctrine; no wonder if such as have
been bred all their lives time in a dungeon, do become dizzie, and count all
light new when they come first into it. My self have known some, that much
cried up for new discoveries some crude and raw apprehensions of those very
truths, which others, who had the happiness of better education, had been very
well acquainted with, and grounded in from their childhood. But others there
are, who have learned the truth more by rode than by heart, and received it
from other men upon their bare word, without seeing any evidence for it. These
men when they come once to see an appearance of reason for the contrary
opinion, (which is more than ever themselves had for the taking up of truth) it
is not much to be wondered at, if such are easily drawn aside to error; and
then it is but very natural for them to call error light, and to condemn truth
for darkness, because they never understood it: And then if a little pride get
but in once (as it is never far of) to mix with their ignorance, how easy a
thing is it for them to grow conceited of their new seize (which yet
wiser men cannot but pity them for) to despise the truth (which before they
did but ravish), and to inveigh against those who formerly taught it them;
calling them blind guides, whereas the fault was, themselves had been blind
followers, and supposing them to have no ground for the truth, because indeed
themselves never had any: yea and to loath the very ordinances in which the
truth had been dispensed to them. Thus the best food, if it lie on the stomach
undigested, is oftimes vomited up again with the greatest abhorrency and
detestation. What a sad condition have those men brought themselves into! A
spirit of error has not only taken possession of them, but has also bolted
himself in, and made them hate the very means of their recovery: By this time
the Devil has got such a commanding power over them, that he drives them about
in herds and droves, as he does the Quakers at this day. Who, that it might be
apparent unto all men that they are seduced, are become mere Vagrants. Whereas
had they at first entertained truth upon good grounds, they would never have
proved so false unto it; had it taken due possession of them, or they of it;
they would never thus have quitted house and home, to be carried about like
empty clouds, and wandering stars, which, though they may pretend unto new
light, yet are they fast bound in chains of darkness, and unless they do
timely repent, S. Jude tells us what their doom shall be, verse 13. To whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

Now then, Sir, Since the danger is so great, what need have we all, as to beg
of God that he by his Spirit would keep us steadfast in the truth, so also our
selves to neglect no means that may be available thereunto; among which I
conceive this one to be none of the least, that we endeavor to understand our
selves well in our religion, to see truth in clear Scripture-evidence, to be
intelligent and knowing, not merely-believing Christians, to be rooted and
well-grounded in the Faith, so shall we be steafast and unmovable. For which
end if it shall please God to make this discourse in any measure profitable (as
I hope it is not altogether unseasonable) unto his people; neither shall I have
any cause to repent myself that I ran this adventure, nor you to be sorry that
you have undergone the trouble of this dedication. And thus, Sir, I take my
leave, recommending you to the gracious protection of the Almighty, and to the
riches of his love in our Lord Christ Jesus.

Sir, Your Assured friend, much obliged to serve and honor you, William
Dillingham.
Cambridge: March 18. 1656.
1. Thessal. V. 21. (...). Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.
SAtan, the grand enemy of our salvation, knowing that it is the truth which
must make us free, as it was a lie by which he brought us all at first into
captivity, labors by all means possible to keep men from the knowledge of the
truth: and that,

First, if he can, by detaining them in gross and palpable ignorance, those
chains of darkness. Thus does he the Turks and Indians to this very day; and
many millions of souls under the Papacy, by a blind obedience and as blind a
faith, the Coliers faith they call it, I doubt 'twill come to the fire at the
last.

Secondly, If this will not do but men will needs be knowing, then he labors
to seduce them into error, giving them husks for bread, pro Dea nubem. This
old deceiver wants not his strophae, nor his methods. He will Proteus-like
screw himself into all modes and figures that so he may the better deceive.
Sometimes he assumes the shape of an Oecumenicall Bishop, and dictates errors
out of an infallible chair, intoxicating with the cup of his errors the Kings
of the earth: otherwhile putting on the appearance of a simple plain man, he
creeps into houses, and the greatest game he flies at are but silly women. One
while he presents error under the reverend cloak of antiquity; anon he
bethinks himself that the newest fashion will give best content, and so they
shall be new lights.

Thirdly, If both these fail, then he raises a dust of controversy, that so
people may not be able to see the truth, or not to know it when they see it. He
finds it good fishing in troubled waters, and cutting purses in an hubub: For,
while people are distracted to see so many opinions in religion, whereof they
are sure but one can be true, (and which that is they are not able to judge)
they resolve to be standers-by until the learned be agreed, supposing it the
safest course and easiest to avoid error, by being of no opinion at all.

Fourthly, Another device he has, to bring truth it self into suspicion. Thus
of old did he set the Poets on work to invent fables like unto many histories
recorded in holy Scriptures, that when the falsehood of those should be
discovered, the truth of these might be called in question. Just as he makes
some play the hypocrites, that when their hypocrisy is detected, all
professors may be thought to be like them.

But let us argue e contra. If the Scripture were not true, sure the devil
would never seek to gain credit to his lies by imitating of it. It Is an
argument that there is true coin in the world, because men counterfeit it: had
there never been such an one as Richard Plantagenet, we had never heard of
Perkin Warbeck.

Reject not therefore all coin; for, there is some good; receive not all
heedlessely, because there is some counterfeit; but bring it all to the test,
and to the touchstone. To think that we must therefore be of no opinion
because others are of so many, is to be of the worst opinion of all: for, whosoever
adheres to a particular opinion, may ineed be in the wrong; but he that is of no
opinion cannot possibly be in the right. If other men do so differ in their
opinions, it concerns us to be well-resolved in our own judgments. If the
winds and waves be so boisterous without, the more need is there of a good
ballast within. All cannot have the truth, therefore make them not thy rule;
yet all pretend to it, therefore give them an hearing. Condemn not all, because
there is truth among them; neither approve all, because some must needs be
false. Let us therefore neither swallow all by a blind credulity, nor reject
all by a rash precipitancy, but follow the advice of the Apostle in the text;
Prove all things, but hold fast that which is good.

The words contain in them a double duty which all believers are bound unto;
as well the people as their pastors, every one in their several orb:
Although more immediately they seem to be directed to the people, who in the
words immediately foregoing are forbidden to despise prophesyings, and here are
bid to try them all, and to hold fast that which is good. Of both these in
their order. First of the first.

Prove all things.
HEre there are two things to be spoken to by way of explication: First, What
it is to try. Secondly, What it is that we are to try.

For the first, By proving or trying here is not meant that we should
experimentally be of all opinions; many such seekers instead of finding truth,
have lost themselves in a maze of error, and an inextricable labyrinth of
perplexity. It Is (...), not (...). Nor is it meant that we should all judices
agere in foro externo sit and determine controversies, binding up all others to
acquiesce in our decisions: but, as it concerns all Christians ( qua tales), to
prove or try is an act of judgment to be exercised by every one within the
private court of his own conscience in order to his own particular embracing or
rejecting of any doctrine offered to his faith. Which act is no further
obligatory to any other man, than the grounds thereof being made known shall
merit his assent.

But secondly, what are we here to understand by (...), all things; must we
examine all things? surely then we shall have work enough. If we must always
be examining, what will become of all holy living? I answer, a man may live by
rule, as well as build by rule. But further, Though we must try all things here
meant, yet is it not meant that we should be always trying of them. But I
conceive the (...) in the text is not to be taken in the utmost extent of its
possible latitude.

Truth fears no fair trial; her face is not painted, and therefore the fairer
for the washing; and she is justified of her children, yet is she sometimes
condemned by strangers that know her not; and her face may possibly get a
scratch in the scuffle, and herself prove (though perhaps more fair, yet) in
the mean while less fruitful; and therefore desires not to live always under
dispute. And indeed some truths seem by their own nature to be exempt from,
trial; there must be some basis to move upon, and that must be immovable;
(...); some first rule, and how shall that be tried? some first principles, and
how shall they be proved? He that will learn must first believe, and doubtless
there are primocredita in Divinity as well as primo-cognita in Philosophy;and
the mind assents to the one by a prima sides; as it does to the other by the
habit called intelligentia. Such there must needs be to give a solid basis to
discourse, and had they prius to prove them by, they were not prima. These have
usually been acknowledged by all for that native evidence that shines in them,
bringing letters credentiall writ in their very faces; yet I know not how of
late some out of the abundance of their leisure or curiosity have been pleased
to question them. We lately dug for fundamental laws till we had like to
have pulled the house down about our ears; and some have dug for principles
in philosophy till they have quite lost them in the rubbish; certainly the man
was either very idle or very melancholic when he began to suspect he might be
deceived in thinking he had a being (which yet was impossible), and came to
Cogito ergo sum. But, that which is worse yet, have we not some who call in
question the very fundamentals of religion also? they are but bad builders,
who, as the Apostle speaks, are always laying the foundation; when then shall
we think that they will set on the roof and bring the building to perfection
who are always digging of it up? I shall say no more; but I had thought the
truth of the scriptures had been out of gunshot, and that God might have been
believed upon his own word. If once it appear to us to be the word of God, we
are not to call in question the truth or equity of it. Let us not spend our
time in calling those truths into question, whereof we have already entertained
a firm and well-grounded belief, but press forwards toward those things which
remain, and practice what we have believed. The blowing of this wind makes the
tree take deeper root, (and it is well if it does always so) but yet in the
mean while it oftimes blows down the fruit. But what is it then that we must
try? try the spirits, says S. John 1. 4. 1. and try prophesyings mentioned
here in the verse before my text; the sense and meaning is one and the same of
both, try all doctrines that are offered to you by any man whatsoever, how
great, how learned soever he be, receive them not upon his (...), but bring
them first unto the beam, unto the touchstone: whence arises the proposition
to be spoken to.

That it is the duty of all Christians to examine the doctrine which they
hear, Doctr.
before they fully entertain it as a principle of faith and life: a truth of
very great importance, but because there has been already so much written, I
shall need now to speak the less, and shall content my self with two arguments
only for confirmation of it, the one from Scripture, the other from Reason,
and be brief in both.

The first argument I shall take from Scripture which does expressly both
command and commend this duty to us: it commands it Mark 4. 24. (...), Reas. 1.
have an eye to your hearing, take heed what you hear: as also in the 1.
epist. of John chap. 4. verse. 1. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God: it commends the practice of this duty in the Bereans
Acts 17. 11. where it is said of them that they were (...) more nobly-spirited
than those of Thessalonica, for that they searched the Scriptures daily whether
those things were so as the Apostles preached, notwithstanding they were
assisted by an infallible spirit. It was not any slownesse in them to believe
which made them examine, but an holy prudence; for, so the words are. They
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures
daily whether those things were so; they received them readily and yet
searched, making no more have then good speed.

But Bellarmine thinks to take off the edge of this place of Scripture by this
distinction. Object.
The Bereans were but beginners and had not yet entertained the faith, and
therefore might examine: but such as are already Christians and believe the
Church's infallibility are bound to believe the doctrine it proposes, without
examination.

I answer, Answ.
first by way of concession, that as many as believe the Churches
infallibility, are bound consequently to believe whatever she propounds, as
far as an error can bind them. But secondly, If all be beginners but those
that believe that, truly for our parts We Protestants do profess our selves to
be Bereans, and therefore I hope he will give Us leave to examine their
doctrine in the balance of the Sanctuary, and so we have and found it light.
And thirdly, is Bellarmine sure the Bereans were not believers when they
searched? since they received the word with all readiness of mind, (and then
it is added) and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. But
fourthly, If they were not, I wonder how men before they believe should be
better able to judge than afterward; and how they should come to loose that
power and privilege by beleiving.

Besides these there are many other Scriptures, which do ex consequenti not
only permit, but also require to try the doctrines before we entertain them:
as Matthew. 24. 4. where our Savior bids See that no man seduce you: and the
Apostle Paul in Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words: and 2
Thessal. 2. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means. To what purpose are all
these monitory cautions, if we may not try; nay, do they not implicitly require
and command us to try and examine the doctrines, whoever they be that bring
them? S. Paul is bold in Gal. 1. 8, 9. Though we or an Angel from heaven should
preach any other Gospel, let him be (...). And that you may see that this
expression proceeded neither from rashness nor passion, but a most advised and
well resolved deliberation, he repeats the words in the verse following: As we
said before, so say I now again; If any preach any other Gospel unto you than
that you have received, let him be accursed. Whence I observe these two things
to my present purpose; first, that there must be an examen, else how could they
know it was another Gospel, and so reject it? and secondly, that the hearers as
such, and not teachers were to be the judges, unless we will say they were bound
to curse themselves.

But the truth in hand may be further evidenced to us by reason thus: Because
we must neither embrace all doctrines, Reas. 2.
nor reject all, nor take some such as come next, no nor the truth it self upon
slight grounds; therefore we must examine.

1. We must not reject all; for, so we shall be sure to reject the truth; and
besides, we do ow so much reverence to the name of God, as not rashly to reject
without examen, any doctrine that has but an appearance of any just pretense
unto it.

2. Nor may we embrace all promiscuously; for, so we shall be sure to be in the
wrong; and I see not how possibly the soul can at the same time assent unto
contradictions, and yet such there are found among opinions.

3. Nor in the third place may we take up a certain number of opinions as they
come next to hand, as they are offered to us by the place where we live, or the
next comer by: for, so there will be great danger of falling into error, and
truth is of more concernment to us, than that we should adventure it upon the
hazard of such a contingency.

4. Nor lastly may we entertain truth it self (if we should happen on it) on so
slight grounds; if we take no better hold of it, we shall never be able to hold
it fast: If we build upon such a sandy foundation, how do we think to stand,
when the winds and waves of temptation and persecution shall arise? It remains
therefore that we must examine, that so we may both refuse the evil, and also
hold fast that which is good. And for the further quickening of us unto this
duty, I shall propound only two considerations, and very briefly.

First, Consid. 1.
Let us seriously consider what great danger there is in being deceived; our
souls ate at the stake; no less than the everlasting good of our souls is
concerned in it: for, error in understanding begets error in life and
practice, and the Scripture tells us of damnable heresies; and what ever some
may think of speculative errors, yet surely as they proceed from that maim in
the understanding which is the effect of original sin, and as they are
cherished and abetted by corruption in the will, they are sins and make us
guilty. For the actions of the understanding as well as of the other faculties
are (...), under the law of God, and the will shall answer at God's tribunal
for not putting the understanding to school to Scripture, as well as for not
bridling the passions, and not governing the outward man. Since then there is
such danger in error as you have heard, had we not need be careful? had we
not need examine? especially considering,

What danger there is of being deceived, Consid 2.
which is the second consideration. For, first, the best are subject to error
themselves, and so may (though unwittingly and unwillingly) be means of
seducing others, who do not examine; and then their godliness and learning,
which were wont to keep them from errors, will become arguments to draw others
into them. But then secondly, how many false prophets, deceivers, and seducers
are there in the world! who make it their design and purpose to deceive. MANY
shall come in my name (faith our Savior, Matthew. 24.5.) and shall deceive many:
and Many false prophets ARE gone out into the world, 1 John 4. 1. and, that
which makes them the more dangerous, they are indefatigably industrious in
their way, compassing the earth (with their master), and compassing sea and
land to make a proselyte. Which they do the more easily effect by reason of the
craft and subtilty which they use. We have it expressed emphatically in Ephesians. 4.
14. Be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive. Our Savior has foretold us that they should come as wolves
in sheeps-clothing, and the Apostle (...) and (...) and again, With all power,
and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness, 2 Thessal. 2. 9, 10. All which places do loudly bespeak our
earnest care to look to our selves, and to examine doctrines before we embrace
them, lest unawares we entertain doctrines of devils in stead of the truths of
God.

By this little that has been said I hope it does appear that it is our duty
to examine. But two things there be which are necessarily requifire to the
right performance of it as we ought. An infallible rule, and a faculty rightly
prepared; the one by which, the other with which we are to judge.

1. 1. Requisite, A faculty.
There must be a faculty, or a soul rightly prepared: and that must be

1. 1. Reasonable.
A reasonable soul; this is the subject of faith and all our other graces, and
is the principium quod of all the actions that flow from them. Faith is a
rational grace, although it do not always act discursively, (E.g. in its
assent to the primo credita, which is to a testimony, not for a testimony)no
more than the understanding does by discourse induce it self to an assent unto
first notions.

2. 2. Enlightened.
This soul or faculty must be enlightened, and assisted by the holy Spirit,
else it cannot apprehend aright spiritual things. The natural man perceives not
the things of the sprit, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Not but that a natural man may apprehend and assent
unto diverse truths recorded in the Scriptures, but not with a saving kind of
apprehension and assent, nor as they are (...), the things of the Spirit; so
they are not known but in a spiritual manner, and by the assistance of the same
Spirit. Which assistance consists in the infusion of an habit of spiritual
wisdom and understanding, and the Spirit's gracious excitation of it, and
concourse with it, whereby the eyes of a believer's mind being enlightened, he
is enabled in some measure to discern and apprehend the truths and will of God,
objectively revealed and propounded to him by the same Spirit in the Scriptures.

This is that donum intellectus and illumination, which is bestowed upon every
believer at his first conversion, though in a lesser measure both of evidence
and object than afterward: for, it grows and increases according to the
proportion of faith which God has dealt to every man, and extends itself as
large as a divine faith does, from which it is inseparable. Now because all
believers have sooner or later a divine faith of all things necessary for them
so to be believed, and some of more, accordingly is this donum intellectus
dispensed; all have some, more or less, none all, but only Christ, to whom
alone the Spirit was given without measure, and of whose fullness we all
receive grace for grace. And as it is of the same extent, so is it of the same
original with a divine faith, wrapped in the same womb, and nursed by the same
breasts; it is both attained and kept by the self same means, prayer, hearing of
the word, reading and meditating on it. This the Papists are not willing to
allow unto private believets, yet Aquinas is clear in the point; 2^.2^. q.8.
art. 4.
Nullus habens gratiam caret dono intellectus, quod nunquam se subtrahit
sanctis circa ea qua sunt necessaria ad salutem. A very clear and full
testimony: So that I shall forbear to add any more.

3. 3. sanctified.
That the soul may be rightly fitted for to judge, it must be sanctified.

First, It must have a reverence of the divine Majesty and of his word; then
will it not so boldly go about with Socinus and our modern circulatours to
bassle Scripture, just as a Sophister would deal with a piece of Aristotle;
Then shall we not profanely abuse it by I know not what kind of mystical, and
cabalistical interpretations. Is this to reverence the word of God? would any
man take it well at our hands to have his words so played withal, so screwed
and wrested from their simple and most apparent sense and meaning?

Secondly, the soul must be humble. Such the Lord himself has undertaken to
teach, they shall be (...), but (...) he resists the proud, while he gives
grace to the humble; grace and glory and no good thing will he withhold from
those that fear him, psalm. 25. 14. and 84. 11. A proud man is a bad scholar, he
will confide in himself, rather then in God; he is fond of his own opinions,
and will not yield unto the truth, being stubborn and disobedient in will and
affections; but if any one be humble and obedient, if any one will do God's
will, he shall know the doctrine whether it be of God. There is great need of
humility also upon this account, that those who have the gift in a lesser
measure, be not presumptuous so as to wade beyond their depth. Which Saint Paul
thought a seasonable caution in the matter in hand: Romans 12.3. Be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that you may prove what is that good
and acceptable and perfect will of God. For I say through the grace given unto
me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he
ought to think, but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man
the measure of faith: the words are emphaticall. (...) not out of an
overweening opinion of self-sufficiency to enterprise things beyond their
strength, but to think soberly according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of faith, for, according to that is the measure of this gift, as you
heard before. I might add also in the third place, that the soul must be
endued with a sincere love of the truth, that it must obey the truth, and
mortify its own corruptions: but of these more conveniently afterward.

Thus much may suffice for the first thing required that we may judge aright, a
faculty rightly prepared.

2. 2. Requisite A Rule.
The second is the Rule according to which we must judge, by which we must
examine all doctrines, and according to their agreeing or disagreeing with it,
either entertain or reject them.

This rule must be (1.) in it self infallible, (2.) in respect of us clear and
known, (3.) in respect of the doctrines to be tried it must be adequate. These
are agreed upon as necessary properties of a rule of divine faith.

Now such a rule are not

First, 1 Not, Reason
the maxims of natural reason. For, (1.) they are far from being infallible,
many of them being but the product of humane discourse and fallible
observation, and therefore some of them false, if they be extended beyond the
sphere of Philosophy, for whose meridian only they were calculated at the
first. I do not think there is any truth in Philosophy which contradicts any
truth in Divinity; yet am I sure that many sayings are true in Philosophy,
which are false in Divinity. For, maxims and general rules being but
collections observed from particulars, if the survey be short, ad nimis pauca
respiciens, not taking in all particulars, the verdict or maxim must needs be
defective, and the general rule be liable to exceptions. So that a rule may be
true in Philosophy as to all those particulars included within the object of
Philosophy, but false if stretched to take in the things of Divinity: as an
observation concerning men may be true of men in France or Italy, but false if
applied to those in England, who were never attended to in the raising. (2.) As
these maxims are not infallible; so neither are they adequate to the things to
be believed, and therefore cannot make a fit rule of divine faith. For there
are many divine truths which are nothing at all of kind to any piece of
natural knowledge, neither flowing from these maxims, nor being reducible to
them. (3.) It is not possible for any of those maxims to be the foundation of
any divine faith at all; for, all assent that is wrought in the soul by them is
but either science or opinion; both which arise from the evidence of the thing,
whereas faith assents unto an article without any such respect, but merely for
the sake of a testimony; and if the faith be divine, such also is the testimony
which produces it.

And yet the Socinians make reason the rule of their faith. Quod absurdum est
rationi, debet esse falsum, says one; others more modest or more subtle will
seem to grant that reason ought to believe what God says, be it never so
contrary to their apprehensions; but then when the question is put whether God
say such a thing or no, here they will deny it if it agree not with their
maxims. Thus what they give with the one hand they take away again with the
other; they pass it in the head, but stop it in the house; decline the volie
but take the rebound, which comes all to one at last.

But how little reason there is for so doing, especially in hac foece Romali,
in this Apostate and fallen condition of humane nature, the alone sense of our
own infirmities and weaknesses may sufficiently convince.

O but yet Right Reason! Ay, where is it? many make account they have it, and
that in those very things wherein yet they contradict one another. Some think
Aristotle did but bid his scholar go look; when he made the judgment of a
wiseman the rule of virtues mediocritie; many pretend to be wise, and many more
think themselves such, but it is seldom that either prove so. So that indeed a
man may sooner find virtue than a wiseman, especially considering that he had
need to be one himself to know one when he meets him. All reason then is not
right, nor have all men right reason, that think they have it; reason it self
then stands in need of a rule to be tried by. Reason is then right when it is
true, and then only true when it judges according to the truth of things
themselves; now things to be believed are contained in Scripture, let us carry
our reason thith'er, and try it by them. For, as Amesius very well. Ratio
quaedicitur recta, si absoluta rectitudo spectetur, non alibi nobis est
quarenda quam ubi existit, id est, in Scripturis; neque differt (quatenus
spectat bonum and aequum) a voluntate Dei ad nostrae vita directionem revelata.
Mcdullae lib. 2. cap. 2.

So then, although the maxims of natural reason may be of singular use in
Divinity, if rightly limited by the Scriptures, yet are they not fit to be
canon, they are both too short and too weak to make a rule of divine faith of.

Secondly, 2. Antiquity.
nor is Antiquity such a rule as is required. Antiquity barely considered is no
good mark, much less rule of truth. The Romanists in giving marks of the true
Church do as Painters, who draw the Virgin Mary by their own Mistresses; they
do not choose the Church by her marks, but endeavor to make their marks by
their Church: In like manner here, they do not square their doctrine by the
true rule, but strive to find out a rule that will fit their doctrine, and yet
herein too they are often times much to seek.

They cry up Antiquity very much, bidding us ask for the old way; for multitude
of days shall teach us wisdom; and make account they have praised themselves
all this while; but no such matter, unless we should look at antiquity and
nothing else: but then I know who may vie with them, the devil was a lier from
the beginning. For our parts we profess we do very much reverence antiquiry,
but it must be then in conjunction with truth; we cannot admire old errors;
but as Solomon speaks of the hoary head, Prove. 16. 31. The hoary head is a
crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness. We shall always
rise up before a reverend hoary-headed truth; but we must have something else
besides its gray hairs to know it by, lest in stead of truth we salute her
mask, and worship a cloud in stead of a goddess. And as for the Papists, for
all their boasting so much of the antiquity of their doctrine, we can easily
show them who brought in this doctrine, and that doctrine into their Church;
this ceremony and that ceremony, this corruption and that corruption. We need
no microscope to see how patcht their coat is, of how different a thread and
spinning, so that it could never hang together, but that the new would rend the
old in sunder, the strong the rotten, were it not for that same Catholic
plaster of infallibility. But while we make the Scriptures to be our rule, our
doctrine is ancienter than much of theirs pretends to be.

Thirdly, 3. Councels and Fathers.
not the writings of the Ancient Fathers, nor Canons of Councels, neither of
these are fit to be made the rule of a divine faith. We do attribute much unto
the judgments of those ancient Fathers, those primitive Saints and Worthies,
whether expressed in their private writings, or signified in lawful Councels.

When the Councels were such as they ought to be, consisting of holy, able, and
learned Pastors of the Church, we look upon them as bright constellations,
whose light was the greater because of their conjunction. They had not only
donum intellectus, and that in a great measure too as they were single
Christians; but also donum interpretationis, as they were Pastors of the
Church: and while they conferred together, seeking God, they were in the use of
the best means to find out truth, and under a promise also, but not of
infallibility; and therefore although we cannot make them the rule of our
faith, yet ought we not rashly to reject them when they are offered to us; nor
to slight their judgments, as if they were nothing worth, but seriously to
examine their reasons and grounds on which they went.

We honor the Fathers as men whom God's providence raised up and endued with
gifts to quell the growing heresies of their times; and doubtless if they were
more looked into, they would furnish us with tried weapons, armor approved to
subdue the self-same heresies risen again among us in these our days, and
prove as successful as that stratagem of the Scythians was, who put their
rebel-slaves to flight, by but showing them the rods where with they had been
wont to whip them But though we honor the Fathers, yet we dare not worship
them, we may not believe in them, nor make their writings the rule of our
faith. This is that which themselves did never desire, but forbid and abhor
the thought of; they seem to say to us, Stand up; for, we also were but men
subject to like infirmities with you; (...). Worship God, believe in him. I
doubt not but they that mended many faults in their own writings, left some
behind, and I wish others had not added more. We admit them as witnesses, but
not as a rule, since they also were but fallible.

The Church of Rome has boasted so long of the Fathers, till at length they
grow almost weary of it. At first they had like to have put the Centuriatours
out of countenance; but afterward Bishop Jewel was so bold as to challenge
them, in a Sermon at Paul's Cross, (afterward printed) and to offer that if
they could produce any one ancient Father, General Council, or example of the
Primitive Church for the first six hundred years, that sided with them against
us in any one of 27 articles by him named, and in controversy between us, he
would subscribe to them. This challenge Dr. Humfryes thought was more than he
needed to have made; yet having made it he made it good against Harding, and
yet died a Protestant: and this was no more than we all promise, says learned
Dr. Whitakar against Campian's fifth reason. So that the Jesuit needed not to
have arrogated to the Church of Rome that privilege of the Jews, Whose are the
Fathers: and Malone might have spared his scurrilous title page against the
Reverend and learned Primate; Though you have ten thousand USHERS, yet have ye
not many FATHERS. We boast not of ten thousand, but are glad that we have one
worth ten thousand of their Popish-Fathers, and as many head-masters of their
schools to boot. But we hope we have the Fathers with us, and I am sure we
honor them more than they, and yet make them not the rule of our faith
neither. They honor them not as Fathers, but as Lords and Masters; as Peter
Cotton was wont to call him, My Lord St. Austin. At servum scis te genitum,
blandeque fateris,
Dum dicis dominum, Sosibiane, Patrem.
Let them therefore be the vassals, if they please, while we are the true and
genuine sons of those ancient Fathers. And yet some of the Papists (to say
the truth) cared not overmuch for the judgment of the Fathers, when it made
against them. Cardinal Cajetan will not fear to go against the general torrent
of all the ancient Doctors Praefat. in Pentat.
; for which Canus indeed blames him, but then Andradius takes his part: and I
am sure what Cajetan said, was no other than what was put in practice by
Maldonate, Jansenius, and diverse others.

Fourthly, 4. Church.
Nor is the judgment or testimony of the Church a sufficient rule of divine
faith. The Papists cry up the Church, as much as the Jews of old did the
Temple: but by the Church they mean their own; which, by that time the Jesuits
have done with it, is nothing else but the Pope. But we will keep their term
the Church, whose testimony they say is infallible, and necessary to a divine
faith of any one article in religion; and although de-Valentia and Canus would
fain mince the matter, and make it only necessary as a condition; yet that
will not serve the Romanists turn, which Bellarmine and a-Sacro-bosco knew well
enough, and therefore make the testimony of the Church necessary, as a medius
terminus and Cause of assent in all divine faith; and so they must say or come
over to us. Now infallibility as it is required to a rule of doctrine, is
nothing else but the constant assistance of the holy Ghost, which the Papists
require a man to believe that their Church has, before he can believe so much
as that there is an holy Ghost: for, that is one article of faith, none of which
(say they) can be believed without the infallible testimony of their Church.
We Will leave the Jesuits to distinguish themselves out of this contradiction,
if they can, and in the mean while let us examine their proofs.

They offer us Tradition for proof; but for them to go about to prove the
Church's infallibity from the tradition of the Church, is to beg the question.
Let them first convince us that the Church is infallible as it gives the
tradition, and then we will spare them any further pains to prove that it is
infallible.

They often attempt to prove it to us by Scripture; by which very practice they
do but condemn themselves: For, First, then it seems the Scriptures
infallibility may be first known, before and without the believing of the
Churches infallibility, quod minime vellent: for, then the latter may be
spared. And secondly, hereby once for all they appeal to men's private
judgments, and that in a point on which their whole cause turns: and if they
think the Scriptures so clear for the Church's infallibility that a private
Christian may discern it, I do appeal to themselves, whether many other
articles be not laid down more clearly in Scripture: we say all. Well, but it
may be some will say the Churches infallibility is first known, before we know
the Scriptures to be infallible. I say then, 1. let them prove it. 2. why do
they go about to prove it by Scripture? 3. let them avoid the abovenamed
contradiction.

Or if they will be willing to draw stakes with us, and have neither the
infallibility of the one, nor of the other to be first believed: Then first,
let them never more quote Scripture for the Church's infallibility. Secondly,
let them not require us to prove the Scriptures by the testimony of the Church.
Thirdly, they must give us leave to fetch all the articles of our faith
immediately from the Scriptures without the midwifry of their Porphyry-chair:
and then we will casily grant them (if it will do tnem any good) that there is no
prius and posterius in the belief of the infallibilities of the Scriptures and
of the Church, because there is no posterius, that of the Church being none at
all.

Fifthly, 5. Teachers.
nor are the words and doctrine of our teachers and ministers to be looked upon
as an infallible rule of divine faith. A private Christian ought to be very
observant of his Pastor, (the Scripture everywhere calls for it) he is to
reverence him as his spiritual Father, to obey him as his governor, to follow
him as his guide, yet no farther then he has the Scripture for his warrant; Be
ye followers of me (says the Apostle) as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. The
words of a godly and able pastor are of great authority, as of one that for
his fidelity would not willingly for a world lead souls into error; and for
his ability has a greater measure of the spirit of discerning, joined with the
advantages of acuteness of parts, much study and reading, and long experience,
and therefore must he be heard with reverence, and not rashly disbelieved, nor
his doctrine rejected, unless upon examination we find it to be condemned by
the Scriptures. Among humane authorities, such an ones testimony is of very
great weight: but a divine faith will dig till it come to the rock of
infallibility, before it build; which is not to be found save in that holy
breath of the unchangeable Spirit, which is the Scriptures.

Sixthly therefore, But Scriptures
the only true adequate and infallible rule of divine faith is the holy
Scripture: this is that (...), this is that balance of the sanctuary, wherein
faith weighs and tries all men's doctrines before it entertain them.

That this was infallibly inspired by the Holy Ghost is granted on all sides,
and that it may be known to be such may sufficiently appear by what has been
already said. That it is and ought to be the rule of faith, might be fully and
at large demonstrated; but since it has already devoured all the other
pretended rules, as Aaron's rod did those of the Egyptian Sorcerers, and
because I would not be prevented in that which lies before me, I shall content
my self briefly to have pointed at an argument or two, and so pass on to what
remains.

But first give me leave to premise only thus much, that whereas some of our
Divines make Scripture the judge, others the rule of controversies, I conceive
by a little distinguishing both may be admitted, and that the Scripture is both
Judge, and Sentence, the Law, Rule and Principle of faith. The holy Ghost in
Scripture is the Judge. Every truth expressed in Scripture is a definitive
Sentence when ever it se;lf is called in question, and in respect of truths
deducible from it it is a Law and Principle; in respect both of truths formally
contained in it, and rightly deducible from it, it is, and may be truly called
a Rule or canon of faith and life; a rule to try and examine doctrines by; and
this I shall prove briefly in three words thus.

1. The Bereans are commended by the holy Ghost for making the Scripture the
rule and trying doctrines by it, and that such doctrines as were delivered by
the immediate assistence of the holy Spirit, as was said before.

2. The Scripture is the rule according to which men ought to preach, and
therefore also ought their doctrine to be examined by it. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
morning-light in them, Isaiah 8. 20. and 1 Timothy 6. 3. These things teach and
exhort, and if any man teach otherwise, [or any other thing (...)] and consent
not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness, he is proud knowing nothing, etc.
[See also Deuteronomy. 13. v. 1, 2, 3.] and in the 12. Romans 6. Let us prophecy
according to the analogy or proportion of faith, by which is usually understood
the doctrine contained in the Scriptures. But that is a remarkable place Gal.
1.8, 9. if we or an angel from heaven, if any man preach any other Gospel than
what ye have received, let him be accursed.

3. The Scripture is the rule by which we must be judged at the last day,
therefore ought it to be the rule of our faith and life here. Romans 2. 16. God
shall judge the secrets of men according to my gospel: and this we may be sure
of that that must needs be suitable to God's will accepting and approving,
which is agreeable and according to the same will commanding and prescribing
faith and duty to us, which is revealed in his word. But this truth having been
so much insisted upon by our writers, and being so well known as it is, I
forbear further enlargement on it at the present. The Scripture then is the
only rule of faith: And though some would admit of something else for a
secondary rule, for my part I see not how that can be admitted: for, if that
same supposed secondary rule do exactly accord with the Scripture, then is it
not another, and so not a secondary rule: but if it swerve never so little from
it, then is it false and erroneous, and not fit to be a rule at all: but take
it at the best it is but regula regulanda, a rule that must be tried it self;
and who will choose to measure with a Carpenters rule when he has the standard
by him?

The Scripture is the rule and the standard by which all doctrines may and must
be tried, by arraigning them before the tribunal of the Spirit in the
Scriptures: but it will not be amiss to draw forth of Scripture a character or
two to judge of doctrines by.

1. Mark 1.
The first shall be that of Paul, but lately mentioned; good doctrine must be
according to the analogy and proportion of faith. There is a (...), an (...),
and a (...) spoken of in Scripture; a body of divine truth, as I may call it,
between the parts and members whereof there is an exact harmony, symmetry, and
proportion: as therefore in the natural body a member would become monstrous,
should it exceed its due proportion to the other its fellow members: so is it
here. We must therefore carefully compare a doctrine concerning one article,
with the truth concerning others, and (for instance) so speak of the unity of
God's essence as not to impair the Trinity of persons; so treat of the justice
of God, as not to let it devour his mercy, and so to advance his mercy as not
to violate his justice, since he is so said to be love, 1 John 4. 8. as that he
is also called a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. Let a man study a single point
alone with greatest accuratenesse, it will scarce have its just proportion till
he does compare it with the body; notwithstanding the best diligence of the
artist, the wheels of a watch will need some filing when they come to be put
together.

2. Mark 2.
A second character is that of S. John 1.4.3. Every spirit that consesseth not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: of old whatsoever
Prophet enticed the people unto idolatry, was a false Prophet for all his
signs and wonders, and prediction of events, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. So whatsoever
doctrine tends to draw us off from Christ is naught and to be rejected: and
thus do not only the Jews who deny that Christ is yet come: but the Socinian
also, who denies him to be God, and so by consequence to have come in the
flesh, in the Apostle's sense, and to have made any satisfaction for sin,
which was the end of his coming: and the Papists also while they undermine him
in all his offices: and what do the Quakers but in effect deny Christ, when
they make him to be nothing else but a Metaphor, and the Gospel a mere Allegory?

3. Mark 3.
The third mark is our Saviors, own, Matthew. 7.16. By their fruits ye shall
know them: observe what the aims and designs are of those that promote them;
judge not rash judgment, but observe the end, A meteor may sometimes seem to
be in heaven under the immediate tuition of some real star, but let us watch
the parallax, and we shall find it many thousand miles below. Some fowls there
are that will hang hovering in the air, as if it were indifferent to them
whether ever they came to earth again or no: and yet if you observe them it is
ten to one but you shall see them alighting in some puddle or other. The Eagle
soars high, very high, when her design is nothing but carton. It will
therefore be our wisdom to observe carefully the tendencies of doctrines, and
their fruits: if these be profaneness or confusion, the doctrines themselves
cannot be from God; for, he is an holy God, and not the author of confusion.

And thus much be spoken concerning the second requisite to the proving of
doctrines, to wit, the Rule, and so I have done with the duty it self.

But here the Romanist pulls me by the sleeve with an objection or two, which
must be satisfied.

obj. 1. Object. 1
And first he objects that this would be pride and arrogance to examine the
doctrines of our superiors, as if private men knew more than they.

Answ. 1. Answ.
It is no pride nor arrogance for us to endeavor to see that with our own
eyes, which our betters tell us they see with theirs, especially since God
himself requires it of us.

2. It is no whit unbecoming humility and Christian modesty to examine any men's
doctrine, while we acknowledge their superiority in gifts, and reverence them
accordingly. They discern an hundred truths to my ten, yet some of ten may
possibly be none of their hundred. I must not reject their doctrine without
examen, out of reverence unto them: I may not trust to it as infallible out of
reverence unto God: I must therefore examine it by that golden rule the
Scriptures, which is no disparagement to them or to their doctrine: for, so
ought they to preach, and so ought we to believe. If any man preach, let him
preach as the oracles of God, and we must so hear and entertain the Gospel,
not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God able to save our
souls, see 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

obj. 2. Object. 2
O! but people are so ignorant they are not fit to judge.

Answ. Answ.
Whose faults that? you keep them from the Scriptures, and the Scriptures from
them, and then say with the Pharisees, This people who knowrth not the law are
accursed, John 7. 49. Well; but if they must not judge of the doctrine, what
must they do to be resolved whether the Protestants or the Papists doctrine be
to be followed? de Valentia tells them, they must adhere to that doctrine whose
teachers have the most authority, but how shall they know that? why forsooth,
by their multitude, sanctity, antiquity and miracles. Which is all one as if he
had said: Because thou art not book-learned thou art not fit to examine
doctrines by Scripture; therefore take only this course; travel over all the
world, and count how many Papists there be, and then how many Protestants, and
by the way enquire into their lives; then read but over the histories of all
ages, and see which were the most ancient: and lastly, take notice of the
number of miracles that have been done (but let him believe none but those who
saw them done) and then thou shall know which doctrine is the truest; (at least
if these marks fail him not)

Now I think I should set the poor man an easier task, if I should bid him
read, or get some other to read the Scriptures to him, and there he should
see what he might trust unto. The necessary points of faith are clear enough
laid down there for any ordinary apprehension: and such an one is as capable of
the donum intellectus (without which none can savingly understand) as a more
learned man; and I am sure the Scripture is the best collyrium, which does not
only clear the sight, but also enlighten the eyes, and that of babes and
simple ones.

obj. 3. Object.3
But thirdly they object. When you have done all, every private Christian will
be fallible in his judgment; why then do ye refuse the Fathers, Councels, and
the Church upon that account?

Answ. 1. Answ.
I am speaking of an infallible Rule, not an infallible Judge: if the Faculty
be fallible, the Rule at least had need be infallible. It is true, an house
that is built on a rock may fall, if it be weakly built; but that which is
built upon the sand cannot possibly stand: he that walks upon firm ground may
stumble, and fall; (and rise again) but he that walks upon a quake mire must
needs sink, and that irrecoverably, when the ground it self sinks under him.

2. But thus much I say for the believer's infallibility. (1.) That while he
keeps to the infallible rule he cannot err. (2.) The spirit of God will
infallibly guide every believer, so as that he shall not swerve from the rule
in any thing necessary to salvation. (3.) Nor in any point whereof it works in
him a divine faith; which is as good security as is needful, and a thousand
times better than the Papists can give to any by believing in the Church.

So that these few rubs being removed out of the way, we may safely proceed to
the practice of what the Apostle here exhorts us to, to prove all things.

Age vero, ne semper forum. But we must not be always trying; trial is in
order to holding fast and that not of all things, but of that which upon trial
we find to be good. So the Apostle proceeds, hold fast that which is good.

Which is the second part of the text, 1. Part of the text considered.
containing in it the second duty incumbent upon every Christian, viz. holding
fast of that which is good. Which I shall speak unto first relatively, and then
absolutely.

First, 1 Relatively.
relatively as it has reference and regard unto the former duty. And so we may
look upon these later words, either 1. as a caution, or 2. as a means, or 3. as
the end of the foregoing duty of proving doctrines.

First, As a caution
let us consider them as a caution, and then they intimate thus much unto us;
That we must so try and prove all things, as in the mean while not to let go
that which is good. They that fish with a golden hook, had need hold fast the
line, and look to the ground they stand upon. We must have a firm basis and
center to trust unto, or else the motion can neither be sure nor regular. If
once we loose our anchor, no wonder if we be (...), carried about by every
blast of temptation from without; and if we cast our ballast overboard, we
must needs be (...), tossed up and down by the wave of every doubt, and so become
the sport and scorn of every wind and wave. And I could heartily wish that some
of late had not sailed so far upon new discoveries, till they have lost their
compass, and so made shipwreck of faith and conscience both together. But if
we desire to be successful in our enterprise of trying and proving
doctrirnes, we must be sure to hold fast all tried and approved principles: and

1. Such as are unquestionable or out of question; we must not go to call them
into question; this were for us to be always laying the foundation, so should
we never build; to be always learning, but never coming to the knowledge of
the truth, weak and unstable souls. When truths are once tried and approved, we
must then study arguments for them, answer difficulties brought against them,
and contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints.

2. We may examine an article of faith without doubring of the truth of it. But
suppose it should be called into question by others, yea, and doubted of also
by our selves, yet must we not presently for every doubt let go our faith, nor
quit it for every argument that is brought against it, though we cannot answer
it. A man may have strong demonstrations for a truth, yet not be able to
vindicate it from all objections, whence scruples will arise; but they may and
must be overcome by believing and attending to the demonstrations and evidence
for the truth, though we be not able to acquit our selves of those
difficulties, which the devil's sophistry, and our own infidelity may suggest.
We must not disclaim a truth because it is by some called in question; much
less ingenuously do they deal by truth, who therefore disclaim it, that so
they may call it into question themselves. We may not disbelieve a truth and
scrape it out of our souls, that so the soul may become rasa tabula, unbiassed
and perfectly indifferent either to receive a truth, or to reject it; as our
new methodists would have us do. That there is a God is an article of faith,
and a first notion ingraved upon the heart of man by nature. Should I now go
and not only forbear my assent unto it, but also imagine the contrary to
counter-poise the soul's natural (...) and inclination? blot out that (...),
to try if I can write it better? What were this else but to lay faith to stake,
and throw the die for it; to part with principles that we may try conclusions;
to deny the truth that we may recover it again by syllogismes; to cast a jewel
into the sea, to see whether we can dive and fetch it up again; with the
Mountebank to wound for experiment; and become Atheists that we may convert our
selves by reason; to tempt God to leave us, and to tempt the devil to destroy
us. For my part, I profess, I see not how this can be put in practice withot
being guilty of sin and blasphemy. Let us therefore hold fast the truth by a
steadfast faith, while we are examining doctrines, and by holiness of life
also: for the devil's great gains these late times have been, that while men
are taken up with disputes about truths in question, they have too much
neglected the practice of those that were indubitable.

Secondly, A means.
we may look upon this latter duty as a means to help to the better performance
of the former; if we hold fast the truth which we already have, we shall the
more successefully prove the doctrines, and find out the truth; he that is
faithful in a little, has the promise of being ruler over much; he that
yields obedience unto truth, shall know more of it: if any man will do the will
of God, he shall know the doctrine whether it be of God or no, John 7. 17.
whereas on the contrary, a corrupt heart will breed a corrupt judgment, and
either hinder the entertainment of truth at the first, or else procure the
ejectment of it afterward out of the soul: but more of this hereafter.

Thirdly, An end.
we might also look upon these later words as the end of the foregoing duty:
let this be your aim and design in proving all things, to wit, that you may
hold fast that which is good. Have recourse unto the Scriptures that you may
know what is good, have recourse unto Scriptures that you may believe it: for,
haec scripta sunt ut credatis, the ensuring of our faith was the end of the
writing of the Scriptures. This then condemns Scepticisme, and the Academicks
(...). Again, prove all things that you may practice that which is good, not
that you may entertain your selves with jejune and idle speculations; the end
and fruit and perfection of knowledge is practice: knowledge is a precious
talent, which is given unto us not to be hidden in a napkin, but that we should
(...), trade or work with it. Unless the fruits of good living do grow upon
the tree of knowledge, it will never become to us a tree of life. I shall leave
others to dispute where Paradise was situate, but our Savior has placed
happiness between those two, 2. Absolutely.
the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge. John 13. 17. If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them. The more we know God, the more we love him,
and the more we love him, still the more do we desire to know of him: so is it
here, the end of the knowledge of truth is that we may practice it, and
practice is a means of knowing more, as the water comes from the ocean to the
fountains, and returns to it again by the rivers. Col. 1.9, 10. We desire that
ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, that ye might walk worthy of the Lord in all well-pleasing,
(there is the first:) being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the
knowledge of God, (there is the second). Let it be our care therefore, brethren,
so to try all things as not to let go our hold of the things that are good; and
hold fast that which is good, that we may the better prove all things: and let
this be the end of all our proofs and of all our trialls, that having found out
that which is good, we may believe and practse accordingly. Thus have I done
with the words in their relative consideration: I come now to speak to them
absolutely and in themselves.

II. Sermon.
Hold fast that which is good.
IN handling whereof I shall briefly show by way of explication; First, what is
meant by that which is good. Secondly, what it is to hold it fast; and then
proceed.

First for the first, that which is good. There beimany that say, Who will show
us any good. Worldlings they are, and worldly goods they mean, such as are
corn, and wine, and oil, and these they are apt enough to hold fast, quocunque
modo rem, and -- vestigia nulla retrorsum. Here they are close-fisted enough,
what they get by diligence, they will keep with care, and need no exhortation
to good husbandry. The good here spoken of is a greater good, and of another
nature. Three things there are (as I conceive) very pertinent to the Apostle's
scope, and the meaning of the words.

1. (...) is (...) for, the Apostle speaking here about doctrines, it is
impossible a doctrine should be good that is not true. To make one's word good,
is to make it true. True doctrine is good doctrine. This was that (...), that
good thing committed to Timothie's charge, which S. Paul exhorts him for to
keep, 2 Timothy 1. 14. and this is that which S. Paul himself kept: I have fought
a good fight, I have kept the faith, 2 Timothy 4. 7. where faith is put for truth,
the object of it: for,'it is no commendation to believe a lie, and to persist in
error is but obstinacy. Our Savior Christ commends the Church in Pergamus for
holding fast his nam: Rev. 2.13. Thou hold fast my name, and have not denied
my faith: my faith, that is, either the true doctrine concerning me; or the
true doctrine which I taught thee. So then Paul charges Timotby to keep the
truth, he professes himself had kept it, and our blessed Savior commends the
Church in Pergamus for keeping of it; what hinders then but that we may
conclude, that S. Paul exhorting the Thessalonians to hold fast good doctrine,
did partly mean such as was true. Ertour has done us the mischief, and it must
be truth must do us good.

2. (...) Good doctrine is holy doctrine. All true doctrine is good, but
holiness adds a greater degree of goodness to it. There are some truths which
tend only to enrich the understanding, and to accomplish the intellect: but
there are others which do change and sanctify the heart, and make it good.
That doctrine which is agreeable to the holy and good will of God, and which
tends unto sanctification, whereby we are made good, is holy and good doctrine,
(as the Law is said to be holy, and just, and good, Romans 7. 12.) in respect of
the first it is called the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, Romans
12. 2. and as it relates unto our sanctification and salvation, it is called
(...) 1 Timothy 6. 3. The doctrine which is according to godliness. (...), 1 Timothy
6. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 13. (...). 2 Tit. 8. and (...) 2 Timothy 4. 3. found and wholesome
words and doctrine. Sound, not rotten, which will deceive a man if he trust
unto it; and wholesome both for food and Physic, a nourishing word and an
healing word. With this (...), this sincere milk of the word was Timothy
nourisht and brought up, (...), from an infant; he sucked it in with his mothers
milk, (...), as the words are of him; 1 Timothy 4. 6. nourished up in the words of
faith, and of good doctrine: which carries in it both a corrasive to eat off
and subdue corruption, and also a cordial to restore and comfort the fainting
soul. That doctrine which is according to the will of God, is such as
sanctifies the heart; for, this is the will of God, even your sanctification.
This all truth cannot do, only the truth of God, which is his word, whence it
is that our Savior prays, John 17. 17. Sanctific them through thy truth, thy
word is truth. Such doctrine then as kills sin and corruption, by purging it
out of the soul, and restores the soul to a spiritual health, by working
saving grace in the heart, and nourishes it unto eternal life, by making it
like unto God in righteousness and true holiness; such, I say, is holy
doctrine, and therefore good.

3. (...) that which is tried and approved. This is a further requisite in the
doctrine which we are to hold fast. It may be true and holy in it self, but
unless we know it to be such, we are not yet sufficiently prepared to assent
unto it. But now, when we have proved it, compared it with the rule, and
brought it to the touchstone, and tried in the surnace; and upon trial found
it to be pure and true and good, then must we close with it and hold it fast:
we must no longer doubt of it, or question the goodness of it. When the
Assay-master has once tried a piece of gold, and it endures the test, he
pronounces it to be good, and so it passes for current. So that if a doctrine
be true, and not false doctrine; if it be holy and pure, and not corrupt
doctrine; and if upon examination by the good word of God, we find it to be so,
then it is good doctrine and such as we are here exhorted to hold fast.

Which is the second thing to be explained; viz. What it is (...), to hold fast.

The word is sometimes used to signify to detain, and so the truth is said to
be detained, both when we conceal and keep it from the knowledge of others, and
also when we depose it from bearing rule in our hearts, and keep it down from
springing up and bearing fruit in our lives; this is (...) Romans 1.18. to detain
the truth in unrighteousness, to imprison and keep it in hold, and to withhold
it from others, but not to hold it fast, as we are here commanded. Three things
I covceive the word (...) does here import.

1. To entertain, thoroughly to close with, to grasp and lay fast hold of that
which is good; to enter upon and take possession of it; and so the word is
used, Matthew. 21.38. The husbandmen said, This is the heir, come let us kill
him, (...), and let us seize upon his inheritance. So should we not only buy
the truth, but also take livery and seisin of it, to have and to hold; seize
upon it as the eagle does her prey, and the hungry man his food. Take fast hold
of it, that is the first.

2. The word (...) signifies to retain, to hold fast and keep possession; thus
must we not let go our hold, nor quit our interest in truth, either through
feebleness or fickleness, through want of strength or want of steadfastness;
and thus the fruitful hearers are said to be such as do (...), having heard
the word do keep it in an honest and good heart, Luke 8. 15.

3. The word (...) imports also the maintaining of truth; the holding of it
fast, not only as a possession, but also as a strong Hold or Castle, defending
it against any that shall go about to oppose it, or to spoil us of it, and
wrest it from us. This the Scripture expresses sometimes by the word (...)
which implies an holding fast by main strength, against any forcible or violent
assault. Sometimes by (...) as in that place Tit. 1.9. a Bishop must be (...)
one that holds fast the faithful word according as he has been taught, that
he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers:
the word properly signifies to hold against: and this is the third thing
employed in the word (...) You may see all three things together expressed in
one verse, Prove. 4. 13. Take hold of instruction (there is the first), let her
not go (there is the second), keep her; for she is thy life: (there is the
third.)

Thus much may serve in brief for the explication of the words, the sense
whereof amounts to thus much.

That whatever doctrine we do upon due trial by the word of God find to be
true, 2. Dectr.
according to God's holy will, and tending to sanctification and salvation, we
must take and keep fast hold of it, close with it thoroughly, and adhere to it
immovably.

We must hold it fast, which we have also expressed to us in Scripture by
standing fast in the faith,[1 Cor. 16. 13.] Continuing, grounded, and settle in
the faith, [Coloss. 1. 23.] established in truth, [2 Timothy 1.12.] by keeping the
faith, [2 Timothy 4.7.] and continuing in it; as in that exhortation of S.. Paul to
Timothy. 2. epist. 3. chap. 14. verse others are deceived, but continue thou in
the things which thou have learned, and have been assured of, knowing of whom
thou have learned them.

Now we must hold fast that which is good these six several ways especially.
Six ways to hold fast truth.


First, 1. Believing
By believing it steadfastly. And here I shall show briefly these two things,
(1.) That truth so tried and evidenced is to be assented unto and continued in,
(2.) That it must be assented unto by an assent of faith.

First, That it must be firmly assented to may appear:

1. Because such an assent is due unto truth it self. Truth is the proper
object of the understanding; and if the truth be presented with sufficient
evidence, either of its own light, or of divine testimony, some question
whether the understanding can suspend its assent; I am sure it ought not: if it
do, the will is too blame, and must answer for it. And then this assent must be
constant; buy the truth, but sell it not, for, it is above price, and if it be
sold it must needs be undervalued.

2. Because such an assent is necessary for us, that the truth may do us good;
we are saved by truth, but it is through the knowledge of it. The truth shall
make us free, but then we must suffer it to unty us, which it cannot do unless
it be entertained by us. The potion, be it never so sovereign, cannot cure us
unless we drink and take it in. Our Savior prays, keep them through thy
truth; but if we would have truth keep us, then we must be sure to keep it; it
is like a fortress. What a loss then must the Sceptick needs be at, who
assents to nothing? how unsatisfied is his mind? how unprovided is his soul?
what a trembling, wavering, and uncertain thing is he? S. James tells us that a
double-minded man is unstable in all his ways, (1.8.) and if a doubting man be
(...), then surely a Sceptick is (...), of a thousand several minds, or rather
(...), having no soul or mind at all, choosing to loose his soul rather than be
at the charge of entertaining truth, or maintaining an opinion: like Socrates,
he goes to the market to buy nothing, thinking that he has no need of any
thing. In his soul he is quodlibeticall, in his life he is (...), as S. James
speaks unstable, and indeed disorderly in all his ways: as the word may be
interpreted; the diverse lusts after which he is carried and goes a whoring,
will not suffer him to wed and plight his faith to any truth.

In little better condition is the fickle and unconstant man, who is
continually fluttering up and down from one opinion to another, never settling
nor abiding by any. He entertains truth by the day; he takes it in but it
stays not with him, being distempered with a kind of intellectual diabetes.
Truth can never nourish such a man, nor will he ever be rooted and grounded in
it, who is always flitting and removing. But we must have the truth dwelling
in us, we must assent unto it firmly, that is the first.

Secondly, As we must firmly assent unto the truth, so must we do it by an
assent of faith. (...). 2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the form of sound words in
faith, and hence it is that doctrine is called faith in Scripture, fides quae
creditur. Many truths there be, which a man may have a natural knowledge of, he
may see the truth in all its avenues and principles, as also in the necessary
issues and consequences of it, and from them be able to make it out to the
rational apprehensions of other men: But besides this knowledge, there is
another kind of assent found in all believers, qua tales, given to a truth
only in respect to the divine testimony: this is faith; which though it be
much helped by that other assent, when in conjunction with it, yet it is often
found without it; and this is that assent upon which God will have our
salvation to depend: and this must we therefore yield unto truth.

1. Because this is God's way wherein he will save souls, by Faith, not by
Philosophy, although it may be man would have liked that way best; but it
pleased God through the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe,
that the glory of the power might be of God. S. Paul tells us 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
that God has from the beginning, chosen you to Salvation through
Sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth: and on the other side our
Savior tells us plainly and without a parable, he that believes not shall be
damned, Mark 16. 16.

2. Because this way of faith makes most for a christian's security against
falling away. Faith takes the surest and fastest hold of truth. By faith ye
stand, 2 Cor. 1. 24. but if ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established, Isai. 7.9. (...). Faith and firmness are very near of kind in
the original; the word for faith grows upon a root that signifies to nourish,
no danger then of withering or fading away; the just by faith shall live, shall
endure, shall persevere, Heb. 10. 38. And it signifies to be firm also. Hence
(...). Being grounded, and settled, and unmoved through faith, as it may be
well translated, Col. 1. 23.

But wherein may some say does this great strength of faith lie? or how comes
it to be so sure an hold-fast?

I answer briefly.

1. It is in its own nature a depending grace, and does chain the soul to God,
who is Adon an immovable basis, even truth it self. Its root is fastened in
God, and from him it draws and sucks continual supply of strength and
nourishment; yea further, it does link the soul to God's truth by a mutual
clasping of hands, as it were. The soul lays hold on God by faith, and God
holds our faith in his own almighty hand, (and none can take it thence). If
faith do shrink and faint at any time, yet God almighty will not let go his
hold, and so long no danger of Apostasy. This mutual complication we may see
variously expressed in Scripture. Sometimes the doctrine of faith is said to be
delivered unto the Saints, Jude 3. Sometimes they are said to be delivered into
that, Romans 6. 17. Sometimes we are said to be in the truth, and on the other
side, that to be in us; we to abide in that, and that to dwell in us; we to
keep that, and that again to keep us. Our faith and God's truth are as it were
mutual hostages and pawns between God and the believing soul. God he engages
his truth to the soul, and the soul trusts God with its faith. God deposites
his truth in the soul, and that again places its faith in God, and commits it
self also into his hand by believing, 1 Pet. 4. 19. God trusts Paul with his
Gospel counting him faithful, 1 Timothy 1. 5. as an Ambassador; 2 Cor. 5. 19. as
a steward, 1 Cor. 4. 1. and Paul again trusts God with his soul: for, he knew
whom he had trusted, 2 Timothy 1. 12. In which verse also we read of Paul's (...)
which was in God's keeping, and in the next verse but one we hear of another
(...) committed to Timothies trust and keeping; If we keep God's truth, he will
keep our souls. Christ has prayed, and God has promised that our faith should
not fail, but he never did so much for our rational knowledge. There is faith's
first advantage.

2. The second advantage which faith has above other knowledge in holding fast
the truth against temptation and persecution, is this: That in believing the
soul rests it self upon the veracity and infallibility of God: whereas in other
knowledge it relies upon the goodness of its own eyesight, in observing the
principles and consequents, the pedigree and offspring of truth, wherein it is
very subject to be mistaken, and is oftimes imposed upon. The Devil will sooner
persuade a man's reason that the world was not created, by raising difficulties
and puzzling his arguments; than he can persuade a believers faith that God is
fallible, who says it was created. The Devil wants no sophistry; the more we
have to do with syllogism and deduction, the more room will he find to get in
his nails. Again faith overcomes the flatteries and frowns of the world by
seeing through them; it believes God and dare not offend him: knows what heaven
is, and will not be cheated of it, as a child for a butterslie: it knows what
hell is and fears God rather than men, who is able to destroy both body and
soul in hell. Thus does faith overcome the world by believing the promises and
threatenings of God, and thus has faith a preeminence over all our natural
knowledge as to closing with and keeping possession of the truth. Knowledge,
that holds, it may be, till a better Orator, or a more subtle disputant come;
but when we shall be beaten from these outworks, faith will be acitadel that
will hold out against all opposition: for by it the heart is fixed trusting in
God, and the gates of hell shall never prevail against it.

Thus have you the first way of holding fast that which is good: viz. by
believing it stedfasly. I shall be briefer in those that follow.

Secondly, 2. Loving.
We must hold fast that which is good by loving it unfeignedly. We have truth
here presented to us under the notion of good, and surely then we cannot but
love it; goodness being love's lodestone, and the proper object about which
it is conversant.

When once, the soul having entertained truth does taste and relish it, delight
and take pleasure in it, then does it cleave unto it, as David's soul did to
Jonathan's. Love is an uniting affection, twining it self about the thing
beloved, and if it be in an intense degree, the thing may possibly by violence
be torn from its embraces, but it will first raise all its posse to prevent it.
And therefore the Apostle Paul bids Timothy to hold fast the form of sound
words, as in faith, so in love, 2 Timothy 1. 13. and by this we are said to cleave
unto that which is good. Romans 12. 9. Let love be without dissimulation, abhor
that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. (...), being glewed to
it, as it were; which is by love, as the opposition there shows. That we be not
as children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine,
but that we may grow up unto him who is the head and so (...) we must (...)
Ephesians. 4. 15. Follow the truth in love, not out of fancy, as children do. That
Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith, we must be rooted and grounded in
love, Ephesians. 3. 17. and therefore where the love of truth once decays, there
truth it self stays not long after it. We read of some, Romans 1. 28. who not
liking to retain God in their knowledge, he gave them over to a reprobate mind.
And it a remarkable place that of, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. where it is said
that the man of sin should come after the working of Satan, with all power
and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness
in them that perish. See what becomes of those who are deceived by the man of
sin, they perish, and if ye ask why so, the words following will give you an
answer, Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved. See there how necessary the love of truth is to salvation. For, indeed
where there is no sineere love of the truth, there can be no true belief of it.
For as the Apostle there goes on, For this cause God shall send them strong
delusions that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Observe the
opposition. A sad place it is, and I wish it were well considered by all that
are so coldly affected to the truth; especially by such as hate it, and are so
much inclined in their minds and affections to the errors of that man of
sin, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and will
destroy with the brightness of his coming, as he there threatens. In the 10
verse it is, they received not the love of the truth: and by the 12 verse it is
come to they believed not the truth: they had lost the truth for want of love
to it. Would we hold truth fast, we must hold it in cord as well as in capite,
hold it fast by loving it unfainedly.

Thirdly, 1. Remembering
hold fast that which is good by remembering it faithfully. and doubtless where
truth is believed and beloved, the mind will often be upon it, quae curant
meminerunt. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2. Moreover brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel
which I preached unto you, which also you have received, and wherein ye stand,
by which also ye are saved, (...), if ye hold fast, and keep in memory what I
preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain. Those that do truly
believe the truth will be careful to keep it in memory, which is a special
means to preserve the faith and love of it in their hearts. Memory holds fast
the truth, while faith and love renew their acts upon it: for this cause ought
we to give the more earnest heed to the things that we have heard, (...), lest
we leak and let them slip, and so we (that I say not they) be spilt and perish
irrecoverably; Heb. 2.1. The Spirit of God confirms us in the truths taught, by
bringing them to our remembrance. The Scriptures were written that we might
believe, that by hearing them preached, by frequent reading them and meditating
upon them (as David did) we might have faith begotten and increased in us.
Therefore we ought (...) to be taken up with these duties. As Paul to Timothy:
The minister is appointed for a remembrancer to us: 1 Timothy 4.6. If thou put the
brethren in remembrance of these things, then shall thou be a good minister of
Jesus Christ: and when S. Paul himself went over again the cities where he had
formerly preached the word, the text tells us what the succese was, And so were
the Churches est ablished in the faith, Acts 16. 5. And S. Peter thought it
meet as long as he continued in his earthy tabernacle, to put Christians in
remembrance of the truths delivered, that so they might have them always in
remembrance after his decease: and that although they knew them already: 2 Pet.
1. 12. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of
these things, though you know them, and be established in the present truth.
Though they were already established, and therefore might seem not to need
putting in remembrance, (which is the means of establishment) yet the Apostle
thought it meet to do it always, even as long as he lived; for, it would
further confirm them, and be a means to keep them from falling from their
steadfastness, and to persevere in holding fast that which is good.

Fourthly, 4. Practicing.
another way of holding fast that which is good is by practicing it
conscientiously. To keep the commandments is to obey them. Jesus Christ tells
his disciples, John 15.10. if ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my
love: as many branches as bring forth fruit abide in the vine, and are fastened
in it by the sap they draw. S. John 1. cpist.3.c. last verse, He that keeps
his commandments dwells in him, and he in him, and hereby we know that he
abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. S. Peter 2. cpist. 1.
chap. exhorts to give all diligence to add unto faith virtue, temperance,
godliness, charity, and the rest of the graces there reckoned up; for, if
these things be in you and abound, they will make you fruit full in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, they will put forth themselves into acts; and what
then? verse. 10. if ye do these things ye shall never fall.

Often times custom engages men to continue in evil practices, while they are
ashamed of their principles; but when good practices are backed with good
principles, the engagement is the stronger to continue in them and defend them.
An honest and good heart having heard the word, keeps it, and brings forth
fruit with patience. A good heart is the fittest cabbinet to keep the good word
of God in. And indeed, when once the word is ingraffed upon the soul by faith,
it overrules the sap of the stock, and sanctifies the fruit. Truth being
espoused to the soul by faith, and bedded by love, brings forth fruit unto
holiness, (faith working by love) and proles firmat conjugium. If we would be
steadfast and immovable, let us be always abounding in the work of the Lord, 1
Cor. 15. 58. If we would but follow that which is good, as we are exhorted in
the 15 verse before my text, we should find that one means, (and a good one
too) of holding fast that which is good.

Fifthly, 5. Prosessing
a fifth way that we must hold fast that which is good, is by prosessing of it
constantly. S. Paul was not ashamed to preach the Gospel, no more must we be
ashamed to profess it: if we be, Christ will be ashamed of us another day.
Mark. 8. 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this
adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy angels. And
whosoever shall deny him before men, him will he also deny before his Father
which is in heaven, Matthew.. 10.33. Christ will have his truth owned by his
followers. The devil indeed will allow men to profess truth, while they
harbor error in their hearts; but Christ will not allow of such discord
between heart and tongue; Cord creditur adjustitiam, With the heart man
believes unto right eousnesse, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation, Romans 10. 10, 11. for, the Scripture says, He that believes on him
shall not be ashamed. Profession is the. badge of truth, and a fealty due to
the God of truth. By constant profession of, and bearing witness to the truth,
the truth it self is propagated, and God's glory is advanced, and other
Professors of truth are much encouraged.

And when was there ever greater need of bearing witness to the truth, than at
this day? when error does on every side so much abound. When the unclean
spirits like froggs (bred of the slime of the earth) come out of the mouth of
the dragon, then blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garment, Rev. 16.
15. Wherefore (...), Let us hold fast the profession of our faith unmoved,
without wavering, Heb. 10. 23. for, beloved, we count them happy which endure,
James 5. 11. and our Savior assures us more than once, that they that endure
to the end shall be saved, Matthew. 24. 13. Mark. 13. 13. Nay, himself encourages
us from heaven, Rev. 2. 10. Bethou faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee a crown of life: again, Hold that thou have, let no man take thy crown,
Rev. 3. 11. That Is a fifth way of holding fast that which is good; by the
constant profession of it.

Sixthly, 6. Contending
the sixth and last way that I shall name, is by contending for it earnestly.
Indeed, so long as a man can enjoy his house by an undisturbed possession, he
need not contend about it; but when thieves shall attempt to break it open,
when a robber shall set upon him for his purse striving by violence to take it
from him, then he must resolve to contend for it, if he mean to keep it. Now
such is the condition of truth in this world, it is in a state militant,
continually surrounded and beset with enemies, whose ringleader is Satan, the
father of lies; who lays continual siege to truth, not that he desires to
have it himself, but that he may dispossess others of it, and slight it when
he has done. 'T was but needful then that the Apostle should exhort us, to
contend earnestly for the faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints, Judo
3. They were betrusted with it as with a fort or castle; and it would be
treachery or cowardice not to defend it to the last. And Paul's exhortation may
be of singular use to us for our encouragement; 1 Cor. 16. 13. Watch ye, stand
fast in the faith, quit your selves like men, and be strong. A gallant speech
of a tried soldier, who had fought a good fight himself, and was now ready to
receive his crown.

Now though it be the duty of every Christian to contend for truth, and that
earnestly; yet every one in his own rank and order: for, a man is not crowned
except he strive lawfully. Private Christians they must strive by earnest
prayer to God, that his truth may have a free passage, and be victorious, while
others, whom God has given commission and abilities, must also contend for it
by preaching, disputing, and writing in defense of it; all by suffering for it,
yea, and dying in witness to it, if God in his providence should call them
forth to it. Beloved, ye have not yet resisted unto blood, but ye know not what
times may come; the clouds gather apace, and some begin to fear a storm: it
concerns us in wisdom however to provide for the worst; to be well-settled in
the faith, to buckle on our harness, and to fortify our selves in holy
resolutions: to stand to our arms having our loins girt about with truth; and
we had need have truth girt close about us, else we may chance to have a lap of
it cut off, and we never the wiser, as Readiness skirt was by David, while he
slept and perceived it not. Or else in time of persecution we may deal with it,
as the young man in the Gospel did by his linen cloth, when soldiers laid hold
of him, he left the linen cloth, and sled from them naked, Mark 14. 51, 52.
Some (it may be) may think it but a nicety that some of the Primitive
Christians sthood upon, when they chose to sacrifice their own lives, rather
than sprinkle a little frankincense upon an idol's censer. Some may imagine
perhaps, that the Martyrs of later years were too straight-laced, many of them
suffering upon the article of Transubstantiation: but died Abner as a fool? did
those Worthyes foolishly and needlessly cast away their lives? No surely: they
understood well enough, that to deny the truth was to deny Christ, and
worshipping the bread was no less than gross idolatry; both grievous sins,
had they been less, they might not, they durst not have committed them, though
to save their lives.

But as people and Ministers must contend for the truth, so Magistrates are not
excused from it. What an abatement was it in the coats of Asa 1 Kings 15. 14.
So Jehoash, Amasia, Azari^, Jotham, Jehoshaphal.
diverse of the Kings of Judah, (and those good Kings otherways) that
idol-worship was tolerated and winkt at in the high places, and not utterly
rooted out. O, beloved, God is a jealous God; he will not endure his worship to
be corrupted, and do we think he will suffer his truth to be adulterated? Will
he not suffer the worship of devils, but will he permit doctrines of devils? Is
not his truth precious to him, and is he not jealous over that? God will not
endure those that worship another God besides him, nor those who tempt others
to it: (read over Deuteronomy. 13. especially 6, 7, 8, 9 verses) and is Christ
contented that they should be tolerated who openly declaim against his Godhead?
No certainly.

Our blessed Savior blames the Church in Thyatira, for suffering Jezabel to
seduce his servants, Rev. 2.20. and he professes that he hates the doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, and lays it heavily to the charge of the Church in Pergamos,
that she suffered those that taught it. Rev. 2. 14, 15. Thou have there them
that hold the doctrine of Balaam, and the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which
thing I hate: Repent, or I will come quickly and fight against them with the
sword of my mouth. The Church it self was for the genetall, and the Governors
of it orthodox, holding fast the faith, and that in the midst of persecution,
(as Christ himself bears her witness) yet because there were some such
heretics in it, whom it had not suppressed, therefore Christ threatens her as
you have heard: and it is observable, how he styles himself when he begins to
speak to that Church, These things says he which has the sharp sword with
two-edges, verse. 12. O, my beloved, when I read this I cannot but think,
should now the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven thus endite England; Thou have
there in the midst of thee those that maintain the doctrine of the Papists, of
the socinians, of the Arminians (which things I hate): yea, thou suffer
those that publicly oppose my truth, revile my faithful Ministers, blaspheme
my word, yea, even deny my very Godhead. Should Christ, I say, plead thus
against us, I besecch you sadly to consider it, what could we be able to answer
for our selves? Beloved, if Christ be God, let us follow him, and let us follow
him thoroughly, with a perfect heart. Let us not with Gallio think our selves
unconcerned, and so stand by and look on, while truth and error fight it out.
Say not, God stands not in need of our help; no more did he need the help of
Meroz, (how mighty soever the enemies were) but if he please to make use or
means, Meroz must afford her help, or else Meroz must be cursed. And though the
Lord could have wrought the deliverance of his people, and rescued them from
the cruelty of cursed Haman, by an outstretched and immediate arm from heaven;
yet Mordecay is bold to tell Queen Esther, that if she held her peace, she and
her fathers house should be destroyed, and deliverance should come some other
way, Esther 4. 14.

Neither let any man say, Let truth alone, it will be sure to prevail and be
victorious. For, be it true, that not all the malice and subtilty of Satan, nor
all the powers of darkness shall ever be able to make any one syllable of the
truth of God prove false; though they should coelum terramque miscere, heaven
and earth should pass away; but not the least iota of God's truth should fail,
yea though they do Acheronta movere, the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it: all this we grant and avow: yet let me tell you that truth would be
truth though never a man in England did acknowledge it. The truth of the Gospel
abides still, though the seven once famous churches of Asta be at this day
engulfed in the abyss of Mahumetan superstition. It is not truth in the Idea,
but in the subject that we are to contend for; not truth in heaven, but truth
upon the earth that we must be valiant for, Jeremy 9. 3. God does not require
of us that we should make his truth to be true, but that we should entertain it
in our hearts, and hold it fast: that we should own it, and countenance it, and
maintain it in its possession of our selves and others, that so the truth may
run and be glorified, and God may be glorified amongst us: least for our
ingratitude, and want of zeal for his truth he remove the candlestick, and
bestow it upon some other Nation. Then our crown is gone, our glory is
departed, our day is done. And England will be nothing else but a kennel, and
den of night-monsters Ziim and Jim and Ochim, with the rest of that dismal
crew: and so much the more dark then it was before it entertained the faith of
Christ, by how much a blaze of thorns does leave the honse darker than it found
it. When the light of the Gospel shall be removed moved, the Prince of
darkness will double his guards, and heap on irons, even chains of darkness.
O let it therefore be our care to hold fast the truth while we have it, to
contend for it earnestly, that we be not spoiled and robbed of it. But that we
may contend aright take these two rules.

1. It must not be out of contentiousnesse: a minister is forbidden being
contentious, and yet is commanded to contend, and that earnestly for the faith.
A quarelsome contentious humor will raise up strife about words when there is
no ground, or fundamentum in re. A proud man (though perhaps orthodox in his
judgment) will not content himself with the received form of sound words, the
usual language of Christians in all ages, but will invent a new set of phrases
and uncouth expressions, which no man else can without pain (it is well if
himself can) understand. He will not trade with the world but in a coin and
language of his own; what a troublesome man is this, that imposes upon the
world a necessity of making new Dictionaries if they mean to converse with him?
if every man should do the like, what a pretty Babel should we have? and all
this is but that he may seem to be singular and to differ something from other
men. But we must not contend out of a (...), but (...), not out of a love of
contention, or affectation of singularity, but out of a sincere love and
affection to the truth, and a pure zeal for the glory of God. Neither may we
make these pretensions of our own private quarrels, as too many are apt to do. I
have read of one Matthias King of Hungary, and one George a King of Bohemia,
that fought a ten years war upon a difference in point of Religion, and then
at length agreed that their two fools should decide the controversy by
fifty-cuffs. By the war they showed how much they pretended to truth and
religion, and by the way of agreement how little indeed they cared for it: and
I think, if Plutarch were now alive, it would be no hard matter for him to find
a parallel.

2. Our zeal and contention for the truth must be proportionable unto the
matter wherein it is: as fire burns hotter in iron than in straw: so must we
contend more earnestly for truths of greater weight, moment, and importance;
wherein the glory of God and the salvation of souls is more emphatically
concerned. We must not contend for all alike, much less be more earnest for
minth and cumine, and neglect the greater things, because our private stomach
or other interest is bound up more in those than these. But I have now done
with the sixth and last way of holding fast that which is good, viz. contending
for it earnestly.

It now remains that I should close up all with a word of use and application,
and very briefly.

Use 1. Use 1.
If then it be the duty of every Christian to hold fast that which is good,
hence then are to be reproved diverse sorts of persons, I will but point at
them.

1. The Sceptick, that holds nothing at all.

2. Those that hold fast indeed, but it is that which is not good, that hold
errors and heresies, and of these they are tenacious enough, even unto
obstinacy: though brayed in a mortar they will not part with them. It is said
of the Pharisees and their traditions, Mark 7.4. (...), they received them to
hold them fast; they took them with a resolution not to let them go for better
for worse. Zeal is good in a good matter, but this their holding fast is to
their own mischief, as a sinking man holds fast the weeds that help to drown
him.

3. This reproves those that hold, and it is good which they hold, but they do
not hold it fast: all wavering and inconstant persons. But these also I have
already spoken something to in the aforegoing part of my discourse.

Use 2. Use 2.
I will therefore conclude all with a word of exhortation; which yet I perceive
is nothing else than what I have been doing all this while. I will add only
to what has been said a motive or two, and a few means or directions.

1. treasure; and a wise man does not use to be over easily persuaded to part
with that. It Is our possession; a man will sue hard before he will suffer
himself to be ejected out of his inheritance. It Is our evidence; our evidence
for a Kingdom, and shall we not look carefully to it? It is our fortress;
while we keep that, that will preserve us; like Ulysses his mast, tie our
selves fast to it, and we shall be safe; yea it is our life, as Solomon of
wisdom, keep her; for, she is thy life: our eternal salvation depends upon our
holding of it. If we give over believing, he that believes not shall be damned:
If we grow weary of well-doing, without holiness no man shall see God: If any
love not Christ and his truth, let him be anathema: If any man deny them before
men, him will Christ deny before his Father which is in heaven. It is
abundantly then our manifold interest to hold fast that which is good.

2. deceivers, who would cheat us of it, and juggle it from us; in respect of
open enemies that would by force wrest it from us: The Devil goes about like a
roaring lion seeking whom he may devour.

And as at all times we had need to hold fast the truth, so especially in times
of seduction and apostasy, in times of temptation, and in time of persecution;
we had need to double our guards, when the Enemy is at hand. But of this before.

3. Jesus Christ stands affected toward his truth and such as adhere unto it.
We may see both in his speech to the Church in Pergamos, Rev. 2.13. Thou
hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith, Even in those days when
Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwells.
Observe how he does aggrandise and amplisie their faithfulness to him and his
truth, from the consideration of time and place; they adhered to him in times
of persecution, and in a most dangerous place; where Satan dwells. He that
was wont to go about like a roaring lion, and to go to and fro up and down the
earth, had now it seems taken up in Pergamos, resolving to make that the seat
of his tyranny, where he would display the bloody ensigns of his rage and
cruelty; and yet in this very place, there were not wanting those, who under
his nose, and to his very teeth did profess themselves the sworn servants of
Christ and truth, and his utter enemies. What an honor was this to christ, who
maintained himself a Church in Satan's own Imperial city; and how kindly does he
take it from those, who at such a time and in such a place did stick so close
unto him and to his truth? Which he calls my faith, and my name; he can as soon
forget his own name and neglect his own glory, as his truth. But then, how
feelingly, how pathetically does he remember and (even by name) make mention of
Antipas! In those days when Antipas was my faithful martyr, etc. In those
days, he keeps an exact account of the time, and makes Antipas his death the
Epoch to compute other things by; when Antipas, he had kept Christ's name and
you see Christ keeps his: he had born witness and set his seal unto Christ's
truth, and Christ wears him as a signet upon his right hand, and engraves him
upon the palms of his hands; he is near and dear unto him, Christ knows him
and calls him by name, Antipas my faithful martyr. O what a pang of affection
was there! Sirs, I am not able to conceive it, much less express it; I
beseech you assist me with your thoughts, and supply by your meditations what
my expression cannot reach, Antipas my faithful martyr. Precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of all his Saints, and blessed are they that die in
the Lord; but much, much more precious is their death, and thrice happy are all
they whom the Lord calls forth and inables to die for his sake, and to lay down
their lives in witnesse-bearing to his truth. I wonder no longer that the
Primitive Christians were so ambitious of martyrdom; who would not be martyr
many times over, to have such a testimonial, such an affectionate
commemoration from his blessed Savior? which will afterward be seconded with
an (...), well fought My son, and with that Euge bone serve and fidelis, well
done good and faithful servant, enter thou into thy masters joy.

So much for motive, Direction
now a few directions, which I will but name, leaving them to be enlarged by
your own private meditations.



Facile est quidvis suadere persuasis mori. Let me say paratis mori. They will
not fear shipwreck, who have sent their souls before, and ensured them in
heaven: that man need not fear death, whose life is hid with Christ in God.

curiosity, carelessness. Get thy self cured of thy natural levity and
slipperinesse, it is good that the heart be established with grace.

non persuaseris etiamsi persuaseris. They do but pretend to be suitours unto
truth, who are before wedded to their own opinions.

Demas will take his leave of truth, and embrace the present world. I will end
all in those words of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and the later end. Therefore
brethren stand fast, and hold the faith, which ye have been taught, which ye
have believed.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved
us, and has given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace,
Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.

CUI LAUS IN SECULA.
FINIS.

